40

MANAGEMENT OF SATELLITE

CAPACITY FOR DTH SERVICE BY

DEPARTMENT OFSPACE

DEPARTMENT OF SPACE

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE .
(2015-16)

FORTIETH REPORT

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

aR at

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2072

FORTIETH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2045-16)

' (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

’

MANAGEMENT OF SATELLITE

CAPACITY FOR DTH SERVICE BY
DEPARTMENT OF SPACE ©

DEPARTMENT OF SPACE

Presented fo Lok Sabha on;

Laidin Rajya Sabha on:

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI :

April, 2016 1 Vaisakha 1938 (Saka)



‘GONTENTS

है PAGES”,
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2015-16)...... (iit)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2014-18).:....° (iv)
1ग्रएू0०0ए९॥014................... : , _ )

REPORT. ८:
PART- |

(CHAPPTER - |
INTRODUCTORY _

1) Procedure of Grant of DTH License

I} Other Conditions
Ill) Satellite Capacity Allocation

‘ CHAPTER “I
PLANNING OF SATELLITE CAPACITY
I) Formulation of SATCOM Policy
Ih Planning and Realisation of DTH Satellites
॥) Deficiencies in Launching Planned Satellites ©

IVY) Inability to Realise Satellites with Ku Band Transponders
V)__ Forced Migration of DTH Service Providers to Foreign Satellite Systems.

VI)’ -Capacities Created Remained Idle

vil) Dominance of Foreign Satellites Over Indian Sky
(X) Crowding of Foreign Satellites in Orbital Slots Above India
X) Inability of DOS to Bring Back DTH Service Providers to INSAT System

CHAPTER - Ill
ALLOCATION OF SATELLITE CAPACITY

1) Satellite Capacity Not Earmarked By ICC

- 1) -- Role of Ministry of Information and Broadcasting in the Allocation of Satellite

है Capacity .
WJ}. Satellite Capacity Altecaticn Procedure Not Developed by ICC and 0087


16.
17.
18.

19.

20.
21.
22,

BON os

(2015-16)
Prof. KY. Thomas . Chairperson
MEMBERS.
‘LOK SABHA

Shei S.S. Ahluwalia .

Shri:Sudip Bandyopadhyay—-—~ 7: ‘ : —
Shrt Ranjit Singh Brahmpura है नह

Shri Nishikant Dubey :
Shri Gajanan Kitikar

Shri Bhartruhart Mahtab

Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank"
‘Shri Neiphiu Rio

Shri Dushyant Singh

Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal

Dr. Kirit Sormaiya

Shri Anurag Singh Thakur

Shri Shivkumar Udasi

Dr, P, Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA
Shri Naresh Agrawal
‘Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
Shri Anil Madhav Dave
Shri Vijay Goel
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
“Shri Shantaram Naik
Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
SECRETARIAT
Shri A.K. Singh - Additional Secretary.
Shri T. fayakumar- - Director. -
Smt. Bharti 5. Tuteja ~ + + Deputy Secretary
Shri Deepankar Kambie - Committee Officer


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2014-15)

Prof. ५, Thomas vs Chairperson
MEMBERS _

LOK SABHA

Shri $.8. Ahluwalia
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay-:.---.-——-——————r es Eo
Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura - पु
Shri Nishikant Dubey
Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
- Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank"'
Shri Neiphiu Rio
" Shri Dushyant Singh
* Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi
Dr. Kirit Somaiya
Shri Anurag Thakur ,
Dr. P. Venugopal

Pe AAR Pe

QE GEE S

‘RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi

17. Shri Vijay Goel

18. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya

19. ‘Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita

20. ‘Shri Shantaram Naik
2... Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy

22. > Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh -

Elected w.c.f 37 December, 2014 vie Sti Rajiv Pratap Rudy who, has been appointed as Minister w.e.f. 9" November, 2014.
_ tBlected wel 3% December, 2014 vice Shri Jayant Sinha who has been appointed as Ministez-s.e.€ 97 November, 2014.
2 1 Blécted w.é.£ 3% December, 2014 .vive Dr: M, Thambidurai wlio hes’been chosen af Han'ble Deputy’ Speaker, Lok Sabha and has
since resigned from the membership of the Committee,


INTRODUCTION

f, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committed, having been authorised by the
Committee, do present this Fortieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Management of

Satellite Capacity for DTH Service by Department of Space‘ based an C&AG Report
- No. 22-of 2014;Department of Space and Ministry of Information and Broadcasting

2, The Report of Comptroller and Auditor Geferal of India was laid on the Table of
118 House on 28" November, 2014

3. | The Public Accounts Committee’ (2014-15) took up the subject for detailed
examination and report. The Commitiee took evidence of the representatives. of
Department of Space and Ministry of Information and Broadcasting on the subject at
their sitting held on 10" February, 2015. The subject was subsequently carried forward
by the successor Committee (2015-16) for examination. The Committee considered
and adopted this Draft Report at their sitting held on 1* April, 2046. The Minutes of the
Sittings form Appendices to the Report

4 For facility of reference and | convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type and form Part- Il of
the Report.

5. The Committee thank the predecessor Committee for taking oral evidence of
Department of Space and obtaining information on the subject

_6. ° The Committee would also like to express their thanks to the representatives of

Department of Space and Ministry of Information and Broadcasting for tendering
evidence before the Committee and furnishing the requisite information to the
Committee in connection with the examination of the subject

7.. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to |
them in the matter by the office of the Comptrolter and Auditor General of India.

‘NEW DELHI : है ‘ PROF. K, ¥. THOMAS,
Eo" April, 2016 . : Chairperson,

| 2 Vaisakha, 1938 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee



i 3 &

REPORT
PART: |

CHAPTER -t
, INTRODUCTORY
, Direct to Home (DTH) senice isa satellite based broadcast service which entails
distribution of multi-channet television programmes in Ku band, Ministry of Information ,
and Broadcasting (Moi&B) is the nodal Ministry for broadcasting services in India.
’ Department of Space (Dos) provides national space infrastructure through satellite
“transponder capacity to meet the telecommunication, broadcasting and security
requitements of the country. The Union Government in November 2000 approved the
proposal of Mel&B fo introduce DTH service in India. The Union Cabinet in January 2000
approved the ‘open sky' policy and allowed Indian and foreign satellites to be used in
DTH services with the condition that proposals envisaging use of Indian satellites would
receive preferential treatment.
17. A Compliance Audit was conducted during July 2012 to August 2012 and: fram
August 2013 to October 2013, covering the period from March 2004 to July 2013. With a
view to evaluate:

० Whether plannihg and realization of satellite capacity for DTH service was
done with a view to give economic, efficient and effective service;

a ‘Whether allocation of satellite capacity for DTH service was transparent, fait
and equitable; and .

° Whether transpondér lease agrééments safegliardéd the financial intérest"—**
af Government and were implemented accordingly.

1,2, During. audit, records’ were scrutinized ‘relating to implementation of SATCOM

Policy, minutes of.various committee meetings, project reports approved by the

competent authority, transponder lease agreements, account statements and its ledgers


a 4
maintained -in DoS, Satellite Communication and Navigational Programme Office

(SCNPO) and Antrix.

4

1.3. Against the above backdrop, the Public Accounts Committee (2015-16) selected

the subject as reported in the C&AG's Report-No. 22 of. 2014 for detailed examination
and report. In the process, the Committee obtained Background Notes and some
. clarifications from the Mol&B and from the DoS. The Committee took oral evidence of the
Secretaries of the Mol&B and DoS and other representatives 01.1 0” February, 2015 and
obtained information onthe subject. Subsequently, the Committee decided to refer the
subject fo the newly constituted Sub-Committee ie. Sub-Committee-V dealing with
subjects on infrastructural projects other than Railways. Based on the , information
gathered, the Committee proceed with examination of the relevant issues in détail in the

succeeding chapters of this Report.

44. The Department of Space (DoS\indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) is
mandated to provide satellite transponder capacity to meet the telecommunications and
; broadcasting requirernents of users in the Country belonging to the Government, PSU
and Private/Commercial sectors. 0S planned to introduce high power Ku-band
satellites for meeting the requirements of Direct-to-Home (DTH) broadcasting
applications during the late 90s with the aim of féalizing the satellites by middle of the

next decade. INSAT-4A and 4B were the first two high power Ku-band satellites planned

DoS/ISRO also started discussions with users including the national broadcaster for

introduction of DTH services on the INSAT- system.

1.5. Dtring 2004 to 2007, 005 entered into lease agreements with Doordarshan (DD),

Dish TV, Tata Sky, Sundirect DTH (Sun DTH), BIG Vv (Reliance), Airtel Digital TV (Airtel}


3-
and D2H (Videocon) for hiring of satellite transponder capacity for providing DTH
services. ;

1.6. The requirement-for DTH service is of the order of minimum of five Ku band -
transponders going up to 18 to 24 transponders for providing 300 to 400 channels.
Therefore, availability of Ku band transponders is the most impertant consideration while
planning satellite capacity for DTH service. DTH service is also location specific. Since
ihe dish antenna of the DTH customer has to be facing the satellite, satellite capacity
should preferably be available at-a particular position in the sky continuously. Therefore,

, larger number of Ku band transponders are required continuously at the same position in

‘

the sky fo ensure continuity of service.

17. In DTH service a large number of television channels are digitally compressed,
encrypted and beamed from satellites. There are four major technical stages involved in
the working ofa DTH service. These are: ह

{i) content acquisition;

(ii) cormpression;

(iii) modulation and uplink to DTH satellite; and

(iv) reception of signals at the users' ehd.

1.8, The contents of the television channels are first acquired and then compressed
using a series of compression equipments. _ The compressed Radio Frequency (RF)
signals are modulated, frequency converted, amplified and uplinked to the DTH Saiellite.

DTH satellites broadcast the RF signals to the ‘smai/ TV dish antenna’ fixed at the users

end.. The dish antenna receives the RF signals, Law Noise Block Down Converter


a4 पु

converts the RF signals and set top box demodulates and decrypts these signals and the

" content is exhibited on the television set

1.9. As of 2014, out of a total of.16,10 crore television homes in India, 9.30 crore (58
per cent) are covered by ‘cable Vv services, 3.70 ‘crore (23 per cent) are covered by
private DTH services and the rest (19 per cent) by [PTV services, terrestrial broadcast
services and free to air DTH services of DD. With the digitalisation of cable TV services,
consumers were in a position to receive 500 channels or more, including a large number
of High Definition (HD) channels, which boosted the demand: for satelite transponder

capacities by DTH operators.

«

॥) Procedure of Grant of DTH License

4.10. The guidelines for obtaining licence for providing DTH Broadcasting Service in
India were formulated in March 2001 by the Mol&B. DTH services are governed by the
DTH guidelines issued by the Minisiry'on 15.03.2001 as amended from time to time.
Eligibility Criteria ‘and other conditions for DTH license, as faid down in the DTH

guidelines, are as follows:-

. Companies registered under the Companies Act are eligible to apply for
DTH license;
. The applicant company must have Indian Management Control with

majority representatives on the board as well as the Chief Executive of the
company being a resident Indian; :

रु Broadcasting companies and/or cable network companies shall not be
- eligible to collectively own more than 20% of the total equity of applicant
company at any time during the license period. Similarly, the applicant
company not to have more than 20% equity share in a broadcasting and/or
cable network-company;

* Total FDI permitted in PTH sector is 74% with FDI upto’ 49% is on
automatic Toute;

* ° DTH operators are réquired to pay € 10 croré as one time non-refiindable
entry fee to the Ministry; and


Il}

1.11.

a ”

° DTH operators are required to pay annual license fee @10% of Gross :
Revenue हु

Procedure of grant of DTH license are as follows:

° Eligible application for DTH service will be subjected to security clearance

“~~ of Board-of Directors-as well-as key executives of the company such as “

CEO etc. in consultation with the Ministry of Home Affairs and for clearance
of satellite use with the Department of Space;

° After these clearances are obtained, the applicant would be required to pay
an initiat non-refundable entry-fee of € 10 crores to the Ministry of
nformation and Broadcasting; oo

रु ‘After such payment of eniry-fee, the applicant would be informed of intent of
Min, of 1&B to issue license and requested to approach Wireless and
Planning Coordination (४४2८) Wing of Department of Telecommunications
or SACFA clearance;

» . After obtaining Standing Advisory Committee on Radio Frequency
Allocation (SACFA) clearance, within one month of the same, the Licensee
will have to submit a Bank guarantee (Form-C) from any Scheduled Bank fo
he Ministry of Information and Broadcasting (MIB) for an amount of = 40
crores valid for the duration of the license; and

. After submission of this Bank Guarantee, the applicant would be required to
sign a licensing agreement with the MIB.

Other Conditions
DTH license shall have to comply with other conditions which infer-atia, include

. The Licensee shall pay an.annual fee equivalent to 10% of its grass
revénue as reflected in the audited accounts of the Company for that
particular financial year;

. The Licensee shail aiso, in addition, pay the license fee and royalty for the
spectrum used as prescribed by Wireless Planning &.Coordination Authority
(WPCA), under the Department of Telecommunications; . , . -

° The validity period of Licensé shall be ten (10) years, on non-exclusive
basis, and shall be reckoned from the date of issue of Wireless Operational
License by the WPCA, unless terminated earlier for defauit or for insolvency

_ of for convenience or for transfer of the License;

. The Licensee shall ensure adherence to the Programme Code (PC) and
Advertisement Code (AC) of the Cable Television Networks (Regulation)


-6-

Act, 1995 and the rules framed thereunder, 1994 as amended from, time to
1 time; and .
* At present, there, are six private operators in addition to free DTH services |
. of Doordarshan (DD) . As informed by the DTH operators, details of their

satellites. and.transponders are as follows:

DTH operators गा - Na. of Name of indian/Foreign
transponders | Satellite

Mis Dish TV India Ltd (Dish 16 NSS-6 (42) Foreign
™) ASIASAT (4)

M/s Tata Sky Lid (Tata Sky) * 412 INSAT-4A ह finda
Mis BIG TV {Big TV ) 8 MEASAT-3 Foreign
Mis Videacon d2h Ltd (D2H) 10 - Sing Tel Foreign
Mis Sun Direct TV Pvt Ltd 5 NSAT 4B (1) Indian
(Sundirect) * | MEASAT(A) Foreign
Ms Bharati Telemedia Ltd 11 SES-7 Foreign
(Airtel . :

Free, Dish (Doordarshan) | _ ९ [| NSAT 48 [indian

1.12. As per the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI)’s report on Performance

indicators for the period July - September; 2014 released on 297 January, 2016, there
» are 39.13 million registered private DTH active subscribers in the country. In addition, DD

DTH platform has 8 million free DTH subscribers.

Kil) Satellite Capacity Allocation /

1.13. In June 2001, INSAT Coordination Committee (ICC) prescribed a back to back
arrangement whereby DoS would acquire and allocate necessary transponder capacity
from foreign satellites to meet the specific requicaments of private customers. Antrix,
after aggregating the requirements of the Indian, customers, would enter inte back to back
agreements with foreign satellite owners for shart term periods, so that the service could

be brought back to INSAT system as and when Indian satellite capacity was available.


a -7- 5

4.14. DTH service is. provided on satellite Ku Band transponders provided by
Department of Space (DoS). Satellite capacity allocation is done by DoS as per the
provisions of policy framework for Satellite Communication in India (“SATCOM policy")
-administered-by.DaS. Allocation.of Ku band transponders to DTH operators are done by -

DoS as per the procedure laid down in the SATCOM policy.

1.15. Although DTH sector is witnessing exponential growth over the recent, DoS has
not been able to meet transponder requirements of DTH operators from the space
available on the Indian Satellite. In order to meet the growing requirement of DTH
operators, DoS is hiring bandwidth in Ku Band from foreign satellite through ISRO or
Antix Corporation which in turn is made available to DTH operators. As per the extant

policy of DoS, DTH. operators are not allowed fo directly contract with foreign satellite

operators for transponder capacity.

1.46. Presently, DD is utilizing 6 Ku-Band Transponders for DD DTH Service, Under 12"
Plan, Doordarshan’s DTH Service is being expanded from 112 to 250 Channels. For this
purpose, request for provision of 5 additional Ku-Band Transponders (5x36 MHz) on

_same orbital slot has recently been given to [SRO.

- 1,17. The Ministry issues licenses to private DTH operators if they fulfil ihe necessary
eligibility criteria and have obtained clearances from MUA and 0०8, SACFA & WOL of
WPGC. The internal procedures that govern such clearances is not dealt with by fhe. .
Ministry on 3 case to case’ basis. This is the mandate of the Nodal Ministry concerned.

* This Ministry may, however, be involved/consulted in broad policy matters concerning
such clearances. INSAT Coordination Committee (ICC) of DoS is one such forum if
which this Ministry is also a member. The last meeting of the ICC was held on 12"

February, 2013.


-8-

CHAPTER ~ fi
PLANNING OF SATELLITE CAPACITY

{) Formulation of SATCOM Policy SATCOM Police

2.1. ~ In. May..1997, DoS ..put-up a. cabinet note for a broader SATCOM policy, duly
considering the opinion of the stakeholders through inter-departmentat consultation
. exercise involving Department of Science and Technology, Ministry.of Finance, Ministry
of Industry, Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting. The proposal suggested having a ‘closed sky’ policy in OTH service

whereby the satellite would be provided by INSAT system or an Indian satellite.

2.2. 4n January 2000, the Union Cabinet of India finally approved the ‘open sky’ policy
and allowed Indian and foreign satellites to be used in DTH services with the condition
that proposals envisaging use of Indian satellites would receive preferential treatment. To
énsure: this, ICC, in June 2001, prescribed a back to back arrangement whereby DoS
would acquire and allocate necessary transponder capectty from foreign satellites to
meet the specific requirements of private customers. Antrix, after aggregating the
requirements of the Indian customers, would enter into back to back agreements with
foreign satellite owners for short term periods, so that the service could be brought back

to INSAT system as and when Indian satellite capacity was available. ©

- th) Planning and Realisation of DTH Satellites DTH Satellites

2.3. Till July 2011, 6,000 transponders were available. the world over, of which India.
had 200 fransponders. DTH services were provided through Ku band iransponders. A
3,000 kg communication satellite could carry upto 24 Ku band transponders, ‘The
requirement for DTH service is of the order of minimum of five transponders i 80 MHz)

going up:.to. 18 to 24 transponders for providing 300 10 400 channels Therefore,


-9-

availability of u band transponders was the most important consideration while planning

7 satellite capacity for DTH service.

2.4. During the oral evidence, the Secretary, DoS informed the Committee about the
number of transponders as under

“Notwithstanding this situation today also if you look at we have our own
about 105 KU Band transponders actually in orbit. We have a complex
centre play of environment and the difficulty in getting through the various
processes. Apart from DTH users we also have to meet the requirement of
our strategic users and societal application thing".

2.5, Further, supplementing on the above, the Secretary, Mo!&B submitted as under:

"The DTH services are governed by the DTH guidelines, which had been

issued by the Ministry in 2001, and awarded from time fo time and at
present, six private DTH operators are operating in the country. My
colleague frorn the Department of Space has already flagged this. In DTH
service, TV channels are distributed directly to subscriber using Ku-band
transponders on satellite. An allocation of Ku-band transponders fo DTH
operators is done by the Department of Space. We have spelt it out in our
report which has been submitted to your office. The Ministry has already
granted permission to about 830 TV channels. About fifty per cent are news
and current affairs channels and the rest are general entertainment
channels. But if you just see the landscape gnd the way the expansion is
taking place; there. are about 250 applications which are still pending with
the Ministry. They are at various stages of processing. So, in effect, maybe,
in another one or two years you will have about more than 1000 odd TV
channels which will be operating in the country. Now DTH operators,
‘including DD, have been demanding additional Ku-band transponders from
the Department of Space. But this is a policy which is decided by them.
There is no coordination or intervention at the level of Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting. If you see the overall nature of delivery
platform, we find that the fotal number of subscribers of private DTH and
IPTV is about 43 million, which is 27 per cent of the total landscape of TV.

Coming to Cable TV network, about 86 .million peaple are hooked on fo
Cable TV comprising 55 per cent of the total landscape.DD Terrestrial is”

about 13 percent”. | . ces eee

2.6, DTH service is location specific. Since the TV dish antenna of the DTH customer
has to be facing the satellite, satellite capacity should be available at a particular.pasition

in the sky continuously and permanently. Any change in the position of the satellite would

result in migration:expenses to the DTH service provider and: inconvenience fo the:


-10- .

customer. Therefore, additional Ku band transponders were required ta be. provided

continuously at the same position in the sky to ensure continuity of service.

॥॥| Deficiencies in Launching Planned Satellites in Launching Planned Satellites

2.7. हु During March 3004 to February 2007, {otal satellite capacity of 52.6 to 80.5 Ku
band transponders was committed by DoS to seven DTH service providers in
transponder lease agreemenis signed with them. 008 could not provide satellite Capacity
(Ku band transponders) on domestic satellites as planned, as it was not able fo realize its

planned communication satellites.

2,8. The following table shows satellite capacity committed by DoS to service providers

in chronological order:

~ Service Date of © Satellites | Number of Number of Satellites | Date of
No, | provider | agreement | planned transponders | transponders | actually commencement
tobe committed actualty used of service
used {Range from - | allocated as uo
to) of July 2043 :
1. | ? | 18 March INSAT- | /| a JNSAT- 15 July 2004
2004 4//48 : 4B है
| 2. Dish TV 27 May NSS6 | ४ | 12 1४55-65 41 June 2004
2004 6 Asiasat.
3. | Sun DTH 19 INSAT- 49 i INSAT- . 15 January 2008
हर February 48 4 4B .
: 2005 : MEASAT. है
4, Reliance 28 June GSAT 8 6-18 |.) | MEASAT 45 April 2008
2005 :
a Tata Sky 12 INSAT- 12-18 12 INSAT- 41 May 2006
November aA हर 4A
207 -
| Airtel 26 GSAT 8 42-15 1 SES 4 Jan 2008
December
2006" है
7. | Videocon 27 GSAT 8 SB 15 ST 1 Feb 2008
February . 7
- 2007 - : 1 -
2.9. As per Audit, DoS could not provide satellite capacity (Ku band transponders) on
- domestic satellites as planned. This was a consequence of DoS. not being able to realise

its planned communication satellites.



4 5 -ll1- धर :

2.10.- Subsequently, when enquired whether DoS had been able to plan and

subsequently, realize satellite capacity for DTH service as envisaged, the Ministry in their

written submission stated that: -

“Planning for transponder capacity was taken up immediately after the ;

' Government approved the introduction of DTH services in November, 2000
and this included the initiatives to conduct the experiments using INSAT-3A
Satellite after it was launched in year 2003. Ku-band Transponder
capacitates envisaged as part of 10, 11" and 127 Five Year Plan (FYP)
are summarised in-the Table-1 below. The detail of the communications
satellites, planned during this period are shown in Table-2 along with the
relevant details such as orbital slot, number of Ku band transponders, date
of project approval and date of realization. Approval was obfained for three
sateltites with a total capacity of 36 transponders during the 1 07 Five Year
Plan period comprising INSAT-4A and INSAT-4B in March, 2003 followed
by INSAT-4C in February, 2004. If is also evident from Table-2 that the
planned capacities were realised with a smail ‘delay of about one year in

- case of INSAT-4A and INSAT-4B. In the case of INSAT-4C the satellite
could not be deployed due to faunch ‘failure in July, 2006, but the
replacement satellite INSAT-4CR: was planned on a war footing and
deployed within a year in July, 2007. During the 11" Five Year Plan period,
GSAT-8, GSAT-9 and GSAT-10 were planned with a combined capacity of
48 transponders out of which GSAT-10 and GSAT-8 have been realised.
There were delays due fo non-availability of the indigenous launch vehicle
GSLV and due to time needed for effecting correction as a result of power
problems observed in INSAT-4B satellite. GSLV launch vehicle delay was

- due to challenges in realizing indigenous cryogenic technology in
building/launching indigenous GSLV launch vehicle.

Table 1

Summary of bent-pipe Ku transponders that could support DTH service

Plan period. |... Planned | Approved | Realised - -|-. ---.~------
somrvp | 6 | 4a | 36
41" FYP 402 48 | 36
व EYP 78 54 | 18



-12-

Table-2
Satellités planned with High power Ku band transponders by DOS which could be used for DTH
Orbital |No of Ku [Date of Planned . .
Satellites [Slot [and 125 lapproval__ [realisation tual Status Remarks
a-| .. . |e. Jo. दि . Launched in Dec,. [Delayed 09 one
है |INSAT-44 63" ६ 7 42 March, 2003 रा. months 005 “lear.
Ss |
जे
छा g . i2 months Launched on March, |Oelayed by three
5 s INSAT-48 | 12 March, 2003 |after INSAT-44|2007 Imonths
ad a
3
“| . Failed launch in
हूं. pNSAT-46 |74°& 12 Feb, 2004 om | months __[July, 2006. *_| Launch Failed
& z > — =
3 [Planned and
0 > jtealised within one
F Replacement |Launched in July, — year of failure of
INST-4CR [74° E 12 \Jan, 2007 for 4C [2007 INSAT-4C taunch.
& Delayed by 2 4/2
= oun Years due to
2g Launched in May” |canfiguration
DB 1 [09/1-8 रच E 24 00, 2006 [24 months 011 Ichangs
£5 5
3 हि Not launched due to
ico non avalability of
8 है (७5 launch
डर (98601-9 a E 12 (७1, 2008 126 months ehicte
lg : Delayed by 1 year 3
° months, due to
r Launched in Sep, realization dual
IGSAT-10 | E 42 [Oct, 2009 _ (20 months” gridded reflector
a -
i Planned to be Delay by 9 months
c= launched in October jto match the faunch
= 5 5581-15 | E | July, 2013 [18 months O18 slat with Anane.
PR
55 : .|Launched in Six months ahead 0
3S “IGSAT-16 155" E | | July, 2013 [24 months December, 2014 schedule.
g हु ॥.॥रएएाएी20 with
ह् Launched in 181, 55५ launch,
न IGSAT-14 (74"& | (५३1, 2012 [18 months [2014 ehicle.
2
fc [Put up for
(74° E i2 lapproval Put up for approval

Aceording to the Audit, from the above facts it is evident that DoS was able fo p

[9981-19 -

and realise satellites as ‘envisaged during the 10° FYP period. However,
_ account of technical constraints, all missions could not be realized in the

EYP",

2.11. During oral evidence, the Secretary, DoS submitted as under:

fan
on
4 th

"The commercial satellites aré around 15. Right now, over India, we have हि
about 45 transponders of ASIASAT. About capacity, we will find out and

give you",


-13-

3

2.12. Further, when asked whether satellite capacity allocated by DoS for DTH service

was transparent, fair ahd equitable:

"DoS replied that the process adopted by DoS to meet the demands of DTH
service providers has satisfactorily met the initial requirements of all the
operators, through indigenous or leased transponder capacity. Requests for «
DTH services in India started with requests from Tata Sky, Dish TV, and
‘ Doordarshan. While discussions with all the three service providers was in
progress Dish TV and Doordarshan started testing by making use of. the
available transponders on INSAT-3A itself. DTH service demanded 52 dBW
of satellite transponder power whereas INSAT-3A had 46 dBW. DoS/ISRO
had planned for 52dBW Ku band transponder capacity in INSAT-4A,
INSAT-4B and INGAT-4C. In view of the demand from Dish TV and
Doordarshan to start the services early they were enabled fo begin their
services through leased capacity of NSS-6, in 2004 without waiting for
INSAT-4A. Tata Sky requirement was met with INSAT-4A after its faunch in
2005. Immediately after the completion of initial lease period of 3 years,
Doordarshan DTH service was brought back to INSAT-4B as planned. In
view of the larger capacity requirement Dish TV continued their service on
NSS-6".

2.13. On being asked about whether transponder lease agreements entered into by DoS
with DTH providers safeguarded the financial interest of the Government and were

implemented, accordingly:

- [958 submitted that the transponder lease agreements entered ‘into with
DTH operators safeguarded the financial interests of the Government by
fixing the transponder price through a Pricing Committee of DoS which
accounted for cost of realisation and internal rate of return while leasing
transponder capacity from foreign satellites, financial safeguards were
ensured by adopting a process of agreements with the satellite operators
and the DTH operators, on commercial arrangements through Antrix
Corporation Ltd, the commercial arm of ISRO".

[¥) Inability to Reatise Satellites with Ku Band Transponders

2.14. During the Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007-12) period, DoS planned to launch nine
satellites with an aggregate of 218 Ku band transponders for yarious applications, -
including DTH. Of ‘the nine satellites, two: satellites (GSAT-8 and GSAT-15) were
earmarked for DTH applications. Out of nine satellites planned, DoS could eventually

4 \

tealize only three satellites with 48 Ku band transponders during Eleventh Pian period,


void
which was only 22 per cent of the target, Two satellites, namely GSAT-9 and 5581-15
were not launched citing non-availability of launch vehicle GSLYV, although two other

satellites; viz. GSAT-8 and GSAT-10 were realized through procured launches.

Py

216. While ‘agreeing to the inordinate delay in realization of satellites in Eleventh Five
Year Plan period, DoS stated that in December 2012, Dr. Kasthurirangan Committee's
recommendations were available only in April 2011 and not at the beginning of Eleventh
Plan. DoS further stated that the procured launch vehicle route was not cost effective for
2,000 kg class of satellites. DoS added.that in March 2014 surrender of funds were due

to budget cut imposed by Ministry of Finance.

2.16. Further, in September 2013, DoS had explained that huge surrenders were due to
revision of budget provision brought about by complex nature of space technology and

developmental uncertainties taking into account development status of the projects.

2.17. During oral evidence, the Secretary Mol&B stated as under:

"The issues which are concerning DTH operators are that they want
definitely more transponder capacity. As per the latest data, which we have
received “froni the DTH operators,.the Dish-TV, for example, is having
roughly 16 transponders. Tata Sky has 12. The Dish TV has it on the
forsign satellite. Tata-Sky has on Indian satellite. Reliance Big TV has nine
transponders on foreign satellite. Videocon has 10 transponders on foreign
satellite. Sun’ Direct TV has five transponders on Indian and foreign
satellites;.one on [ndian and four on foreign. Bharti Telemedia Limited also
has 11 transponders on foreign satellite. DD Free Dish has six
transponders on Indian satellite. This demand is repeatedly growing. If you
see the overall breakup of the charges which are paid for the satellite

_ - transponders to the Department of Space, last year itself it ran into a total of.
about हैं 539.62 crore". ह

2.18, . As per Audit, DoS faited to provide satellite .capacity (Ku band transponders) ori
domestic satellites as it was not able to realize the communication satellites-as planned.

Out of hine éatellites with an aggregate of 218 Ku band transponders planned for launch

during Eleventh Five Year Plan period, DoS could eventually realize three satellites with :


आन

4 तु श

48 Ku band transponders, which was only 22 per cent of the target. When asked about
_ the reasons far non realization of the satellite capacity and did the DoS take any
emergent measures to realize the satellite capacity as planned:

“DoS stated that it may be noted that Ku band bent-pipe transponders can *
be used for multiple services like DTH, V-SAT, DSNG, etc. Out of the 218
transponders, thdse planned on ACTS-1 & ACTS-2 (104 transponders}
were intended for V-SAT services. INSAT-4CR with 12 Ku band
transponders (which was realized on a fast track mode to mifigate the
impact of loss of INSAT-4C due to GSLV-FO03 launch failure) is a spillover
from 10° FYP. In view of multiple failures encountered in GSLV-Mkll
resulting in non-availability of indigenous launchers for communication
satellites and inability to secure adequate coordinated orbital spectrum,
Government approvals cauld be processed only for GSAT-8, GSAT-9 and
GSAT-10 and others got delayed. While 36 Ku transponders were realized
through GSAT-8 and GSAT-10 and with procured faunches, 12
transponders on GSAT-9 were not realized in view of non-availability of
GSLV launch vehicle. Subsequently, with the launch of GSAT-14 and
GSAT-16, another 18 Ku transponders were realized. With GSAT-15 due
for.faunch in 2" half of 2015, another 24 Ku transponders will be available.
Thus, a total of 78 Ku band transponders will be available by end of 2015.
Further, GSAT-9 with 12 Ku transponders and GSAT-18 with 12 Ku
transponders (being realized in 12" FYP) will increase to a capacity of 102.
In order to address various issues related to communication satellite service
availability, Dr. K. Kasturirangan Committee was constituted to recommend
suitable measures".

४) Eorced Migration of DTH Service Providers to Foreign Satellite Systems Service Providers to Foreign Satellite Systems

2.19, According to the Audit, DoS was unable fo maintain the satellite capacity already
being used for DTH service due to technical problems, using these capacities to
substitute for satellites being de-commissioned, etc DoS could not satisfactorily fulfill the
competing needs of critical, strategic and commercial sectors, which led to a forced
_.migration of commercial DTH users (Sun DTH, Afrtel and Reliance) to_ foreign satellite
systems. GSAT-6 satellite was committed through firm transponder lease agreements
for Reliance, Airtel and Videocon. GSAT-B was: planned in 2007 but it was actually
launched in May 2011, after delay of more than three years. Subsequently, Airtel was
allocated capacity on INSAT-ACR and in 2008 Reliance and Videocon moved to foreign

satellites MEASAT and ST respectively. Due to de-commissioning of two satellites,


चढ़. ‘
Edusat in September 2010 and GSAT-2 in March/April: 2011, ‘Airtel was vacated frorn
‘{NSAT-4CR in order to accommodate the services of these satellites and ta meet their
additional capacity requirements. INSAT-4B allotted for Sun DTH. Four transponders of
INSAT-4B were switched off in July: 2010 due to power problems in the satellite. In
September 2010, Sun OTH consequently moved to foreign satellite, MEASAT-2, Pianned
DTH Satellites GSAT-9 (spare) and GSAT-45 (DTH applications) could not be launched

due to non-availability of indigenous launch vehicle, GSLV.

2.20. DoS attributed (June 2010/March.2014/June 2014) the delay in faunch of GSAT-8
to changes in design of the satellite and modifications carried out in its solar array system
and associated power systems, which were prompted due to failure of the power systems
reported in two other satellites viz. W2M-22 and INSAT-4B. DoS added that after
examining the prevailing situation in 2011 when GSAT-8 was finally launched, ICC
decided to allot transponders of GSAT-8 to more important national and government
services, which could only be met through INSAT/GSAT capacity. DoS also stated that
faiture of INSAT-4B and GSLV were unexpected contingency situations. Dos further ;
stated that best efforts were being made such as accelerated realisation of increased
number of high power satellites to support DTH services and procured launches,
‘augmentation of capacity, etc:, for enabling it to cater to demands of ail kinds of services

including DTH

2.21, During oral evidence, the Sepretary DoS supplementing the above ‘submitted aS.

under:

"Sir, the DTH itself started in the late 90s. Se, the kind of high power that
-_ was required was also stated around that time, We started our first high
capacity in INSAT-4A. Up to INSAT-3 while we had a transponder its
power was much less, Even the others had just started. It was not very
muchiearlier, It was a maiteriof five years’ >


W-

5 4 a पु
| 2.22. Further, he submitted that:

"What we did further actually we launched GSAT-16 in December last year
and GSAT-15 is getting ready for launch in the last quarter of-this year.
These we are trying fo do through procured launchers because they are in
the- three-and-a-half tonne capacity. GSAT-17 and GSAT-18 will also
ensure certain capacity. ft is going through the process of the final *
approvals of the Government. They will came up and will be in orbit before
the end of next year. So, with these things the overall capacity availability
will be significant. Even after covering for this, the capacity that is available
we will be in a position to reorganize and re-position some of the satellites
and in principle can bring back the capacity ‘which we have given through
the foreign satellite".

2.23, The Secretary, 1005 also submitted that:

“We did try to launch, for example INSAT-4C which was supposed to be
faunched by our own launcher. That launcher. failed and the satellite did not
go into space. We replaced it with INSAT-4GR within about a year-and-a
half time from that failure and we were able to’ put it up because we did it on
our PSLV launcher. But with respect to other satellite realisation we also
had to go through a large arnount of technology development and then
ensure that the failures which we have seen on’ the satellite which were
launched are not going to recur". ह

2.24, As per Audit, in.spite of having sufficient funds, DoS did not consider procured
launches for its. ready satellites or acquire satellites in orbit and position it under the
orbital slot coordinated by India. When asked to specify as to what prevented fhem from
launching from foreign satellite vehicles and acquiring satellites:
"DoS replied that during the -11" FYP, three satellites carrying Ku band
transponders were planned fo be launched using the indigenous GSLV-Mkl|
and two satellites using GSLV-MkII] launch vehicles. While weight class of
two satellites planned for GSLV-MkII!, (GSAT-10 & GSAT-15) was

economically viable for procured launch and the same was pursued. It may ”
also be noted: that a committee under the Chairmanship of Dr. K

Kasturirangan was formed after GSLV failure, to suggest the measures to: ~

minimize the impact of failure on GEOSAT program road map in the year
2011. The recommendations of this Committee,.among other things,
include launch of satellites on procured vehicles as an interim measure.
This is being implemented in 12" FYP. Acquiring in-orbit foreign satellite(s)
for positioning in Indian orbital slot is not technically feasible as :
* The coverage. do not match to Indian co-ordinates leading to
significantly compromised performance, and

+ The transponder design parameters like frequency plan, coverage,
rolt-off, EIRP etc will be as per original operator's requirements

‘


-18-

optimized for operation from their own slot. Hence it is not possible to
meet the performance & co-ordination requirements of Indian slots.

In spite of this, an attempt was made fo source foreign satellites in orbit, for
Indian use through RFP. However, this attempt turned out to be futile".

2.25; Audit stated that DoS was unable to maintain the satellite capacity already used

for DTH Service due to technical problems, using these capacities to substitute for

satellites being de-commissioned, etc. When the Ministry was asked to clarify the

technical problems for maintenance of the sateflite capacity:

2.26. On being asked as to what prevented DoS from not satisfactorily fulfilling the
competing needs of critical, strategic and commercial sectors, which led to a forced

migration of commercial DTH users (Sun DTH, Airtel and Reliance) to foreign satellite

systems:

“DoS clarified that the first generation of Ku-Band DTH satellites were buitt

during 10" FYP, namely INSAT-4A, 48 & 40. Issues of high power
handling, on-board thermat management, and performance of dual-gridded
antenna over large temperature excursions encountered in orbit posed

technological challenges. Similar issues resulting in operational constraints

are faced in satellites made by others also”.

“DoS answered -that as per the Norms, Guidelines and Procedures for
Implementation of the Policy Framework for Satellite Communications in
India approved by the Cabinet in the year 2000, INSAT capacity comprises
of capacity on indigenous INSAT/GSAT satellites and capacities leased on
foreign satellites. Accommodating the service providers (Sun DTH, Airtel
DTH, Reliance) through leased capacity was necessitated to by:

(a), Unexpected power anomaly on INSAT 4B — M/s Sun DTH;
(b) Additional capacity requirements ~ M/s Airtel DTH; and
(0)... Defay in‘launch of GSAT-8- M/s Reliance...

The demand from strategic and societal applications originated fromm
Goyernment users and these demands had to be met only from the
satellites built by DoS/SRO and were therefore accorded priority on °
satellites built by DoS/SRO. DTH operators, on the other hand, were
largely in the commercial private sector and their demands at specific
orbital slots, was higher-than the available capacity and hence they were
accommodated on leased capacity from foreign satellites".


19+

i

VI) Capacities Created Remz Created Remained Idle

2.27, “GSAT was planned to meet the transponder commitments made to Reliance
and Videocon, the satellite launch was delayed by more than three years with the result
that the service providers -moved to~ foreign’ satellites. In May 2011, when satellite -. -
capacity was eventually available in GSAT-8, the capacity was not earmarked and
remained idle. In December 2011, the satellite was finally allocated for non-DTH use

(strategic and government users).

, 2.28. The 12 Ku band transponders of INSAT-4A satellite were allotted to Tata Sky on
an exclusive basis. At the instance of Tata Sky, in September 2012, DoS launched
GSAT-10 satellite having 12 Ku band transponders and positioned it at the same orbital
slot (83° east) as that of INSAT 4A with the intention of swapping the 12 transponders of
INSAT-4A with 12 transponders in GSAT-10. Tata Sky, which was initially willing to swap
the transponders of INSAT-4A with GSAT-10, subsequently in July 2013 declined the
proposal on the ground that swapping would not provide additional capacity required by
them. Apprehending litigation from Tata Sky, DoS did not allécate capacity on GSAT-10
to any other service provider and entire 12 Ku band transponders capable of generating

huge revenue remain idle (January 2015) since its launch in May 2011.

2.29, In March 2014, DoS replied that Ku band capacity in GSAT-10 was treated as
spare capacity with appropriate approvals, As per Audit, the reply is not acceptable, ‘as
spare capacity of Ku band on GSAT-10 was not a planned option, but a fall back option |.
since Tata Sky was given exclusive first right of refusal on INSAT-4A. Pending Tata Sky's
decision, the 12 transponders could not be utilized otherwise, with the implied pecuniary _
_ loss to the public exchequer. Audit further observed that allocation of satellite capacity

being the responsibility of ICC, the decision‘to keep satellite capacity as spare was taken :

without the specific approval.of ICC.


~20-

"2:30, Audi observed that satellite. launch of Geo Stationary Satellite (GSAT-8) initiaily
intended for DTH use was delayed by more than three years. When satellite capacity was
eventually available, it was not immediately earmarked and capacity remained ide from

- July 2011 to December-2071.- The satellite was finally allocated for non-DTH use. When -
asked about the reasons for the delayed launch of GSAT-8:

“DoS replied that initially, GSAT-8 satellite was planned with 18 Ku band
transponders to match with the coordinated spectrum at that point of time.
Later, it was decided fo increase the transponders from 18 to 24 in view of
enhanced coordinated spectrum available. !n addition, some. corrective
measures were to be incorporated in the power system of the satellite
based on the experience of anomalies in the on-orbit satellites: Hence the
realization of GSAT-8 was delayed".

2.31. When asked why wasn’t the satellite capacity earmarked & remained idle when it _
was specifically intended for DTH use:

"DoS replied that it may be noted that the Ku Band Transponders design of
GSAT-83 can cater to DTH as well as V-SAT (e-Governance, Armed forces,
Banking etc) services. When GSAT-8 was realized in orbit, the DTH
requirements were already catered to and there was no demand for DTH
service at particular orbital slot. Hence GSAT-8 capacity was utilized by
government users as the demand for government was higher".

2.32, Further, it was enquired that why was the satellite allocated for non DTH use:
"DoS reiterated that the DoS caters to strategic and societal requirements
of Government in addition to DTH services. The demand from critical
national and government services including armed forces can be met only
through capacity on satellites buitt by [SRO. Therefore the capacity
available on GSAT-8 was allotted to government users". _
2.33. As highlighted by Audit, DoS Launched GSAT-10 satellite in order to swap with
capacity allocated to Tata Sky on INSAT-4A, which was-functioning with reduced power.
Tata ‘Sky subsequently declined the proposal but DoS did not ‘allocate capacity on GSAT-
10 to any other service provider apprehending litigation, as Tata Sky was given exclusive

first right of refusal on Ku band capacity of INSAT-4A. On being asked as to why did Tata

Sky decline the allocated capacity when if was given preferential treatment and why were


. नशा
i 5

the exclusive rights accorded to a private party in violation of principle of non-
exclusiveness of [CC DoS Teplied that:

“that it may be -kindly noted that as per the approval obtained, DoS
taunched GSAT-10 satellite in order fo replace the aging INSAT-2E, INSAT-
3B and to create additional capacity for growth and also to provide on-orbit
‘back up to GPS Aided Geo Augmented Navigation (GAGAN). The capacity
of 12 Ku transpohders on GSAT-10 was.meant for replacing the traffic of
INSAT-3B and to provide additional capacity to meet the increased demand
of DTH operators for additional transponders. Hence, it is not appropriate
to say that GSAT-10 satellite was launched in order to swap with capacity
allocated to Tata Sky on INSAT-4A. Tata Sky were planning to expand their
network and were expecting increased number of transponders available
ftom the operating orbital slot. Hence, they were not in fayour of only
swapping 12 transponders from INSAT-4A to GSAT-10. Taking into account
the coordinated bandwidth in any given orbital slot we can operate a
maximum of 24 Ku transponders. As pointed out by the C&AG in ifs report,
DTH services require a capacity of 12 - 24 Ku-band transponders at a
single orbital location to expand services.-In view of this any additional
capacity available at the same location will be an essential requirement for
the service provider. Hence making additional capacity available for DTH
providers cannot be construed as exclusive offer”.

2.34. When asked why no formal amendment was effected when Tata Sky had agreed

to relinquish the first right of refusal on the orbital sict in a meeting held on July 2013:
“DoS replied that as the process of finding the solution envisaged in the
meeting held on July, 2013, is still in progress, the formal amendment has

not yet been signed".

Vil} Dorninance of Foreign Satellites Over Indian Sky Satellites Over Indian SI

2.35. Audit stated that a comparison of demand met through INSAT systems against the
foreign satellite systems showed that initially during 2006 to 2009, major portion of

services were being provided through indian satellite capacity. Thereafter, INSAT

transponders providing. DTH service reduced. from_30. units to 19 units in. 2013 and...

beyond. There was a progressive increase in dependence on foreign satellite systems
है from 6.5 units in 2004 to 57 units in 2013, Based on the assessment of demand in DTH
sector, a demand analysis was prepared by Department of Space in May 2013
According to these estimates, the demand was expected to increase to aver 200 units

beyond the year 201 3, which was planned to be met almost entirely through foreign


$ -22- ;

' satellite systems. Although there were requests for satellite capacity from INSAT system,

Do$ did not consider these on the ground that these satellite capacities were not feasible

to be realized in near future.

2.36, . Thus, inability to create and maintain planned capacity for DTH services along with
increased dependence on foreign satellite systems even for future needs may eventually
lead to a situation in which only 10 per cent of the Ku band requirement for DTH services
» will be provided by Indian satellites resulting in 1055 of opportunities ‘for revenue

generation and strategic interests.

2.37, in March 2014, DoS stated that to overcome the shortage in Ku band
transponders, best efforts were being made in accelerated realization of increased
number of high power satellites to-support DTH like services, procured launches and
augmentation of capacity: DoS added that this coupled with tevised ‘policy for
transponder allocation and pricing for which approval was awaited from Cabinet, it would

- be able to cater to the demand for alt kind of services including DTH sector.

' 2.38, Audit observed that though BoS had the foresight to recognize the risks of
impfementing an open sky policy for allocation of satellite capacity for DTH services in
protecting strategic interests, challenges to development of Indian space secfor and
business ‘opportunity, etc. yet it was unable to develop a strategy and implement a plan

to offset these risks.

2.38. AS highlighted by Audit, out of the fotal 76 Ku band transponders used by Indian |
DTH operators in July 2013, only 19 transponders (25 per cent of total) belonged to
indian satellites. The remaining 57 transponders (75 per cent of total) were on foreign
satellites. Tata Sky, which was using 12 transponders in the INSAT system, had also

decided in July 2013 to migrate to foreign satellites arrangement as a permanent


-23-
measure. As such, only 10 per cent of the satellite capacity for the DTH service would be
serviced by INSAT system. The future requirement of transponders for DTH services was
also planned to be met largely from foreign satellite. When asked to specify the exact
- Teasons as’to why the.DTH. service providers were using foreign satellites and the details
of the satellite launches planned in next seven years and Ku band capacity that would be

available through them:

"as per SATCOM policy frame work approved by Cabinet in year 2000, the
indigenous as well as leased transponders are part of INSAT system. DTH

_ demand for transponders in the country witnessed large growth in a short
period as compared fo the world DTH market. DTH operators wanted to
start their services as early as they could. In such a situation, the options
available for DoS were to:

(a) accommodate DTH services by allotting the capacity available on
satellites built by [SRO; or

{b) lease foreign satellite capacity temporarily to accommodate DTH
services.

Tata Sky DTH, Airtel DTH, Sun DTH and DD DTH were successfully
‘accommodated in satellites built by. ISRO and Videocon, Reliance and Dish
TV in foreign satellite in the year 2009. Accommodating the service
providers (Sun DTH, Airtel, Reliance) through leased capacity was
necessitated by:

‘(a) Unexpected power anomaly on INSAT 4B — Mis Sun DTH;
(b) — Additional capacity requirements — M/s Airtel; and
(c) Delay in launch of GSAT-8- M/s Reliance ह

in the immediate future it is planned to launch four satellites carrying Ku
band transponders. Out of these GSAT-15, GSAT-18 and GSAT-9 will add
48 Ku band transponders and GSAT-11 (3 high throughput satellite with
multi-beam coverage). will provide, 10 Gbps capacity for. supporting .V- .
SAT/broadband applications. Beyond 2017, future satellites will be
envisaged as part of 13" FYP and the process of identifying satellite and
payload composition for each satellite is under progress. DoS is exploring
fo take appropriate measures fo bring the DTH operators back on satellites
built by ISRO and address various issues of providing the requisite capacity
to various services in broadcasting and-telecorn sectors".

4


अब

IX) Crowding of Foreign Satellites in Orbital Slots Above India
2.40. Orbital siot is the position of a geo-stationary satellite above earth. Member

countries under the framework of United Nations acquire these orbital slots through a

. ‘coordination - process ; at International Telecommunication Union (ITU). Any country *

desirous of providing satellite based services within its national boundary must obtain the
approval of the {TU for operating a communication satellite in a particular orbital slot. The
orbital slots positioned above a country are convenient for its application and called
country specific slots for each country. The regulation towafds operating a satellite is
governed by the following criteria:

° Any country can cover any region of the world and the requests are
5. recarded in [TU on ‘first-come-first served’ basis;

* Coordination with neighbouring satellites as identified by ITU is
required to be completed;

o After coordination of the orbital slot, member countries should put
their satellites in the designated orbital slots and spectrum filed
should be brought to use within the ‘due diligent’ period of seven
years from the date of filing the first request; and

° The satellites should be operated continuously in a coordinated
orbital slot without any discontinuity. The maximum discontinuity.
allowed would be three years and the position needs to be informed
fo ITU.”
Thus, ITU coordination involving satellite bands at {TU level is a lengthy process
tequiring considerable lead time, This, together with the necessity to maintain the satellite

fleet for long period without any discontinuity etc., makes the orbital slot a scarce and

valuable resource... . - यु "न नल

2.41. India specific orbital slots are located between 40° and 120° east. DoS had

successfully placed five Indian satellites viz..INSAT-4A, 4B, 4CR, GSAT-8 and 5501-10 का

at orbital 8॥०5. 83९ 93.5" 74°, 65° and 83° east respectively. Of these, only INSAT-4A
and 4B provided capacity for commercial DTH service. As such, Indian administration

needed to coordinate adequate number of Ku band orbital stots in the sky. 7005 could not


: 48. ; :
achieve the targeted Ku band capacity to meet its commitments for DTH service
providers during Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007-12) at the critical point when the DTH
services were being introduced in India under the umbrella of ‘oper sky’ policy. It was a
fortuitous turn of events for the foreign satellite owners, who were ready at the opportune *
time to place their satellites over five orbital slots in indian skies for providing DTH
services in India. The five foreign satellites viz. NSS-6, Measat-3, SES-7, ST-2 and
Asiasat-8 were providing DTH service and were positioned at 95°, 91.5°, 108.2°, 88°

100.5° east respectively,

2.42. Audit noted that leasing of another foreign satellite Asiasat-7 in the orbital slot 837
was also under active consideration of the [CC in July 2012. However, due to the strong
views of Mol&B against placement of a foreign satellite Asiasat-7 in the Indian orbital stot,

itwas ultimately decided not to proceed with leasing of the foreign satellite.

‘2.43. With the increased dependence on foreign satellite systems for DTH service, there
was a crowding of foreign satellites over Indian skies, which had the following implication:
_ “Increased competition for orbital slots over Indian Skies: DTH service
providers were, using 57 Ku band transponders of five foreign satellites
against 19 transponders in three Indian satellites. With the exit of Tata Sky,
the foreign satellite utilization which is presently 75 per cent, would be more
ttian 90 per cent. DoS had also conceded that Ku band satellite capacity
for DTH services from Indian satellites were not feasible in the near future

and had planned to meet the future demand also from foreign satellites”.
2.44, DoS replied that in March 2014, the orbital slots and coordinated space spectrum
resources belonging to ladia will continue to remain with India and be available for
various services as long.as INSAT satellites were operated therein irrespective of the

capacities leased by India from foreign satellites for DTH.

2.45. Audit observed that crowding of foreign satellites and steady business opportunity

to foreign satellite owners would result in continued priority for thern in their slots and


~26-
efforts to protect Indian coordinatéd spectrum and additional coordination would be a

difficult exercise.

2.46. Audit was of the view that there was a need for the coordination of more number of
orbital slots. The foréign satelite owners would continue to provide satellites in their
orbital slats since their satellites continue to get business from India. The need was for
DoSASRO to aggressively capture DTH business opportunity in India in view of

preferential treatment given to. Indian satellite as per SATCOM policy.

2.47. DoS, therefore, needed fo plan and coordinate more number of Ku band orbital
slots"and satellites to bring back those DTH service providers to INSAT system that had

; moved to foreign satellites. However, as DoS had already planned future DTH:
requirement from foreign satellites it needs to work out medium term and long term
strategy to avoid monopoly of foreign satellites. DoS, however, did not indicate medium
term and long term strategy, but stated in March 2014 that the process ‘of coordinating
additional orbital slot/spectrum was a continuous process and was being handled by DoS

on a continuous basis based on the demand, future technology advances and DoS plans.

2.48. As per Audit, non-achievement of targetted Ku ‘band capacity to meet its
commitments for DTH service providers was fortuitous for the foreign satellite owners,
who were ready at the opportune time to place their satellites over five orbital slois in
Indian skies for providing DTH services in India, thereby, crowding of foretgn satellites
~ over India consequently increasing the demand for orbital slots affecting INSAT system.
On being asked whether the Ministry is contemplating any measures for achieving.
targeted Ku band capacity resulting in-availability of strategically important slots of India:
the Ministry replied that Geo-stationary orbital slots can be coordinated. under

a

International Tele-communication Union (ITU) over any region and.in any frequency band


1 aT ~27- 1

through ITU coordination process, “on the basis of firstcome-first-served principle.

However, downlink rights are governed by country specific. regulations. To enable the ,

DTH service providers fo operate over Indian region DoS went through the process of

indigenous system was inadequate. It may be noted that no new foreign satellite was

". moved over fo the orbital locations in order to enable the operation of the DTH service

through leasing process. DoS/tSRO is making all its efforts to strengthen INSAT system ,

in the country to enhance the Ku band capacity.

2.49. When asked as fo how does the DoS plan to protect Indian coordinated spectrum
and additional coordination between INSAT satellites as a result of crowding of foreign
satellites in orbital slots above India:

"DoS replied that coordination between existing adjacent satellites of
different countries and fresh coordination by any country are governed
through International Telecommunication Union (ITU) by means of well
established Radio Regulation procedures. DoS/ISRO is planning to follow
such well established procedure".

_ x) Inability of DOS to Bring Back DTH Service Providers to INSAT System of DOS to Bring Back DTH Service Providers to INSAT System

2.50. The arrangement of foreign satellite capacity to Indian DTH industry was
envisaged fo be a short term measure-to ensure that the service could be brought back ta
INSAT system as and when Indian satellite capacity was available. To ensure that INSAT
system gets priority over foreign satellite system, ICC put in place a back’ to back

_ @tmangement mechanism.so that. service. Providers who had moved ta foreign. satelite

system could be brought back.

2.51.~ However this arrangement did not work: favourably: for DoS due to the following

reasons:
(a). Failure of DoS in creating/maintaining capacities: DoS could not realise. its
communication satellites in time, Due to these problems, most of the DTH

--leasing transponders from foreign satellite service praviders whenever the capacity in the - -


“28.

i

sénvice providers such 88 Reliance, Videocon, Sun DTH and Airtel moved
to foreign satellites. Thése DTH service providers later did not prefer to
return fo INSAT system due to trust deficit that was created

These DTH service providers later did not prefer to return to INSAT systern due to
- trust deficit that was created due to the following circumstances: ~~

0) Reliance and Videocon, after waiting for the launch of GSAT-8
satellite, moved to foreign satellites since GSAT-8 was delayed by
more than 3 years; .

(il) Airtel was forced fo vacate INSAT-4CR to accommodate sociat
networks of ISRO with the result that Airtel also moved to foréign
satellite capacity; and

(ii) Tata Sky, the major non Government DTH service provider in the
(NSAT system had ‘also decided fo move to a foreign satellite. With
this, more than 90 per cent of the satellite capacity requirement of
Indian DTH service would be serviced -by foreign satellites.

(b) Inherent issues in Migration: DTH service is ‘location specific’ and requires
: that satellite capacity should be available at a particular position in the sky

only. Any change in the position of the satellite would result in migration
expenses to the DTH service provider besides causing re-orientation of
dish antennas by ‘a large number of users. The additional investment
would be to the tune of € 60 crore approximately. Therefore, bringing back
of service providers from foreign satellite fo INSAT system would.be an
improbable and difficult exercise. Back fo Back arrangement was put in
place by [CC to ensure that INSAT system get preference to foreign
satellite system as provided in SATCOM Policy. DTH service providers had
fo be moved to foreign satellite systems due to delayed launch of GSAT-8.
Eventually, when GSAT-3 was launched in May 2011, though satellite
capacity was available. with DoS, it was not earmarked though meeting of
ICC was convened in July 2011, Around the same time, lease agreements
of at least three service providers had expired or were due to expire.
DOS did not even attempt to bring the service providers back fo
INSAT/GSAT system, instead, lease agreements with the foreign
satellite providers was renewed far further periods.


“29.
2.52, DoS stated that In March 2014, DTH service providers could net be brought back
to INSATIGSAT due fo insufficient available capacity to meet DTH requirements, as
capacity on GSAT-8 was allocated to meet national and government services. The reply
needs to-be viewed in, the light-of.the fact that GSAT-8 was initially planned to cater to
requirements of DTH service providers (2005-07). But due to delays in its launch DTH
service providers were accommodated on foreign satellites. Once capacity was allocated
on foreign satellites, it was difficult to bring the service providers back to INSAT system

for operational reasons such as location specific nature, bulk requirement of satellite

capacity and dish migration expenses and customer inconvenience.

2.53. Audit observed that DoS arranged foreign satellite capacity to Indian DTH industry
as a short term measure to ensure that the service could eventually be brought back to
INSAT system. As DoS could not realize its communication satellites in time, most of the
DTH service providers moved to foreign satellite. These DTH service providers later did
not prefer to return to INSAT system due to trust deficit. When asked, about the steps
were being taken by DoS to rectify the trust deficit and bringing ‘back the DTH service
providers to the INSAT system ‘and does the DoS think that it is really possible to get
-back the DTH providers who have since shifted to foreign satellites DoS reptied that:
"DoS has plans to bring the DTH operators back on satellites built by
DoS/ISRO. DoS has protected the interest of DTH operators and they
continue to be the users of INSAT system which comprises of leased as
well as indigenous transponders. The-business relationship between DTH
operators and DoS continue to be good. DoS/[SRO is ‘working towards
enhancing the capacities for DTH services from a given_ slot. which is
essential for addressing the growth requirements of any DTH operator.
With increased capacity it will be feasible to.bring back the DTH operators
on satellites built by DoS/ISRO" .
2.54. Audit ebserved that DTH service is focation specific’ and any change in the
_ position of the satellite would result in mitigation expenses to the DTH service provider

besides causing inconvenience to the customers. Therefore, bringing back service


i 30-;
providers from foraign satellife to INSAT systern would be an improbable and difficult

exercise. On being asked whether ‘the DoS had this in rind when the DTH ‘service

providers started migrating to foreign satellite systems and wanted to know if the DoS

_.fook/propose. any measures for bringing back the DTH service providers back to INSAT |
system DoS replied that:

"DoS is aware that the DTH operator would have difficulties to migrate their
services from one sateltite to another in view of the financial implications
and inconvenience to the customers. Any DTH operator would be willing to
move fe a new location only when his capacity requirements of praviding a
larger number of channels cannot be met frorn his operating orbital location,
Increasing larger number of channels by DTH service provider may have to
‘be adopted due to: -

. The additional capacity required to beam high quality HD & Ultra-HD,
3b TV channels, especially sports, music, movies etc, and

. Addition in number of regional language channels

DTH operator would have to balance the need to expand services with the
difficulties involved in migration ta different orbital slot. Therefore, if the
required additional capacity were to be made available or committed 10 the
DTH operator by DoS/ISRO with assured continuity in the future, it would
be possible to bring back DTH operators to satellites built by DoS/ISRO.
DoS/ISRO is planning to initiate discussions in the ICG, Space Commission
and with the government for finding a suitable strategy, including the
regulatory provisions in the country, so that in the coming years Indian
satellites can meet the transponder capacity requirements of users
including that of DTH services".


31- -
CHAPTER ~ til
ALLOCATION OF SATELLITE CAPACITY
3.1. Allocation of satellite capacity for DTH service was to be done in accordance with
thé /provisions- ofthe SATCOM palicy.. According to Article: 2.5.2 of the policy, INSAT
Coordination Committee (ICC) was to earmark at least a certain percentage of capacity in
INSAT system for use by the non-governmental users who had been authorized by law to
provide various telecommunication services including broadcasting. Article 2.5.3 of the’
_ poticy stipulated that ICC was to evolve the procedures from time to time taking into
account the capacity available and prevailing situation in the satellite communications

market.

3.2. Article 2.6.2 of the policy further stated that once capacity was earmarked by ICC,
DoS was to provide the satellite capacity following ifs own procedures. In case the
demand exceeded available capacity, DoS was fo evolve suitable transparent procedures

for allocation of capacity, which could be any equitayle method such as auction, good

faith, negotiation or first come first served basis etc. As of 31 July 2013, five Indian
satellites were identified for DTH service in india, as shown below:
fe | Date of Mission Number of Ku Band DTH service
No. Jaunch life transponders provider to whom
. (Years) . . | capacity was
है -atlocated
Total | Allocated.far fo
| | DTH Service |
1 - INSAT 44, 22 12 12 12 Tata Sky
है। | December
2005 :
12 7 “5 “INSAT 48 12 January: 12 Poop se) DB, Sun DTH ~—
» 2007 _
3 ‘| INSAT4CR 2 12 42 P| Not allocated
- September : हु
2007 हि
4° GSAT 8 21 May 12 ia 24 | ° | Not allocated
2014 _.
5 _-GSAT 10 29 . 16 12 P| Not allocated
"| September है
2012 : है
Total - छा | i



392-

q . 4 . 4

=) Satellite Capacity Not Earmarked By ICC

“3.3.” ICC was not convened after June 2004 and was re-constituted by the Government
of India only in May 2011, after lapse of nearly seven years. in the meantime, three ~
-- satellites -were-launched,’.in which-capacity. was allocated to DTH service providers

directly by DoS, which was not as per SATCOM policy.

"3.4. While confirming the facts, DoS stated in December 2012 that rnembers were
informed about the transponder allotments to DTH services in the Technical Advisory
Group (TAG) meetings. Audit did not find the reply acceptable as TAG was only a
technical subcommittee of ICC and its mandate was not fo earmark satellite capacity in

- INSAT system.

3.5. When asked why was the INSAT Coordination Committee (ICC), which was to
earmark satellite capacity, not convened after June 2004 and reconstituted by the
Government of India only in May 2011, after fapse of nearly seven years, DoS answered
that since the Technical Advisory Group (TAG) of ICC was functioning til December 2008
and DoS was assigned most of activities related to communication satellites, there was
no compelfing need to convene the ICC meeting. However, DoS/ISRO will ensure that in

future at regular intervals, the ICC is convened.

3.6. During oral evidence, the Secretary, Mol&B submitted as under:

" the hon. Member wanted to know whether we had initiated any steps for
ICC meetings. | wish to inform you that on 26th of August 2014 | had
_canvened a meeting with the Department of Space Officials. In that, we had
detailed discussions regarding the. representations which were made by the

DTH service providers",
..3.7....When asked about the last meeting. of [CC hefd and what décisions were taken

therein, the Ministry reptied that the last ICC meeting (ICC-75) was held on March 23

2015 and the minutes of the meeting are under preparation.


33.

I) Role_of Ministry of _Information and Broadcasting in the Allocation of

Satellite Capacity 200 भी श; शी दी दशक

3.8. #७०णदाएु 0 the Allocation of Business Rules, 1961, the Ministry of Information
and Broadcasting (Mol&B) was responsible for matters relating to broadcasting in India

and DoS is responsible for all activities connected with space, DTH service being a

broadcasting service comes under-purview of Mol&B. Mot&B is also a member of ICC.

* By not convening ICC, MIB was not involved in the satellite capacity allocation decision

making process.

3.9. In May 2014, MoI&B also agreed that ICC being the apex body for all maiters
relating to allocation of transponders, it should be mandatory that all allocations be made

by DoS with the approval.of ICC.

3.10. During oral evidence, the Secretary, Mol&B submitted as under:

"H | may revert back to the subject, we had aiready submitted our
comments to the draft Report of the C&AG and the salient features have
already been covered in the report but from time to time we have been
receiving representations from the DTH operators regarding additional
Ku/BSS plan band for DTH services, Open Sky Policy to atlow hiring of
foreign sateillites/transponders and for the issue of short-term contract being -
signed by DoS with foreign satellite owners, In this regard,.! have also held
a meeting in my chamber on 26" August, 2014 with the representatives of
Department of Space and we arrived at a solution that it is better that we
have much more coordination, much greater harmony in our operations so
that all the guidetines, rules and regulations which are framed by the
Department of Space are in syne with what exactly the other requirements
of the Ministry of 1&B"

ill} Sateliite Capacity Allocation Procedire Nof Developed by ICC and DoS | .

3.14, As per Audit, the procedure for allocation of satellite capacity was not framed by
ICG as envisaged in Article 2.5.2 of SATCOM policy unti! February 2013. In the absence
of an ICC approved transponder alfocation policy, there was no prescribed procedure
within DoS. for allocation of satellite capacity for DTH service providers. Though .DoS-

stated in March 2011 that after the announcement of SATCOM policy, generally


~34- A
bandwidths were allotted on first come-first served’ basis by maintaining a waiting list.of
customers, documents relating to formulation of first come first served policy, rules of
precedence, operational guidetines/manual, etc. duly approved by the competent
authority. were not found on record. DoS stated that. evolving suitable transparent: .
procedure for allocation required under Article 2.6.2 arises only when demand exceeds
available capacity. However, during the period from 2004 to 2011 when the satellite
éapacity was allocated to DTH service providers, the demand for the satellite capacity

exceeded supply in all the years. The reply confirmed the fact that neither method of

allatment nor pracedure for allocation was framed by DoS with the approval of 100.

3.12. A comparison of demand met through INSAT systems against the foreign satellite
systerns showed that initially during 2006 to 2009, major portion of services were being

provided through Indian satellite capacity as shown below:

Year . Number of transponders
Demand Met through Met through foreign satellite systems
INSAT system
2004 24.5-30.5 |_ 0 | es 2: | 6.5 है
2005 |. 34,5-57.5 [a |: ६. |
2006 46.5-72.5 12 |“ घफज़ऑ ़ ।
2007 52.5-80.5 17 ee: |
2008 | © 52.5-80.5 29.75 23.5
2009 52.5-80.5 है 29.92 : 23
| 2040 52.5-60.5 26.67 31
2011 52.5-80.5 25 91
2012 $2.5-80.5 23.5 54
2013 52.5-80.5. 49 . 57

पथ

3.13, Thereafter, INSAT transponders providing DTH service reduced from 30 units in

2609 to 19 units in 2013. There was a progressive increase in dependence on foreign
satellite systems from 6:5 units in 2004-to 57 units in 2013. Based on the assessment of
demand in DTH sector, a-demand analysis was Prepared by DoS in May 2013. According
to these estimates, the demand was expected to increase to over 200 units beyond ‘the

year 2043, which was planned to be met almost entirely through foreign satellite systems,



7 4 ~35- %
3.14. On being asked as fo how could, in contravention of SATCOM poticy, capacity be
allocated of DTH service providers directly by DoS subsequent to launching of three.
satellites without the concurrence of ICC DoS stated that:
it may-be noted as per the-Government’s rules of business, Department of .”
Space is the adiministrative Ministry with respect to satellite system where
-as Department of Telecommunication and Ministry of Information’ and
Broadcasting are assigned the responsibilities pertaining to ficense in
respective sectors. INSAT Coordination Committee (ICC) is a body to
coordinate the activities among the user departments. Based on the ICC-64
(Agenda-3, June 23, 2001) and ICC-65 (Agenda-5, January 04, 2002}
.DOS/ISRO is authorized fo make transponder allocations and keep ICC
informed. [00 has been informed whenever convened",
3.15, DoS: stated in March 2014 that evolving suitable transparent procedure for
allocation required under Article 2.6.2 arises only when demand exceeds. available
capacity. DoS further stated that the rules of precedence were not relevant since the
capacities were available. DoS added that approval of Space Commission was not
necessary, as there was no policy making involved. The reply is not acceptable, as
- SATCOM policy stipulated that procedure for allocation of satellite capacity was to be
evolved by (CC. Further, during the period from 2004 to 2011 when ICC was not in place, .
the demand for satellite capacity exceeded supply in all years. The reply also confirmed

_ the fact that neither method of allotment nor procedure for allocation was framed by DoS

and satellite capacity was committed to various DTH service providers without-an [CC - -~

approved poliey/procedure.

3.16. Audit were of the view that allocation of satellite capacity to DTH providers is an
important decision making process under DTH service. ICC, in which the Ministry of
information and Broadcasting (Mol&B} is a member, is mandated to plan and earmark
satellites capacity to users including DTH service providers. By nat convening ICC,
Mol&B was nof involved in the satellite capacity allocation decision making process. On

being asked whether the Mol&B take up the maiter with DoS to convene ICC being


36-

4 पु 3 * पु मु

responsible for matter relating to broadcasting in india of mutely followed the decisions
f है ;

taken by the DoS:

"DoS replied that from the available records, there are no communications
from Mol&B for convening the ICC meeting. DTH operators approach

es... Mol&B for. obtaining.the-service licenses. Mol&B after receiving applications
for DTH service license fram the prospective operators, communicates to
DoS/ISRO for obtaining the concurrence regarding satellite segment for
DTH services, During this process, Mol&B is fully aware of the space
segment identification/allotment to DTH operators. Mol&B is also member
of the Technical Advisory Group (TAG) of ICC"

3.17 When asked why no pracedure was formulated by DoS/ICC for allocation of
satellite- capacity for DTH service providers, the Ministry replied that the procedure
followed by DoS/ISRO is:

(a) Receive user requests for transponders capacity;

(b) Make all efforts to accommodate the users on satellites built by
: BOS/ISRO; and

(c) "When capacity is not available or inadequate on satellites built by
DoS/SRO, adopt leasing of capacity from foreign satellites.

IV) Allocation of Sateilite Capacity Out of Turn

3.18. Tata Sky was fifth in the order of preference for allocation of satellite capacity.
Tata Sky was granted precedence over DD and allocated capacity on INSAT-4A satellite
which was launched earlier in December 2005. DD, which was first in the precedence list,

was allocated capacity on INSAT-4B which was launched in January 2007.

3.19. DoS stated in March 2044 that DD was allocated capacity on a foreign satellite

; (NSS 6) before allocation. of capacity to Tata Sky on’ INSAT-4A. As DD had already
started their DTH service from the foreign satellite, the services were migrated fo INSAT-
4B after.the end-of their contract period: DoS however, did not state whether capacity on

INSAT-4A, at the prime slot of 83° east was offered to DD and turned down by the fatter,


-37-

4 4 a 3
which is significant tn the confext.that DoS granted exclusive rights over this prime slot to

Tata Sky.

3,20. Addressing the Cémmittee’s concern regarding out of turn allocation of satellite

capacity to Tata Sky, the Secretary, DoS, during oral evidence stated as under:

"We are trying to explain the situation with respect to allotment and with
respect to priority of allotment. We will come to competitiveness. This
particutar composition we had given fo Tata Sky for a 10 year period and
that price was not revised. That was one specific comment made by the
C&AG. As we said earlier, INSAT 4A and INSAT 4B were the first of this
kind of satellites that we were bringing in. If you have already been
operating and you have a demonstrated performance capability, then the
other: party which is going to take will 8180 be comfortable. This is where
the issue comes. So, our option at that point of time was, we are bringing in
a new capacity. Here is an operator who Is also prepared to take your

- services what you are providing. Unless you ensure that he is assured of
up to 10 years of licencing”.

3.21. When asked to specify the reasons for granting precedence to Tata Sky over
Doordarshan in allocation of capacity on INSAT- 4A in spite being fifth in order of
preference for allocation of satellite capacity, the Ministry stated that during the nascent
stage of DTH service, poteritial DTH operators need to engage in technical discussions
with satellite operator in order to firm up ground system and service offerings. DoS/ISRO
was engaged in discussions with all the three early starters (Tata sky, Doordarshan and

Dish TV) and firmed up satellite capacities as follows:

(a) Doordarshan started te services from leased capacity on NSS-6
located at 95°E, for a period of 3 years from June 2004;

1 -...{b} - Dish TV. started. their testing. through, INSAT-3A and subsequently
moved to leased capacity on NSS-6 located at 95°E from June 2004;
and

(०) . Tata Sky started their-service in [NSAT-4A ajter its launch in
soe 5 ~- + Decefaber 2005——-----~--- :

It may be noted that prior to the starting of DTH service by Tata Sky, Doordarshan

and Dish TV had already started their services through leased capacity for a stipulated


“38- हि नह 4

lease period using NSS-6. When Tata Sky were allotted the transponder capacity, all the

requests at that time were addressed. It is evident from the above that there is no

precedence or preference to Tata Sky over Doordarshan and Dish TV. it may also be

. .Noted-that at the-end of the-stipulated lease period of 3 years, Doordarshan moved their

service to INSAT-4B, whereas Dish TV continued on NSS-6 as they required larger
capacity. DoS/SRO offered INSAT-4A/INSAT-4B satellite capacities to Doordarshan for
starting their DTH services, However, Doordarshan desired to start their service in NSS-6
for an initial period of 3 years and subsequently moved to INSAT-4B. DoS/ISRO agreed |
fo Doordarshan's plan and accordingly accommodated their request. With regard to Sun
DTH, the fourth operator, the initial agreement was entered into in February 2005, for
transponder capacity on INSAT-4C scheduled for launch in June 2006. As the launch of
INSAT-4C failed, based on their concurrence M/s Sun DTH were accommodated on
INSAT-4B to start their service in March 2007. With regard to Reliance Big TY, the fifth
operator, the initial agreement was entered into in June 2005, for a capacity on INSAT-
4G/GSAT-8. Due to delay in launch of INSAT-4G/GSAT-8, M/s Reliance was offered the
transponder capacity on INSAT-4CR during September 2006, which was refused by the
operator. Subsequently with their concurrence, initial allocation of transponders on
MEASAT-3 was offered in June 2009. Based on the above events, it may be noted that
all the allotments made to DTH operators, especially among Doordarshan, Dish TV, Tata

Sky, Sun DTH and Refiance Big TV are in order. Therefore, Tata Sky was not given

precedence over Doordarshan. we eee cee eee -+-+ : tee pee «5

५) Grant of Exclusive Rights Over Prime Orbital Slots

3.22. “AS per Audit, DoS granted exclusive first right of refusal to Tata Sky for using Ku

_ band transponders at 83 degree east. This had resulted in a very advantageous position

for Tata Sky as any Ku band transponders launched to this orbital slot fequired to be first


-39-

offered to Tata Sky and on its refUsat onty coutd be allocaied to others. With the result,

£

the Ku band transponders of GSAT-10 satellite launched at this spot was not allocated by |

DoS fearing litigation frorn Tata Sky. Consequently 12 Ku band transponders capable of

- -generating revenue-of ¥ 60,crore.a year is.idling from September 2012 onwards...

3.23. DoS stated in December 2012 that the satellite capacity was allocated to Tata Sky

to improve acceptability of INSAT/GSAT system without compromising government

+ interest, DoS added that in March 2014 the first right of refusal was given as a technical

requirement as further expansion of capacity for DTH service was possible only at the
same orbital location. Audit had stated that DoS did not give exclusive right of first refusal

fo any other DTH service provider, indicating that DoS gave a preferential treatment to

. Tata Sky over other DTH service providers.


*, AO:
CHAPTER -IV

LEASING OF SATELLITE CAPACITY:
4.1. According to Article 2.6.5 of Norms Guidelines and Procedure (NGP) of Satellite
Communication.(SATCQM) Policy, the use, of Indian National Sateltite System (INSAT)
capacity by non-Government users was to be based on a formal lease agreement signed
between DoS/INSAT. and the party, which would spell out the technical, financial,
contractual and management terms and conditions. However, approval and control
mechanism to ensure that the various terms and conditions of the agreement were
determined after examining the technical,-financial and legal implications of the contract
as well_as to fix responsibility and accountability for management of thie contract was not

put in place in respect of DTH transponder tease agreements.

4.2. Audit also observed that there was no prescribed procedure for:

. Approval of the appropriate authority from the financial’ angle (Member
Finance of Space Commission) so that financial interests and financial risks
involved were sufficiently covered in the lease agreement;

« Approval from Ministry of Law from the legal angle;

» Duly documented meeting of Technical committee and Commercial,
negotiation Committee at the appropriaté level for negotiatiorof terms.and
conditions with the service providers; and

* Stipulation of the officials responsible for management of the contract.

DoS stated in March 2014 that various methods for leasing transponders to

commercial users in INSAT/GSAT system had since béen adopted and streamlined,

4.3, Audit observed that in respect of the transponder lease agreements entered: into
by DoS with DTH providers for allocation of satellite capacity on INSAT systems,
whereas DoS provided all technical support, invoicing and collection of payments was
done by Antrix. For thts, Antrix charged commission ranging from 16 per cent to 40 per

cent from DoS. In respect. of ihe back to back contracts entered into by Antrix with the


Al पु 4
DTH service providers for foreign satellite capacity, Antrix charged commissian of 7.6 per
cent from the DTH service providers. Though 963 offered substantial technical support in
the allocation and leasing of satellite capacity to DTH service providers, no remuneration
_..was-claimed. by-DoS.-On-the contrary, the effective realisation of revenue by DoS through
leasing of INSAT/GSAT capacity was also reduced due to considerable percentage being
paid as commission to Antrix. While agreeing that it provided technical support to Antrix,
DoS stated that in March 2014 back end work related to end user and Antrix was
significant and the current mechanism was necessary to establish INSATIGSAT system
as a good commercial venture. The reply may be viewed in the context that in spite of
tendering complete technical support for the allocation of satellite capacity in back to

back agreements, DoS did not claim any compensation from Antrix.

॥| Loss Due to Non Revision of Transponder Charges Revision of Transponder Charges.

4.4, According to the audit, the period of lease committed in the DTH transponder
lease agreements between DoS and ihe DTH service providers for, satellite capacity from
INSAT system ranged ftom five toten years. Transponder lease agreements entered by
DoS did not include provision for revision of prices. Though Dos subsequently decided
in April 2012 to raise its prices by 15 per cent ICC did not finalise the prices, due to which
the revision was not cartied out. In contrast, transponder lease agreements with foreign
satellite. operators were valid for one , to six years only. Consequently, prices of
fransponders leased from foreign satellite systems were increased by’5 to 33 per cent ©
“over. a period of one to six years whereas DTH service providers availing INSAT
transponder capacity paid the same charges for six to ten years. The poor marketing
strategy. of DoS to continue with the same prices, when foreign satellite providers हे

regularly revised their prices resulted in loss of transponder charges and provided an


i “AR

‘extra advantage to the service providers who were allocated INSAT capacity. Pricing

differential was estimated at हैं 36.17 crore to the disadvantage af DoS

Audit observed that lease period in transponder lease agreements of INSAT Ku

band satellite capacity for OTH service ranged from five fo ten years without provision for
revision of prices. Though, DoS subsequently decided to raise its prices by 15 per cent
the revision was not carried out. In contrast, the transponder lease agreements with
foreign satellite operators were valid for one to six years only. Prices of transponders
leased from foreign sateilite system were increased by 510 33 per cent over a period of
one fo six years whereas DTH ‘service providers availing INSAT transponder capacity
paid same charges for over six years to ten years. Thus, the transponder lease
agreements did not safeguard financial interests of the government. When asked to
clarify as to why no price revision clause was included in the lease agreement thereby
adversely affecting the financial interest, DoS, in their written submission to the
Committee, replied that it is appropriate fo note that DTH services being provided in
country was a new service with lots Gf uncertainties about its growth and sustainability. In
view of this, it was appropriate to efter into-a long term agreement with a fixed price.
However, this fixed price has been arrived at after accounting for cost of reatization and
internal rate of return which ensured the financial interest of the Government. The stable
and jong term pricing has improved the acceptability satellites built by DoS/SRO and

made it competitive even as it has remairied comparable 0 international'prices.

4.6. While noting that Antrix Corporation charged:a commission of 15%-14% for
leasing of satellite capacity it was asked whether DoS sought any compensation from the
lessees DoS replied that as the Contract Manager, Antrix Corporation Ltd, monitors and
manages agreements; raises invoices on a periodical basis; maintains accounts :for

receipts; recovers dues on behalf of DoS through fallow up and personal visits of officials;


-43-;

undertakes comméercial/service taxfincorne tax assessments by hiring professionals,

makes tax payments etc. Upon payment by the INSAT/GSAT transponder users, the . रा

amount towards space segment charges is transferred to DoS. DoS, then, reimburses
the contract management fees.at 15%.to Antrix Corporation Limited. Thus, DoS gets 85%

of the transponders charges that ate allotted to users,

4.7. The period of lease committed in the DTH transponders lease agreements
between DoS and DTH service providers from INSAT system ranged from 5 fo 10 years
while the transponder lease agreements with foreign satellite operators were valid for 1 to
6 years only. When asked to specify the reasons for longer term contracts which _
adversely affected the financial interests DoS answered that the DoS-User agreements
signed for DTH operations services using indigenous satellite capacity are for a longer है
term of 5-10 years, This is primarily towards providing an assurance and commitment to
the Indian DTH operators about the continued availability of space segment capacity at
the same orbital slot. Considering the large investments and risks incurred by a DTH
operator in terms of establishing feleports, Hubs (earth station), technology, redundancy,
set-top boxes, etc., the assurance on the availability of satellite space segment capacity
for a longer duration would go a fong way in computing their cash flows and evolving firm
business plans. With respect to leasing of capacity on foreign satellites, the agreements

are signed for a shorter period since it is always intended, in tune with the SATCOM

policy, fo bring services back on the satellites built by DOSASRO.

4.8. During oral evidence, the Secretary, DoS, submitted as under: हि
"Sir, | will just try to make one small point here. See, when you are trying to

‘ negotiate a contract with a particular operator, depending on that particular
operator's queries and demands, there will always be differences.
Depending on my own technical capabifity, there are differences and one is
not shown to the other. Whatever specific contract features were asked by
the parties, which was acceptable.was agreed fo".


dds.

‘ y 4

4.9. Further, duririg oral evidence, on being asked about the progress made after the हि

last recommendation about incorporation of price ‘revision clause and was there any
progress towards that, the Secretary, DoS submitted as under:
fan TT teens oe Currently with-respect to-the-price revision, we had.a mechanism which is *
being established. We are looking into that and we will come out with that
because the drait Cabinet Note also addresses al! this - what is the
category of the user and for each user what type of price should be done.
Sa, this is being addressed. We will come back with that".
4.10. When enquired on as 10 why was the decision of DoS to raise prices by 15 percent

not carried out, DoS replied that since the contract is firmed-up for fixed period, the price

revision is not feasible.

il) _ Special Terms and Conditions of Transponder Lease Agreement with Tata
Sky

4.41. Audit observed that Transponder lease agreement entered with Tata Sky
extended benefits to Tata Sky which were not offered to any of the other DTH service
providers, such as open ended commitment for satellite capacity, greater credits in the ,
case of interruption in service, provision for inspection of customer's earth station by
DoS, facility to assign iis rights or obligations to ifs affiliates. Chairman of Tata group was
one of the non-functional directors in the board of directors of Anttix. Although there
might be no direct impact on the decision making process within Antrix, allocation of Ku
band transponders of INSAT-4A on exclusive basis to Tata Sky does raise the question

of conflict of interest.

4.12. While admitting the above, DoS stated in December 2012 that the contract with
Tata Sky was entered during initial period of marketing INSAT/GSAT system with a vision
.to bring private users towards INSAT/GSAT system. DoS added that in March 2014 such
clausés were accepted based: on customer specific request as a part of negotiations and

were intended to provide certain confidence to the usets as well as flexibility ih contract


-45-

management. Audit further stated that substantial differences ‘between agreement
entered into with Tata Sky vis-a-vis other transponder lease agreements, especially ‘grant
of exclusive tights over the prime orbital slot, were also noticed by Ministry of Finance,
which requested DoS in March 2013 to re-negotiate the terms of agreement entered with

Tata Sky. However, as of June 2014, this was yet to be done.

4.13. On being asked whether the transponder lease agreement was tweaked in favour
of Tata Sky giving certain benefits to the company and not to any other DTH service
providers, DoS replied that the transponder lease agreement is not tweaked in favour of
Tata Sky. In any contract the technical terms and conditions that get finalized depends on
the issues brought to discussions by the parties. Any condition which has significant
impact on the financial aspect of the contract also gets factored into, in these
discussions. The lease agreement with Tata, Sky is executed to make indigenous
satellites built by DoSASRO with High power Ku band transponders, acceptable to DTH
service provider. It may be noted that Tata Sky was the first private operator to put trust
in indigenous satellite technologies, and agreed to pay rates for the transponders which
protected the financial interest of government.

tn) Loss Due to Undercharging of Transponder Prices

4.14. DoS under charged for the transponders of Sun DTH which resulted in a loss of &
2.94 crore over the period from 16-January 2008 to 6 July 2010. DoS also reduced the

price of these transponders with effect from January 2010 which resulted in loss of &

46.92'lakh fo DoS.

4.45. Audit further observed that without citing any reason, DoS also reduced the price
_ of these fransponders with effect from January 2010 to ₹ैं 4.70 crore per transponder,
' which resulted in loss of 46.92 lakh to DoS. DoS stated in March 2014 that the Standing

Committee was empowered to take thé decision.


‘ : 46-0 1;
4.16. During oral evidence, when asked whether Sun DTH was provided bonus time first
and other DTH operators were provided subsequently, the Secretary, DoS submitted as
under:
"No, Sir: would just explain it. -What happens is that when ane is getting
into the service, when the satellite is in place and also the operator: is

coming in, there is a minimum time by which he is able fo test it out and
then prove; and also he has to get the licence".

4.17. Further, he submitted as under:

“in all cases, there is a certain amount of free time, which is provided to
everybody. In this case, there was an extra three months, which came
because’ of the licence getting issue, the time by which they could get the
licence. This was an extra time. Otherwise, everybody is provided with
certain time where they can test it out, test the signals. That is nominal
which everybody gets. But in this particular case, there was an extra period
which came in because of the difficulties in completing the licensing
process, with the Depariments. It was causing the problem. Finally, they
had gone for litigation". :

_ 4.18. When asked about any delay occurred in the case of Sun DTH to get the licence
and who issues DTH ficences during oral evidence, the Secretary, 0५89, submitted as
under:

"This delay was frorn Network Operation Control Centre (NOCC) and not
Mol&B. There are three segments. Initially, the Mol&B comes when the
request is made. They say, okay. The final operator is the DoT”.

- 4.19. On being asked to specifically clarify that an agreement with, Sun DTH for leasing
of 6.25 transponder units in [INSAT-4B satellite at the rate of हैं 4.75 crore per

‘transponder was actually in.effect charged for only six transponders resulting. ina loss of
₹ 46.92 lakh. DoS replied that the reason for charging for 6 transponders as against 6.25
transponders is taken by DoS/SRO by following structured discussions with due
approvals. Sun Direct TV was initially offered 9x36 MHz transponders an INSAT-4C. With

the loss of INSAT-4C during launch, Sun Direct had to‘pastpone its plans fo commence

DTH business, although all the ground equipments were ready, and huge investment was


‘ न 47 हि ;
‘already made with no return. INSAT 46 carried 9x36 MHz and 3x27 MHz of Ku band
transponders. M/s DD Direct Plus of Doordarshan had been provided with 5x36 MHz
transponders for its DTH operations. Rather than await the launch of the replacement ,
satellite, INSAT-4CR, Sun. Direct opted for ku bandwidth on INSAT-4B ai 93.5 degrees. -

east, accepting the residual capacity of (4x36 + 3x27) MHz transponders on INSAT-48.
The standard bandwidth configuration preferred by a DTH operator is either 36 or 54
MHz bandwidth. As the DTH operator operates on a Multi-Channel per carrier {MCPC)
mode, working with lesser bandwidth (27 MHz transponder) poses several constraints in

‘terms of reduction in number of channels that could be multiplexed ina transponder,
additional investment in the uplink equipment chain etc. Also, unlike any DTH operator
seeking large chunks in space segment capacity, Sun Direct was ready to operate with
just 4x36 + 3x27 MHz residual capacity on INSAT-4B, Considering ail these factors, it

was decided to treat the capacity as 6 full transponders (equivalent of 36 MHz), with due

approvals.

’
{V) Allocation of Bonus Time
4.20. DoS allowed bonus free pertod of 15 months after the permitted three months
- time to Sun DTH which resulted in unintended benefit of 3.56 crore 0 Sun DTH. DoS
stated in March 2014 that the decision was taken by the Standing Commities, which was
-empowered to take the decision. Audit did not finti-the reply of DoS acceptable since the

Standing Committee was only mandated to establish the minimum price for each type of

transponders and was not mandated to extend bonus free time for usage of
transponders.

4.21. When enquired about as to what were the reasons for allowing. bonus free access
to satellite capacity for 1.5 months after the permitted three months time to Sun OTH

resulting in unintendéd benefit of = 3.56 crore to Sun DTH, DoS answered that typically, a

2


3 -48- a
service provider can access a satellite only after obtaining approvals from Mol&B,
Wireless Planning & Coordination (४४7), Network Operation Control Centre (NOCC})
etc. To facilitate the service provider to carry out initial trials and testing with the satellite
- Space. segment, free period is given to all operators. It is the standard industry practice to ~
provide a free period to a DTH service provider in the initial phase of business. Such free
period is ufilized by the operator to get hands-on feel of operations on the satellite,
resolve technical problems with respect fo antenna, abfain optimal performance output
from the antenna, to conduct trial uplink tests and access to the satellite, fine tune and
optimize performance, etc. In this specific instance, Sun DTH was unable to start the
testing due fo the non-receipt of regulatory clearance from NOGC/DeT for uplink. DoS
pursued with Sun DTH for the payment as per the contract at the end of stipulated free
period. However, since, Sun DTH had not received the NOCC/DoT clearance in time and
are unable to use the transponders, they disputed the extent of free period from this start
date. Simultaneously, it also initiated arbitration proceedings and brought out an
injunction from Madras High Court restraining DoS from taking any corrective steps to
enforce the demand for payment. In résponse to this, DoS attempted to resolve this
issue through @ high level committee which recommended extending the free period by

1.5-months to this user, in view of the fact that delay had happened because of non-issue

of NOCC/DoT clearances.

V) Revenue of % 5.99 erore Not Collected Due To Failure To Sign MoU .#

422. Adicle 2.6.5 of NGP of SATCOM Policy stipulated that for (easing of capacity,
DoS was to enter into transponder lease agreements with the DTH service providers. |
DoS, however, did not enter into such an ‘agreement with DD instéad, signed MoU in

March 2004 with.Prasar Bharti for leasing five transponders of INSAT-4B to DD for DTH


‘ 749- + ‘

service. Although the MoU stafed that DD would be charged for the Ku band

transponders at the prevailing rates, the rates te be charged were not indicated.

4.23. Based on the request of Prasar Bharti, though DoS allocated one additional
transponder to Prasar Bharti it did not enter into a firm agreemenUMoU Prasar Bharti
. later informed that the additional transponder was not put to use since MoU was not
signed. As a result, revenue of हैं 5.90 crore towards lease charges was net collected by

DoS,

5 4.24. DoS replied that in March 2014 Prasar Bharti subsequently signed MoU and had
agreed to pay lease charges for the additional Ku band transponder with effect from May

2012. DoS, however, remained silent on the status of the said payment.

4.25. During oral evidence, the CEO of Prasar Bharti apprised the Committee as under:
"| asked the Engineer-in-Chief and he says that our billing starts from the
date of signing. Since there were initial’ glitches, we were not signing.
However, I will get back and give a written report to the Committee, | am
litle bothered about the relaxed manner in which these things operate. |
have been asking them for a white paper

4.26. When asked that even after allocating one additional transponder to Prasar Bhrati,

why didn’t the DoS did not enter into firm agreernent/MoU with Prasar Bharati, DoS

replied that it entered into an MoU with Prasar Bharati (Ref.: MOU/4B/Ku/DTH/06/2012
dated May 22, 2012) for the provision of 6x36 MHz Ku band capacity on INSAT-4B for its

DTH operations. The commencement date of this MoU is the date of allotment of the

transponder / 8. May 22, 2012 and is valid till March 31, 2015.

4.27. Audit noted that Prasar Bharati did not use the additional transponder as a result
of non signing of MoU with DoS resulting in non collection of lease charges of हैं 5.90.
crore. When the DoS was:asked to explicitly explain the logic of assigning an additional

transponder without signing an agreement/MoU with Prasar Bharati DoS submitted that:


+50- j . 4.
"An additional transponder (ie. 6” Transponder) was allocated to
DD/Prasar Bharati during May 2012 and charges towards this transponder
is being paid on a regular basis. Till September 2014, payments for the

space segment charges are being received as per the old rates. From _

October 1, 2014 onwards, space segment charges as per the revised rates
_ are being received. The difference in space segment charges between.
revised and.pre revised rates. for the- period from April 1, 2012 tilt

September 30, 2014 is yet to be received".
4.28. twas sought to know whether the DoS taken any steps after the audit observation
fo prescribe procedure for approval of the appropriate authority from the financial angle,
approval of the Ministry of Law from the legal angle, duly documented meeting fo
technical committee and commerciat negotiation committee and stipulation of the officials
responsible for management of the contract? DoS answered that an initiative was taken
by DoS to standardize the terms and conditions of the Agreement in coordination with the
Ministry of Law & Justice, Department of Legal Affairs. Wherever standardized terms and
conditions are feasible, DoS/ISRO is proposing to follow uniform MoU. Accordingly, the
terms and conditions for the provision of Space segment capacity were finalised. In
accordance with the standardized terms, an Agreement with standard terms and
conditions is entered into with commercial users and a Memorandum of Undersianding

with Government users: From April 01; 2012 onwards, the Agreement/MoU with all

INSAT/GSAT satellite users of space segment capacity is in line with the vetted terms

* and conditions for space segment capacity. The existing practice. of tecording technical

committee meeting deliberations and commercial negotiations are further strengthened.

Antrix continues to be contract manager for all transponders lease contracts. Contracts

with foreign vendors are executed by Antrix ‘and DoS/ISRO executes the “contract | with

end users, -

Vi) Qiitstanding Dues. From Back to‘Back Agreements

‘4.29. DoS arranged foreign satellite capacity to Indian DTH seryice providers for short

term period through Antrix as a femporary measure to ensure that the service could be


"5h.

‘ i 5
brought back to INSAT ‘system when Indian satellite capacity was eventually available.
DoS entered in back to back agreements for Dish TV, Sun DTH, Airtel, Refiance and
Videocon, The transponder lease charges to the tune of = 62.55 crore remained to be

recovered from these parties:-—-- . मु . be ----

4.30. DoS stated that in March 2014, an amount of = 57.17 crore was since recovered.
The balance of © 5.38 crore remained outstanding. As per Audit, outstanding dues in
back fo back arrangement suggest that in these cases Antrix did not collect money in
advance from service providers as per. the conditions of the transponder lease

agreements and allowed them to make payment on credit basis, thereby extending

undue favour and resultant accumulation of transponder lease charges.

4.31. When asked why Antrix did not collect money in advance from service providers
as per the transponder lease agreements and allowed the providers to make payment on
credit basis DoS replied that ail the agreements managed by Antrix stipulate paymenis in

हु अ
advance, either monthly/quarterly/half yearly/annually.



$2-

PART «If
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
Introduction: The Committee note that the Government approved the
~ proposal -of: they Ministry. of Information and Broadcasting, the nodal Minlstry, to. *
introduce Direct to Home (DTH), a satellite based broadcast service which entails
distribution of muiti-channel television programmes in Ku band, in India in
November 2000. The Government approved an ‘Open Sky’ policy and allowed both
Indian and foreign-satellites to be used in DTH services with the, condition that
proposals envisaging use of Indian satellites would receive preferential treatment.
The Committee further note that the Department af Space (DoS) provides national
space infrastructure through satellite transponder capacity to meet the
telecommunication, broadcasting and security arrangements of the country and
according to the approved policy, it had to acquire and allocate necessary
transponder capacity from foreign satellites for short term periods, so that the
service could be ‘brought back to INSAT system as and when ‘indian satellite
capacity was available. Audit carried out a performance audit on management of
_ satellite capacity for DTH service by reviewitig the ‘Open Sky’ policy of the
Government and found, during the course of audit, that, despite having sufficient
funds, Department of Space {DoS). failed fo realise the communication satellites
against their planned target achieving only 22 per cent, which resulted in foreign
satellites providing 75 percent: of. transponder services to Indian .channels...
Consequently, Indian service. providers migrated to foreign satellites and luring —
them back ० INSAT satellifes is a difficult task since DTH service Is location
specific and any change in satellite position would result in migration expenses to
the service providers as well as inconvenience to the customers. It was also found

that satellite capacity allocation was plagued with certain systemic lapses. The


; (58 .

INSAT Coordination Committee (ICC) empowered to earmark satellite capacity, was
not convened after June, 2004 till it was reconstituted in May 2011, after a lapse of

nearly seven years. DoS unilaterally allocated satellite capacity without involving

--- other-concerned Ministries-like-Ministry of [&B. It was also. observed that Tata Sky

was glven preferential treatment in the allocation of satellite capacity, violating
stipulated policy. In the case of Sun DTH also, a case of favoritism was observed

causing a loss of ¥ 46.92 lakh to the exchequer and an unintended benefit of हैं 3.56

crore to the operator, Besides, allocation of an additional transponder to Prasar —

Bharti on the latter's request remained unused due to unsigned MoU between the
two from May 2012 to July 2013 resulting in a loss of f 5.90 crore to the Department
of Space (0०9). Since the DoS coutd not materialise the planned/communicated
satellite capacity, satellite capacity was arranged from foreign satellites-and most
of the DTH service providers did not return to Indian satellite system thereby
putting India at a disadvantage in maintaining its own INSAT fleet. The problems
were further compounded due fo idling of GSAT-8 and GSAT-10 for 7 to 11 months
intended for DTH service. Further, the Transponder Lease Agreements did not
safeguard the financial interests of the Government. The lease period in the
agreement for INSAT Ku Band satellite-capacity ranged from 5 to 10 years without

any provision for revision of prices. Although, the prices were raised by 14 percent

it is yet fo be implemented resulting in an avoidable loss of € 36.17 crore fo the |

increased by 5 to 33 percent over a period of 1 to 6 years whereas those availing
INSAT transponder capacity paid the same charges for over 6 to 10 years, The

examination of the subject by the Public Accounts Committee {2015-16) and its

Sub-Commitige-V ‘dealing with ‘infrastrictural projects other than Railways’ also हे

_.nation._Prices . of. fransponders. .|€४8९ए from.. foreign satellite. systems were... .....


St

brought out various shortcomings. These and other relevant issues have been

dealt with in the succeeding paragraphs.

2. Satellite Capacity not Earmarked by ICC: The Committee note that the INSAT

Coordination Committee {ICC), a high level multi departmental decision making
body, consisting of Secretaries of Department of Space, Department of Economic
Affairs, Department of Telecommunications, Ministry of Information &
Broadcasting, Department of Science& Technology and Department of Information
Technology was responsible for coordinating and monitoring the implementation
of space and ground segments of INSAT projects. However, the Committee note
with serious concern that the ICC was not convened after June 2004 and was
reconstituted after a lapse of 7 years in May 2011. The Committee observe that the
DoS flouted the norms framed under the SATCOM policy by allocating transponder
capacities on three satellites to DTH service providers without convening ICC
meetings which was responsible for earmarking satellite capacity for non-
Government users. The Comimittee note from the reply of the DoS that members of
the ICC were informed about the above mentioned arrangement in meetings of

Technical Advisory Group (TAG), a technical Sub-Committee of the ICC. The
Committee opine that {CC has been mandated to earmark the satellite capacity for
non-Government users and , therefore, only informing members of ICC during a

sub-Committee meeting shows the callousness of the DoS towards the high level

‘decision making authority, The Committee are of the strong view that the DoS did

not follow the prescribed procedure and exceeded its sphere by taking unilateral
_______- decisions-bypassing the mechanisin on issues-which are beyond its expertise. The

Committee exhort the DoS to regularly convene the ICC meetings which is required

as per norms for leasing of transponder capacity on Indian satellites since


‘ F Sf : ;
allocating satellite capacity is a sensitive issue having financial implication on the
revenues of the Government. The Committee desire to be apprised of the reason
for not convening the ICC meetings, taking unilateral decisions bypassing the

system and. the punitive, action taken-within three months of.the. presentation of *

this report.

3. Role of Moi&B in the Allocation of Satellite Capacity: The ‘Committee

highlight the fact that since DTH being a broadcasting service, it comes directly
under the purview of Ministry of Information and Broadcasting (Mol&B) as it is
responsible for all the matters relating to broadcasting in the couniry. According to
the SATCOM policy, all allocations are made by DoS with the approval of the ICC.
Also, being a member of the ICC, Mol&B is also involved in satellite capacity
allocation. Since, the ICC was not convened, Mol&B and other members were
inadvertently left out of the decision making process. The Committee are shocked
to note the lackadaisical approach of the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting as
it remained a mute spectator while the DoS was flouting norms by directly
allocating satellite capacities and the Mol&B even did not bother to intervene for
convening the icc of which if was a member. The Committee are of the view that it
is high time that the different wings of the Government of India be proactive in
their approach and keeping in view the national interest, coordinate properly for

taking decisions which are crucial both commercially and strategically. The

Committee recommend that the Ministry as well as DoS make sincere and
concerted efforts to convene the ICC meetings reguiarly so that all the relevant
stakeholders are involved in the sound planning for allocation of transponder
capacity thereby paving way for a more transparent approach which could help in

re-building of trust and faith of DTH service providers in the DoS and the Ministry


; ; -86- हि
A. Satellite Capacity Allocation Procedure not developed by ICC_and DoS: The
Commitiee observe that procedure for: allocation of satellite capacity was not

framed by ICC as per SATCOM policy until February 2013 and during the years

~-2004-to 2011, the demand. for satellite capacity exceeded supply in all the years, *

Further, INSAT transponders providing DTH service decreased from 30 units in
2009 to 19 units in 2013 and a progressive increase in dependence on foreign:
satellites from 6.5 units in 2004 to 57 units in 2013. The Committee also note that
according to DoS' own submission, the demand was expected to increase over 200
“units beyond 2013. The Committee ate unable to comprehend as to how the DoS
went about allocation of capacities in absence of any prescribed procedures. The
Committee Gbserve that non-framing of a sound procedure led to the filling of gap
of satellite capacity by foreign satellites causing a drastic drain on Government's
revenue. In view of the above, the Committee exhort that the ICC should frame
procedure for satellite capacity allocation as per the SATCOM policy by and further
to foltow the rules in letter and spirit since demand for satellite capacity is steadily
increasing over the years.. The Committee desire to be apprised within three

months of the action taken in this regard.

5. (i) Out of Turn Allocation of Satellite Capacity: The Committee note that

while Tata Sky was fifth in order of preference of satellite capacity allocation, it

was granted precedence.on INSAT-4A and given exclusive rights at the prime slot

76 83 degrees east in December 2005 superseding Doordarshan which was later

allocated capacity on INSAT 4B launched in January 2007. The Committee further
-note from the subinission of DoS that DD ‘was allocated capacity on a foreign
satellite before allocation of capactty to Tata Sky on INSAT 4A and DD. migrated to

INSAT 4B at the end of the contract period, The Committee are shocked fo note

that the national broadcaster was allocated capacity on a foreign satellite and then


“ST,

"a private broadcasier was given exclusive rights on INSAT 4A. The Committe /

observe that the national broadcaster being the first in precedence should have

been given preference on Indian satellite being a free to air service accessed by

.- majority. of popufation-across India-and. also -has an obligation for broadcasting

across the country, thus fulfilling Government's obligation towards the citizens of

this country. The Committee note with dismay that the charges paid to a foreign

_ Satellite for usage by Doordarshan was a wasteful expenditure, more so, since Tata

Sky could not be retained on INSAT 4A in addition to the revenue forgone fearing
litigations by the Tata Sky, taking advantage of its first right of refusal. The
Committee desire to be apprised of the reason for apparent favouritism towards
Tata Sky and further desire that punitive action may be taken against all those
responsible for the same.

{ii) Grant of Exclusive Rights over Prime Orbital Slots: of Exclusive Rights over Prime Orbital Slots: The Committee note with

much concern that Tata Sky had a very advantageous position over other DTH
service providers as it ‘had the exclusive first right of refusal for using Ku band
fransponders at 83 degrees east. Due to this Ku band transponders of GSAT-10-
could not be allocated to any other DTH service providers and remained idle
thereby causing a loss of हैं 60 crore per year fo the exchequer and wonder why
Tata Sky was given preferential treatment over others. The Committee are shocked

at such preferential treatment shown by the DoS for a private company and;

therefore, desire than.an.enquiry.may be conducted into the transaction, stem. .

action may be taken against those found guilty and apprise the Committee within
three months of the presentation of this report.

(1) Special Terms and Conditions of Transponders Lease Agreement with Tata

Sky: The Committee note that Tata Siy was the biggest benefactor as compared to

other DTH service providers as. the lease agreement it entered into with DoS


-58-

x 4 3 4
provided them with certain benefits such as open ended commitment for satellite
capacity, greater credits in case of service interruption, earth statiqn inspection
and assigning tights or obligation to its affiliates. It was also observed that the
-. Tata‘Group_Chairman..was one.of the non-functional directors in.the Antrix board
of directors hinting towards undue benefits extended to Tata Sky and raising the
question of vested interest. Further, the Ministry of Finance had requested DoS In
March 2013 to re-negotiate the terms of agreement entered with Tata Sky. The
Committee, therefore, direct the DoS to act upon the request of Ministry of Finance
urgently ‘and re-negotiating the contract with Tata Sky thereby building trust
amongst other service providers so that an impression of impartiality, openness
and healthy competition is conveyed. Also, the Committee impress upon the
Ministry that it should select candidates for the position of non-functional directors
amongst those who have worked for the corporations involved in space related

activities and arresting the doubts of conflict of interest.

6: {i) Leasing of Satellite Capacity: The Committee note that Antrix, after

aggregating the requirements of the Indian customers, was to enter into back ta
back agreements with foreign satellite ownets. However, tn contravention of Article
2.6.5 of Norms Guidelines and Procedure {NGP) of Satellite Communication
" (SATCOM) Policy, measures regulating the contract management procedure in
respect,.of DTH transponder | lease agreements were not_put in place. The
Committee also note that DoS paid commission to Antrix from 15 percent to 40
. percent for invoicing and collection of payments thereby reducing lis effective
“realization of revenue. Further, the Committee wonder that in spite of rendering
complete technical support for the allocation of:satellite capacity in hacic to back

agreements, DoS did net claim any. compensation from Antrix. In this regard, the


59

- Comnilitee desire that the DoS explain the reasons therefore ahd recommend that

the DoS fake steps fo put in place effective mechanisms to ensure that interests of

DoS are not compromised and the agreements are made at arm's length.

(il) Quistanding Dues from Back to Back Agreements: The Committee note that

DoS arranged foreign satellite capacity to Indian DTH service providers for short
term period through Antrix as a temporary measure to ensure that the service
could be brought back to INSAT system when Indian satellite capacity was

eventually available. DoS entered in back to back agreements for Dish TV, Sun

DTH, Airtei, Reliance and Videocon. The transponder lease charges to the tune of

₹ 62.55 crore remained to be recovered from these parties. The Committee further
note that till March 2014, an amount of 57.17 crore was recovered and a balance <
5.38 crore was still te be collected. The Committee observe that Antrix did not
follow the conditions of the transponder lease agreements by not collecting money

in advance thereby extending undue favour and resultant accumulation of

_ transponder lease charges. The Committee desire to be informed about the action

taken by the DoS to collect the outstanding amount of हैं 5.38 crore. The Committee
feel that satellite capacity allocation contributes a handsome amount of revenue to
the Government freasury, and DoS' faltering in administering established rules and -
procedure leading (0.08 flow of revenue is fotally unacceptable. The Committee

further desire that DoS ensure the compliance of all the ferms of the agreements

and in the instant case to see that if liquidated damages/penalties could_be ......

imposed on Antrix for non-compliance of the terms. The Committee also
recommend that erring officials be identified and. accountability be: fixed on them

by means of punitive action and also a thorough irivestigation be done by agencies

: such as CBI, DRI, ED et al to further probe the matter and bring the guilty parties to

justice.


-60-

7. Loss Due to Non Revision’ of Transponder-Charges; The Committee. note

that DTH transponder lease agreements had a lease period from five to ten years
with no provision for revision of prices whereas lease agreements with foreign
‘satellites ranged from one to six years with provision for price revision from five to
thirty three percent. The lack of such basic provisions resulted in revenue
foregone to the tune of हैं 36,17 crore. The Committee are displeased with such
poor terms of agreements. where even a simple provision for price revision at
regular intervals was not included. The Committee desire that such apreements be
reviewed and reframed to include sound/prudent financial terms in the interest of
the exchequer. The Committee exhort the DoS to fine tune their marketing
strategies to attract and retain service providers as well as to bring back those
DTH Service providers using foreign satellites back to INSAT/GSAT systems. The
Committee impress upon the Ministry that the service providers be charged at the
competitive rates and preferably the lease term be also uniform for everyone
ensuring level playing field across the OTH sector thereby leading to more
transparency and healthy competition. The Committee further, desire that the DoS
set.up an inquiry to look into the 18886 agreements with various parties and take
stringent action against those responsible for agreeing fo terms that were against

the interests of the exchequer and apprise the Committee of. the action taken

within three months.

8. - (i) Loss Due to Undercharging of Transponders Prices: The Committee take

serious note of the 005 undercharging of transponders of Sun DTH resulting in & '
loss of है 2.94 crore from January 2008 to July, 2010, The DoS first charged Sun
DTH only for 6 transponders where as 6.26 transponders were leased to them

Subsequently, the transponder prices were reduced to & 4.70 ‘crore per


-61-

transponder resulting in a loss of दें 46,92 lakh, The Committee also note from the

reply of DoS that Standing Committee of DoS was empowered for taking such

decision but are of the firm opinion that reducing prices arbitrarily raises suspicion

of favouritism-and-hurts:the interest. of the exchequer. The Committee further-feal / . .

that just to retain service providers on INSAT, the DoS went about distributing
goodies to private players. The Committee desire the Secretary, DoS to revisit the
files relating to alf the transactions, apprise the Committee of the reasons for
giving such undue benefits toa private service provider and the penal action taken
against the guilty officials to prevent such capricious decisions in future.

(ii) Allocation of Bonus Time: The Committee note that DoS had allowed ‘bonus
free period of 1.5 months to Sun DTH which resulted in a benefit of हैं 3.56 crore to
Sun DTH. The Committee find the reply of the DoS untenable that Standing
Committee of the DoS had taken such a decision as Sun DTH could not get
regulatory clearances from Network Operating Control Centre (NOCCWDoT for
uplink in first three months. The Committee further note that DoS' demand for
payment for the bonus free time earlier ended in Sun DTH, initiating arbitration
proceedings and bringing out an injunction from the Hon'ble Madras High Court.
The Committee are of the measured view fhat the Government collectively is
responsible for such a situation wherein. DoS had to bear costs to save the

commercial interests of the service providers for retaining them. The Committee,

therefore, recommend that the Government .of_India should streamline all the.

hecessary procedures relating fo satellite capacity allocation, especially the
clearances and approvals from the concerned Ministries in a time bound manner.
The Committee feel that exemplary disciplinary action be taken against the then

officials who did not give approvals in stipulated periods.


él

i

9, Revenue of € 6.90 crore nof collected due to failure to sigr of £5.90 crore not collected due to failure to sign MoU: The
Committee are amazed to note that as per the prevalent Satellite Communication
{SATCOM} Policy, no agreement was signed by the DoS with Doordarshan instead
-an-MoU was signed. with-Prasar Bharti with-the rider that Doordarshan would be
charged for the 5 Ku band transponders of INSAT-4B for providing DTH service.
However, chargeable rates were not indicated and although one additional
_ transponder was allocated to Prasar Bharti on request, it remained unutilized for
want of non signing of MoU thus Jeading to non collection of revenue fo the tune of
% 5.90 crore. Subsequently an MoU was signed and lease charges were effective
from May 2012 but DoS was silent on actual payment status. The Committee are
surprised at the ‘approach of DoS as it has shown poor management skills. Even
basic requirements have been left incomplete and both DoS and Prasar Bharati
have shown lethargic attitudes. Such type of casual attitude maligns the image of
Government organizations. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
adjustments made, if any, for the time period of the MoU from May 2012 to March
“2016 in light of revision in the charges etc. The Committee further desire the
Ministry to inform them about whether the charges have been implemented and are
being collected and the exact machinations: which prevented Prasar Bharti from

signing an MoU with DoS thereby resulting in the delay in accrual of revenue.

10. . Committed Planning of Satellife:....... The .Committee observe that DoS...
could not satisfactorily fulfill the competing needs of critical, strategic and 7
commercial sectors, which led to a forced migration of commercial DTH users like
Sun DTH, Videocon, Airtel and Reliance’ to foreign satellite systems: These DTH
Service providers later did not prefer to return to INSAT system due to trust deficit

that was created. The Committee note that DoS committed 52.5 to 80.5 Ku band


-63-
transponders to seven DTH service providers by signing lease agreements with
them, but could not provide satellite capacity on domestic satellites as planned
due to non-realization of its planned communication ‘satellites. The Committee हि

a ~--.-observe-that launch-of only three satellites with 48 Ku band transponders, i.e., only
22 per cent of the target, coupled with non availability of indigenous launch vehicle
resulted in forced migration of DTH service providers to foreign satellites. Further,
when satellite capacity was eventually available in GSAT-8, it was not earmarked
and remained idie and was finally allocated to non-DTH use. DoS was not even
able fo maintain the satellite capacity already being used for DTH service due to
technical problems and used these capacities to substitute satellites being de-
commissioned. During 2006 to 2009 major portion of services were being provided
through indigenous satellite capacity. However, INSAT transponders providing
DTH services fell from 30 units to 19 units in 2013. A progressive increase in
dependence on foreign satellites from 6.5 units in 2004 to 57 units in 2013 was also
observed. The Committee further note that 1016 of the 12 Ku Band transponders
on GSAT-10 was allocated to any service providers by DoS and thus remained idle.
According to Audit, DoS did nat allocate capacity on GSAT-10 to any other service
provider fearing litigation from Tafa Sky since it was given the first right of refusal - -
on INSAT-4A thereby idling its entire 12 Ku band transponders. The DoS in its
reply stated that it was able to plan and realize satellites as envisaged during the
10" Five Year Plan (FYP) but due to technical constraints, al. missions. could not.
be realized in the 11" FYP. Highlighting the estimate prepared by DoS, the
Committee observe that over 200 units beyond the year 2013 would be providing
DTH service through foreign sateliites and only 10 percent would be provided by
Indian satellites implying that DTH service providers were using 57 Ku band

transponders of.5 foreign satellites against 19 transponders of 3 Indian satellites


-64-

revealing that 75% of foreign satellite utilization thereby providing steadily
increasing business for foreign satellite owners, This was a consequence of the”
utter failure of DoS in creating planned/committed satellite capacities in time,
inherent issues in migration,.- DTH service providers did not prefer 0 return. te.
Indian satellites and stayed back on foreign satellites. The Committee are of the
considered view that since orbital spectrum is a vital natural resource for revenue _
generation,-the Ministry may re-look into the allocation of satellite capacity which
has been a letdown in terms of providing transponders to the DTH service
providers. The Committee while acknowledging the fact as submitted by the DoS
that it has to provide satellite transponder capacity to meet telecommunication,
broadcasting and security requirements of the country exhort the DoS to first
focus on the production of the satellites and launch vehicles so that these can be
made available in sync with the country's needs. The Committee feel that aithough
indigenous production of satellites and launch vehicles is a very complex process
and need lot of acumen and scientific research but keeping in view in fact that our
country is into satellite production and its launch since 1972, the spectacular work
done by our scientists since then leaves no question in one’s mind about their
capabilities. However, much is desired presently from the DoS in ferms of
committed and timely creation of satellite capacity so as to prevent migration of
more and more DTH service providers to foreign satellites. The Committee desire
that the. Ministry should create a transparent Policy for allocation of: satellite

capacity for the present DTH Service as well as future satellite capacity allocations.

41. Conclusion: The Committee observe that failure of the DoS in timely~
planning, launching and realization of satellite capacity commensurate with the

detmand and requirement of the service providers as well as to the national and


65~
strategic applications 180 to a great loss to the national exchequers. it enabled the
foreign ‘satellite providers to attract and capitalize. the ever increasing demand
from the Indian Service providers and even leading. to migration of the existing
~-service providers fromthe INSAT-system.-The situation is so worse. that even the °
future requirement of transponders for DTH service was also Planned to be met
from foreign satellites. The Committee are dismayed to note that the trend of
migration of most of .DTH service providers to foreign satellites and their
unwillingness to return to INSAT shows trust deficit. The Committee observe that
the crowding of foreign satellites over Indian slot and the ever increasing demand
for orbital slots would affect the working of INSAT- and would also lead to non-
availability of the strategically important slots for the country. The Committee,
therefore, exhort that the DoS and ICC should formulate a transparent and
foolproof policy as well as guidelines for creation of Ku band satellite capacity and
equitable as weil as judicious allocation of satellite capacity for DTH services in
the country. Also, the Committee are of the measured view that. scientists and
other technocrats involved in planning, designing, manufacturing and launching of
satellites are inept in the requisite financial aspects especially economics and
marketing and feel that Antrix Corporation ‘Limited specially created for marketing
satellites are not upto their job and desire that the DoS may seck professional help
i.e. other Government Depariments/Organizations having specialized competence
in the relevant area and further to overcome this bottleneck, the DoS may create &
specialized marketing wing with professionals having the required quatificatians
and expertise for such a specialized job of sensitive nature. The Committee desire
that the Government should introduce ‘single window clearance of licence and

other approvals for the satellite capacity allocation. The Committee recommend


66- ; ;

that the DoS should incorporate adequate price revision clauses in the

transponder lease agreements at par with that of international rates.

deepen : पु

NEW DELHI; . oS , PROF. K. V. THOMAS,

4° April; 2045 Chairperson,
12 Chaitra, 1938 (Saka} Public Accounts Committee