“EXTRA AVOIDABLE EXPENDITURE BY

ANURAG

MINISTRY OF DEFENCE

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2015-16)

FORTY-FOURTH REPORT

44

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

Ea at

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO.2076
1

FORTY-FOURTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2015-16)

{SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA}

EXTRA AVOIDABLE EXPENDITURE

BY ANURAG

MINISTRY OF DEFENCE

Presented to Lok Sabhaon: Q& + sys 20) 4
Laid in Rajya Sabha on: De - oly. 2०1८
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DE L 111

April, 20161 Vaisakha, 1938 (Saka)


CONTENTS

PAGES

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2045-16).*....

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2014-15)...

॥भ1२0700० 710॥............... . .

|
॥
Hl
Iv

® I

REPORT
PART- |

Introductory

Audit Review

Project Planning on Single Tender Basis *
Price Negotiation/Cost Estimation

. Outsourcing of Project Execution

Overall Supervision for Execution

|
: PART - ॥

_ Observations/Recommendations

APPENDICES

(iti)
(५)
(vii)

Minutes of the 1% sitting of the Sub-Committee-I (Defence) of PAC

(2014-15) held on 6" January, 2015
Minutes of the " sitting of the PAC (2015

कै ok obbended

18) -held an 25" April, 2016

of wos

=
=

21

25

28


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNT

Opi Aah ON

a
ao

ae
ZESR

16,

17

48.
19.
20,
21.
22.

(2015-16)

Prof. (,५४. Thomas =, Chairperson

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA
Shri 8,5, Ahluwalia
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay -
Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura
Shri Nishikant Dubey
Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" i
Shri Neiphiu Rio
Shri Dushyant Singh
Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
Dr. Kirit Somaiya |
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
Shri Shivkumar Udasi
Dr. P. Venugopal -

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Naresh Agrawal .

Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
\Shii Ani} Madhav Dave
Shri Vijay Goel

Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Shri Shantaram Naik

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy

SECRETARIAT |

Shri AK. Singh - Additional Secretary
Shri Tirthankar Das ~ Additional Director
Shri Deepankar Kamble - Committee Officer



COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS Caer OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2014-15)
Prof. K.V. Thomas -
| MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri 8.8. Ahluwalia
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
4... Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura
5... Shri Nishikant Dubey
6. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank"
9. -ShriNeiphiu Rie | ‘
10... Shri Dushyant Singh
11. | Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
42t, Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi
13... Dr. Kirit Somaiya
414, Shri Anurag Thakur
45%, Dr. P. Venugopal
RAJYA SABHA
16. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
47. Shri Vijay Gbel
18. Dr. Sor ayan Jatiya
19. Shri Bhubarjeswar Kalita
20. Shri Shantaram Naik
21. --Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
22.

Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh

ee

* Blected w.e.£ 3" December, 2014 vice Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy who has been appt

T Elected w.et. 3" December, 2014 vice Shri Jayant Sinha who has been appoints

Chairperson

ointed as Minister w.e.f. 9° November, 2014.
das Minister wed, 9 November, 2014.

३ Blected ७.०. ३० December, 2014 vice Dr. M: Thembiducai who has been chosen as Hon'ble Deputy Speaker, Lok Sabha and has

since resigned from the membership of the Committec.


‘ INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee, having been authorised by the
Committee, do present this Forty-fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on “Extra
Avoidable Expenditure by ANURAG" based on Para 5.1 of the C&AG's Report No. 30
of 2013 relating fo Ministry of Defence.

2... The above-mentioned Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
was laid on the Table of the House on 18" February, 2014.

3. The Public Accounts Committee (2014-15) fook up the subject for detailed
examination and report. A Sub-Committee under the convenorship of Shri $.S.
Ahluwalia, M.P. and a Member of PAC was constituted for the purpose. The Sub-
Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Defence and Defence
Research and Development Ofganizatioh (DRDO) on the subject at their sitting held on
6" January, 2015. Asthe Report on the subject could not be finalized, the PAC (2015-
16). reselected the subject to continue the examination and present a Report.
Accordingly, a draft Report was prepared and placed before the Committee for their
consideration. The Committee considered and adopted this draft Report at their sitting
held on 257 April, 2016. The minutes of the Sittings are appended to the Report.

4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type and form Part- II of
the Report. : हि

5 The Committee thank the Sub-Cornmittees for taking oral evidence and obtaining
information on the subject as well as finalizing and placing the draft Report before the
main Committee.

6. THe Committee would also like to express their thanks to the representatives of
the Mini: ie of Defence and the Defence Research and Development Organization
(DRDO) for tendering evidence before them and furnishing the requisite information to
the Committee in connection with the examination of the subject.

7. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to

them in the matter by the Office of the Comptrotier and Auditor General of India and the
Committee Secretariat in preparation of the Report. 7

|

NEW DELHI; PROF. K.V. THOMAS
25 April, 2016 Chairperson,

06 Vaisakha, 1938 (Saka} Public Accounts Committee.


REPORT
PART-t

1. INTRODUCTORY

@ Background of ANURAG

ANURASG refers to an Advanced Numerical Research Group. It is a laboratory under
the aegis of Defence Research & Development Organization (DRDO) and is located in
Kanchanbagh, Hyderabad. It is involved in the development of High Performance
Computing (HPC) systems and Application Specific Integrated Circuits (ASICs) for critical
applications using parallel processing techniques with indigenous architecture & design.
HPC systems are primarily used by other DRDO Labs to execute Computation Fluid
Dynamics (CFD) Application, besign of Aero-frames etc. The Lab has also successfully _
developed Processor for Aerodynamic Computations and Evaluation (PACE) series of
parallel computers, software packages for scientific data visualization, VLSI Digital and
Analog ASICs, Microprocessors, System on Chip (SoC) using in-house developed IP cores
and commercial 7 cores. Lab is currently working on the development of trusted computing
and networking products and secure Operating System (OS) solutions.

(ii)  Histortcal Perspective

2. DRDO's requirement of HPC systems for its Lab was driven by two factors: (a) move
into cluster computing, following world-wide trend and (b) realizing the difficulty of
maintaining more and more complex HPC systems in different laboratories, DRDO decided
to establish a centralized HPC facility ie. ANURAG, developed and maintained by it,
catering to the needs of other user DRDO labs. Thus, Centre for High Performance
Computing and Research (CHITRA) was established in 2007. CHITRA is a 24x7 facility
and housed DRDO High Performance Computer for Very Large Application (DHRUVA-1)
Linux Cluster Computer connected to user labs over DRDO's intranet DRONA. DRONA is
DRDO Rapid Online Network Access. DHRUVA-1 Linux cluster has 384 Dual CPU nodes
interconnected using high speed Infiniband switch with a peak performance of 8 Teraflops
(TFLOPS). In response to ANURAG's Open Tender in 2006 for establishment of HPC
system, seven offers were received and the contract was awarded to M/s IT! Limited being
1.1 bidder. M/s IT] Limited successfully completed he delivery and installation as per
ANURAG specifications.



| ह 2
(tit) Need for Up-gradation

3, Growing demand for higher computing speeds of core HPC by user labs and the fact

that there were no slots available for new users, ANURAG raised the need for up-gradation

of CHITRA facility to faster Linux Cluster. Up-gradation task had to be performed with the

constraints that same data centre with power supply and cooling design has to be used

with minimum down time for existing computer.
हैं |

{iv) Components of HPC Facility |

4, A HPC facility may be broadly classified into three components, viz., civil
infrastructure, data centre facility that includes power supply, power backup and cooling
system and HPC system. While existing civil infrastructure was used in up-gradation, data
centre facility was to be up-graded to meet the higher power required. HPC system that
consists of computing power, network features and software for managing computing
system were to be erected to meet the higher computing speeds.



Il. AUDIT REVIEW

5. Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) Procurement Procedure
2006, stipulates that for non-proprietary items, single tender system should be adopted with
the approval of Competent Financial Authority (CFA) only when single response is
available in spite of limited tendering on more than one occasion.

6. However, during audit it was found that violation of the prescribed procurement
procedure and allowing M/s ITi to execute the job through outsourcing at a higher price
resulted in extra expenditure of हैं 2.12 crore by Advance Numerical Research and Analysis
Group (ANURAG).

_7. . Against this backdrop, the PAC (2014-15) selected the subject as reported in Para

5.1 of C&AG's Report No. 30 of 2013 (Compliance Audit-Defence Services) for details
examination and report. Subsequently, the subject was referred to the Sub-Committee on
Defence i.e., Sub-Committee-| dealing with subjects on Defence. 'Subsequently, the
Committee obtained background note and requisite replies and some other clarifications
from the Ministry of Defence and DRDO. The Committee took oral evidence of the
representatives of the MoD and DRDO on 06.01.2015 and obtained information on the
subject. However, due to paucity of time, the examination on the subject could not be
compieted during 2014-15. The subject was carried forward to the successor Committee
ie. PAC (2015-16) and subsequently, again was referred to the Sub-Committee-I on
Defence examining subjects relating to Defence. Based on the information gathered, the
Committee proceeded with examination of the relevant issues in detail as outlined in the
succeeding paragraphs.



4

Ill. PROJECT PLANNING ON SINGLE TENDER BASIS

8, ANURAG designed and developed a 384 node Linux cluster system under the
project "Center for High-Performance Computing and Research" (CHITRA), installed by
Mis ITI Limited, Hyderabad (11) in 2007 through an open tender process.

9. Due to speed limitation of DRONA network, it was proposed by ANURAG (March
2010) to upgrade the system as huge amounts of data could not be transferred.
Accordingly, ANURAG proposed (und 2010} to upgrade the supercomputing facility by
adding 300 computing nodes. to the existing CHITRA facility at an estimated cost of %14.50
crore. The existing system (CHITRA) had been installed by Mis ITI Limited Hyderabad (ITI)
in 2007, through an open tender process. As ITI had successfully integrated and
maintained the existing system, ANURAG proposed the upgradation on single tender basis
through ITI only, in order to have a seamless upgradation.

10. During oral evidence, justifying the DRDO's decision to award the contract te M/s ITI,
the representatives of DRDO submitted as under:

"Sir, they are an electronic manufacturing company and they have integrators
people and they have got the hardware from somebody else. They are the
integrating company like BEL and all similar companies. Sir, in 2010, when
we had conducted the technical evaluation of the offer from ITI, they had
given a letter from IBM categorically saying that they will support ITI in
commissioning and. installing the system at Hyderabad......our CITAR facility
in Bengaluru is there with 11. They have a large computing system there.
They manage all these equipment. They have that supervision and contro}
knowledge in this particular case. { am not saying that they are a super-
computer people. They have used that Knowledge. | am not saying that they
are a tatally selling company. They are a technical company".

11. The DG of DRDO, while supplementing the above during oral evidence, submitted
as under:

"First of all, when in 2011 we had floated, it was an open tender. So, all
companies had equal right to bid and IT| being a non-company and we had
dealt with if earlier — we dealt with them prior to 2007 - we had that
confidence that ITI has the capability to deliver the system and they did
deliver. In this case also, the customs duty exemption certificates were
provided to ITI for a direct procurement from wherever it wanted. There was
ho third party involved. That confidence was there. To that extent, due
diligence was done in the case and there was a proper response. Secondly,
IT] has been maintaining the system since 2007 to 2010. That is why, when



5

ie we wanted to expand, we wanted to see that the person who is familiar with
। the system as it exists gets it and we had done the estimation. Accord ingly,
| we were having a concern. In one case, we had the American teams asking
i for an inspection on site and we did not want to give any end dues. We
wanted 10 go to an agency who does nat compromise. That is why, we
selected IT! so that | need not go to a thitd party which was exposed directly.
Frankly, we did not know 100 per cent turnkey outsourcing sort of a thing.
But outsourcing in general is a part of the system. Today, if LCA is made by
HAL, 70 per cent of the items come from private industries......IT/ is better
than the Government organisation. As we said, the previous system
knowledge was totally with the ITI. That knowledge was part of the
contractual process that whoever does the job should have the ability to
integrate with the existing infrastructure and existing capability. That has been
utilised, So, we feel that out of the total cost, a good part goes into smooth
| + integration of the system which has been demonstrated as it is working
smoothly".

12, Supplementing the DG, DRDO, the representative of DRDO submitted as under:

i . “| do not want to say that the IT] people are super computing people. They
have computing knowledge. They are a huge Corporation where they
maintain a huge computing system. They have maintained our total defence
computing networks also. They have done the PLAN AREN & ASCON. For
| the whole defence network they have made the communication system. | am
not saying that they are one time sales people". ] only want to submit that first
of all, our selection of M/s ITI was based on the past record and the general
awareness of what it has been doing in the various systems. We have placed
i order on if with the full trust that it would be doing the job. It had done the job
| in the past successfully. But, as the hon. Chairperson has suggested, whether
j they were hiring or not, we cannot prove it either way. | cannot say they were
or they were not doing it because | do nat have the right information today
with me. But one thing is there that as far as the capability of M/s ITI in this
area is concerned, we have interacted with it in the. past and it, is quite
capable. In this case, the fact that it went on a turnkey basis to another
agency is something which is usually not encouraged nor done. It is a back to
back contract, But as far as the Government of India’s policy and procedure
are concerned, | will have to search the rules which inhibit us from doing it. If
| we are able to find any tegal methodology of putting it, we will take action
accordingly".

13. | The representative of DRDO further supplemented as under:

"This was a supply order which was placed on M/s 11. There is no clause in
j this to deal with it when it comes to the question you have raised".



6

14. The Ministry, in their written submission, stated the reasons for selecting M/s ITI Ltd
for upgradation as under:

"Computing power constitute the major part of HPC system followed by
hetwork hardware. Earlier ANURAG faced end use verification by US DOC
(US Dept. of Commerce) in connection with data communication switches
procured from M/s CMC Lid. To obviate the recurrence of same and to
ensure seamless up-gradation of the systems without having any backward
compatibility issue, ANURAG proposed up-gradation of the facility on turn-key
basis from M/s ITI Ltd. On single tender basis as they were the supplier of
major and critical components during DHRUVA-1, were invelved all through in
the integration process and assured that no end-use-certificate’ would be
requested": ह

15. On being asked whether any technical evaluation of offer by M/s [TI Limited was
made by the Ministry/ORDO by procurement of 2007 and aspect of execution of projects
{2007) by third party was examined, the Ministry stated’ that during procurement of 2007,
seven offers were received consequent to open tender bidding. A Technical Evaluation
Committee (TEC) headed by senior scientist of DRDO Headquarters, and members from
Scientific Analysis Group (SAG), Defence Research Development Lab (DRDL) and
ANURAG was constituted as per provisions of Purchase Manual) PM -2606. The Technical
Evaluation Committee (TEC) examined the technical offers of bidders with respect to the
RFP and recommended four bidders for consideration of TPC/NC. TEC did not go into the
details of subletting/transfer as it was not specified in the bids submitted,

16. When specifically asked whether the DRDO Procurement Procedure provides for
follow up upgradation of project through same vendor and if it is in the affirmative, whether
any timeframe for such procurement is stipulated, the Ministry intimated that for high end
technology intensive projects, components/subsystem were available only from
OEM/monopolistic Vendor. Apart from that there were requirement of end user certificate
being imposed by certain OEM. Relevant clause of DRDO PM-2006 on this aspect were
given under:

Ghapter 5 : General Principles of purchase and under of Ethics and reproduced here

under .-

5.1.6 For high technology projects in progress, the materials/components required
are obtainable only from a few monopolistic manufacturers/vendors of repute. fn
such cases flexibility will be allowed to effect purchases on PAC/Limited Tender
basis.

5.1.7 The vendors after identification and satisfactory evaluation should not be
changed fil! successful completion of technicaluser trials for supply of



7

components/sub-systems. Such procurement will, therefore, be treated as
proprietary. It is, however, advisable fo work out reasonableness of cost in such
cases. :

Therefore, in order: to execute technology intensive project flexibility had been

provided for follow-up up gradation through identified Vendor. However, no

timeframe had been mentioned under these provisions".

17. During oral evidence, the DG, DRDO submitted as under:

"tt was in year 2007. We are adding extra computing power. What happened
in this case is that initially there are 6 teraflops. We are not adding one or two
teraflop but we are making it 40 terafops. This is basically a modular type of
system and six teraflops means one module. We have to add more servers
and more madules to enhance the capacity and the communication. It is not
that | am replacing one item in the overall infrastructure by this”,

18, “Supplementing the above, Scientific Advisor to the Defence Minister and Secretary,

_ R&D, submitted as under;

"What has happened is, actually from 6 teraflops we are adding another 34
feraflops. Core has been retained. | am practically adding totally 34 new
teraflops. | would just like to add that what you were saying is right. While |
am adding the capacity from 6 terafiops to 40 teraflops, seven times, the cost
is almost the same. It is not becoming seven times because a [ot of other
features are common",

49. Onbeing enquired upon the names and details of the firms from whom systems/part
were sourced for the CHITRA High Performance Computing (HPC) system. the Ministry

stated the following. names and details of the firms :

Fal Name of the firm Item Sourced More Tender | |Cosf{in &%

No. | Lakhs)

1. 5 Locuz Enterprise | Xeon 64 bitbased | Limited 1 | 8.50
Solutions Ltd., Servers :
Hyderabad and Infiniband PCI :

Express HCA ५

2, | Mis Locuz Enterprise | 288 Port Gigabit Limited | | 46.50
Solutions Ltd,,” Ethernet हि
Hyderabad Switch :

3. |M/sAA Enterprises, | Itanium based me हे ४ 144.00
Malleswaram, Computing
Bangalore Servers

| | Mis RTTS Private High Speed Data Limited 175.00
Limited, Communication
Malleswaram, Switch
Bangalore



| | Mis RTTS Private High Speed Secure | Limited 38.46
Limited, Connectivity
Malleswaram,
Bangalore.
“| M/s RTTS Private High Speed Data Repeat Order 175.00
Limited, Communication
Malleswaram, Switch
Bangalore
7. | Més Pioneer Telecom | Supply and laying | Limited 12.08
Services, Hyderabad | of Fibre :
: Optic Cable
a Mis ITI Ltd., RO, High End &Mid- pe 665.00
Hyderabad range
Servers
[9. | Civil Works MES [Nomination _‘[ 110.00

20. The Ministry further stated that items were sourced from registered vendors of

Procurement procedure 2006.

“ ANURAG/DRDO. Technical Evaluation was carried out as stipulated

in DRDO



9

Vv. PRICE NEGOTIATIGN/COST ESTIMATION

21. Audit scrutiny revealed that in response to a tender enquiry, in September 2010, ITI
quoted a price of £17.50 crore for upgradation of CHITRA computing facility at ANURAG.
However, Tender Purchase Committee (TPC) considered the rates as high and negotiated
the price to %16.38 crore.. Director General (DG) DRDO accorded financial sanction for
216.38 crore in December 2010 and ANURAG placed supply order (SO) an IT] at a cost of
2416.38 crore. Initially, the delivery was to be completed by June 17, 2011 which was
extended up to October 17, 2011. However, the firm supplied the system in parts from
September 2011 to November 2011. i

22. On being enquired about the reasonableness of cost aspect worked out by the
Tender Purchase Committee (TPC) as procurement was based on single tender basis after

three years in 2010, the Ministry replied as under.

“ANURAG completed CHITRA High Performance Computing (HPC)
system in 2007-2008 wherein M/s ITI supplied mid range and high end
servers with computing power of 6 Teraflops. M/s 11 was chosen after
competitive bidding through open Tender system. The other systems/parts
were sourced from other firms and integration was carried out by ANURAG.
In 2010, the whole project for upgrading the existing HPC system to 40
Teraflops computing power was outsourced to M/s ITI on turnkey basis.
During the process, ANURAG estimated the cost of the project including three
years warranty and operational support, as Rs 14.5 crore by taking last
purchase price (LPP) and additional work/scope into consideration as against
the budgetary quote of Rs 20.5 cr. The tendering was done on Single Tender

(ST) basis to ensure seamless up gradation and backward compatibility. The

‘ TPC/NC (Negotiation Committee) negotiated with M/s [TI and cost for the

i turnkey project was finalized at Rs 15.5 crore plus taxes considering the
exchange rate variation".

23. Explaining how cost estimate is done, the DG, DRDO, during oral evidence,
submitted as under:

...What | was saying was how we estimate the cost. But this was not
taking into account the new technology because when we bought the first
machine, there was a single processor. When we got into the thing there
were six cores, A new technology had come. So, there was the cost of the
new technology and we did not take into account the dollar variation cost.
Our estimate was 14.5 without these factors taken into account, So, from that
angle we are saying that the negotiated cost of हैं 15 crore without tax and =
16 crore was considered reasonable, That is reason we were trying to give".



1 10

24. When asked about the reasons for opting for single tender for upgrading the existing
HPC system, the Ministry replied as under:

"ANURAG has approached M/s ITI for upgrading existing HPC system on
single tender basis for following reasons 1. M/s IT| had provided major
components of HPC System, IBM's Computing hardware of High & Mid-
Range Servers. This consisted of 384 computing nodes with dual Xeon
processors. 2. M/s 11 were L1 vendor in open tender process followed in
2007. 3. M/s ITI had contextual knowledge of existing system 4. To ensure ©
seamless upgradation and backward compatibility with existing systems and
to ensure minimum down time of existing system. 5. To obviate’ End Use
Verification to avoid denial of technology & critical hardware in future.

DRDO procurement procedure 2006 has a provision for Single Tender
- procurement (para 7.7 (b)}as “For items to be purchased from a source
specified by Government or by the user (duly approved by the CFA)”.

In addition, 2२00 Procurement Procedure 2006 provides flexibility (Para

5.1.8) to effect purchases on PAC/Limited Tender basis for high technology

projects. The relevant para is reproduced below Para 5.1.6 “For high

technology projects in progress, the materials/ components required are

obtainable only from a few monopolistic manufacturers/vendors of repute. In

such cases flexibility will be allowed to effect purchases on PAC/ Limited
* Tender basis".

25. When Leked to explain as to why was the cost of the project estimated by taking last
purchase a (LPP) and additional work/scope only, the Ministry replied as under:

ANURAG had obtained budgetary quotation from M/S ITI. However, cost of
CHITRA upgradation was estimated independently by ANURAG by taking last
purchase price of major items including three years warranty and operational
‘support. This is one of the conventional methods of cost estimation and
‘purchases were made within previous 3 — 4 years adopting competitive
bidding".

26. ‘The Ministry further replied as under:

"The 6 Teraflops HPC system, around 384 computing nodes with Dual Xeon
:processors, was set up at a cost of around = 12.56 crores. It was proposed to
add additional computing power of 40 Teraflops by procuring 280 computing
nodes with dual socket Intel Xeon Westmere six core processor. Estimated
cast included additional UPS systems and Precision air conditioners. M/S iT!
had provided a budgetary quotation of Rs 20.5 Cr for above mentioned work".
1 [PER pg. 8 05]



11

५ OUTSOURGING OF PROJECT EXECUTION

27. Audit scrutiny revealed that ITI had outsourced the entire job and placed back to
back supply order at a cost of 14.26 crore on M/s Real Time Tech Solution Bangalore
(RTTS). M/s RTTS was registered with ANURAG for electronics, software development,
and supply of computers etc on the terms and conditions stipulated by ANURAG.

28, ANURAG justified the SO on ITI on the ground that the existing system had been
established, integrated and maintained by them successfully. ANURAG further added that
above jobs needed multidisciplinary expertise which included configuration of high end
servers, design of efficient cooling systems and design of optimal power distribution and
that ITI had’ the requisite expertise for the same. Further, in February 2013, ANURAG
stated that they were not aware of the sub-contract on RTTS by {Tl and became aware of it
only in April'2014. The statement was however, not factually correct as representatives
from vendor associates of ITI, included member from RTTS who were to attend Price
Negotiation Committee (PNCYTPC meeting on behalf of ITI, in December 2010. |

29. Explaining their position with regards to. Audit scrutiny, the Ministry, in their written
submission, stated as under: ह

"ANURAG completed CHITRA High Performance Computing (HPC) system
in 2007-2008 wherein M/s IT! supplied mid range and high end servers with
computing power of 6 TFLOPS. M/s IT! was chosen after competitive bidding
through open Tender system. The other systems/parts were sourced from
other firms and integration was carried out by ANURAG.

b) In 2010, the whole project for upgrading the existing HPC system to 40
Teraflops computing power was outsourced to M/s ITI on turnkey ‘basis.
During the process, ANURAG estimated the cost of the project including three
years warranty and operational support, as ~ 14.5 crore by taking last
purchase price (LPP} and additional work/scope inte consideration as against
the budgetary quote of % 20.5 cr. The tendering was done on Single Tender
(ST} basis, after approval of CFA, to ensure seamless up gradation and
backward compatibility. The TPC/NC (Negotiation Committee) negotiated with
M/s 11 and cost for the turnkey project was finalized at ₹ 15.5 crore plus
taxes considering the exchange rate variation. Approval by the CFA was
accorded under following provisions of DRDO PM-2006 (issued vide Govt. of
India letter No. DMM/PP/0000205/M/868/D(R&D)} Dated 22/03/2006)
Chapter-5: General Principles of Purchase and Code of Ethics

5.1.6 For high technology projects in progress, the materials/components
Tequired are obtainable only from a few monopolistic manufactures/vendors of
repute. In such cases ffexibility will be allowed to effect purchases on
PAC/Limited Tender basis.

5.1.7 The vendors after identification and satisfactory evaluation should not
be changed till successful completion of technical/user trials for supply of



12

i components/sub-systems. Such procurement will therefore, be treated as
| proprietary. It is, however, advisable to work out reasonableness of cost in
such cases",

: Therefore, in order to execute technology intensive project flexibility has been
; provided for follow-up up gradation through identification Vendor.

i ०) During the bidding process M/s IT| did not reflect outsourcing the project
execution to any third party. ANURAG gave contract fo M/s ITI on Turnkey
basis. Subsequently, after the contract was awarded, M/s IT| sought custom
duty exemption certificate (CDEC) for orders placed on M/s Real Time Tech
Solutions (RTTS} Pvt. Ltd Bangalore, which was denied by customs
notification (39/96). Thereafter, M/s ITI requested for the CDEC for import
1 from M/s |RTTS, Singapore. it may please be noted that during execution of a
technical complex project, often system integrator/lead supplier procures
equipment and acquires services from variaus sources. However, the entire
responsibility of successful installation and commissioning of the system
Temains with the integratoread supplier

d) Further regarding participation of officials of M/s RTTS in the TPC meeting,
it is submitted that as per the prevailing procedure when negotiations are
contemplated, bidders are informed concurrently so as to enable them to be
present on the day of the meeting, are only held with the bidder that has
quoted the lowest price (L1). In the meeting authorized representatives of
bidders are allowed to participate in TPC/NC. These representatives are
identified through their authorization letter issued by the respective bidder. It
is reiterated that only reps of M/s IT| and M/s IBM participated in the TPC/NC
meeting. Still, as a remedial measure to prevent reoccurrence of such
instances in future, Labs/Estts have been provided with a template of sample
draft contract that covers "Transfer & subletting".

30. Onbeing asked about the action taken by ANURAG, the Ministry stated as under:

1 "During bidding process M/s IT] did not reflect outsourcing the project
i execution to any third party. ANURAG gave contract to M/s ITI on Turnkey
basis. Subsequently after the contract was awarded, M/s IT| sought custom
} duty exemption certificate for orders placed on M/s Reai Time Tech Solutions
Pvt. Ltd Bangalore, the custom duty exemption certificate was denied by
ANURAG as it was not as per contractual conditions. Subsequently M/s ITI
cancelled their orders on RTTS Bangafore and placed order on RTTS
Singapore. During execution of technically complex projects often the vendor
procures many equipment from various sources and acquires services also
but the vendor with whom contract was concluded remains responsible for
successful installation and commissioning. In such cases vendor does not
provide details of items being procured from sub-contractors".

31. In response fo a query by the Committee with regard to the possibility of the
representative of vendors taking part in Price Negotiation Committee meeting (PNC), the
Ministry submitted as under:

“As per the prevailing procedure when negotiations are contemplated, bidders
are informed concurrently so as to enable them to be present on the day of



13

the meeting. Negotiations by TPC/NC, if considered necessary, are only held
with the bidder that has quoted the lowest price (L1}. In the meeting
authorised representatives of bidders are allowed to participate in TPC/NC.
These representatives are identified through their authorization letter issued
by the respective bidder".

32, While stating the remedial measures taken by Ministry/DRDO to prevent such cases
in future procurement, the Ministry stated as under:

| As a remedial measure to prevent such instances in future. Labs/Estts have
! been provided with a template of sample draft contract that covers “Transfer
& subletting’ in Article 27. The same is reproduced as under :-

Transfer and Subletting

“The seller has no right to give, bargain, self, assign or sublet or otherwise
dispose of the contract or any part thereof as well as to give or to let a third
party take benefit or advantage of the present contract or any part thereof”.

33. During oral evidence, when asked about registered authorized vendor, the
representative of DRDO submitted as under:
"Mis RTTS is a registered vendor of ANURAG".

34. When further asked about who all were summoned for the TPC, the representatives
of DRDO, during oral evidence, submitted as under

"He actually participated in the 2007 case. We had sent a request to IT to
attend the TPC and ITI participated in TPC along with 1BM representatives.
We had sent a letter to M/s iT] intimating that there is TPC on 111

December, 2010. They have sent a letter to ANURAG on 90 of December
saying that following vendor associates also will be coming for. the TPC
meeting. They have given a list of nine names. Sir, other than ITI, two reps of
M/s IBM for TPC". है

35. On being specifically asked about the technical evaluation of subietting/transfer of
work by ANURAG to a third party for the execution of the project not specified in the bids
duzing the 2007 procurement, the Ministry replied as under:

"ANURAG established, under Project CHITRA, High Performance Computing
System (HPC) during 2007-08 wherein M/s IT{ supplied mid-range and high-
end servers with computing powers of 6 Teraflops. Other major parts were i)
288 port gigabit Ethernet switch, ii) High speed data communication switch
iii) High speed secure connectivity, iv) Xeon 64 bit servers and ५) Itanium
based computing servers. In 2007, ANURAG bought out stores/services from
the market and integrated the system themselves. So there is no question of
subletting/transfer. Further, there was no clause in respect of


4 |

subletting/transfer of work to a third party in the prevailing standard template
of RFP". .

36. Further, during ora! evidence, the representatives of DRDO submitted as under:

"Actually, originally the hardware was from IBM which was supplied by IT! in
2007. We are upgrading by adding more IBM hardware. So, ITI requested
that they will bring OEM partner for TEC. The IT! was selected because in
2007, we went for an open tender and they were L1 vendors. We wanted to
go back to the same IBM hardware. Therefore, we went back to the vendor
who supplied IBM hardware in 2007. Sir, they have been doing our defence
contracts and all the time. Sir, in 2010, we did not do that but in 2007, they
were selected on the competitive bidding process. So, we went back to the
same Company for upgradation. Sir, in 2007, it was installed by ITI and was
being maintained by ITI....... in 2007, there were 3-4 different components of
HPC system. One is high and mid end computing servers for which 11 was !
selected through open tenders. There was a high speed data communication
system for which RTTS was selected and some 244 Ethernet ports switch
were purchased including cables and cabinets. All this was done for prajects
called CHITRA and ANURAG. The civil works were done by our MES. So,
the integration was by and large carried out by ANURAG. So ITI has got
hardware through IBM distributor called Redington. 11 have given a CDE
certificate to Redington. We had engaged a integrator called Spanco who
helped us in integrating at that time". [verbatim pg 586, 11,12,13,14, 15]

37. With regard to amending the DRDO PM-2006 for incorporating timefrarne for follow
up upgradation of projects, the Ministry replied that DRDO has submitted a revised
Purchase Manual to Min of Defence for approval with (i) Since R&D is a continuous ©
process involving iteration, it may not be desirable feasible to change
design/development/production partners till completion of technical/user trials for supply of
components/sub-systems. Care should, therefore, be taken to follow a transparent
selection mechanism for sefection of such partners through wide publicity and after their
capability/capacity assessment. On the merit of the case procurement of individual
items/components specifically developed/fabricated during the process of R&D may be,
procured on STE basis from such developed Vendors with the approval of CFA. Cost
reasonability would be worked out in such procurements with clear demarcation of
recurring and non-recurring costs. (ii) PAC status can be awarded to the firm selected and
qualified as development partner in execution of a development contract when associated
subsequently for fabrication/upgradation/modification thereof. Orders will be placed on PAC

basis till such time an alternative source is developed,



15

38. On further being asked whether the Ministry had taken any action against the erring
officials for allowing member from RTTS to attend the Price Negotiation Committee meeting
on behalf of [TI in December 2010, the Ministry replied that two reps of M/s 11 and two
reps of M/s IBM attended the -TPC/PNC meeting on 13th December 2011 held at DRDO
Hrs. No rep of M/s RTTS attended the TPC/PNC meeting. Therefore, it is submitted that
there was no error on part of the Officials. ANURAG received a letter from M/s 11 on Sth
December 2011 requesting for visitor pass for attending the TPC meeting scheduled on
13th December 2011. The list included names of 8 persons classified as, two from ITI and
6 from Vendor associates, and the same was forwarded to DRDO HQrs for arranging
visitor passes at DRDO Bhawan, New Delhi. The names of Firms were not mentioned in
the letter. ,

39. It was observed that in February 2013, ANURAG stated that they were not aware of
the sub-contract on RTTS by IT! and became aware of it only in April, 2011. The
statements was, however, not factually correct as representatives from vendor associates
of 11, included member from RTTS who were to attend the Price Negotiation Committee
(PNCYTPC meeting on behalf of ITI in December, 2010. The Ministry were asked to furnish
reasons for giving such a wrong statement, the Ministry replied that the statement given
earlier is not wrong. ANURAG received a letter from M/s IT] on Sth December 2011
requesting for visitor pass for attending the TPC meeting scheduled on 13th December
2011. The list included names of 8 persons classified as, two from IT| and 6 from Vendor
associates, and the same was forwarded to DRDO HQrs for arranging visitor passes at
DRDO Bhawan, New Delhi. The names of Firms were not mentioned in the letter. It is
reiterated that a team of 4 attended the TPC/NC meeting from M/s IT| -Two reps of M/s IT!
and two reps of M/s IBM. No rep of Mis RTTS attended the TPC/PNC meeting. It is
therefore, humbly submitted that ANURAG came to know that M/s ITI has outsourced
entire work to M/s RTTS only after placement of Purchase Order when Custom Duty
Exemption request was received. |

40. The Ministry stated that ANURAG/DRDO had estimated the cost of the project,
including 3 years warranty and operational support as € 14.5 crore considering Last
Purchase Price and additional work. As the orders were on fixed and firm price basis and
did not include factors like exchange rate variation the negotiated cast of ₹ 15.5 crore

(without tax) and & 16.38 crore (inc of tax) was considered reasonable.


! 16

41. The Ministry stated that Més ITI had imported mid-range and high-end servers
through M/s Reddington, Singapore. There was no evidence of M/s ITI making undue profit
in 2007.

42. On being asked whether such anomalies had been rectified in the 2010 procurement
tender, the Ministry replied that no-anomalies were reported in 2007 procurement case.
The anomalies came to light during audit carried out in 2013 of CHITRA Upgradation
Project. DRDO HQrs, while bringing out newer edition of Purchase Procedure, has
circulated the draft document and draft template of contract wherein issue of Transfer &
Subletting has been addressed. The document has been.submitted to MOD for approval.
43. The Ministry further stated that ANURAG has approached Mis ITI for upgrading
existing HPC system for following reasons 1. M/s ITI had provided IBM's Computing
hardware of High & Mid-Range Servers, most important and costly components of existing
HPC systems procured in 2007. 2. M/s IT] were L1 vendor in open terider process followed
in 2007. 3. M/s ITI had contextual knowledge of existing system. 4. To ensure seamless.
upgradation, backward compatibility, and minimum down time of existing system. 5. To
obviate the requirement of End Use Verification and to avoid denial of technolegy and
critical hardware in future. 6. Més iT! has diversified into delivering [T and Data Centre
Products. 7. M/s ITI hosts a variety of serviges in its Data Centre in Bangalore Unit. 8. M/s
IT's financial viability was not examined as it was a PSU. 8, ANURAG had initiated up-
gradation case by estimating the cost of up-gradation, including three years warranty and
operational support, to be हैं 14.5 crore by taking last purchase price (LPP) and additional
work/scope into consideration against budgetary quote of ₹ 20.5 crore TPC/NC
{Negotiation Committee) negotiated with M/s IT! and cost for the turnkey project was
finalized at हैं 15.5 crore plus taxes considering cost of technology and exchange rate
variation after comparing the cost of HPC systems for which POs were placed by SAG in
2010 and ADA in 2010.

44. During oral evidence, the representative of DRDO deposed as under:

"Normally we issue a purchase order where only DRDO is a signatory. In the
present case also purchase order was issued. However, now we have
recommended issue of a contract with signature of both parties".



17

45. Further, he added:

“In that, we have taken: care of the fact that we have specifically mentioned
that the seller has no right to, sell, assign or sub-let part or full contract or
otherwise. For the future, after seeing M/s ITI's back to back contract with M/s
RTTS we have included this. It is part of the contract. Our standard terms of
contract also include penalty for violation. So, it will go into arbitration. There
is a clause for arbitration in all standard contracts. What we have done, as a
measure of caution, after seeing this case is, we have proposed a change to
the effect that wherever there is not just a mere procurement action taking
place, and there is a contract which involves procurement as well as services,
guarantee, post-guarantee services, etc., it wil be a normal contract which
will have these clauses 50 that we can safeguard from such cases in the
future".

46. The representative of DRDO, explaining the contract clauses, submitted as under
during oral-evidence:

"This has been newly introduced. fn our old purchase arder contract, it is not
there. It is not there. So, we have now mandated that we will include it in
respect of all cases". | ह

47. Supplementing the above, DG, DRDO, during oral evidence, stated as under:

“We will seek legal advice and take action accordingly as suggested by you.
- We will do that".



18

VL OVERALL SUPERVISION FOR EXECUTION

48. Audit scrutiny further revealed that 11 was responsible only for overall supervision,
control and management for the execution of the contract and the entire system including
installation and commissioning was outsourced to RTTS. ITI by way of outsourcing of the
work for DATA center design, power and cooling system including plumbing and
mechanical work had earned 8 per cent net profit amounting to 71.24 crore on customer
‘purchase order without any value addition. The ‘matter was referred to Ministry in
December 2012 and Ministry in reply (October 2013) stated that ANURAG was not aware

| of association of RTTS with ITI for the upgradation work and any back to back arrangement
‘with a third party. The reply is not factually. correct as representatives from vendor
assaciates of ITI, included member from RTTS who were to attend Price Negotiation
Committee/TPC meeting on behalf of IT], in December 2010. Thus, the case revealed that
ANURAG violated DRDO's Procurement Pracedure by resorting to single tender instead of

| calling open tenders from other vendors registered in its vendor base. ANURAG as a result

allowed ITI to execute the entire work at a higher price which resulted in additional cost of
¥ 2,12 crore.

49. During oral evidence, the representative of DRDO, stated as under:

"Nothing to that effect has come to our notice that anybody from the DRDO
was involved in it".

‘50. Supplementing the above, the DG, DRDO, stated as under, during oral evidence:

"We will take legal opinion from the Ministry and then take action as
suggested by you".

51... The Ministry have informed that ITI was in reality responsible only for overall
supervision, control and management for the execution of contract and the entire system
including installation and commissioning was outsourced to RTTS and If so, did not the
DRDO allow contractually ITI to outsource the work, the Ministry stated that ANURAG had
placed a Supply Order on M/S ITI Ltd for “Upgradation of CHITRA camputing Facility at
ANURAG”. During the execution of technically complex projects often the vendor procures
several equipment and required services from various sources but the vendor with whom

1
1
1
}

fhe contract is concluded remains responsible for successful installation and
commissioning. During TEC, it was brought out by M/S ITI that they will use IBM hardware



19

and they produced documents from |BM (i) authorizing M/S IT! to resell their products and
(1) to provide applicable technical support and assistance in supply, implementation and
warranty (Annexure |, Il and III}. We have not contractually allowed M/s IT] to outsource the
work. During the bidding process, M/s ITI did not reflect outsourcing entire project
execution to any third party. ANURAG placed contract on M/s ITI on turnkey basis.
Subsequently, after the contract was awarded, M/s [1 sought Custom Duty Exemption
{CDE} certificate for the orders placed on M/s Real Time Tech Solutions Pyvt.(RTTS) Ltd.,
Bangalore. The CDE certificate was not provided by ANURAG as it was not complying with
3rd party CDEC conditions. Subsequently, M/s ITI cancelled their original order on M/s
RTTS, Bangalore and placed two orders an M/s RTTS Pte. Singapore for line items 1 to 15
of ANURAG PO and Mis RITS Bangalore for line items 16 & 17 of ANURAG PO.

52. St was inquired whether the Ministry/DRDO verified the credentials of the persons
installing/upgrading the CHITRA Project so that the security of the nation is not
compromised, the Ministry Teplied that only the personnel authorized by M/S ITI for
installing/upgrading the CHITRA project were permitted to enter the facility housing HPC. It
may be pertinent to submit that during installation/commissioning only standard benchmark
programs for evaluating correctness of systems were used. DRDO specific applications
were run separately by ANURAG/DRDO team. So there was no compromise on the
security of the nation.

53. On being asked to explain the reasons for cancelling, the orders placed on Real
Time Tech Solutions Pvt. Ltd. (RTTS) Bangalore and placing the same again on RTTS
Singapore, the Ministry stated that ANURAG had never placed any order on RITS,
Bangalore, and never placed again on RTTS, Singapore. ANURAG placed P.O. (contract)
on Mis ITI on turnkey basis. Subsequently, after the contract was awarded, M/s ITI sought
Custom Duty Exemption (CDE) certificate for the orders placed on M/s Real Time Tech
Solutions Pvt.(RTTS) Ltd., Bangalore. The CDE certificate was not provided by ANURAG
as it was not complying with 3rd party CDE conditions. Subsequently, M/s ITI cancelled
their original order on M/s RTTS, Bangalore and placed two orders on M/s RTTS Pte.
Singapore for line items 1 to 15 of ANURAG PO and M/s RTTS Bangalore for line items 16
8 17 of ANURAG PO.

54, On being enquired whether any clause could be added in the future bidding process

for providing details of items being procured from sub-contractors in technically complex


20

projects in cases where the Vendor outsources the project execution to a third party, the
Ministry stated that DRDO has issued a standard template for RFP vide letter no.
DMMII/PP/0050912/P-1 (RFP) dated 17 May 2013, wherein under standard terms and
conditions at sl. No. 12 it has been specified that “The seller has no right to give, bargain,
sell assign or sublet or otherwise dispose of the Contract or any part thereof, as to give or
fo let a third party take benefit or advantage of the Contract or any part thereof without
written consent of the Buyer’. It may also be noted that instructions issued relating to
framing of RFP specify that Part Il contains Standard Terms & Conditions which have legal
implications. Therefore, neither deviation from the text given in the clause nor deletion of
any of these clauses should be admitted. In case a deviation from these clauses has to be
considered/allowed, approval of DRDO HQ will be required,

85. On being enquired whether the Ministry/DRDO was planning to recover the amount
of हैं 212 crore from ITI for the breach of trust and if not, why, the Ministry replied that as
advised by Chairman of Sub Committee PAC (Defence), a letter has been sent to M/s ITI
asking explanation for breach of trust and outsourcing the job to M/s RTTS. M/s ITI has
been given time up to fourth week of February to reply.

56. On being specifically asked whether the Ministry‘DRDO was planning to, incorporate
‘Transfer and Subletting in Article 27. of DRDO Procurement Procedure 2006 in future
bidding process fo avoid avoidable extra expenditure, the Ministry stated that as explained
in reply for item no, 17, DRDO has specified {in the RFP) that Transfer/Subletting of the
contract would require explicit approval of Buyer. So clauses on Transfer/Subletting in the
contract will be drafted accordingly.

preter ated



21

PART-II
OBSERVATIONS & RECOMMENDATIONS

1. introduction: Advanced Numerical Research and Analysis Group
(ANURAG) is a laboratory under the aegis of Defence Research and Development
Organisation (DRDO) and is tocated in Hyderabad. It is Involved in development of
High Performance Computing (HPC} systems and Application Specific Integrated
Circuits (ASICs) for critical applications using parallel processing techniques with
indigenous architecture and design used to execute Computation Fluid Dynamics
(CFD) applications, design of aero-frames etc. Further, due to worldwide trend and
difficulty in maintaining complex HPC systems in different DRDO laboratories, DRDO
decided to establish a centralized HPC facility at ANURAG. This decision paved the
way for installation of Centre for High Performance Computing and Research
(CHITRA) laboratory in 2007 by Mis JTI Ltd. (Hyderabad). The need for up-gradation
was felt due to demand for higher computing speeds of core HPC and non existence
of slots for new users and with power supply and cooling design had to be used with
minimum down time for existing computer. Accordingly, ANURAG proposed (June
2010} to upgrade the supercomputing facility by adding 300 computing nodes to the
existing CHITRA facility at an estimated cost of ¥ 14.00 crore. However, during Audit
scrutiny, it was found that there were violations of the prescribed procurement
procedure and by allowing Mis ITI Ltd. to execute the job through outsourcing at a
higher price resulted in extra expenditure of हैं 2.12 crore by ANURAG. The
examination of the subject by the Sub-Committee-I (Defence) of the PAC (2015-16)
also brought out various shortcomings. The issues examined and the observations
made by the Committee have been detailed in the succeeding paragraphs.

2. Cost Estimation/Price Negotiation: The Committee note that M/s ITI Ltd.

quoted a price of % 17.50 crore for upgrading of CHITRA computing facility at
ANURAG., Considering the rate as high, the Tender Purchase Committee negotiated
the price for 7 16.38 crore, after which DRDO accorded financial sanction. The
Committee find that DRDO in their own admission have stated that they did not take
into account the dollar variation cost while determining the cost estimation and their
estimate was हैं 15.00 crore without tax and & 16.00 crore was considered reasonable.

To their utter surptise, the Committee find that the Tender Purchase Committee


22

negotiated for हैं 16.38 crore although DRDO considers = 16.00 crore to be
reasonable. The Ministry, however, has a different view point which highlight that
CHITRA upgradation was estimated independently by ANURAG by taking last
purchase price of major items including three years warranty and operational
support. The Committee feel that in the absence of competitive price bids, the cost
of the upgradation project was not reasonably fixed. Moreover, they are of the
opinion that the contention of the Ministry do not conform to modern methods of
cost estimation. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should set
up an enquiry to go into details of the factors which were taken into consideration
before finalising the cost of upgradation of CHITRA to ascertaln the reasonableness
of the cost. Action taken in this regard be intimated to the Committee.
i,

3. Outsourcing of Project Execution: | The Committee are appalled to note that
Mis IT! Ltd, had outsourced the entire job of upgradation of CHITRA and placed back
to back supply orders at a cost of ₹ 14.26 crore on M/s Real Time Tech Solutions
(RTTS), Bengaluru and subsequently to Mis RTTS, Singapore, although M/s ITI Ltd.
had taken the job at a cost of ₹ 16.38 crore. They are, however, not convinced with
the contantion of ANURAG that they were not aware of the sub-contract on M/s RTTS
by Ms ITt Ltd. till April, 2071 as the Committee understand that the representatives
of the vendor associates of Mis ITI Ltd. included the members of Mis RTTS, who

must have attended the price negotiation committee meeting in December, 2010.
Meanwhile, the Committee note that after the award of the turn-key project, M/s ITI
Ltd. sought Customs Duty Exemption Certificate for orders placed on Mis RTTS,
Bengaluru, which was denied by ANURAG, after which M/s ITI Ltd. cancelled their
orders on M/s RTTS, Bengaluru and placed the same on M/s RTTS, Singapore. The
Committee feel that at the time of denial of the Customs Duty Exemption Certificate,
ANURAG must have sensed the intention of M/s ITI Ltd. to get the work outsourced
by an external agency. The Committee wonder why af that point of time, ANURAG
did not cancel the job awarded to Mis [Tt Ltd. or did not prevent them from getting it
outsourced. The Committee feal that the way the contract was awarded on a single
tender basis to M/s ITI Ltd. albeit taking into account the trust that they had created
out of an earlier job execution (CHITRA) speaks volumes about the unfounded faith
ANURAG or the DRDO officials had on M/s ITI Ltd., due to which perhaps
DRDO/ANURAG failed to check them from getting the job outsourced even though it



23

had come to their notice accidentally. The very fact that M/s ITI Ltd. did not inform
ANURAG about outsourcing and got it accomplished at a cost of T 14,26 crore shows
that the DRDO officials must have been acted as facilitators for their profit, thereby
incurring losses to the exchequer. The Committee consider this a very serious issue
not only because of financlal loss but also because of the intentions behind officials
who are in charge of scientlfic and defence research of the sub-continent. They,
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should debar such companies having
doubtful credentials from executing DRDO projects as execution of the projects by
such compantes might compromise security of the country. They also recommend to
suitably amend the existing procurement procedure to insert a clause whereby such
outsourelng without the concurrence of the organization which awards the lcontract
will not be permissible. The Committee are unhappy to note that the information
sought by them seeking explanation of M/s ITI Ltd. for breach of trust and
outsourcing the job to Mfs RITS is still awaited. The Committee desire an
expeditious action in the matter. 1

4. Conclusion: The Committee are disturbed to note that ANURAG
proposed the upgradation of the existing system (CHITRA) on single tender basis
through M/s ITI Limited only In order ta have a seamless upgradation. Although, the
Committee are convinced with the rationale for upgradation of the CHITRA facility,
they do not find any justification behind award of work of upgradation through single
tender or nomination basis to M/s 1] Ltd. Moreover, during examination of the
subject, when the Committee enquired whether the Ministry/DRDO had ever tried to
find out if at the time of.execution of CHITRA; M/s ITI Ltd. had executed through the
help of any third party, neither the Ministry nor the DRDO could give any satisfactory
reply. DRDO in their own admission has submitted that selection of Mis ITI Ltd. was
based on the past record and the general awareness of what It has been doing in the
various systems. The Gommittee wonder whether work of upgradation pertaining to
scientific research can be awarded on the grounds as claimed by DRDO, The
Committee feel that it appears to be a pte-decided move on the part of DRDO to
award it to M/s ITI Ltd. only which not only violates the prescribed procurement
procedure of the Government of India but also reflects inaction on the part of the
controlling/administrative Ministry in monitoring such sensitive issues. They,
therefore, urge upon the Ministry to find out whether such award of contract is


24

permissible and if not, to initiate appropriate disciplinary action against the erring
officials. The Committee feel that since scientific and defence research involves
some security risks, they desire the Ministryf(DRDO to make all out efforts to see that
the specification, design and security of the nation is not put to risk or is not
compromised in any manner while undertaking such turn-key projects. Action taken
in this regard may be intimated to this Committee.

MenEReneRARRA ERIE
NEW DELHI; | ' PROF. K. V. THOMAS,
25'" April, 2016 Chairperson,

5 Vaisakha, 1938 {Saka} Public Accounts Committee



CONFIDENTIAL

नि ~ as-

MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE | (DEFENCE) OF THE PUBLIC
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2014-15) HELD ON 6™ JANUARY, 2015.

The Sub-Committee sat on Tuesday, the 6” January, 2015 from 1500-hrs to
1620 hrs in Room No. 139', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT
- Shi SS. Ahluwalia - Convenor
Members
RAJYA SABHA .
2. Shri Bhubaneshwar Kalita
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
4. ShtiA.K Singh - Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Anita B. Panda - Director
3. Shri Jayakumar T. - Additional Director
4... Shri S.L. Singh - Under Secretary
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMP7ROLLER 2४ के OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR
GENERAL OF INDIA
4. Shri Parag Prakash - Director General of Audit (Defence
. Services)
2. Shri Purshottam Tiwary - Principal Director (PAC) ”
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE DEFENCE
4. Dr. Avinash Chander - Scientific Advisor to Raksha Mantri and
Secretary (R&D)
2. Shri R.G. Vishwanathan ~ Joint Secretary and Additional Financial
Advisor

3. Dr. K.D. Nayak * - Director General (MED & CoS)


Ah न+
2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the representatives of the Office of the.
C&AG to the sitting of the Cammittee. Apprising that the sitting had been convened to
fake‘oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Defence on the subject 'Extra
avoidable Expenditure’ by ANURAG' based on Para No..5.1 of the CRAG Report No, 30 of
2013, the Convenor invited the Audit Officers to brief the Sub-Committee on the finer
points of the subject. The Audit Officers. accord ingly briefed the Sub-Committee explaining
various issues. pertaining-to.the subject. . . न ee cee ee ee

3. The representatives of the Ministry of Defence were then called in. Welcoming
them, the Convenor impressed upon those attending the sitting not to disclose any
information regarding the proceedings of the sifting to anybody else before the Report on
the subject is presented to Parliament. He then highlighted serious lapses on the part of
Advanced Numerical Research and Analysis Group (ANURAG) such as violation of the
Defence Research.and Development Organization (DRDO) Procurement Procedure 2006 ,
while awarding the contract for upgradation of the Project ‘Centre for High Performance .
Computing and Research’. (CHITRA). He pointed out that this contract was placed on
single tender basis on M/s ITI Limited, Hyderabad at a cost of 716.38 crore on the plea that
it had successfully integrated and maintained the existing sysiem. However, M/s ITI
Limited outsourced the work at a cost of [14.26 crore resulting in extta expenditure of Rs.
2.12 crore by ANURAG which could have been avoided. Thereafter, he asked the
Secretary (R&D) to give a brief ac¢ount of the Ministry's response to the Audit findings on
the subject under discussion.

4. The representatives of the Ministry explained their position by giving a powerpoint
presentation on the Audit findings and-the response of the Ministries’ thereon. They
apprised that the contract in question was awarded without calling for open tender on the
basis of 2007 price when fhe existing system was procured from the same company. The
Convenor pointed out that the cost of the two contracts cannot be compared since the
2007 contract was for outright purchase of the equipment/system whereas the 2010
‘contract was only for upgradation of the equiprnent/system which should obviously cost
much less. Because of this flaw, tle objected to the award of the contract for upgradation
of the project 'Centre for High-Performance Computing and Research’ (CHITRA) i.e. 2010
contract on single tender basis. Further, he criticized Advanced Numerical Research and
Analysis Group (ANURAG) and the Ministry for not taking any action against. M/s ITt
Limited, Hyderabad when the contract was outsourced to another company resulting in

extra- expenditure of 2.12 crare by ANURAG, Admonishing that no due diligence was :


- हो .-

done on M/s ITI by DRDO, and the aforesaid outsourcing came to light onty when the

- company needed a customs clearance certificate, the Convenor pointed out the possibility

of M/s IT Limited, Hyderabad outsourcing the 2007 contract foo.

5. The representatives of the Ministry submitted that they were not concerned about
who has done the job. Criticizing such an attitude, the Convenor opined that this involved
security risks and cautioned thern fo be careful and vigilant in developing sophisticated
things on sensitive issues of the Country. Then both the Convenor and the Member of the
Sub-Committee observed that the outsourcing by M/s 11 was a breach of frust and there
was a need for recovering the amount of & 2.12 crore incurred as extra-expenditure by
ANURAG. A representative of the Ministry submitted that the contract was a supply order
and there was no clause in it to deal with such matters. The Corlvenor expressed his
dissatisfaction over this lapse and enquired what the Ministry were going to do as remedial
measure and punitive measure in this case. The Secretary, (R&D)replied that they would
seek legal advice/opinion from the Ministry and then take action as suggested by the Sub-
Committee. ‘The Convenor directed that they should give a proper reply within a week's

time. हे

6. The Convenor thanked the representatives of the Ministry for appearing before the
Sub-Committee and the Tepresentatives of the Office of the C&AG of India for providing
assistance to the Sub-Cammittee in the examination of the subject.

The witnesses, then withdrew.

A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record.

| The Sub-Committee, then, adjourned.