80

Loss for Train parting due to Failure of Centre
Buffer Coupler (CBC) Components

[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their Forty-first Report (16th Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(Railway Board)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2017-18)

EIGHTIETH REPORT
OT फक्फ्ममक्‍न्‍-..

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI :


EIGHTIETH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2017-18)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

Loss for Train parting due to Failure of
Centre Buffer Coupler (CBC) Components

[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their Forty first Report (16th Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(Railway Board)

Presented to Lok Sabha on: ib ae 20]
Laid in Rajya Sabha on: Al. धर

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

August, 2017/ Shravana 1939 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2017-18) हु

INTRODUCTION .................................... ........................

CHAPTER |
CHAPTER It*

CHAPTER IIl*

CHAPTER iv*

CHAPTER V*

Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ..........................

Observations/Recommendations - which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
teplies received from the Government ................

Observations/Recommendations _ in tespect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration ...

Observations/Recommendations _ in fespect of
which the Government have furnished interim
replies ................... eee ee ree eee मम मनन कक

APPENDICES*

Minutes of the 7" Sitting of Public Accounts
Committee (2017-18) held on og" August, 2017.

Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their Forty-first

Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

* Not appended fo the cyclostyled copy of the Report appended (0 the cyclostyled copy of the Report


AN Oar wh

11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

BONS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2017-18)
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Prem Singh Chandumajra

Shri Nishikant Dubey

Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Smt. Riti Pathak

Shri Neiphiu Rio

Shri Abhishek Singh

Prof. Ram Shanker

Dr. Kirit Somaiya

Shri Anurag Singh Thakur

Shri Shivkumar Udasi

Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Naresh Agrawal

Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Vacant*

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
Shri Ajay Sancheti

Shri Bhupender Yadav

SECRETARIAT
Shri A.K. Singh - . Additional Secretary
Shri T. Jayakumar —- Director
Shri A.K. Yadav - Deputy Secretary
Ms. Sonia Gupta - Committee Assistant

*Shri Shantaram Naik ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his

retirement from Rajya Sabha on 28 July, 2017.


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2017-18) having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Eightieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on
action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee, contained in their Forty-first Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Loss for
Train parting due to Failure of Centre Buffer Coupler (CBC) Components' related
to the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board). :

2. The Forty-first Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on
on 26 April, 2016. Replies of the Government to the Observations/ Recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 04 August, 2017. The Public Accounts
Committee considered and adapted the Eightieth Report at their siting held on
09 August, 2017. Minutes of the sittings are given at Appendix-}.

3. For facility of - reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the C&AG of India.

5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eightieth Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha) is given at Appendix-Ii,

NEW DELHI; MALLIKARJUNA KHARGE
10 August,2017 Chairperson,

\9Sravana, 1939 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


REPORT
CHAPTER ~ |

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their Forty First Report (16" Lok Sabha) on ‘Loss for Train Parting due to Failure of
Centre Buffer Coupler (CBC) Components’: based on Para 4.2 of C&AG Report No,

25 of 2043 Union Government—Railways relating to the Ministry of Railways (Railway
Board).

2. The Forty First Report (16" Lok Sabha), which was presented to Lok Sabhaflaid
in Rajya Sabha on 26% April, 2016, contained 04 Observations and Recommendations.
Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations and Recomniendations have
been received from the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) are broadly categorized as
under : |

(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:

Para Nos. 1,2 and 3
Total: 03
Chapter - Ii

(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in
view of the replies received from the Government:

Para Nos. Nil .

Total: Nil

Chapter - li

(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government have
hot been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:

Para Nos. 4
: Total: 04
Chapter - IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished .
interim replies: . 5
Para Nos. Nil
Total: Nil
Chapter - ४


3. The detailed examination of the subject by the Commitiee had revealed delay on
part of Railway authorities in taking corrective action to identify and resolve the issue of
train partings which affect the Railway network and trains running on that particular line
resulting in loss to Railway exchequer. It was further observed that there was a lack of
suitable mechanism to assess the losses and delay in taking punitive action against
defaulting manufacturing firms. There was also a serious issue of many CBC
components being found without requisite marking details which casted doubt on their

authenticity.

4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Railways in respact of all the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have been reproduced in the
relevant. chapters of this Report. The Cornmittee will now deal with the action taken by
the Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations made in their Forty

First Report, which need reiteration or merit comments.

DELAYED ACTION ON DEFAULTING FIRMS
{Recommendation No.3)

5. The Committee had observed that the defaulting firms for supply of CBC
components were clearly identified by the Railway Administration viz. M/s Raneka
Industries Limited (RIL) and M/s Orient Stee! Industries Limited (OSIL) and Railway ,
Board was even requested by Railway Administration to advise RDSO, who maintain
vendor directory, to deregistering the firms for supply of critical safety items like knuckle
lock etc. However, M/s Raneka Industries Ltd. was only delisted for manufacture and*

supply of. knuckle, only for a short period from 22.01.2006 to 12.03.2007. The

uw


Committee were surprised to note that RIL continued to supply Railways with defective
items for another three years from 2010 to 2012 before it was downgraded from Part
to Part नी status. It meant though less. amount of items were sourced from the said
vendor but the firm continued to supply the components, effectively blunting out the
penal measures. Similarly, action of delisting of M/s OSIL came very late in 2010 while
failure reports were available since 2008. The Committee felt that due to lacunae in the
existing system of inspection, a large number of defective CBC components from a
particular manufacturer got inducted into the Railways. Though the Zonal Railways
were aware of the issue relating to quality of product of the firm since July’ 1999, they
failed to resolve the issue. Keeping in view the serious nature of the issue, the
Committee had recommended the Railways to advise the RDSO to outrightly de-list the
defaulting firms instead of first downgrading the defaulting firms and then delisting them.
They also urged upon the Railways to maintain a healthy directory of vendors for the
purpose of inviting and awarding tenders to the genuine firms. Further, the Committee

‘had also recommended that the RDSO may be advised to introduce a provision of black

listing of firms after a certain period of poor supply of manufactured items so that

séverely defaulting firms cannot be-listed again.

6. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Note have furnished as under:

“RDSO-is an ISO 9001 2008 certified organization and so has laid down the
procedure for dealing with the Registration, Downgradation, Delisting of approved
vendors. One of the responsibilities of RDSO is also to ensure that adequate
number of vendors are available to meet out the crisis of material on Railways
and at the same time initiate punitive action against the erring vendors. Hence as
per procedure laid down vendors are in general downgraded initially and if no
further improvement is affected in the given time then they are delisted
subsequently.


Failure of knuckle manufactured by M/s Raneka industries Ltd. (RIL) was
teported by Zonal Railways and therefore, M/s Raneka Industries Ltd. (RIL)
which was in Part-| status for knuckle was delisted for manufacture and supply of
knuckle. The firm remained delisted from 22.01.2006 to 12.03.2007 (more than a
year). As per procedure in vogue at that time, the firm after delisting can apply for
fresh approval again and approval can be given after expiry of one year. After
delisting in Jan.2006, M/s Raneka Industries Ltd. (RIL) applied for fresh approval
for knuckle after delisting of one year, it was approved for lower status of Part-li
on 13,03.2007 after one year on meeting all the ‘requirements of fresh approval.
Again the firm was downgraded from Part-l status to Part-ll status for CBC
assemblies and all its components including knuckle from 15.03.2010 to
23.02.2012 (almost two years) on receipt of quality issues from Zonal Railways
as per procedure in vogue at that time.

In case of M/s OSIL the firm was downgraded from Part-I status to Part-I! status
for manufacture and supply of CBC assemblies and its components including
knuckle in March, 2010 and. was given an opportunity to improve their
manufacturing facilities and quality control measures. As the firm did not improve
the manufacturing facilities and quality control measures, the firm was finally
delisted for this ttem in 2010 and still stands delisted.

Thus it can be seen that, in one case, M/s Raneka Industries (RIL) was. out-
tightly delisted for manufacture and supply of knuckle to Railways for more than
one year. However, in other case, the firm was downgraded from रिक्षा status to
Part-ll status for more than two years. In case of M/s OSIL, the firm was first
downgraded and then finally delisted and still stands delisted. However, the
Committee’s recommendation of the out-rightly delisting of the defaulting firm for. ,
excessive failure of CBC and its components can be considered.
7. The Committee observe that the Ministry of Railways have stated that the
Committee’s recommendation to out-rightly delist the defaulting firms for
excessive failure of CBC and its components can be considered. Similarly,
the Ministry remained silent in its reply about the instructions issued to RDSO
and ‘modifications in the relevant procedures for delisting of defaulting firms in
the first instance itself on recommendations of the Zonal Railways. The -
Committee had also recommended for incorporating a provision for black listing

of firms after instances of poor supply of manufactured items so that

severely defaulting firms cannot be listed again. Since the Ministry have now


informed the Committee that there is a provision enabling the delisted firms to
apply again and get fresh approval for supply to the Railways, the necessity for
the provision of blacklisting firms after couple of instances of being delisted by
the Railways becomes all the more pertinent. The Committee, therefore, desire
that the Ministry take appropriate and time bound action on its recommendations
and male suitable amendments/incorporations in the laid down procedures of
RDSO for effectively dealing with poor quality component suppliers to the हि
Railways. The Committee are unhappy to note that the Railways took nearly two
years to downgrade M/s Raneka industries Ltd. (RIL) from Part-| status to Part-ll
status for CBC assemblies and all its components including knuckles as per
, procedure in vogue. The Committee are further surprised that the present status
of supply quality by the firm has not been revealed. The Committee feel that there
should be well defined upper limit on the period for which a firm can keep
supplying to the Railways under a downgraded Part II status without improving
supply quality. The Committee desire that the Railways should standardize its
procedure for dealing with vendors and more Specifically in cases of deficient
supply quality for maintaining the utmost standards of ‘quality of components

being procured by the Railways, at all times. ह
Assessment of Loss
(Recommendation No. 4)

8. The Committee had noted that although train parting of indian Railways had
actually reduced from 996 cases in 2006-07 to 403 cases in 2013-14, the figure of 403

was still quite high in terms of consequential losses and resultant inconvenience of


bunching of other trains. Moreover, the fact that there is no methodology available for
calculating the revenue losses due to train parting incidences, as admitted by the
Railways, shows the nonchalant approach of the Railways towards dealing with cases
of train partings as in absence of quantifiable losses, neither steps can be taken to
address the reason for losses nor responsibility can be fixed in event of persistent
losses. In the absence of any methodology, on the part of the Railways, Audit have
estimated a loss of 6.8 goods trains per incident with opportunity cost of Rs. 9 lakhs per
train on the basis of information provided by the Railways. However, during evidence
the Railways submitted that their estimates of losses of Rs. 9 lakhs per train were based
on assumptions. The Committee had: strongly deprecated the failure of the Ministry of
Railways to determine exact revenue losses from train parting incidents and relying on
mere assumptions. The Committee had desired the Railways to devise suitable
methodology for calculating the revenue losses due to train parting incidences at the
earliest and recommended that the said methodology should conform to the standards
: observed by the audit. The Committee also felt that the Zonal Railways may be advised
to maintain figures of losses on account of train partings along with the details of steps
taken to address the said losses which may be reviewed by the Railway “Board :

periodically.

9. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Note have furnished as under:

“Train partings take place both due to normal wear and tear and quality problems
in various components of the CBC. Indian Railways seek to reduce the
number of cases of train partings by tackling the following issues:

(a) Improving the quality of CBC Couplers, its components and draft gears.
(b) Ensuring that proper quality of coupler components and draft gears are
procured through strict implementation of quality assurance protocols


10.

as well as maintaining a strict system of vendor approval as detailed in
para 3 above.

(c) The result of the efforts made are apparent in the rates of failures
achieved as below:

Year Train Parting | Goods NTKM Average

over IR (in Billions) failure/month/
है billion NTKM
2006-07 [998 4834 “| 2.06
2007-08 | 877 523.2 1.68
2008-09 | 793 552.0 4.44
2009-10 | 778 601.3 1.29
2010-11 | 717 626.5 1.14
2011-12 | 611 639.8 |
2012-13 | 562 641.8 0.88
2013-14 | 403 _ | 651.9 0.62 —
2014-15 | 445 685.9 0.65
2015-16 | 365 655.6 0.56

Train partings also happen because of miscreant activities where CBC operating
handle is operated causing CBC lock to open. These happen because of
miscreant activities which are aimed at pilferage / sabotage and are basically a
law & order problem. Efforts are being made to control such cases also. है

The cases of train parting result in detention of the train involved along with some
other trains which may have to wait for signal/line clear in case of parting. As a
result, the number of trains that get detained would depend on traffic density in
section where such failure occurs as well as the position of traffic at given
instance of time. हैं

Therefore, while it would be possible to define the cost of damage to CBC
coupler, draft gear assembly, it would be purely subjective and speculative to
define the cost due to detention of trains and loss on account of opportunity cost.
Since the matter comes in the realm of hypothesis about loss of opportunity and
possibility of enhanced operation only, the actual calculation of cost of losses
may not be accurate." *

The Committee in their earlier recommendation had suggested that the *

Railways should devise suitable methodology for calculating the revenue losses

due to train parting incidences at the earliest and recommended that the said

methodology should conform to the standards observed by the audit. The

Ministry in their action taken note have stated that while it would be possible to


define the cost of damage to CBC coupler, draft gear assembly, it would be purely
subjective and speculative to define the cost due to detention of trains and loss
on account of opportunity cost. Since the matter comes in the realm of
hypothesis about loss of opportunity and possibility of enhanced operation
only, the actual calculation of cost of losses may not be accurate. However, the
Committee reiterates its view that in absence of quantifiable losses, it would be
difficult to judge the sufficiency of actions taken to reduce the cases of train
partings nor responsibility can be fixed in event of persistent cases of train
parting without knowledge of consequential losses. Thus, Committee reiterate
their earlier recommendation that the Ministry, based on their own
assessment/judgement, should devise suitable methodology for calculating the
revenue losses due to train parting to give a quantifiable aspect to the damages

caused by the train partings to the operations of the Railways.


OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE
CONTAINED IN THEIR FORTY-FIRST REPO!

(i)

(i)

(ii)

(iv)

(v)

~ (Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction)

APPENDIX-II

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY TH

Total number of Observations/Recommendations

Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
which have been accepted by the Goverriment:

Para Nos. 1,2 & 3

Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of

the teply of the Government:

Observations/Recommendations in respect of

which replies of the Government have not been

accepted by the Committee an
teiteration:.

Para No. 4

id which require

Observations/Recommendations in respect of

which the Government have furnished interim replies:

-NIL-

E GOVERNMENT ON THE
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
RT (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) -

04

Total : 03
Percentage: 75%

Total : NIL
Percentage: 0%

Total: 01

' Percentage: 25%

Total : NIL
Percentage: 0%