B84

EXCESSES OVER VOTED GRANTS AND CHARGED
APPROPRIATIONS (2012-13) .

[Actlon Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in thelr Nineteenth Report (160 Lok Sabha)]

- PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2017-18)

EIGHTY FOURTH REPORT

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI



PACNO.2118

BELGHTY FOURTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2047-18)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

EXCESSES OVER VOTED GRANTS AND: . |"
CHARGED APPROPRIATIONS {201 2-13)

{Action Taken by the Government’on the Observations/Recommendations of
_ the Committee contained In their Nineteenth Report (16™Lok Sabha)]

है

Presented fo Lok Sabha on: i} 12. our

Laid in Rajya Sebha on: 4 —
Ray ral [22७1

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI |

December, 2017 /Agrahayana, 1939 (Saka)



CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2017-18) ~ (iii)

INTRODUCTION शा (iv).
CHAPTER! = Report 4-18
CHAPTER II _Observations/Recommendations which have

been’ accepted .by the Government

CHAPTER Ill Observations/Recommendations which the
हे Committee do not desire to pursue in view of.

the replies received from the Government

CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of
7 है ‘Which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and which

require © teiteration
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of
7 which the Government have furnished interim
Teplies हु मु है
- APPENDICES DICES
|. | Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2017-18) held on
6" October, 2017 Q .
॥ "Analysis of - the Action Taken by the
Government “on “the

Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their
Nineteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) .....


COMPOSITION GF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2017-18) °

Shri Mallikarjun Kharge है - Chairperson

MEMBERS
LOK SABHA °

2 Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
4... Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra ”
5, Shri Nishikant Dubey
6 Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar,
7. © Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8... Smt. Riti Pathak
9. Shri Neiphiu Rioh
40.° Shri Abhishek Singh
41... Prof. Ram Shanker —
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya
43. ° Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
_ 44, Shri Shivkumar C.-Udasi
- 45. Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA

- 16... Shrt Naresh Agrawal
17. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedt
48, Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
49. Shri Shantaram Naik”
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Royt
24: Shri Ajay Sancheti
22, Shri Bhupender Yadav

SECRETARIAT
4. Shri AK. Singh "9 > Additional Secretary
2... Shri Jaya Kumar - . Director

3. Smt. Anju Kukreja = "_ Under Secretary

3 Ceased tn be a Member of Committes consequent ‘npoa his retizement fror Rajya Sabba on 28 july,
2017, .
t Cessed tn be a Member of Cornittes coasequent won his seiissmant rom Rajya 300० on 18

- &शहाफा, 2017, :



INTREORBUCTION

|, the Chalrperson, Public Accounts Committee (2017-18), having been ‘
authorized*by the Cormmitice, do-present-this Eighty-fourth Report (Sixteenth
Lok Sabha) on Action “Taken © by the Government on the हु
Observations/Recommendations ‘of the: Committee ‘contained in- their
Nineteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Excesses Over Voted Grants
and Charged , Appropriations (2012-13)'__ relating yarious ..
-Ministries/Departments concerned. है _

2. The Nineteenth Report was presented to tok Sabha and laid in Rajya’
~ gabha on 29" April, 2015. Replies .of the Government -to all the
” Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received The_

Public Accounts. Committee considered and adopted the Fighty-fourth Report

at their sitting held on 6° October, 2017. Minutes of the sitfing are given at

Appendix I. : — .

’

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observatioris” and De,

Recommendations of the Committee have been printed ‘in thick type in the-
body of the Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the. assistance .
rendered to them in. the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor
- General of india.

5: An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/ Recommendations contained in’ the Nineteenth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-ti. .

_ NEW DELHI. : ~ SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE
4 December, 2017. Chairpetse
13 Agrahayana, 1939 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


REPORT

(cee wnt अभय हल «5 . PART =H.

INTRODUCTORY

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by
the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Nineteenth Report (16" Lok Sabha) on “Excesses Over Voted
Grants and Charged Appropriations {2042-1 3)". relating to various

Ministries/Departments concerned.

2. 116 Nineteenth Report (167 Lok Sabha), which was presented to Lok Sabha
and laid in Rajya Sabha on 29" April, 2015 contained 22 Observations and
Recommendations. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations and ©
Recommendations have been received from Ministties/ Depariments concerned are

broadly categorized as under:

{i) Observations/Recommendations which have been . accepted by the ,
Government: . .

Para Nos. 1-22 : Total: 22 7
. . ” Chapter 51
(ii) Observations/Recommendations _ which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:

Para Nos. Nil Total: NIL
हि Chapter - Ill

~ iti) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies: of Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:

Para Nos. Nil ~ Total: NIL

a a Chapter - IV

{iv} Observations/Recommendations in respect af which Government have
furnished interim replies: - : oo a

Para Nos. Nif oo Total: NIL
o Chapter - ४



3. the Nineteenth Repar-dealt with the Appropriation Accounts OF ihe Onto

> ANC

Government relaiing to the Civil, Defence Services Postal Servic

for the financial year 2012-13. The Report highlighted that the total ©
expenditure of ¥6591 .30 crore was incurred in 19 cases of 16 Grants/Appropriztions.
The defaulting Ministries were Ministry of Defence (5 cases under four Grants Le.
Grant No. 21-Defence: Pensions, Grant No. 22 Defence Services-Army, Grant No
23-Defence Services Navy and Grant:No. 24-Defence Services-Air Force), Ministry,
of Finance (Appropriation No, 34: Interest Payments), Deparimentof Indian Audit and
‘Accounts (Grant No. 40-Indian Audit and. Accounts Department), Department of
Urban Development (Grant No, 104 Depariment'of Urban Development), Ministry of
Communications and information Technolegy (Grant No. 13-Department of Posts)
and.-the Ministry of Railways. (10 cases under 8 Grants/Appropriations i.e. Grant No:
8-Operating Expenses-Rolling, Stock and Equipment, Grant No. 10-Operating
Expenses-Fuel, Grant No. 13-Working Expenses-Provident Fund, Pension and
other. Retirement ‘Benefits, Appropriation No. 03-Working Expenses-General
Superintendence and_ Services Appropriation No. 04-Working Expenses-Repairs
and Maintenance of Permanent Way and Works, Appropriation, No.. 05-Working
Expenses-Repairs and Maintenance of Motive Powers, Appropriation No, 07-
. Working Expenses-Repairs and Maintenance of Piant and Equipment, Appropriation
No. 08-. Operating. Expenses-Rolling Stock and Equipment Appropriation No. 11-
Working Expenses-Staff Welfare and Amenities and Appropriation No. 13 Working
, Expenses Provident Fund, Pension and other Retirement Benefits). The Committee
had accordingly given the observations/recommendations in their Report. The gists
-of important Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report are given as

under

i) The Committee emphasized on the need for scrupulous scrutiny of the ;

budget proposals, rigorous monitoring of the pace of expenditure and |



aa

ii)

ii)

iv)

v)

sirict compliance of ‘tseneral Financial RUS so-as tw elimimate the

.. possibility of excess expenditure. |

The Committee urged upon the Ministry of Finance to take the issue of-

excess expenditure with utmost seriousness and find innovative steps
for establishing sound pudgetary mechanism whereby the expenditure

management of any Gran Appropriation. is made more accurate and
- practicable and the scarce financial resources are utilized appropriately

The Committee recommended that the Ministries/Departments evolve
' an effective mechanism In coordination with the Ministry of Finance -

(Department of Economie Affairs), Comptroller and Auditor General of

India and the Controller General of Accounts in’ the Department of
Expenditure by which the progress of expenditure: can be strictly
_monitored and timely action.taken to ensure that expenditure does not

overshoot the [limit authorized py Parliament despite having
Supplementary Granis

Taking a serious view of the callous. attitude on the part of the Ministry
of Railways for delay in preseritation of Appropriation Accounts of
Railways for the financial year 2012-13, the Committee recommended

the Ministry to take urgent corrective action to timely present the.

Appropriation Accounts to Parliament so that regularisation of excess
expenditure jncurred during a particular financial year can be done

promptly.

Noting that the Department of Posts is implemeniing an “IY |

, Modernisation Project" through which real-time budgetary information
would be. available,;- which would streamline the expenditure and -

budgetary contfol and instill fiscal discipline. The project is likely to

complete its implementation phase by the end of October; 2016 the

3


~ committee hoped thet thé’ project’ was imblemnenta-wilhin~ the —
prescribed time limit and the Deperiment of Posis will be consistent in
their efforis to ensure £0 expenditure is incurred in excess of the ~~

authorized limits under this Grant in future.

vi) The Committee recommended that the Ministry of Railways should
evolve a mechanism {to assess and project realistic requirement of
unds -both at Budgetary and Supplementary stages so that timely
action is taken to ensure that the excess expenditure could be avoided.

as far as possible

4, The Action Taken Notes fumished by the Ministries/ Departments concemed
in respect of alt Observations and Recommendations of the Committee have been
reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report The Committee will now deal _
with the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and
Recommendations made in the Original Report which either need reiteration or merit
comments. | , | ह .
Excess expenditure despite obtaining Supplementary “rat's expenditure despite obftainin Supplementar Grants

. (Recommendation Para No 6)

5. The Committee were constrained to observe that out of jotal 19 cases of |
excess registering Grants/Appropriations, an excess expenditure of %6420.17
crore was incurred in as many as 15 cases even after obtaining Supplementary
Grants/Appropriations to the extent of 8596.33 crore. The percentage of excess
expenditure over the Supplementary Grants in espect of these 15
Grants/Appropriations ranged from 2.52 percent (Grant No. 40-Indian Audit and
Accounts Department) fo 4596.70 percent (Appropriation No. 03-Working
Expenses-General Superintendence and Service) and in 9 cases this percentage
was more than 100 percent. In respect of-nine Grants and Appropriations the
quantum of. excess expenditure incurred has been even higher than the



- Supplernentary Grants sought. The Committee dep eplored the tendency ofthe हे
defaulting Ministries/Departments in incurring excess expenditure despite ~
obtaining huge sums of Supplementary Grants in a routine manner. What was ,

more -astonishing was that these Ministries/Departments could not realistically
project their requirement of funds even after obtaining of Supplementary Grants

at various stages. This was a clear indication of. the pervading malaise in the |

exiant budgeting methodimechanism, which has failed [0 ensure proper

assessment and accurate projection of the fund requirement despite availability ©

_ of ample opportunities for seeking approval of Parliament. It was, therefore,

imperative that the Ministries/Departments should keép 8 close watch over the
"trend of expenditure and when any need for additional funds arises they should ,

_ assess realistically their requirement of funds in advance’ and approach

Parliament by presenting Supplementary Demands for Grants in time, It-is not.

expected of any Ministries/Departments to cross their financial limits after
obtaining Supplementary ‘Grants as has happened in many cases. The
Committee: recalled that only last year, they had emphasized that the
Supplementary Budget should normally be for unexpected items of expenditure
or schemes taken up for compelling public interest. However, the Ministries went
- on incurring. excess expenditure, year after year, in spite of ample provisions
available for supplementary ‘demands for grants to obtain Parliament's approval
to meet unexpected expenditure. Based on other fiscal federal models- the
Finance Ministry should evolve modalities enshrined on ‘prudent financial
principles which will enable the sanctity of budgetary provisions ensuring the
yeach and superintendence of Parliament on appropriation outgoes. The

Committee had also urged that the Ministry of Finance should initiate. a study of
: . : : aa

the best Interriational Practices on the modalities for ensuring greater conformity
of expenditure to the budgetary provisions. The Secretary (Department of

Economic Affairs) had submitted that in the next four-five months they would try

to do a paper of the best international practices and present it to PAC. The

i



Commies regretied thal such a study was Ndr iniiated The Committee desired -—

no sald siudy be completed within the iimeframe as stated by the Ministry.

“The Committee elso recommended that the Ministries/Departments shoutd

evolve an effective mechanism tn coordination with the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs), Comptroller and Auditor General of India anc
ihe Controller General of Accounts in the Department of Expenditure by which
{he progress of expenditure can be strictly monitored and timely action takeri to -.
- ensure that expenditure do not overshoot ihe limit authorized by Parliament

despite having Supplementary Grants.

6. The Ministry of Finahce (Department of Economic Affairs) in their Action
Taken Reply have stated as under: हि हु
“The recommendations of the Committee made in para 6 of 92nd

Report has already been accepted and the action taken on this है पे
-recotmmendation has been submitted to the Committee vide our letter dt, =
2.6.2016 (copy enclosed).The study, as recommended by the. Committee, ©
has been made in consultation with the office of the Controller General. of
Accounts-and the office of the Comptrotier & Auditor General of India

Office of the Comptroller & Auditor General has conveyed that there
already exists a healthy mechanism of monitoring of expenditure under the
scheme ‘Integrated Financial Adviser’ which has further been redefined by.
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) in June, 2006
Under -this scheme, the Financial Adviser is responsible to’ the
administrative. Ministry and the Ministry of Finance being overall in charge
of Budget and Accounts in addition to Infernal Finance Section. in this —

_ system, Financiat Adviser in coordiriation with - Chief Controller of
Accounts/Controller of Accounts of the Ministry needs to’ ensure that the *
Ministry not~ only maintains accounts of expenditure against the.
grants/appropriations, but aiso obtains. figures of expenditure incurred by

6



the subordinate offices 50 That the Ministry asa complete montirtementk—§- — |

picture’ of the entire expenditure and fo monitor the same vis-a-vis

authorised grantsfappropriations.

With the introduction of modified exchequer control based
expenditure management system, it has been mandatory to ail
Ministries/Departments to prepare Monthly Expenditure Plan (MEP) and
Quarterly Expenditure Allocations (QEP) and send the same to Cash
Management Cell of the Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic
Affairs for better monitoring and compliance of the guidelines regarding
‘expenditure management. Thus, by following the extant measures already -

है in place ‘and closely monitoring the’ monthly expenditufe vis-a-vis.
-authorised grants/appropriations and also with the information technology,
the phenomenon of excess over the above the authorised appropriation

can be arrésted.

Office of the Controller General of Accounts has made . similar
suggestions like periodical review . of expenditure of
Ministries/Departments, strict adherence to Monthly Expenditure Pian,
obtaining supplementary appropriations at appropriate stages, etc. to avoid

excess expenditure.”

7. In.their 497" Report (46 Lok Sabha), the Committee had desired that
the Ministry of Finance should initiate a study of the, best international
practices on the modalities for ensuring greater conformity of expenditure
to the budgetary provisions. The Committee regret to note that the said
study has not been conducted 50 far, In that Report, the Committee also -
recommended that the Ministries { Departments should evolve an effective
_imechanism in coordination with the Ministry of Finance {Department of
Economic Affairs), C&AG of india and the CGA in the Department of

7



cyperditure so that the progress of expenditure can be strictlyinenitered — -

action faken fa ensure that expenditure including

Supplementary Grants does not overshoot the lirait authorized’ by
Parliament, in their Action Taken itote, the Ministry of Finance (Department
of Economie Affairs) stated that the Ministry was lm consultation with Office .
of C&AG and GGA of expenditure for evolving & mechanism by which the.
progress of expenditure can be monitored and timely action taken fo avoid:
excess expenditure. This also includes identifying international best
practices, conducting a study and replicating the system in tndia. In this
regard, the Ministry have. now apprised the Committee that since Offices of-
C&AG and GGA have emphasized on the existing system of monitoring,
strict adherence to monthly expenditure plans and timely seeking
appropriations from the Parliament through Supplementary Grants, it has
been decided to follow the existing system of monitoring strictly and
" vigorously for avoiding the excess expenditure. Office of C&AG has also
conveyed to the Ministry that there already existed a healthy mechanism of
- monitoring of expenditure under the Scheme ‘Integrated Financial Adviser’
which has further been redétined by Ministry of Finance (Department ‘of
Economic Affairs) in June, 2006. The Committee was surprised to note that
the study of best international practices has yet to be conducted by the -
Ministry of Finance and. no steps are being undertaken fo ensure
effectiveness in monitoring of expenditure. Noting that no changes have
been brought in the monitoring system since June, 2006 and expenditure is
“overshooting. its limits year after year, the Committee are of the view that
the existing monitoring system is ineffective and review of the system is -
necessary for stringent monitoring Besides ATNs do not indicate any
information about the study of best international practices conducted
” either by the Ministry or by C&AGICGA the Committee are unable to
understand as to how in the absence, of such study, the Ministry can claim

$ .


that the existing mechenisin oF saonitoring of expenditure is-heatihy and.
-adequate enough for avoiding the excess expenditure. Since instances of
‘excess expenditure have been recurring -year after year specially with
regard to key Ministries fike Finance: Defence and Railways, it Is clear that
ihe matter is being considered only in a routine manner and the
Government is not making. serious efforts to ensure financial discipline. in -
view of the persistent trend of excess expenditure going unchecked,. the i
Committee strongly recommend that the Government should undertake a
thorough review in the matter, while overhauling the existing mechanism

- for better monitoring of expenditure. The Committee. also reiterate their a
earlier recommendation regarding undertaking of study of best ,
international - practices to avoid excess expenditure in future. The
Committee further desire that their recommendations in this regard must
be implemented strictly so that excess expenditure is completely avoided 7

in future. ©

Recurring phenomenon of Excess expen©en= henomenon of Excess expenditure .

(Recommendation Para No. 7)

8. The Committee found that the incurrence of excess expenditure is. a
recurring phenomenon In fhe past despite recommendations of ‘the Public
Accounts Committee and subsequent issuance of instructions by the Ministry of
Finance from time to time. The scrutiny of excess expenditure. incurred by

various Ministries/Departments during the last ten years revealed that in all the - _

ectors the excess expenditure which was reduced to a considerable extent
during the year 2007-08 had’ again showed an upward trend during the year
2008-09. From 2009-16 to 2012-13 it had again showed a decreasing trend
However, during the year under review Le. 2012-13 while the excess
expenditure under Civil, Defericé Services and Postal Services had shown 8 7


downward trend, it had increased in case of Railways bottrin respect of arsed:

3 well as mamher ef excess registering Grants/Appropriations. Similarly, ovetali

excess expenditure had also been reduced from ZB503.14 ordre in 2011-12 |

6597.02 crore during the fiscal , 2012-13 even though number of excess
registering Grahts/Appropriations has increased from 11 in 2011-12 to 16 in
2012-13. Further, from the scrutiny of excess tegistering Grants/Appropriations

, ‘for the last five years period Le, from 2008-09 to-2012-13 it had been found that

in 9 Grants/Appropriations - (Grant No. 21-Defence Pensions, Grant No. 13-

Department of Posts and Grants/Appropriations Nos 3,4,5,6,8,12 & 13 operated,

by the Ministry of Railways) persistent excess occurred in at least three years out
- of five years. It was further observed that the Ministry of Defence under Grant
No, 21-Defence Pensions, ‘had incurred excess expenditure of more than Rs
3000 crore recurringly for the last four years ie. from 2009-10 to 2012-13
8999.54 crore in 2009-10, 3336.31 crore in 2010-11, $3568.81 crore in 2014-

42 and %3863.71 .crore in 2012-13. Similarly, the Departrient of Posts under '

- Revenue-Voted Section of Grant No. 43-Postal Services had incurred. excess
_ expenditure of more than ₹100 crore for the years 2009-10 to 204 2-13 (€818.13
crore in 2009-10, %366.63 crore in 2010-11, 7400.04 crore in 2014-42 and
£160.14 crore in 2012-13). Further, in case of Grants/Appropriations operated by
the Ministry of Railways it was séen that out of 46 Grants/Appropriations,

.  Técurring excess expenditure under two Grants/Appropriations namely Grant No.

13-Provident Fund, Pension and other Retirement Benefits and Appropriation No.

03-General Superintendence and Services had been incurred. for the fast four -

years ic. from 2009-10 to 2012-13. The fact that the excess expenditure
persisted, year after year, despite repeated exhortations of the Committee and

issuance of instructions by the Ministry of Finance from time to time only led the ©

Committee to conclude that. the ‘matter had not been. viewed by the’ ;

Ministries/Departments with the. seriousness it deserved. The Committee desired
४ that Ministries bear in mind that excess expenditure is ‘unauthorized expenditure:

40



betraying fack of financial discipline कह only-sittration—in- which the excess ~
expenditure is understandable is when-a need for unforeseen of unavoidable
expenditure had arisen suddenly which could not-be anticipated and with’ no time
left for the Ministry/Depariment to approach Parliament for a Supplementary
Grant, Only last year, the Committee in Para 6 of their 9200 Report (15" Lok
Sabha) had desired thai the Government: should earnestly undertake case
studies of the instances where expenditure .had persistently. exceeded the -
budgetary allocations during the last five years However, no such study seems
to have.been conducted by the Government in this regard. In view of the ©
persistent trend .in the incurring of excess expenditure going unchecked, the
- Committee once again recommended the Government to. undertake a case study
of the instances of excess expenditure incurred recurringly-for the last five years
with a view to looking into the reasons as to why.the existing mechanism for
control of expenditure has failed to effectively check the unabated trend of
excess expenditure. Steps shoutd-also be initiated to constitute a high-level inter-
Ministerial Group under, the Chairmanship of the Cabinet Secretary to examine
this recurring issue and apprise the Committee about the steps taken to rectify
the problems. The Comptroller and Auditor General of India also‘need to be
closely associated with this process. Considering the fact that the Committee had
been asking the Government to take steps 0 minimize the recurring excess
expenditure, the Committee ‘desired to be apprised about the corrective -
measures taken along with the specific results achieved during the last ten years

as a follow-up of PAC’s recommendations in the matter. Non-implementation of

fecommendations, if any, should was to be clearly indicated in the Action Taken हु

1३०७5 required to be furnished to the Committee:

9. The Ministry of Finance {Department of Economic Affairs) in their Action
Taken Reply have stated as under

a


“The obseivations of The Punic sSuequnts-Gomrnittiee have been

1080.

‘The recommendations of the Commitee made in para 0 of 92nd

Report has already been accepted ‘and the action taken on this ;

recommendation has been submitted to the Committee Vide. our letter OL
2.6.2016 (copy enclosed). The study, as recommenced by the Committee
has been made in consultation with the office of the Controller General of
Accounts and the office of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India

Office of the Comptroller & Auditor General has conveyed that there
already exists a healthy mechanism of monitoring of expenditure under the

scheme ‘Integrated Financial Adviser’ which has further been redefined by .

Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) in June, 2006,

Under this scheme, the Financial Adviser 15 responsible to the

administrative Ministry and the Ministry of Finance being overall in-charge
of Budget and Accounts in addition to Internal Finance Section. In this
system, Financial Adviser in coordination -with Chief Controller of
Accounts/Controller of Accounts of the Ministry heeds to ensure that the
Ministry not. only maintains accounts of expenditure against the
grantsfappropriations but also abtains figures of expenditure incurred by

‘the subordinate offices so that the Ministry has a complete month, to month
picture of the entire expenditure and to monitor the same viS-a-ViS

authorised grants/appropriations

With the introduction - of modified exchequer control’ based
expenditure management system, if has been mandatory to ‘all

Ministries/Departments to prepare Monthly Expenditure Plan (MEP) and. .

Quarterly Expenditure Allocations (QEP) and send the same to Cash
Management Cell of the Ministry of Finance Departinent of Economic

42



Affairs for better monitoring and ‘complianesof tine-guidelines -regardit ३ -
expenditure management. Thus, by following the extant measures already
in place and closely monitoring the monthly expenditure vis-a-vis
authorised grants/appropriations and also with the information technology,
the phenomenon of excess over. the above the authorised appropriation

can be arrested.

_ Office of the Controller General of Accounts has made similar
suggestions like periodical - review of " expenditure: “of.
Ministries/Depariments, strict, adherence. to Monthly Expenditure Plan,
obtaining supplementary appropriations at appropriate stages, etc. to avoid

"excess experiditure.”

40.. The Committee are constrained to observe that the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) have submitted the same reply
on the Committee’s observations/recommendations at Para No.6 & 7 of the
49" Report. ‘The Committee are shocked to note that the Ministry of
Finance (Department ‘of Economic Affairs} have not undertaken thorough
scrutiny of recurring instances of excess expenditure over the last five
years with a view to Jooking into the reasons for failure of the existing
mechanism to effectively check the unabated trend of excess expenditure.
Further, no steps were initiated towards constituting 2. high-level Inter
Ministerial Group: under the Chairmanship of the Cabinet Secretary to
examine the recurring phenomenon of excess expenditure. ‘It is apparent
that the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) which isa
nodal Ministry’ for monitoring excess expenditure. is not sincere about.
introspecting and finding solutions to the ever recurring unjustified excess
expenditure. While strongly criticizing “such a cavalier attitude, the
Committee reiteraie their earlier recommendation impressing Upon the

Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) to undertake

33



cp of fre instances Of pacurring excess expendiure-ancto

al Iniss Ministerial Group under the Chairmanship of

Cebinet Secrevary 10 find cut the solutions for this recurring Valaise aikt ~

. t ensure ouscrvance ef strict ‘fiscal discipline should be prudently

addressed in the coming years:

Excess expendi expenditure incurred by Ministry off of Railways
; (Recommendation No. 16)

41. The Committee’s examination of the Indian Railways Appropriation
Accounts ‘for the Financial year 2012-13 revealed that the Ministry of Railways
incurred a total excess expenditure of x 4678.98 crore fatter misclassification) in
40 cases of 8 excess registering Grants/Appropriations. The Committee noted
that while there was some decline in the excess expenditure as well as excess
registering’ Grants/Appropriations during the year 2011-12 in comparison to thé
year 2010-11, ithad again reversed during the year 2012-13.when the amount of

excess expenditure as well as the number of cases of Grants/Appropriations had
increased from दैं। 049,86 crore in. 4 Grants/Appropriations during 2011-12 to
- 4675.96 crore in 8 Grants/Appropriations during the year 2012-13. The

Committee were astonished to note that out of the total excess expenditure

incurred by the Ministry of Railways during the fiscal 2012-13, the: excess
expenditure of more than % 600 crore awas incurred under two Grants viz ¥ 658,82

crore under Grant No, 10-Working Expenses operating Expenses-Fuel and

981.95 crore under Grant No.13-Working Expenses-Provident Fund, Pension
‘and Other Retirement Benefits. According to the Ministry of Railways, the excess
हि expenditure of 1674.66 crore under Revenue (Voted) Section of Grant Nos. 8,
40 and 13 was incurred due to incurring more expenditure towards staff cost,
more contractual payments, increase in prime ‘cost of HSD olf and more
consumption of HSD oil, increase in rate of energy purchased from outside,

receipt of more debits from Pension disbursing authorities on’ account of

44


implementation of MACPS and deamess attowarice hike More ex g ralia- pension, —

_ qnore..casés of death cum retirement gratuity, leave encashment of pension
optees and more government contribution for new pension scheme. Apparently,
most of these items were not such as to crop up suddenly or which could not be
anticipated at the time of budgetirevised estimates . by an experienced —
organization like the Railways Further, under Revenue (Charged) section of
Appropriation Nos. 3:4,5,7,8,11 & 13 the excess expenditure of £1.29 crore was
‘incurred due to decretal payments The Committee desired to know when exactly
the decretal payments made. in all the cases and whether provisions for these
payments could have been provided fer. at the time of revised budget allocation.
It, however appeared that no attempt was made to provide for them in वे
Supplementary appropriation for authorization by Parfiament during the year

है itself. Deploring the tendency of excess expenditure by the Ministry of Railways,
the Committee in their earlier report had expected that the Ministry should 100४६
into the recurrent lapses on ‘this account with a’view te fixing responsibility at the
appropriate level so that the existing. deficiencies and shortcomings in the
prevailing ‘expenditure review system were rectified and recurrence of excess
expenditure was avoided. The fact that the Ministry had. not taken due care

- despite the Committee’s directive was regretiable. The Committee therefore,

emphasized that through proper control over expenditure and with more accurate

estimation of expenditure and liabilities; much of the excess expenditure could be _
avoided. The Committee desired fo be apprised of the concrete action taken in

this regard by the Ministry within six months

42. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Reply have stated as under.

“Iq 2012-43 most of the excess has been registered under Demand
Nos.10 & 13, In these Deniands it was quite difficult to assess the actual

requirement.



Demand’ No. 10 is for_ expenditure telah te iueitor iraction

ice of BSD of

consisting of high speed diesel and electileal energy. 7 ff

cannut be ‘forecast exactly, as ihe price oF PES Vai * inctades local
taxes vary from staie to state. As far as electic eneray is concerned, there
ig also wide variation in rate of ‘electric energy. purchased from various
power supply agencies. Besides, consumption of both diesel and electrical
energy is directly related to traffic carried and train operations. Given the
complexity involved, despite pest efforts to accurately estimate the
expenditure, the variation with’ grant can never be entirely ruled out. As far

as pension projection is concerned while trends & other known factors like

anticipated retirements etc. af factored, at budgetary stages, it is very

difficult to assess the exact requirement due fo large number of railway -

pensioner settled across the country: and irregular pattern in raising of

pension debits by the banks.

The. 6th CPC has an inbuilt mechanism of pension revisions due to
pensioners attaining certain age when the basic rate itself goes up or pay
commission implications like granting an extra increment to staff whose
date of natural increment was falling between February 0 June, with

retrospective effect, revision of Fixed Medical Allowance rate. Apart from

norma! retirees due to superannuation, pensions payable on the railways ,

get changed due 10 . implementation of new schemes like MACPs,
LARSGESS,. more than’ earlier cases. of DCRG etc. also contfibuted to
difficulty in. assessing the requirement under Demand No. 13. It is also to

be mentioned here ‘that the excess under Demand No.13 in 2012-13 is ~

only 4.7% which is less than the 5% mark which is the limit stipulated by

the committee.

16



Budget estimates includes 2 attivities- funetiens-- yd—_cormplex___.

coordination among 8 large number of departments on railways field units

spread across.the country. Fixing of responsibility on any one officer is not:

feasible unless there is a case of rialafide or deliberate act of negligence

involved.

Raitway is making all efforts to contro! expenditure within fhe

sanctioned grant. A number of steps including introducing 11 application

and e-governance In accounts and budgeting have been taken to न
strengthen the accounting and budgeting process As far as information ~~

_under Charged Appropriations 18 concerned the same: Is being collected

from ‘Zonal Railways and will appropriately be communicated to the -

committee. Considering the vastness of the. railway system both in size
and the accounting/oudgeting units involved as also the number -of
transactions taking place on the railway system, including intra-railway,

inter-railway debits & credits, the incidence of excess expenditure in a few

grants cannot be ruled out. Itis-to be mentioned here that railway is putting
all possible efforts to contro! the expenditure within the sanctioned grant
All the Zonal Railways have been cautioned to assess their requirement of
funds accurately and timely: at various stages. Certain decisions. like

progressive updation and computerization of pension masters, PPOs and ‘

implementation of pension software ARPAN' would in due course reduce"

excess inthis grant also and make the budgeting process more effective. It,
is reiterated here that due 10 systems put in place like ‘ARPAN, ‘VPN-

based Rai! Budget Sysiem, 8 reconciliation the excess In all Grants in

2044-15 is nil.



aie

a3 The vetted comments of Audit on hevepiies ot thetinisty-are asunder: .

“Mort needs 0 inprove methorology of assessing the requirement
: ONDE tase sot

of funds more accurately arid regular monitoring of the expenditure trend.
use of IT applications in budgeting and accounting and its interlinking with
the all field units, divisions, workshop and Zonal Railways, the total
expenditure and budget allotment under different grantsfappropriations :
could be seen at every stage and finally at Railway Board ievel. Adequate
Supplementary demand can also be taken if all the units are interlinked
-and the assessment of funds requirement is done accurately and promptly
- by the field units. Ministry of Railways ts requested to interlink all the
units/divisions/workshops. to thelr zonal railways and afl zonal railways to
Railway Board to get the benefit of computerization in maintaining financial
discipline. Ministry of Railways is also requested to intimate. the PAG
regarding constraints/limitations in assessing the actual requirement of
funds 10 meet the liability of decretal payments arising due to award ‘of
court decrees and exact peried of payment made towards court decrees by

the Zonal Railways.

44, In response to the vetted comments of Audit, the Ministry of Railways have :

stated as under:

“The recommendations of the audit have been noted. MOR has —
- already been closely monitoring the expenditure vis-a-vis the proportionate
budget on a monthly basis. The MOR is also taking progressive steps in

the domain of IT applications like putting in the systems ‘ARPAN’, "VPN

pased Rail Budget System, ‘e-reconciliation’ io beef up the connectivity

across the units for maintaining the financial discipline.
As far as decretal payments are concemed, ‘it is the difficulty in
estimating the timings of the courts’ decrees which impedes the exact

18



assessment of the requirement of funds—Tho-detalls-cltne payment made

in all the cases of decretal payments in 2012-13 are enclosed herewith.”

45. The Committee appreciate the measures talsen by the Ministry of
Raiiways in the domain of IT apptications like introduction of Advanced
Railway Pension Access Network (ARPAN), Virtual Private Network (VPN)

based Rail Budget System, e-reconciliation to strengthen connectivity and ;
real time ronitoring of all railway zones and units across the country and -

ensure financial discipline. The Committee also note that. excess
expenditure under voted. Grants operated by the Ministry of Railways.
during 2014-15 is nil. While agreeing with the view of the Ministry that it is
difficult to estimate the timings. of the court decrees and subsequently not
feasible to make an exact assessment on the requirement of funds for
decretal ‘payments, the Committee however desire that in. all future
budgeting, process the Ministry take into account factors like number of
pending court cases, amount involved in these cases, stages of these
pending cases efc. so as to prepare 8 realistic budget proposal. This
exercise will ensure minimal excess expenditure in respect of decretal

payments.

iMisclassification of expenditure by the Ministry शनि यार of ex enditure by the Ministry of Railways -

(Recommendation Para No.20)

46. . The Committee, regretted that’ during the year 2012-13 there was
misclassification of expenditure of &571,55,478 under Grant No. 8 ८ Working
Expenses - Operating Expenses- Rolling Stock and Equipment operated by the
Ministry of Railways. Taking into account the effect of this misclassification, the
actual excess expenditure incurred by the Ministry of Railways during the year

2012-13 was है 4675.96 crore instead of & 1670.24 crore as indicated in Indian

Railways Appropriation Account (2012-13): The Committee were distressed to-

19



find despite their repeated exh axhoitations the Ministry ७ Railwayshave pot secks

2 Io stop slassification of expenditure in their accounts. puring the fast 10

financial years, the Committee came’ across 56 cases of migclassilication of
expenditure. Further, scrutiny of cases of misclassification of expenditure curing
the last five’ years revealed that though the ynisclassification, of expenditure
during the year 2011-12 had reduced to ₹ 174:75,509 in 2 cases in comparison
“to the misclassification of = 29,70,40,848 in 9 cases in the year 204 0-11, it had
again increased to 574,55,478 in one case in 2012-13. It seemed that no
tangible action was faken by, the Ministry of Railways either . to. fix. the
‘responsibility against. the officers for such glaring mistakes or to revarnp their.
existing accounting system as had been repeatedly recommended by the Public
“Accounts: Committee. The Committee took a serious view of such callous
approach on the part of the Ministry of Railways for not timely detecting such
: mistakes which led to derail the budgetary exercise. As.major functions of
Accounts Department of Ministry of Railways were stated to be computerized
with several. applications to strengthen the various accounting activities, the
Committee hoped that ihe Ministry would be abie to overcome systemic lacunae/

{oopholes and progressive elimination of the misclassification syndrome in future.

47. The Ministry of Raliways in their Action Taken Reply have stated as under:

“The concern of Public Accounts Committee regarding
misclassification of expenditure is noted for strict compliance. Detailed
codal provisions exist for allocation of expenditure. Instructions are also”

- issued to the Railways — from “time 0. time for further
strengtheningitightening the systems to restrict the factors contributing 10
misclassifications and mistakes in accounting, fo reduce instances of’

misclassifications besides fixing responsibilities for japses . at suitable
levels. However, due fo enormity of transactions of varied nature, some
items of misolassification/mistakes escape | detection, despite ail

_ 20



“precautions and checks. It ismpertinentt teanention thatthe number of.

misclassification/mistakes is 0.004% approx. of total number of accounting
transactions handled over ‘Indian’ Railways during 2012-13" Review of
internal check mechanism is a continuous process and all efforts are being. -
- made to overcome systernic lacunae/ loopholes which are likely to result in
misclassification of expenditure. Ministry of Railways, is committed for
~ computerization of various accounting activities to bring about efficiency
and expediency in its functioning. It shail always remain the endeavour of
- Ministry of Railways to avoid ‘Misclassifications/Mistakes’ altogether.” ,

ig. The Committee are distressed to find that a large number of cases of
misclassification of expenditure under various grants/appropriations ‘had
jpeena recurring phenomenon in the Railways. Upon noticing that major
functions of Accounts Department of Ministry of Railways were stated to be
computerized with several applications to strengthen the - various
accounting activities, the Committee in their 19 Report (167 Lok Sabha)
had expressed hope that the Ministry would be able to overcome systemic - ,
lacunae/loopholes and progressive elimination of misciassification
syndrome in future. The Committee however find that misclassification of
expenditure by Ministry of Railways is a recurring feature in the successive
years also. Now, in their Action Taken Notes, the Ministry have submitted

that due to enormity of transactions of varied nature, some jtems of ©

misclassification/mistakes, escape detection, despite all precautions and
checks. Taking note of the recurring trend ‘of misclassifications, the
Committee strongly recommend the individual Railway/Unit to take
measures to prevent misclassification of expenditure in frequently
recurring cases. Besides, the Committee desire that the cases of
misciassification should be divided into two categories viz those arising

out of wrong interpretation’ of rules and those resulting from tack of

24


— —~pdaquate career the’ tirneros preparations of एफ hers As-reqerds- these

atlee dus to di x

reaptions, Zonal Rallways/untis may’ 96
4ructed 8 make en २०6 disétiss “aid sort out such cases tr
consultation with their Audit. For cases which arise asa resuit of lack of
care and which could have keen avoided responsibility of goncemed staféf
officers may be fixed for tie lapses. The Committee would like to be

apprised of the concrate action taken by the Ministry of Railways in this

regard.

NEW DELHI; SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE

4 Becember, 2017 / Chairperson,
3 Agrahayana, 4939 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

22