 
       113 
 
 
DEFENCE ESTATES MANAGEMENT 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Eighty-ninth Report (15th Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
              
  
                      
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 

  
 
                     PAC NO. 2152  
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018 -19)  
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                              
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Eighty-ninth Report (15th Lok Sabha)] 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE  
 
 
                                       
   
                                                                              
Presented to Lok Sabha on:  ………….…… 
 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   ………………. 
 
 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
December, 2018/Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka) 
 
 
 
DEFENCE ESTATES 
MANAGEMENT 
 
 

  
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2018-
19)      
(iii) 
 
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………... …………………….. 
  
 
(iv) 
CHAPTER I              
  
 
Report ………………………………………………. 
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government …………………….. 
 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
replies received from the Government ..………….. 
 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been  
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration ……………………………………………. 
 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which the Government have furnished interim 
replies ………………………………………………… 
 
 
APPENDICES  
 
I 
 
Minutes of then Sitting of the Pu blic Accounts 
Committee (2018-19) held on 3rd October, 2018 
 
 
II Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public 
Accounts Committee contained in their Eighty-ninth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
 (2018-19) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge   - Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria  
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra 
5. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar   
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
7. Smt. Riti Pathak 
8. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank” 
9. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
10. Shri Abhishek Singh 
11. Shri Gopal Shetty 
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya  
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
15. Dr. Ponnusamy Venugopal 
 RAJYA SABHA 
16. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda 
17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
18. Shri Shwait Malik 
19. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
21. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
22. Shri C.M. Ramesh 
 SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A.K. Singh -  Additional Secretary 
2. Shri T. Jayakumar -  Director 
3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja -  Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Deepankar Kamble -  Committee Officer 

  
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperso n, Public Accounts Committee  (2018-19), having been 
authorised by the Committee, do present this  One Hundred and Thirteenth                         
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Eighty -ninth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Defence Estates Management' relating to Ministry 
of Defence.  
 
2. The Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 9 th 
December, 2013. Replies of the Government to the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the R eport were received on 15 th October, 2014.  The Public Accounts 
Committee (2018 -19) considered and adopted the One Hundred and Thirteenth 
Report at their sitting held on 3 rd October, 2018.  Minutes of the sitting are given at 
Appendix-I. 
 
3. For facility o f reference and convenience, the Observations and  
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of  
the Report. 
 
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered 
to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/  
Recommendations contained in the Eighty-ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)  is 
given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                     MALLIKARJUN KHARGE, 
 12th December, 2018                                                                   Chairperson, 
 21  Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)                                   Public Accounts Committee 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
CHAPTER – I 
R E P O R T 
 
 This Report of the  Public Accounts Committee deals with Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the C ommittee contained in 
their Eighty-Ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on “Defence Estates Management” 
based on the C&AG Report No. 35 of 2010 -11 (Performance Audit) Union 
Government, relating to the Ministry of Defence.  
 
2. The Eighty-Ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) , which was presented to Lok 
Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha  on 9th December, 2013 , contained 12 
Observations/Recommendations.  Action Taken Notes in respect of all the 
Observations/Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Defence 
and these have been categorized as under: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
 Paragraph Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6 and 8 
 
Total: 06 
Chapter- II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
 
-NIL- 
Total: NIL 
Chapter- III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of whi ch replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration: 
 
 Paragraph Nos.  4, 10, 11 and 12 
Total: 04 
Chapter- IV 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government 
have furnished interim replies: 
 
 Paragraph Nos.  7 and 9 
 
Total: 02 
Chapter- V 

  
3. The Committee desire that the Ministry of Defence furnish the 
final/conclusive Action Taken Note on the Observation/Recommendation No s. 
7 and 9 of their Eighty -Ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) in respect of w hich 
the Ministry have furnished interim reply. 
 
4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Defence on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee  contained in their Eighty-Ninth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relev ant Chapters of this 
Report. In the succeeding paragraphs, the Committee have dealt with the Action 
Taken by the Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations which 
either need reiteration or merit comments.  
 
I.  Variations in Records of Actual Land Holdings   
 (Recommendation Para No. 3) 
 
5. The Committee had expressed deep concern at the large scale discrepancies 
between the figures of A -1 lands furnished by the Local Military Authorities (LMAs) 
and the Defence Estates Officers (DEOs) who keep th e records in General Land 
Register (GLR) and Military Land Register (MLR). The Committee had also found 
that out of 25 stations in four Army Commands, between the LMAs and DEOs, the 
land area in the records of LMAs in respect of nine stations was higher by  12769.86 
acres i.e., 46.9 percent  and in the remaining 16 stations less by 9,427.77 acres i.e., 
23.36 percent. The Committee had not accepted the explanation furnished by the 
Ministry that discrepancies between the records of LMAs and DEOs could be due t o 
occupying units move -out & new units move -in without the knowledge of the DEOs 
and possibly without proper handing/taking over of land records between themselves. 
The Committee had viewed both DEOs and LMAs responsible for inept handling of 
valuable land records, failure to conduct regular inspections and reconciliation of land 
record. The Committee had therefore, recommended that the Ministry take immediate 
steps to make it mandatory for DEOs to periodically inspect the land records 
maintained by the LMA s and take swift and stringent corrective measures. Taking 
serious note of the wide discrepancies ranging up to 46.9 per cent in land records, 
the Committee had further recommend ed that the comprehensive survey of all 
Defence lands be c ompleted within a de finite time period and the Committee 
apprised. The Committee had also recommend ed that an effective E -system be 

  
created expeditiously by which the records maintained by LMAs are integrated and 
the data shared on real-time basis with the DEOs/DGDE/Ministry. 
 
6. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under: 
 "(i) With respect to the observations of the PAC the Ministry would like to 
reiterate that Land records are maintained by the Defence Estates Officer 
(DEO) as a custodian of land records, as  a statutory requirement under 
Cantonment Land Administration Rules, 1937 (CLAR) for land inside 
Cantonments and under ACR Rules, 1944 for land outside Cantonments. 
Land records maintained by the LMAs are only internal records to enable them 
to manage lands under their custody.  
 
(ii) The Ministry would like to submit that in terms of provisions of sub -rule 
(3) of Rule 13 of CLAR 1937 DEO is required to submit a certificate duly 
countersigned by the Station Commander, as to the correctness of plans and 
schedules of Class A land. Likewise ACR Rules also require that DEO/Land 
managing agency is required to give a certificate each year that 20% of land 
holding has been inspected and that there are no encroachments found. The 
discrepancies reported by Audit coul d not be addressed as certificates 
required by the CLAR and ACR rules were not being furnished by LMAs and 
DEOs. DGDE has intimated that it has instructed DEOs and CEOs to issue 
the necessary annual certificates . Service HQrs are also being advised to 
ensure that LMAs issue the necessary certificates. This will ensure that 
discrepancies in records are addressed.   
 
(iii).  It is further brought to the notice of the Committee th at to ensure 
reconciliation of Defence land records with actual land holding on g round 
physical survey of entire Defence land has been undertaken by the Defence 
Estates Department under a project sanctioned by the Ministry of Defence in 
2011. The survey work outside Cantonments was to be carried out by DEOs 
in phases. Nearly 91% of the  overall survey work has been completed by 
30.06.2014. The remaining survey work will be completed soon. Necessary, 
survey reports will be submitted by the DEOs by 31.12.2014. The survey 
work inside Cantonments is being carried out by the Cantonment Boards  
with the help of professional institutions. Survey of lands inside 
Cantonments is also expected to be completed by 31.12.2014. DGDE has 
planned survey and reconciliation of Defence land as a continuing activity 
and all Defence lands are proposed to be sur veyed every three years from 
the year 2015 -16 onwards. This will result in regular physical inspection of 
Defence lands and their reconciliation with land records. An SOP is also 
being formulated in this regard. For this purpose staffs are being regularly 
sent for training in survey techniques to reputed institutes. The above action 
would ensure compliance with the recommendation of the PAC for 
undertaking a comprehensive survey of all Defence lands within a definite 
time period 
 
(iv). In addition to the ab ove Army HQrs has also intimated that it has 
already ordered an internal assessment of A -1/Analogous to A -1 Defence 
land holding by LMAs after physical verification in concert with DEO and 

  
state revenue department. HQ Commands have been advised to take 
following necessary action:- 
 
(a) To streamline the land records of A -1/Analogous to A-1 Defence land 
under their management.  
 
(b) Conduct regular inspection of land holdings. 
 
(c) Reconcile land records with those held with DEO as per Raksha 
Bhoomi CD and extend all co operation to DEO for reconciliation of 
these records.  
(v)  With respect to recommendations of the PAC for creation of an 
effective E-system by which the records maintained by LMAs are integrated 
and the data shared on real -time basis with the DEOs/DGDE/Mi nistry it is 
submitted that integration of data held by DGDE with that of LMA is possible 
only if data is held by the LMA in electronic form and with a compatible data 
structure. Further, integrating databases of DGDE with that of the Services 
online will have security implications. As such the Ministry is of the opinion 
that the present practice of providing data in CDs to the LMAs may be 
continued and update patches may be provided by DGDE to them from time 
to time. 
 
(vi) Further to address the concerns a nd recommendations of the PAC the 
Ministry has asked DGDE to take the following actions:  
 
 (a) Carry out a one -time exercise of reconciliation of records of A - 1/
 analogous to A -1 lands held by them with the records held by the 
 Military Authorities (LMAs). DGDE has been asked to complete this 
 exercise within 4 months and submit its findings to the Ministry. 
 
 (b) Undertake a periodic reconciliation of their records with that of the 
 LMAs along with periodic survey planned of all Defence lands 
 every 3 years. 
 
 (c) Instruct DEOs to extend all support to the Army in the internal  
 assessment /audit being undertaken by them which also includes 
 reconciliation of records. 
 
 (d) Provide electronic land records to the Services and update these at 
 regular intervals. 
 
(vii) In addition Services have been asked to extend all cooperation to 
DGDE for undertaking both the one time reconciliation and subsequent 
periodic reconciliation exercises. They will also be advised to provide 
inspection certificates annually as required under CLAR and ACR 1944". 
 
7. The Committee note that in order to address their concerns expressed in 
the recommendation, the Ministry has asked DGDE to take action viz. to carry 

  
out one-time exercise of reconciliation of records of A -1/analogous A-1 lands 
held by them with the records held by the LMAs, underta ke a periodic 
reconciliation of their records with that of the LMAs and provide electronic land 
records to the Services and update these at regular intervals. Yet, from the 
replies furnished by the Ministry, the Committee find th at thes e are some 
inherent deficiencies in the functioning of DEOs and LMAs. The Ministry's own 
admission that the deficiencies reported by Audit could not be addressed as 
certificates were not being furnished by LMAs and  DEOs, shows the casual 
attitude on the part of these offices and officers in the Ministry in the discharge 
of their respective duties/functions. The Committee desire appropriate punitive 
action against the concerned officials immediately. Moreover, the Mi nistry's 
submission that DGDE has instructed DEOs and CEOs to issue the necessary 
certificates further highlights as if it is not mandatory on the part of the DEO s 
and LMAs to furnish the certificates annually which is required under the CLAR 
and ACR rules. The Committee feel that had the subject not been examined by 
them, such lackadaisical attitude on the part of DEO s and the LMAs would not 
have come to the notice of the Ministry.  Moreover, they are surprised to note 
that although the Defence Estates Depa rtment has been undertaking a survey 
since 2011 to ensure r econciliation of Defence land records with actual land 
holdings on ground, physical survey of the land has not yet been completed. 
The Committee desire that the survey of the entire D efence land in the country 
be completed soon and the survey report be provided to them. With respect to 
the creation of an e-system for integrated data sharing, the Committee feel that 
with the advancement in the IT s ector, the Ministry need to create a secure and 
encrypted e-management system wherein the relevant data can be shared with 
DEOs/DGDE/Ministry without compromising security. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
II. Computerisation of Defence Land Records 
 (Recommendation Para No. 4) 
 
8. The Committee were informed that the computerization of Defence land 
records under the project “ Raksha Bhoomi”  had been completed.  However, the 
Committee had noticed considerable delay in completing the project and the reasons 
attributed for the delay were (i) incompatibility of the newly purchased hardware with 

  
the operating system, which led to procurement of improvised software, (ii) lack of 
uniformity in the GLRs maintained by DEOs, (iii) shortage of technical staff, (iv) 
involvement of staff in disposal of other priority work and (v) inordinate delays in 
mutation process.  The Committee had observed that the avoidable delay in 
implementation of the ‘Raksha Bhoomi’ project was caused due to lack of effective 
planning, execution and monito ring, resulting in purchase of inappropriate hardware 
that was incompatible with the operating system apart from shortage of staff – 
general and technical, etc.  The Committee, therefore, had recommended that 
responsibility be fixed for delay in computeriz ation of Defence lands and stringent 
action taken against the responsible for incompatible hardware.  Also, finding that 
General Land Registers maintained by the DEOs differ from one State to another, the 
Committee had recommended that uniformity must be m aintained to make entries 
which should be followed by all the DEOs throughout the country without fail and the 
Committee apprised. 
 
9. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under: 
"(i)  The computerization of Defence land records under the project “Raksha 
Bhoomi” was a gigantic task which has been successfully undertaken by the 
Defence Estates Organization mostly utilizing internal resources. The first 
version of the Raksha Bhoomi software developed in house for 
computerization of General Land Registers (GLRs) was released by then RRM 
on 08.11.2006. Thereafter a project for computerization of records for all 
Defence lands records was taken up and administrative and expenditure 
sanction for implementing the project was issued by the ministry on  
07.02.2007.  As per sanction, the project was to be implemented within 02 
years from the date of Government sanction.  Subsequently, an upgraded 
version of Raksha Bhoomi software for Military Land Registers (MLR) was 
released by RRM on 22.10.2007.  The da ta of entire Defence land records in 
the Raksha Bhoomi(RB)  database was thereafter  consolidated and provided 
to all stakeholders during July, 2011. The next version of RB database was 
released in June, 2012. 
 
(ii) The delay in implementation of the RB so ftware was mainly on account 
of data entry problems faced by various offices of DGDE. Therefore, several 
“patches” had to be released to attend to specific problems faced by various 
field offices. Further, training of officers and staff were also undertake n for 
data entry work, attending to software related issues, verification and 
authentication of data and security related aspects. This process took time but 
was unavoidable. It is also submitted that land record management for lands 
spread across various States/UTs is a complex exercise. Most software 
projects related to land management result in failures due to the complexities 
and inaccuracies in land records. The entire Defence land records data 

  
contained in GLRs and MLRs was successfully computerized b y July, 2011 
and since then is being used on a day to day basis by all the field offices. 
 
(iii) As regards the observation of the Committee about the avoidable delay 
in implementation of the ‘Raksha Bhoomi’ project  and causes for the same it 
is submitted that as stated above computerization of land records is a complex 
exercise and the work was being taken up in -house and initial delays were 
unavoidable. Computerization of Defence land records has since been 
completed and has been put to practical use. Th e delays were due to several 
unforeseen reasons and the complexities associated with IT systems being 
developed for large and complex data.  
 
(iv) With respect to the observation of PAC that General Land Registers 
maintained by the DEOs differ from one Sta te to another and its 
recommendation that uniformity must be maintained to make entries which 
should be followed by all the DEOs throughout the country it is clarified that 
the format for GLR is uniform and as per format given in Cantonment Land 
Administration Rules 1937.This uniform format has been adopted in the RB 
software. 
 
(v) However, as is true for any IT system and computer programme, the 
Government recognizes the need for upgrading and improving the system 
based on feedback received from the users.  DGDE is in the process of further 
upgrading Raksha Bhoomi database by undertaking the following: 
 
 (a) Migration of the stand -alone system in various Defence Estates 
 offices to a Central Server for on -line updation and access by 
 users. 
 
 (b) A secured n etwork is being develop ed through NIC for providing 
 connectivity to 113 offices across India. 
 
   (c) User-interface on ‘Windows’ is being developed to enable users to 
 access ‘Raksha Bhoomi’ database with ease while the database 
 itself will be in the secured Linux System (CentOS, Red Hat etc.)". 
 
10. The Committee note that although the Ministry has informed about the  
steps taken by them towards successfully computerizing all Defence land 
records under the project 'Raksha Bhoomi' , yet their reply is conspicu ously 
silent on the lapses or dereliction of duty, which caused delay in completing 
the project i.e. i) incompatibility of the newly purchased hardware with the  
operating system, which led to procurement of inappropriate software;  ii) 
shortage of technical staff; (iii) involvement of staff in disposal of other priority 
work; and (iv) inordinate delays in mutation process. Reaffirming their earlier 
observation that the avoidable delay in implementation of the 'Raksha Bhoomi' 

  
project was caused due to lack of effective planning, execution and monitoring, 
resulting in purchase of inappropriate hardware that was incompatible with the 
operating system, apart from shortage of staff etc. The Committee reiterate that 
responsibility be fixed for delay in computerizat ion of Defence land and 
stringent action taken against those responsible for purchasing incompatible 
hardware. The y feel that such an action will act as a deterre nt and will help  
prevent recurrence of such lapses in future. 
 
III. Encroachment On Defence Land 
 (Recommendation Para No. 8)  
 
11. The Committee we re deeply dismayed to note the unabated encroachments 
on Defence land despite the repeated wake up calls given by the constitutional 
auditor. Worse, non -mutation of land records and non -utilization of vast tracts of 
Defence lands only encouraged encroachme nt of Defence land which had  increased 
from 6,903 acres in January 1997 to 14,539.38 acres in July, 2009. The Committee 
observed that the existence of multiple authorities like the DGDE and the LMAs that 
look after management of Defence lands, had only exacerbated the situation for want 
of clear demarcation of responsibility. The Committee, therefore, recommend ed 
creation of a single unified authority, which shall look into management and 
protection of Defen ce lands, fast -track the recovery of encroached lands and shall 
also be responsible for monitoring & supervision of all field offices entrusted with the 
responsibility to manage Defence lands and property. 
 
12. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under: 
"It is submitted that as per data collected the total extent of land under 
encroachment as on 31.3.2013, was 11,456 acres. Details of land area under 
encroachment for different land management agencies are as follows: 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Land 
Management Agency 
Area Under 
Encroachment in Acres 
1 DGDE 5007.50885 
2 Army 4669.4568 
3 Air Force 1191.4505 
4 Navy 484.2727 
5 D(Production) 77.276 
6 DRDO 19.7 
7 DGQA 5.75588 
8 Dte. of Standardization 0.117 
 Total 11455.53773 

  
(ii). It is stated that  most of the encroachments are more than 20 years old. 
DGDE has stated that of the approximately 5000 acres of land under its 
management  which is encroached, 2496 acres is land held by ex -agricultural 
lessees and will be taken over after following due pro cess of law. Around 799 
acres are held unauthorizedly by State Governments and other Departments 
of the Central Government. These encroachments cannot be removed and 
have to be regularized in consultation with the concerned 
Departments/Governments.  
(iii). The Ministry would also like to bring to the notice of the Committee that 
it has issued several instructions for protecting Defence land and for 
preventing encroachments. It is a result of this that new instances of 
encroachment are reportedly few. In add ition, action against encroachers is 
taken under the PPE Act and the Cantonment Act. This process though 
ongoing is slow due to lack of support from local government, resistance from 
encroachers and litigation initiated by the encroachers. Nevertheless, it  is 
reported that over the last 3 years there has been a reduction in the area 
under encroachment by 1409.7 acres. 
(iv). With regard to PAC’s observation that the existence of multiple 
authorities like the DGDE and the LMAs that look after management of 
Defence lands, have only exacerbated the situation for want of clear 
demarcation of responsibility, it is submitted that MoD’s instructions, 
Cantonment Land Administration Rules and ACR Rules clearly assign the 
responsibility for management and protection of  Defence land and for removal 
of encroachments to the various land management agencies. Monitoring and 
supervision of respective field offices is undertaken by Service HQrs and by 
DGDE and overall control is exercised by the Ministry.  
(v). In the context of the above the Ministry is of the view that a single 
unified authority would not be necessary. However, to review and monitor 
actions for prevention and removal of encroachments a Committee has been 
formed under the Chairmanship of the Additional Secreta ry, Ministry of 
Defence and with Joint Secretaries dealing with land matters of Army, Navy 
and Air Force and representatives of DGDE and other land management 
agencies as members. The Committee would periodically monitor (quarterly or 
six-monthly) the stat us of encroachments, increase/decrease in 
encroachments, measures taken to fast track recovery of encroached lands 
and measures for protection of Defence land." 
13. Subsequently, on the request of the Committee, the Ministry furnished updated 
figures regarding encroachments on Defence land which are as follows: 
"As per data collected the total extent of land under encroachment as on 
October 2015 was approximately 11, 179 acres as against 11,456 acres of 
land under encroachment as on 31.3.2013. Details of land a rea under 
encroachment for different  land management agencies are as follows: 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Land Management 
Agency 
Area under Encroachment in 
Acres 
1. DGDE 4767.3401 

  
2. Army 4610.7194 
3. Air Force 1192.55 
4. Navy 505.53 
5. D(Production) 77.276 
6. DRDO 19.7 
7. DGQA 5.75588 
8. Dte. of Standardization 0.117 
 Total 11178.98838 
 
14. Encroachment of Defence land is yet another area of concern for the 
Committee as they find that huge areas of Defence land is still under private 
and unauthorized encroachme nts. What is even more disturbing for the 
Committee to note in the Ministry's submission that these encroachments 
cannot be removed and have to be regularized. They feel that this attitude on 
the part of the Ministry will not help in removing the encroachm ents; rather it 
will help agitate/provoke the encroachers to augment their demand for 
regularization. Moreover, the Committee find that the Ministry in their own 
submission have stated that the process to remove encroachments is slow due 
to lack of support  from the local Governments and resistance from the 
encroachers. It seems the Ministry of Defence has not been serious at issued 
routine instructions without any proper follow up for protecting Defence lands 
and for preventing encroachments. However, the Committee find that after this 
subject was taken up for examination by the Committee, the encroachment on 
Defence lands has come down from 11,456 acres in March, 2013 to 11,179 acres 
in October, 2015. The Committee, therefore, urge upon the Ministry to take  up 
the matter with the State/local Governments  at the highest level for removal of 
encroachments on Defence land under intimation to the Committee. The 
Committee would also like to be apprised as to how many periodic review 
meetings have been held and als o the outcome of these meetings.    They feel 
that a more proactive approach on the part of the Ministry will help address this 
issue in an effective manner. 
IV. Unauthorised Use of Defence Land for Parks and Clubs 
 (Recommendation Para No. 10) 
 
15. The Committee had noted that clubs and parks established for the benefit of 
Defence personnel and their families were exploited by civilians for organizing 

  
parties, marriages, exhibitions, etc. Worse, the proceeds from such events are not 
being credited to the Govern ment account. There were instances of illegal 
constructions on such parks. The Committee  had impressed upon  the Ministry of 
Defence to setup an enquiry in the matter so that all encroachments and prohibited 
activities are detected and stringent remedial action taken to prevent misuse/abuse of 
Defence environmental parks/lands and the Committee be apprised. 
16. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have submitted as under: 
(i) "The Clubs and Parks on A -1 Defence land were being established for 
the benefit of Defence personnel and their families residing in the 
Cantonments. These facilities are also used by Civilian residents of 
Cantonments. Several Clubs and institutes have been set up on leased land or 
OGBs and have existed from the British era 
 
(ii). Though no specific case has been cited in the report of the PAC, the 
position with regard to cases highlighted in the Performance Audit Report of 
C&AG (i.e. Report No 35) is that in the case of Agra Club action under PPE 
act has been initiated and in the case of MB Club action for determining the 
lease has been proposed. The case relating to Royal Western India Turf Club 
involves a dispute about the area of land covered by the perpetual lease given 
by Government prior to independence. Some issues are also sub-judice. In the 
case of Secundrabad Club action taken by DEO under PPE Act has been 
challenged in Courts and the matter is sub -judice. As regards to the 2 parks 
mentioned in the Report, it is intimated that the Park in Bangalore has been 
closed to the Public following audit objections though the same had been used 
as a Public park since 1996. As regards the park at Bhatinda i.e. Chetak Park, 
AHQ has intimated that the park was setup as a welfare measure in 1997 for 
residents of the military station and Ex -servicemen frequenting the Station. 
The land for various reasons is not suitable for buildings and was kept as an 
open space. Two regimental shops were set up based on feedback of visitors 
to the park.  As per existing policy 50 % of profits are being deposited in the 
Government account and the balance is being used for upkeep of the park. 
Though the park was set up from regimental funds 50% of ticket prices are 
being deposited in Government Treasury.  
 
(iii). Às regards observation of the Committee that clubs an d parks 
established for the benefit of Defence personnel and their families are 
exploited by civilians for organizing parties, marriages, exhibitions, etc, AHQ 
has issued instructions to all the Commands to ensure that Defence lands are 
being uitilised for  bonafide military purposes and those stipulated in land 
norms laid down by the Government and as stipulated by the extant rules, 
regulations and Government policies. It has also been advised that stringent 
action be taken against any misuse/ abuse of Defence land in violation of 
Government policy and necessary action be taken so that such violations do 
not occur in future. Navy has intimated that no unauthorized use of Defence 
land has been permitted to set up Clubs/parks at Naval Stations  and clubs 

  
and p arks are being set up as per authorization and no misuse is being 
permitted. 
 
(iv). Keeping in view the observations of the PAC instructions are being  
issued to all Service HQrs not to allow any parks and clubs which are 
established for the Defence personnel to be utilized by unauthorized persons 
for organizing parties, marriages, exhibitions etc.  Copy of the instructions, 
when issued, will be made available to the PAC as well as Audit. 
 
17. The Committee are aghast to note that the reply of the Ministry is not in 
consonance with the spirit of the recommendation made by the Committee. The 
main intention behind recommending an enquiry into instances of illegal usage 
or illegal construction/encroachment was to detect/find out the details of such 
illegal encroachment/usage which may be throughout the length and breadth of 
the country, and to take remedial action to prevent misuse of D efence land. 
Surprisingly, the Committee find that instead of setting up an enquiry they have 
simply given instruction to the Service HQs for preventing unauthorised use of 
Defence land. They earnestly feel that without setting up of an enquiry in the 
matter, the Ministry will not be able to detect al l the encroachments and cases 
of unauthorized use of D efence land. The Committee, there fore, reiterate their 
earlier recommendation and urge upon the Ministry to set up an enquiry in the 
matter without causing any further delay so that all encroachments and 
prohibited activities are detected and stringent remedial action be taken to 
prevent misuse/abuse of Defence land.  
V. Dismal State of Management of Leases 
 (Recommendation Para No. 11) 
 
18. The Committee had noted with concern that as of March 2010, 2500 acres of 
land valuing ` 11,033 crore was on lease for an annual rent of ` 2.13 crore which was 
a pittance considering the market value of the land. Shockingly, no visible efforts had 
been made to renew 3780 cases of lease renewal, in 1800 cases no requests were 
received for lease renewal and in 1081 cases the status of leases was unknown. The 
Committee had deplored the reply of the Ministry expressing their inability to fix 
responsibility due to involvement of multiple authorities. The Committee were 
however, assured that all these aspects and deficiencies could be addressed in the 
policy being formulated in this behalf. The Committee had , therefore, recommended 

  
that the Government bring out the concerned policy within six months of the 
presentation of this report and apprise them about the salient features of the policy. 
19. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have submitted as under: 
"With respect to the observations and recommendations of the PAC it is 
submitted that  4200 acres of Defence land had been given on lease to private 
parties under the provisions of the Cantonment Codes 1899 and 19 12 and the 
Cantonment Land Administration Rules, 1925 and 1937.  These leases were 
given long time back, and the lease rent and premium (wherever applicable) 
was fixed at that point of time based on the prevalent land value.  There are 
2850 leases which ha ve expired and have not been renewed on account of 
the following difficulties encountered in their timely renewal: 
 
(a) Non-receipt of renewal application from the lessees. 
 
(b) Non submission of requisite documents by lessees.  
 
(c) Violation of lease terms such as:  
i. Failure to complete construction of building within the prescribed 
time as stipulated in the lease deed and/or to obtain sanction of 
competent authority, for additions/alterations to the building 
constructed on leased land. 
 
ii. Sale of leasehold rights and n on submission of intimation thereof 
within the prescribed time period to the competent authority. 
 
iii. Change of purpose. 
 
(d) Non-mutation due to (c) and also on account of disputes amongst legal 
heirs of ex-lessees and litigation arising therefor.  
 
(e) Shortage of officers and staff in the DE Organization etc. 
(ii). Despite efforts made by the field officers i.e. DEOs and CEOs in 
obtaining requisite documents from the lessees to renew leases, results have 
not been so encouraging. Awareness camps have also been organ ized in the 
past at various Cantonments to inform the concerned persons regarding the 
requirements for renewal of leases and the implications of non -renewal. 
Instructions have been issued from time to time to the Directorates and to the 
field offices to pr ogress the cases of lease renewal in a time bound manner.  
Instructions have already been issued by the DGDE vide their letter 
No.723/A/3/L/DE/2007 dated 19.12.2012 wherein detailed guidelines for 
renewal of pending leases have been issued. While reiterati ng the instructions 
once again, the following have also been emphasized and a special drive to 
renew leases has been launched by each Directorate/field office: 
 

  
(a) DEO/CEOs were asked to update the list of expired leases and 
intimate the ex -lessee/lessees about the requirement for renewal of 
leases and submission of documents. 
 
(b) DEO/CEOs were directed to process such cases for determin ation 
of lease where no documents have been forthcoming for renewal of 
lease  within the prescribed time. 
 
(c) Strict mo nitoring by each Directorate and to submit 06 monthly 
report to DGDE about progress made. 
 
(d) Cases of leases which are going to expir e will be taken up for 
renewal or determination, as the case may be, six months in advance. 
 
Where ever lessees have not applied for renewal of leases or where 
there are major breaches of lease conditions, the DEOs have initiated 
the proposals for determination of the lease.  
 
(iii). The Ministry will bring out a comprehensive policy for renewal of leases 
which will address all the difficulties encountered and system deficiencies 
noticed, within 6 months. Salient features of the proposed policy will be 
intimated to the PAC in due course." 
 
20. The Committee are dismayed to note that despite efforts made by the 
field officers in o btaining requisite documents from the lessees to renew 
leases, the results have not been encouraging.  Moreover, the Committee are 
disturbed to note that the Ministry did not formulate a comprehensive policy for 
renewal of leases  within six mo nths of the p resentation of their 89th Report.  
This is yet another manifestation of the Ministr y's continued lackadaisical 
approach in tackling the issues and problems of dismal state of management of 
leases of Defence lands. The Committee are of the view that in the absence of a 
comprehensive policy for management and renewal of leases of Defence lands, 
the systemic deficiencies and difficulties witnessed will not be addressed 
properly. This may create serious problems and further complicat e the matter. 
The Committee, therefore, would like to reiterate their earlier recommendation 
and urge the Government to make all out efforts to bring out a policy with 
regard to management and renewal of Defence lands without any further delay 
under intimation to the Committee. 
 

  
VI. Irregularity in Management of Old Grant Sites 
 (Recommendation Para No. 12) 
 
21. The Committee had noted that the largesse extended by the colonial power 
had continued even after independence and worse, t he Old Grant Bungalow Site 
(OGBs) were allowed to be kep t with some civilians. The mis -management of such 
Bungalows has led to loss of Government revenue apart from entanglement of 
Government in lots of avoidable litigations. The Committee had also noted that the 
Land Policy of 1982 and the Revised Land Policy of 1995 have provisions for dealing 
with such sites and resuming/leasing of such OGBS by the Government, and no 
alteration of any kind are allowed on such sites. However, the Committee had found 
large number of unauthorized constructions, unauthorized sale /transfer are 
happening right under the nose of the DEOs concerned. The Committee had also  
observed that various educational institutions are being run illegally, thereby flouting 
all norms relating to the management of OGBs and exposing apparent collusion  
between vested interests and the concerned authorities. The Committee had sought 
reasons as to why 92 cases of resumption involving 288.63 acres of land referred to 
the Ministry were pending of sanction. The Committee had further expressed their 
desire to have a complete status paper of all such OGBs, the land area, the 
properties resumed and the properties awaiting sanction for more than three months . 
Observing that there had been obvious dereliction of duty by DEOs and LMAs in not 
ensuring strict compliance of the poli cy directives, the Committee had recommended 
stringent disciplinary action against such Officers and the Committee apprised. The 
Committee had also desire d that all such sites should be resumed and utilized 
exclusive for Defence Officers/Staff, within a defined period of time  and earnest and 
focused efforts should be made to free the Bungalow Sites from litigations at the 
earliest. Regarding the educational institutes, the Committee had desired that these 
may be allowed to continue if they ca ter exclusively to the wards of Defence and Ex-
Defence personnel and if not, then the revenue generated from such institutes should 
be deposited into the Government account, with proper monitoring by the concerned 
authorities. 
22. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have submitted as under: 
"(i) In the context of the observation of the PAC relating to continuance of 
largesse to certain civilians, it is submitted that  sites for OGBs were 

  
historically allotted to service men, doctors and civilians under GGO  179 of 
1836 for undertaking buildings on the sites. The grantees were only given 
occupancy rights whereas ownership of the land remained with the 
Government which had the power to resume the land. Very often structures 
built on the land were taken on hire  for Defence /public purpose. Besides, 
several Civilians who hold occupancy rights on Old Grant (OG) sites, have 
been living in Cantonments over generations and their requirements cannot be 
ignored. Further, a distinction is also required to be made betwee n land held 
on OG terms in Bungalow areas and land held on OG terms in notified civil 
areas and Bazzar areas of Cantonments. Most of the old grant sites i.e. 
46,500 are in Civil/Bazzar areas. These cover an area of 1359 acres and 
hence the average size of these sites is 0.029 acres or 1200 sq feet only. 
Most of the HORs in this case, cannot be said to be enjoying any largesse and 
have been settled in Cantonments to provide services to the Military 
population. Here the focus  was to convert these OG sites to  freehold. On the 
other hand in the Bungalow area there are 3000 OGB sites covering 6178 
acres (average 2.06 acres). The policy in bungalow areas is to gradually 
resume OG sites. However, as Civilians have been in occupation of these 
Bungalows resumption has to be calibrated and need based and should follow 
the priority laid down in the relevant policy. 
 
(ii) As regards the observation of the Committee that mismanagement of 
OGBs has caused loss of revenue the following is submitted:  
 
(a) In civil areas OG sites are to be converted into free hold if the 
land is not required for Defence purposes and the LMA gives 
NOC for the same.  Conversion to free hold would earn the 
Government revenue. However, LMAs/AHQ have not been 
forthcoming with NOCs on the plea that  conversion will lead to a 
spurt in construction which will affect the Military character of 
Cantonments. As a result conversion of OG sites to free hold 
and resultant revenues have not materialized. 
 
(b) Unauthorised use of OGBs for commercial activities,  
deprive the  Government/Cantonment Board of property taxes 
at the higher  Commercial rates. DGDE, has however, intimated 
that it has instructed CEOs to collect property tax on commercial 
basis in all such cases without prejudice to its right to take actio n 
for unauthorized use of OGBs. 
(iii) On the observation relating to litigations, it is submitted that this is a 
result of HORs of sites invariably taking recourse to litigation whenever action 
to resume sites is initiated. Courts are also approached whene ver action is 
initiated against unauthorized occupation/use of OG sites and for unauthorized 
construction. Litigation in such matters are beyond the control of Defence 
Estates authorities. All attempts are, however, made to defend the interest of 
Government in the Courts of law. 
 

  
(iv) As regards unauthorized construction in violation of restrictions placed 
on alteration of Bungalows, it is stated that action against unauthorized 
construction is taken under the provisions of the Cantonment Act and the PPE 
Act. However, such action is invariably challenged before appellate authorities 
and in Courts of law and stay orders obtained. Actual removal of unauthorized 
construction is, therefore, a protracted process. It is also submitted that  the 
land policy of 1995  provides for regularization of past cases of unauthorized 
construction provided the same is within 10% of existing floor space and is as 
per rules, bye -laws etc. Resumption action and action under the PPE Act in 
case of OGBs being used as Educational Inst itutions have been initiated. 
These have, however, not progressed due to intervention of Courts. In all the 
cases of unauthorized construction and unauthorized use of OGBs cited in the 
CAG’s Performance audit report, action under the law has been initiated  by 
the Defence Estate Officials.  
 
(v) It is further submitted that sale/transfer of occupancy rights is not 
prohibited under the rules but restrictions have been placed on such transfers. 
In Bungalow areas transfer invariably requires prior permission of  the 
Government and the concurrence of the LMAs.  As LMAs often object to 
transfer of occupancy rights and obtaining Government approval takes time, in 
several cases HORs have transferred occupancy rights without the permission 
of Government. Such transfer s, however, may not become known to the 
Defence Estates authorities until the concerned parties disclose the same 
while seeking ex -post facto approval for the transfer. A policy for regulating 
transfers of occupancy rights is presently under consideration. 
 
(vi) As regards resumption of OGBs it is submitted that OGBs are resumed 
from time to time based on the requirement projected by the Army and in 
terms of the policy letter of Ministry of Defence dated 18.6.1982.It may be 
noted that in 2002 resumption of 57 OGBs in Jalandhar Cantonment was 
sanctioned by the Government. The case of the resumptee owners were taken 
with the then RM by public representatives. It was, therefore, decided to 
examine the issues involved. After examination MoD issued fresh instruct ions 
vide ID No. 23(2)/2003/D(Q&C) dated 07th July 2003 which stipulated that 
resumption of OGBs at a location should be taken up only after ascertaining 
that there are no other vacant lands inside or in the vicinity of Cantonment and 
that the requirement for KLP has been determined in totality. DGDE has 
intimated that in all the cases referred to it including the 92 cases referred by 
the PAC, it had asked the concerned DEOs to ensure that the instructions of 
MoD of 2003 are complied with. AHQ has however, been projecting the need 
for early approval of resumption in all the cases referred to the Ministry by 
them. A meeting was, therefore, held by the MoD wherein DGDE was asked to 
forward all cases of resumption of Bungalows under hiring, in dilapidated 
condition and of vacant sites straight away. With regard to other proposals 
DGDE was asked to submit a detailed time table for processing these cases. 
DGDE was also advised to circulate detailed guidelines to its field units for 
expediting recommendations on al l pending proposals. It is submitted that in 
the last Financial year and the current year orders for resumption of 17 OGBs 
have been issued by the Ministry. 
 

  
(vii) It is submitted that while the recommendations of the PAC with regard 
to resumption of OGBs will be implemented in the right spirit, resorting to large 
scale resumption is not feasible as many Civilians have been residing in these 
OGBs for generations. If sites held by these Civilians are to be resumed then 
as per extant instructions they have to be given alternate land. DGDE has also 
brought out the difficulties in issuing resumption notices as in many cases the 
recorded HORs have either expired or have transferred their rights to others. 
In the absence of recorded HORs, it takes time for the DEO s to ascertain the 
bonafide occupiers who may be served such notices. In many OGBs, the 
process of resumption is held up due to title or legal disputes. DGDE has, 
however provided a list of over 250 cases where resumption has either been 
completed or is su b-judice. DGDE has therefore, contended that delays are 
not attributable to any collusion by the DEOs or their staff. It has been pointed 
out that on the contrary, DGDE has proposed that OGBs be gradually 
resumed and resumptee owners be offered smaller plots on lease basis.  
 
(viii) As regards Educational institutes located in OGBs, the 
recommendation of the PAC that these be allowed to continue provided that 
the institutions were meant for children of service men and ex-servicemen, it is 
submitted that  a comprehensive study of all such  institutions would be 
needed before the recommendation can be implemented. 
 
(ix) In the context of the observations and recommendations of the PAC the 
Ministry has decided to take the following actions: 
 
a. MoD would take acti on for resuming OGBs based on the need of 
the Defence forces in terms of extant land policies. 
 
b. DGDE  has been  asked to furnish a complete status paper on all 
OGBs covering aspects such as area of land, name of recorded 
HOR and actual occupier, unauthoriz ed construction if any, division 
of site if any, nature of use of site and bungalow etc within 3 months 
to the Ministry. 
 
c.  DGDE has been instructed to undertake a comprehensive study of 
educational institutions being run in OGBs and make 
recommendations wi th regard their continued functioning or 
otherwise. 
 
d. DGDE has been asked to submit a status report within 1 month on 
all pending cases of resumption of OGBs with a definite time table 
for completing resumption action." 
 
23. The Committee are unhappy that the M inistry, except promising action 
and issuing instructions to DGDE, have failed to take concrete action to do 
away the irregularities in the management of Old Grants Sites of Defence land 

  
which had led to loss of Government revenue apart from entanglement o f 
Government in lots of avoidable litigations. There can be no justification for 
continuation of such irregularities for a prolonged period dating back to pre -
independence period. Not only the Ministry have failed to furnish a complete 
status paper of all OGBs where unauthorised constructions/sale/transfer are 
happening, but also defended the obvious dereliction of duty by DEOs without 
whose complicity the much publicise large scale and prolonged irregularities in 
management of Old Grant Sites would not have been possible. While deploring 
such lack of promptitude on the part of the Ministry in tackling the problem, the 
Committee reiterate that the Ministry should furnish without further delay a 
complete status paper of all OGBs where irregularities are happening inter-alia 
detailing the land area, the properties resumed and the properties awaiting 
sanction for more than 3 months. Further, stringent disciplinary action should 
be taken against the errant DEOs and LMAs as well as officials concerned in 
the Ministry who failed to ensure strict compliance of the policy directives. The 
Committee also desire that all such sites should be resumed and utilised 
exclusively for Defence Officers/Staff within a defined period of time. Besides 
earnest and focused efforts sh ould be made to free the Bungalow Sites from 
litigations at the earliest. Regarding the educational institutes, the Committee 
desire that these may be allowed to continue if they cater exclusively to the 
wards of Defence and Ex -Defence personnel and if not , then the revenue 
generated from such institutes should be deposited into the Government 
account, with proper monitoring by the concerned authorities.  The outcome of 
the steps taken or proposed to be taken by the Government should be 
intimated to the Committee. 
 
****** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
CHAPTER II 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
 
Observation/Recommendation Para No. 1 
 
INTRODUCTORY: 
  
 The holding of all the Defence lands in the country rests under the titular 
ownership of the M inistry of Defence, with the apex level land management resting 
with the Directorate General of Defence Estates (DGDE).  The DGDE offices at six 
Army Commands spread across the country are headed by six Principal 
Directors/Directors Defence Estates (PDDEs/ DDEs).  At the circle level, 40 Defence 
Estates Officers (DEOs)/Assistant Defence Estate Officers (ADEOs) are responsible 
for maintaining land records and land management, both inside and outside the 
Cantonments.  Taking note of the persistent misuse of De fence lands, the C&AG 
decided to conduct a performance audit in the Ministry of Defence, office of the 
DGDE, all six PDDEs/DDEs at Command level, 20 selected DEOs at circle level, all 
the three Services HQs, all six Command HQs of Army, 28 Station HQs of A rmy, two 
Air Commands (HQ Western Command Delhi and HQ Training Command 
Bangalore), four Air Force Stations (Hindon, Palam, Yelahanka and Hyderabad) and 
two Naval Commands (Mumbai and Kochi), covering a period of five years from 
2004-05 to 2008 -09.  The Au dit scrutiny centered around broadly on (i) Lacunae in 
application of land norms (ii)  Variations in records of actual land holdings (iii) 
Computerization of Defence Land Records (iv) Mutation of Defence land (v) Non -
utilization/underutilization of acquire d land (vi) Commercial use of land (vii) 
Encroachment on Defence land (viii) Unauthorized use of Defence land for Golf and 
other activities (ix)  Defence land being used for schools (x) Unauthorized use of 
Defence land for parks and clubs (xi) Payment of c ompensation (xii) Dismal state of 
management of leases  (xiii) Cases of delay in renewal of leases (xiv)  Irregularities in 
management of Old Grant sites.  The Committee’s observations and 
recommendations after examination of the subject are detailed in th e succeeding 
paragraphs. 
 
(Sl. No.-1; Para-1 of the Eighty-Ninth 
Report of the Public Accounts Committee 
(15th Lok Sabha) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 The ownership of all defence lands in the country vests with Ministry of 
Defence (MoD). The management of defence land is carried out under the provisions 
of the Cantonments Act 2006, the Cantonment Land Administration Rules (CLAR) 
1937, the Cantonment Property Rules 1925, the Acquisition Control and 
Relinquishment Rules (ACR) 1944 and a number of Government instructions issued 
from time to time. The existing statutory and policy framework in this regard provides 
for entrusting the custody, control & management of defence land upon the user 
authorities i.e. the Services, Defence Establishments viz Ordnance Factory Board 
(OFB), Defence Research and Development Organization (DRDO), Director General 
of Quality Assurance (DGQA), Directorate of Standardisation (DOS) and  Director 

  
General of Defence Estates (DGDE). Defence land placed under the direct control of 
DGDE is managed by the Cantonment Boards and Defence Estates Officers (DEOs). 
DGDE is in addition the custodian of all defence land records and advises the 
Government on all matters related to Defence land.  The Ministry has been 
continually engaged in making further improvements in management of Defence land 
and undertaking corrective measures based on recommendations of Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India (C&AG) and Parliamentary Committees. The Ministry has 
provided comprehensive inputs and detailed action taken to the PAC on C&AG’s 
Performance Audit Report No. 35 of 2010-11 on Defence Estates Management.  
 
 
(Deepak Anurag) 
Joint Secretary (C&W) 
 
(Ministry of Defence O.M. No 13014/1/2011/D(Lands)/Vol-III  dated    July 2015) 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 2 
 
LACUNAE IN APPLICATION OF LAND NORMS: 
  
 The Committee are dismayed to note that despite revising the norms over the 
years i.e. in 1972, 1991 and 1992, the Ministry repeatedly faltered in applying the 
norms for proper and judicious management of the lands at its disposal.  The Ministry 
in their submission to the Committee categorically stated that no Defence land is to 
be declared surplus and the lands that are seemingly vacant or unused are actually 
reserved for present expansion and future needs of the Forces. The continuous 
holding of excess land, want of proper management and effective vigil over such vast 
tracts of uninhabited land is fraught with risks of encroachment and land grab.  
Further, the Committee are of the considered opinion that want of effective  
institutional mechanism and stringent regulatory procedures, precious Defence lands 
are bound to be encroached upon, come under adverse possession or surreptitious 
transfer as reported in the Sukhna and Kandivali land transfers.  In order to protect 
the precious Defence lands from the preying eyes of the land mafia and to ensure 
that the officers are not unwittingly embroiled in such avoidable controversies, the 
Committee strongly and unreservedly feel that the entire ambit of Defence lands 
record keeping,  mutation, sale, transfer, lease, etc., should be bestowed upon the 
DGDE so as to ensure accountability, transparency and judicious use of Defence 
lands.  Further, the Committee, while appreciating the need for having sufficient lands 
for training as well as future needs of the Armed Forces, recommend that the whole 
issue of the requirement of land by the Forces be revisited in its entirety so that the 
land is put to optimum use by the Forces and the surplus land so identified be 
earmarked for other housing  and developmental activities of the Armed Forces, that 
this analysis and recommendation therein should be completed within a period of one 
year since the presentation of this report to the Parliament. 
 
 
(Sl. No.-1; Para-2 of the Eighty-Ninth 
Report of the Public Accounts Committee 
(15th Lok Sabha) 

  
Action Taken 
 
 The responsibility for planning and utilization of land in both existing and new 
stations, by adhering to Zonal Plans/Key Location Plans, devolves on the Local 
Military Authorities (LMAs). LMAs are  required to prepare the Key Location Plan 
(KLP) based on the provisions of land norms promulgated by the MoD and keeping in 
view operational/security considerations.   
 
2. The present land norms policy letter was issued by the Ministry in 1991after revisi ng 
land norms given in the Hand -book of 1947, wherein a 41.8% cut has been imposed on the 
1947 land norms. While providing a reply to the related Audit observation contained in C&AG’s 
Performance Audit Report No. 35, it was explained that the contention of  the Audit that the cut 
of 41.8% should have been applied to all Stations retrospectively and not to the Stations where 
the land was being acquired after 1972 was not reasonable. If the same cut is applied 
retrospectively to the Stations in existence prior  to 1972, then it would entail demolition and re -
construction of existing structures and other external services so as to accommodate assets in 
a reduced area. This would involve massive expenditure and would also damage/affect 
structures with historical a nd archaeological value. Besides there is a requirement of keeping 
accommodation well dispersed so as to avoid heavy col lateral damages in time of war when 
Cantonments/Military Stations will be the first line of target for any enemy action.  
3. It is perti nent to point out that each and every piece of land held by the Armed forces 
has planned usage to meet Key Location Plan (KLP), Ammunition storage, training 
requirements, operational mobilization and other strategic and operational needs of the Armed 
Forces. Taking into account all the requirements, Armed Forces have projected that they are 
actually deficient of land to plan and construct various projects required for national security 
and the defence of the country. Defence land remain vacant and may appea r to be surplus as 
construction of Key Location Plans (KLPs) assets and infrastructure projects are  taken up 
based on availability of funds and the capacity of the Military construction agencies. Land which 
appears to be excess now are all earmarked for s pecific uses. AHQ has however, intimated 
that it has instructed all LMAs to carry out an internal exercise to assess all A -1/Analogous to 
A-1defence land under their management in order to ensure optimum utilization of these lands 
for military purposes. 
4. As regards the observation of PAC that holding of excess land makes the land 
vulnerable to encroachment and land grab for want of proper management and vigil it is 
submitted that instructions for protecting Defence land and preventing encroachments are in  
vogue. As a result most cases of encroachment are old and encroachment of new land is very 
limited. With respect to cases like ‘Sukna’ or ‘Kandivili’, it is clarified that the lands involved in 
these cases were not defence lands.  Ministry of Defence has however, issued instructions vide 
MoD letter No.11015/1/2011/D(Lands) dated 02.06.2011 (Annexure X) to ensure that 
irrespective of the title, land under occupation of defence authorities for long, should not be 
ceded without obtaining prior approval of the Government.  
5. As far as the recommendation of Committee that the entire ambit of defence 
lands record keeping, mutation, sale, transfer, lease etc. should be bestowed upon the 
DGDE; it is submitted that DGDE already has full responsibility for Defence la nds 
record keeping and is the agency handling cases of mutation, sale, transfer, lease etc in 
consultation with Military authorities and with the approval of the Government as 

  
required. It is also stated that as per extant instructions approval of the cabi net is 
required for all cases of t ransfer/alienation of Defence lands including sale and 
lease of land.  
 
6.. However, in the light of the observations and recommendations of the PAC and 
keeping in view the rapidly escalating pressure on land and increased  complexities and 
cost of fresh land acquisition under the newly enacted Right to Fair Compensation and 
Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 a review 
of land norms and of utilisation of current land has been instituted by the Government. A 
Committee has accordingly been constituted with the following terms of reference: 
 
a. Analyse existing land norms and recommend revised norms for various 
KLP Units and other requirements giving full justification. 
 
b. Frame norms for land requirement for special purposes so that number of 
items where land requirement is to be fixed on a case to case basis is reduced to 
a minimum. 
 
c. Study utilisation of existing defence land and suggest measures to 
optimise use of land at existing stations.  
7. The above mentioned Committee has been set up on 24.09.2014. PAC is 
requested to give 12 months from this date for finalizing the above exercise.  
   
 
(Deepak Anurag) 
Joint Secretary (C&W) 
 
 (Ministry of Defence O.M. No 13014/1/2011/D(Lands)/Vol-III  dated     July 2015) 
 
Observation/Recommendation Para No. 3 
 
VARIATIONS IN RECORDS OF ACTUAL LAND HOLDINGS: 
  
 The Committee are deeply concerned with the large scale discrepancies found 
between the figures of A -1 lands furnished by the Local Military Author ities (LMAs) 
and the Defence Estates Officers (DEOs) who keep the records in General Land 
Register (GLR) and Military Land Register (MLR). The Committee also find that out of 
25 stations in four Army Commands, between the LMAs and DEOs, the land area in 
the records of LMAs in respect of nine stations was higher by 12769.86 acres i.e., 
46.9% and in the remaining 16 stations less by 9,427.77 acres i.e., 23.36%. The 
Committee are unable to accept the explanation furnished by the Ministry that 
discrepancies bet ween the records of LMAs and DEOs could be due to occupying 
units move-out & new units move-in without the knowledge of the DEOs and possibly 
without proper handing/taking over of land records between themselves. The 
Committee views both DEOs and LMAs resp onsible for inept handling of valuable 
land records, failure to conduct regular inspections and reconciliation of land record. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry take immediate steps to 
make it mandatory for DEOs to periodically inspect the land records maintained by 

  
the LMAs and take swift and stringent corrective measures. Taking serious note of 
the wide discrepancies ranging up to 46.9 per cent in land records, the Committee 
further recommend that the comprehensive survey of all Defence lands be completed 
within a definite time period and the Committee apprised. The Committee also 
recommend that an effective E -system be also created expeditiously by which the 
records maintained by LMAs are integrated and the data shared on real -time basis 
with the DEOs/DGDE/Ministry. 
 
(Sl. No.-1; Para-3 of the Eighty-Ninth 
Report of the Public Accounts Committee 
(15th Lok Sabha) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 With respect to the observations of the PAC the Ministry would like to reiterate 
that Land records are maintain ed by the Defence Estates Officer (DEO) as a 
custodian of land records, as a statutory requirement under Cantonment Land 
Administration Rules, 1937 (CLAR) for land inside Cantonments and under ACR 
Rules, 1944 for land outside Cantonments. Land records maintained by the LMAs are 
only internal records to enable them to manage lands under their custody.  
 
2. The Ministry would like to submit that in terms of provisions of sub -rule (3) of 
Rule 13 of CLAR 1937 DEO is required to submit a certificate duly counter signed by 
the Station Commander, as to the correctness of plans and schedules of Class A 
land. Likewise ACR Rules also require that DEO/Land managing agency is required 
to give a certificate each year that 20% of land holding has been inspected and that 
there are no encroachments found. The discrepancies reported by Audit could not 
be addressed as certificates required by the CLAR and ACR rules were not being 
furnished by LMAs and DEOs. DGDE has intimated that it has instructed DEOs and 
CEOs to issue the ne cessary annual certificates (Annexure-Y). Service HQrs are 
also being advised to ensure that LMAs issue the necessary certificates. This will 
ensure that discrepancies in records are addressed.   
 
3.  It is further brought to the notice of the Committee th at to ensure 
reconciliation of defence land records with actual land holding on ground physical 
survey of entire defence land has been undertaken by the Defence Estates 
Department under a project sanctioned by the Ministry of Defence in 2011. The 
survey wo rk outside Cantonments was to be carried out by DEOs in phases. 
Nearly 91% of the overall survey work has been completed by 30.06.2014. The 
remaining survey work will be completed soon. Necessary, survey reports will be 
submitted by the DEOs by 31.12.2014.  The survey work inside Cantonments is 
being carried out by the Cantonment Boards with the help of professional 
institutions. Survey of lands inside Cantonments is also expected to be completed 
by 31.12.2014. DGDE has planned survey and reconciliation of D efence land as a 
continuing activity and all Defence lands are proposed to be surveyed every three 
years from the year 2015-16 onwards. This will result in regular physical inspection 
of defence lands and their reconciliation with land records. An SOP is a lso being 
formulated in this regard. For this purpose staffs are being regularly sent for 
training in survey techniques to reputed institutes. The above action would ensure 

  
compliance with the recommendation of the PAC for undertaking a comprehensive 
survey of all Defence lands within a definite time period. 
 
4. In addition to the above Army HQrs has also intimated that it has already 
ordered an internal assessment of A -1/Analogous to A -1 defence land holding by 
LMAs after physical verification in concert with DEO and state revenue department. 
HQ Commands have been advised to take following necessary action:- 
 
(d) To streamline the land records of A -1/Analogous to A -1 Defence land under 
their management.  
(e) Conduct regular inspection of land holdings. 
(f) Reconcile land records with those held with DEO as per Raksha Bhoomi CD 
and extend all cooperation to DEO for reconciliation of these records.  
5.  With respect to recommendations of the PAC for creation of a n effective E-
system by which the records maintained by LMAs  are integrated and the data 
shared on real -time basis with the DEOs/DGDE/Ministry  it is submitted that 
integration of data held by DGDE with that of LMA is possible only if data is held by 
the LMA in electronic form and with a compatible data structure. F urther, 
integrating databases of DGDE with that of the Services online will have security 
implications. As such the Ministry is of the opinion that the present practice of 
providing data in CDs to the LMAs may be continued and update patches may be 
provided by DGDE to them from time to time. 
 
6. Further to address the concerns and recommendations of the PAC the Ministry 
has asked DGDE to take the following actions:  
 
i. Carry out a one-time exercise of reconciliation of records of A-
1/analogous to A-1 lands held by them with the r ecords held by the Local 
Military Authorities (LMAs) . DGDE has been asked to complete  this 
exercise within 4 months and submit its findings to the Ministry. 
ii. Undertake a periodic reconciliation of their records with that of the LMAs 
along with periodic survey planned of all defence lands every 3 years. 
iii. Instruct DEOs to extend all support to the Army in the internal 
assessment/audit being undertaken by them which also includes 
reconciliation of records. 
iv. Provide electronic land records to the Services and update these at 
regular intervals. 
7. In addition Services have been  asked to extend all cooperation to DGDE for 
undertaking both the one time reconciliation and subsequent periodic reconciliation 
exercises. They will also be advised to pr ovide inspection certificates annually as 
required under CLAR and ACR 1944. 
 
(Deepak Anurag) 
Joint Secretary (C&W) 
 
 (Ministry of Defence O.M. No 13014/1/2011/D(Lands)/Vol-III   dated     July 2015) 

  
Observation/Recommendation No. 5 
 
MUTATION OF DEFENCE LAND: 
  
 The Committee find that a large area of acquired land awaits mutation for a 
period ranging from 1 year to 60 years. The Ministry in their written submissions to 
the Committee highligh ted the facts that the mutation is to be carried out by State 
Government authorities and most of the acquired lands have not been mutated in 
favor of the Ministry as a result of which considerable Defence lands have been 
encroached upon by private persons and State Governments. The Committee note 
with concern the casual a pproach of the DEOs to an important issue like mutation of 
Defence Land. It seems no serious initiatives have been taken to expedite the 
mutation of land in the Ministry’s name in order to ensure their title and ownership of 
the land. The Committee therefo re urge that time bound steps should be taken to 
complete the process urgently. Regular meetings should take place with senior 
officers of the State Gove rnments at regular intervals in order to fast track the 
process. The Committee would like to have state -wise details of such land as on 
31.03.2009 and the results of the mutation drive as on 31.03.2013 within six months 
of the presentation of this Report. 
 
(Sl. No.-1; Para-5 of the Eighty-Ninth 
Report of the Public Accounts Committee 
(15th Lok Sabha) 
Action Taken 
 
 The Ministry would like to reiterate that mutation of defence land in the 
revenue records is required to be carried out by State Government authorities. The 
DGDE and the Ministry of Defence has been regularly taking up the issue with State 
Government authorities at various levels including at the level of DEOs, PDsDE and 
DGDE. They have been requested for passing instructions to the Revenue authorities 
under their jurisdiction for effecting mutation in respect of defence land in the 
Revenue Records. Bulk of the non -mutated lands are ex -State Forces lands vested 
in or transferred to the Central Government under Articles 294, 295 & 296 of the 
Constitution and land acquired under the Land Acquisition Act.  The procedure for 
mutation is cumbersome and t ime consuming as each case is required to be taken 
up separately with the respective State revenue authorities. The requisite documents 
for effecting mutation have been painstakingly collected by various DEOs and have 
been made available to the State Gover nments. DEOs have been pursuing this 
matter vigorously with the revenue authorities.  Getting defence land mutated in 
revenue records is a continuous process and efforts made by DEOs have resulted in 
significant progress in the matter. The state -wise detai ls regarding mutation of 
defence land as on 31.03.2009 and 31.03.2013 is reflected as Annexure ‘A’ to this 
report. It would be seen that during this period 3.9 lakh acres of land has been 
mutated. Out of the total defence land about 78.63% land has already  been mutated 
in the revenue records of the State Governments concerned.   
 
2. To expedite the process of mutation, the matter is regularly and consistently 
taken up by the Defence Estates Department with the State Governments concerned. 
DGDE has taken up the matter with the State Governments from time to time and 
has reiterated to his Principal Directors in all the Commands the need for early 

  
mutation of defence land in civil revenue records.  In this regard, copies of DGDE 
letter No.738/50/L/DE/NC/2011 da ted 29 th June 2012 and D.O. letters dated 
03rdOctober 2011 are also enclosed for reference (Annexures-A3 A4 & A 5). In 
addition, the Principal Directors, DE of various Commands have taken up the matter 
with the Chief Secretaries of various States regularly to impress upon this important 
aspect of defence land management on the civil authorities.  In this regard D.O. 
letters of PDDE, Central Command/ Northern Command dated 20 th October 2011 to 
the Chief Secretary of Uttar Pradesh and 10 th February 2011 to the  Chief Secretary 
of J&K are also enclosed (Annexures-A6 & A7).  In addition, recent correspondences 
made by the DE authorities in this respect are enclosed for ready reference: -  
 
i) Minutes of Civil Military Liaison Conference held at HQ South Western 
Command, Jaipur on 29.09.2011 wherein at point No.39 the State Govt. 
of Rajasthan agreed to mutate defence lands at the earliest (Annexure-
A8).  
ii) Principal Director, DE, Northern Command, Jammu letter dated 
19.07.2012 to the Revenue Secretary, Govt. of J&K (Annexure-A9). 
iii) DO letters dated 04.09.2013 from Director, DE, Central Command, 
Lucknow to the Revenue Secretary, Govt. of Madhya Pradesh, 
Commissioner cum Secretary (Revenue & Disaster Management), 
Govt. of Orissa, Principal Secretary, Dept of Revenue, Govt. of Bihar, 
Principal Secretary, Dept of Revenue, Govt. of Jharkhand, 
Commissioner Land Records, Government of Chhattisgarh 
(Annexures-A10 A11 A12 A13 & A14). 
iv) Director, DE, DO letters dated 28.10.2011 to the Chief Secretaries, 
Governments of Sikkim, Manipur, As sam, Meghalaya, Nagaland and 
West Bengal (Annexures-A15 A16 A17 A18 A19 & A20). 
3. In the past the issue of non-mutation has also been taken up at the level of the 
Minister of State who has written to the CMs of Goa and J&K on this issue. Copies of 
D.O. letters to the Chief Ministers are enclosed for ready reference (Annexures-A1 & 
A2).  Recently in September 2014, Additional Secretary in the Ministry of Defence 
has written to all Chief Secretaries to undertake mutation of Defence land on priority.   
 
4. The above references are not exhaustive and are intended to provide a 
glimpse of efforts being made by the Defence Estates Organization to get the 
mutation of defence land done in civil revenue records and the importance attached 
to this matter. It is also p ointed out that whenever senior officers of the Defence 
Estates Department meet functionaries of the State Governments, the issue of non -
mutation of Defence land is invariably raised and discussed. The Ministry would, 
therefore, like to assure the PAC of i ts full commitment for addressing the issue of 
non-mutation of Defence land in Revenue records. 
 
(Deepak Anurag) 
Joint Secretary (C&W) 
 
 (Ministry of Defence O.M. No 13014/1/2011/D(Lands)/Vol-III   dated     July 2015) 
 

  
Observation/Recommendation Para No. 6 
 
DISCONTINUANCE OF LAND AUDIT BY DGDE:  
 
 The Committee find that the internal audit mechanism of Land Audit was 
discontinued by the DGDE after its first  audit report, which brought out many 
irregularities in the management of Defence lands, obviously du e to the objections 
raised by the Army Head Quarter. They also observe that the Quarter Master 
General (QMG) suggested amendments to the land rules. The QMG also 
recommended that a land audit authority presided by a Service Officer should be 
constituted for carrying out the audit. Taking note of the fact that Land Audit has been 
resumed and is being conducted by the DGDE, the Committee desire to know 
whether the concerns and suggestions of the Army have been considered and 
whether any subsequent amendments in the land rules and changes in the 
composition of the land audit authority have been made. Further, the Committee 
recommend conduct of regular annual land audit and the result of the latest audit be 
furnished to them within three months of the presentati on of this report and the 
position also reflected in the Annual Report of the Ministry submitted to Parliament 
annually. 
 
(Sl. No.-1; Para-6 of the Eighty-Ninth 
Report of the Public Accounts Committee 
(15th Lok Sabha) 
Action Taken 
 
 The Ministry would like  to submit with regard to the observations of the PAC 
on Land Audit that it has issued orders for land Audit by DGDE vide  Ministry of 
Defence letter No. 723/A/4/L/DE/2011/448/DO(N)/ D(Lands)/2011 dated 18.04.2011 
(Annexure-B).  Since then, land audit has been carried out in all the 37 DEO Circles. 
In subsequent audits DGDE plans to cover all DEO circles once in 3 years. Reports 
of Audit for 20 DEO circles covered in the 1 st two phases have been submitted. 
Executive Summaries of these reports are enclosed (Annexure-C&D). 
 
2. The Committee has desired to know whether the concerns and suggestions of 
the Army have been considered and whether any subsequent amendments in the 
land (audit) rules and changes in the composition of the land audit authority have 
been made. In this connection it is submitted that AHQ vide their note dated 30th 
August 2011 had inter-alia, suggested the following: 
 
 (a) Land audit relating to aspects managed and controlled by Services in r/o A -1 
defence land be conducted by joint teams co mprising of Service officers and reps of 
DGDE while audit of all other aspects managed and controlled by DGDE be 
conducted by the teams comprising of service officers, reps of DGDE and CGDA. 
 
(b) Land audit cell may be set up under HQ, IDS, which can indep endently and 
objectively evaluate and analyse the audit reports and forward meaningful 
recommendations to the Government for implementation. 
 
(c) CAG recommendations with regard to constitution of a Board for management 
of Defence land, amendment of land r ules and regulations for speedy disposal of 

  
cases and better utilisation of land, updating and computerisation of land record, 
survey, demarcation and protection of defence land, improvement in procedures for 
removal of encroachment and speedy mutation of land in favour of MoD, may be 
considered for implementation in a time bound manner.  
 
3. Subsequently other suggestions were also made by AHQ such as defining 
priority for taking up audit of DEO circles, working out detailed audit plan in 
consultation with  user’s  and prescription of time lines for finalising action taken 
reports based on accepted audit report.  
 
4. After taking into account the comments of DGDE on the suggestions of AHQ 
the Ministry has arrived at a conclusion that entrusting the audit of Defence land to 
service personnel who are the users and managers of most of the Defence land , 
would not make the exercise objective. It was therefore decided that the responsibility 
of audit should continue to be entrusted to DGDE. To make audit objective,  DGDE 
has been advised that audit teams should be chosen from other circles which should 
report directly to DGDE Hqrs. In addition the following decisions have also been 
taken: 
 
i) Users/services (auditee) should be closely involved with the audit by assoc iating them at 
the planning stage, and by sharing audit findings and observations at all stages to elicit 
feedback and explanations.  
ii) DGDE must provide a draft of the final report to the Service HQrs for comments and take 
these into account before submitting a final report to the MoD.  
iii) DGDE should formulate a SOP for associating the users/services at various stages of the 
audit and submit the same to the Ministry at the earliest.  
v) DGDE should make suggestions for modifying terms of reference of the  
audit based on its experience of audits conducted thus far.  
5. Important findings of Land Audit would be considered for inclusion from the 
Annual Report of 2015-16 onwards. 
 
(Deepak Anurag) 
Joint Secretary (C&W) 
 
(Ministry of Defence O.M. No 13014/1/2011/D(Lands)/Vol-III   dated     July 2015) 
 
Observation/Recommendation Para No. 8 
 
ENCROACHMENT ON DEFENCE LAND:  
 
 The Committee are deeply dismayed to note the unabated encroachments on 
Defence land despite the repeated wake up calls given by the constitut ional auditor. 
Worse, non -mutation of land records and non -utilization of vast trac ts of Defence 
lands only encouraged encroachment of Defence land which have increased from 
6,903 acres in January 1997 to 14,539.38 ac res in July, 2009. The Committee 

  
observe that the existence of multiple authorities like the DGDE and the LMAs that 
look after management of Defence lands, have only exacerbated the situation for 
want of clear demarcation of responsibility. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
creation of a sing le unified authority, which shall look into management and 
protection of Defence lands, fast -track the recovery of encroached lands and shall 
also be responsible for monitoring & su pervision of all field offices entrusted with the 
responsibility to manage Defence lands and property. 
 
(Sl. No.-1; Para-8 of the Eighty-Ninth 
Report of the Public Accounts Committee 
(15th Lok Sabha) 
 
Action Taken 
  
It is submitted that as per data collected the total extent of land under encroachment 
as on 31.3.2013, was 11,456 acres. Details of land area under encroachment for different 
land management agencies are as follows: 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Land Management 
Agency 
Area Under Encroachment in 
Acres 
1 DGDE 5007.50885 
2 Army 4669.4568 
3 Air Force 1191.4505 
4 Navy 484.2727 
5 D(Production) 77.276 
6 DRDO 19.7 
7 DGQA 5.75588 
8 Dte. of Standardization 0.117 
 Total 11455.53773 
 
2. It is stated that most of the encroachments are more than 20 years old. DGDE has 
stated that of the approximately 5000 acres of land under its managem ent  which is 
encroached, 2496 acres is land held by ex -agricultural lessees and will be taken over after 

  
following due process of law. A round 799 acres are held unauthorizedly by State 
Governments and other Departments of the Central Government . These enc roachments 
cannot be removed and have to be regularized in consultation with the concerned 
Departments/Governments.  
3. The Ministry would also like to bring to the notice of the Committee that it has issued 
several instructions for protecting Defence land  and for preventing encroachments. It is a 
result of this that new instances of encroachment are reportedly few. In addition, action 
against encroachers is taken under the PPE Act and the Cantonment Act. This process 
though ongoing is slow due to lack of s upport from local government, resistance from 
encroachers and litigation initiated by the encroachers. Nevertheless, it is reported that over 
the last 3 years there has been a reduction in the area under encroachment by 1409.7 acres. 
4. With regard to PAC’s observation that  the existence of multiple authorities like the 
DGDE and the LMAs that look after management of Defence lands, have only exacerbated 
the situation for want of clear demarcation of responsibility , it is submitted that MoD’s 
instructions, C antonment Land Administration Rules and ACR Rules clearly assign the 
responsibility for management and protection of Defence land and for removal of 
encroachments to the  various land management agencies. Monitoring and supervision of 
respective field offic es is undertaken by Service HQrs and by DGDE and overall control is 
exercised by the Ministry.  
5. In the context of the above the Ministry is of the view that a single unified authority 
would not be necessary. However, to review and monitor actions for prevention and removal 
of encroachments a Committee has been formed under the Chairmanship of the Additional 
Secretary, Ministry of Defence and with Joint Secretaries dealing with land matters of Army, 
Navy and Air Force and representatives of DGDE and other  land management agencies as 
members. The Committee would periodically monitor (quarterly or six -monthly) the status of 
encroachments, increase/decrease in encroachments, measures taken to fast track recovery 
of encroached lands and measures for protection of Defence land.  
 
(Deepak Anurag) 
Joint Secretary (C&W) 
 
 (Ministry of Defence O.M. No 13014/1/2011/D(Lands)/Vol-III   dated     July 2015) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
CHAPTER III 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies received from the Government 
 
 
 
- NIL - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
CHAPTER IV 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration 
 
Observation/Recommendation Para No. 4 
 
COMPUTERISATION OF DEFENCE LAND RECORDS:  
 
 The Committee were informed that the computerization of Defence land 
records under the project “ Raksha Bhoomi”  has been completed.  However, the 
Committee noticed considerable delay in completing the pr oject and the reasons 
attributed for the delay are (i) incompatibility of the newly purchased hardware with 
the operating system, which led to procurement of improvised software, (ii) lack of 
uniformity in the GLRs maintained by DEOs, (iii) shortage of tec hnical staff, (iv) 
involvement of staff in disposal of other priority work and (v) inordinate delays in 
mutation process.  The Committee observe that the avoidable delay in 
implementation of the ‘Raksha Bhoomi’ project was caused due to lack of effective 
planning, execution and monitoring, resulting in purchase of inappropriate hardware 
that was incompatible with the operating system apart from shortage of staff – 
general and technical, etc.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that responsibility 
be fixed for delay in computerization of Defence lands and stringent action taken 
against the responsible for incompatible hardware.  Also, finding that General Land 
Registers maintained by the DEOs differ from one State to another, the Committee 
recommended that u niformity must be maintained to make entries which should be 
followed by all the DEOs throughout the country without fail and the Committee 
apprised. 
 
(Sl. No.-1; Para-4 of the Eighty-Ninth 
Report of the Public Accounts Committee 
(15th Lok Sabha) 
Action Taken 
 
 The computerization of Defence land records under the project “ Raksha 
Bhoomi” was a gigantic task which has been successfully undertaken by the Defence 
Estates Organization mostly utilizing internal resources. The f irst version of the 
Raksha Bhoomi s oftware developed in house for computerization of G eneral Land 
Registers (GLRs) was released by then RRM on 08.11.2006. Thereafter a project for 
computerization of records for all Defence lands records  was taken up and 
administrative and expenditure sancti on for implementing the project was issued by 
the ministry on 07.02.2007.  As per sanction, t he project was to be implemented 
within 02 years from the date of Government sanction.  Subsequently, an upgraded 
version of R aksha Bhoomi software for M ilitary Land Registers (MLR) was released 
by RRM on 22.10.2007.   The data of entire defence land records in the Raksha 
Bhoomi(RB)  database was thereafter  consolidated and provided to all stakeholders 
during July, 2011. The next version of RB database was released in June, 2012. 
 
2. The delay in implementation of the RB software was mainly on account of data 
entry problems faced by various offices of DGDE. Therefore, several “patches” had to 
be released to attend to specific problems faced by various field offices . Further, 

  
training of officers and staff  were also undertaken for  data entry work, attending to 
software related issues, verification and authentication of data and security related  
aspects. This process took time but was unavoidable. It is also submitted t hat land 
record management for lands spread across various States/UTs is a complex 
exercise. Most software projects related to land management result in failures due to 
the complexities and inaccuracies in land records. The entire defence land records 
data contained in GLRs and MLRs was  successfully computerized by July, 2011 and 
since then is being used on a day to day basis by all the field offices. 
 
3. As regards the observation of the Committee about the avoidable delay in 
implementation of the ‘Raksha Bhoomi’ project  and causes for the same it is 
submitted that as stated above computerization of land records is a complex exercise 
and the work was being taken up in -house and initial delays were unavoidable. 
Computerization of defence land records  has since been completed and has been 
put to practical use . The delays were due to several unforeseen reasons and the 
complexities associated with IT systems being developed for large and complex data. 
  
4. With respect to the observation of PAC that General Land Registers 
maintained by the DEOs differ from one State to another  and its recommendation 
that uniformity must be maintained to make entries which should be followed by all 
the DEOs throughout the country  it is clarified that the format for GLR is uniform  and 
as per format given in Cantonment Land Administration Rules 1937.This uniform 
format has been adopted in the RB software. 
 
5. However, as is true for any IT system and computer programme, the 
Government recognizes the need for upgrading and improving the system based on 
feedback received from the users. DGDE is in the process of further upgrading 
Raksha Bhoomi database by undertaking the following: 
 
(i) Migration of the stand -alone system in various D efence Estates offices to a 
Central Server for on-line updation and access by users. 
 
(ii) A secured network is being developed through NIC for providing connectivity 
to 113 offices across India. 
 
(iii) User-interface on ‘Windows’ is being developed to enable users to access 
‘Raksha Bhoomi’ database with ease while the database itself will be in the 
secured Linux System (CentOS, Red Hat etc.). 
 
(Deepak Anurag) 
Joint Secretary (C&W) 
 
(Ministry of Defence O.M. No 13014/1/2011/D(Lands)/Vol-III   dated    July 2015) 
 
 
 

  
Observation/Recommendation Para No. 10 
 
UNAUTHORIZED USE OF DEFENCE LAND FOR PARKS AND CLUBS:  
 
 The Committee note that clubs and parks established for the benefit of 
Defence personnel and their families are exploited by civilians for organizing parties, 
marriages, exhibitions, etc. Worse, the proceeds from such  events are not being 
credited to the Government account. There are instances of illegal constructions on 
such parks. The Committee, would like the Ministry of Defence to setup an enquiry in 
the matter so that all encroachments and prohibited activities ar e detected and 
stringent remedial action taken to prevent misuse/abuse of Defence environmental 
parks/lands and the Committee   be apprised. 
 
(Sl. No.-1; Para-10 of the Eighty-Ninth 
Report of the Public Accounts Committee 
(15th Lok Sabha) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 The Clubs and Parks on A -1 defence land were being established for the 
benefit of defence personnel and their families residing in the Cantonments. These 
facilities are also used by Civilian residents of Cantonments. Several Clubs and 
institutes have been set up on leased land or OGBs and have existed from the British 
era. 
 
2. Though no specific case has been cited in the report of the PAC, the position 
with regard to cases highlighted in the Performance Audit Report of C&AG (i.e. 
Report No 35) is that in th e case of Agra Club action under PPE act has been 
initiated and in the case of MB Club action for determining the lease has been 
proposed. The case relating to Royal Western India Turf Club involves a dispute 
about the area of land covered by the perpetual  lease given by Government prior to 
independence. Some issues are also sub -judice. In the case of Secundrabad Club 
action taken by DEO under PPE Act has been challenged in Courts and the matter is 
sub-judice. As regards to the 2 parks mentioned in the Repo rt, it is intimated that the 
Park in Bangalore has been closed to the Public following audit objections though the 
same had been used as a Public park since 1996. As regards the park at Bhatinda 
i.e. Chetak Park, AHQ has intimated that the park was setup a s a welfare measure in 
1997 for residents of the military station and Ex -servicemen frequenting the Station. 
The land for various reasons is not suitable for buildings and was kept as an open 
space. Two regimental shops were set up based on feedback of vis itors to the park.  
As per existing policy 50 % of profits are being deposited in the Government account 
and the balance is being used for upkeep of the park. Though the park was set up 
from regimental funds 50% of ticket prices are being deposited in Gove rnment 
Treasury.  
 
3. Às regards observation of the Committee that clubs and parks established for 
the benefit of Defence personnel and their families are exploited by civilians for 
organizing parties, marriages, exhibitions, etc, AHQ has issued instructions to all the 
Commands to ensure that Defence lands are being uitilised for bonafide military 
purposes and those stipulated in land norms laid down by the Government and as 

  
stipulated by the extant rules, regulations and Government policies (Annexure-F). It 
has also been advised that stringent action be taken against any misuse/ abuse of 
defence land in violation of Government policy and necessary action be taken so that 
such violations do not occur in future. Navy has intimated that no unauthorized use of 
Defence land has been permitted to set up Clubs/parks at Naval Stations  and clubs 
and parks are being set up as per authorization and no misuse is being permitted. 
 
4. Keeping in view the observations of the PAC instructions are being issued to 
all Servic e HQrs not to allow any parks and clubs which are established for the 
defence personnel to be utilized by unauthorized persons for organizing parties, 
marriages, exhibitions etc.  Copy of the instructions, when issued, will be made 
available to the PAC as well as Audit. 
 
 
(Deepak Anurag) 
Joint Secretary (C&W) 
 
(Ministry of Defence O.M. No 13014/1/2011/D(Lands)/Vol-III   dated         July 2015) 
 
Observation/Recommendation Para No. 11 
 
DISMAL STATE OF MANAGEMENT OF LEASES:  
 
 The Committee are concerned  to note that as of March 2010 , 2500 acres of 
land valuing Rs. 11,033 crore was on lease for an annual rent of Rs. 2.13 crore which 
is a pittance considering the market value of the land. The Committee are shocked to 
note that no visible efforts had been made t o renew 3780 cases of lease renewal, in 
1800 cases no requests were received for lease renewal and in 1081 cases the 
status of leases was unknown. The Committee deplore the reply of the ministry 
expressing their inability to fix responsibility due to involvement of multiple authorities. 
The Committee were however, assured that all these aspects and deficiencies could 
be addressed in the policy being formulated in this behalf. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Government bring out the concerned po licy within six months of 
the presentation of this report and apprise them about the salient features of the 
policy. 
 
(Sl. No.-1; Para-11 of the Eighty-Ninth 
Report of the Public Accounts Committee 
(15th Lok Sabha) 
 
Action Taken 
 
With respect to the observ ations and recommendations of the PAC it is 
submitted that  4200 acres of defence land had been given on lease to private parties 
under the provisions of the Cantonment Codes 1899 and 1912 and the Cantonment 
Land Administration Rules, 1925 and 1937.  These  leases were given long time 
back, and the lease rent and premium (wherever applicable) was fixed at that point of 
time based on the prevalent land value.  There are 2850 leases which have expired 
and have not been renewed on account of the following diffi culties encountered in 
their timely renewal: 

  
(f) Non-receipt of renewal application from the lessees. 
(g) Non submission of requisite documents by lessees.  
(h) Violation of lease terms such as:  
iv. Failure to complete  construction of building within the prescribed time as 
stipulated in the lease deed and/or to obtain sanction of competent authority, 
for additions/alterations to the building constructed on leased land. 
v. Sale of leasehold rights and non submission of intimation thereof within the 
prescribed time period to the competent authority. 
vi. Change of purpose. 
(i) Non-mutation due to (c) and also on account of dis putes amongst legal heirs of 
ex-lessees and litigation arising therefor.  
(j) Shortage of officers and staff in the DE Organization etc. 
2. Despite efforts made by the  field officers i.e. DEOs and CEOs in obtaining 
requisite documents from the lessees to renew leases, results have not been so 
encouraging. Awareness camps have also been organized in the past at various 
Cantonments to inform the concerned persons regardin g the requirements for 
renewal of leases and the implications of non -renewal. Instructions have been issued 
from time to time to the Directorates and to the field offices to progress the cases of 
lease renewal in a time bound manner.  Instructions have alr eady been issued by the 
DGDE vide their letter No.723/A/3/L/DE/2007 dated 19.12.2012 (Annexure-‘G’) 
wherein detailed guidelines for renewal of pending leases have been issued. While 
reiterating the instructions once again, the following have also been emph asized and 
a special drive to renew leases has been launched by each Directorate/field office: 
 
(i) DEO/CEOs were asked to  update the list of expired leases and intimate the 
ex-lessee/lessees about the requirement for renewal of leases and 
submission of documents. 
 
(ii) DEO/CEOs were directed to process such cases for determination of lease 
where no documents have been forthcoming for renewal of lease within the 
prescribed time. 
 
(iii) Strict monitoring by each Directorate and to submit 06 monthly report to DGDE 
about progress made. 
 
(iv) Cases of leases which are going to expire will be taken up for renewal or 
determination, as the case may be, six months in advance. 
Where ever lessees have not applied for renewal of leases or where there are 
major breaches of lease conditions , the DEOs have initiated the proposals for 
determination of the lease.  
 
3. The Ministry will bring out a comprehensive policy for renewal of leases which 
will address all the difficulties encountered and system deficiencies noticed, within 6 

  
months. Salient features of the proposed policy will be intimated to the PAC in due 
course.  
 
 
(Deepak Anurag) 
Joint Secretary (C&W) 
 
 (Ministry of Defence O.M. No 13014/1/2011/D(Lands)/Vol-III dated      July 2015) 
 
Observation/Recommendation Para No. 12 
 
IRREGULARITY IN MANAGEMENT OF OLD GRANT SITES:  
 
 The Committee note that the largesse extended by the colonial power has 
continued even after independence and worse, the Old Grant Bungalow Site (OGBS) 
were allowed to be kept with some civilians. The mis -management o f such 
Bungalows has led to loss of Government revenue apart from entanglement of 
Government in lots of avoidable litigations. The Committee note that the Land Policy 
of 1982 and the Revised Land Policy of 1995 have provisions for dealing with such 
sites and resuming/leasing of such OGBS by the Government, and no alteration of 
any kind are allowed on such sites. However, the Committee find large number of 
unauthorized constructions, unauthorized sale/transfer are happening right under the 
nose of the DEOs c oncerned. Also, the Committee observe that various educational 
institutions are being run illegally, thereby flouting all norms relating to the 
management of OGBs and exposing apparent collusion between vested interests 
and the concerned authorities. The C ommittee seek reasons as to why 92 cases of 
resumption involving 288.63 acres of land referred to the Ministry are pending of 
sanction. The Committee would like to have a complete status paper of all such 
OGBs, the land area, the properties resumed and the properties awaiting sanction for 
more than three months. Further, the Committee observe that there has been 
obvious dereliction of duty by DEOs and LMAs in not ensuring strict compliance of 
the policy directives. They, therefore, recommend stringent disciplinary action against 
such Officers and the Committee apprised. Further, the committee also desire that all 
such sites should be resumed and utilized exclusive for Defence Officers/Staff, within 
a defined period of time. Further, earnest and focused effor ts should be made to free 
the Bungalow Sites from litigations at the earliest. Regarding the educational 
institutes, the Committee desire that these may be allowed to continue if they cater 
exclusively to the wards of Defence and Ex -Defence personnel and i f not, then the 
revenue generated from such institutes should be deposited into the Government 
account, with proper monitoring by the concerned authorities. 
 
(Sl. No.-1; Para-12 of the Eighty-Ninth 
Report of the Public Accounts Committee 
(15th Lok Sabha) 
Action Taken 
 
 In the context of the observation of the PAC relating to continuance of 
largesse to certain civilians, it is submitted that  si tes for OGBs were historically 
allotted to service men, doctors and civilians under GGO 179 of 1836 for undertaking  
buildings on the sites. The grantees were only  given occupancy rights whereas 

  
ownership of the land remained with the Government which had the power to resume 
the land. Very often structures built on the land were taken on hire for defence /public 
purpose. Besides, several Civilians who hold occupancy rights on Old Grant (OG) 
sites, have been living in Cantonments over generations and their requirements 
cannot be ignored. Further, a  distinction is also required to be made between land 
held on OG terms in B ungalow areas and land held on OG terms in notified civil 
areas and Bazzar areas of Cantonments. Most of the old grant sites i.e. 46,500 are in 
Civil/Bazzar areas. These cover an area of 1359 acres  and hence the average size 
of these sites is 0.029 acres or 1200 sq feet only. Most of the HORs in this case, 
cannot be said to be enjoying any largesse  and have been settled in Cantonments to 
provide services to the Military population. Here the focus  was to convert these OG 
sites to freehold. On the other hand  in the Bungalow area there are 3000 OGB sites 
covering 6178 acres  (average 2.06 acres ). The policy in bungalow areas is to 
gradually resume OG sites. However, as Civilians have been in occupation of these 
Bungalows resumption has to be calibrated and need  based and should follow the 
priority laid down in the relevant policy. 
 
2. As regards the observation of the Committee that mismanagement of OGBs 
has caused loss of revenue the following is submitted:  
I. In civil areas OG sites are to be converted into free  hold if the land is not 
required for Defence purposes and the LMA gives NOC for the same.  
Conversion to free hold would earn the Government revenue. However, 
LMAs/AHQ have not been forthcoming with NOCs on the plea that conversion 
will lead to a spurt in  construction which will affect the Military character of 
Cantonments. As a result conversion of OG sites to free hold and resultant 
revenues have not materialized. 
II. Unauthorised use of OGBs for commercial activities, deprive the 
Government/Cantonment Board  of property taxes at the higher Commercial 
rates. DGDE, has however, intimated that it has instructed CEOs to collect 
property tax on commercial basis in all such cases without prejudice to its right 
to take action for unauthorized use of OGBs. 
3. On the observation relating to litigations , it is submitted that this is a result of 
HORs of sites invariably taking recourse to litigation whenever action to resume sites 
is initiated. Courts are also approached whenever action is initiated against 
unauthorized occupation/use of OG sites and for unauthorized construction. Litigation 
in such matters are beyond the control of Defence Estates authorities. All attempts 
are, however, made to defend the interest of Government in the Courts of law. 
 
4. As regards unauth orized construction in violation of restrictions placed on 
alteration of Bungalows, it is stated that action against unauthorized construction is 
taken under the provisions of the Cantonment Act and the PPE Act. However, such 
action is invariably challenge d before appellate authorities and in Courts of law and 
stay orders obtained. Actual removal of unauthorized construction  is, therefore,  a 
protracted process. It is also submitted that  the land policy of 1995 provides for 
regularization of past cases of u nauthorized construction provided the same is within 
10% of existing floor space and is as per rules, bye -laws etc. Resumption action and 
action under the PPE Act in case of OGBs being used as Educational Institutions  
have been initiated. These have, howev er, not progressed due to intervention of 

  
Courts. In all the cases of unauthorized construction and unauthorized use of OGBs 
cited in the CAG’s Performance audit report , action under the law has been initiated 
by the Defence Estate Officials.  
 
5. It is fu rther submitted that sale/transfer of occupancy rights is not prohibited 
under the rules but r estrictions have been placed on such transfers. I n Bungalow 
areas transfer invariably requires prior permission of the Government  and the 
concurrence of the LMAs.   As LMAs often object to transfer of occupancy rights and 
obtaining Government approval takes time, in several cases HORs have transferred 
occupancy rights without the permission of Government. Such transfers, however, 
may not become known to the Defence Estates authorities until the concerned 
parties disclose the same while seeking ex -post facto approval for the transfer. A 
policy for regulating transfers of occupancy rights is presently under consideration. 
 
6. As regards resumption of OGBs it is submitted that OGBs are resumed from 
time to time based on the requirement projected by the Army and in terms of the 
policy letter of Ministry of Defence dated 18.6.1982.It may be noted that in 2002 
resumption of 57 OGBs in Jalandhar Cantonment was sanctioned by the 
Government. The case of the resumptee owners were taken with the then RM by 
public representatives. It was, therefore, decided to examine the issues involved. 
After examination MoD issued fresh instructions vide ID  No. 23(2)/2003/D(Q&C) 
dated 07th July  2003 (Annexure-H) which stipulated that resumption of OGBs at a 
location should be taken up only after ascertaining that there are no other vacant 
lands inside or in the vicinity of Cantonment and that the requirement for KLP has 
been determined in totali ty. DGDE has intimated that in all the cases referred to it 
including the 92 cases referred by the PAC, it had asked the concerned DEOs to 
ensure that the instructions of MoD of 2003 are complied with. AHQ has however, 
been projecting the need for early ap proval of resumption in all the cases referred to 
the Ministry by them. A meeting was, therefore, held by the MoD wherein DGDE was 
asked to forward all cases of resumption of Bungalows under hiring, in dilapidated 
condition and of vacant sites straight awa y. With regard to other proposals DGDE 
was asked to submit a detailed time table for processing the se cases. DGDE was 
also advised to circulate detailed guidelines to its field units for expediting 
recommendations on all pending proposals. It is submitted that in the last Financial 
year and the current year orders for resumption of 17 OGBs have been issued by the 
Ministry. 
 
7. It is submitted that while the recommendations of the PAC with regard to 
resumption of OGBs will be implemented in the right spirit,  resorting to large scale 
resumption is not feasible as many Civilians have been residing in these OGBs for 
generations. If sites held by these Civilians are to be resumed then as per extant 
instructions they have to be given alternate land. DGDE has also brought out the 
difficulties in issuing resumption notices as in many cases the recorded HORs have 
either expired or have transferred their rights to others. In the absence of recorded 
HORs, it takes time for the DEOs to ascertain the bonafide occupiers wh o may be 
served such notices. In many OGBs, the process of resumption is held up due to title 
or legal disputes. DGDE has, however provided a list of over 250 cases where 
resumption has either been completed or is sub -judice. DGDE has therefore, 
contended that delays are not attributable to any collusion by the DEOs or their staff. 

  
It has been  pointed out that on the contrary, DGDE has proposed that OGBs be 
gradually resumed and resumptee owners be offered smaller plots on lease basis.  
 
8. As regards Educational institutes located in OGBs, the recommendation of the 
PAC that these be allowed to continue provided that the institutions were meant for 
children of service men and ex -servicemen, it is submitted that  a comprehensive 
study of all such  institution s would be needed before the recommendation can be 
implemented. 
 
9. In the context of the observations and recommendations of the PAC the 
Ministry has decided to take the following actions: 
 
e. MoD would take action for resuming OGBs based on the need of the Defence 
forces in terms of extant land policies. 
f. DGDE  has been  asked to furnish a complete status paper o n all OGBs 
covering aspects such as area of land, name of recorded HOR and actual 
occupier, unauthorized construction if any, division of  site if any, nature of use 
of site and bungalow etc within 3 months to the Ministry. 
g.  DGDE has been instructed to undertake a comprehensive study of 
educational institutions being run in OGBs and make recommendations with 
regard their continued functioning or otherwise. 
h. DGDE has been asked to submit a status report within 1 month on all pending 
cases of resumption of OGBs with a definite time table for completing 
resumption action. 
 
 
(Deepak Anurag) 
Joint Secretary (C&W) 
 
 (Ministry of Defence O.M. No 13014/1/2011/D(Lands)/Vol-III   dated      July 2015) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
CHAPTER V 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government have furnished 
interim replies 
 
Observation/Recommendation Para No. 7 
 
COMMERCIAL USE OF LAND: 
  
 The Committee observe that the asp ect of commercial use of Defence land 
and their misuse and non -crediting of income from these lands, and properties into 
Government account have been repeatedly objected to by Audit but no tangible 
action has been taken by the Government to rectify the sit uation. The Committee 
deplore the inability of the Ministry to check such irregular practices and not directing 
the LMAs to deposit the proceeds into the Government account. The Committee 
cannot brook any laxity in the observance of fin ancial rules and fin ancial prop riety 
and therefore recommend that the Government take strict action in this regard to 
safeguard the Government revenues. The Committee also expect that the new policy 
for allowing shopping complexes, if implemented transparently, would bring 
substantial revenue to the public Exchequer. Further, the Directorate of Defence 
Estates being the nodal agency, should be furnished with complete details of 
management and revenue generation from all Defence properties by the LMAs which 
should be computerized and the Committee apprised of the procedure evolved in this 
regard for strict compliance. 
 
(Sl. No.-1; Para-7 of the Eighty-Ninth 
Report of the Public Accounts Committee 
(15th Lok Sabha) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 Due to historical reasons Armed Forces were allowe d to create shops within 
unit areas in certain locations.  Establishment of shops within the Unit lines, as an 
essential requirement, is considered to be an authorized measure. Shopping Centre’s 
have also been authorized for Military Stations under the Sca les of Accommodation 
2009.These shops and centre’s are meant exclusively for the use of Service 
personnel, ex -servicemen and their families.   However, over the years, shopping 
complexes and shops created from non -public/regimental funds or operating from re-
appropriated buildings have also come up in a number of stations. In this context 
AHQ has submitted that A-1/analogous to A-1 land is being used for bonafide Military 
purposes and no commercial exploitation of such land has been envisaged. They 
have str essed that Shopping Centre’s are being run to provide basic provisions to 
military personnel and all dues including rent etc are being paid into Government 
Treasury. 
 
2.  However, to address the question of levying rent on such premises, the 
Ministry of De fence have issued instructions in 2001 and later promulgated the 
Shopping Complex (Maintenance and Administration) Rules 2006. These rules inter -
alia provide that in the case of shopping complexes created out of non -public funds 
on Defence land 50% of the net revenue would be credited to the Government 

  
Treasury and the rest to Regimental fund/welfare fund. In the case of such 
complexes operating fully or partly from Government buildings 100% net revenue 
would be deposited in Government Treasury. All the thr ee services have confirmed 
that they are complying with these rules. It is further submitted that the policy/rules 
with regard to crediting of revenues from Shopping Complexes and Centre’s, 
management of such centre’s/complexes, audit of the accounts of the complexes and 
allocation of shops is being further reviewed and fine tuned to ensure greater 
revenues, equity, transparency and accountability. This review and formulation of a 
revised policy if required, will be completed within 3 months.  
 
3. As regards depositing the revenues generated from the use of Defence land 
for shops etc. in the Government account, DGDE has reported that for the year 2010-
11 it has deposited Rs.20.75 crore on this account. OFB has reported that during 
2010-11 it has deposited revenue generated of Rs.14 crore. Air Force and Navy have 
reported depositing Rs. 11.20 crore during the period 2006 -2011. Army has reported 
that details of revenue deposited in Government account for commercial exploitation 
of Defence land have been sought from HQ Commands and CGDA but obtaining this 
input is time consuming. During meetings they have attributed this to the spread and 
number of their units from where inputs are required and the fact that there is no 
separate head of account for accounting rev enues from Shopping 
Centre’s/complexes. They have, however, reported that based on inputs received 
from some Commands Rs.4.654 crore was deposited into Government Treasury 
during 2011 -12. Detailed information on revenues collected by the Services and 
other users from use of Defence land for Shops etc. will be provided to the PAC. 
 
4. As regards the observation of PAC that the Directorate General of Defence 
Estates should be the Nodal Agency and should be furnished with complete details of 
management and rev enue generation from all defence properties by the LMA, it is 
submitted that existing rules/policy already provide for membership of the DEO in the 
Management Committee of the Shopping Complexes and the DEO in this capacity 
has been vested with several imp ortant responsibilities. Further, enhancement of the 
role of the DEO in the management of the Shopping Complexes and computerization 
of details of shopping complexes will be considered in the ongoing review of policy.  
 
 
(Deepak Anurag) 
Joint Secretary (C&W) 
 
 (Ministry of Defence O.M. No 13014/1/2011/D(Lands)/Vol-III    dated     July 2015) 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 9 
 
UNAUTHORISED USE OF DEFENCE LAND FOR GOLF AND OTHER 
ACTIVITIES:  
 
 The Committee note that the scales of Accommodation for Defe nce Services 
do not include Golf  as an authori zed activity and therefore, Golf  cannot be 
considered as a military activity. Under the Cantonment L and Administration Rules, 
1937 the recreation grounds which are not strictly reserved for the use of tro ops 

  
alone can’t be used for Golf  Courses. The Committee are surprised to note that in 
2004, C hief of Army Staff declared Golf  as a sports activity and not only a 
recreational activity. He directed that Golf Courses would be named as Army 
Environmental Park and Trainin g Area. Land used for these Army Environmental 
Park and Training Area shall continue to be A -1 Defence land. He further directed 
that no commercial activity will be undertaken on the Golf Courses such as 
sponsoring golf tournaments by corporate entities. T he Committee are shocked to 
find that Defence authorities had been offering membership of the Golf Courses to 
civilians on payment basis so much so that in places like Delhi even foreign 
diplomats were being given membership and revenue generated from the civilian 
membership was not credited to Government account. The Committee deplore the 
gross misuse of Golf Courses and recommend that the entire policy of the Golf 
Courses be revisited comprehensively, and appropriate remedial action taken to 
ensure that t he recreational facilities needed for the Armed Forces are not 
misused/abused in any manner. The Committee would like to have a status paper 
about the Golf Courses and Environmental parks used by the military, area -wise, 
nature of membership and the revenu e generated annually and the account where 
credited. 
 
(Sl. No.-1; Para-9 of the Eighty-Ninth 
Report of the Public Accounts Committee 
(15th Lok Sabha) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 While it is true that the Golf  is not a recognized /authorized sporting or 
recreational ac tivity which can be undertaken on  A-1 Defence land , Services have 
been running Golf Courses on A -1 Defence land. They have justified the use of A -1 
defence land on the following grounds: 
 
i. Golfing is a legitimate training and sporting activity for the Armed Forces which 
is now even taught in NDA, IMA etc. They have stated that over the years Golf 
has become a popular sport both among officers and other ranks.  
ii. They have pointed out that whereas in British era golf was treated as an elite 
sport and therefore not allowed on A -1 Defence land, the same was allowed 
on land given to Clubs etc which were used by officers , at present golf is open 
to all service personnel including PBORs. 
iii. Golf courses are being run in open spaces authorised as per KLP norms and 
in vac ant land where KLP is yet to come up. No additional land has been 
authorised for the Courses. They have stated that the golf courses allow the 
maintenance of such open grounds as green areas and also safe guard land 
against encroachment. 
iv. Membership of the courses have been restricted to service personnel,  ex -
servicemen and Defence civilians and except for Army Golf Course at Delhi 
where Diplomatic personnel are allowed as per a laid down SOP, no 
foreigners are allowed on the Golf Courses. 

  
2. AHQ has also e xplained the adoption of the name Army Environmental Park 
and Training Area, as vacant areas in Military Stations have been greened and used 
for playing Golf as well as for providing training of troops. As regards the Committee’s  
observation that membership of the Golf Courses are offered to civilians on payment 
basis, the AHQ has provided details of instructions issued in 2001 (Annexure-E).  
regulating membership of  Army Golf Courses. In terms of these instructions Civilian 
members and Foreigners were no t allowed. As noted above  AHQ has  while 
proposing a policy for Golf Courses  intimated that Membership of the courses have 
been restricted to service personnel,  ex -servicemen and Defence civilians and 
except for Army Golf Course at Delhi where Diplomati c personnel are allowed as per 
a laid down SOP, no foreigners are allowed on the Golf Courses. 
 
3. In view of the fact that even though existing instructions/rules do  not explicitly 
permit use of A -1 Defence land for Golf Courses the Services have continue d to use 
such land for Golf Courses, the Ministry accepts the recommendation of the PAC to 
revisit the whole issue and formulate a suitable policy with a view to ensure that 
recreational facilities needed by Armed Forces are not misused /abused. It would 
also like to submit that work on formulation of a new policy is already underway in 
consultation with the Services and DGDE. 
 
4. The Ministry has also issued instructions  to the Services to prepare a 
comprehensive status report about the Golf Courses and En vironmental parks used 
by the military on the lines advised by the PAC. In the interim Services have been 
directed to open golf courses on Defence land only with the approval of the 
Government. 
 
 
(Deepak Anurag) 
Joint Secretary (C&W) 
 
(Ministry of Defence O.M. No 13014/1/2011/D(Lands)/Vol-III   dated       July 2015) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                     MALLIKARJUN KHARGE, 
 12th December, 2018                                                                   Chairperson, 
 21  Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)                                   Public Accounts Committee 
 
 

  
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
CONTAINED IN THEIR EIGHTY-NINTH REPORT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations  12 
 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee           Total : 06  
which have been accepted by the Government:            Percentage: 50% 
  
 Para Nos. 1-3, 5-6 and 8          
 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the             Total : 00  
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of             Percentage: 00% 
 the reply of the Government: 
 
- NIL - 
 
 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of              Total : 04 
which replies of the Government have not been                  Percentage: 33.33% 
 accepted by the Committee and which require  
 reiteration: 
 
Para Nos. 4 and 10-12 
 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of               Total : 02 
which the Government have furnished interim replies:          Percentage: 16.66% 
  
 Para Nos. 7 and 9 
 
 
                                                                                         
 