 
 
 
 
136 
 
 
ASSESSMENT OF ASSESSEES IN 
PHARMACEUTICAL SECTOR 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE) 
 
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
              
  
                      
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 

 
 
 
 
PAC NO. 2175 
 
O N E  H U N D R E D  A N D  T H I R T Y  S I X T H 
R E P O R T 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(201 8-19) 
 
 
(SI XTEENTH  LO K S ABH A)  
 
 
 
 
                           
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE) 
                                      
   
                                                                                 
Presented to Lok Sabha on:  ………….…… 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   ………………. 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
February 2019/ Magha 1940 (Saka)  
 
 
ASSESSMENT OF ASSESSEES IN 
PHARMACEUTICAL SECTOR 

 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
PAGES 
 
REPORT 
 
PART- I 
 
I INTRODUCTORY  1 
II Audit objectives 1 
III Systemic issues and internal control 2 
IV Allowance of R&D expenditure without approval from DSIR 3 
V Deduction of TDS in respect of contract entered by assessee company with 
a manufacturing company for manufacture of products 
5 
VI Mechanism for cross verification of turnover declared in Income Tax Return 
with the turnover declared in Excise Return 
7 
VII Allowance of expenditure towards gifts, freebies etc. to Medical 
Professionals 
8 
VIII Breakup of ex penditure on freebies/gifts not taken from sales promotion 
expenses 
9 
IX Allocation of R&D/other common expenses 10 
X Allowance of concessions /deductions /rebates /relief 11 
XI Setting off/carry forward of depreciation/business loss/capital loss 12 
 PART – II  
 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 13-21 
 APPENDICES *  
I. Minutes of the Second sitting of Sub -Committee - III ( Direct and Indirect 
Taxes) of the Public Accounts Committee (2017-18) held on 08-06-2017. 
 
II. Minutes of the Twentieth sitting of the  Public Account s Committee (2018 -
19) held on 05-12-2018. 
 
III. Minutes of the Twenty-third sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2018-
19) held on 07-01-2019. 
 
 
 
* Not  appended 

 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB COMMITTEE - III (DIRECT AND INDIRECT TAXES) OF 
THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2017-18) 
 
 
Convenor                  : 1. Shri Nishikant Dubey                     
Alternate Convenor   : 2. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
Members                   : 3. Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi 
 4. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
 5. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy1 
 6. Shri Ajay Sancheti 
                                                           
1 ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 18 August, 
2017. 
  

 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
                                                           
2 Elected w.e.f. 6 August, 2018 for filling vacancies. 
 Shri Mallikarjun Kharge   - Chairperson 
 
 M E M B E R S  
 
L O K  S A B H A  
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria  
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra 
5.    Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar   
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
7. Smt. Riti Pathak 
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank” 
9. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
10. Shri Abhishek Singh 
11. Shri Gopal Shetty 
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya  
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
15. Dr. Ponnusamy  Venugopal 
 R A J Y A  S A B H A  
 
16. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda 
17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
18. Shri Shwait Malik 
19. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
21. Shri C. M. Ramesh2 
 
22. Shri Bhupender Yadav2 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Abhijit Kumar  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri T. Jayakumar     - Director 
3. Smt Anju Kukreja  - Under Secretary 

 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2018-19) having been authorised by 
the Committee, do present this  One Hundred and Thirty-sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok 
Sabha) on ' Assessment of Assessees in Pharmaceutical Sector ' based on C&AG 
Report No.5 of 2015 related to the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue). 
2. The above-mentioned Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India was 
laid on the Table of the House on 20th March, 2015. 
3. The Sub -Committee - III (Direct and Indirect Taxes ) of the Public Accounts 
Committee (2017-18) took up the subject for detailed examination and report.  The Sub -
Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Revenue) on the subject at their sitting held on 8th June, 2017. Further, the Main 
Committee also took evidence of the repres entatives of the aforesaid Ministry on 5 th 
December, 2018. Accordingly, a Draft Report was prepared and placed before the Public 
Accounts Committee (2018 -19) for their consideration. The Committee considered and 
adopted this Draft Report at their sitting h eld on 7 th January, 2019.  The Minutes of the 
Sittings are appended to the Report. 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and  
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type and form Part- II of 
the Report.  
5. The Committee thank their predecessor Sub -Committee for taking oral evidence 
and obtaining information on the subject.   
6. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) for tendering  evidence before them and 
furnishing the requisite information to the Sub -Committee/Main Committee in connection 
with the examination of the subject. 
7. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to 
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                   MALLIKARJUN KHARGE 
   February, 2019                                                                              Chairperson, 
   Magha, 1940 (Saka)                                                 Public Accounts Committee 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
REPORT 
 
I. INTRODUCTORY 
1. This Report is based on C&AG Report No.5 of 2015 on the subject "Assessment 
of Assessees in Pharmaceutical s Sector", pertaining to the Ministry of Financ e 
(Department of Revenue). 
2. The Sub -Committee - III (Direct and Indirect Taxes) of the Public Accounts 
Committee (2017-18) considered the subject for detailed examination, took oral evidence 
of the representatives of Ministry of Finance (Department of Reven ue) and obtained 
written replies on the s ame. Based on the oral evidence and written replies, the Sub -
Committee examined the subject in detail.  Further, the Public Accounts Committee 
(2018-19) took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Fi nance 
(Department of Revenue) on the subject and obtained oral as well as written replies. 
3. Indian Pharmaceuticals industry has witnessed robust growth in last five-six years, 
taking its turnover from ` 71,000 crore in 2007 to ` 1,21,015 crore in 2013 and t hereby 
making it a vital economic sector with corresponding potential for the Government 
revenue. India ranks 4th in terms of generics production and 17 th in terms of export value 
of bulk actives and dosage forms. Indian exports are going to more than 200 countries 
around the globe including highly regulated markets like US, West Europe, Japan and 
Australia. Indian Pharmaceutical industry has developed excellent Good Manufacturing 
Practices (GMP) compliant facilities for the production of different dosage f orms. The 
strength of the industry is in developing cost effective technologies in the shortest 
possible time for drug intermediates and bulk activities without compromising on quality. 
This is realised through country's strength in organic chemical's synt hesis and provides 
support to this sector by way of various area based tax exemptions, weighted deductions 
on expenses towards Research and Development (R&D) and other deductions against 
business profits in the Income Tax Act 1961 (Act), concessional rate of excise duties, 
State VAT etc. 
II. Audit objectives 
 
4. Audit conducted Performance Audit on “Assessment of Assessees in 
Pharmaceuticals Sector” with the objectives to focus on whether (a) the exemptions and 
deductions allowable to Pharmaceutical Sector have been allowed as per entitlement; (b) 
the administrative and procedural adequacy for taxation of pharmaceutical sector exists ; 

 
 
 
 
and (c) the allowance of deduction of Research and Development expenditure to the 
assessees in Pharmaceuticals Sector has contributed to the growth in industry as well as 
in tax revenues. 
5. In their Report, C&AG pointed out the following irregularities in the assessment of 
assessees in Pharmaceutical sector: 
 
III. Systemic issues and internal control 
Sector-wise data in the Income Tax Department 
6. The Committee found from Audit Report that a list of manufacturing units engaged 
in Pharmaceuticals sector published by National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority 
(NPPA), Department of Pharmaceutical containing names, addresses, telephone 
numbers was referred to the ITD for providing PAN and jurisdiction charge of the 
assessees but the same could not be provided to Audit by the ITD. In absence of 
jurisdiction-wise database of assessees engaged in Pharmaceutical Sector, Audit had to 
rely on its historical knowledge to find out assessees of the Pharmaceutical Sector. Audit 
also obtained data from the Assessment Information System (AIS) maintained by the 
DGIT (Systems) of the ITD of assessees filing the return under code ‘0105 - Drugs and 
Pharmaceuticals’. It was observed that data provided by the DGIT (Systems) was 
incomplete as many Pharmaceutical manufacturing units indicated in the Directory of 
Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Units in India did not exist in the database.  Thus, ITD 
along with Departme nt of Pharmaceuticals and Drug Control Department ( DCD) did not 
maintain complete sector wise/industry -wise data of assessees engaged in 
Pharmaceuticals sector. In absence of sector/trade wise data, it would not be able to 
analyse the various aspects relat ing to policy formation, revenue foregone on particular 
sector/trade, contribution of such sector in tax revenue and the contribution of such 
sector is in tune with their growth etc. 
7. When asked about the reasons for not maintaining complete sector -wise/industry-
wise database of Pharmaceutical Sector, the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Revenue) in their written replies submitted as under: 
"The Sector-wise data can be obtained using 'nature of business code available in 
the respective Income Tax return (I TR). The business code for 'Drugs and 
Pharmaceutical Industries' is 0105. However, in case of an entity having 
diversified businesses, it becomes difficult to capture sector wise data since the 
Income Tax Return captures a consolidated Profit and Loss stat ement and a 
Consolidated Balance Sheet and it may not be possible to fully isolate only the 

 
 
 
 
P&L A/c and Balance Sheet for a Pharmaceutical division/unit/line in a diversified 
company. 
Further, the Revenue forgone statement of each year's budget document (referred 
to as Statement of Revenue Impact of Tax Incentives under the Central Tax 
System in Budget), does contain sector wise data relating to revenue impact of 
direct tax incentives in respect of various sectors such as telecommunication, 
power, infrastructure, mineral oil & natural gas, housing, food processing etc. 
Appendix to Statement also enlists the effective direct tax rate in more than 70 
sectors. As per the Statement of Revenue Impact of Tax Incentives under the 
Central Tax System 2015 -16, the eff ective tax rate in the manufacturing of drugs 
and pharmaceuticals sector is 19.47%." 
8. The Committee sought to know as to how in the absence of such a database, the 
Department of Revenue could monitor the assessees engaged in Pharmaceutical sector. 
In response, the Ministry replied that the assessing officers/field formations monitor the 
advance tax payment of big taxpayers in their charge which also include entities from 
Pharmaceutical sector. 
9. As regards the steps taken by the Ministry for instituting a mech anism for 
compilation of sector-wise data, the Ministry stated that sector specific data is captured in 
the ITR Form subject to constraints and capturing further data would lead to complexity 
in Return Forms and shall hamper ease of doing business. 
10. In thei r reply to a query raised by the Members on this issue during evidence, 
Secretary, Department of Revenue deposed before the Committee that "If it is 
specifically required, we can find it out but generally we do not maintain such data." 
11. In this regard, Chai rperson, CBDT in his deposition before the Committee stated 
that "we are starting a new project called insight, which is exclusively for data mining. 
This is under preparation. We are going to start that project for data mining from next 
year onwards." 
 
IV  Allowance of R&D expenditure without approval from DSIR 
12. The due date for filing return of income under the Act is 30th September in respect 
of company not having international transactions. Thus, companies claim R&D 
expenditure in its return of income be fore getting approval of DSIR. The reason being 
that the due date for filing return of income of such assessee companies precedes the 
date of forwarding of approved Form 3CL report, i.e. 31st December by Department of 
Scientific and Industrial Research ( DSIR) to Director General of Income Tax  (DGIT) 
(Exemptions). Therefore, R&D expenditure are claimed by assessee companies and 
allowed by the ITD in summary processing, before such expenditure is being approved 

 
 
 
 
by DSIR. In CIT-II Delhi Charge , the assessee M/s Modi Mundipharma Pvt. Ltd   claimed 
and ITD allowed weighted deduction under Section 35(2AB) of ` Rs. 3.15 crore in AY 
2011-12 completed in January 2014. Audit observed that AO allowed the claim without 
verifying the form 3CL as Form 3CL was issued by D SIR in April 2014. Thus, the ITD 
allowed weighted deduction under Section 35(2AB) before approval of DSIR. Reply wa s 
awaited (October 2014). The date of forwarding of approved Form 3CL by DSIR to DGIT 
(Exemptions) should be prior to the due date of filing of ITR. 
 
13. The Committee desired to know about the steps being taken by the Ministry to 
devise a mechanism wherein the copy of Form 3CM/3CL duly approved by the DSIR is 
invariably attached with the Income Tax Return to verify the genuineness of the 
expenditure. In their written reply, the Ministry submitted as follows: 
"With effect from 01.07.2016, CBDT has made substantial changes in Rule 6 of 
Income-tax Rules, 1962 so that possibility of recurrence of lapses as pointed out 
by the Audit is minimized. The ame nded Rule would enable the Department to 
keep a track on claim of weighted deduction by the concerned taxpayer and 
whether the conditions subject to which approval was allowed to it, are being 
fulfilled or not. These can be summarized as under: 
 
i. The Prescribed Authority i.e. Secretary, DSIR is required to submit its report in 
Form No. 3CL electronically to the concerned jurisdictional 
Pr.CCIT/CCIT/Pr.DGIT/DGIT. Earlier, in all cases, report of DSIR was to be 
submitted manually to the Principal DGIT(Exemp tions) who was not the 
jurisdictional Income-tax Authority in many of such cases and hence, there was a 
possibility that these reports/approvals did not reach the correct jurisdiction. The 
new provision, therefore, ensures proper transmission of the report  to enable 
verification of claim of weighted deduction, if required, under section 35(2AB) of 
the Income-tax Act made by the taxpayer in the return of income. 
 
ii. Post approval of DSIR, the concerned taxpayer is required to submit a duly 
audited report, electronically, in Form No. 3CLA to the Secretary, DSIR within the 
timeframe prescribed under the Act for filing return of income under section 139(1) 
of the Act, unlike earlier, when a manual report was to be submitted to the 
Secretary, DSIR by 31st October of each year. This change would enable DSIR to 
keep a track of compliance requirements being fulfilled by the concerned 
taxpayer. In case of possible infringement, the same would also get reported to 
the Income-tax Department quickly in electronic mode." 
 
14. On being asked as to whether the Ministry have examined the possibility of linking 
of the approval of the DSIR, available with DGIT (Exemption with the Income Tax 
Return), the Ministry submitted as follows: 
"Earlier, in all cases, report of DSIR was to b e submitted manually to the Principal 
DGIT(Exemptions) who was not the jurisdictional Income -tax Authority in many of 
such cases and hence, there was a possibility that this reports/approval did not 
reach the correct jurisdiction. The new provision, theref ore, ensures proper 

 
 
 
 
transmission of the report to enable verification of claim of weighted deduction, if 
required, under section 35(2AB) of the Income -tax Act made by the taxpayer in 
the return of income." 
15. In this regard, Chairperson, CBDT in his depositio n before the Committee stated 
that "After many consultation with the DSIR, we have changed the Rule 6 altogether, we 
have changed the formats and within 120 days, this will come, and after that, the 
suspension will take place. So, henceforth, there is no c hance of allowing any deduction 
like this before getting the DSIR report". 
 
16. The Committee further desired to know about the tax incentive in case of R&D 
and why the industrialists are keen to take tax incentives in case of R&D sector. In 
response, representatives of the Ministry replied during evidence as follows: 
"We have to Phase out those deductions. From this year, it will be 150 percent 
and from 2021 it will be actual expenditure, which is done on that particular item." 
 
V Deduction of TDS in respect o f contract entered by assessee company with 
a manufacturing company for manufacture of products. 
17. The Committee found that the Pharmaceutical companies , by just not supplying 
raw materials directly to the contract manufacturers,  treated such contracts as s upply 
contracts and did not pay TDS taking advantage of exclusion clause of Section 194C. 
But they made binding conditions for contractors about source and price of raw materials 
to be purchased, rights of inspection and control over production process, co ntrolled final 
price and exclusive buying rights etc. On termination of such contracts, the contract 
manufacturer were required to return technical know -how and all papers, documents, 
data etc. back to the Pharmaceutical company. Thus entire control of man ufacturing 
process remained with the Pharmaceutical companies which made it akin to works 
contract only, attracting TDS.  Thus, the relevant amount of tax was not collected in 
advance from such manufacturers through the deductors. In absence of the individu al 
contract details, Audit could not work out the amount of TDS deductible. In CIT -VIII, 
Mumbai Charge for the Assessment Year 2010 -11 the assessee M/s Pfizer Ltd.  entered 
into an agreement for manufacturing its patented pharmaceutical products with 
manufacturers such as Snehal Foods & Feeds, Medibios Laboratories Pvt. Ltd., Kemwell 
Pvt. Ltd. and Geno Pharmaceuticals Ltd., in Maharashtra. There were conditions in the 
agreement of procurement of raw material from the list of approved sources, selling of 
specific quantities of products as ordered by the Pfizer Ltd. on pre -determined prices. 
Audit observed that the manufacturer neither had the liberty to procure the materials from 

 
 
 
 
other suppliers nor had the freedom to sell the manufactured products to other 
customers or to determine price himself. However, Pfizer Ltd. was not deducting TDS on 
value of works done by the manufacturer by treating these contracts as sell contracts. 
Due to non availability of the exact details under ass essment/tax effect could not be 
quantified. 
 
18. The Committee sought to know as to how the Department ensure that the 
Pharmaceutical companies deduct the TDS on payments made to contract 
manufacturers and whether any action has been initiated in this regard. The Ministry in 
their written replies submitted as under: 
"It is to state that  with effect from 1.10.2009, a distinction has been made in 'work 
contracts' and 'sale contracts' on the basis of who is supplying the material for 
manufacturing. The C&AG have recommended that instructions may be issued by 
CBDT to include such contracts within the definition of 'work contract ' where the 
entire control of the manufacturing process vests with the assessee/customer. 
The C&AG has relied on only one case law, which relates to AY 1997 -98 apart 
from its own findings on facts during the audit process. 
It is submitted that the recommendations of the C&AG, as contained in point No.3 
of the Draft report, are not acceptable for the following reasons: 
(i) There is lack of adequate material to warrant intr oduction of another criterion 
for distinguishing work contract from sale contract. 
(ii) The legal ambiguity that existed before 2009 has already been addressed by 
the 2009 amendment; 
(iii) Implementation of the C&AG's suggestions would require legislative change in 
Section 194C. 
In view of the facts stated above, no Instruction as recommended in the Report 
can be issued by the CBDT." 
VI Mechanism for cross verification  of turnover declared in Income Tax Return 
with the turnover declared in Excise Return 
19. Manufacturers paying more than one crore rupees as Central Excise duty are 
required to file annual information in Form ER 4 under rule 12(2)(a) of the Central Excise 
Rules, 2002. This form contained details of quantity & value of raw materials as well as 
of quantity & value of finished goods. As the Central Excise and ITD both belong to the 
Ministry of Finance, ITD should have correlated/link the turnover of the assessees 
claiming exemptions /deductions as declared in Income Tax records (viz. 10CEB) with 
that of ER-4 for deepening the tax base. Such correlation/linking was easily possible in 
case of Large Taxpayer Unit (LTU) which is a single window clearance point for three 

 
 
 
 
taxes i.e. Income Tax, Central Excise & Service Tax and thereby data to be 
correlated/linked was readily available to the AOs. 
 
20. Audit test checked in 14 States and observed that there was no mechanism with 
the ITD to cross -verify the turnover declared in ITR with the turnover declared in Central 
Excise Return. In absence of such cross -verification of turnover, possibility of revenue 
leakage in the form of incorrect deduction claimed under the provisions of the Act cannot 
be ruled out. 
 
21. On being asked about the steps taken by the Ministry to develop a mechanism to 
cross verify the turnover dec lared by a company in the ITR with the turnover declared in 
Central Excise Return, the Ministry stated as follows: 
"As regards creating a mechanism for compulsory obtaining Form ER 4 from the 
assessee in order to compare the turnover declared under Central  Excise and 
Income tax it may be submitted that, under the Income -tax Act, 1961 under 
section 142(1) the assessing officer is authorised to obtain information during the 
course of assessment. Further, under section 133 such information may be 
obtained from  the other agency (CBEC) during pendency of any proceedings. 
Thus, already a mechanism exists for obtaining all information including Form ER -
4. 
Further, compulsory furnishing such forms by assessee will only increase -the 
compliance burden of the assessee which will increase compliance cost and it will 
create unnecessary hurdles for voluntary compliance and ease of doing business. 
It is the endeavour of the department to minimize compliance burden and increase 
tax base thereby. As a balance needs to be str uck between compliance burden 
and revenue leakages, suitable safe guards are already provided under section 
142(1) and 133 of the Income -tax Act, 1961 to obtain information wherever 
necessary. 
Further, under section 44AB of Income -Tax Act, every year, taxp ayers whose 
income exceeds the monetary limit prescribed therein or those who are not 
engaged in businesses specified therein are required to get their books of 
accounts compulsorily audited. Such a report of audit is required to be filed 
electronically wi th the Income -Tax Department within the time frame prescribed 
under section 139(1) of the IT Act. Therefore, the turnover declared by the 
taxpayer before the Central Excise Department is by and large captured 
satisfactorily in such reports of audit. Since books of accounts are common, the 
figure of turnover gets similarly reported before both the authorities while filing 
respective returns. 
In cases under scrutiny, the Assessing Officer, depending on specific 
requirements of the case can also call for such information from the concerned 
assessee or may verify it independently from the concerned Excise authorities. 
It may be further mentioned that in Income -Tax return, the taxpayers are required 
to file a statement of all taxes paid or payable to the Governme nt. Thus, the 

 
 
 
 
turnover, so declared in Central Excise, gets captured, indirectly, in Income Tax 
also. 
However in view of the Audit observation, an MOU was entered into with CBEC 
on 30.11.2015 on exchange of information. The details of ER -4 are now being 
obtained from CBEC. Wherever required the Excise turnover as per ER -4 and 
turnover as per profit & loss account of Income-tax return are being compared."  
 
Chapter 3 - Compliance Issues 
 
Section A - Inadmissible expenses related to Pharmaceutical Sector 
 
VII Allowance of expenditure towards gifts, freebies etc. to Medical 
Professionals  
 
22. As per explanation to Section 37(1) of the  Income Tax Act, any expenditure for a 
purpose which is an offence or which is prohibited by law is not an allowable business 
expense. MCI vide its regulations of 2002 provided that medical practitioners should 
prescribe generic drugs as far as possible. It inter -alia prohibited them to solicit or 
receive any commission, gifts etc. for any approval or recommendation, endorsement of 
any medicine or drug for advertisement purpose or for referring or recommending any 
patient any medical, surgical or other treatment. Vide amendment dated 10 December 
2009, Pharmaceutical companies were specifically prohibited to give any consideration in 
the nature of gifts, travel facilities, hospitality, cash or monetary grants etc. CBDT issued 
a circular in 2012 and clarified that such expenses would not be allowable. Judicial 
pronouncement also clarified that this circular had retrospective effect. Thus, the AOs 
have not adopted uniform approach in disallowance against freebies given to doctors 
and uniform treatment for effective date from which such payments, as prohibited against 
law or not related to business, wer e disallowable. Audit noticed 36 cases in 07 States  in 
which the AO had allowed the expenses which were in the nature of freebies given to 
Doctors involving tax effect of ` 55.10 crore. 
 
23. When asked about the reasons for allowing expenses which were in the nature of 
freebies given to doctors in 36 cases in seven States, involving tax effect of ` 55.10 
crore, the Ministry replied as under: 
"As per the clarificatory circular of CBDT No. 5/2012 dated 01.08.2012, any 
expenditure incurred by an entity engaged in pharmaceuticals business in 
providing g ifts, travel facilities, hospitality, cash or monetary grant (termed as 
freebies) which is prohibited by The Indian Medical Council (Professional 
Conduct, Etiquette and Ethics) Regulations 2002 as amended on 10.12.2009 (the 
MCI guidelines) is not an allowa ble business expenditure under the Act. The AOs 

 
 
 
 
are required to duly take into consideration the above position of law. Therefore, 
from policy perspective, no specific intervention is required. However, if any lapse 
has occurred on the part of the AO, adequate provisions exist for taking necessary 
remedial measures. In specific cases pointed out by the C&AG the action is being 
taken separately." 
 
24. In regard to the action initiated against the concerned Assessing Officers who 
have violated the CBDT circular o f 2012, the Ministry stated that directions have been 
issued to the Chief Commissioners of Income Tax to issue advisory to the officers 
concerned in suitable cases. 
 
VIII Breakup of expenditure on freebies/gifts not taken from sales promotion 
expenses 
 
25. Pharmaceutical companies routinely incur expenses on freebies and gifts to the 
medical professionals. Hence, during scrutiny assessment proceedings, the AOs seek 
break up of sales promotion expenses, identify expenses on freebies and disallow the 
same. By not  doing so, such expenses are allowed as a part of sales promotion 
expenses. Despite the fact that such prohibited expenses by Pharmaceuticals 
companies to Doctors are a routine industry practice, the AOs did not disallow expenses 
on freebies by seeking det ails of such expenses under the head sales promotion 
expenses.  Audit noticed 11 cases in Uttaranchal and Maharashtra in which the AOs had 
allowed the expenses on freebies given to Doctors included in sales promotion without 
examination of the detailed breakup. 
 
26. As regards the steps taken to evolve a mechanism for the assessees to provide 
details of expenditure in the nature of freebies under sales promotion expenses for 
claiming the deduction, the Ministry in their written replies stated as under: 
 
"The assessees are reporting such expenses in their Profit & Loss account under 
the head "Sales Promotion" which is a part of the mandatory Audit Report 
attached with the Return of income filed. During the course of scrutiny 
proceedings detailed examination of th ese expenses is carried out, and if any 
expenditure is not in accordance with the MCI guidelines the same is disallowed 
and added back to the taxable income of the taxpayer." 
  
 Section - B - Compliance issues in Pharmaceutical Sector 
 
IX Allocation of R&D/other common expenses 
 
27. Section 37 of the Act provides for the deduction of business expenses from the 
income of the assessee, to arrive at the gross profit. Depending upon the benefit accrued 

 
 
 
 
from any expense to a specific unit or more than one unit or al l the units of the assessee, 
the particular expense is required to be allocated to the beneficiary unit(s) either on 
actual basis or on the basis of their sales turnover ratios. Audit noticed 15 cases in 
Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu in which the AOs had allowed the 
allocation of common and R&D expenses without proper examination of the same 
involving tax effect of ` 121.21 crore. This indicated that the ITD has not put in place a 
foolproof system to ensure that common expenses or weighted dedu ctions from R&D, 
which the exempted / non exempted units and multi locational units benefit from, were 
allocated properly to all the beneficiary units and undue exemptions/deductions 
/concessions were not claimed. 
 
28. On being asked as to how the Ministry wil l ensure that allocation of all common 
expenses or weighted deduction has been done correctly and what mechanism has been 
evolved to avoid such incidents in future, the Ministry stated as follows: 
"With effect from 01.07.2016, CBDT has made substantial cha nges in Rule 6 of 
Income-tax Rules, 1962 so that possibilities of recurrence of lapses as pointed out 
by the Audit are minimized. The amended Rule would enable the Department to 
keep a track on claim of weighted deduction by the concerned taxpayer and 
whether the conditions subject to which approval was allowed to it are being 
fulfilled or not. These can be summarized as under: 
i.  The Prescribed Authority i.e. Secretary, DSIR is required to submit its report in 
Form No. 3CL electronically to the concerned jurisdictional 
Pr.CCIT/CCIT/Pr.DGIT/DGIT. Earlier, in all cases, report of DSIR was to be 
submitted manually to the Principal DGIT(Exemptions) who was not the 
jurisdictional Income-tax Authority in many of such cases and hence, there was a 
possibility that  these reports/approval did not reach the correct jurisdiction. The 
new provision, therefore, ensures proper transmission of the report to enable 
verification of claim of weighted deduction, if required, under section 35(2AB) of 
the Income-tax Act made by the taxpayer in the return of income. 
ii. Post approval of DSIR, the concerned taxpayer is required to submit a duly 
audited report, electronically, in Form No. 3CLA to the Secretary, DSIR within the 
timeframe prescribed under the Act for filing return of income under section 139(1) 
of the Act, unlike earlier, when a manual report was to be submitted to the 
Secretary, DSIR by 31st October of each year. This change would enable DSIR to 
keep a proper track of compliance requirements being fulfilled by the con cerned 
taxpayer. In case of possible infringement, the same would also get reported to 
the Income-tax Department quickly in electronic mode." 
29. As regards the steps initiated to indicate the basis of allocation of common 
expenses in the assessment records, the Ministry stated as under: 
"As per Rule 6 in the Income Tax Rules, the Secretary DSIR is the prescribed 
Authority, who shall furnish the certificate in Form 3CL regarding R&D expenses, 
on the basis of which these expenses shall be allowed in the assessme nts. This 

 
 
 
 
form is to be sent by the Secretary DSIR electronically within a prescribed limit to 
the jurisdictional authority." 
X Allowance of concessions/deductions/rebates/relief 
30. Audit noticed 26 cases in 13 States in which the AO had allowed the 
concessions/deductions/rebates/relief without proper examination of the same involving 
tax effect of `158.89 crore. Thus, the ITD was not having a system of inbuilt checks to 
ensure that deductions /concessions/exemptions/rebates/relief are thoroughly scrutinized 
before being allowed by the AOs. 
 
31. Apprising the Committee about the specific reasons for such mistakes, the 
Ministry submitted that: 
"The mistakes are unintentional, due to oversight, heavy pressure of work, and 
time limitation of completing large number of  assessments. The mistakes are 
corrected through appropriate remedial actions as soon as they come to the 
notice of concerned assessing officer." 
 
32. In order to avoid such lapses in future, the Ministry stated that: 
"The assessing officers are imparted train ing regularly where they are sensitized 
on such issues. Regular courses are conducted by the National Academy of 
Direct Taxes, Nagpur, and the Regional Training Institutes to the assessing 
officers, wherein all issues on assessments are exhaustively covere d. Recently 
CBDT has also initiated the exercise to revise all the existing Manuals on different 
subjects, including Audit Manual 2011. The Committee for Review of Audit Manual 
has to submit its report by 31.01.2018." 
 
XI Setting off/carry forward of depreciation/business loss/capital loss 
 
33. Audit noticed in 28 cases in 11 States in which the AO had allowed business 
expenditure in contravention to the laid down provisions involving tax effect of ` 27.77 
crore.  This indicated that the AOs allowed setting off /carry forward of 
depreciation/business loss/capital loss without doing proper scrutiny of the details 
available / required for the purpose, which was in contravention of the provisions of the 
Act. 
 
34. While furnishing their justification in this regard, the Ministry stated as follows: 
"The carry forward/set -off of earlier year business losses/depreciation losses is 
allowed after verification from earlier years records. Sometimes, the earlier years 
records are not readily available, as they are sent in appeal proceedings, and in 
such situations the losses claimed by the assessee are likely to be allowed. This 
has to be avoided. Also due to excessive workload or as a result of oversight such 
mistakes do take place. The same are rectified the moment they are brou ght to 
the notice of the Department." 

 
 
 
 
PART II 
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
1. Indian Pharmaceuticals Industry has witnessed a robust growth over the 
past few years. The industry ranks 3 rd in terms of volume and is 14 th in terms of 
value globally thereby accounting for around 10 per cent of world's production by 
volume and 1.5 per cent by value. It has shown tremendous progress in terms of 
infrastructure development, technology base creation and a wide range of 
products. It has established its presence an d determination to flourish in the 
changing environment. The industry now produces bulk drugs belonging to all 
major therapeutic groups requiring complicated manufacturing technologies.  This 
has resulted in a robust growth since the beginning of the 11th P lan in 2007 from 
about ` 71,000 crore to over  ` 1,21,015 crore in 2012 -13 comprising some ` 65,323 
crore of domestic market and exports of over ` 55,692 crore , thereby making it a 
vital economic sector with corresponding potential for Government revenue.  
Considering the robust growth in pharmaceutical industry in the last four years 
and the Government support in the form of fiscal incentives i.e. deduction against 
business profits in the Income Tax Act and concessional rate of excise duties and 
State VAT, Audit felt it appropriate to select Pharmaceutical sector for 
performance evaluation to seek assurance that exemptions and deductions 
allowable to Pharmaceuticals Sector under Income Tax Act, 1961 (Act) have been 
allowed as per entitlement and there exists  a proper machinery to exercise 
necessary checks/controls in the area of probable misuse of the provisions 
relating to tax concessions. 
2. The performance Audit  Report No. 5  of 2015 of C&AG on  "Assessment of 
Assessees in Pharmaceuticals Sector" and the Commit tee's examination of the 
issues have revealed plethora of deficiencies in systemic issues as well as 
compliance issues relating to assessment of assessees in Pharmaceuticals 
sector. It contains (i) ITD did not maintain data of incentives given to the 
Pharmaceuticals Sector and hence the impact of such incentives could not be 
assessed. The ITD also did not maintain database of the assessee s in the 
Pharmaceuticals sector ignoring its importance for planning and decision making.  
Hence, the Audit could not assess the impact of revenue foregone in growth of the 
industry; (ii) In 22 cases in six States involving tax effect of ` 570.59 crore where 

 
 
 
 
weighted deduction on expenses towards R&D was allowed without verifying the 
claims from the form 3CL/3CM issued by Department of Scientific & Industrial 
Research ( DSIR) or from the website of DSIR who is the competent authority to 
grant approval of such claims ; (iii) The assessees have not paid TDS by taking 
advantage of exclusion clause of Section 194C in respect of con tract 
manufacturers by treating thes e contracts as supply contracts ; (iv) In 17 cases 
involving tax effect of ` 8.51 crore where assessees took advantage of ambiguous 
provisions related to salary and interest payment to its partners by not providing 
the same in the partnership deed and thereby taking undue be nefit of Section 80IC 
deduction; (v) ITD does not have any mechanism to correlate and verify, carried 
forward of losses/depreciation especially of the unit availing 80IC deductions. ITD 
also does not have any mechanism to correlate and verify the turnover declared in 
Income Tax returns with the turnover declared in Central Excise returns whi ch is 
part of the same Ministry ; (vi) In 36 cases involving tax effect of ` 55.10 crore in 
seven States where the e xpenditure towards gifts/freebies to medical 
professionals were allowed despite being prohibited  by law/not related to 
business; (vii) In 171 cases in 17 States involving tax effect of ` 714.24 crore, of 
general nature, which included mistakes in allowing business expenditure, R&D 
expenses, and allocation of such expenses among the units benefitting from such 
research and development, inconsistency in asses sments, arithmetical errors etc ; 
and (viii) There are systemic issues such as need for evolving a syst em of sector -
wise data for tax planning, misuse of the ambiguities in the legal 
provisions/lacunae in the Act, lapses by the ITD . These irregularities involving tax 
effect of hundreds of crore of rupees have been examined by the Committee in 
detail in the succeeding Paragraphs. 
Non-maintenance of Sector-wise/Industry-wise data 
3. The Committee are constrained to observe that ITD did not maintain sector -
wise/industry-wise data of assessees engaged in Pharmaceuticals sector. Thus, in 
absence of sector/trade wise data, the Committee would not be able to analyse the 
various aspects relating to policy formation, revenue foregone in this sector, 
contribution of such sector in tax revenue and whether the contribution of such 
sector is in tune with their growth etc. In  this regard the Committee have been 
informed by the Ministry that the sector -wise data can be obtained using nature of 
business code available in the respective Income Tax Return (ITR). The Ministry 

 
 
 
 
have further informed that it may not be possible to fully isolate only the Profit and 
Loss (P&L) account and Balance sheet for a pharmaceutical division/unit/line in a 
diversified company. They further informed that the assessing officers/field 
formations monitor the advance tax payment of big tax payers in th eir charge 
which also include entities from Pharmaceuticals sector. The Ministry submitted 
that sector specific data is captured in the ITR Form subject to certain constraints 
and capturing further data would lead to complexity in Return Forms and shall 
hamper ease of doing business. The Committee view seriously of the scant 
attention paid by the Income Tax authorities in the compilation of such vital data 
having large repercussion and loss in the collection of tax from Pharmaceutical 
sector. It is astonish ing that such an important area involving substantial revenue 
to the national exchequer was left ignored by non -maintenance of reliable data of 
tax payers in this sector. During evidence Secretary revenue stated that "if it is 
specifically required we can find it out". The Committee have further been 
informed during evidence that the Ministry are starting a new project called 
'insight' from next year, which is exclusively meant for data mining. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the present status o f commissioning of 
this project and recommend that henceforth a comprehensive data of 
Pharmaceuticals sector be maintained not only for helping in tax planning and 
making sector specific policy but also for proper accounting and collection of the 
taxes fro m this sector. The Committee, also desire the Department of Scientific 
and Industrial Research and National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority to capture 
PAN details of the sector to facilitate its linking with ITRs. 
 Allowance of R&D expenditure without app roval from Department of 
Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR) 
4. The Committee find 22 cases in six States involving tax effect of ` 570.59 
crore where weighted deduction on expenses towards R&D was allowed without 
verifying the claims from the Form 3C/3 CM issued by Department of Scientific and 
Industrial Research (DSIR) who is the competent authority to grant approval of 
such claims. The Committee further notice that due to date of filing of return 
preceding the date of approval of R&D expenditure, as cl aimed in the return, by 
DSIR, such claims are allowed by the ITD before/without its approval. In this 
regard, the Committee have been apprised that with effect from 01.07.2016, CBDT 
has made substantial changes in Rule 6 of Income -Tax Rules, 1962 which wou ld 

 
 
 
 
enable the Department of Revenue to keep a track on claim of weighted deduction 
by the concerned tax payer and whether the conditions subject to which approval 
was allowed to it, are being fulfilled or not . The new provision also ensures proper 
transmission of the report to enable verification of claim of weighted deduction, if 
required, under section 35 (2AB) of the Income -Tax Act made by the taxpayers in 
the return of income. So, henceforth, there is no chance of allowing any deduction 
like this before  getting the DSIR Report. On being asked as to why the 
industrialists are keen to take tax incentives in case of R&D sector, the 
representative of the Ministry replied during evidence that they have to phase out 
those deductions and from 2021 it would be a ctual expenditure, which is done on 
that particular item. The Committee trust that Government would make an in -depth 
study before phasing out these deductions from 2021 and take further measures, 
legal or procedural as might be necessary to effectively dea l with this issue. The 
Committee would also like to be apprised of the action taken against the 
assessing officers who allowed weighted deduction on expenses towards R&D 
without verifying the claims from the Form 3CL/3CM issued by DSIR in the 
aforesaid 22 cases resulting in loss to the exchequer to the tune of ` 570.59 crore. 
 Deduction of TDS in respect of contract entered by assessee company with 
a manufacturing company for manufacture of products 
5. Section 194C of the Act provided for deduction of TDS at t he rate of two 
percent from the payment to the contractor for carrying out any work in pursuance 
of a contract between the contractor and an assessee. The Committee are 
constrained to observe that the Pharmaceutical companies, by just not supplying 
raw mat erials directly to the contract manufacturers, treated such contracts as 
supply contracts and did not pay TDS taking advantage of exclusion clause of 
Section 194C . Since entire control of manufacturing process remained with the 
Pharmaceutical companies whi ch made it akin to works contract only, attracting 
TDS, the Audit recommended that the CBDT should consider issuing instructions 
to bring under the ambit of section 194C of the Act such work contracts where the 
entire control of manufacturing process vests  with the assessee companies. In 
reply thereto, the Ministry stated (January 2015) that implementation of C&AG 
suggestion would require legislative change in Section 194C as it is possible that 
some assessees may take advantage of the definition of work co ntract as defined 
in Section 194C. The Committee are surprised at this complacent approach of the 

 
 
 
 
CBDT. The Committee are distressed to note that despite being pointed out the 
issue by the C&AG way back in 2015, no concrete steps have been taken thus far 
by the Ministry in this direction. Since a large number of potential tax payers can 
be identified in the Pharmaceutical sector, non -deduction of TDS in these cases 
resulted into huge revenue loss to the exchequer. Since the case pointed out by 
the Audit are only test checked and only tip of the iceberg, the net tax effect would 
be much detailed audit examination is done. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should take legal advice on the matter and amend the 
Section 194C of the IT Act, if r equired, at the earliest besides issuing clear 
instructions to ensure that the Pharmaceutical companies deduct the TDS on 
payments to contract manufacturers. 
 Mechanism for cross verification of turnover declared in Income Tax Return 
with the turnover declared in Excise Return 
6. Manufacturers paying more than one crore rupees as Central Excise duty 
are required to file annual information in Form ER4 under Rule 12 (2)(a) of the 
Central Excise Rules, 2002. As the Central Excise and ITD both belong to the 
Ministry of Finance, ITD should have correlated/link the turnover of the assessees 
claiming exemptions/deductions as declared in Income Tax records (viz 10CEB) 
with that of ER-4 for deepening the tax base. However, the Committee are shocked 
to note that in 14 St ates there was no mechanism with the ITD to cross -verify the 
turnover declared in ITR with the turnover declared in Central Excise Return. The 
Committee are, therefore, of the view that in the absence of such cross-verification 
of turnover, possibility of revenue leakage in the form of incorrect deduction 
claimed under the provisions of the Act cannot be ruled out. In this regard, the 
Committee have been informed that in cases under scrutiny, the Assessing 
Officer, depending on specific requirements of the case can also call such 
information from the concerned assessee or may verify it independently from the 
concerned Excise authorities. The Ministry have further stated that compulsory 
furnishing such forms by assessee will only increase the compliance burde n of 
the assessee which will increase compliance cost and create unnecessary hurdles 
for voluntary compliance and ease of doing business. The Committee are 
dismayed at this unfortunate state of affairs in the Department entrusted with the 
responsibility of  collecting due tax revenue from the assessees. However, the 
Committee have been apprised that an MOU was entered into with CBEC on 

 
 
 
 
30.11.2015 on exchange of information. The details of ER-4 are now being obtained 
from CBEC, wherever required the Excise tu rnover as per ER -4 and turnover as 
per profit and loss account of Income -Tax return are being compared . While 
welcoming the steps taken in this direction by the Ministry, the Committee hope 
that these steps will ensure in deepening the tax base of pharmace utical sector. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of such steps initiated by 
the IT Department way back in the year 2015. 
 Allowance of expenditure towards gifts, freebies etc to Medical 
Professionals 
7. The Committee observe that as per e xplanation to Section 37 (I) of the 
Income Tax Act, any expenditure for a purpose which is an offence or which is 
prohibited by law is not an allowable business expense. Medical Council of India 
(MCI) vide its regulations of 2002 provided that medical prac titioners should 
prescribe generic drugs as far as possible. It , inter-alia, prohibited them to solicit 
or receive any commission, gifts etc. for any approval or recommendation, 
endorsement of any medicine or drug for advertisement purpose or for referring or 
recommending any patient any medical, surgical or other treatment. Further, vide 
amendment dated 10 December 2009, Pharmaceutical companies were specifically 
prohibited to give any consideration in the nature of gifts, travel facilities, 
hospitality, c ash or monetary grants etc. CBDT issued a circular in 2012 and 
disallowed such expenses. The Committee are constrained to observe that in 36 
cases, involving tax effect of ` 55.10 crore in seven States where the expenditure 
towards gifts/freebies to medica l professionals were allowed despite being made 
irregular by the Income Tax Act, Medical Council of India regulations, 
CBDT/Judicial pronouncement etc. Out of 36 cases, the Committee find 21 cases 
in five States (Gujarat, Karnataka, Maharashtra, New Delhi,  Tamil Nadu) in which 
the AO had allowed the expenses which were in the nature of freebies given to 
doctors involving tax effect of ` 45.43 crore. Further, in 11 cases in Uttaranchal 
and Maharashtra the AOs had allowed the expenses on freebies given to doc tors 
included in sales promotion without examination of the detailed breakup. The 
Committee also noticed three cases in Maharashtra in which the AO had allowed 
the expenses on Physician samples given free to doctors involving tax effect of ` 
1.57 crore. Again, in one case in Andhra Pradesh the AO had allowed the expenses 
on the penalty levied by National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) 

 
 
 
 
involving tax effect of ` 8.10 crore. The Committee are failed to find any specific 
reasons for allowing such expen ses for tax deduction . The Committee have been 
informed that directions have been issued to the Chief Commissioners of Income 
Tax to issue advisory to the officers concerned in suitable cases. However,p the 
Committee find that no penal action was initiated against any of these officers who 
have failed in their duty. From the information made available to the Committee it 
is seen that the disciplinary actions are proposed to be taken against the AOs 
only. The Ministry have not offered any explanation on the role of delinquent 
senior officers. The Committee desire that the Ministry should initiate exemplary 
disciplinary action against the junior as well as senior officers connected with the 
lapses so that the principles of accountability and responsibility are  applied in 
letter and spirit. Further, the Committee are of the opinion that the assessees 
would not have succeeded in their efforts in defrauding the Government without 
the connivance of certain departmental officers. While deploring such an 
unhealthy practice in the Income Tax Department, the Committee recommend that 
not only the cases highlighted by the Audit but also similar such cases in the field 
should be thoroughly inquired into so as to find out as to how and why such 
lapses occurred, to what exte nt they were bonafide mistakes and exemplary stern 
action taken against the officers concerned. The Committee are perturbed to note 
that the AOs are taking divergent views for disallowance of expenses in the nature 
of freebies as CBDT has not clearly speci fied in its circular the effective date of 
disallowance of such expenses. Since the failure to mention the effective date in 
the circular by the CBDT led to divergent views of the AOs on a same issue result 
in litigation and finally to loss of revenue, the  Committee desire that the Ministry 
should take immediate corrective action in this regard. 
 Compliance issues in Pharmaceutical Sector 
8. The Committee observe the deficiencies in applying the provisions of the 
Income-Tax Act and relevant rules/judicial pron ouncements by the AOs during 
assessment of assessees in Pharmaceuticals sector. The Committee noticed 171 
cases, in 17 States where the provisions of the Act were not followed correctly 
results in a tax effect of ` 714.24 crore. Broad categories of mistake s in 
assessment included allocation of R&D/Common expenses, allowance of 
concessions/exemptions/deductions/rebate/relief, setting off of carry forward 
business loss/depreciation, allowance of business expenditure/R&D expenses, 

 
 
 
 
allowance of expenses on whic h TDS was not deducted/deposited, inconsistency 
in assessment, arithmetical errors in computation of income and tax, assessment 
of income under special/normal provisions, classification and computation of 
capital gains and irregularities in International T ransactions. According to the 
Ministry the mistakes are unintentional, due to oversight, heavy pressure of work 
and time limitation of completing large number of assessments and the same are 
rectified the moment they are brought to the notice of the Depart ment. The 
Committee have further been apprised that the assessing officers are imparted 
training regularly where they are sensitized on such issues. Besides, CBDT has 
also initiated the exercise to revise all the existing Manuals on different subject, 
including Audit Manual 2011. The Ministry while attributing several reasons for 
irregularities in the aforesaid cases, have not explained the lapse on the part of 
Internal Audit Wing in not having detected these cases themselves. The 
Committee exhort the Ministry to look into the reasons for failure on the part of the 
Internal Audit Wing for detecting such lapses leading to huge revenue loss to the 
exchequer and take suitable steps so as to ensure that this Wing perform 
efficiently in exercising effective contr ol to find out mistakes in assessment and 
thereby to prevent leakage of revenue. The Committee would, therefore, like to be 
apprised of the action taken by the Ministry in this regard within 6 months of the 
presentation of this report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                   MALLIKARJUN KHARGE 
   February, 2019                                                                              Chairperson, 
   Magha, 1940 (Saka)                                                 Public Accounts Committee 
 
************ 
 