52

PROCUREMENT OF ALLOPATHIC DRUGS IN CGHS

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their 220 Report (167 Lok Sabha)]

- MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

FIFTY-SECOND REPORT

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAG NO. 2085

FIFTY-SECOND REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

PROCUREMENT OF ALLOPATHIC DRUGS IN
CGHS

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Twenty-second Report (16" Lok.Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE

Presented to Lok Sabha on:

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: हैं

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

November, 2016 /Kartika, 1938 (Saka)


CONTENTS

PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS tii
COMMITTEE (2016-17)

INTRODUCTION senses snnsnnnantunsintststsennnsn tiv)
CHAPTER | 1

CHAPTER Il* Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ...... ००० ००० "बन
CHAPTER lit | Observations/Recommendations — - which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
replies received from the Government ..... ... .-- ०-१
CHAPTER IV* Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration ००००० ०४००० फिर
CHAPTER V* Observations/Recommendations . in respect of -
- which the Government have furnished interim
T@PHOS ............ ०-० तन ने लि raaeeeeeerseaertee

APPENDICES*

1 Minutes of the 12” Sitting of Public Accounts
Committee (2016-17) held on 8 September, 2016.

I Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their Twenty-
second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

*Not appended fo the eyciostyled copy of the Report Not appended fo the cyclosiyled copy ofthe Report SsS=~—Ss—s—s—sS

i)


en aanaswn

16.
47.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

Fens

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

Prof. K.V. Thomas - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
Shri Nishikant Dubey

Prof. Richard Hay

Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Smt. Riti Pathak

Shri Neiphiu Rio

Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
Shri Abhishek Singh

Dr. Kirit Somaiya

Shri Anurag Singh Thakur ~
Shri Shivkumar 0. Udasi

Dr. ?. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA ©

Shri Naresh Agrawal

Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi

* Shri Bhupender Yadav
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Shri Shantaram Naik

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
Shri Ajay Sancheti

SECRETARIAT
Shri A.K. Singh - Additionat Secretary
Shri S.C, Chaudhary - Joint Secretary

Shri TJayakumar = - Director

Smt. Anju Kukreja —- Under Secretary

* Blected w.¢.f. 09.08.2016 vice Shri Vijay Goet, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f, 05.07.2016.

(1४)


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson; Public Accounts Committee (2016-17), having been
authorised by the Committee, de present this Fifty-second Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained jin their Twenty-Second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha} on
‘Procurement of Allopathic Drugs in CGHS" relating to Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare. ; ;

2. The Twenty-second Report was presented to Lok Sabha/iaid in Rajya Sabha on
13 August, 2015. Replies of the Government to all the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report were received. The Public Accounts Committee considered and
adopted the Fifty-second Report at their sitting held on 8 September, 2016. Minutes of
the sifting are given at Appendix I.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.

74, The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptrofier and Auditor Generat of India.

5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is
given at Appendix-ti. |

NEW DELHI; PROF. K.V. THOMAS
16 November, 2016 हि Chairperson,

25 Karttka, 4938 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


REPORT

PART -।

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deats with the Action Taken by the

Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their Twenty-Second Report (16" Lok Sabha) on "Procurement of Allopathic Drugs in

CGHS".

2.

The Twenty-Second Report which was presented to Lok Sabha on 13" August,

- 2015, contained 16 Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken Notes on all the

Observations/ Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Health and

Family Welfare and are categorized as under:

()

)

(iil)

Observations/Recommendations ‘which have been accepted by the
Government:

Para Nos. 4, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11,12,13,14 & 15

Total: 13
. Chapter - fl
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to

pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:

Para Nos. NIL

Totals. NIL
Chapter - lfl
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the

Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration: ;

Para Nos. 2, 16

Total: 2
Chapter - IV


(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have

furnished interim replies/no replies:

Para No. 8
Total: 1
Chapter -V
3. The Committee's examination of the subject 'Procurement of Allopathic drugs in

CGHS' relating to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare revealed several
shortcomings in the procurement and distribution of medicines such as opting for
commonly prescribed brands of drugs instead of identifying commonly prescribed drug
composition, procurement of drugs not listed in the formulary, non-finalisation of
procurement rates of drugs listed in the formulary, inadequate and incomplete drug |
formulary, delays in procurement of drugs, procuring higher priced branded drugs
despite availability of low cost brands, branded drugs continue to be preferred over

Generic drugs etc.

4, The Committee had accordingly given their Observations/Recommendations in
the 220 Report (16 Lok Sabha). The gist of important Qbservations/
Recommendations as contained in the Report are given as under:

() Ministry should formulate a comprehensive and more reliable policy for
procurement of drugs in CGHS so as to ensure that the entire procurement
process becomes more transparent.

(i} = Mfnistry should ensure that ail the CGHS Wellness Centres maintain their
formularies and update them at regular intervals. The Committee had also
emphasized the imperative need for regular inspections of the Wellness Centres
as well as prompt action on the complaints/grievances received from CGHS
beneficiaries on the matter.

(iii) Stringent measures are needed for evolving an effective and transparent
mechanism to keep an eye on the errant doctors.

(iv) Earnest and concerted efforts should be taken to ensure speedy finalisation of
Procurement rates of drugs.


(vy) Ministry, in coordination with CGHS Wellness Centres should effectively
implement the long-term measures for complete shift towards the procurement
and distribution of Generic drugs,

(vi) Ministry should consider the setting up of a strong on-line surveillance system as
well as a team of inspectors with emphasis on surprise inspections of the
Weliness Centres.

(शी) The Committee had impressed upon the Ministry to carry out periodical
inspections of manufacturers as well as the local chemists and exemplary action
taken against them so that any possibility of supply of sub-standard medicines to
the patients is eliminated. ;

(viii) Periodical inspections of the stores of Wellness Centres should be done with a
view to prevent the stockpiling of medicines and replacing the expired stock with
the fresh one.

{ix} Manufacture, supply and sale of spurious/adulterated drugs should be dealt with
most stringent penalties. /

(x) The Ministry should conduct a study of the best health care systems and models
in different countries both developed and developing countries and fry to emulate
them in order to ensure supply and availability of quality medicines at affordable
prices in the country.

5. The Action Taken Notes furnished by Ministry of Health & Family Welfare in
respect of all the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee as contained in
their Twenty-second Report (16" Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant
chapters of this Report. The Committee desire that Government shouid furnish
finalfconclusive action taken replies to the Recommendations for which interim replies
have been furnished. The Committee will now deal with the. action taken by the
Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations made in their Twenty-
second Report (16 Lok Sabha), which need reiteration or merit comments.

I. Shortcomings in pracurerment of medicines in CGHS
(Recommendation Para No. 2)

6. The Public Accounts Committee in their 24 Report (157 Lok Sabha) on
"Procurement of medicines and medical Equipments" had deliberated upon various


shortcomings in the procedure of procurement of medicines/medical equipment and
given observations/recommendations such as bringing in the Codified Purchase
Manual, exploring the feasibility of doing away with the local purchase of drugs
altogether, strengthening the Monitoring mechanism, initiating exemplary action against
the errant doctors, codifying and adopting a defined process for annual updation of
medicine selection and periodical revision of CGHS formularies in order to make the
MSO corruption free and wipe out the menace of spurious/adulterated drugs etc. Upon
noticing that though these recommendations were accepted by the Government, the
shortcomings in the drugs procurement system in CGHS remained unresolved, the
Committee exhorted the Ministry to urgently address the deficiencies pointed out and
initiate the requisite and urgent measures so as to effectively resolve the shortcomings
in the drugs procurement system in CGHS.

7. The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare in their Action Taken Note have stated
as under: है

"The views of the Committee are noted; and it is admitted that there is need to
remove the perceived shortcomings in the procurement system of the CGHS."

8. In their 2207 Report (16"" Lok Sabha) the Committee had exhorted the
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare to urgently address the deficiencies pointed
out in procurementidistribution of allopathic medicines in CGHS and initiate the
requisite and urgent measures so as fo effectively resolve the shortcomings in
the drugs procurement system in CGHS. The Committee feel that the Ministry
have furnished an evasive reply which merely states that the views of the
Committee are noted. Although they have admitted that there is need to remove
the perceived shortcomings in the procurement system of the CGHS, however,
the reply is silent about the specific action taken by the Ministry to remove these
shortcomings. This also clearly shows fack of urgency on the part of the Ministry .
to remedy the situation. Keeping in view the glaring tapses in procurement and
distribution of drugs resulting in huge infructuous and avoidable expenditure, the
Committee deplore the skewed approach on the part of the Ministry and desire to
have a complete and detailed reply from them indicating the action taken within

two months of presentation of this report.


IE. Opting for higher priced brands despite availability of low cost brands
(Recommendation No, 3) .

9. The Committee were concerned to note that test check by Audit of 21 cases in
the branded drug formulary revealed availability of several low-cost brands in the same
category of drugs. It was also found that even the discounted price of the selected
brand was much higher than the MRP of other low cost brands available in the market.
The Committee were utterly dismayed to find that the comparison of price of these 21
test checked brands with other brands of identical available drugs indicated that CGHS
Delhi incurred avoidable expenditure of % 9.25 crore during 2011-12 by opting for higher
priced brands. However, the Committee had been assured by the Ministry that only L-1
(lowest priced) out of the tender for branded formulary would be considered and other
brands of the same composition would not be purchased. While observing that still there
was ample scope for further improvement in the procurement system, the Committee
had impressed upon the Ministry to formulate a comprehensive and more reliable policy
for procurement of drugs in CGHS so as fo ensure that the entire procurement process
becomes more transparent.

10. The Ministry of Health & Famity Welfare in their ATN have stated as under:

"There are four channels for procurement of drugs for the CGHS as follows:
4. Pilot Project;

2. Procurement through MSO;

3. Procurement of Life Saving drugs through MSO, CGHS; and

4. Locat purchase. ;

Details about these modes of procurement have been furnished to Lok Sabha
Secretariat, PAC Branch. vide this Ministry's Office Memorandum No.
G.2501 1/1/2013-CGHS (P) dated 21st April, 2015.

There have been systematic improvements in all the above modes of
procurement over a period of time and necessary changes have been
incorporated therein e.g. procurement of drugs only at L-1 price, increase in
reliance on procurement of generic drugs-etc. Nevertheless, if is true that as in
any other system, there is scope for improvement. Though CGHS suffers from
shortage of trained staff yet atiempts have been made fo improve the system.
Some examples are:

i. Instructions have been issued to all Additional Directors about scientific
estimation of demand through constitution of committees for this purpose.

ii. Instructions have been issued fo place indent on MSO on a quarterly basis
rather than annua! basis. This would provide more accurate assessment of
tequirement and also reduce the resources required for storage etc. This step


would also reduce the chances of drugs getting expired because of non-
consumption.

iti, ~ Under the pilot project, some medicines which were out of stock in the
dispensary for various reasons were not reflected in the auto-generation of
demands since there was no consumption of these out-of-stock items. Now, NIC
has been instructed fo include all items in the auto-generation of demand.

A MSO has been able to reduce the lead time for supply of medicines to
various cities, हु

v. Within Delhi, distribution of drugs from MSD has been streamlined to
ensure that stocks at each Wellness Centre are replenished on a monthly basis
instead of earlier system of quarterly basis. In addition, Wellness Centre can
obtain supplies from MSD on a ‘need’ basis. Also, the option of distributing drugs
directly from the GMSD Delhi to the Wellness Centres is also being considered —
this would eliminate the intermediate storage at CGHS’s own MSD at Gole
‘Market, New Delhi."

1t. Upon noticing that the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare had opted for
higher priced brands despite the avaitability of low cost bratids in the market, the
Committee had impressed upon the Ministry to formulate a comprehensive and
more reliable policy for procurement of drugs in CGHS. In response thereto the
Ministry have submitted that several steps such as issuing instructions about
scientific estimation of demand through constitution of Committees, issuing
instructions to place indent on Medical Stores Organisation (MSO) on a quarterly
basis rather than annual basis, instructing NIC to include all items in the auto-
generation of demand, reducing the lead time for supply of medicines to various
cities etc. have been taken. Besides, within Delhi, distribution of drugs from
Medical Stores Depots (MSD) has been streamlined to ensure that stocks at each
Weliness Centre are replenished on a monthly basis instead of quarterly basis.
Wellness Centre can also obtain supplies from MSD on a ‘need! basis. Further,
the option of distributing drugs directly from the Government Medical Stores
Deport (GMSD} Delhi to the Wellness Centres is also being considered. The
Committee are unhappy to note that the Ministry had failed to address the issue .

of formulating a comprehensive and more reliable policy for procurement of
drugs inspite of issuing. routine instructions. The Committee are of the view that
in the absence of such a policy the lapses/shortcomings in procurement of drugs


would continue to recur, They, therefore, reiterate their eartier recommendation
and desire to be apprised of the action faken thereon at the earliest.

Hl Doctors Prescribing drugs outside the formulary
{Recommendation No. 5)

12. The Committee had observed that the doctors continue to prescribe drugs
ouiside the formulary despite the adverse recommendations of the Parliamentary
Committees, In order to keep check on the prescription pattern of doctors, the
Committee in their 24" Report (15" Lok Sabha) had recommended that the monitoririg
mechanism be strengthened and exemplary action taken against the errant doctors,
who frequently prescribe medicines outside the formulary. However, while not accepting
the Action Taken Notes of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare thereon, the
Committee in their 847 Report (150 Lok Sabha) presented to Parliament on 30-04-2013
had further recommended to evolve a transparent and effective mechanism ‘enabling
the aggrieved patients to lodge their complaints against the errant doctors without fear
orpressure so that more instances of malpractices are detected and large scale
purchase of medicines outside the formulary is avoided. The Committee had desired to
know the number of such cases detected in the Wellness Centres in the last 2 years
following this recommendation. They had also desired that due explanation may be
sought from those CGHS doctors who make prescriptions which are regularly at
variance. It seems from the latest Audit observation on the subject that the
recommendations of Public. Accounts Commitiee were not properly addressed by the
Ministry as prescribing expensive medicines by the doctors was continuing without any
check. The Committee in their 2270 Report (167 Lok Sabha) had, therefore, reiterated
that stringent measures for evolving an effective and transparent mechanism are
needed to keep an eye on the errant doctors. है है

13. The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare in their Action Taken Note have stated
as under:

“The status of computerization of allopathic and AYUSH Wellness Centres is at
respectively. As far as prescription of medicines outside the formulary is
concerned, it has already been submitted fhat it is not possible to restrict
prescription only to the generic formulary because of the constant evolution of
new drugs and their prescription by concerned specialists. It is also true that


tevision of the formulary cannot be done so frequently so as fo keep pace with
the development of new drugs. It is also submitted that at the moment, CGHS
does not have a formal system to know which docter is prescribing drugs outside
the formulary. . This exercise would have to be done on manual basis and would
be very time consuming even if resources for the same could be spared. The
National Informatics Centre (NIC) had been approached to see whether such
information could be retrieved from their database, but they have replied in the
negative. However, NIC has given a list of doctors which have been indenting
maximum amount of medicines in all CGHS cities. It is proposed to analyse the
prescriptions and indents on a sample basis to assess whether any wrong doing
has taken place and draw lessons for the future.”

14. The Committee find that on the issue of prescribing drugs outside the
formulary the Secretary, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare informed the
Committee that the CGHS, Delhi had been computerised and the Ministry was
able to identify as to which doctor had prescribed which medicine. © The
Committee had, thus desired that ail the CGHS Wellness Centres across the
country may be computerised expeditiously. From the Action Taken Notes the
Committee observe that while the computerisation of all the 275 Allopathic
Wellness Centres has been accomplished, the computerisation of 49 AYUSH
Wellness Centres is still pending and according to the Ministry it will be taken up
in the next phase. However, the reply is silent about the date ‘as to when the next
phase would be started and by what time it would be completed. Since the
computerisation of Weliness Centres is essential to keep an eye on the errant
doctors, the Committee desire that the Ministry may take urgent measures to
computerise those 49 AYUSH Wellness Centres expeditiously.

Further, from the list of doctors which have been indenting maximum
amount of medicines in all the CGHS cifies, the Committee find that during the
two years ie. from 01.01.2014 to 31.03.2016, top ten doctors had prescribed
medicines of more than £108 crore each in 23 cities, the Commitice feel that it is
tip of the iceberg and the figure could have been much larger for all the doctors in
all the cities. Again, the reply neither refiect any punitive action faken against
those doctors nor the Ministry had taken any stringent measures for evolving an
effective and transparent mechanism to evade such practice as desired hy the

Committee, The Committee also cannot accept the Ministry's proposal to analyse


the prescriptions and indents on a sample basis to assess whether any wrong
doing has taken place, as this does not reflect the true picture of malpractice until

_ no effective mechanism is in place to check such menace. The Committee would,
therefore, while reiterating their earlier recommendation now desire that the
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare should take immediate necessary steps to
effectively deal with such cases so as to keep check on the doctors prescribing
expensive medicines which resulted large scale infructuous expenditure and
undue benefits to the unscruputous doctors.

lV. Procurement and distribution of Generic drugs and distribution of Generic drugs
{Recommendation No. 7}

15. The Committee noted that many drugs are available in both Generic as well as
Branded versions. Generic drugs are substantially cheaper than the Branded versions.
In September, 2010 the Minister of Heaith and Family Welfare, while approving the
revised formulary of Branded drugs, had expressed serious concern on prescribing of
Branded drugs by doctors instead of Generic versions and directed for complete shift
towards Generic drugs, within one year both in prescriptions and supplies. In order to
promote Generic drugs, the Ministry, had revised in May 2011 Generic drug formulary
from 818 to 1128 drugs. Director (CGHS) also inter-alia issued instructions to analyze
and take necessary steps for better utilization of Generic drugs. However, there had not
been tangible progress in the procurement and distribution of Generic drugs. The
Committee had noted that during 2009-2012, the percentage of Generic drugs procured
in Delhi was only 2 to 5 percent and in Bhubaneswar it was around 5 to 7 percent during
the same period. Further, in major cities like Ahmadabad, Kalkata, Chennai and in
Mumbai, the graph of percentage of Generic drugs procured had drastically came down
from nearly 50 percent during 2009-10 to below 10 percent in 2011-12. The Committee
deplored the laxity on the part of the Ministry and desired the Ministry fo continue with
appropriate corrective action taken in coordination with CGHS Wellness Centres to
effectively implement the tong-term measures for complete shift towards the
procurement and distribution of Generic drugs.

16. The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare in their ATN have stated as follows:


10

“STATUS OF THE VARIOUS TENDERS. FLOATED FOR THE GENERIC
DRUGS BY MSO/GMSDs

(७) STATUS OF TENDERS FLOATED EARLIER:

Sr. | Tender No. No. of | Responsive | Status of the

No. items bids Tender
tendered

- Y.1140111 1/2015 St- | 410 “| 273 Technical

IVRE-O5 : Evaluation under
process.

2. | GMSD/HYD/Generic- | 402 Price bid for 250 medicines

1 . are qualified and technical

evaluation committee

meetin: called for their
consideration.

3. GMSD/KOL/Gen-01 | 417 Price bid for 250 medicines

are qualified and technical
evaluation committee
meeting called for their
consideration.

{b) STATUS OF TENDERS FLOATED SUBSEQUENT TO FINALIZATION
OF FORMULARY: .

After the approval of the New Generic Formulary of 1165 molecules containing
2017 formulations, four more tenders were floated for a total of 1214
formulations/ compositions , which also include items for which quotations were
not received inthe above mentioned earlier tender enquiries but now included in
the new Generic Formulary.

= = Enquiry No. No. of = Status of Tender
_| No. tendered
‘4. | GMSD/HYD/EQ/2015- “2421 Opened on 17.03.2016
16/B/245/ dt 11.01.2016 and Technical Evaluation
is under Process.

.5. | GMSD/Mum/NEQ/2015- 322 | Opened on 06/04/2016

16/328 dt 11.01.2016. and Technical evaluation
under process

6. | GMSD/Hyd/EQ/2015-16| 273 Opened on 26/04/2016

7४274 dt 11.01.2016 Technical evaluation

under process.



17.

[eee | ai Due for = on].

a1

46/400 dt 11.01.2016 : 17/05/2016

Total 4214 |

Promotion of use of Generic Drugs

Following guidelines have been issued from time to fime to by this Ministry for
promoting the use of generic medicines :

(i) Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has issued guidelines vide Office
Memorandum No. H11013/4/2010-DFQC dated 19/6/2011 followed by a
circwiar No. H-11013/7/2012-CGHS (P) dated 8/2/2013 and No. S-
41011/16/2012-CGHS (7) dated 8/5/2015 emphasizing the need of
prescribing generic drugs. All specialists/Doctors working in CGHS were
directed to ensure that generic drugs are prescribed to the maximum extent
possible with a view to make medical treatment cost effective and affordable.

tii) After detailed discussions with the specialists of the Dr RML Hospital &

Safdarjung Hospital New Delhi, following instructions were issued vide O.M.

No. 25-4/09-10/CGHS/MSD/CGHS (P) dt. 30.9.2009:

a. Specialists of these hospitals were advised to prescribe only those drugs
which are available in the CGHS Wellness Centres, as far as possible , so
ihat immediate avaitabitity of drugs to beneficiaries can be ensured.

b. Medicines available in 0515 Wellness Centres and having identical
formulations and/or therapeutic values may be issued to the beneficiaries.

{iil}Also, vide order No. S-11025/45/10-MH-I df. 26.5.2010 all the Central
Government Health Institutions under the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
were instructed that only good quality generic medicines must be provided.
They were also instructed that whenever any branded drug was prescribed, it
should invariably be mentioned that any other equivalent generic drug could
also be provided.

However, multiple stakeholders are involved in this regard: CGHS beneficiaries,
Medical Officers and Specialists - and it would be some time before switching
over to a-largely generic formulary. The genera! perception that generic
medicines are sub-standard has to be overcome. There is need to educate
beneficiaries as well as the medical fratemity to have ‘faith in the generic
medicines. There is offen a perception to rely on tested and known brands.
Therefore, it might take some time before beneficiaries and doctors are
persuaded to depend largely on generic medicines.”

The Committee note that in September, 2010 the Minister of Health and

Family Welfare, while approving the revised formulary of Branded drugs, had

directed for complete shift towards Generic drugs, within one year both in


12

prescriptions and supplies. Upon noticing that there had not been tangible
progress in the procurenient and distribution of Generic drugs, the Committee in
their 2277 Report (167 Lok Sabha} had desired the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare to continue with appropriate corrective action taken in coordination with
CGHS Wellness Centres to effectively implement the long-term measures for
compiete shift towards the procurement and distribution of Generic drugs. The
Committee had alse desired to be apprised of the findings of the Committee set
up under DG (Health Services) and action taken thereon by the Ministry. The
Committee are unhappy to note that the replies of the Ministry do not mention
about the steps taken on these two aspects. Rather they have expressed that it
might take some time before beneficiaries and doctors. are persuaded to.depend
largely on generic medicines. The Committee regret fo note that inspite of lapse
of six years since the Minister's statement no concrete system has been put in
place as yet by the Ministry to effectively deal with the issue of complete switch
over towards the generic medicines. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare should take immediate necessary
measures in consultation with other stakeholders for complete shift towards the
procurement and distribution of Generic drugs. The Ministry should also
establish an effective centralized mechanistn to periodically monitor the quafity of
generic drugs so as to provide good quality generic drugs throughout the
country. International benchmark may also be followed in this regard. The
Committee further fake serious note of the failure of the Ministry to apprise the
Committee of the findings of the Committee set up under DG (Health and
Services) and action taken by the Ministry.

Further, as regards the current status of finalisation of the rates of
proposed 1165 drugs for inclusion in the Generic formulary, the Ministry
submitted that technical evaluation of the tenders floated is under consideration
and tenders for 374 molecules are due for opening on 17-05-2016. The Committee
fee] that in order to augment the procurement of generic drugs, Ministry should
take earnest efforts for finalisation of rates of drugs and apprise the Committee of

the same within two months of the presentation of this Report,


13

Vv. Management of Phasmaccutical Procurement Procedure Procedure
(Recommendation No. 16)

18. Keeping in view the several deficiencies in the management of pharmaceutical
procurement procedure for procurement of allopathic drugs for CGHS, the Committee
had urged the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare to plug the loopholes and take timely
corrective action as suggested by them and recommended that the Ministry should
strengthen their internal control system to check irregularities in procurement process
and ensure procurement of good quality medicines at affordable prices In accordance
with the canons of financial propriety. The Committee had also recommended that the
particulars of the CGHS Wellness Centres performing well and those lagging behind
may be furnished to the Committee and also placed in the Public domain periodically.
The Ministry should also conduct a study of the best health care systems and models in
different countries both developed and developing countries and try to emulate them in
order to ensure supply and. availability of quality medicines at affordable prices in the
Country.

19. In their Action Taken Notes, the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare have merely
submitted that the views/suggestions made by the Committee have been noted by
them. .

_ 20. In Para 16 of their 22" Report (460 Lok Sabha), the Committee had
recommended that the Ministry should strengthen their internal control system to
check irregularities in procurement process and ensure procurement of good
quality medicines at affordable prices. The Committee had also recommended
that the particulars of the CGHS Wellness Centres performing well and those
lagging behind may be furnished to the Committee and also placed in the public
domain periodically. The Ministry was algo desired to conduct a study of the best
health care systems and models in different countries both developed and
developing countries and try to emulate them in order to ensure supply and
availability of quality medicine at affordable prices in the country. In their Action
Taken Note the Ministry have merely stated that the views/suggestions made by
the Committee have been noted. The Ministry have not befittingly responded on

these recommendations. The Committee are not satisfied with the casual and



14

routine reply of the Ministry on these issues. In view of the vital role played by the
CGHS in arranging/providing Healthcare to the beneficiaries, the Committee while
reiterating their earlier recommendations urge the Ministry to intensify the
measures to plug the loopholes and strengthen the monitoring mechanism for
procurement of medicines for CGHS so as to provide a sound healthcare system

in the country.

NEW DELHI; PROF. (४.४. THOMAS
___ November, 2016 Chairperson,

Kartika, 1938 (Saka) : Public Accounts Committee