1 
 
     32 
 
 
INDIGENOUS CONSTRUCTION OF INDIAN NAVAL 
WARSHIPS 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2015-16) 
 
 
THIRTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
               
                      
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 


2 
 
PAC NO. 2064 
 
 
 
T H I R T Y  S E C O N D  R E P O R T 
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(2015 -16)  
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                              
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
                                         
                                                                                          
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on: 22.12.2015  
 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on:  23.12.2015  
 
 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
December, 2015 /   Pausha, 1937 (Saka)  
 
 
 
INDIGENOUS CONSTRUCTION 
OF INDIAN NAVAL WARSHIPS 
 
 

3 
 
CONTENTS 
 
PAGES 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2015-16)……     (ii) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2014-15)……     (iv) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2013-14)……     (vi) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2012-13)……            (viii) 
 
INTRODUCTION………………..            (x) 
            
       
REPORT 
PART- I 
 
I Introduction 1-7 
II Audit Review 7-8 
Iii Financial Considerations and Contract Management 8-24 
IV Delivery Management 24-41 
V Procurement 41-51 
                                          
PART - II 
 
 Observations/Recommendations 52-61 
  
APPENDICES 
 
 
I Minutes of the 22nd sitting of the PAC (2012-13) held on 31th January, 2013  
II Minutes of the 17th sitting of the PAC (2015-16) held on 21th December, 2015  
 
 
 

ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2015-16) 
 
  
  
 
Prof. K.V. Thomas  - Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura 
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey 
6. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar  
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
9. Shri Neiphiu Rio 
10. Shri Dushyant Singh 
11. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
15. Dr. P. Venugopal 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Naresh Agrawal 
17. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
18. Shri Anil Madhav Dave 
19. Shri Vijay Goel 
20. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
21. Shri Shantaram Naik 
22. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh - Additional Secretary  
2. Shri Tirthankar Das - Additional Director 
3. Shri Deepankar Kamble - Committee Officer 

iii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2014-15) 
                                            
* Vacant vice Dr. M. Thambidurai who has been chosen as Hon'ble Deputy Speaker, Lok Sabha and has since 
resigned from the membership of the Committee.  
 
Prof. K.V. Thomas  - Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura 
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey 
6. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar  
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
9. Shri Neiphiu Rio 
10. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
11. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
12. Shri Jayant Sinha 
13. Dr. Kirit Somaiya 
14. Shri Anurag Thakur 
15*. Vacant 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
17. Shri Vijay Goel 
 
18. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya 
 
19. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
 
20. Shri Shantaram Naik 
 
21. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
 
22. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh 
 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2014-15) 
                                            
† Vacant vice Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy who has been appointed as Minister w.e.f.  9th November, 2014. 
‡ Vacant vice Shri Jayant Sinha who has been appointed as Minister w.e.f.  9th November, 2014. 
§ Vacant vice Dr. M. Thambidurai who has been chosen as Hon'ble  Deputy Speaker, Lok Sabha and has since 
resigned from the membership of the Committee.  
 
Prof. K.V. Thomas  - Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura 
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey 
6. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar  
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
9. Shri Neiphiu Rio 
10†. Vacant 
11. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
12‡. Vacant 
13. Dr. Kirit Somaiya 
14. Shri Anurag Thakur 
15§. Vacant 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
17. Shri Vijay Goel 
 
18. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya 
 
19. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
 
20. Shri Shantaram Naik 
 
21. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
 
22. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh 

v 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2014-15) 
                                            
** Elected w.e.f. 3rd December, 2014 vice Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy who has been appointed as Minister w.e.f.  9th 
November, 2014. 
†† †† Elected w.e.f. 3rd December, 2014  vice Shri Jayant Sinha who has been appointed as Minister w.e.f.  9th 
November, 2014. 
‡‡ ‡‡ Elected w.e.f. 3rd December, 2014  vice Dr. M. Thambidurai who has been chosen as Hon'ble Deputy Speaker, 
Lok Sabha and has since resigned from the membership of the Committee.  
 
 
Prof. K.V. Thomas  - Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura 
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey 
6. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar  
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
9. Shri Neiphiu Rio 
10**. Shri Dushyant Singh 
11. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
12††. Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi 
13. Dr. Kirit Somaiya 
14. Shri Anurag Thakur 
15‡‡. Dr. P. Venugopal 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
17. Shri Vijay Goel 
18. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya 
19. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
20. Shri Shantaram Naik 
21. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
22. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh 

vi 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2013-14) 
                                            
§§ Elected w.e.f. 14 th August, 2013  vice Dr. Girija Vyas  appointed as Minister of Housing, Urban 
Development & Poverty Alleviation  w.e.f.  17th June, 2013. 
 
*** Elected w.e.f. 3 rd September, 2013 vice Dr. V. Maitreyan ceased to be a Member upon his retirement 
as a Member of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 24th July, 2013. 
 
††† Elected w.e.f. 3 rd September, 2013 vice Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan  appointed as Minister of 
State for Commerce and Industry w.e.f.  17th June, 2013. 
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  - Chairman 
 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
  2. Shri Anandrao Adsul 
  3. Dr. Baliram 
  4. Shri Ramen Deka 
  5. Shri Sandeep Dikshit 
  6. Dr. M. Thambi Durai  
  7. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan  
  8. Shri Jayaprakash Hegde 
  9. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
10 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee 
12. Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
13. Shri Ashok Tanwar 
§§14. Shri Ajay Maken 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee 
17. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
***18. Shri Ashwani Kumar 
19. Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
†††20. Dr. V. Maitreyan 
21. Shri N.K. Singh 
22. Smt. Ambika Soni 

vii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(2012-13) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  - Chairman 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
  2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul 
  3. Dr. Baliram 
  4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit 
  5. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
  6. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan  
  7. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
  8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
  9. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
10 Shri Shripad Yesso Naik 
11. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana 
12. Shri Ashok Tanwar 
13. Dr. Shashi Tharoor 
14. Dr. Girija Vyas 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee 
17. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
18. Shri Satish Chandra Misra  
19. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
20. Shri J.D. Seelam 
21. Shri N.K. Singh 
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz 

viii 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2012-13) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
                                            
‡‡‡ Elected w.e.f  6th December, 2012 vice Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana appointed as Minister on 28th 
October, 2012. 
§§§ Elected w.e.f  6th December, 2012 vice Dr. Shashi Tharoor appointed as Minister on  
28th October, 2012. 
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  - Chairman 
 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
  2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul 
  3. Dr. Baliram 
  4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit 
  5. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
  6. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan  
  7. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
  8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
  9. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
10 Shri Shripad Yesso Naik 
‡‡‡11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee 
12. Shri Ashok Tanwar 
§§§13. Shri Takam Sanjoy 
14. Dr. Girija Vyas 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee 
17. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
18. Shri Satish Chandra Misra  
19. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
20. Shri J.D. Seelam 
21. Shri N.K. Singh 
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz 

ix 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2012-13) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                            
**** Vacancy occurred  vice Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana appointed as Minister on 28 th October, 2012. 
†††† Vacancy occurred  vice Dr. Shashi Tharoor appointed as Minister on  
28th October, 2012. 
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  - Chairman 
 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
  2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul 
  3. Dr. Baliram 
  4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit 
  5. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
  6. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan  
  7. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
  8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
  9. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
10 Shri Shripad Yesso Naik 
****11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee 
12. Shri Ashok Tanwar 
††††13. Shri Takam Sanjoy 
14. Dr. Girija Vyas 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee 
17. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
18. Shri Satish Chandra Misra  
19. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
20. Shri J.D. Seelam 
21. Shri N.K. Singh 
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz 

x 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, having been authorised by the 
Committee, do present this Thirty -second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 
"Indigenous Construction of Indian Naval Warships " based on C&AG's Report No. 
32 of 2010-11 relating to Ministry of Defence.  
 
2. The Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid on the Table of 
the House on 22nd March, 2011. 
 
3. The Public Accounts Committee (2012 -13) took up the subject fo r detailed 
examination and report.  The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Defence, the Indian Navy, Mazagon Dock Limited, Goa Shipyard Limited, 
and Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Limited  on the subject at their sittin g held 
on 31st January, 2013.  The subject was subsequently carried forward by the successor 
Committees (2013 -14), (2014 -15) and (2015 -16) for examination.  The Committee 
considered and adopted this Draft Report at their sitting held on 21 st December, 2015.  
The Minutes of the Sittings form Appendices to the Report.   
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type and form Part - II of 
the Report.   
 
5. The Committee thank the predecessor Committees for taking oral evidence of 
the Ministry of Defence, the Indian Navy, Mazagon Dock Limited, Goa Shipyard Limited, 
and Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Limited  and obtaining information on the 
subject. 
 
6. The Committee would also like to express their thanks to the representatives of 
the Ministry of Defence, the Indian Navy, Mazagon Dock Limited, Goa Shipyard Limited, 
and Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Limited for tendering evidence before the 
Committee and furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in connection with 
the examination of the subject.    
 
7. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to 
them in the matter by the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                 PROF. K.V. THOMAS, 
  December, 2015                                                                                        Chairperson, 
  Pausha, 1937 (Saka)                                                      Public Accounts Committee. 
        
 

-2- 
 
 
 
REPORT 
PART – I 
[[[ 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
(i) Warship Building - An Overview 
 
1. India is a major maritime nation with vital economic and security interests 
linked to the seas.  Although the Indian Navy's primary role revolves around 
deterrence to security threats, yet by virtue of India's emerging economic 
strength and its geography, the Indian Navy has a significant peacetime role 
as well.  Hence, it is imperative that the Indian Navy be equipped with the 
requisite number of ships in a timely manner.  The Indian Navy has a detailed 
ship procurement plan which has been prepared after considering specific 
requirements for ships, funds availability and decommissioning schedule of 
existing ships.  The Navy has, in its Maritime Capability Perspective Plan 
(MCPP), formulated in 2005, projected a 160 ship -strong navy, including 90 
front-line combat platforms. 
 
[ 
2. Universally, navies around the world take longer periods for development and 
consolidation due to complex defence systems, cutting edge components, 
state-of-the-art weapons, communication and navigational technologies.  
Huge capital outlay is synonymous with modern ship building  processes. 
Indian Navy has based its vision of ship acquisition on construction of its 
ships at Indian Shipyards. 
 
3. Between September 1986 and March 2003, the Competent Financial 
Authority (CFA) approved the indigenous construction of 16 frigate, destroyer  
and corvette class ships to be built in the DPSU shipyards under project 15A, 
16A, 17 and 28. But performance audit has reviewed three projects viz. P15A 
(Destroyer), P17 (Frigate), and P28 (ASW Corvette) projects respectively. 
Between 2003-04 and 2009-10, the Ministry of Defence released ` 5240 crore 
for the indigenous construction of P -17 Frigates, ` 3132 crore for P -15A 

-3- 
 
 
 
Destroyers and ` 948.07 crore for P -28 Corvette ships. The period under the 
audit was 2005-06 to 2009-10. The details of the Audit examination & findings 
will be dealt within the subsequent paragraphs. 
 
4. Before going into details of the warship building and also Audit findings, it 
would be proper to know the complexities involved in indigenous naval 
shipbuilding processes.  Warship design and building is different from the 
process of design and manufacturing of any other engineering/industrial 
product on account of the following: 
 
(a) Being a complex multidisciplinary engineering activity involving integration 
of multitude of equipment and syst ems, Naval shipbuilding requires 
significantly higher shipyard effort and dependence on a large number of 
agencies/OEMs; 
 
 
(b) Due to long gestation period, telescopic design & construction are 
resorted to in most of the projects; 
 
(c) The need to have state -of-the-art systems onboard the ships leads to 
frequent mid-course changes; 
 
(d) Considering long gestation for warship construction, generally 07 to 08 
years, the experience gained on the first ship is implemented on remaining 
vessels.  However, since the batch siz e is small, each new class has its 
own learning curve; 
 
(e) Thrust on indigenization to overcome dependence on other Countries and 
possible 'sanctions' at crucial times; 
 
(f) Non-receipt of inputs relating to various equipment and systems under 
development on-time, sometimes because of concurrent development of 
technology by the industry; 
 
(g) Delay in finalizing the weapon package leading to late receipt of binding 
data, resulting in frequent design changes and in some cases re-work; 
 
(h) Unfamiliarity with modern technology experienced by the shipyard and 
navy, leading to delays; 
 
(i) Some of the weapons/equipment were still at development stage at the 
time of nomination leading to a situation of risk of unproven systems; and 
 

-4- 
 
 
 
(j) Acceptance of equipment etc. with diluted/ changes parameters vis -à-vis 
NSQRs. 
 
(ii) Warship Building - Processes and Practices 
 
5. Warship building is a highly sophisticated and complex activity involving 
various processes. A ship construction programme  has a number of 
elements, which interact with each other, including feasibility studies, design 
issues, system integration, construction, tests and trials. It also involves 
technology application and transfer, selection of equipment, development of 
new eq uipment, identification and purchase of large number of items 
including weapons and sensors, from numerous indigenous and foreign 
suppliers. The warship build procedure commences with mission 
requirements and culminates with build ability and cost estimate s.   The 
following processes succinctly describe warship building such as mission 
requirements, hull form, hull structure, design of ship systems, selection of 
equipment, powering, selection of main machinery, arrangement of machinery 
and equipment, selection of weapons, weapons system integration, signature 
management, and buildability and cost estimates. 
 
6. The Naval Ship Building Procedure, which was implemented from 1 st July, 
2005 outlines the following steps as shown below: 
 
(i) Outline Staff Requirement; 
(ii) Acceptance of Necessity; 
(iii) Preliminary Staff Requirements; 
(iv) Nomination of Shipyard; 
(v) Preliminary Design; 
(vi) Preliminary Build Specifications; 
(vii) Budgetary Cost; 
(viii) Price Negotiations; 
(ix) Approval of CFA; 
(x) Letter of Intent and Mobilisation Advance; and 
(xi) Contract conclusion. 

-5- 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) Organisational Structure 
 
7. Various Directorates are involved in the construction and manufacturing of 
naval warships. At the Naval Head Quarters, various Directorates are 
involved in the construction and monitoring of warship building, t he Vice Chief 
of Naval Staff (VCNS) is concerned with all activities regarding the activities 
leading upto sanction and construction of warships. The Controller of Material 
Monitoring is responsible for monitoring the construction activities.  Both 
report to the Chief of Naval Staff (CNS).   
 
8. The Assistant Chief of Naval Staff (Policy and Plan) is responsible to the 
VCNS for promulgation of all perspective, force level, financial and 
infrastructure plans and programmes of the Navy. The Directorate of Staff 
Requirements (DSR) is responsible for formulation of Staff Requirements of 
all ships and on -board weapons etc. The Directorate of Naval Design (DND) 
has a team of engineers who undertake the design of various ships. The 
Directorate of Ship Production (DSP)  functions as project manager for each 
class of ship. Both DND and DSP are under the Controller of Warship 
Production and Acquisition (CWP&A). The Directorate of Cost and Contract 
Management (DCCM), also under the CWP&A, exercises the budget control 
and co ordinates the signing of contract for ships under construction. Thus, 
together, these directorates are responsible for design, production, 
equipment/material procurement and financial control related to the ships 
under construction.  
 
9. The Controller of Mat erial Monitoring is responsible for the management of 
various types of equipment on -board ships. The Assistant Chief of Material 
(Dockyard and Refits) is responsible for planning and co -ordination of 
induction, exploitation and management of hull and hull related equipment 
and systems as well as Marine Engineering equipment and systems for which 
the Directorate of Marine Engineering under him is responsible for 
undertaking systems integration of Marine Engineering Systems on ships and 

-6- 
 
 
 
drawing up specificati ons for their selection, procurement, tests, acceptance 
and maintenance schedules. The Assistant Chief of Material (Information 
Technology and Systems) is responsible to the COM for identification and 
induction of emerging technologies in the field of info rmation Technology, 
Electronics, Electrical, Weapons, Sensors and missiles in consonance with 
the Naval Staff Requirements promulgated by Staff Branch. The Directorate 
of Electrical Engineering (DEE), which reports to him, is responsible for all 
technical matters pertaining to Inspection, Acceptances, Testing and Tuning 
and Maintenance of Electrical, Electronics, Sensors and Communication 
Systems, whereas, the Directorate of Weapon Equipment (DWE) is 
responsible for technical evaluation for acquisition of n ew weapons and 
sensors.   
 
10. Warship Production Superintendent (WPS), the official representative of 
Naval HQ and head of the Warship Overseeing Teams exercises financial 
control, monitors progress of production schedules and ensures assurance of 
quality in respect of ships under construction at the shipyards. WPS and the 
team under him acts on behalf of, and corresponds directly with NHQ in 
regard to all new construction ships.  
 
11. Under the Ministry of Defence, 3 Defence Public Sector Units (DPSU) 
shipyards are engaged in the construction and production of naval warships 
namely, Mazagon Dock Ltd. (MDL) in Mumbai, which oversees production of 
destroyers, submarines, stealth frigates, etc.; Goa Shipyard Ltd. (GSL) in 
Goa, which builds medium -sized sophisticated vessels for the Indian Navy 
and Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Ltd (GRSE) in Kolkata which 
manufactures warships, vessels and various engineering products for 
onboard deck use for the Indian Navy and the Indian Coast Guard. 
 
12. While explaining the who le process involved in the warship building, from 
conception till commissioning, MoD furnished the following reply: 

-7- 
 
 
 
"The need for a new warship evolves from the Maritime Capability Perspective Plan 
(MCPP) of the Navy. Acceptance of Necessity (AON) for the project is accorded by 
Defence Acquisition Council (DAC) based on a paper prepared by Principal Staff Officer 
amplifying the development of need for the warship/project. This paper contains Outline 
Staff Requirements and a concept design with broad categor y of weapons and sensors 
to be fitted on the ship along with the status of their indigenous development if 
applicable, operational necessity, approximate cost and budgetary provisions. On AON 
being accorded, IHQ MoD (N) carries out a capacity assessment of  the shipyards in 
consultation with Department of Defence Production (DDP) and forwards 
recommendations on the nomination of a single shipyard or more than one shipyard 
with allocation of number of ships for each yard.  Preliminary Staff Requirements 
(PSRs) are promulgated based on the parameters of the concept design. The 
formulated PSRs form the basis of Preliminary Design wherein hull form design, 
weapons/sensors/equipment fit, identification of OEMs/vendors for specific weapons, 
sensors, machinery and e quipment, model tests, validation studies and other design 
activities are carried out by IHQ MoD (N)/Shipyard in consultation, as necessary.  
Based on the preliminary design, the Preliminary Build Specifications (PBS) of the 
vessel is prepared by IHQ MoD ( N) and forwarded to the nominated shipyard(s). The 
IHQ MoD (N) and nominated shipyard interact to finalise these and other related 
documents. A Build Strategy is prepared by the nominated shipyard based on the ship 
specifications, yard infrastructure and resources. This would include a draft construction 
schedule and the procurement schedule for major long lead items including weapons 
and sensors. After approval of the build strategy by IHQ MoD (N), the shipyard(s) 
forward a budgetary cost for the construct ion of the ship on the basis of the Build 
Strategy, along with draft contract.  Before seeking the approval of CFA, negotiations on 
the price and the other aspects of the contract with shipyard are to be undertaken and 
concluded by a Contract Negotiation C ommittee (CNC) chaired by the Acquisition 
Manager (Maritime Systems). The Committee is to include representatives from the 
concerned directorates of the IHQ MoD (N) in addition to the representatives of MoD 
(Fin) and shipyards.  The contract is signed with in a specified period from the date of 
CFA approval. In cases, where subsequent CCS approvals are necessitated, 
Supplementary Contracts are to be signed within two months of such approval. In case 
of delay in signing of contract, approval of Raksha Mantri (RM) is to be sought with full 
justification for the delay.  On conclusion of contract, shipyard commences the Detailed 
Design, orders equipment & material and obtains binding data for the detailed design 
from IHQ MoD (N). The actual construction of the sh ip, however, starts in parallel along 
with the detailed design. Warship overseeing teams positioned at the shipyards monitor 
progress of shipbuilding activities on a daily basis. As the production progresses, 
various trials are undertaken by various naval trial agencies to prove the installed 
functionality of equipment and systems.  The trials are spread over various stages of 
construction and continues even after delivery of the ships until performance of all 
weapons and sensors are proven at sea.  The Nav y takes delivery after the first reading 
of D -448, wherein all pending liabilities of the shipyard are indicated with probable 
timelines.  Post completion of all D -448 liabilities, which is generally completed during 
the guarantee period, a second reading of D-448 is carried out and this concludes the 
final stage of payment to be made to the shipyard".  

-8- 
 
 
 
 
13. When the Committee wanted further information on the Maritime Perspective 
Plan, to which, the Vice Chief of Naval Staff, during oral evidence stated as 
under: 
"Prior to framing Maritime Capability Perspective Plan each and every factor is 
considered like threat perceptions as well as our requirement.  As stated, there is a 
maritime capability perspective plan assessing the capabilities in Navy after 15 years .  It 
is divided in five year plan period.  Thus, all the factors are counted such as what are 
our shipbuilding capability, threats as well as their capabilities.  It is decided on the 
basis of requirement of capabilities as to how many ships, submarines a nd aircrafts we 
need in order to counter these or to take care of our maritime interest in maritime 
domain because India is a maritime nation.  This plan is framed on the basis of the 
same.  I would like to say that the plan we have has been framed conside ring our threat 
perceptions and as per this plan our warship construction requirement is going on well.  
At present the details are as follows; the ships under construction include 15 Alpha 
destroyers which are being built at the Mazagon Dock Ltd. you may have heard about 
Delhi Class Destroyer.  After that three big destroyers are being manufactured.  After 
that there will be four destroyers for 15 Bravo.  Under Project 28, four ships are being 
manufactured in Garden Reach.  These are anti submarines corvet tes.  Other aircraft 
carriers like these are being manufactured in Cochin.  At present there are 44 ships 
being manufactured in total out of which only two are being manufactured from outside 
– one is Goroshkov and another one frigate from follow -on-Russia, which are yet to be 
obtained.  The rest 42 ships are being manufactured in our own shipyards - 34 in 
defence public sector and 8 in private sector."    
 
14. Further, he emphasized: 
 "There is separate time schedule for each project.  Let me tell you, normall y 4 to 
5 new ships will be inducted in Navy each year.  These are the details of various stages 
of process and the time of their induction.  4 to 5 ships like frigates, destroyers and 
aircraft carriers are likely to be inducted this way each year in years to come.  These 
ships are meant for our capability perspective plan and to enhance the capability of 
Navy.  All these plans have been framed for strengthening our Navy." 
 
15. During oral evidence, when the Committee desired to know the ship building 
processes as compared to advanced Countries, the Defence Secretary stated 
as under: 
"Our emphasis is on indigenization. I must say that at least in the field of warship 
building, we have achieved some good success. As far as the other countries’ help that 
you are mentioning is concerned, we are comfortable with all countries; we strictly 
negotiate our commercial terms with them; we are having collaboration for submarine 
building with France; we have a large number of platforms with Russia like aircraft 
carrier Korsakov; we are going to have a contract with Korea for MCMB. So, it is not 
that we are confined to any single country. We are comfortable with other countries 

-9- 
 
 
 
also, but we negotiate our terms and conditions with counties strictly and see that what 
best technology we can get from them. The purpose is that we must learn from out of 
that experience also. In most of these cases, in submarine for example, it is being 
constructed in India only, in MDl, though we have taken the technology from France. 
So, I would not say the same thing with respect to other platforms, but at least in ship 
building, we have been immensely benefited by our earlier experience vis -à-vis foreign 
countries and we have learnt a lot. Again, transfer of technology is a very complex issue 
because advanced countries will not transfer technology for no gains. The first thing is 
that they will definitely not part with most critical part of the technology. In most of the 
cases, we have seen this, that they will give you 60 -70-80 per cent and some 20-25 per 
cent or maybe in some cases, 5-10 per cent, they would keep with them. Secondly, they 
will not give you the best technology that is available with them. So, there is no 
substitute for the indigenous effort of R&D. For example, there was a mention about 
stealth technology. We have done it ourselves; this is for the first t ime that a stealth 
frigate was made in India. There is no substitute for our own indigenous R&D; no 
country will give you 100 per cent technology; it is never given and nobody gives." 
 
II. AUDIT REVIEW 
16. The Performance Audit on the construction of warships was conducted by the 
C&AG between 1998 to 2009, covering 3 projects; P -15A (Destroyer), P -17 
(Frigate) and P -28 (Anti Submarine Warfare Corvette).  The main objectives 
for close scrutiny were: 
 
 Proposal for the building of a particular class of ship indigenous ly has 
been taken keeping in view the envisaged force level; 
 
 Designated shipyards have been selected after due diligence and giving 
due weightage to their capacity and expertise; 
 
 Contracts concluded with the designated shipyards are within the 
reasonable time, as per the laid down procedures, and will incentivize ship 
construction processes; 
 
 Internal control mechanism is adequate and exists to ensure timely and 
economical completion of the projects; and 
 
 Financial management and control measures are adequate to ensure 
timely and economical completion of the project. 
 
17. The audit criteria used for the audit were drawn from various documents like 
the Long Term plans prepared by Indian Navy, papers leading to approval of 
the project and nomination of shipy ard, various guidelines issued on the 
subject, instructions issued time -to-time by Ministry of Defence and Indian 

-10- 
 
 
 
Navy, Naval Staff Qualitative Requirements regarding performance 
parameters of the equipment/systems fitted onboard the commissioned ships, 
Defence Procurement Procedure/Manual applicable, and the Indigenous 
Shipbuilding Procedure.  
 
18. The C&AG's Audit Report No 8 for the year 1998 had highlighted the following 
areas of concern in the construction of frigates under Project -15 and 16A at 
MDL and GRSE respectively.  The reasons that were identified then are such 
as, depletion in force levels of frigates; tardy progress of construction of new 
frigates in MDL and GRSE; increase in cost; and deficient internal controls. 
 
19. Against this backdrop, the Public Accounts Committee (2012 -13) selected the 
subject for detailed examination and report.  The Committee obtained 
Background material and detailed Advance Information from the Ministry of 
Defence and the contracted 3 DPSU shi pyards.  The Committee took oral 
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Defence, the Indian Navy 
and the DPSU shipyards on 31 st January, 2013.  Post Evidence replies were 
also obtained.  However, as the subject could not be examined due to pauc ity 
of time, it was carried forward and again taken up for examination during the 
year 2013-14.  Based on these written and oral depositions, the Committee 
examined the subject in detail and discussed some very important issues 
enumerated in the succeeding paragraphs.    
 
III. FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS AND CONTRACT MANAGEMENT 
(i) Cost Estimates and Revision in Costs  
 
20. Ships require many years to plan, budget, design and build. The complexity of 
their weapons, equipment and systems implies that, in general, t heir 
construction period is longer than that for comparable equipment like fighter 
aircrafts or tanks. The long build periods introduces an element of uncertainty 
and difficulty in estimating cost of ship building projects. Apart from the long 
periods, mod ern, state -of-the-art weapons and sensors, some of which are 

-11- 
 
 
 
imported or under development, add to the ambiguity with regard to their 
costs. Despite such uncertainty, cost estimates need to be assigned to each 
project while seeking the sanction of the CFA,  in this case Cabinet/Cabinet 
Committee on Security. This requirement puts an onus on the Ministry and 
Navy that the cost estimates are firmed up with due care and professionalism 
taking into account the exigencies that may arise in the future. The cost 
estimates would not only need to be current but also would need to provide 
for escalation during construction periods.  
21. Audit examination revealed that estimation of costs in the case of the P15A, 
P17 and P28 ships has been done more as a formality for obtaining approvals 
to the ship building projects from the Cabinet/CCS rather than as a 
professional and meaningful exercise which would lead to effective controls 
and monitoring. Audit obtained no assurance from the documentation 
provided that the Ministry has  in place a system which comprehensively 
verifies the costs/estimates received from the shipyards. In fact, audit noted 
that cost estimates projected were simplistic, based on the previous projects 
completed several years ago and did not provide for escala tion cost of 
modern technology and equipment or for the exchange rate variations for the 
imported items. The simplistic and ad hoc approach towards costing these 
ship-building projects is illustrated below: 
Project  Date of 
Approval/Sanction  
Approach for estimating costs/ 
Assumptions  
Remarks  
15A June 2001  Cost estimates based on last of P15 
ships at 1999 price level 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The CCS approval was 
based on a price level 
two years old and while 
preparing the estimated 
cost increase for these 
two years was not 
incorporated.  
 
The last P15 ship was 
still under construction 
and its costs were 
revised in 2006. 
 
 The estimates were 
unrealistic as the 

-12- 
 
 
 
Weapon/sensor package would be 
worked out in the contract. 
construction period for 
the project was not 
taken into 
consideration and 
escalation was not 
provided till the 
anticipated date of 
completion.  
 
Combat capability 
which constitutes a 
significant part (48 per 
cent) of costs was not 
decided while 
presenting estimates.  
 
Costs of on-board 
spares was also not 
included. 
17 January 1998 Based on a price level of 1994  
 
 
 
 
Calculated taking escalation @ seven 
per cent on the indigenous components 
(including labour, labour  heads, direct 
expense, subcontract etc) and 2.5 per 
cent on imported equipment  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Based on total construction period of 78 
months, thus, escalation was calculated 
only till 2002-03. 
The CCS approval was 
based on a price level 
four years old 
 
 
While preparing the 
estimates, no basis for 
selecting the particular 
escalation rate was 
ascribed. For instance, 
for imported items, 
generally, Ministry has 
been taking three per 
cent and subsequent to 
2004-05 higher rates 
like six per cent with 
respect to R ussian 
equipment. This has, in 
fact, been the major 
cause for cost growth as 
seen in the next 
section. 
 
Assumption of 
completion period as 78 
months was not 
realistic as the previous 
frigate project took 
over 100 months for 

-13- 
 
 
 
completion. 
28 March 2003 Price level of 2001-02 Estimates unrealistic as 
the construction period 
for the project was not 
taken into 
consideration. 
 
No escalation provided 
till the anticipated date 
of completion. 
 
Despite the fact that there are inherent uncertainties in the ship construction process, 
there was no recognition of this fact and Navy did not account for the probability of cost 
escalation when estimating costs. Although it would have been prudent to factor in the 
experience gained in the ship building activities and pr ocess over the past years, the 
same was not done. 
 
22. Estimation of costs in the case of the P -15A, P-17 and P -28 ships has been 
done more as a formality for obtaining approvals to the ship building projects 
from the Cabinet/CCS rather than as a professional and meaningful exercise 
which would lead to effective controls and monitoring.  The Ministry has in 
place a system which comprehensively verifies the costs/estimates received 
from the shipyards.  In fact, Audit noted that cost estimates projected were 
simplistic, based on the previous projects completed several years ago and 
did not provide for escalation cost of modern technology and equipment or for 
the exchange rate variations for the imported items. 
 
23. Explaining the escalation in costs and time overruns,  the Ministry in their 
Background Note furnished to the Committee submitted as follows: 
 "Accurate estimation of ' cost' and 'build-periods' of warships is extremely difficult 
 because of inherent complexities, need for modern state -of-the-art weapons fit 
 onboard, limited number of ships, large gestation period from concept to delivery 
 and the uncertainty associated with timely development and supply of various 
 equipments and systems.  Indigenous construction has ensured availability of 
 potent platforms at costs comparable to international standards, besides 
 conserving vital foreign exchange.  However, in most indigenous shipbuilding 
 programs revised sanction of the competent authority had to be sought with 
 regards to increased cost and time.  This may  sometimes paint a picture of 
 indigenous shipbuilding being 'overly expensive'  and sometimes uneconomical.  

-14- 
 
 
 
 However, a large part of the increase in cost is invariably attributable to inability 
 for accurate initial estimates due to lack of accurate inpu ts necessary to forecast 
 the cost of warship at the time of delivery.  A long gestation period from the time 
 of the initial sanction to actual delivery, a phenomenon that is typical to warship 
 construction, creates greater scope for inaccuracies in the estimates.  While 
 every effort is made to ensure that project schedules and cost estimates 
 prepared are as realistic as possible and that these are thereafter adhered to, 
 there are a number of factors, some anticipated and others unanticipated whose 
 impact cannot be predicted at the time of seeking original sanction, but which 
 significantly alter the final cost and schedules". 
 
24. When the Committee desired to know the competitive cost and time taken for 
vis-a-vis other Countries, the Defence Secretary st ated during evidence as 
under: 
"I think, it is comparable and in certain cases it is less also because we are using 
indigenous weapon systems and sensors also now." 
 
25. He also added that the Indian cost was approximately 38 million dollars and 
the one built by Tenix Defence, Australia was about 59 million dollars and that 
built by BAE Systems, UK was 86 million dollars. 
 
26. The Ministry, in their written submissions to the Committee, have stated the 
reasons which have led to cost as well as time overruns with re spect to the 3 
ongoing naval warship production as:  
(a) P-15A - The first stage sanction of P -15A was obtained on estimation basis due 
to non-finalization of the weapon and sensor package.  As per NHQ, escalation 
for the build period was not taken into consideration and specific endorsement for 
accounting for the same during subsequent cost revision was indicated while 
seeking approval of Competent Financial Authority (CFA).  It was also indicated 
that the cost finalization would be nearer the date of construc tion which in this 
case was 2004.  The second stage CFA sanction was accordingly processed 
from 2004 and obtained in 2006.  Thus, this is a case where the 2 nd stage 
sanction was envisaged even in the 1st sanction of the CFA.  It may be noted that 
the 1 st stage CFA approval for P -15A ships was worked out based on cost 
estimates of P -15 ships, with 1999 as base year.  At this stage, the cost of 
variables (primarily the cost of updated weapons and sensors package to cater 
for changes in technology, which was a  major cost component) was not known 
and could not be considered in initial sanction.  CFA permitted for 2 nd stage 
sanction on finalisation of cost of these equipment, taking into account cost 
escalation due to inflation and exchange rate variation due to currency 
fluctuations.  On confirming the cost of variable components in 2006, revised 
CFA (Competent Financial Authority) approval was accorded at an estimated 

-15- 
 
 
 
cost of `11662 crores , inclusive of variable component.  It may be noted that 
initial cost for P -15A ships, ` 3580 crore, was worked out based on cost 
estimates of P -15 ships with 1999 as base year.  At this stage the cost of 
variables (primarily cost of updated weapons and se nsors package to cater for 
change in technology), which was a major cost component, was not known and 
could not be considered in initial sanction.  However, on confirming the cost of 
variable component, revised CFA approval was accorded at an estimated cos t of 
` 11662 crore (inclusive of variable component).  Therefore, one to one 
comparison indicating 226% increase in price may not be a valid comparison.  As 
far as the build period is concerned, the initial build period was estimated on the 
work content in building the ships.  However, there were delays in the project due 
to, inter-alia, delay by propulsion equipment suppliers, calling for cancellation of 
order and reordering, and developmental nature of main weapons and sensors.  
The delays due to above re asons could not be estimated at the beginning of the 
project. 
 
(b) P-17 - The initial cost estimates of this project were based on the equipment fit of 
Project-15 class ships, which was the then latest available data on equipment 
cost.  The yard effort cost an d other yard material costs were given by the 
shipyard, based on the experience of building P -15 ships.  The initial build period 
estimated for the project was 60 months, and the cost estimates considered 
escalation over the build period.  An escalation of  2.5 per cent on imported 
equipment and 7.0 per cent on indigenous equipment was estimated.  The price 
levels were based on the year 1994 as no other reference was available.  The 
build period was estimated as 78 months based on the learning curve for 
previous projects.  The uncertainty in the escalation rate and delay in completion 
was due to the turmoil in the erstwhile USSR and the subsequent uncertainty in 
Russia from where most of the sensors/weapons were being sourced.  This 
could not be foreseen.  Th e original sanction of ` 2250 crore included 10% as 
cost of B&D spares.  The revised CFA sanction of ` 8101 crore included 15% 
cost of B&D spares and also included ` 217 crore as cost of modernization of 
MDL.  The cost escalation was primarily attributable  to the increase in cost of 
equipment sourced from Russia.  These prices were far exceeding the estimated 
prices.  This project is a complex warship project, and it was the first of its kind in 
many ways.  Sourcing of equipment for this project was also di verse, with some 
equipment coming from Russia, some from Western Europe and the main 
propulsion Gas Turbines coming from USA.  As a result of these technological 
and other factors, there were delays in the Project; and the build period and 
subsequently the cost of the project had gone up.  It was also seen that the rise 
in equipment cost did not follow any standard escalation pattern.  This has been 
the experience with Project 15A as well.  However, when the case for revision of 
sanction of the project was taken up in 2006, the costs were verified by a 
technical sub-committee and a cost sub -committee constituted by the Ministry of 
Defence (MOD), and a ceiling was placed on cost of balance yard efforts. 
 

-16- 
 
 
 
(c) P-28 – Original CFA sanction of March 2003 for P -28 ships at price levels of 
2001-02 was for an amount of ` 3051.27 crore.  Weapons and sensors 
contributed to escalations which were not foreseen during initial sanction of CFA.  
The contract for P-28 has since been signed in June 2012 at a cost of ` 7852.39 
crores subsequent to CCS approval.  The initial sanction for the project was 
received in March 2003, at price levels of 2001 -02 based on build period of 48 
months.  However, considerable time was consumed due  to various reasons 
such as non-availability of warship-quality D-40S steel, time taken for developing 
the indigenous steel and weld consumables, and stabilising indigenous 
production.  Subsequently, the production of the first ship could commence only 
in March 2006.  The uniqueness of this project is that the Navy and MOD aimed 
at a very high level of indigenisation in the project.  Except for a part of the 
propulsion system, almost all weapons and sensors and other ship equipment 
are totally indigenous, t aking the indigenous content level to over 90 per cent.  
There were some delays in the project, since most equipments were 
developmental in nature.  When the supply of steel and ordering & supply of 
equipment stabilised in 2008, the shipyard was asked to t ender a firm cost and 
time-frame for building ships of the project.  The shipyard projections were 
verified by a technical sub -committee and a cost sub -committee of the 
Acquisition Wing, and documents of the shipyard were verified by a team led by 
Adviser (Cost).  Negotiations were carried out with the shipyard by a Contract 
Negotiations Committee (CNC), and a case for revised sanction of the project 
has been initiated. 
 
27. During oral evidence, when the Committee sought to know the delays 
affecting the P -15A, P-17 and P -28 projects and were concerned about the 
late deliveries of these warships, the Defence Secretary, stated as under: 
 
".... .... .... Earlier, the practice was to have cost plus contracts.  Right from 1997-98, first 
the letter of intent was issu ed to the public sector shipyard and then they used to start 
the work.  Money was also given to them without any contract, as per their requirement 
and subsequently, seven to eight years after, the contract was being signed which was 
a wrong practice.  Thi s has been totally stopped.   With the DPP in place, as soon as 
the competent financial authority, CCS approves the contract, the contract has to be 
signed. The latest example is P15B in which we signed the contract within one month of 
the CCS approval. I can say with confidence that the earlier practice was there, it was 
wrong, it should not have been done and CAG’s report has very correctly pointed out, 
but this practice, I can assure you, has been totally stopped. Now the contract will be 
signed as soon as the CFA approval is opted."  
 
(ii) Cost Escalation 
 
28. The cost of building a ship has four main components:  
 Labour;  

-17- 
 
 
 
 Material;  
 Equipment; and  
 Other costs.   
 
The shipbuilding contract also includes an element of profit at the rate of 7.5 per cent.  
As per the original cost estimates, in terms of total cost across three projects, 
equipment accounted for a major portion (almost 62 per cent) of costs, followed by 
labour (19 per cent), other cost (15 per cent) and material (3 per cent).     
 
29. When the Committee enquired the reasons associated with the cost and time 
over runs, the Ministry, in their written submission to the Committee, stated as 
under:  
 Delays in Deli very of Equipment  - Delay in delivery of equipment by both 
indigenous and foreign vendors has been a major cause of project delays.  
Indigenization of certain weapons and sensors, and development by R&D 
organization takes time, resulting in time over runs.  Cases in example are 
IFF, SRGM, AK630, ATAS, EON 51 and Kavach for Project 17. 
 
 Indigenous development - Indigenization of equipment invariably involved 
development costs, technology induction/transfer costs and support costs.  
However, indigenization ha s its own spin offs and benefits for the nation 
as a whole and for the industry, which may not be quantifiable, but which 
is highly beneficial for development of an indigenous defence industrial 
base.  
 
 Soviet Disintegration  - The disintegration of former Soviet-Union from 
1989 to 1994 adversely affected the delivery schedule as well as the cost 
of the weapons and sensors for various projects. 
 
 Labor/Labour Overhead - The effect of periodic Wage Revisions & Labour 
Overheads cannot be overlooked.  Influence of this factor has been on the 
rise with time and has sometimes been beyond the estimated escalation 
of 7% per annum.  Even though this increase is anticipated, its actual 
magnitude can be unpredictable. 
 
 Obsolescence - Considering the long gestation perio d of Warship projects 
and ship's life of approximately 25 -30 years, despite concurrent design 
and construction, it becomes necessary at times to upgrade the weapons 
and sensors during execution of the project which is likely to result in time 
and cost overruns. 
 

-18- 
 
 
 
 Lack of Industrial Support Base  - In spite of considerable efforts towards 
indigenization, the ancillary industry is unable to provide desired support 
to the shipyards in terms of quality and time. 
 
 State-of-the-Art Technology - The need to have the  latest technology in 
equipment and materials and the Industry to develop and deliver the same 
has added to increased delivery schedules.  
 
30. When the Committee sought to know the delay in production and delivery and 
the cost escalation, the Vice Chief of Naval Staff, during oral evidence stated 
as under: 
"At the very outset, I must state that it is a very conscious decision of the Indian Navy 
along with the Ministry of Defence to ensure that cost and time overruns are avoided in 
any project.  As has been b rought out, you asked about the monitoring process.  There, 
we have ensured that there are Warship Overseeing Teams which are in position in 
each yard to monitor the project on an ongoing basis.   That means they are there 
positioned in the yard itself.  T hese are naval personnel who monitor the process.  We 
also ensure that working level meetings are held.  We use all means, including video 
conferencing to have these meetings so that construction activities can be monitored 
more closely and at all costs, a void the time and cost overruns.  The other aspect that 
you raised is with regard to the PACs.  As you are aware, defence equipment is not 
available off the shelf and therefore, there are a few vendors who come forward to 
supply us the equipment that is re quired.  It is in this regard that a PAC is issued and 
the main reason is that these are fundamental to design, therefore we need that 
particular item and the second aspect is for standardisation because we would not like 
too many types of the same equipme nt.  We would like commonality and we would like 
standardisation.  In this process, all the procedures that are laid down in the DPM as 
well as the procedures in the DPP are strictly followed. I can assure you that all efforts 
will be made hereinafter as well to see that all procedures laid down both in the DPM as 
well as in the DPP are adhered to."  
 
(iii) Delay in Signing of Contract 
 
31. The Defence Procurement Procedure, approved in July 2005, stipulates that 
the contract between the Ministry and the shipya rd is to be signed within a 
period of 12 to 18 months from the date of approval of the competent financial 
authority (CFA) in case of construction of new design ships and within 9 to 12 
months from the date of CFA approval for repeat orders. 
 

-19- 
 
 
 
32. Audit scrutiny pointed out that as the contracts had been signed much after 
construction had begun and in fact, had been signed after the originally 
expected dates of delivery.  Although contracts were inordinately delayed, 
construction activities were com menced on the basis of the Letters of 
Intent/CFA sanctions issued.  Thus, even before the contracts for P -15A and 
P-17 were signed in June 2008, the Navy had paid `2998.72 crore and 
`4942.9 crore to the shipyard in each case.  These amounts were 84 and 219  
per cent of the originally sanctioned costs. In the case of Project 28, as of 
September 2010, `1653.30 crore has been paid, i.e. 54.18 per cent of the 
sanctioned amount without conclusion of contract. 
 
33. When the Committee wanted to know whether multi compo nent contracts 
were being assigned accurately to the deals inked with the vendors, the 
Defence Secretary, during oral evidence, stated as under: 
 
".... .... .....  There will be a certain degree of variable components.  A contract has two 
parts, namely, fixed contract in case of ship building and the other is variable one.  What 
we have in the new system is, in cases where nomination is there, first approval will be 
in two parts, that is, variable and fixed component and the time limit will be given that 
within two years or 30 months they have to come back to the CCS and by that time, 
they have to firm up the variable component also.  Then, they should sign the contract 
for variable components also on the former costs.   Those practices were there which I 
do not deny.  Rightly, these things have been pointed out in the performance report 
also.  But we have put an end to that type of system." 
 
34. When the Committee sought to know the processes that caused delay in 
finalizing and designing of contracts, during ora l evidence, the Vice Chief of 
Naval Staff stated as under: 
"Sir, the blue print for the future Indian Navy is based on self -reliance and 
indigenisation. As the hon. Chairman was told, this is true for the warship construction. 
But it is our endeavour that this true for even the weapons and equipment that go on it. 
Largely, if we see on board a ship, we have the floating component which is largely the 
hull, the move component which is the propulsion systems and there is the fight 
component which comprises of  weapon systems and the sensors. In the hull 
component, we have no problem and no delays take place on that. We have overcome 
some issues with regard to propulsion as well though still in terms of gas turbines and 
sophisticated equipment still get imported .  The problem of delays largely take place 
because of the weapon and sensors. Here again, because of the Navy’s quest for self -
reliance, we have realised that we need to involve the DRDO because these are all 

-20- 
 
 
 
highly research intensive. So, they do researc h and development and then our Defence 
Public Sector Undertakings or others make them. This is an area where there has been 
a delay and efforts have now been made and if the hon. Chairman will see the progress 
made on the kind of warships and the delays wh ich took place 10 to 15 years ago and 
the delays taking place now, they have been reduced. It is a drawback and it is being 
corrected." 
 
35. Further, he added: 
"We have also had problems in the past because largely earlier we did not have many 
sources from which we could get cutting edge of technology and largely it would come 
only from the Soviet Union and then Russia. There have been many delays and 
particularly after the breakup of the Soviet Union there were large delays both in supply 
as well as cost ch anges. This is another reason which caused the delay.  Now that we 
are getting technology, efforts have been made to ensure that our ships are equipped 
with the latest technology because the life of a ship, firstly it takes 5 to 7 or 8 years 
depending on the type of ship to construct and then the life of the ship is at least 25 to 
30 years.  As the hon. Chairman mentioned, we would not like obsolete technology. 
Therefore, at times, we have systems which are still under -development which can be 
nominated to be put on a ship, but because delay takes place in those developmental 
processes, there is delay in the weapon aspect also. All these aspects including the 
issues that have been raised by the CAG have been taken note of and serious efforts 
are being made at all levels. There are aspects in R&D, something that the Navy has to 
do, something which are procedural because – defence procurement procedure is a 
very good procedure – but it takes time to resolve various issues. All aspects have been 
taken into account with a view to cut short the time delay and yet, have the cutting edge 
technology." 
 
36. To substantiate further query by the Committee in this regard, the Ministry, in 
their written reply, stated that a new warship design was an evolutionary 
process, which  took some time for maturing of details.  This was also the 
trend worldwide.  As a result of this, it was not possible to estimate cost of the 
ship with complete certainty at the beginning of a new warship project.  The 
nature of the acquisition planning p rocess led to taking time in signing of the 
contract for all indigenous warship projects.  However, with the promulgation 
of the streamlined procedure for defence shipbuilding as a part of DPP -2011, 
it was expected that contracts would be signed within the  time limits provided 
under DPP-2011. It may be noted that the contract for P -15B was concluded 
within a month’s time of approval accorded by the CFA.  The reasons for 
delays in shipbuilding projects were primarily a combination of unavoidable 

-21- 
 
 
 
dependency o n foreign sources for procurement of major weapons and 
sensors, and MoD’s aspirations for increased indigenous content in warships. 
Keeping in view the complexities of warship construction, the Defence 
Procurement Procedure envisages sanction of CCS for wa rships at two 
stages for nominated cases. 
 
37. When the Committee enquired whether any policy was formulated or was 
being formulated to arrest the delay in the completion of contracts, the CMD 
of Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL), during oral evidence, stated as under: 
"The basic thing is to ensure that the ship construction is not delayed.  Modernisation 
has a key role to play in it. As we are modernising, many new facilities are coming in 
and they ensure that the ships will come out in quicker time as contracted.  S econdly, 
improvements have been brought about as a consequence of better logistics within the 
country and also better sources of supply.  One of the key things in ship construction is 
having vendors who supply you items and equipment in time. There has bee n a 
remarkable change which has occurred, with what used to happen in 1990s and what is 
now there after 2010.  So, you would see in the coming years that there will be much 
lesser delays in the ship construction as a consequence of modernisation as well as  
better processes that have been put in place." 
 
38. Further, the CMD, Mazagon Dock Limited (MDL) also stated as under:  
"We are doing two things to make sure that ship construction projects are not delayed. 
One is the Government has invested heavily in our modernisation programmes.  I think 
the hon. Member had mentioned that the modernisation programme itself got delayed. 
But there were reasons for that, which were beyond our control. In one case there was 
a suspicion that the contractor who was about to be awarded a contract, perhaps had 
some foreign ownership and our Ministry was not comfortable with that.  So, we have 
lost about eight to ten months in finding out the correct ownership and then only we 
awarded the contract for the modernisation part. But modernisation programme is now 
going on very well.  As we are discussing here, Phase I of MDL modernisation has been 
inaugurated today by our hon. Raksha Rajya Mantri at Mumbai. I am here to be part of 
the discussions of the Committee.  This is the kind of importance that we give to this 
Committee.  Second is that with the support of Navy, we are going to make new ships 
with something called integrated construction.  All the modern warship building ship 
yards in the world are using this process.  It is our commitment to the Government that 
when 17 Alpha class frigates are made by us, they will be made by MDL and the GRSE 
using this methodology of construction which will ensure that we make ships in the 
world class time frame."  
 
(iv) Implications of Contractual Terms on Construction Activities 

-22- 
 
 
 
 
39. The Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP) which became effective from 
June 2005 also includes a Warship Building Procedure. The procedure 
stipulates that the contracts should be on ‘ Fixed Price’ basis indicating inter-
alia permissible price escalation, exchange rate variations, labour wage 
variation, increase in statutory levies and also m obilisation advance for 
undertaking preparatory activities for commencement of production. Further, 
as per DPP -2006 contracts are to be signed within a period of 12 to 18 
months from the date of approval of the CFA in case of construction of new 
ships and within nine to 12 months from the date of CFA approval for repeat 
orders.  In cases, where subsequent CFA approvals are necessitated, 
supplementary contracts are to be signed within six months of such approval.  
In case of delay in signing of contract, app roval of RM is to be sought with full 
justification for the delay. 
 
40. Audit scrutiny revealed that the contracts signed for P -17 and P -15A ships 
have, by and large, followed DPP guidelines and were ‘ fixed price’ contracts.  
The contracts for ship-building projects had been signed years after obtaining 
CCS approvals, commencement of production and issue of Letters of Intent 
(LoI), the sanctity of the contractual conditions was vitiated.  The contracts 
were more in the nature of formalizing events/costs which h ad already 
occurred. The contracts were eventually signed only much after obtaining 
approval of CCS to the revised cost estimates. 
 
41. When the Committee enquired whether the MoD had taken steps to obviate 
the recurrence of delayed conclusion of contracts for  ship building which 
resulted in financial implications, the Ministry in their written submission to the 
Committee stated that t he time-frame for signing of the contracts, post -award 
of project sanction, had been stipulated in DPP -2011, which would obviate  
delayed conclusion of contracts for naval shipbuilding.  In the case of Project 
15-B, the contract was signed in January 2011, within one month of CCS 
sanction. 

-23- 
 
 
 
 
42. When the Committee sought to know the rationale behind sanctioning of large 
advances by the Ministry to the shipyards on ad-hoc basis without any linkage 
with immediate utilization, the Ministry, in their written submission, stated that 
no “On Account ” payments to shipyards had been made since FY 08 -09. 
Since then, all payments were being made onl y if the linked contractual 
milestone had been certified by the concerned customer. Chapter III of the 
DPP stipulates that all payments to shipyards are to be linked to achievement 
of related contractual milestone(s). 
 
43. When the Committee desired to know the reasons for abnormal delay in 
signing of the ship building contracts with the shipyards, the Ministry in their 
written submission to the Committee stated that in case of P -17, the LoI was 
issued in January 1998. Howev er, the consideration amount of the contract 
became clear only after receipt of Russian Draft Supplementary Assignments 
in 2003. Since the total amount had exceeded CFA sanction, already existing, 
revised sanction had to be taken before signing of contract . The revised CFA 
sanction was obtained in March 2006.  For P -15A, LOI was issued in 2003 
and second stage CFA sanction was taken after firming up the cost of 
weapons in January 2006.  In both the cases, the contract was signed within 
30 months of revised CFA sanction.  In case of P -28, original CCS sanction 
for construction of four P -28 ships was accorded in 2003. However due to 
delay in availability of indigenous steel, finalisation of propulsion system (to 
ensure low underwater noise signature) and delay  in development of number 
of weapons and sensors, the cost and timelines were required to be revised 
which precluded signing of the contract. The revised CFA sanction was 
obtained in March 2012 and contract signed in June 2012. 
 
44. When the Committee enquired  about the efforts being made to neutralize the 
impediments, the Ministry, in their written submission to the Committee, 
stated that    the time -frame for signing of the contracts, post award of project 
sanction, had been stipulated in DPP -2011, which woul d obviate delayed 

-24- 
 
 
 
conclusion of naval shipbuilding contracts. As per DPP -2011, contracts 
should be on ‘ Fixed Price ’ basis for Follow -on ships and on Fixed Plus 
Variable Price in case of new design or Follow -on ships with substantial 
design/equipment change s based upon the first stage CFA approval, 
indicating inter alia permissible price escalation, exchange rate variations, 
increase in statutory levies etc. However, variable price element would be 
indicated on not exceeding basis in the Supplementary Contract based on the 
2nd stage CFA approval. This approach would ensure that delays due to non -
availability of firm costs of equipments/sensors which are under 
development/not finalised at the time of initiation of the projects are curtailed. 
DPP-2011 clearly s tipulates a period of 02 months post CFA sanction for 
signing of contract and the same was being strictly adhered to. 
 
45. When the Committee desired to know the reasons for delay in internal 
decision making process in respect of ship building projects and als o the 
efforts made by the Ministry's in this regard, the Ministry stated that there was 
no delay in internal decision making process in respect of shipbuilding 
projects. Further, force structures were projected in the MCPP upto 15 years 
in advance and AoN of such projects were pursued accordingly. 
 
46. On being enquired whether any timeline had been fixed for signing contracts 
as per DPP-2011 as also of the procedure followed, and if it was comparable 
worldwide, the Ministry stated that as per stipulations of D PP-2011, contract 
was to be signed within a period of two months from the date of CFA 
approval. In cases, where subsequent CCS approvals were necessitated, 
Supplementary Contracts were to be signed within two months of such 
approval. As per DPP -2011, contr acts should be on ‘ Fixed Price ’ basis for 
Follow-on ships and on Fixed Plus Variable Price in case of new design or 
Follow-on ships with substantial design/equipment changes based upon the 
first stage CFA approval, indicating inter-alia permissible price e scalation, 
exchange rate variations, increase in statutory levies etc. However, variable 
price element would be indicated on not exceeding basis in the 

-25- 
 
 
 
Supplementary Contract based on the 2nd stage CFA approval.  The DPP 
defines the contract signing timeli nes. Further it was intimated that there was 
no authentic information available in respect of average time taken by the 
global shipyards in signing of shipbuilding contracts.  
 
(v) Release of Funds 
 
47. A mobilization advance is allowed by DPP for ship -building contracts to 
undertake preparatory activities for commencement of production activities. 
Before conclusion of contracts funds were to be released as per LoI placed 
on the shipyard which contained the following provisions: 
 
1. P-15A: The funds were to be released based on completion of specific 
milestones.  An interest bearing advance of ` 312 crore paid to MDL in March 2002 
remained unspent till the end of the financial year 2004 -05 and was finally adjusted in 
December 2005 against th e pending bills of P -15A. In the mean time, MDL received a 
further advance of ` 216 crore in March 2003 despite the fact that MDL was unable to 
spend the advance of ` 312 crore. 
 
2.  P-17: No milestones were specified and MDL was to indicate funds requirem ent. 
 However, means of release of funds was not specified.  MDL was paid `75 crore 
 and `37.50 crore in 1997 -98 and 1998 -99 on account of advances which 
 remained unspent for two years. 
 
3. P-28: Similar to P-17 LoI provisions. 
 
48. The Ministry in their written submission to the Committee, explained the 
processes involved in the release of funds as under: 
 
(a) Stage/Milestone payments- Stage/Milestone payments released in a 
financial year in respect of each shipbuilding project were governed by contracts 
of each project. Moreover, each and every payment was specifically scrutinized 
at IHQ/MoD(N)/WOTs for each project before submission of the 
documents/invoices/bills to CDA. In addition, every payment was also pre -
audited at CDA prior to release of expenditure. 
(b) Payment norms for P-15A-  In case of P -15A, as per the payment norms, 
an interest bearing mobilization advance was admissible to the shipyard on issue 
of LoI. Accordingly, the interest on unutilised advance was adjusted while 
obtaining 2 nd stage CFA sanct ion. All payments post signing of contract was as 
per stipulated payment terms. 

-26- 
 
 
 
(c) Interest on advances paid to the yards-  Practice of paying advances to 
DPSU shipyards had been discontinued except for 1 st stage payment as per 
contract. Now, payments were ma de on contractual milestones. It may be noted 
that interest earned on the un -utilized portion of the mobilization advance had 
been paid to the Government from time to time. The total of such interest, after 
getting the same vetted both by the statutory and  internal Auditor, paid for the 
two years by GRSE was `19.36 crore. 
 
49. When the Committee enquired to know about the monitoring mechanism, the 
Defence Secretary, during oral evidence, stated as under: 
"We have an internal financial system. Of course, C&AG audit is also there. .... .... .... ....  
Whenever there is an observation, we have to reply. We are held responsible for that."  
 
50. The Ministry, in their written submission to the Committee, stated that it had 
concurred to the Audit recommendation which  stipulated that PCDA should 
maintain a statement of accounts for each shipbuilding project at the end of 
each financial year.  
 
51. Audit scrutiny further revealed that large amounts were sanctioned to the 
shipyards as advance, even on the last working day of  the financial year. In 
2004-05, 2005-06 and 2006 -07 advances totaling to more than ` 1000 crore 
were sanctioned in March with respect to Projects P-15A and P-17. 
 
52. Observations of the Audit point out that release of large funds in March 
without any linkages with immediate utilization were clear instances of parking 
of public funds outside Consolidated Fund of India and were aimed at 
avoiding the lapse of funds. As per extant financial rules MoD was required to 
surrender the excess funds to the exchequer rat her than parking them with 
shipyards. 
 
53. When the Committee sought to know the mechanism adopted by the Ministry 
to monitor the advances paid to the shipyards for purchase of equipments, 
etc. for ship building projects and whether the Ministry had any system  in 
place to monitor and control excess release of funds, the Ministry in their 

-27- 
 
 
 
written submission to the Committee stated that funds for various shipbuilding 
projects were released strictly on the basis of contractual terms and 
conditions, which were moni tored by IHQ/MoD (Navy).  While advances (on -
account payments) were released to DPSU shipyards till FY 2007 -08, this 
practice had now been discontinued and “ Nil” advances had been paid to 
DPSU shipyards during FY 09 -10 and FY 10 -11.  The allocation of fund s for 
the FY to each of the shipbuilding projects was made on the basis of shipyard 
projection and IN’s assessments.  However, payments were released to the 
shipyards by Controller of Defence Accounts (CDA) only on the basis of bills 
referred by the yard w ith supporting documents duly vetted by customer 
representative. 
 
(vi) Monitoring of Advances 
 
54. Audit scrutiny revealed that bulk advances were released to the shipyards 
against procurement of equipments but the accounting authority had not kept 
a track of their adjustments or credit verifications. No mechanism exists to 
reconcile the expenditure booked against the projects in the books of PCDA 
and respective DPSUs.  Demand register is a record maintained by Principal 
Controller of Defence Accounts for monito ring and liquidation of advance 
payments. It was noticed that PCDA (Navy) had not been maintaining 
Demand Register to regulate the payments made to GRSE against P28 and 
subsequent adjustments made against bills raised. 
 
55. The Ministry in their written submis sion to the Committee stated that the 
practice of paying advances to DPSU shipyards had been discontinued 
except for 1 st stage payment as per contract.  Subsequent stage payments 
were made on contractual milestones and the advance paid was liquidated on 
such subsequent payment stages. 
 
56. When the Committee sought to know whether the Ministry had taken steps to 
ensure reconciliation of the expenditure booked against the project by the 
accounting authority and the shipyards, the Ministry submitted that from tim e 

-28- 
 
 
 
to time, on an “as required”  basis, the Principal Controller of Defence 
Accounts (PCDA) sought reconciliation from the shipyards on various aspects 
of the expenditure incurred on the project. 
57. When the Committee questioned the rationale behind sanctioning  large 
advances by the Ministry to the shipyards till financial year 2007 -08 on adhoc 
basis without any linkage with immediate utilization of the sanctioned funds 
and whether the mechanism adopted by the Ministry to monitor the advances 
paid to the shipyards for purchase of equipment, etc. for ship building projects 
were being followed properly, the Ministry in the written submission to the 
Committee stated that prior to 2008 -09, “ on account ” payments were being 
made to the shipyards to meet requirements pr ojected by the shipyards. 
These advances were paid after due process of approval within the MoD.  
The advanced paid were adjusted against the cost incurred and interest was 
paid to the Government wherever indicated in sanction letters.  However from 
2009, these payments had been stopped and only payments as mandated by 
DPP-2011 were being paid.  No advances other than those mandated by 
DPP would be paid to the shipyards in future.   
 
 
IV. DELIVERY MANAGEMENT  
 
(i) Nomination and Readiness of Shipyards 
 
58. In order to augment the force levels of the Indian Navy, the Defence 
Acquisition Council (DAC), headed by the Raksha Mantri, in March 2003 
considered the Navy’s 15 -Year Shipbuilding Plan envisaging a certain 
number of ships with the Indian Navy by 2017.  T he ambitious ship 
construction plans led to Indian Navy sanctioning three major projects for 
warship constructions within a span of six years. 
 
59. The selection of shipyard was done by the Navy in consultation with the 
Department of Defence Production. As men tioned at earlier the nomination of 
shipyards for construction of Frigates, Destroyers and other larger ships was 
limited to MDL and GRSE. 

-29- 
 
 
 
 
60. MDL was nominated to construct the P -17 class of ships in 1998.  The 
construction of P -17 ships started late by 17 m onths in December 2000 as 
two ships of P-15 were in advanced construction stage at MDL.  Such parallel 
production of major warships was unprecedented. 
 
61. GRSE was nominated for the production of P -28 warships.  At GRSE, 
construction of the P -28 ships commenc ed after a three year delay from the 
sanctioning date. 
 
62. Recognizing that modern infrastructure was critical to reducing build periods, 
the Navy, sanctioned over ` 600 crore from 2003 onwards to MDL and GRSE 
with the aim to arrest time and cost overruns. 
 
63. In their Background Note, furnished to the Committee, the Ministry reiterated 
their stance on modernizing of shipyards by providing information as under:   
 
 
(a) Investment in modernization:  Modernization of DPSUs shipyards such as 
MDL & GRSE was being undert aken as part of ongoing projects of the Navy. 
Adequate funds were made available to shipyards as stipulated in the CFA 
sanction. 
(b) Infrastructure up-gradation:  Modernisation of infrastructures and facilities at 
MDL and GRSE were being progressed and likely to be completed by end of 
2011/early 2012.  MDL was being modernized at a total estimated outlay of ` 
1495 crore out of which ` 604 crore were through internal accruals. After 
completion of modernization, MDL will have Goliath Crane of 300 Tons, wet 
basin, hull fabrication and outfitting shop, module shop, cradle assembly shop 
etc.  GRSE was being modernized at a total outlay of ` 606 crore out of which ` 
275 crore was being funded through internal accrual. Post modernization GRSE 
will have a modern hull sh op, drydock of 10,000 tons capacity, inclined berth 
(4500 tons), Goliath Crane (250Tons) and module Hall, Paint Cell and associated 
equipment. Post completion of modernization, MDL and GRSE will have state of 
the art modular construction capabilities.  
(c) The Project P-28 is Anti Submarine Warfare (ASW) Corvette which is made by 
special steel hull. The special steel DMR -249A was developed by SAIL which 
started supplying it only by July 2005. Freezing of structural design was another 
issue which contributed to the delay in this project. It may be noted that detailed 
designing of this project was being undertaken by GRSE. 
 
 

-30- 
 
 
 
64. When the Committee desired to know what was the position of monitoring 
teams of the Indian Navy and the Ministry of Defence and whether due 
diligence was being practiced regarding technologies involved, the Controller 
(Warship Production and Acquisition)  of the Indian Navy, stated during oral 
evidence as under: 
"When we go for the review meetings in the ship yards we not only monitor the progress 
of the work there, we also look at what is the level of modernisation.  Also, in case of 
technical issues, the vendors they have gone to and the equipment coming into the ship 
is closely monitored by the review which is held in the ship yard.  We have a  warship 
overseeing team. Anything which goes on the ship has to be qualified by the overseeing 
team that it meets the naval standards." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
65. Further, he added: 
"When we procure any equipment, there is a technical negotiation done first. Then only, 
a price negotiation is done.  The Central Monitoring is done by the Controller (Warship 
Production & Acquisition)." 
 
66. Further, when the Committee sought information regarding the system of 
reviewing and monitoring and whether anybody was answerable in respect  of 
implementation of contracts or cost escalation, the Vice Chief of Naval Staff, 
during oral evidence, stated as under: 
"What the Navy has is that we have a Controller (Warship Production and Acquisition).  
He is a three-star officer. Under him, there is  a full organisation.  We have the Director -
General (Naval Designs).  We have the Directorate of Ship Production. We have the 
Warships Overseeing Team. It is his job. You have asked about a single point as to 
where all the inputs come. Indeed, coming to ev ery shipyard, the Warships Overseeing 
Teams monitor on a daily basis.  If something, as you said, is amiss or something needs 
to be reported, it is reported directly to the CWP&A’s office.  In addition, there is a multi -
tier mechanism like the Shipyard; th e Directorate and the DND in various aspects of 
contract management and to monitor the progress, the acquisition process and all the 
activities related to ship design as well as ship construction.  So, he is the single point 
authority that we have put in place." 
 
67. When the Committee sought to know the lessons that the Indian Navy learnt 
from its past experiences so that the shipyard modernization program placed 
a well defined naval ship delivery schedule, the Ministry in their written 

-31- 
 
 
 
submission to the Commi ttee stated that experience had shown that freezing 
of design was critical to curtail time overruns in shipbuilding projects. The 
major impediment in this regard was finalization of weapon and sensor fit. 
Towards this end, dedicated efforts were also being  made to ensure freezing 
of equipment at a relatively early stages of the project and firm dates for 
provision of binding data of all major equipment were included in the contract 
in consultation with the shipyard.  Further, a focused attempt was also bein g 
made to contain delays associated with weapons and sensors. While most 
weapons and sensors had traditionally been imported, attempts were being 
made to indigenize the same. The private Indian industry had also been 
encouraged to develop weapons/sensors. Collaborative efforts to build 
missile systems by DRDO had also been taken up, which were eventually 
expected to fructify into pure indigenous systems. While all these efforts were 
being vigorously pursued, results of the same would only be seen in the nex t 
5-6 years.  A due assessment of shipyard’s capacity is undertaken prior 
placement of order to ensure, the capacity constraints at the yard did not 
result in project delays.  Further, infrastructure upgradation through 
modernization projects were being undertaken in all major DPSU shipyards to 
leverage the advantages offered by modern ship building techniques. Further, 
strict and regular monitoring procedures at various levels had been put in 
place and were being strictly adhered to. Corrective actions ide ntified by 
these monitoring processes were formally promulgated and implementation 
ensured.  Promulgation of DPP-2011, which gave a streamlined procedure for 
undertaking shipbuilding projects, was also expected to help curtail delays 
and ensure quality ships and delivery on time and within budget.  
 
(ii) Modernization of Shipyards - MDL and GRSE 
 
68. Presently, facilities at MDL include three drydocks, three slipways and one 
wet basin. The need for modernisation  was felt as early as 1995 by the 
shipyard and accordingly, a modernisation programme was also developed 
by MDL. However, no action was taken on this plan. Later, when the LOIs 

-32- 
 
 
 
were issued for P17 and P15A shipbuilding projects (1998 -2001), MDL 
emphasized that these facilities needed to be available progressively between 
2003 and 2006 to attain the required shipbuilding capacity. 
 
69. In terms of financial effects, the cost of construction of P -15A would increase 
approximately by ` 175 crore for a delay of 24 m onths.  Audit also noted that 
due to the delay, the cost of modernisation also increased as the cost 
estimates were made based on the assumption that the modernisation would 
be completed by January 2007.  As on date, the modernisation cost of MDL 
was propo sed to be escalated from ` 423 crore to  
` 826.11crore, an increase of 96 per cent. 
 
70. GRSE has one dry dock, one wet basin, one building berth and two slipways.  
With the modernisation expected to cost approximately `270 crore in 2001 -
02, it was felt that N avy and GRSE would share the modernisation expenses 
at `180 crore and  
`90 crore respectively. Against Navy’s share of `180 crore sanctioned in 
March 2003, `141.69 crore was paid to GRSE ( `34 crore in March 2003 and 
another `107.69 crore in March 2007).  T he shipyard utilised `137 crore 
against a total payment of `141.69 crore made by Navy as of November 
2010. 
 
71. In December 2008, GRSE had computed the modernisation cost to be 
`605.81 crore with the revised distribution as `331.73 crore and `274.08 
crore in respect of Navy and GRSE.  Thus, despite sanctioning `180 crore for 
infrastructure development, the yard was unable to put in place the 
infrastructure required even after seven years of sanction of funds. 
 
72. When the Committee sought to know the modernization activities taking place 
in GRSE, the Secretary (Defence Production), during oral evidence, stated as 
under: 
 
 

-33- 
 
 
 
"The total amount involved in modernisation would be about ` 671 crore and this is 
moving on schedule.  I think some time during this year, April of this year, they are 
hoping to complete the modernisation process.  Insofar as the apex Committee 
meetings are concerned, I would admit that there have been some times w hen they 
have not been absolutely regular.  But I would like to assure the hon. Committee that 
they are being held very regularly now.  For the current period the last meetings were 
held in October and they would be held at six monthly intervals at the ape x level.  In 
addition, at the Navy level where again all concerned are involved, the CWP&A holds 
the meeting at a quarterly level and these meetings are being held on a very regular 
basis." 
 
73. The Ministry, in their Background Note, furnished to the Committee, stated 
that there was no linkage of modernization of MDL to Project P -15A.  Hence 
delay in modernization project would have no impact on the time and cost of 
Project P -15A.  The time overr uns in the indigenous shipbuilding projects 
were due to combination of factors like telescopic design, number of 
equipment/systems which were under development, delayed delivery of 
equipment/system by the manufacturer etc. The international standards of 
build period for frigates given by Audit were based on a frozen design and 
timely availability of proven equipment/system for installation during 
construction period of series construction of ships. MDL had concluded 
contract for P -15B with build period of t he first of class being 90 months 
though certain weapon and sensors were yet to be finalized.   GRSE would 
be building two ships under P-28 project in the building berth and the balance 
two in the dry dock.  The modern hull shop had been enhanced to make 
blocks upto 65 tons in phase -1.  Also, capacity of the building berth were 
enhanced to take care of launching of P -28 ships.  Hence delay in completion 
of modernization of Phase -2 had no major effect on construction schedule of 
P-28 ships. 
 
(iii) Slippages in Delivery 
 
74. Audit scrutiny revealed that at the time of original sanction of these three 
projects, delivery period of 78, 86 and 66 months was envisaged in respect of 
P15A, P17 and P28 respectively.  Against 108 months taken for P15 class of 

-34- 
 
 
 
ships, MDL wa s likely to take 129 and 144 months for the P15A and P17 
ships respectively. Also, these figures were almost double the originally 
envisaged Build Periods.  However, as the shipyards were not able to deliver 
in the specified period, the CFA approved a revi sed schedule, shown as 
under:   
 
Project/Date of 
Original/Revised 
Sanction 
Ship Original 
date of 
delivery of 
Ships 
Revised 
date of 
delivery  
Status as 
of 
September 
2010 in 
percentage 
terms 
Expected 
Date of 
Delivery 
P 17 
January 1998 
March 2006 
Ship 1 December 
2005 
September 
2008 
100 Delivered 
in March 
2010 
Ship 2 December 
2006 
May 2009 95.53 January 2011 
Ship 3 December 
2007 
December 
2009 
89.18 May 2011 
P 15A 
June 2001 
February 2006 
Ship 1 2008 May 2010 71.08 March 2012 
Ship 2 2009 May 2011 57.52 March 2013 
Ship 3 2010 May 2012 46.77 March 2014 
P 28 
March 2003 
Ship 1 August 2008 June 2012 47.67* June 2012 
Ship 2 August 2009 March 2013 27.86* March 2013 
Ship 3 August 2010 March 2014 11.79* March 2014 
Ship 4 August 2011 January 2015 5.36* January 2015 
*As of October 2010 
 
75. Shipyard efficiency in terms of the Build Period had not improved.  Even in 
the present shipbuilding projects being reviewed by Audit, the situation has 
remained by and large unchanged, if not worsened. 
 
76. During oral evidence, when the Committee wanted to know whether 
agencies, internal or external, caused delays, the Secretary (Defence 
Production), stated as under: 
"Sir, so far as the industry and the learning process are concerned, it has been 
projected before you that the Indian industry is still coming to the grips with the 
requirements of this industry.  I would only submit that the platforms which the Navy 

-35- 
 
 
 
develops and manufactures through the industrial DPSU, our shipyards are so diverse 
that the requirements are of a few parts to be produced over a period.  And, therefore, 
many a time the Indian industry does not find it very remunerative to specialise in that 
particular part and do it.  Therefore, what happens is that while we develop some 
general purpose vendors and they try to help, this process of development is always 
very difficult.  To address this problem our Navy follows a very defined path, which is 
very regular interactions with the vendors where the requirements of the shipyards of 
the Navy are projected to the vendors.  They are helped in developing these parts which 
are required for the ships." 
 
77. He further added: 
"It is a very elaborate process which is followed on a very continuing basis and that is 
how it has been possible to reach the indigenisation levels which have been reflected 
before you in the presentation made earlier.  But it is a very cumbersome and dif ficult 
process because very frequently even the best of our private sector companies, we find, 
do struggle to produce the specialised parts that are required.  Therefore, it is a very 
continuing battle to get it in order.  Many a times, the delays have tak en place because 
something which we had targeted to be developed within the country, even the very 
good vendors are not able to develop it in time and it results in certain delays.  So, there 
are several reasons for the delays.  One reason is indigenous ve ndors and then so far 
as the foreign vendors are concerned, there are certain countries where we find that 
their internal processes are so slow that to get to the ordering stage, it takes us 
sometimes almost two years and thereafter the delivery period sta rts.  While these are 
factored into our calculations, these orders are processed well in advance.  But still it is 
an uncertain process and it takes time.  Other contingencies also arise that while we 
have placed orders with a particular vendor in a countr y, he may renege on the contract 
and then it again takes time to go through the entire process of finding the lowest tender 
etc."   
 
78. Supplementing to the Committee's concern, he further added: 
"The third part of delays which you have mentioned relates to o ur own internal decision 
making processes.  I would admit that there have been instances of delay because of 
our internal decision-making process.  But I would like to assure the hon. Committee is 
that we are continuously looking and refining those process es.  These monitoring 
meetings which have been brought to your kind attention are one of the major means 
wherein all the Directorates, for example, the Navy or within the Defence Ministry there 
are other Wings which are associated with it.  Wherever the de lay is taking place, the 
concerned representative is called and he is made to expedite things.  So, these 
processes have been refining and over a period I think we are slightly better than what 
we were earlier in that.  But we still have a way to go in ref ining our own internal 
processes.  I would say that these two -three things are definitely are a factor and the 
Ministry has to continuously struggle to get it right to expedite the entire process." 
 

-36- 
 
 
 
79. The Ministry in their written submission to the Committee , stated that the 
issues of material delays increased with the dependency on overseas 
vendors for technology, weapons, sensors, equipment and a developing 
indigenous industry, controlling the delays on this account was very difficult 
for Indian Navy as well as the shipyard. 
 
80. When the Committee sought to know whether any time limit was being framed 
by the Ministry/NHQ for accepting the modifications so that the design of the 
Navy ship could be finalised timely.  Approval of modifications in a 
shipbuilding pr oject was governed by DPP -2011.  Modification proposals 
were assessed on the basis of time and cost for executing the same, as 
offered by the shipyard; and the modifications were approved at at the level of 
the Vice Chief of the Indian Navy, while taking c are not to jeopardise the 
overall cost and time frames for the project.  Further, for all future shipbuilding 
projects, there was a 4% cap on the modification cost that could be incurred 
on the project, as per DPP-2011. 
 
81. The design of Navy ships was telescopic in nature, i.e. the process of detailed 
designing ran concurrently with the ship construction i.e. changes to the 
preliminary design became inevitable.  Modifications also became necessary 
to keep pace with the technology changes during the build peri od, leading to 
delays both at the start of production and during construction, as shipyards 
were unfamiliar with the new technology. 
 
82. The design of a ship was also dependent upon the parameters of on -board 
equipment.    Delays were also noticed in finalizi ng weapon package which 
resulted in late receipt of binding data essential for design. Delays in 
indigenization resulted in impact on design. 
 
83. Addressing to the Committee's concern regarding design and technology 
issues, the Ministry, in their written subm ission to the Committee, stated that 
nomination of fully proven systems for new construction ships was not always 
advisable as the systems/technology may become obsolete by the time the 

-37- 
 
 
 
ship was commissioned. This resulted in outdated equipment fit on new ships.  
Therefore, equipment under development which was likely to fructify in the 
time-schedule of the ship build was nominated.  There was always a 
progressive attempt at indigenization and equipment which were under 
indigenous development were nominated .  IHQ MoD (N)/DSR regularly 
monitored the development of new equipment nominated for new construction 
ships and nominated alternatives, wherever possible, if the developmental 
process did not fructify in time.  Design of certain mission critical systems 
such as Combat Management Systems (CMS) and Ship Data Network (SDN) 
were significantly dependent on the equipment fit nominated and need to be 
designed/developed concurrently with the shipbuilding activity.  In such cases 
prototype system could not be devel oped and proven prior nomination. 
Design details of certain mission critical systems, like CAIO, which 
implements the warfare tactics of any country, were not readily available 
through open literature nor could be asked from any foreign OEM.  With 
nascent capability for development of such intricate systems in the Indian 
industry, the developmental time frames were bound to be extended. 
 
84. Further, the Ministry, while explaining the delays caused in selection of 
weapons and sensors, in their written submissio n to the Committee, stated 
that selection of weapons and sensors and vendors, took considerable time.  
A case in point was PDMS selection for P -17.  In spite of the decision for 
change in PDMS being conveyed to the shipyard in June 2004, it took 
considerable time to conduct price negotiations because clearance to go for 
BARAK PDMS for P-17 was given in October 2005 only after which order was 
placed in March 2006.  Even the propulsion system for a warship was not a 
COTS (Commercially Off-the-Shelf) item.  It was required to be tailor made to 
a particular design of a ship after undergoing iterations of analysis, which was 
time consuming. 
 
85. When the Committee sought to know as to what steps were being taken by 
the Naval HQ to address the issue of revision in cutoff date for freezing the 

-38- 
 
 
 
design of ships so that the delay in construction could be minimized, the 
Ministry, in their written submission to the Committee, replied that, i n 
shipbuilding contracts, designs were finalised on finalising equipment.  In new 
ship-building contracts, the dates for finalising the known equipment was 
agreed with the shipyard.  Navy took necessary administrative actions, 
internally, to monitor progress in meeting the contractual obligations of 
equipment finalisation. 
 
86. While the Committee sought to know the factors which were considered 
during modernization programme, the Defence Secretary, during oral 
evidence stated as under: 
"We have a continuous process also in that respect through the mechanism of 
consultations with in the Integrated Defence Staff as well as through the institution of 
Defence Acquisition Council.  We have a long term perspective plan which is for 15 
years.  This perspective plan is divided into a Five Year Plan.  This is a continuous 
process.  For eve ry two year we have this exercise and the changing pattern of threat 
perception is taken into consideration.  There is no doubt about it.  When we go for the 
perspective planning the three Services first make their own plans and thereafter this 
plan is int egrated in one perspective plan in light of the Raksha Mantri’s Op Directives 
which are also shared with the three Services.  These Op Directives are the unified 
directives integrated approach.  So, I would say that inter se financial priorities are also 
a part of the planning process." 
 
87. In response to a query of the Committee to know whether Ministry had 
devised any methodology for knowing the futuristic development in the field of 
weapons and sensors on the basis of which design/modifications could be 
decided in advance, the Ministry in their written submission to the Committee, 
stated that given the rapid strides in technology and long gestation period for 
developing system details of future weapons and sensors, the Indian industry 
was being encouraged to adopt the principle of modularity for future systems. 
This would help decouple system design and development of individual 
weapons and sensors from ship design and construction.  For its planning 
purposes, the Indian Navy also had a 15 -year Technology Per spective 
Capability Roadmap for the period 2012-2027. 
 

-39- 
 
 
 
88. Material issues were concentrated basically in the timely availability or not of 
specially fabricated material like fire -proof cabling, high tensile steel etc.  
However, there was an absence of backwar d linkages of the shipyards with 
strong and reliable vendors in India.  Not only was availability a problem but 
dependency upon a few international suppliers resulted in protracted 
negotiations and consequent delays. 
 
(iv) On-Board Equipment 
 
89. The reason for a new warship was often a new weapon or a new sensor.  
However, there was a great risk to design and construct a ship, which was to 
carry a major system that had not been proven.  Audit noticed that in the three 
projects presently under construction at M DL and GRSE, seven 
equipments/systems viz; ATAS, AISDN, EON51, CAIO, ATDS, LR SAM and 
Revathi; were still under development at the time of nomination. The 
performance of these equipments onboard the dedicated ships as well as their 
successful integration c an be evaluated only post commissioning of the ships. 
Naval Staff Qualitative Requirements (NSQRs) expressed the user’s 
requirements in terms of functional characteristics of a system, equipment etc., 
while the Statement of Technical Requirements (SOTR) enabled standardisation, 
inter-changeability, inter -operability, system integration etc. Audit noticed that 
certain equipments/systems were approved for use in the ships under Project 
15A, Project 17 and Project 28 despite their non -compliance with NSQR/SOTR  
formulated. Details are tabulated below: 
Sl. 
No.  
Project Name of 
System/Equipment  
Remarks 
1. P15A Asynchronous Transfer 
Switches 
ATM Switches with 
lesser capacity 
2. P15A/P28 Ship Weapon Interlock 
System 
The system will not 
transfer data at the rate 
prescribed in SOTR 
3. P28 Diesel Alternator The noise and vibration 
levels are higher than 
those stipulated in 
SOTR 
4. P28 Main Propulsion 
Change 
Navy accepted engines 
beyond the specified 

-40- 
 
 
 
N&V levels 
 
90. The Ministry, while replying to the Committee's concern about 
equipments/systems not complying with NSQR/SOTR standards, in their written 
submission to the Committee, stated that the Audit had observed acceptance of 
P-28 DAs and MEs with noise and vibration levels higher than those specified 
in the SOTRs. The Indian industry was gradually getting used to the stringent 
specifications of noise and vibration demanded by the Indian Navy. There had 
been instances where the first trials of equipment in the factor y did not meet 
the requirements. However, though permissions of the Navy and repeated 
rectification/trials, the DAs and MEs were brought up close to the required 
levels with some deviations which could be accepted.  The ATM switches of 
P-15A were a develop ment system and were based on the P -17 switches 
with similar capabilities. However, the referred technical specification had to 
be adapted to the specific fit on P -15A ships. As regards SWISS, the transfer 
rate was as per end node equipment capabilities. 
 
91. When the Committee sought to know that while nominating 
systems/equipments under development for the new projects, how did the 
Naval HQ ensure the capability of the same and what were the reasons which 
prevented the Naval HQ not to assume a cutoff date for  providing these 
systems/equipments so that the delay in completion of project could be 
minimized, the Ministry, in their written submission to the Committee, replied 
as under: 
 
(a) Equipment Nomination: The Naval Headquarters promulgates NSQRs of all 
weapons/systems/equipment that are to be procured or developed. NSQRs are 
the mandatory qualitative requirement to be met by the production/ development 
agencies. This ensured that capability of the equipment met the Navy’s 
requirements.  During the development pr ocess, the Navy monitored all 
developmental projects through Preliminary Design Reviews/Critical Design 
Reviews and  regular progress review meetings to ensure that the project was 
progressing as per the NSQRs and within the given timelines. 
 
(b) Delays in Developmental Projects: Almost all development processes were 
complicated, requiring the realisation of science, technology, engineering, ToT and 

-41- 
 
 
 
production of all the components of an equipment/weapon. Components that involved 
critical technology, especi ally those under denial regimes, took the maximum time for 
development and caused delays in completion of projects. All development projects also 
had to necessarily pass through User Evaluation Trials before being accepted and 
inducted in service. 
 
(c)  Assumption of Cut-Off Date: In case the equipment deliveries were 
expected to go beyond acceptable cut -off dates, the particular developmental item was 
delinked from the delivery of the ship, and the ship was delivered “fitted” for the 
equipment by the shipyard. 
 
 
(v) Monitoring Mechanism 
 
92. Warship building being a complex task, involved a number of agencies.  Such 
interaction required close co -ordination and constant monitoring.  Audit was 
unable to identify a single agency responsible for ensuring timely completion 
of the projects. 
 
93. A large number of conflicting issues were resolved in these review meetings 
chaired by CWP&A to ensure smooth progress of projects. 
 
94. Shipbuilding projects were monitored at different levels, a Naval Warship 
Overseeing Team was stationed for technical scrutiny of bills, resolving 
technical issues, etc. Naval Headquarters also monitored shipbuilding 
progress through CWP&A (Controller of Warship Production and Acquisition) 
Progress Review Meetings (CPRM) on a quarterly basis chaire d by the 
CWP&A with representation from officers of Director General, Naval Design 
(DGND), representatives from WOT, and concerned shipyards.  At the 
Ministry level, an Apex Steering Committee under the chairmanship of 
Secretary (Defence Production) with J oint Secretary rank officers (MoD), 
Financial Adviser, and representative from IHQ MoD (Navy) and respective 
shipyards was held every six months to review ongoing projects. 
 
95. When the Committee desired to know as to what steps were being taken by 
the Minist ry to ensure close co -ordination and constant monitoring by the 

-42- 
 
 
 
agencies involved, the reply of the Ministry in their written submission to the 
Committee stated that close coordination and monitoring was an essential 
part of warship building.  This coordin ation was required between many 
agencies such as MoD, Indian Navy, Shipyards, the DPSUs supplying major 
equipments and material, and many Indian and foreign firms which supplied 
important equipments.  The project teams at IHQ MoD (Navy) maintained 
constant interaction with the shipyards through frequent Working Level 
Meetings to address all issues of the project.  There were other higher levels 
of monitoring through Pre-CPRM, CPRM and Apex Committee meetings. The 
professional directorates of the Navy mainta ined constant supervision over 
the equipment suppliers to ensure that all technical issues were resolved and 
equipment delivery timelines were realised within minimal delays.  Further, 
the procurement of indigenous equipment from OFB and PSUs/DPSUs like 
BEL and BHEL were also monitored by Steering Committee meetings chaired 
by the Indian Navy’s Chief of Material (COM). 
 
96. When the Committee sought to know that inspite of having various levels of 
monitoring, why did the Ministry fail to learn lessons from the past mistakes 
and continuously failed to ensure adherence to timelines leading to time and 
cost overruns in ship building project, the Ministry in their written submission 
to the Committee, stated that while there was continuous monitoring of 
projects at v arious levels, the complexities and uncertainties involved in the 
warship building process inevitably resulted in some cost and time overruns. 
Although, efforts were being made to deliver ships on time and within budget, 
there were a number of factors, som e anticipated and other unanticipated 
whose impact could not be predicted at the time of seeking sanction.  Delays 
due to the requirement of importing weapons and sensor system , which were 
invariably associated with issues of export licenses, delays due t o 
developmental projects (to ensure availability of State -of-the-Art Technology 
at time ship’s delivery) and dependence on foreign suppliers for propulsion 
systems had made estimating the timelines and cost, very difficult.  

-43- 
 
 
 
 
97. On being enquired whether any time limit has been prescribed for each stage 
of project from approval till commissioning, the Ministry, in their written reply 
to the Committee, stated that warship building was an extremely complex 
activity with long gestation period requiring integration of multiple components 
and involving multiple agencies. The genuine inability to forecast realistic time 
frames arose from some endemic factors such as:- 
(a) The need to have state of the art weapons and sensors at the time of 
 induction of warships;  
(b) Dependence on developmental items to induct the latest technology etc.; 
(c) Problems associated with export license for imported weapons and  sensors; and 
(d) Delays in indigenisation efforts.  
 Such delays were not unique to India but was prevalent all over the world. 
Notwithstanding the same, all efforts were made to bring economy, efficacy and 
efficiency through proper planning, scheduling, monitoring and course correction at 
different levels. Timelines for major milestones such as production start, ke el laying, 
launching, delivery etc were defined in the master control network, start and finish dates 
of other activities were also defined on a PERT.  
98. When the Committee desired to know whether the contracts signed with 
foreign vendors/suppliers contained  provisions pertaining to Liquidated 
Damages (LD), the Ministry in their written submission to the Committee, 
stated that the LD clause was included as a Standard Clause in accordance 
with provisions of DPP -11 with all OEMs.  Further, the Committee sought to 
know that in case of late supply of weapons and sensors by the foreign 
vendors/suppliers, whether the Ministry could invoke the suitable clause of 
Liquidated Damages, the Ministry stated that LD was invoked in all cases of 
late delivery unless it satisf ied the ‘ force Majeure ’ Clause as agreed in the 
Contract in accordance with the DPP. 
 
99. When the Committee enquired to know that while nominating 
systems/equipment under development for the new projects, what were the 

-44- 
 
 
 
reasons which prevented the Ministry/Ind ian Navy from assuming a timely 
cutoff date for providing these systems/equipment for shipbuilding, the 
Ministry in their written submission to the Committee, stated that the cutoffs 
for provisioning of various equipment being developed by DRDO were 
decided well in time by the Ministry/Indian Navy. However, during the process 
of identification/progressing the cases for AoN for induction of alternate 
equipment (due to delays in development by DRDO), continued insistence of 
DRDO to provide equipment lead to shifting/amendment of cutoffs. 
 
100. When the Committee sought to know that despite maintaining constant 
supervision over the equipment suppliers by the professional directorates of 
the Navy, why there had been inordinate delays in realizing equipment 
delivery timelines leading to huge time overrun in ship building, the Ministry, 
stated that, the delay in delivery of equipment was generally observed in 
equipment that were developed specifically for the Navy using technologies 
that had not completely matured.  Mos t of the delays had happened in the 
case where the nominated systems had been “ developmental” in nature, viz., 
LRSAM for P-15A, SRSAM for P-28, IRL for P-15A & P-28, CMS-17, SDN-17, 
VCS Mk II, etc.  This developmental nature projects were in keeping with 
MoD directives for greater thrust towards indigenization of weapon and 
systems onboard IN Warships. The SQRs of these systems had been drawn 
up by IHQ (N)/DSR based on futuristic requirements of the IN and to be 
current with the available technology at the time of commissioning of the ship. 
The mechanism of supervision of the equipment supplier, had resulted in 
modification to design during review meetings, and consequently delayed the 
timely delivery of these systems. In the case of CMS -17, there had been 
inordinate delay of over 27 months by Russian OEM for delivery of few 
subsystems, which precluded timely delivery of the complete CMS system.  
 
101. When the Committee intended to seek information regarding the Ministry's 
proposal to strength the existing monitoring system which was ineffective in 
ensuring coordination amongst the Ministry of Defence, Indian Navy, 

-45- 
 
 
 
Shipyards, PSUs and Indian and foreign  firms which supplied important 
equipment, the Ministry, in their written submission to the Committee, stated 
that the delays in delivery of complex state of the art developmental systems 
through indigenous firms were opined to be reasonable for greater se lf-
reliance and long term product supportability through indigenous industry, 
especially considering that the order quantities were limited vis-à-vis the 
developmental efforts required for these systems. For developmental 
systems, project monitoring terms at various levels from working level to Apex 
level were incorporated. Regular interaction with all stake holders were 
implemented to prevent major delays. Apart from this, periodic reviews by 
Professional Directorates and APSOs had also been institutionali zed with the 
concerned OEMs/development agency to minimize delays. Equipment OEMs 
were also invited to participate in CPRMs where in equipment delivery 
schedules were reviewed.  
 
102. The Committee sought the details of quarterly review meetings held with 
shipyards for P-15A, P-17 and P-28, to which the Ministry furnished as below: 
 
P17 P15A P-28 
28 Apr 06 28 Apr 06 30 Mar 05 
24 Aug 06 24 Aug 06 05 Aug 05 
28 Dec 06 28 Dec 06 30 Nov 05 
17 Apr 07 17 Apr 07 09 Mar 06 
17 Aug 07 17 Aug 07 05 Jul 06 
24 Nov 07 24 Nov 07 24 Nov 06 
14 Mar 08 14 Mar 08 07 Mar 07 
13 Jun 08 13 Jun 08 29 Jun 07 
12 Nov 08 12 Nov 08 09 Oct 07 
15 Apr 09 15 Apr 09 26 Feb 08 
29 Aug 09 29 Aug 09 04 Sep 08 
20 Jan 10 20 Jan 10 15 Jan 09 
08 Jul 10 08 Jul 10 12 Aug 09 
11 Feb 11 11 Feb 11 29 Jan 10 
09 Dec 10 
29 Jul 11 
 

-46- 
 
 
 
 In addition to the above, regular visits were made by the respective project 
officers & DGND to the shipyards.  The projects were also reviewed by video 
conferencing on a regular basis. 
[[[[ 
103. Further, the Committee sought details of the Apex level Committee 
meetings held with shipyards for P -15A, P-17 and P-28, to which the Ministry 
furnished as below: 
 
P17 P15A P-28 
09 Dec 05 09 Dec 05 23 Jun 05 
03 Jul 06 03 Jul 06 07 Dec 05 
19 Dec 06 19 Dec 06 13 Jul 06 
09 Jul 07 09 Jul 07 17 Jan 07 
19 Dec 07 19 Dec 07 03 Jul 07 
09 Sep 08 09 Sep 08 05 Mar 08 
27 Dec 08 27 Dec 08 03 Oct 08 
23 Jun 09 23 Jun 09 23 Jan 09 
28 Feb 11 28 Feb 11 28 Feb 11 
 
 Follow-up action by various wings/departments/agencies was continuously taken 
on the actionable points emerging from these meetings. 
104. When the Committee sought to know as to when was the Apex Level 
committee set -up and what were the major issues/agenda discussed in the 
Apex Level Committee meeting held with the shipyards for P -15A, P-17 and 
P-28 ships and whether there had been any short fall in the number of such 
meetings held, replying to the Committee's query, the Ministry, in their written 
submission to the Committee stated that the Apex Steering Committee to 
review ongoing projects on Defence Shipyards had been constituted under 
the Chairmanship of Secretary (Defence Production) with the approval of 
Raksha Mantri vide GOI OM 21/38/2003/MDL(SY) dated 24 Sep 2003.. The 
first Apex Steering Committee meeting was held on 19 th December 2003. 
Delays in delivery schedule of various equipment, physical progress being 
achieved by the shipyards, upcoming milestone activities, contractual issues 
and likely delays in delivery schedule of the ships were in general discussed 

-47- 
 
 
 
during the Apex  Steering Committee meetings. The details of the Apex level 
committee meetings held with shipyards for P -15A, P -17 and P -28 are as 
follows:- 
 
P17 P15A P28 
19 Dec 03 19 Dec 03 - 
05 Oct 04 05 Oct 04 - 
21 Jul 05 21 Jul 05 23 Jun 05 
09 Dec 05 09 Dec 05 07 Dec 05 
03 Jul 06 03 Jul 06 13 Jul 06 
19 Dec 06 19 Dec 06 17 Jan 07 
09 Jul 07 09 Jul 07 03 Jul 07 
19 Dec 07 19 Dec 07 05 Mar 08 
09 Sep 08 09 Sep 08 03 Oct 08 
27 Dec 08 27 Dec 08 23 Jun 09 
23 Jun 09 23 Jun 09 11 Mar 11 
28 Feb 11 28 Feb 11 28 Nov 11 
30 Oct 11 30 Oct 11 02 Nov 12   
 In addition to the Apex Steering Committee meetings, shipbuilding projects were 
being closely monitored through a strong monitoring mechanism which includes the 
following:- 
(a) WOTs, which had been positioned in all the shipyards, reported the 
 progress of projects on a continuous basis to IHQ; 
(b) Shipyards had been networked with production directorates at IHQ and 
 working level meetings were held through Video Conference on a regular  basis; 
(c) Regular working level meetings were conducted at the shipyards; and 
(d) High level review meetings in the form of CPRMs (at the yards) were held  at 
appropriate intervals. 
 The above mechanism which was followed to monitor the progress of projects 
was considered adequate. Notwithstanding the same, it was also proposed to increase 
the frequency of CPRMs by holding these high level reviews alternately at the shipyard 
and IHQ. 

-48- 
 
 
 
105. When the Committee pointed out certain discrepancies in the Apex  level 
Committee meetings, the Secretary (Defence Production), stated during oral 
evidence as under: 
"Insofar as the apex Committee meetings are concerned, I would admit that there have 
been some times when they have not been absolutely regular.  But I wou ld like to 
assure the hon. Committee that they are being held very regularly now.  For the current 
period the last meetings were held in October and they would be held at six monthly 
intervals at the apex level.  In addition, at the Navy level where again all concerned are 
involved, the CWP&A holds the meeting at a quarterly level and these meetings are 
being held on a very regular basis." 
 
106. When the Committee enquired as to why no Apex Level Committee 
Meeting was held in the year 2010, the Ministry, in thei r written submission to 
the Committee, stated that concerns of PAC had already been noted by 
Ministry and it was informed during the oral evidence held on 31 st January 
2013, that in future Apex Steering committee meetings would be held 
periodically as stipulated in DPP-2011.  
 
107. When the Committee sought to know that what were the actionable points 
that emerged from the Apex Level Committee meetings and what follow -up 
actions had been taken by the various wings/departments/agencies, the 
Ministry in their writ ten submission to the Committee, stated that delays in 
delivery schedule of various equipment, physical progress were being 
achieved by the shipyards, upcoming milestone activities, contractual issues 
and likely delays in delivery schedule of the ships wer e in general discussed 
during the Apex Steering Committee meetings. Further, action required by all 
stake holders including the shipyard, the design/production directorate, DPSU 
equipment suppliers etc. were listed indicating clear timelines for completion . 
Directives for augmentation of resources at shipyards to meet required 
progress of shipbuilding projects and infrastructure upgradation requirements 
were also discussed and plan for implementation of the same were laid down.  
 
V. PROCUREMENT 
(i) Procurement Procedure 
 

-49- 
 
 
 
108. The shipyard initially prepares an equipment ordering schedule as part of 
the build strategy and indicates a requirement of Ordering Instructions (OI) for 
equipment from the Production Directorate (DND). The actual equipment 
procurement process started with the NSQR (Naval Staff Qualitative 
Requirements) and based on the same the concerned professional 
directorate (DME/DEE/DWE/DNA) prepared the SOTR (Statement of 
Technical Requirements). The professional directorates issued SO TR along 
with the short listed vendors to the Production Directorate who in turn issues 
the OIs to the shipyard to take the procurement action for the equipment. The 
guiding factors for short listing of vendors and procurement of equipment are: 
 
 ● Standardisation of proven equipment; 
 ● Reliability of proven equipments performance; and 
 ● Self-reliance/indigenization 
 
109. The Navy nominated vendors for various equipment, weapons and 
sensors and the shipyard, in turn, procured them from the vendors. This 
process effectively restricted competition and lowered transparency. 
 
110. The Indian Navy sought to maintain commonality in its on -board 
equipment among ships. As such, financial prudence would demand that 
Navy co-ordinate with shipyards in the procurements of these equipment. 
 
111. The Ministry, in their written submission to the Committee, trying to justify 
the economies of scale in warship building stated that each of the warship 
building projects underway in each shipyard was governed by a separate 
contract. Depending on shipbuilding schedule, the required delivery dates of 
equipment for various projects underway in different shipyards was different.  
Further, the actual scope of supply and structural terms and conditions of the 
different shipyards were different. Howe ver, shipyards exchanged necessary 
information on pricing in order to get the best deals.  As recommended by 
Audit, a greater co -ordination, to the extent feasible, in procurement of 
common equipment was certainly recommended. 

-50- 
 
 
 
 
112. When the Committee desired t o know the reason behind adopting a 
separate procedure of nomination of vendors by the Navy for procurement of 
equipments for the ships being constructed at Indian shipyards while it followed 
open tendering for its own procurement, the Ministry, in their w ritten 
submission to the Committee, stated that similar procedures were adopted for 
selection of vendors within the Navy for its own procurement, and for 
procurement of equipment for the ships being constructed at Indian 
shipyards. Standard multiple vendor lists for each Engineering/Hull equipment 
were available and were provided to the shipyard, and were also used by the 
Navy for its own procurement.  In some cases, nomination of equipment 
became important from considerations of equipment standardisation, 
maintenance etc., which was governed by Para 41, Section A, Chapter III of 
the DPP-2011. 
 
113. When the Committee sought to know the rationale behind issuing 
Proprietary Article Certificate (PAC) status to Indian PSUs for the 
equipments/system when there was considerable amount of foreign 
exchange involved in these procurements, the Ministry replied that n o PAC 
status had been accorded to any Indian PSU for procurement of any 
Engineering/Hull equipment/system.  Article 2.4.8(b) of the Defence 
Procure ment Manual (DPM) states that "Any item developed / 
manufactured by a Defence PSU specifically for the Defence Services, with 
transfer of technology or through design and development, should be 
procured from the concerned Defence PSU only. Similar, Defence PSUs shall 
be approached for providing any service, such as repairs and overhauling, if 
facility for providing such services has been set up  by a Defence PSU 
exclusively for the Defence Services". Para (c) of the same article further 
states "that such cases will not be treated as STE/PAC procurements". 
This provision of the DPM was used for procurements through Defence 
PSUs. 
 

-51- 
 
 
 
114. During oral evidence, when the Committee sought more information on 
PAC and whether it was being denied to Indian firm s, the Defence Secretary 
stated as under: 
 
 
"Sir, you have referred to this issue of PAC. Navy which has been referred in the audit 
report, we have addressed in our replies to the audit also this particular aspect.  
Essentially the observation of C&AG rela tes that in some cases probably it did not look 
like that the tender may have been given to one vendor who would be treated as the 
Proprietor Article Supplier.  This was the basic nature of the objection and the 
observation of the C&AG.  We have tried to a nswer that by stating broadly that with 
regard to issue of PAC there is a very elaborate and a very deliberate process is 
followed.  While there are instances where there may have been more than one vendor, 
it is true and the observation of the C&AG is cor rect that in some cases there may have 
been more than one vendor and for technological reasons and the design philosophy, 
the threat perception which Navy has assessed, they have chosen a particular 
configuration of the ship and in that particular configur ation that particular supplier 
happens to be the best possible supplier.  Therefore, in our procurement procedure 
there is a provision that certain items would have to be selected by Navy because it is a 
question of perception and not just the question of a L -1 situation, but it is on the 
country’s security that I must choose a weapon, I must choose capabilities which would 
best serve the security of the country.  Therefore, this sort of decisions has been taken 
and they are part of the mandated provisions in the defence procurement procedure.  I 
think broadly, CAG has agreed to such assertions.  I do not know whether you have 
anything to add to that but broadly, we have been able to satisfy this argument and 
CAG has found it to be all right." 
 
115. When the Committee enquired whether the Ministry of Defence/Navy had 
made any attempt to find out vendors globally for equipments/systems before 
according PAC status to firms, the Ministry stated that the PAC status was not 
accorded to any firm for initial  procurement of any equipment.  All new 
inductions were done through Limited Tender Enquiry (LTE) involving multiple 
vendors. PAC status was accorded to a firm for procurement of spares once 
the equipment had been inducted into service.  Identification of new vendors 
and technology was a continuous process, and the Navy was also actively 
involved in identifying new vendors globally. 
 
116. When the Committee sought to know the mechanism adopted in the 
evaluation of the performance of a firm and what internal controls are in 
place in ministry/ Naval HQ to ensure that supply orders for purchase of 

-52- 
 
 
 
equipments/stores are not placed on firm(s) whose performance in the past 
had been erratic and not up to the mark, the Ministry in their written submission 
to the Committee, stated that the performance of the equipment in service and 
the performance of the vendor in providing product support/services was 
monitored/periodically reviewed by various agencies in field, Command 
Headquarters, Repair Organisations and Naval Headquarters.  In case the 
performance of a firm was not up to the mark, the firm was given a tender 
holiday or black -listed for future acquisitions. 
 
117. In the absence of open tendering procedure, the Committee wan ted to 
know whether the absence of open tendering procedure, the placement of 
huge number of orders to one or two vendors indicated the lack of 
transparency and accountability and what measures were being taken by 
Navy for expanding their vendor base so as to increase competition, 
accountability and transparency, the Ministry in their written submission to the 
Committee, stated that the Engineering/Hull equipment used for warships 
were peculiar and had to meet stringent requirements like shock, vibration, 
operations in roll/pitch environment etc. There were only limited vendors who 
manufactured marine-grade equipment.  A new vendor/equipment could be 
considered only after it had been evaluated. The Indian Navy continuousl y 
kept in touch with world -wide developments and made efforts to identify 
additional vendors who could meet its requirements.  Expansion of vendor 
base was an ongoing process, and in the last few years the vendor base for all 
major engineering/hull equipment had been expanded to increase competition 
and transparency. Additional vendors had been identified for Gear Boxes, 
Pumps, Reverse Osmosis plants, Oily Water Separators, Water Jets, Modular 
Accommodation, HVAC (Heating, Ventilation and Air -Conditioning) systems 
etc. in the recent past. 
 
118. When the Committee desired to know as to why the Indian Navy followed 
a policy of nominating vendors for various equipment, weapons and sensors 
which restricted competition and lowered transparency, the Ministry in their 

-53- 
 
 
 
written submission to the Committee, stated that t he standard and quality of 
equipment required for the naval warships were extremely stringent in terms 
of the specifications. At most times these specifications could not be met by 
the commercially available  equipment. A detailed assessment of the 
equipment offered by the OEM vis-à-vis the requirements of the Indian Navy 
was undertaken by the Professional Directorates before the vendor was 
shortlisted for supply of the equipment. These specifications include the ability 
to withstand shock, stealth requirements like Structure Borne Noise  and Air 
Borne Noise, reliability, maintainability, adherence to defence/military 
standards during manufacture etc.   Further, limiting the vendor base also 
resulted in standardization of the equipment and avoids equipment 
proliferation leading to lesser i nventory holding cost and improving availability 
of the spares in the Material Organizations. New vendors who wished to offer 
their equipment were encouraged and given an opportunity and the vendor 
list was constantly updated based on availability of equip ment that were able 
to meet the naval/military standards.  
 
119. When the Committee sought to know the meaning and the purpose of the 
Proprietary Article Certificate (PAC) issued by the Navy to the vendors, the 
Ministry in their written submission to the Commit tee, explained that c ertain 
items, particularly equipments, were the propriety product of a manufacturing 
firm. Such items were only available with that firm or their dealers, stockists or 
distributors as the detailed specifications were not available for others to 
manufacture the item. Situations may also risen when, for standardization of 
machinery or ensuring compatibility of spare parts with the existing sets of 
equipment, as per the advice of the competent technical expert, goods and 
services had to be  obtained from a particular source. In such situations, a 
Propriety Article Certificate (PAC) may be issued to the original equipment 
manufacturer (OEM) and items procured on PAC basis from that particular 
firm or its authorized dealers, stockists or distr ibutors in accordance with 
serial 4 of annexure 1 to NI 1/S/2006 and para 4.5.1 of DPM - 2009. 

-54- 
 
 
 
Contracts for equipment and spares could be awarded directly to a firm 
holding a PAC for the particular equipment.  This had a twofold benefit of 
ensuring genuin e spares/equipment which were directly procured from the 
Original Equipment Manufacturer and the middlemen were obviated from the 
process. 
 
120. Further, when the Committee desired whether the importance of PAC in 
awarding defence contracts was a pre -requisite, the Ministry in their written 
submission to the Committee, stated that as far as possible, items of general 
nature were procured through competitive bidding. However, manufacturer 
specific items of equipment, machinery and spares required for specific use in 
the Navy were required to be procured on PAC basis for reasons of fitness, 
availability, quality and standardization. The PAC in case of Weapons and 
Sensors were not used for procurement of main equipment. All units/sub -
systems/components used in the m ain equipment manufactured by the 
particular OEM were proprietary of the firm or his authorized sub -vendor. 
Accordingly, PACs were issue to facilitate product support in procurements of 
the spares/requisite support services.  Certain items, particularly eq uipments, 
were the propriety product of a manufacturing firm. Such items were only 
available with that firm or their dealers, stockist or distributors as the detailed 
specifications were not available for others to manufacture the time.  
Situations may als o have risen when, for standardization of machinery or 
ensuring compatibility of spares parts with the existing sets of equipment, as 
per the advice of the competent technical expert, goods service had to be 
obtained from a particular source. In such situa tions, a Propriety Article 
Certificate (PAC) could be issued to the original equipment manufacturer 
(OEM) and items procured on PAC basis from that particular firm or its 
authorized dealers, stockists or distributors in accordance with serial 4 of 
annexure 1 to NI 1/S/2006 and para 4.5.1 of DPM 2009. Contracts for 
equipment and spares could be awarded directly to a firm holding a PAC for 
the particular equipment. This had a twofold benefit of ensuring genuine 

-55- 
 
 
 
spares/equipment, were directly procured from th e Original Equipment 
Manufacturer and the middlemen were obviated from the process. 
 
121. The Committee have also been informed that no separate PAC was 
required to be issued to Defence PSUs. PAC status was accorded to other 
Indian PSUs as and when required and  merited based upon the necessity 
with respect to quality, availability and standardization and ensuring 
compatibility of spare parts with the existing sets of equipment, as per the 
advice of the competent technical authority. The criteria for consideratio n for 
award of PAC status to foreign vendors also remained the same as that for 
Indian vendors as per para 4.5.1 of DPM - 2009. 14 International Firms and 
03 Domestic Firms have been accorded PAC status for various equipment. 
 
  
122. When the Committee sought t he details of the initiatives being taken by 
the Indian Navy/Ministry to identify new vendors globally, the Ministry, in their 
written submission to the Committee, stated that identification of new vendors 
was undertaken as part of induction of new systems  through the process of 
RFI, as stipulated in DPP -11. The refining of vendor base was continuous 
process. The refining was done through RFIs, capability demonstration during 
seminars, exhibitions and literature study from the open source/various 
domains in cluding through Defence attaches posted at different countries 
abroad. Perspective vendors were requested to submit their products for 
evaluation of Indian Navy authorities on NC -NC basis. Induction of LED 
based lights, Automated Fire and Flood Alarm/Warni ng systems, Indigenous 
Rocket launchers, Indigenous Torpedo Tube launchers etc. had been 
progressed through such efforts in increasing the vendor base. 
 
123. Further, continuing the measures that had been taken by the Indian 
Navy/Ministry to ensure timely deliv ery of weapons/sensors/parts/equipment 
by the vendors, in their written submission to the Committee, the Ministry 
have stated as under: 
 
 

-56- 
 
 
 
(a) Periodic monitoring of the deliver/project schedules by the Professional 
Directorates, the APSO and subsequently at the PSO level was undertaken. 
Further, the Navy had been strict in imposing of LD clause to ensure minimal 
delays in deliveries. Further, inordinate delays were taken up even at the highest 
level of Inter Governmental Cooperation meetings. 
 
(b) 02 firms were o bserved to be erratic in their performance. Out of this, one firm 
(M/s Indocem, Mumbai) was debarred/ deregistered for tender issue. In the case 
of the other firm M/s ROS(I), the PACs had not been renewed. However, these 
were related to repairs and support  issues and not to main equipment induction. 
Further, the Navy had been strict in imposing of LD clause (to serve as a 
deterrent) to:- 
 
(a) Indigenous Rocket launchers; 
(b) Indigenous Torpedo Tube launchers; and 
(c) Wind Speed and Direction System. 
 
124. The Committee have also been informed that the Indian Navy/Ministry had 
identified any firm whose performance was not up to the mark and was found 
erratic, the Ministry in their written submission to the Committee, stated that 
M/s KPCL had been given a tender ho liday up to 31 Dec 2013 for the supply 
of gear boxes due to sub optimal performance of gearboxes supplied by the 
firm for the WJFACs. However, the firm was being encouraged to collaborate 
with established gear box OEMs to improve upon the design and technology.   
 
125. When the Committee sought to know whether any vendor had been 
blacklisted or given tender holiday, the Ministry in their written submission to 
the Committee, stated that M/s KPCL had been given a tender holiday for the 
supply of gear boxes. Howeve r, shortlisted OEMs including indigenous 
vendors like M/s Walchandnagar Industries Limited and M/s Elecon had been 
identified and shortlisted for supply of gear boxes for the ongoing projects. 
 
126. The Committee have also been informed that the process of eval uation of 
vendors was done according to laid down procedures. The new OEMs were 
encouraged to present equipment on offer and were selected based on the 
OEM’s ability to meet the stringent IN requirements. The vendor assessment 

-57- 
 
 
 
was carried out by checking t he technical compliance to the various 
military/defence standards, shock specifications etc. Periodic site visits by 
Professional Directorate reps were conducted to evaluate the technical 
capability of the firm. New OEMs were inducted after a thorough asse ssment 
of the technical capabilities of the vendor.   
 
127. Moreover, the vendor base for all engineering equipment had constantly 
been expanded based on the availability of OEMs who were capable of 
supplying the equipment according to the Indian Navy requireme nts and also 
provided assurance of support in terms of spares and services during the life 
time of the equipment/ship.  In the case of Weapons and Sensors, the vendor 
base was limited. There were very limited firms who had the capability world 
over to cate r for the technology of Weapon and Sensors.  However, prior 
every induction of a new equipment or capability an elaborate RFI procedure 
was followed to maximize the vendor base. A few examples where the vendor 
base had been increased in the recent years are as follows:- 
 
(a) Submarine EKM Batteries; 
 
(b) EBXL Electrical Cables; 
 
 
(c) Automatic Fire Alarm system; 
 
(d) Automatic Flood Warning system; 
 
 
(e) LED Lights; 
 
(f) Indigenous Rocket Launchers; 
 
 
(g) Indigenous Torpedo Tube Launchers; and 
 
(h) Wind Speed and Direction System. 
 
128. When the Committee enquired whether the Indian Navy would now be 
able to increase competition, accountability and transparency in defence 
procurement with the increasing expansion of its vendor base, the Ministry, in 
their written submission to the Committ ee, stated that the increase in vendor 
base would definitely aid in increasing competition in defence procurement 
owing to a larger number of OEMs for supply of the same equipment. 
Expanding vendor base had resulted in greater competition in Reverse 

-58- 
 
 
 
Osmosis Plants, AC and Ref Plants, pumps, centrifuges and other auxiliary 
equipment to name a few.   
 
129. On being enquired about R&D expenditure in warship building, the Vice 
Chief of Naval Staff, during oral evidence, stated as under: 
"I fully agree with the sugge stion given by Mr. Chairman (PAC) that there should be 
more expenses and attention towards research and development.  You talked about 
technology.  If we have to develop technology in our own country, it will be very 
essential to have research and developm ent.  DRDO has a great contribution therein 
and it will have to get involved more.  There is need to give more time and efforts 
towards research and development." 
   
130. Further, the Committee sought to know the Country's position in research 
and development o n the construction of naval warships, the Ministry, while 
informing the Committee, stated that, as far as R&D activities of defence 
shipyards were concerned, following may be taken note of:- 
 
MDL. In case of MDL built Naval ships, Navy was the principal de signer and undertook 
all basic design concepts, simulation tests and selection of major systems and 
equipment. Ship building process was not R&D intensive, however, MDL upgraded the 
practices and undertook the detailed design of the ships being built in th e yard. MDL 
has earmarked ` 30 crore towards R&D for the current year and as on date already 
spent ` 32.2 crore. 
GRSE. For the year 2012 -13, GRSE had earmarked an amount of ` 49 Lakh for 
the R&D which was 0.5% of PAT as per the DPE guidelines. Till 31 st December 2012, 
GRSE had spent ` 46 Lakh and company was likely to spend around ` 50 Lakh by 31 st 
March 2013.  
GSL. GSL had its own R&D team and built ships to its own design for the Indian Navy 
and the Indian Coast Guard. GSL was annually investing in R&D and developing newer 
platforms with better endurance fuel efficiency and higher speeds. Also R&D was being 
done on ships with varied operational roles. The shipyard spent about 0.5% of their PAT 
per R&D activities. 
 
131. Further, the Committee wanted to know th e number of skilled manpower 
deployed for Research and Development on the construction of naval 
warships in India, the Ministry in their written submission to the Committee, 
stated as under: 

-59- 
 
 
 
 
MDL. In both shipbuilding and submarine Research and Design cent res, in excess of 
150 Design Executives and 300 highly skilled Design staff were deployed. 
 
GRSE. For the activities related to R&D of construction of ships, an approximate 25 
number people were working in various aspects of shipbuilding. 
 
GSL. GSL had deployed approximately 60 skilled manpower for Research & 
Development on the construction of Naval warships. 
 
132. The Committee sought to know the measures taken by the Ministry/Indian 
Navy to prevent delays in indigenous construction of Indian naval warships, to 
which the Ministry replied that a focused attempt was being made to delays 
associated with weapons and sensors. While most weapons and sensors had 
traditionally been imported, attempts were being made to indigenize the 
same. The private Indian industry  had also been encouraged to develop 
weapons/sensors and IRL, ITTL were examples of success on this front. 
Collaborative efforts to build missile systems by DRDO had also been taken 
up, which were eventually expected to fructify into pure indigenous system s. 
While all these efforts were being vigorously pursued, results of the same 
would only be seen in the following 5 -6 years.   Dedicated efforts were also 
being made to ensure freezing of equipment at relatively early stages of the 
project and firm dates f or provision of binding data of all major equipment 
were included in the contract in consultation with the shipyard. A due 
assessment of shipyard’s capacity was undertaken prior placement of order 
to ensure, the capacity constraints at the yard did not res ult in project delays. 
Further, infrastructure upgradation through modernization projects were being 
undertaken in all major DPSU shipyards to leverage the advantages offered 
by modern ship building techniques.  Strict and regular monitoring procedures 
at various levels had been put in place and were being strictly adhered to. 
Corrective actions identified by these monitoring processes were formally 
promulgated and implementation ensured.  While the above measures would 
help in reducing delays in shipbuildi ng projects, the same couldn't be totally 
eliminated. Such delays were not unique to Indian warship building industry 
as time over runs were prevalent even in shipbuilding projects being 

-60- 
 
 
 
undertaken in advanced countries. In addition to the above, the defen ce 
shipyards had taken following measures to reduce delay in construction of 
ships:- 
 
(a) Creation of infrastructure to meet the challenges of modern warship 
 building; 
 
(b) Adoption of modular construction techniques; 
 
(c) Imbibing modern technology such as C NS pipe bending machines, plate 
cutting machines etc; 
 
(d) Implementation ERP solutions to speed up the processes; 
 
(e) Delegation of financial and administrative powers to project teams to  speed 
up the decision making processes; and 
 
(f) Regular monitoring of project activities at various levels within shipyard. 
 
 
 
******************* 
 
 
 
 
  

-61- 
 
 
 
PART – II 
OBSERVATIONS & RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
1. Introduction: India is a major maritime nation with vital economic and 
security interest linked to the sea. As a result, Indian Navy's pivotal role revolves 
around deterrence to security threats. However, India's emergence as a strong 
economic power in the region as a lso its geographical positioning has added a 
significant peacetime role to the Indian Navy as well. It has become imperative for 
the Indian Navy to be equipped with requisite number of ships in a timely manner 
to meet these multifarious challenges. The Nav y has, in its Maritime Capability 
Perspective Plan (MCCP), formulated in 2005 not only projected strong navy with 
combat  warships, but has based its vision of ship acquisition  on construction of 
its ships at Indian Shipyards viz. the three Defence Public  Sector Units (DPSU) 
shipyards engaged in the construction and production of naval warships namely, 
Mazagaon Dockyard Limited (MDL), in Mumbai, Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL) in 
Goa and Garden Reach Ship Builders and Engineering Limited (GRSE) in Kolkata. 
As such, the performance of the indigenous ship building capability is critical to 
Navy achieving operational efficiency and preparedness. Although, India has 
attained a credible capacity in warship -building over the years, the three Defence 
PSU shipyards entrusted with their responsibility differ widely in their role, areas 
of strength and outputs. Although the Competent Financial Authority (CFA) 
approved the indigenous constructions of 16 frigates, destroyers and corvette 
class ships to be built in these DPSU s, under project 15A, 16A, 17 and 28, 
performance audit has reviewed three projects - P15A (Destroyer), P 17(Frigate) 
and P28 (ASW Corvettes) respectively. Warship building, on its own, is a complex 
and time consuming activity. Nonetheless, the extent to w hich Indian Navy ship  
building projects are delayed and the scale of under -estimation reveals a deeper 
malaise. The findings of audit has brought several issues in the ship building 
practices and procedures such as delay in ship building, poor cost estima tion, 
undue delay in the conclusion of the contracts for Project 15A and Project 17, 
lack of adequate infrastructural facility, non -finalization of structural designs, 

-62- 
 
 
 
slippage in delivery and several issues related to procurement and slackness in 
financial management, which have been dealt with in the succeeding paragraphs.  
 
2. Warship Building:  The Committee find that Naval Ship -building, being a 
complex multi disciplinary engineering activity, requires significantly higher 
shipyard effort and dependence  on a large number of agencies. A ship 
construction programme has a number of agencies which interact with each 
other, including feasibility studies, design issues, system interaction, 
construction, test and trials. The Committee also find that besides bei ng a multi 
disciplinary engineering activity, construction and monitoring of ship -building 
involves various Directorates. What is more important to note is that at Naval 
Headquarters itself, the activities of construction and monitoring are separated in 
two wings. The Committee find that there are multiple responsibility centres in 
the Integrated Headquarters, depending upon their role and responsibility 
towards ship building but without a single control point which would enforce co -
ordination and overall c ontrol. The Committee feel that although India has 
credibly demonstrated the capability in indigenous construction of naval 
warships and is one of the few Navies in the world capable of designing and 
building warships, yet, performance in this area needs t o be improved as the 
operational preparedness of Indian Navy depends on an efficient and effectively 
managed warships construction projects. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that single point accountability for ship building project should be fixed afte r 
taking due care of all the aspects related to ship building. They feel that such an 
unity of command would ensure better span of control and would result in 
effective management of ship building processes and procedures. They 
recommend that enquiry be or dered against officials responsible for all the 
irregularities pointed out by Audit in naval warship building. 
  
3. Cost Estimates and Revision in Costs:  The Committee are dismayed to 
note that estimation of costs in the case of P -15A, P-17 and P-28 ships had been 
done as a formality for obtaining approvals to ship building projects from the 
Government rather than as a professional and meaningful exercise. The 

-63- 
 
 
 
Committee note that in case of P -15A ships, the cost was calculated with 1999 as 
the base year leading to an increase of 226% in the initial estimate. In the case of 
P-17 ships, the Committee noted that cost estimate was based on the year 1994. 
The steep rise in the rate was due to erratic supplies from Russia, modernization 
of Mazagaon Docks and cost of B&D spares. Due to this the build period 
escalated from 60 months to 78 months. For P-28 ships, the cost escalated from ` 
3051.27 crore to ` 7852.39 crore. The production was to start in March 2003 but it 
commenced only in March 2006. The Committee also  note that non-availability of 
warship quality steel and other supplies also affected the time schedule. From the 
above, the Committee are of the considered view that since warship production 
directly affects the security preparedness of any country, the C ommittee find that 
accurate initial estimate is affected due to lack of accurate inputs necessary for 
forecasting cost and delivery of a warship. They, therefore, desire the Ministry to 
take punitive action against officials responsible for preparing inacc urate 
estimates. The Committee, also, exhort the Ministry to make all out efforts to 
ensure calculation of accurate cost of a warship which would also determine the 
delivery time. To supplement this, there should be an institutionalized mechanism 
in NHQ and the Ministry to verify the correctness of budgetary costs submitted by 
DPSU shipyards. Besides, the Committee expect the NHQ and the Ministry to 
conduct independent cost estimation by using internationally accepted best 
practices so that cost becomes com petitive and the warships get completed 
within the approved budget and get delivered within the stipulated time.  
 
4. Cost Escalation: The Committee note that cost of building a ship includes 
labour, material, equipment, other miscellaneous costs and a pro fit margin.  The 
Committee also note that the manufacturing of naval combat ships is quite 
complex and time consuming. During the course of examination of this subject, 
the Committee noted that various factors apart from the above lead to cost 
escalation in warships production. The Committee have been given to understand 
that delays in delivery of equipments, indigenous development, Soviet 
disintegration, labour  overhead, obsolescence, lack of industrial support base 

-64- 
 
 
 
and state of the art technologies were some of the factors causing cost 
escalation. The Committee are also of the view that weapons technology is not 
available "off the shelf"  and takes time for manufacturing the desired end 
product. The Committee also note that some escalation in cost happen d ue to the 
complexities involved in warship production and manufacturing. Yet, the 
Committee feel that while sanctioning funds for warship production project, 
certain factors should be thoroughly examined which could act as a safeguard 
against cost escalati on midway during the warship manufacturing process. The 
Committee desire that the Ministry should identify and select only those vendors 
who have a proven track record of supplying materials on the scheduled delivery 
date thereby arresting time and cost es calation. They also desire that sanctions 
for the warship constructions should be more realistic, based on appropriate 
variable criterion and should contain provisions for escalation of the anticipated 
build period so as to avoid significant cost revisions  at a later date.  The 
Committee feel that Defence PSUs and Shipyards be augmented with production 
capacities to ensure timely production of naval warships. The Committee feel that 
to achieve this, joint ventures and MoUs be explored with those nations who have 
traditionally and historically been building naval warships. The Committee note 
that majority of the military hardware in use in our Country is of Soviet origin and 
make. Since the disintegration of the Soviet Union, many ongoing and planned 
projects were put in limbo affecting the military capabilities of our Country. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Government should focus on further 
promoting indigenous production of naval warships and the military hardware to 
give boost to the Government' s "Make In India" campaign. The Committee are of 
the considered view that wage revision factor cannot be overlooked and ignored 
as monetary benefits are certainly intended for the work force to work more 
efficiently and as a reward for their hard work. The  Committee urge upon the 
Ministry that while calculating the cost of a certain project, wage revision and 
labour cost should also be kept in mind so that the final project cost totals close 
to the final sanctioned amount and does not lead to cost escalatio n midway 
through the project. The Committee note that there is a long gestation period in 

-65- 
 
 
 
warship design and life of the ship is between 20 to 30 years and so up -gradation 
of weapons and sensors becomes all the more necessary to keep the warship 
relevant in combat role. The Committee feel that the Ministry in consultation with 
experts, engineers and others should focus on reaching to an accurate 
assessment of the warships' relevance, keeping in mind the gestation period and 
the operational life.  The Commit tee observe that a lot needs to be done to 
develop ancillary units and an industrial base which is the backbone of any major 
industrial production unit. The Committee desire the Ministry to take up this 
matter with other Ministries/Departments/Organisation s for creating and 
developing an industrial base across the country and setting up of ancillary units 
so that manufacturing capability, not only in Defence, but in  other sectors as well 
is enhanced by such an infrastructure. Lastly, the Committee feel tha t the 
Ministry should take measures to develop scientific temperament in  the 
prestigious institutions engaged in R&D so that state of the art technologies are 
developed, which would be useful not only in Defence sector but in other sectors 
as well helping in the overall development of the Country. 
 
5. Delay in Signing of Contract: The Committee find that the Defence 
Procurement Procedure (DPP), as approved in July 2005, stipulates that contract 
between the Ministry and the shipyard is to be signed within a  period of 12 to 18 
months from the date of approval in case of new ships and within 9 to 12 months 
for repeat orders. The Committee note that in case of P -15A and P -17 ships, 
money had been paid to the shipyards much before the contracts had been 
signed. Also, for P -28 project, 54.18 percent of the sanctioned amount had been 
paid without the conclusion of contract. The Committee wonder as to what was 
the reason for the Ministry to make such a move. It has also come to the notice of 
the Committee that delay s largely take place because of weapon and sensors. 
While observing that many of the projects of the Navy are delayed due to delay on 
the part of the DRDO to provide timely R&D support, the Committee are of 
considered view that the Ministry should impress upon DRDO to provide R&D 
support within a strict time bound manner to DPSUs to encourage Navy's quest 

-66- 
 
 
 
for self -reliance. The Ministry has assured that all future projects would be 
regulated as per DPP 2011 and instances of advance sanctions of Money prior to 
a formal contract would be avoided. The Committee are happy to note that the 
Ministry and the Navy are committed to make new ships with something called 
'integrated construction', which is being used by all the modern warship building 
shipyards in the w orld. However, the Committee desire that conclusion of 
contract with the shipyards should be within the prescribed period in order to 
facilitate proper execution and monitoring of the project and to avoid time 
overrun. They also desire that efforts should the made to clarify intermediate 
milestones and responsibilities of both shipyard and the Navy to be fulfilled 
within the stipulated timeframes.  
 
6. Implications of Contractual Terms on Construction Activities:  The 
Committee note that P -17 and P-15A ships were "fixed price" contracts but these 
were signed years after getting the necessary approvals thereby flouting the 
terms of the contract. The Committee further note that since warship building is a 
technology intensive process and some delay regarding the procurement of 
sensitive gadgets and equipments could not be prevented, the Committee desire  
that concerted efforts should be made to reduce the procurement time by the 
Ministry as well as the Indian Navy and  the concerned shipyards. The Committee 
note with concern that cost escalation midway through the project exceeding the 
original sanction is the result of increase in prices of the imported equipments 
being procured through foreign vendors. The Committee a lso note that since 
development of indigenous technologies is given due importance by the present 
Government, much needs to be done in this regard. Therefore, the Committee 
exhort the Ministry to show foresight and to do proper due diligence while 
drafting contracts and selecting a foreign vendor so that contractual terms 
shouldn't become a strangehold in the production of warships and would also 
lessen the dependence on foreign vendors. The Committee feel that taking a 
small step in this direction could he lp in the production of frontline combat naval 
platforms which is the need of hour for the Country's security.  

-67- 
 
 
 
7. Release of funds and monitoring of Advances:  The Committee are 
surprised to note that large amounts were sanctioned to shipyards as advance 
even on the last working day of the financial year. They find that between 2004 -05 
and 2006 -07, advances totaling to more than ` 1000 crore were sanctioned in 
March with respect to Projects P -15A and P-17. The Committee feel that such an 
act on the part of the Ministry in releasing funds in March without any linkages 
with immediate utilization are clear testimony of instances of 'parking of public 
funds' outside the Consolidated Fund of India, which amounts to be a grave 
financial irregularity and the Committee desire that responsibility be fixed against 
the erring officials. They presume that the only intention, perhaps, was to avoid 
lapse of funds. Moreover, the Committee are dismayed to note that no 
mechanism exists to reconcile the expenditure booked agai nst the projects in the 
books of Principal Controller of Defence Accounts (PCDA) and the respective 
DPSUs. The Committee, therefore, recommend that PDPA (Navy) should maintain 
a statement of accounts for each ship building project at the end of each financ ial 
year.  They also desire that the liquidation of advances paid to the former 
agencies for procurement of equipment, etc. should also be tracked by PDPA 
(Navy) through an effective and reliable mechanism. The Committee would also 
like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.  
 
8. Nomination and Readiness of Shipyards: The Committee have been 
informed about the India Navy's 15 year ship building plan to augment force 
levels by 2017. The Committee are dismayed to note that the different  class of 
ships were in parallel production at Mazagaon Dock Limited, Mumbai viz. P-17 
and  P -15. As a result, construction of P -17 commenced late by 17 months. 
Similarly, construction of P -28 warships commenced after a delay of three years 
from the date of sanction ing. What is more disturbing for the Committee to note 
is that while the project costs are now  estimated at more than double of the 
original estimate, progress of ship building itself is very slow. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that Ministry may revisi t its policy of getting its warships built 
only through DPSUs and should think of including capable shipyards either in 

-68- 
 
 
 
public or private sector also. They also urge upon the Ministry to be more 
judicious  in selecting shipyards that possess adequate capac ity and 
infrastructure, keeping in view the features of the ships to be built and ensure 
adhere to timelines and costs. The Committee feel that had the selection of 
shipyard been done by taking into it's preparedness, the delay and the increase in 
cost wou ld not have been that high. The Committee, therefore, urge upon the 
Ministry to fix responsibility for such lapses of the officials under intimation to 
the Committee. 
 
9. Modernization of MDL and GRSE:  The Committee are deeply concerned to 
note that the modernization cost of MDL escalated from ` 423 crore to ` 826.11 
crore, an increase of 96%, which increased the cost of construction of P -15A 
warships by ` 175 crore for a delay of 24 months.  The Minist ry also note that 
despite ` 180 crore being sanctioned for infrastructure development at GRSE, the 
yard was unable to upgrade infrastructure even after 7 years of sanction.  The 
Committee wish to impress upon the Ministry and the shipyards not to undermine 
the importance of infrastructural upgrade and modernization of the shipyards but 
to initiate timely measures for their adequate expansion and modernization. They 
desire that the Ministry should revisit the existing practice of shipyard 
modernization plans during the construction or even at the time of selecting of 
shipyard. The Committee are of the considered view that all shipyards should be 
modernized and necessary resources be made available to them so as to bring 
them at par with the best shipyards of the world. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that modernization programmes be restructured and implemented 
expeditiously so that the production of warships is in sync with the demands of 
the Indian Navy. 
 
10. Slippages in Delivery: Slippages in delivery is yet another issue of 
concern for the Committee. The Committee have been given to understand that 
delivery period of the warships as envisaged were extended viz. for P-15A target 
was of 78 months but was extended to 129 months. The Committee note that th e 
extended time was almost double of the originally envisaged timeline. The 

-69- 
 
 
 
Committee find this unacceptable as the shipyards' efficiency has not improved 
though the claims of the Ministry in this regard state otherwise. The Committee 
also note with displeasure the Ministry's repeated claims regarding the causes for 
delays. The Committee are of the view that shipyards engaged in production of 
naval warships haven't been upgraded to the desired level as they seem to be 
unfamiliar with new technologies and processes being acquired and implemented 
across the world. Therefore, the Committee desire that the Ministry try to expand 
their domestic vendor base so that dependency on international suppliers would 
gradually reduce thereby automatically arresting delays and protracted 
negotiations. The Committee feel that in keeping with modern notion that a 
warship is built around weapons and sensors, emphasis should be given to 
timely selection and finalization of weapons and sensors. Moreover, a ship 
building project s hould be seen with definite timelines and milestones with 
deadlines for all stakeholders for fulfilling their respective obligations. The 
Committee, therefore, urge upon the Ministry to fix responsibility in case of non -
performance/delay under intimation to this Committee. 
 
11. Monitoring Mechanism: The Committee note that construction of warship is 
a complex task involving multiple agencies which require close coordination and 
constant monitoring. The Committee have been informed that review meetings 
are h eld every six months to review on -going projects. The Committee are also 
happy to note that Naval Warship Overseeing Team of the Indian Navy is 
stationed at the shipyards for close scrutiny of the projects. The Committee 
observe that taking cognizance of a nticipated and unanticipated factors affecting 
cost and time overruns in the warship building industry, a more realistic 
assessment for the production of warships needs to be done. For this, the 
Committee desire that special experts in the field be roped i n so that the delivery 
schedules may be more accurately assessed and used effectively for monitoring 
parameters. The Committee note with concern that Apex level Committee 
Meetings were not held in the year 2010. The Ministry in this regard submitted 
that h enceforth, the meetings would be held periodically as stipulated in DPP -

-70- 
 
 
 
2011. The Committee desire that since Apex level Committee Meetings were 
crucial for reviewing and monitoring warship production, they be held regularly 
so that any anomalies as notice d could be immediately brought to notice and be 
rectified as early as possible.  
 
12. Procurement Procedure:  The Committee note that the Indian Navy 
nominated vendors for various equipment, weapons and sensors and the 
designated shipyards, in turn, procured directly from the vendors. The Committee 
are of the considered view that financial prudence demands that the Indian Navy 
co-ordinate with shipyards in the procurement of various equipment. The 
Committee feel that since globalization, the market for Defen ce related 
equipments has also been opened up and new suppliers are entering into the 
market. The Committee desire that the Ministry should expand their vendor -base 
by incorporating both domestic as well as international, so that a comprehensive 
vendor bas e is developed which will not only curtail dependence on a single 
vendor but also will ensure supply of equipments in a timely manner. The 
Committee feel that this could help in increasing healthy competition and create 
an open transparent tendering system . The Committee view this as mutually 
beneficial to the Indian Navy, the vendors/suppliers and the Nation as whole.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                PROF. K.V. THOMAS, 
21st December, 2015                                                                                   Chairperson, 
1 Pausha, 1937 (Saka)                                                     Public Accounts Committee. 
  

-71- 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SECOND SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(2012-13) HELD ON 31ST JANUARY, 2013 
 
  
The Public Accounts Committee sat on Thursday, the 31 st January, 2013 from  
1530 hrs.  to 1715 hrs. in Room No. '53', Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 PRESENT  
 Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi - Chairman 
  
LOK SABHA 
 
 
2. Shri Sanjay Nirupam  
3. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik  
4. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee  
5. Shri Ashok Tanwar  
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
8. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee  
9. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy  
10. Shri J.D. Seelam  
11. Shri N.K. Singh  
12. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Devender Singh - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar - Director 
3. Shri M.L.K. Raja - Deputy Secretary  
4. Shri S.L. Singh - Under Secretary  
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA   
1. Ms. Vijaya Moorty  Dy. C&AG (Defence, Communication & 
Railway) 
2. Ms R. Rajalakshmi  Director General  
3. Shri C.M. Sane Principal Director (Navy) 
 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL 

-72- 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
1. Shri Shashi Kant Sharma   - Defence Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Mathur  - Secretary (Defence Production) 
3. Smt. Priti Mohanty   - FA(DS) 
4. Dr. S.B. Agnihotri   - DG (Acquisition) 
5. Shri Ashok Kumar Gupta  - Additional Secretary (Defence 
Production) 
6. Shri Ashok Meena  - Joint Secretary (Naval Systems) 
7. Mrs. Preeti Sudan   - JS &AM (MS) 
8. Shri Prem Kumar Kataria  - Additional FA (K) and JS 
9. Shri Rajnish Kumar  - Additional FA (RK) and JS 
10. Smt. Arti Bhatnagar   - FM (MS) 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF INDIAN NAVY 
 
1. Vice Admiral R.K. Dhowan                    - VCNS 
2. Vice Admiral K.R. Nair            - CWP & A 
3. Rear Admiral A.K. Saxena      - DGND 
  
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF DEFENCE SHIPYARDS 
 
 
1. Rear Admiral (Retd.) R.K. Shrawat        - CMD, MDL 
2. Rear Admiral (Retd.) A.K. Verma           - CMD, GRSE 
3. Rear Admiral (Retd.) Vineet Bakshi        - CMD, GSL 
4. Rear Admiral (Retd.) N. K. Mishra          - CMD, HSL 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members, the representatives of the 
Office of the C&AG of India, the Ministry of Defence, the Indian Navy and the Defence 
Shipyards to the sitting of the Committee.  Apprising that the meeting had been 

-73- 
 
 
 
convened to take oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Defence on the 
subject 'Indigenous Construction of Indian Naval Warships' based on C&AG Report No. 
32 of 2010-11 (Performance Audit), the Chairman impressed upon the witnesses not to 
disclose the contents of the deliberations of the Committee to any outsider, especially to 
the members of the Print and Electronic media.  
 
3. The Chairman then asked the Defence Secretary to give a brief account of the 
indigenous construction of Indian Naval Warships and the Ministry's stance on Audit 
findings.  Upon a request made by the Defence Secretary, the Chairman gave 
permission for a Power Point presentation on the subject.  
 
4. In their Power Point presentation, the representatives of the Ministry highlighted 
the historical evolution of the indigenous production of naval warships and the current 
status of the various naval warships being constructed at various defence shipyards 
across the country. The representatives of the Ministry, the Indian Navy and the 
Defence Shipyards also attended to various queries raised by the Committee on the 
deficiencies, short comings and lapses in the indigenous construction of Naval warships 
which, inter-alia, included delays in shipbuilding, poor cost estimation, undue delay in 
conclusion of the contracts; inadequate infrastructure at the Defence PSU shipyards, 
delays in finalizing design and technology, price inefficiencies, lack of competition and 
transparency in procurement and improper financial management. The representative s 
of the Defence Shipyards then explained about the infrastructure at their respective 
shipyards.   
 
5. As some queries required detailed and statistical reply/information, the Chairman 
observed that a consolidated questionnaire incorporating all those poi nts in addition to 
some other points would be sent to the Ministry seeking written reply.  He asked the 
Defence Secretary to furnish the requisite reply urgently.  The Defence Secretary 
assured that he would comply.  
 
6. The Chairman thanked the representa tives of the Ministry of Defence, Indian 
Navy and Defence Shipyards for appearing before the Committee and furnishing the 
available information on several issues on the subject.  
 

-74- 
 
 
 
 The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting was kept on record. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 