61

GLOBAL ESTATES MANAGEMENT BY
THE MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Thirtieth Report (16 Lok Sabha)]}

MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

SIXTY-FIRST REPORT

ee

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

rat
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2094

SIXTY-FIRST REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

str nar ESTATES MANAGEMENT BY THE

MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Thirtieth Report (16" Lok Sabha}]

MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS

Bra जयते

Presented to Lok Sabha on: ../45.:.4,.2.2.20/6

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: .../6../2.:.2al4

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

December, 2016/ Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)


CONTENTS

PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (iii}
COMMITTEE (2016-17)
INTRODUCTION (v}
CHAPTER I Report {

CHAPTER II* Observations/Recommendations which have
been accepted by Government

CHAPTER itl* Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do-not desire to pursue in view of
the replies received from Government

CHAPTER IV+ Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of Government have not been
accepted by the Committees and which require

हु Teiteration

CHAPTER Vt Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which Government have furnished interim
replies

APPENDICES

I Minutes of the Nineteenth sitting of Public Accounts
Committee (2015-17) held on 1.12.2016

il Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their Sixty-First
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

* Not appended to the cyclostyled copy of the Report


16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

Sens

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

Prof. K.V. Thomas -
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Chairperson

Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
Shri Nishikant Dubey

Prof. Richard Hay

Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Smt. Riti Pathak

Shri Neiphiu Rio

Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
Shri Abhishek Singh

Dr. Kirit Somaiya

Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
Shri Shivkumar 0. Udasi

Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Naresh Agrawal

Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi

* Shri Bhupender Yadav
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Shri Shantaram Naik

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
Shri Ajay Sancheti

SECRETARIAT

Shri A.K. Singh

Shri Sukhi Chand

Shri T.Jayakumar

Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja

- Additionai Secretary
- Joint Secretary

- Director

- Deputy Secretary

* Elected w.e.f. 09.08.2016 vice Shri Vijay Goel, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f. 05.07.2016.

Cun)


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2016-17), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Sixty-First Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Thirtieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Gtohal
Estates Management by the Ministry of External Affairs’ relating to the Ministry of
External Affairs.

2. The Thirtieth Report was presented to Lok Sabhafiaid in Rajya Sabha on
21 December, 2015. Replies of the Government to the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report were received on 287" August, 2016. The
Public Accounts Committee considered and adopted the Sixty-First Report at their
sitting held on 1 December, 2016. Minutes of the Sitting are given at Appendix-|

3 For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report,

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirticth Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha) is given at Appendix.

NEW DELHI; PROF. K.V. THOMAS
1 December, 2016 Chairperson
10 Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

Cv)


CHAPTER -।

REPORT

This Report of the Public Agcounts Commitiee deals with Action Taken by the

Government on the Observations/Récommendations of the Committee contained in their
Thirtieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on “Gtobal Estates Management by the Ministry
of External Affairs” based on the C&AG Report No. 16 of 2014 (Performance Audit) Union.
Government (Civil) relating to the Ministry of External Affairs.

2. The Thirtieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabhajlaid in Rajya
Sabha on 21st December, 2015, It contained 18 Observations/Recommendations, Action

‘Taken Notes in respect of alt the Observations/Recommendations have been received from

the Ministry of External Affairs and categorized as under:

(ii)

(itiy

(iv)

Observations/Recommendations of the Committee which have been accepted
by the Government:

Paragraph Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 14,13,15,16,17 and 18

Total: 15
Chapter- ll

Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the replies received from the Government

-NIL-
Total: NIL
Chapter- Ill

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which requires reiteration

-NiL- .
_ Total: NIL
Chapter-1V_

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which’ Government have
furnished interim replies: हि है

Paragraph Nos. 8, 12 and 14 हे
. Total: 03
Chapter- V


2

3. The detailed examination of the subject by the Cornmittee had revealed certain
shortcomings/deficiencies on. the part of the Ministry of External Affairs which infer-alia
included not maintaining even basic records of its properties, dotays in construction on
acquired properties ranging from 14 to 51 years, significant delays in identifying properties
and finalizing deals, the renovation process tock decades to complete, unsatisfactory .
planning and assessment of the requirements of the buildings; tardiness in acquisition of
properties on recipracal basis and deficient monitoring of various works by the Ministry etc.
The Committee had accordingly given their Observations/Recommendations in their .
Thirtieth Report. हु

4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of External Affairs have been
reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. The Committee will now deal with action

taken by the Government _on_their _Government_on_their_Observations/Recommendations which either need

teiteration or merit comments.

5. The Committee desire that Action Taken Note in respect of
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapier | and final action taken replies
in respect of the Recommendation contained in Chapter V for which interim reply has
been given by the Government may be furnished to them within three months of the
Presentation of the Report to the House.

6. The Cammittee, on perusal of the replies submitted by the Ministry, note that
the Ministry has in 6 out of 18 paragraphs responded in a single sentence ie.
“Committee's recommendation has been noted for compliance”. without giving
specific details about the action taken or proposed to be faken thereon by the
Ministry. Further, the Ministry was asked to apprise the Committee about the action
specified in several paragraphs within two months of the presentation of the Report
but the Ministry did not send any such information within the stipulated time. The
Committee strongly deprecate the casual approach of the Ministry in furnishing the

Action Taken Replies to the Committee. The Committee desire the Ministry to furnish furnish

contained in their Thirtieth Report within a period of one month of the presentation of

this Report to the House. The Committee also desire that appropriate punitive action

may be taken against the officers found responsible for the delays/ negligence responsible for the delays/ negligence
causing avoidable losses. The Committee hope that Ministry has learnt lessons from



3

the inexplicable delays in acquisition/ construction of properties, particularly, as
pointed out by them in their earlier Report in respect of construction at 501, Tokyo
which commenced after 53 years of purchase of land.

"Creation of database
(Recommendation Para No. 2)

7. Opining that database 19. instrumental ‘in better ‘management of properties by

_ providing a comprehensive overview for effective planning and by filling in the gaps in
monitoring process , the.Committee in their original Report had desired that the database
produced before the Committee during evidence should also include details about the
ownership (including previous ownerships) of all the properties (leased? rented/ owned), the
details of the inventories and the dotails of the periodical verification of the inventories. The -
Committee had further desired that all the documents relating to the properties be
microfilmed for effective monitoring of those properties and be readily available for scrutiny.
The Committee had also directed the Ministry to upload the database on its website within
two months,

8. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:

"Suggestions/recommendations of the esteemed Committee have been noted
for compliance. Ministry has taken the steps to better manage the existing
portfolio and also strive to widen its portfolio. These include creation of a
database of both rented and owned properties and inclusion of the Section
dealing with rented properties within the ambit of the Projects Division.
Property | Section which supervises the rented properties which was earlier
part of the Establishment Division has now been merged with Projects Division
to create a Global Estate Management Division",

9. White vetting the said ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:

"Ministry may apprise the PAC if the desired data had been uploaded on its
website. It may also confirm if there was some system in place to update the
existing database of rented / owned properties on periodical basis. If so, the
details, thereof, may be appended",

10. in their further comments to the above said audit observation, the Ministry stated as
under:

“Ministry has instituted a mechanism for creation of a database of both rented
as well as GOI owned properties after compiling the information received from
the Missions and Posts abroad, The database of both rented as well as 501
owned properties are available in electronic format and updated regularly.

Though this database is available with the Ministry and would be submitted to
the esteemed Committee as and when directed, the Ministry has reservation
regarding making this avaitable for uploading in its website primarily on


4

security considerations. Availability of the database in public domain could
prove detrimental to our interests as certain foreign elernents could use and
develop the information to their advantage and local agencies in host countries
wauld be able ta raise the level of surveillance on the officials with much
greater ease",

1f. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that steps taken to: better
manage the existing portfolio and also widen the same include creation of database
of both rented and owned properties and merging the section dealing with rented
properties which was earlier a part of the Establishment Division with Projects
Division to create a Global Estates Management Division. The Committee while
appreciating the steps taken by the Ministry are of fhe view that the database to be
useful over a period of time needs to be comprehensive and give a bird's eye view of
the holdings of the Ministry. The Committee, thereforc, reiterate their carlier
recommendation that, to ensure transparency, the database may also include details
about the ownership (including previous ownerships) of all the properties (leased!
rented! owned), the detaiis of the inventories and the. details of the physical
verification thereof. The Committee after taking note of the security concerns of the
Ministry regarding uploading of the database on the website desire that appropriate
mechanism may be put in place to ensure that database is regularly updated and is
readily made available far monitoring of the properties by the Division.

Delays in acquisition
(Recommendation Para No. 5)

12. The Committee in their original Report had found that there had been significant
delays in identifying properties and even after identification, in many cases, the deals felt
through for one reason or other, pointing fo a serious lack of time bound, committed and
professional approach in identification and negotiation of properties. The Committee were of
the view that a detailed Search Report may be prepared for all the properties that have been
identified for acquisition and made available to the Ministry and the members of the
purchase committee. The Committee had desired that interaction with professional agencies
abroad for fimely identification, acquisition, development and maintenance of properties may
be done in a more scientific, professional and structured manner by forming small teams
comprising analysts and in cases where identification and finalization of the deals have
taken longer time the team may be led by an official frorirthe Ministry to effectively negotiate


5

and finalize the transaction. The Committee had also desired to be apprised of the steps
taken by the Ministry in this regard.

13. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:

"Recammeondation has been noted for compliance. Ministry has instructed the
Missions/Posts to pursue acquisition of properties aggressively. All
Missions/Post have been instructed to appoint a Nodal officer who would
ensure progress in acquisition of properties. The Missions/Posts mentioned in
the Report have been instructed to forthwith send proposals for empanelling
prominent Real Estate Agents fo locate/ identify properties for acquisition.

The expenditure incurred by these Missions/Posts in Rental outgo for
the years 2012-13 to 2014-15 are given in Annexure ॥".

14. The Vetting comments of Audit on the above-said ATNs are as follows:

While the Ministry have noted the recommendations for compliance, it has not
specifically responded to PAC's recommendation on the preparation of
detaiicd search report. As such, the factual position can be ensured at the
time of next audit.
15. In their further comments fo the above said audit observation, the Ministry stated as
under: ©

“In order to pursue acquisition of properties by the Missions/Posts abroad,
Ministry has allowed engagement of appropriate agencies who could
locatefidentify properties and assist the Ministry in acquisition of properties.
Missions/Posts abroad have also been advised to update the Ministry on the
development in search of properties and the same is regularly reviewed in the
Ministry by senior officers."
16. The Committee note the reply of the Ministry that the Missions/ Posts have
been instructed to pursue acquisition of properties aggressively and to appoint a
Nodal Officer who would ensure progress in acquisition of properties . The Ministry
has further stated that engagement of appropriate agencies to locate / identify
properties and assist the Ministry in acquisition of properties has also been allowed. —
The Committee reiterate that in order to present a better picture on identified
properties, detailed Search Reports in respect of these properties may be prepared
by the agencies for placing it before the members of the purchase committee. The
Committee aiso desire that the Nodal officers may be made responsible for sending
regular updates to the Ministry on the progress made in the acquisition process and

to ensure time bound acquisition of properties.


Purchase of property in Paris

(Recommendation Para No. 8).

17. The Committee in their original Report had noted that the Ministry decided to
purchase a property belonging to French Government for establishing India Cultural Centre
at Paris and both the architects/ consultants engaged by the Mission to assess the suitability
of the butting reported that the building was not suitable to be used as a cultural centre and
the Ministry ignored the reports af the architects and purchased the property which has been
lying unutitized since then. The Committee were astonished to find that the Ministry did not
heed -to the advice of the Architects/ Consultants and went on with the acquisition of the
property which eventually resulted in idling of assets and wasteful expenditure on
maintaining the property. The Committee were of the view that making such a deal without
proper planning and consultation tantamount to criminal negligence. The Cammittee were of
the considered opinion that a comprehensive system of reporting be evolved where all such
deviations from routine procedures get automatically identified and reported to the Projects
Division so that a judicious and prudent decision could be arrived at and the project
implemented without loss of time and escalation of cost. The Committee had desired to be
apprised of the action taken in this regard within two months.

18. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:
“Committee's recommendations are noted for compliance, Design is submitted
to local authorities and final approval is expected in next two manths. Partly
’ the renovation work has begun with removal of asbestos used in the existing
building. Tenders finalised by the Architect are in the process for approvat in
the Ministry".
19. The Committee nofe that the Ministry in their reply has stafed that the
renovation work at india Culture Centre, Paris has begun partly and the tenders
finalised by the Architect are in the process for approval in the Ministry. However, the
Commitfee find that the Ministry has not responded to the observation of the
Committee that making such a deal without proper planning and consultation
tantamount to criminal negligence and also fo the suggestion for evolving a
comprehensive system of reporting wherein the Ministry is automatically informed of.
the deviations in the procedures. The Committee are also of the view that the nodal

officer being appointed may be made responsible for intimating the Ministry about
any such deviations. The Committee also desire that an inquiry may be instituted


7

against the officers responsible for criminal negligence in making a deal without

proper planning and consultation and the Committee may be apprised of the action

faken in this regard. The Committee desire that a statement showing properties both
rented as well as acquired by the indian Missions abroad, its date of acquisition and
date of effective use may be submitted to it within two months of presentation of the
report.

Expenditure over and above the delegated financial powers
(Recommendation Para Ne. 12)

20. The Committee in their original Report had noted with serious awe that CGI
Vancouver, GGI Houston, Fo! Panama City and 501 Chile incurred expenditure over and
above the delegated financial powers on repair and maintenance of Government of India
properties. The Committee were, perturbed to note the reply of the Ministry that due to large
number of Missions/Posts fo be audited coupled with limiting factors of manpower, limited
budgetary resources, there was no periodicity for conducting internal audit. The Committee
had felt that the need for the internal audit as a preventive and remedial mechanism could
not be over emphasized and, therefore, strongly desired that the officials of the Ministry be
adequately sensitized and an effective internat e-audit systom may be developed in the
Ministry to minimize such recurrences, The Committee had desired to be apprised of the
action taken by the Ministry in this regard within twa months.

21... The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:

“Committee's Observations are noted for compliance. Excess expenditure
over and above the delegated powers in respect of E/l, Panama City and Eft,
Santiago, Chile has been regularised and Sanction issued vide No. Q/Proj-
17745/03/2015 dated 23.09,2015 and vide No. Q/Proj-ll/ 745/04/2014 dated
27.01.2016 respectively. The regularisation is under process in the case of
CGI, Houston and CGI, Vancouver".

22. While veiting the said ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:

"Ministry has not specified the time-lines for the regularisation of excess
expenditure over and above the delegated powers in respect of CGI, Houstan
and CGI, Vancouver".

23. _ In their further comments to the above said audit observation, the Ministry stated as
under:

“The process of regularisation of excess expenditure is being expedited to
avoid further delay".

24. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that excess expenditure over
and above fhe delegated powers in respect of E/l Panama City and E/l Santiago, Chile


8

has been regularised and in case of 691, Houston and CGI, Vancouver, the
regularisation is under process. The Committee, however, find that the Ministry has
not responded to their recommendation regarding strengthening of the internat audit
system. The Committee are of the considered view that effective internal audit
system ensures that accounting and allied records have been property maintained,
the assets management system is in place in order to safeguard the assets and also
to see whether policies and procedures are in place and are duly being complied
with. The Committce, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that the
officials of the Ministry be adequately sensitized and an effective internal e-audit
system be developed so as to ensure timely regularisation of excess expenditure,
The Committee further desire to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.

eee


CHAPTER ए

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT
HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES

Obser¢ation / Recommendations

The Committee note thal the Ministry decided 10 purchase a property belonging
to French Govenment for establishing India Cultural Centec at Paris and both the Ar-
chitects/Consultants engaged by the Mission to assess the suitability of the building
based on structural soundness, feasibility of utilization of structure for the desired pur-

” pose, design, execution and compliance with locat regulations ctc. reported that the
building was not suitable to be used as a Cultural Centre since the building neither had
two exits nor enough provision for assembly of at least 100 people as required under
French regulations. The Committee further note that the Ministry ignored the reports of
the architects and pwrehascd the property for Rs. 30.03 crore in March 2011 which has
been laying unutilized since then. As per the reply of the Ministry, the issues raised by
the Architects/Censultants were taken up with French Government which authorized
{he Mission to make additional/allernations jn dhe existing building as well as, if re-
quired, (0 rebuild the property by following bye laws prevailing in the city. However,
information relating to taking up the maitcr with French Government was not provided

' to the Audit. The Ministry has now appointed auother Architect-Consultant for renova-
tion of the property fo make it suitable for Cultural Contre and as reported by the Minis-
try the project is likely lo be completed by September, 2016. The Comunittee are aston-
ished to find that the Ministry did not heed to the advice of the Archilects/Consultants
and went on with the acquisition of the properly which eventually resulted in idling of
asscts and wasteful expenditure on maintaining the property. The Committee are of the
view thal making such a deal without proper planning and consultation tantamount to
criminal negligence. The Committee aiso take serious note of non-furnishing of im-
portant information to Audit by the Mission and desire that all the relevant records be
produced to the Audii urgently within two months. The Committee after going through
the reply of the Ministry feel that the objections raised by the Architect/Consultants af-
ter the confirmation by the Ministry/ICCR for purchase of the property were not
brought before the Ministry by the Mission. The Committee are of the considered opin-
ion thal a comprehensive system of reporliug be evolved where all such deviations [rom
routine procedures get automatically identified and reported to the Projects Division so
that a judicious and prudent decision could be arcived at and the project imptemented
without loss of time and escalation of cost. The Commitlee would like to be apprised of

* the action taken in this regard within two months.

{Observation / Recommendations No.8 of 30th Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (161 1,0४8 Sabha)]


CHAPTER V

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT
HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES

Observation / Recommendations

The Committee note that the Ministry decided to purchase a property belonging
to French Government for cstablishing India Cultural Centre at Paris and both the Ar-
chitects/Consultants engaged by the Mission to assess the suitabilily of the building
based on structural soundness, feasibility of utilization of structure for the desired pur-
pose, design, execution and compliance with local regulations etc. reported that the
building was not suitable to be used as a Cultural Centre since the building neither had
two exits nor enough provision for assembly of at feast 100 people as required under
French regulations. The Committee further note that the Ministry ignored the reports of
the architects and purchased the property for Rs. 30.03 crore in March 2011 which has
been laying unutilized since then. As per the reply of the Ministry, the issues taised by
the Architects/Consultants were taken up with French Government which authorized
the Mission to make additional/atternations in the existing building as well as, if re-
quired, to rebuild the property by following bye laws prevailing in the city. However,
information relating 10 tating up the matter with French Government was not provided
to the Audit. The Ministry has now appointed another Architect-Consultant for renova-
tion of the property to make if suitable for Cultural Centre and as reported by the Minis-
try the project is likely lo be completed by September, 2016. ‘The Committee arc aston-
ished to find that the Ministry did not heed to the advice of the Architects/Consultants
and went on with the acquisition of the property which eventually resulted in idling of
assets and wasteful expenditure ou maintaining the property. The Committee are of the
view that making such a dea! without proper planning and consultation tantamount to
criminal negligence. The Committee also take serious note of nou-fumishing of im-
portant information to Audit by the Mission and desire that all the relevant records be
produced to the Audit urgently within two months. The Committee after going through
the reply of the Ministry feel that the objections raiscd by the Architcct/Consuttants af-
ter the confirmation by the Ministry/ICCR for purchase of the property were not
brought before the Ministry by the Mission. The Committee are of the considered opin-
ion that a comprehensive system of ccporting be evolved where all such deviations from
routine procedures get automatically identified and reported to the Projects Division so”
that a judicious and pradent decision could be arrived at aad the project implemented
without loss of time and escatation of cost. The Committee would like to be apprised of
the action taken in this regard within two months.

हु [Observation / Recommendations No.8 of 30th Report of the
Public Accounts Cominittee (6th Lok Sabha}|

lo


Action Taken

Comniittes’s recommendations are noted for compliance. Design is submitted to
local authoritics and final approval is expected in mext two months. Partly the renova-
tion work has begun with rcmoval of asbestos used in the exisling building. Tenders
finalised by the Architect are in the process for approval in the Ministry.

Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN
No further comments.

[Ministry of External Affairs OM No, Q/Proj-IT/745/01/16 dated 12 August 2016]

Observation / Recommendations

The Committee note with serious awe that CGT Vancouver, CGI Houston, EOT
Panama (19 and EOI Chile, incurred expenditure over and above the delegated finan-
cial powers on repair and maintenance of Government of India properties. The Com-
mittee also note with dismay that the Missions in Oman, Libya; Tehran, Moscow, Bu-
charest, Guangzhou and Pyongyang had rctained vacant Icased residential accommoda-
tion for more that 90 days without the prior approval of the Ministry as required under
the relevant Rules, The Committee find from the reply of the Ministry that the expendi-
ture incurred by CGI Houston, 1901 Panama City and EOF Chile are yet to be regular-
ized by (08 Ministry. The Committee also observe that the Ministry has now examined
all the cases of unauthorised retention and regularized all of them. ‘The Committee are,
however, perturbed to note the reply of the Ministry that duc to large number of Mis-
sions/Posts to be audited coupled with limited factors of manpower, limited budgetary
resources, there is no periodicity for conducting internal audit. The Cominittee while
‘noting the observation of the audit that in case of Oman, Libya and Moscow, the Mis-
sion could have applied for prior approval of the Ministry for retention. It clearly cstab-
lishes that the internal audit syste of the Ministry has not becn functioning properly as
otherwise these aregutarities would have been easily brought out, The Commiilee feel
that the need for the internal audit as a preventive and remedial mechanism cannot be
over emphasized and, therefore, strongly desire that the officiats of the Ministry be ade-
quately sensitized and an effective internal e-audit system may be developed in the
Ministry to minimize such recurrences, The Committee may be apprised of the action
taken by the Ministry in this regard within two months.

[Observation / Recommendations No.12 of 30th Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (1611 Lok Sabha)]


Action Taken

Comunittec’s Observations are noted for compliance. Excess expenditure over and
above the delegated powers in respect of E/l, Panama City and E/T, Santiago, Chile has
been regularised and Sanction issued vide No. Q/Proj-I1/745/03/2015 dated 23.09.2015
and vide No. Q/Proj-Il/'745/04/2014 dated 27.0.2016 respectively. ‘Fhe regularisation
is under process in the case of CGI, Houston and CGI, Vancouver.

Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN

Ministry has not specified the time-lines for the regularisation of excess expendi-
ture over and above the delegated powers in respect of CGL, Houston and CGI, Van-
couver,

Reply on vetting comments of Audit by MEA:

The process of regularisation of excess expenditure is being expedited lo avoid
further delay. है

[Ministry of External Affairs OM No. Q/Proj-I1/745/01/16 dated 12 Angust 2016]

Observation / Recommendations

The Committee note that there were inordinale delays in construction of proper-
ties on the plots of land acquired by the Ministry for its various passport offices coun-
try-wide viz. Jaipur, Amritsar, Mumbai and Srinagar resulting in huge outgo of avoida-
ble rent. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that except for Srinagar all
other buildings are ready or will be ready by the end of 2015. ‘Che Committec, howev-
er, feel that there have been significant delays in the construction of buildings even in
India and are astonished to find that Passporl Office, Jaipur took over the building 25
long years after acquiring the plot. The Committee are shocked to find that CPWD has
taken two and a half years for submitting revised drawings and estimatcs for Srinagar -
Regiona! Passport Kendra. ‘The Committee are of the view that lackadaisical attitude of
the officers and lack of follow up and persuasion on part of the Ministry has contributed
to these inordinate delays. The Committee desire that alongwith fixing the timeframes
for completion of construction the responsibility of the officers may be fixed and they
may be asked to give periodic updates on each of the property under thcir supervision.
The Committee further fee that a comprehensive mechanism may be developed so that

. allotment of land, its construction is done in a time bound manner for future needs. The
Committee may be apprised of the action taken by the Ministry in this regard within
two months.

12-


{Observation / Recommendations No.14 of 30th Report of the
Public Accounts Commitice (16th I.ok Sabha)|

Action Taker

Cominitize’s observations are noted for compliance. The plot initially allotted in
1983 for the construction of RPO building and staff quarters at RPO, Jaipur got can-
celled and another plot was aflotted and the possession was given on 30.03.2001. Con-
struction started in-2005 and the Ministry is exploring options other than CPWD for
execution of its projects at Srinagar, Kolkata and Bhopal so that time and cost overrun
which have been faced by the Ministry in almost all the projects entrusted to CPWD are
averted in future, PAC's kind observation is noted for comapliance to closely monitor the
progress, coordinate with the executing agencics/local bodies and submit regular up-
dates on the progress.

Audi('s yetting comments on Ministry's ATN

The present position of stated projects would be reviewed at the time of next

audit,
[Ministry of Uxternal Affairs OM No. Q/Proj-Il/745/01/16
dated 12 August 2016]
NEW DELHI; PROF. K.V. THOMAS
414 December, 2016 Chairperson

24 Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

13


APPENDIX-I

MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2016-17) HELD ON 017 DECEMBER, 2016.

The Committee sat from 1015 hrs. ६0 1055 his. on 01% December, 2016 in
Room No. “51”, Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT
Prof. K. ५, Thomas ~ Chairperson

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri Nishikant Dubey

Shri Gajanan Kirtikar

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
Dr. Kirit Somaiya

Dr. P. Venugopal

Smt. Riti Pathak

Shri Neiphiu Rio

Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi

CPN On AR YN

soo
S200

_RAJYA SABHA
12. Shri Bhupender Yadav
13. Shri Shantaram Naik
14. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
15. Shri Ajay Sancheti

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

1. ShriA. K. Singh - Additional Secretary
2. Shri S.C. Chaudhary ~ doint Secretary

3. Shri T. Jayakumar है - Director

4... Shri Tirthankar Das - Additional Director


-
5. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary

6. Shri AK. Yadav - Deputy Secretary

REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND
AUDITOR GENERAL OF ENDIA :

1. Shri Nand Kishore - Deputy C&AG (DGR)

2. Shri Mukesh P. Singh - Director General of Audit

3. Shri Manish Kumar - Principat Director of Audit (PAC)
4. Ms, Pooja Singh Mandol - Principat Director (Railways)

2. At the outset, the Chairperson, PAC welcomed the Members to the Sitting of
the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft Reports for

consideration:

(i) wx XXXX XXXX : XXXX

(ii) Draft report on Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their

Thirtieth Report {Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on "Global Estate Management
by the Ministry of External Affairs’. .

3. The Chairperson invited suggestions of the Members on the above mentioned
draft Reports. After discussing the draft Reports, the Committee adopted both the
Reports with some changes/modifications.

4... The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize these Reports in the light
of verbal discussion and consequential changes arising out of the suggestions by the
Members factual verification by the Audit and present the same to Parliarnent.

The officials of the C&8AG then withdrew.
5. XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX
6. XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX

The Committee then adjourned.


APPENDIX-II
{Vide Paragraph 5 of introduction}

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
CONTAINED IN THEIR THIRTIETH REPORT {SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

(i} | Total number of Observations/Recommendations : 18
{ii) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee - Total : 15
which have been accepted by the Government: Percentage:
83.33%

Para Nos, 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,9,10,11,13,15,16,17 and 18

(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee - Total : 0
do not desire to pursue in view of Percentage: 0%
the reply of the Government:
-Nil-
(५) Observations/Recommendations in respect of - Total : 0
which replies of the Government have not been Percentage: 0%
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
-Nif-
{v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of . Total : 3
which the Government have furnished interim replies: Percentage:

16.67%
Para Nos, 8, 12 and 14