58

NON-COMPLICANCE BY MINISTRIES IN TIMELY SUBMISSION
OF ACTION TAKEN NOTES ON THE NON-SELECTED AUDIT
PARAGRAPHS OF THE C&AG OF INDIA

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their 207 Report (16" Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF
EXPENDITURE) .

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2046-17)

FIFTY-EIGHTH REPORT

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT _
NEWDELHE


PAC NO, 2091
FIFTY-EIGHTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

NON-COMPLICANCE BY MINISTRIES IN TIMELY
SUBMISSION OF ACTION TAKEN NOTES ON THE NON-

| SELECTED AUDIT PARAGRAPHS OF THE C&AG OF
INDIA

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Twentieth Report (160 Lok Sabha)}

MINISTRY .OF -FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF
EXPENDITURE) :

Presented to Lok Sabha on: agi

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: . ah aeoreawes

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

November, 2016 /Kartika, 1938 (Saka}


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2016-17)

INTRODUCTION |
"CHAPTER | Report vcesesssecssssseeevsscesserviessneesvveesanessneversesa
. CHAPTER II* Observations/Recommendations which have been
. accepted by the Government ............ secre ress
CHAPTER हा"... Observations/Recommendations which the
- Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
replies received from the Government न
CHAPTER 1७४९. Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require.
शीशिब्वॉणा ........- ००००० हल cette erste eee लिन ल ता * 2
CHAPTER ५४ Observations/Recommendations in respect of

_which the Government have furnished interim .

replies ......... .-

APPENDICES*

Minutes of the 18" Sitting of Public Accounts
Committee (2016-17) held on 107 November,
2016

Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/fRecommendations’ of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their Eighteenth
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

ANNEXURE

*Not appended to the cyclostyled copy of the Report

“PAGE
{iii}

(५)


SOPrN Pa BeN

11.
12. -
13,
14.
15.

16.
"47.
18,
19,
20.

21

22.

AON a”

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2016-17)
Prof, K.V, Thomas - Chairperson
MEMBERS ,
LOK SABHA SABHA

Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay

_ Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
Shri Nishikant Dubey
Prof. Richard Hay
Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Smt. Riti Pathak
Shri Neiphiu Rio
Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
Shri Abhishek Singh
Dr. Kirit. Somaiya
Shii Anurag Singh Thakur
‘Shri Shivkumar 0, Udasi

, Dr. P. Venugopal

’ RAJYA SABHA

Shri Naresh Agrawal

Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi

” Shri Bhupender Yadav
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Shri Shantaram Naik

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
Shri Ajay Sancheti

SECRETARIAT

Shri A.K. Singh - Additional Secretary
Shri 8. C. Chaudhary - Joint Secretary
Shri Tirthankar Das - Additional Director
Shri Paolienlal Haokip - Deputy Secretary

cin)

* Blected w.e.f, 09.08.2016 vice Shri Vijay Goel, MP. appointed as Minister of State w.e.f. 05.07.2016.


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2016-17), having been
authorized by the’ Committee, do present this Fifty Eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Twentieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Non-Compliance by Ministries/Departments in timely submission of Action Taken
Notes on the non-selected Audit paragraphs of the C&AG of india’ relating to

“Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure).

2. The Twentieth Report was piesented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on
24 April, 2015. Replies of the Government fo all the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report were received. The Public Accounts Committee considered and
adopted the Fifty Eighth Report at their sitting held on 10 November, 2016. Minutes of
the sitting are given at Appendix |.

3. For facility of « reference and convenience, ‘the Observations and

Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the

Report.

4, The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to

them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the action-taken by the Government on the Observations!
Recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given at

Appendix-lt.

NEW DELHI; - _ PROF. K.V. THOMAS,

‘November, 2016 Chairperson,
-Kartika, 1938(Saka) Public Accounts Committee.



CHAPTER -।
-REPORT -

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained ‘in
their Twentieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on “Non-Compliance by Ministries /
Departments in timely submission of Action Taken Notes on the Non-selected
audit paragraphs of the C&AG of India” based on thé Oral evidences of selected
Ministries/Departments having huge number of Audit paragraphs pending submission of
ATNs within the stipulated four months period from the date of on which the relevant

-C&AG reports were laid before Parliament

“2.” .- The Twentieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in
Rajya Sabha on 29.04.2015. tt contained 16 Observations/Recommendations, Action
Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recomimendations have been received ,

from the concerned Ministries and categorized as under:

3)... Observations/Recommendations of the Committee which have been
. accepted by the Government

Paragraph Nos. 1,2, 4, 9-16.

Total: 14
_ Chapter Il.

(1). Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do. not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:

Paragraph Nos. 3
Total: 01

Chapter: Ill

(i) Observations/Recommendations * in respect of which replies of
Government have. not been .accepted by the Committee and which
requires reiteration :

Nil

Total: 00
Chapter-IV


‘{iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which: Government have
furnished interim replies:

Paragraph Nos. 5

Total: 04

Chapter- V

3. The examination of the Non-comptiance by Ministries/Departments in timely
submission of Action Taken Notes on Non-selected Audit of the C&AG reports as a
“subject by the Committee during the period 2014-15 had revealed that even though
there had been tremendous improvement overall in the timely submission of
remedial/corrective _ action, faken notes on Audit observations by concerned
Ministries/Departments of the Government of India, some Ministries still have fairly large
numbers of Audit Paragraphs on which they could not furnish remedialicorrective Action
Taken notes within the stipulated time. The Committee had taken Oral evidence of the
representatives of the Ministries of Finance, Defence Railways Environment & Forests
and Climate Change, Home Affairs and Human Resource Development during the

course of the examination.

4, The Committee, apart from examining the issue of timely submission of ATNs
had also faken up. select pending paragraphs for detailed discussion with the respective
Ministries/Departments during the oral evidences taken of concerned Ministries and, डा
based on the findings thereof, had made certain 7ecommendations on important issues . .

highlighted in those select. Audit paragraphs/reports.

— The Action Taken Notes furnished by the concerned ministries on the
observations/recommendations of the Committee contained: in their Twentieth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant chapters of this report. In
the following paragraphs, the Committee have dwelled on the action’ taken by the

' Government on some of their observations/recommendations made in the original:

Report which either need reiteration or merit comments


1, inclusion of timely submission of ATNs as one of the targets of hesul of timely submission of ATNs as one of the targets of Result
Framework Document (RFD) of Ministries. हु

(Recommendation No. 3}
6. The Committee in their earlier Report, had noted the stand taken by Monitoring
Cell that they cannot fix responsibility for non compliance as its mandate js, only to
coordinate. and monitor progress across Ministries of the efforts to submit remedial हु
action taken notes on Audit Paras within the stipulated period of four months from the
date ‘of laying of C&AG Reports in Parliament. The Committee had also noted that

- Secretaries of concerned Departments/Ministries, as Chief Accounting Authorities
(CCA) have absolute responsibility to ensure timely submission of ATNs. Legal

- propriety of expenditure and efficient execution being equally important, if not more to
effective implementation of Government | programmes the Committee had
Tecommended that a suitable mechanism to make the CCAs accountable may be put in
place, The Committee had desired that such mechanism should incorporate a range of

- stringent disincentives for the CCAs for graded ‘levels of non-compliance keeping in
view the importance of strengthening the system of audit and financial accountability in
the country. Among other things, the Committee had desired fhat such a mechanism
should incorporate allocation of adequately high points to submission of ATNs on time,
second only to effective execution of programs. The Committee had further noted that
the-Department of Expenditure had asked all the Ministries, way back in the year 2010
to include timely submission of ATNs as one of the targets of Result Framework
Document (RFD) of their Ministry, as the direct responsibility of their CAA. However,
the Committee had found that even though five years had elapsed, very few Ministries
like Ministry of HRD have reflected it as one of their priorities in their RFDs. The
Committee, therefore, had desired that the initiating of such a mechanism in the RFDs
by all Ministries may be reported fo them within six months from the presentation of this

report.

7. .° The Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure, in their Action Taken note
have stated as under: |
"The observations of Public Accounts committee have been communicated to

Cabinet Secretariat, Performance Management Division’as they are the nodal
agency of Result Framework Document (RFD) (copy enclosed.)


2. This Action Taken Note has been vetted by Audit vide their note .
No.RCiPAC/93/2015-16/123 dated 30.05.2016

3. Cabinet Secretariat, Performance Management Division have informed
that they have dispensed with the Result Framework Document w.ef 2014-15
(Copy enclosed)

8. The Committee are constrained to note that Cabinet Secretariat,
Performance Management Division have informed that they have dispensed with
the Result Framework Document ४.४. 2014-15, However, they would like to re-
emphasize the fact that the substance of their recommendation was fo make
timely submission of remedial Action Notes an important element of performance
, appraisal of Ministries. The Commilttee have sought comments of the
Performance Management Division (PMD), Cabinet Secretariat on a viable
_ alternative mechanism of performance monitoring to reflect timely submission of
ATNs by Ministries and they have stated that many other mechanisms/monitoring
agencies such as Ministry of Statistics and Programme implementation, NITt
Ayog, e-samiksha, e-nivesh, e-suvidha, etc. are in place and suggested that
Monitoring Cell may suggest a suitable mechanism for effective. monitoring. of
ATRS/ATNs, ‘The Committee recommend that PMD of Cabinet Secretariat may
study the cited mechanisms and identify the most appropriate performance
monitoring mechanism which can reflect timely submission of ATNs by
Ministries/Departments as an important parameter and also take up the matter

with the Monitoring Cell for appropriate incorporation

Th. Expedite submission of ATN on report of ०६५७ on CAMPA funds submission of ATN on report of C&AG on CAMPA funds
हु (Recommendation No. 5}

9... The Committee while examining various pending ATNs, had noted with great
concern the gross’ mismanagement, inaction, delays and even diversion of CAMPA
funds meant for Compensatory Afforestation. They expressed disappointment over the
‘ailure of the Ministry to submit remedial action taken notes on the Audi?’s observations,
especially keeping in view the responsibility of the Ministry which should have taken
Proactive steps to check such mismanagement even before Audit has taken it up. The
Committee were surprised. that ATNs having serious ramifications had been jeft


inatténded by the Ministry. They, therefore, had recommended that the Ministry to
expedite the submission of ATNs on the. said report on CAMPA as well as all pending .

paras of the C&AG reports.

10.

The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:

"| is mentioned at the outset that the funds being managed by the Ad-hoc
Compensatory Afforestation Management and “Planning Authority (Ad-hoc
CAMPAY are kept outside the general revenues, the Consolidated, Fund, or the
Public Account of india, or the States, In this cohnection , the’ Order dated 20
October 2002; the judgment dated 26" September 2005; the Order dated 5" May
2006; the Order dated 10" July 2009, and the judgment dated 12 march 2014 of
the hon’ble_ Supreme Court of india, in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 202 of 1995:TN
Godavarman Thirumalpad Vs UOI-& Ors, are relevant. :

Jn the above background, a doubt had artsen whether the Report, ‘Compensatory
Afforestation in India’ (21 of 2013) ought to have been laid in thé Parliament.
The then Secretary (Environmerit and Forests) was advised as under, in 0.0.
letter No. 15 93)-B(SDV/2012 dated the 29" July 2013 from the then Secretary,
Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance: पु हि

"2, ._ Presently money is credited into and disbursed from CAMPA fund, and
this fund is not’a part of the Consolidated Fund of India, Hon'ble Supreme Court
(SC} in its judgement on 26.09.2005 in WP(C) No. 202 of 1995 had stated that
Article 283 of the Constitution and provisions of CAG (DPC) Act are not
applicable to this fund. Therefore, after reading the Constitutional provisions
related to CAG, CAG(OPC) Act and the opinion of SC, it may be construed that
the Report may not be laid in the Parliament." °. . : हे : .

Notwithstanding the above advice, the Report in question was Tabled in
Parliament, by the Ministry of Finance. . हे

Nevertheless, addressing the concerns expressed both’ in the above
communication, and also, variously about the large funds remaining outside
legislative control, the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill 2015 has been
tabled in the Parliament. The Bill has been referred to the Department related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology and Environment &
Forests. Their Report is awaited. है है

In'so far as preparation of a reply to the above Report is concerned, the position
is that in- addition to the ‘Executive Summary’, and the 6 Chapters on the issues
‘dealt with in the Report, there is also a Chapter concerning 30 State/UTs. Efforts ~
had been set afoot to obtain the responses of the States/UTs in February 2013
itself when the Report was tn the draft stage. Efforts were continued and stepped
up, when the Report was tabled in the Parliament.’ The responses from the
States/UTs had, without exception, to the revised through a process. of


6

consultations involving telephone discussions, personal visits, and interactive
Conferences with the States, the last of them having been held in the month of
May 2015. The revised responses of many States were received in the course of
the meeting itself. पु

The task of studying, and collating the responses of the States, which comprises
.the ‘bulk of the Report of ‘the C&AG of India-the responses, together run to
thousands of pages —is currently in progress; and substantial work has been
done. It is expected that after further consultations with the States/UTs (none of
whom have responded, after the interactive Sessions held with them in the
month of May 2015) it would be possible to finalize. the replies, soon. है

In so faras observation of the hon'ble Public Accounts Committee, that there has
‘been diversion of CAMPA funds meant for Compensatory Afforestation. is
concerned, it s submitted with due deference that the use/utility for which the
funds being collected under various ‘heads’ and deposited into the corpus being
managed by the Ad-hoc Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and
Planning Authority is concemed the same are guided by the ‘State CAMPA'
Guidelines which.have been approved by the hon’ble Supreme Court of India, in >
their Order dated the 107 July 2009. The funds forming part of fhe corpus. are
deposited under various heads, like ‘Compensatory Afforestation’, ‘Net Present
Value’, ‘Catchment Area Treatment plans’, and funds realized from user
/ agencies in pursuance of the orders of the hon’ble Supreme Court of India or the
decisions taken by the National Board far Wildlife involving cases of diversion of
forest land in protected areas (which is to form a distinct corpus and shall be
used exclusively for undertaking protection -and conservation activities in
protected areas of the State}. हु है

. The provisions in thé State CAMPA Guidelines provide that:

1. the. money received for compensatory afforestation, additional
compensatory afforestation, penal compensatory afforestation, Catchment Area.‘
Treatment Plan and for any other site specific scheme may be used as per site-
specific schemes submitted by the State alongwith the approved proposals for
‘diversion of forest land under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980;

2. after receipt of fhe money, State CAMPA shall accomplish the afforesation
for which money is deposited in the Compensatory Afforestation Fund within a
period of one year or two growing seasons after project-compietion, as may be
appropriate; हु

3... the money received on account of Net Present Value (NPC) shall be used
for natural assisted regeneration, forest management, protection, infrastructure
development, wildlife protection and management, supply of wood and other
forest praduce saving devices and other allied activities; . हे :


4, Monies realized from the user agencies in pursuance of the Hon'ble
- Supreme Court’s orders or decision taken by the National Board for Wildlife
involving cases of diversion. of forest land in protected areas shall form a distinct
corpus and shall be used exclusively for undertaking protection and conservation
activities in protected area of the State. है ना
In terms of the orders of the hon'ble Supreme Court of India, release of funds
and their utilization has to be in terms of the Annual Plans of Operation drawn up
by the States, with the approval of the State level Steering Committees.

- it is submitted, further, that the Ad-hoc Compensatory Afforestation Fund
Management and Planning Authority had drawn up an elaborate list of activities
in which the States were dissuaded from incurring expenditure from out of the

- CAMPA funds released to them. This list of activities was considered by the

National CAMPA Advisory Council, in its 4" Meeting held on 26" January 2012,in

which the following was decided: हु

"46, As regards the principles for release of funds to State CAMPAs, and the
items of expenditure on which expenditure should be, and should not be
permitted, IIke of providing vehicles to the functionaries above the Range Officer
Jevel, arid also, about the provision of POL for such vehicles; and communication
facilities to the field officials, the PCCFs present in the meeting argued that
- senior officers too should be treated as-field officers for the purpase of providing
vehicles and communication facilities, as they are required to tour extensively in
- their jurisdiction. The Chairperson observed that no view could be taken unless
such requirements were examined vis-a-vis the CAMPA Guidelines and
Supreme Court orders in the matter. She clarified that notwithstanding the
paucity of infrastructure in the States, CAMPA funds cannot be envisaged as an
avenue to substitute for the States’ lack of resources. st .

Following the above deliberations, a Committee of senior officers was constituted
under the then Additional Director General of Forests (Forest Conservation) in
the Ministry of Environment Forests and Climate Change. The issue of items of
work to be permitted / not permitted from the CAMPA funds was one of the
issues deliberated, upon by the Committee. The recommendations of the High
level Committee were considered in the 5" meeting of the National CAMPA
Advisory Council held on 24" November 2014, in which the following decisions
were taken and circulated to all States/ Union Teritoties: °° S

“on the items of work on which the States have been dissuaded from incurring
expenditure from out of the CAMPA funds fas in Annexure ‘A’) following is the

decision: a - :
(a) thé funds meant for Compensatory Afforestation, {including Addl CA,
Pensla CA) should be used for CA alone, and cannot be diverted for any other

use;


g

(b) the same applies to funds for Catchment Area Treatment and Safety zone
afforestation fund, which should be used for these specific works, only

(c) - the orders ‘of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India are very clear on
restriction of the funds obtained in compensation for areas falling in wildlife and
Protected areas, Therefore, the only funds. that could, if at all, be used for
administrative,’ recurring and staff expenditure are the funds realized as Net
Present Value. हे : .

Oui of the fotal allocation under the head ‘NPV in any Annual Plan af Operation,
Sub allocation will be in the following manner:

() 8 cumulative not less than 70% should be earmarked for ‘core activities!

” which include assisted natural regeneration (ANR}, plantations, implementation
of Working Plan Prescriptions, forest protection and conservation measures, and
management of notified forest Protected Areas;

(i) up to 5% May be used for applied and need based research; |

{ii} ५०1० 10% may be used for communications ICT and capacity building and
training programmes: :

(४) not more than 15% of the allocation to the State out of the NPV
“component may be allowed to be used for items hitherto Placed in the capacity of
items of work. on which States are dissuadeu from incurring expenditure. -

In this Context, the following provisions from the ‘Overarching Objectives and ;
Core Principles’ of the State CAMPA Guidelines are reproduced: —

“State CAMPA provide an integrated framework for utilizing multiple sources of
funding relating to protection and Management of forests and wildlife. Its prime
-fask would be régenerating natural forest and building up the institution engaged
in this work in fhe State Forest Department including training of the forest Officials
at various levels with an emphasis on training of the Staff at cutting edge.tevel
(forest range level). The amount received by it will also be utilized for providing
residential accommodation to the field: staff and necessary machinery to them.
These include appropriate arrangement for their conveyance during inspection
and protection duty. tn short, the arrangement would be modernized to protect
and regenerate the forests and wildlife habitat”,”

4 The Committee had expressed _ great concern over the gross
mismanagement, inaction, delays and even diversion of CAMPA. fund meant for
compensatory afforestation, The Ministry have stated that the CAMPA fund are
kept outside the general revenues of Consolidated Fund of India or the Public
Accounts of India or the States. They have ‘also quoted the Supreme Court's
judgment that Article 283 of the Constitution and provisions of CAG(DPC) Act are


not applicable to this fund. Hence, it was ‘construed that the said report on
CAMPA may not be faid in Parliament. However, addressing the concerns about
the large funds remaining outside legislative . control the Compensatory
Afforestation Fund Bill, 2015 has been tabled in Parliament. The Committee has
also noted the recommendations of the National CAMPA advisory Council's
decision dated 24-11-2014 that the fund meant for Compensatory Afforestation
should be used only for compensatory afforestation and can't be diverted under
any circumstances The Committee are deeply disappointed to note that the
Ministry still have not been able fo compile the final ATN on the report of the
C&AG on CAMPA funds, despite claiming to make efforts since 2013, The
’ Committee find the inability on the part of the Ministry to furnish ATNs on the
plea that the replies have to be obtained from 30 States/UTs, to be unreasonable
and unacceptable as the Audit report on the subject was laid in Parliament as far
back as September, 2013. The Commitiee, therefore, express. their strong
displeasure with the lax and casual attitude of the Ministry and desire that the
Minlstry conciude consultations with all States/UTs at the earliest and ‘obtain the
_ desired information. They further desire that the Action Taken on each actionable
paragraph of the Audit report should be furnished within two months of this

report being presented to Parliament.

WV. Standing order on processing Audit objections order on processing Au
(Recommendation No. 7)

42. - The Committee had further recommended that henceforth, the Ministry of
Environment, Forests and Climate Change and all other Ministries having outstanding
ATNs should issue a standing order to all their divisions and units across the country to
the effect that Audit objections at the time &f actual audit should be taken nofe of and
shared-with ‘all their divisions and units which are liable fo such objections by virtue of
similarity of functions Thereafter, as soon as the C&AG reports are tabled in
_ Parliament, concerned units/divisions should promptly process and submit the Action

Taken Notes for approval without awaiting instructions from the Ministry Headquarters


10

The Heads of each division/units should be acquainted with audit obligations and.made

accountable to Ensure necessary action in this regard,

13, The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:.

“The above observation/recommendation of the PAC fegarding timely
submission of ATNS/ATRs has been Circulated to all Divisional Heads of -

' Stipulated time period, Audit objections at the time of actual audit will be taken

note of and theréby ATNs will be promptly processed and subniitted for
approval." * _ “
14. The Committee had further desired that the Ministry of Finance may coordinate
with all Ministries regarding compliance to this recommendation of the Committee and
apprise the Committee of the progress achieved within six months.

Recommendation {Para No, 8)

15. The ‘Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure, in their Action taken reply
stated as under: : हि

- “The observations of the Committee were circulated fo ail the
Ministries/Departments with the “request to ensure that Heads of - their ~
subordinate/attached office are acquainted with Audit objections as well as procedure.
for dealing with PAC maiters (copy enclosed). In response, 4 large jumber of Ministries/
Departments have confirmed that they have issued instructions to their
_ Subordinate/attached offices. , ;

2, This Action Taken Note’ has been vetted by Audit vide their note No.
SO/RC/PAC/93/2015-16 dated 29.03.2016." हि

46. The ‘Committee had recommended. that the Ministry of Finance may
Coordinate with Ministries on issuing standing orders to all their divisions and
units actoss the country fo the effect that Audit objections at the time of actual


i.

audit. should be taken note of and shared with all divisions having similar
objections and for concerned divistons/units to promptly process and submit the
action taken Notes for approval. The Committee had also recommended that
such exercise should be initiated by all the units without awaiting instructions
from the Ministry Headquarters, as soon as the C&AG reports are tabled in

Parliament, making heads of divisions/units accountable in this regard. ©

_ The Committee note. that the Ministry of Finance, Department of
Expenditure had on 7" September, 2015 communicated the recommendation of

ihe Committee to all the Ministries, seeking their compliance by 17.09.2045.

. The Committee are, however, constrained to note that the Ministry of
Finance, Department of Expenditure has not been able fo place before the
Committée the details of compliance by Ministries and that their claims of a large
number of Ministries having confirmed issuing instruction to
subordinate/attached offices is vague at best. ~The Committee, therefore,
reiterate thelr. earlier recommendation. and desire the Ministry of Finance,
Department of Expenditure to obtain statements of compliance from all
'Ministries/Departments and place the same before the Committee within two

_ months of presentation of this report.

५. Action against_officers responsible for serious lapses_in_furnisting against_officers. responsible for serious lapses_in_furnishin
remedial/corrective ATNs on Audit paras हैं

(Recommendation No. 16)

17... The Committee, had noted that from the depositions made by the Ministry during
evidence and their replies to questions post evidence, most of which are not reproduced
ih this report for purposes of brevity, the Ministry had ‘adopted the APMS operated by
the Monitoring Cell, had Afained officials on its use and had satisfactory mechanism for
: timely preparation and submission of remedial. ATNs to audit abjectians,. During the
evidence, the Audit para No. 8.2 of C&AG Report No. 19 of 2013 concerning irregular
release of grant of Rs. 8.86 crore to State Government of Jammu and Kashmir for 372
Madarsas was discussed in detail, which was not accepted by the Ministry. However,
subsequent to the Sub-Commitiee’s evidence, the matter was pursued by the Ministry


12

and the Committee note that the State government having sent utilization cértificate for
. Rs. 149.256 disbursed to 103 Madarsas and having sought revalidation for unspent
- balance of Rs. 737.274 lakhs, the inregularity has now been rectified: The pendency of:
1 ATNs concerning UGC based on para 1.3 of C&AG Report No. 4 of 2602 and its larger

ramifications was discussed in detail, The Committee were pleased 10 note that the

Ministry has finally settled the same. However, the Committee found the number of

other pending and delayed ATNs on several other Paras unacceptable. They further felt
‘that the Ministry needs to focus on policy matters and take decisions expeditiously

failing which the pendency of ATNs concerning HRD would be difficult to liquidate.

The Committee had further recommended that the Ministry expedite the
implementation of their Standing Audit Committe. (SAC) recommendation fo have
action initiated against officers responsible for serious - lapses in furnishing
remedial/corrective ATNs on Audit paras. The Committee had, further reiterating its
earlier recommendation, desired that a system of fixing responsibility for serious lapses -
be put in place by-all Ministries, The Committee also had desired that Monitoring ceil of
the Ministry of Finance may communicate this recommendation to all Government of

India Ministries/Departments and monitor its impfemientation.

18. - The Ministry in their Action faken reply have stafed as under:

4) Audit Para No.8.2 of C&AG Report No.19 of 2013 (Depariment of School
Education & Literacy) - trregular release of grant of Rs.8,86 crore to State
Government of Jammu _and Kashrit for 372 Madarasas, :

Action Taken : Final Action Taken Note (ATN) has been sent fa Monitoring Cell,
Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance vide letter No.8-9/2010-EE-19
dated 12!" November, 2015 (Annexure ५ 0

7 2) Audit Para No. 1.3 of C&AG Report No.4 of 2002 (Department of Higher
Education} ~ University Grants Commission है ;
Action Taken : Final Action Taken Note. (ATN) has been sent fo Lok Sabha
Secretariat, PAC Branch vide OM No,4-43-2001-U1 (part) dated 237 March, 2015
(Annexure - Ii). :
3) [9 The Committee has noted the Action Taken in the matter and was
Pleased to note that the Ministry have finally settled the above pending audit
paras. .


13

(fi) Instructions have been issued in the Ministry of HRD to strictly adhere. to the
time schedule for Formulating and sending to the Monitoring Gell the final ATNs
of pending Audit paras. Further, the recommendations of the PAC (16" Lok -
Sabha vide Para No. 16 of the Report No.20).that “that Ministry expedite the
implementation of their Standing Audit Committee (SAC) recommendation to
have action initiated against officers responsible for serious lapses in furnishing
remedialicorrective ATNs on Audit paras. The Committee, further reiterating its
earlier recommendation, desire that a system of fixing responsibility for serious
lapses be put in place by all Ministries” nave also been brought to the notice of all
Bureau Heads in the MHRD for strict compfiance (Annexure — IM). :

(iii) In the case of AICTE {missing/untraceable of records), AICTE had
constituted a Committee to investigate the issue of loss of records and for fixing
responsibility. The final ATN, in this regard, had been sent to Monitoring Cell, Dio
Expenditure vide OM No.1-2/2013-TS-I] dated 26.10.2015 (Annexure — WW).

- (iv) itis also mentioned here that the APMS portal is being used in all stages
« Le. the ATNs have been uploaded on the APMS portal in draft stage and also in
final stage. Since March, 2015, the final ATN of 13 (Thirteen) C&AG paragraphs
have been settled and the requisite nurnber of copies have also been sent to the
Monitoring Cell, Department of Expenditure. There is a fegular monitoring jor
preparation of pending OraftFinal ATNs and-to ensure 8 regular and sustained
monitoring of outstanding paras in respect of Central Educational Institutes
(CEis)/Autonomeous Bodies (Abs)/Subordinate Offices under the administrative
control-of MHRD; Nedal Officers in the respective Bureaus have also been

appointed (Annexure — ५).

(v) At present there are 47 (seventeen) G&AG paras pending against the
Department of Higher Education. Out of these 17 paras, the draft ATN of 9 (nine)
paras, have been prepared and sent to Audit for vetting. These Draft ATNs have
also been uploaded on APMS portal. a .

(v) © The systems and procedures in place in MHRD for monitoring of pending
Audit Paras have been recognized by the Ministry of Finance, Department of
Expenditure and ithas ciroulated the procedure adopted by MHRD, amongst all
the Ministries for information and guidance (Annexure ५ Vij

19. The Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure, in their action taken note on

the above recommendation have stated as under:

“The recommendations of the Committee contained in para 16" of its 20" Report
(167 Lok Sabha): have been circulated to all the Ministries/Departments of
Government of India for necessary compliance vide OM No. 4/20.2015-MC/352
dated 8" December 2015 (copy enclosed). All ‘Ministries/Departments have
been advised to put in place a system of fixing résponsibility for serious lapsés in
-furnishing corrective Action Taken Notes (ATNs)‘on Audit observations.


ह

2. This Action Taken Note has been vetted by Office of the C&AG of India
vide their U.O. .RC/PAC/93/2015-16/125 dated 01.06.2016”

-20. The Committee note that the Ministry of Finance (Department of
हे Expenditure) had, on 8B December, 2045, written to aif Ministries, Government of
India asking for compliance to the Committee's recommendation requiring all
Ministries to put in place.a system of fixing responsibility for serious lapses in
timely ‘submission of ATNs and to intimate the action taken thereon to the
Monitoring cell by. 18" Deceinber, 2015, However, the Ministry are yet to furnish
any detajis ‘regarding the action taken by various Ministries on the
recommendation of the Committee. They, ‘therefore, reiterate their earlier
recommendation and emphasize that the Ministry, being mandated by.the Public
Accounts Committee, as the nodal Ministry in this regard, should closely follow
up with all the Ministries of the Government of India and report the status of
compliance by Ministries 0 this recommendation of PAC within three months of

the presentation of this report.

NEW DELHI; | PROF, KV. THOMAS

fé November, 2016 Chairperson,

2S Kartika, 1938 (Saka) . न Public Accounts Committee