NON-COMPLIANCE BY MINISTRIES/
DEPARTMENTS IN TIMELY SUBMISSION OF
ACTION TAKEN NOTES ON THE
NON-SELECTED AUDIT PARAGRAPHS
(CIVIL AND OTHER MINISTRIES)
MINISTRY   OF  FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE)
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2014-2015
TWENTIETH  REPORT
SIXTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
20

TWENTIETH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2014-2015)
(SIXTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
NON-COMPLIANCE BY MINISTRIES/
DEPARTMENTS IN TIMELY SUBMISSION OF
ACTION TAKEN NOTES ON THE
NON-SELECTED AUDIT PARAGRAPHS
(CIVIL  AND OTHER MINISTRIES)
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 29 April 2015
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 29 April 2015
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
April, 2015/Vaisakha, 1937 (Saka)

PAC  No. 2051
Price:  ` 85.00
© 2015  BY  LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager,
Government of India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2014-15) ....................... (iii)
COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE-IV OF THE PAC  (2014-15) ......................... (v)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................... (vii)
REPORT
PART I
I. Introductory .............................................................................. 1
II. Non-compliance in timely submission of  A TNs on  non-selected
Audit paragraphs by Ministries and the role of   Monitoring Cell,
Ministry of Finance in ensuring compliance ............................ 4
III. Non-compliance in timely submission of  A TNs  on non-selected
Audit paragraphs relating to Ministry of Environment, Forests
and Climate Change................................................................... 9
IV . Non-compliance in timely submission of  A TNs on  non-selected
Audit paragraphs relating to Ministry of Railways ................... 12
V. Non-compliance in timely submission of  A TNs on  non-selected
Audit paragraphs relating to Ministry of Home Affairs ............ 15
VI. Non-compliance in timely submission of  A TNs  on non-selected
Audit paragraphs relating to Ministry of  Defence ................... 20
VII. Non-compliance in timely submission of  A TNs on  non-selected
Audit  paragraphs  relating  to  Ministry  of  Human  Resource
Development ............................................................................. 24
P
ART II
Observations and Recommendations ....................................... 29
ANNEXURE
Minutes of Sittings ................................................................... 35
APPENDIX
Tables ........................................................................................ 52

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2014-2015)
Prof. K.V . Thomas — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
4. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey
6. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank”
9. Shri Neiphiu Rio
*10. Shri Dushyant Singh
11. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
*12. Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi
13. Dr. Kirit Somaiya
14. Shri Anurag Thakur
***15. Dr. P. Venugopal
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
17. Shri Vijay Goel
18. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya
19. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
20. Shri Shantaram Naik
21. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
22. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Director
3. Shri T. Jayakumar — Additional Director
4. Shri Paolienlal Haokip — Deputy Secretary
 * Elected w.e.f. 3rd December, 2014 vice Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy who has been appointed as
Minister w.e.f. 9th November, 2014.
* Elected w.e.f. 3rd December, 2014 vice Shri Jayant Sinha who has been appointed as Minister
w.e.f. 9th November, 2014.
*** Elected w.e.f. 3rd December, 2014 vice Dr. M. Thambidurai who has been chosen as Hon’ble
Deputy Speaker, Lok Sabha and has since resigned from the membership of the Committee.
(iii)

COMPOSITION   OF   SUB-COMMITTEE -IV
OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2014-2015)
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab — Convenor
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nishikant Dubey — Alternate Convenor
3. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar — Member
4. Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi — Member
Rajya Sabha
5. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh — Member
(v)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee, (2014-15) having been authorized
by the Committee, do present this Twentieth Report  (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on “Non-
Compliance by the Ministries/Departments in timely submission of Action Taken
Notes on the non-selected Audit Paragraphs (Civil and other Ministries)”.
2. Taking cognizance of the persistent delay on the part of various Ministries/
Department in timely submission of Action Taken Notes on the non-selected audit
paragraphs of the reports of C&AG of India, the Public Account Committee (2014-15)
carried over the subject which was selected by the PAC (2013-14) for detailed examination
and Report. Sub-Committee-IV of the PAC under the Convenorship of Shri Bhartruhari
Mahtab, M.P. and a Member of the PAC, was again constituted to further examine the
subject and make a report.
3. The Sub-Committee took evidences of various Ministries in their sittings held
on 18.11.2014, 28.01.2015, 02.02.2015, 11.02.2015, 19.02.2015 and 23.03.2015. The draft
Report on the subject was finalized by the Sub-Committee and approved by Convenor,
and subsequently by the Chairperson, PAC. Thereafter, it was considered and adopted
by the Main Committee at their sitting held on 27.04.2015. The minutes of the sittings
are annexed to the report.
4. The Committee thanks the Convenor and members of the Sub-Committee-IV
(PAC) for their untiring efforts in examining the subject, which involves taking evidences
of representatives of various Ministries and making a report thereon.
5. The Committee also would like to express their gratitude to the representatives
of the Ministries of Finance (Department of Expenditure), Environment, Forests and
Climate Change, Railways, Defence, Home Affairs and Human Resource Development,
who have deposed before the Sub-Committee and have provided all the information
required by the Sub-Committee in their examination of the subject.
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI; PROF.  K.V.  THOMAS
27 April, 2015 Chairperson,
7 V aisakha, 1937 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(vii)

REPORT
PART I
I. INTRODUCTORY
Executive accountability to Parliament is the corner stone of parliamentary
democracy. The Reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India, after being
laid in the Parliament as per Article 151 of the Constitution of India, stand referred to
the Public Accounts Committee for their scrutiny. Every year, a number of reports are
presented to the Parliament by the C&AG , bringing into light inefficiencies, wasteful
expenditure and indiscretion in the implementation of policies and programmes
approved by Parliament. Due to paucity of time and voluminous reports of the C&AG
it is almost impossible for the PAC as a body to scrutinise all such reports. In fact, it
has neither the time for a thorough scrutiny of the entire activities of the Government,
nor it is practically feasible to do so. Therefore, the Public Accounts Committee has
evolved a system whereby Government departments concerned are required to furnish
remedial/corrective Action Taken Notes in respect of all non-selected paragraphs
contained in the Audit Reports to the Committee through the Ministry of Finance
within four months from the day of laying Audit Reports on the Table of the House.
2. There was no system for ascertaining the Action Taken by the Ministries/
Departments till 1981 on the Audit Paragraphs not selected by the Committee for
detailed examination. The Public Accounts Committee (1981-82) at their sitting held
on 30.6.1981 decided that the Ministries concerned be asked to furnish the Remedial/
Corrective Action Taken Notes on the Audit paragraphs/Reports of the C&AG for the
year 1979-80 which had not been selected by the Committee for detailed examination.
Subsequently, the Public Accounts Committee at their sitting held on 7.4.1982 decided
that the various Audit Reports for the year 1980-81 be referred to the Ministries
concerned for furnishing notes duly vetted by Audit showing Remedial/Corrective
Action Taken on all the paragraphs contained therein. The Committee also decided
on 16.4.1982 that these instructions were to be treated as 'standing instructions' for
future also. Accordingly, the Lok Sabha Secretariat informed the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Expenditure) on 19.4.1982 that the Ministries concerned be asked to
furnish in future notes indicating the Remedial/Corrective Action Taken by them on
the various Audit paragraphs contained in Audit Reports for the year 1980-81 as soon
as the same were laid on the Table of the House. The Ministry of Finance (Department
of Expenditure) was enjoined to coordinate and collect the notes from the various
Ministries and forward the same to the Lok Sabha Secretariat.
3. Taking note of the inordinate delay and persisting failure on the part of the
Ministries in reporting to the Committee the Corrective Action Taken on Audit

2
Paragraphs, the Committee in their 105th Report (10th Lok Sabha – 1995-96) had
observed that the results of audit of Government's financial transactions would largely
remain in vain, unless an adequate mechanism was devised to ensure timely submission
of the Action Taken Notes. The Committee, therefore, recommended that the Action
Taken Notes on all paragraphs of the Reports of C&AG should be furnished to the
Committee through the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) within a
period of 4 months from the date of laying of Audit Reports on the Table of the House
(Starting from 31.3.1996 onwards). The Remedial Action Taken Notes and briefs on
'non-accepted' paras are then circulated to the Members of the PAC for their perusal
and then the Remedial Action Taken Notes reach the stage of finality. If not satisfied
any of these categorized Paras/Reports/Subjects can be taken up for in-depth
examination and Report. From the year 2009-10 onwards, the Public Accounts
Committee have been examining the subject 'Non-compliance by the Ministries/
Departments in timely submission of Action Taken Notes on Non-Selected Audit
Paragraphs' the Reports on which are also presented to the Parliament.
4. Since inordinate delays were noticed in the receipt of Action taken Notes
from the various Ministries/Departments, the PAC (2008-09) took cognizance of the
matter and asked the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure—Monitoring
Cell) hereinafter mentioned as Monitoring Cell, to look into the matter and expedite
submission of the Action Taken Notes. Taking a serious view of the inordinate delay
in submission of Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes by various Ministries/
Departments, the Committee asked the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure) on 15.9.2008 to take necessary action for furnishing all the pending
Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes to them within a period of three months i.e.
by 14.12.2008. The Ministry was also directed to furnish Ministry/Department-wise
position of the paras on which Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes were awaited
from the concerned Ministries/Departments.
5. During the first sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2010-11) held on
21.5.2010, the Comptroller and Auditor General of India apprised the Committee about
the pendency of large number of Action Taken Notes from various Ministries/
Departments. Consequently, the Committee selected the subject "Non-Compliance
by the Ministries/Departments in timely submission of replies to the Audit paragraphs
of the C&AG" for detailed examination and a Sub-Committee of the PAC (2010-11)
was constituted (Sub-Committee-I) for examination of the subject. The observations
and recommendations of the Committee (58th Report) were:—
(i) Inordinate delay and huge pendency in respect of the Ministry of Finance,
Department of Revenue and the two boards under its administrative control,
namely Central Board of Direct Taxes (DBDT) and Central Board of Customs
Excise (CBEC) and recommended that the Ministry chalk out an effective
and time bound procedure to reduce the pendency of A TNs on audit
paragraphs;

3
(ii) M ismatch of figures supplied by the Ministry of Finance (Monitoring Cell)
and office of the Comptroller and Auditor General (C&AG) and desired that
all the Ministries/Departments take urgent steps to reconcile the figures in
consultation with the Audit;
(iii) Fixing of common date for compilation of the pending ATNs with the
concurrence of the C&AG to avoid mismatch of figures;
(iv) Setting up of Standing Audit Committee (SAC) by all the Ministries/
Departments and holding of regular SAC meetings to review the pending
A TNs and also to ensure that A TNs in respect of new Audit Reports are
furnished to the Monitoring Cell within the prescribed time frame of four
months;
(v) Holding of meetings of Committee of Secretaries (CoS) chaired by the Cabinet
Secretary once in three months to take stock of the pendencies to ensure
that the A TNs are invariably submitted within the prescribed period; and
(vi) Apprising the Committee about the impact of the Audit Para Monitoring
System (APMS) and the difference it made in wiping out the pendencies.
6. The PAC (2013-14) at their first meeting held on 17.05.2013 decided to pursue
further the subject-matter of 'Non-Compliance by Ministries/Departments in timely
submission of Action Taken Notes on the non-selected Audit Paragraphs of the
C&AG of India'. A Sub Committee on the subject under Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab, MP
and a Member of the PAC, as Convener, was constituted to pursue the matter.
7. The PAC (2014-15) carried over the subject and its first report presented in
both Houses of Parliament on 25.11.2014 was on the subject. C&AG was requested to
furnish a Background Note on the subject which contains status of the pending
Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes pertaining to various Ministries/Departments
as on 31.10.2014. As per the information furnished by Audit, the follow-up action by
the Ministries/Departments concerned on the C&AG's Reports still continues to be
highly unsatisfactory as large number of Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes are
still pending submission by the Ministries/Departments concerned, some for several
years. According to information received from Monitoring Cell, as many as 491 paras
were pending with various Ministries/Departments as on 31.10.2014. The information
submitted by Audit is attached as Appendix I  to this report.
8. Out of the 491 pending paras as on 31.10.2014, 93 paras pertained to the
Ministry of Defence. The Ministry of Railways had 96 paras, the Ministry of Human
Resource Development had 20 paras pending, whereas the Ministry of Environment,
Forests and Climate Change had a pendency of 15 paras.
9. The Committee, therefore, again formed a Sub-Committee (Sub-Committee-IV)
under the same Convener in order to pursue and thus minimize the non-compliance of

4
A TNs not selected by the PAC. This time, the Sub-Committee decided to focus on the
non-compliance in timely submission of A TNs on non-selected Audit paragraphs
relating to Ministries of Environment, Forests and Climate Change, Human Resource
Development (Department of Higher Education & Department of School Education &
Literacy), Railways (Railway Board), Home Affairs and Defence. Oral evidences of
respective Ministries were taken by the Sub-Committee in the meetings held on
28.01.2015, 02.02.2015, 11.02.2015,19.02.2015 and 23.03.2015 respectively. Prior to these
evidences, the Sub-Committee first took evidence of representatives of Department
of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance on 18.11.2014 to take an overall view of the
pendency of Audit Paras with various Ministries of the Government of India as per
their Monitoring Cell and to assess the measures taken to coordinate and monitor the
progress by the Ministry of Finance.
II. NON-COMPLIANCE IN TIMELY SUBMISSION OF A TNS ON NON-SELECTED
AUDIT PARAGRAPHS BY MINISTRIES AND THE ROLE OF MONITORING
CELL, MINISTRY OF FINANCE IN ENSURING COMPLIANCE
10. The Monitoring Cell, under the Department of Expenditure (Ministry of
Finance) has been entrusted to coordinate and collect the Remedial/Corrective Action
Taken Notes on the various Audit Paragraphs contained in different Audit Reports
from all the Ministries/Departments concerned duly vetted by Audit and forward the
same to the Public Accounts Committee within the stipulated period of four months
from the date of presentation of Audit Reports to the Parliament. The Sub-Committee
therefore took evidence of representatives of the Department of Expenditure, Ministry
of Finance on 18.11.2014 to get an overall picture of non-compliance by the Government
in timely submission of A TN on Audit paras not selected by PAC for examination. The
Sub-Committee noted that since 21.05.2010 when the PAC had for the first time selected
"Non-Compliance by the Ministries/Departments in timely submission of replies to
the Audit paragraphs of the C&AG" as a subject for detailed examination, there have
been a noticeable decline in the number of pending paras. According to the Ministry,
from 4216 paras with pending A TNs as on 30.06.2010, the number had come down to
491 as on 31.10.2014, as against figure of 514 given by the office of C&AG.
11. Later, a statement of pendency as on 31.3.2015 of the various Ministries
was obtained from Audit. Same is given in the following table:—
Total Number of Reports / paras on which ATNs are pending as on 31.03.2015
No. of Reports/ No. of Reports/ A TNs finally No. of ATNs T otal
Paras on which paras on which vetted by Audit with Audit
ATNs have not revised ATNs are but pending for V etting
been received awaited from with Ministry /
even for the Ministry/Department Monitoring Cell
first time from for submission
the Ministry/ to PAC
Department
189 223 6 7 160 639

5
Thus, from the figures given on the table above, it is noted that the total
pendency of ATNs has increased from 514 to 639. The figures furnished by Monitoring
Cell, Ministry of Finance again differed from that furnished by the C&AG to 869,
which showed that the reconciliation of pendency figures between the two have not
been fully redressed. However, some new paras, which have in the meantime become
due, have been added to the total pendency. Ministry- wise pendency as on 31.3.2015
is at Appendix II.
12. The Sub-Committee noted the efforts of the Department in upgrading the
web-based Audit Para Monitoring System (APMS) and in organizing training for
officers of Ministries on the usage of the APMS. However, they were concerned with
the lukewarm response of certain Ministries to the directions for adopting APMS and
sponsoring officers for training on APMS. Out of 91 Ministries and Departments,
54 were reported to have pending Audit Paras, out of which 35 have reportedly
adopted the APMS.
13. Elaborating on the improved APMS portal, the representative of the Ministry
during evidence stated:—
"Consequent upon up gradation of the Portal, it has become possible to upload
the Monthly Progressive Review Report electronically. A training schedule has
also been drawn up in this context, which has begun and will go on up to
13th January 2015 for all Ministries and Departments to make them familiar with
the new upgraded facilities on the portal."
14. When it was pointed out to the Department of Expenditure that the figures
they provided with regard to number of Audit Paragraphs with various Ministries do
not tally with the figures given by the Audit and were asked about the steps taken by
the Monitoring Cell to reconcile the data, the Ministry informed:—
"Monitoring Cell has been regularly interacting with the C&AG and Ministries
and Departments to reconcile the data on submissions of A TNs. Following
sustained efforts the discrepancies in the figures has come down to 110 from
206 as on the date of the Oral Evidence. This figure has now further come down
to 80. The reconciliation process is being electronically taken up with C&AG on
regular monthly basis to ensure better efficiency."
15. On whether any time-limit has been prescribed by the Department of
Expenditure within which all the Ministries/Departments would start using the APMS
portal to its full potential and the follow up action taken, the Department of Expenditure
submitted:—
"Group of Officers (Go) in August, 2013 had asked all Ministries and
Departments to ensure usage of APMS portal by 30.04.2014 (Annexures II & VIII).
Training is being imparted to officers regularly to facilitate usage of the portal. The
latest such ongoing training schedule is from 17.11.2014 to 13.01.2015. Also CGA's
Office has been holding regular meetings with the nodal officers nominated by
Ministries/Departments for the purpose."

6
16. Asked to furnish the names of Ministries that have so far sent officers for
training in the use of APMS, the Ministry submitted as follows:—
List of Ministries that attended the training on APMS portal as on 31.3.2015
Sl. Name of Ministry/Department Sl. Name of Ministry/Department
No. No.
12 3 4
1. Administrative Reforms and Public 39. Justice
Grievances
2. Agri. Res. Education 40. Labour and Employment
3. Agriculture and Cooperation 41. Legislative
4. Animal Husbandary 42. Legal Affairs
5. AYUSH 43. Micro, small And Medium
Enterprises
6. Bio-Technology 44. Minority Affairs
7. CBDT 45. National Aid Control Organisation
8. Custom 46. New and Renewable Energy
9. Central Excise 47. Overseas Indian Affairs
10. Chemicals and Petrochemicals 48. Pensions and Pensioners Welfare
11. Coal 49. Personnel and Training
12. Commerce 50. Pla nning Commission
13. Consumer Affairs 51. Petroleum and Natural Gas
14. Corporate Affairs 52. Posts
15. Culture 53. Power
16. Defence 54. Railways
17. Disinvestment 55. Road Transport and Highways
18. Drinking Water and Sanitation 56. Rural Development
19, DSIR/CSIR 57. Revenue
20. Development of North-Eastern Region 58 School Edu. and Literacy
21. External Affairs 59. Science and Technology
22. Earth Sciences 60. Shipping
23. Economic Affairs 61. Social Justice and Empowerment
24.. Environment and Forests 62. Space
25. Expenditure 63. Statistics and Programme
Implementation
26. Fertilizers 64. Steel
27 Financial Services 65. Sports

7
28. Food and Public Distribution 66. T extiles
29. Food Processing Industries 67. T elecommunication
30. Health and Family Welfare 68. T ourism
31. Health Reaserch-ICMR 69. Urban Development
32. Home Af fairs 70. Woman and Child Development
33. Heavy Industry 71. Water Resources
34. Higher Education 72. Civil Aviation
35. Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation 73. Land Resources
36. Industrial Policy and Promotion 74. Mines
37. Information and Broadcasting 75. Tribal Affairs
38. Information Technology 76. Youth Affairs
17. On whether the Ministry/Monitoring Cell have any monitoring mechanism
to ensure timely uploading of information about Action Taken Notes on the portal by
all the Ministries/Departments concerned, they submitted as under:—
"In the present APMS System, uploading of C&AG paras, A TNs and clearance
of A TNs are to be uploaded at each stage by Ministries/Departments. However,
office of C&AG may need to automate the process of uploading the paras.
Monitoring Cell has been in touch with C&AG's office in this regard. However,
presently the C&AG paras are being manually uploaded by the Monitoring Cell
in respect of individual Ministries/Departments. A system of alerts/blinks from
APMS portal to concerned Ministries to indicate pending para status has been
developed and is expected to be functional by January, 2015, which will further
facilitate regular monitoring."
18. The Sub-Committee desired to be apprised whether the obstacles, if any, for
Ministries in using the APMS portal have been identified and the corrective steps
taken thereon. The Ministry in their written reply, stated as under:—
"The reasons have been analyzed and obstacles identified. Action has been / is
being taken to remove the obstacles faced by the Ministries /Departments for
using the APMS through training of officers, meeting with nodal officers of
Ministries/Departments, issue of reminders and regular interaction with the
office of C&AG."
19. Based on some of the issues the Ministries have highlighted with regard to
the functionality of the APMS portal to facilitate vetting of ATNs, including claims by
Ministries of C&AG not uploading the replies to ATNs, the Sub-Committee sought
comments of the C&AG. In reply, the office of C&AG submitted as follows:—
"It is stated that all the concerned audit offices/wings were instructed to ensure
the optimal usage of APMS for online vetting of ATNs vide this office.
12 3 4

8
U.O. No. 262 dated 10.07.2014 (copy enclosed) and requested to submit status
update on the usage of the portal. In response, certain issues were raised by the
field offices which needed to be addressed by the Monitoring Cell-e. These
issues were communicated to M.C. vide this office letter No. 351/93/Rep.
C/PAC/2014-15 dated 02.09.2014 (copy enclosed)** A list of officers who required
further training on the APMS usage was also forwarded along with this letter.
However, no response regarding the resolution of these issues or holding of
training sessions was received from Monitoring Cell. In compliance of the
directions of Public Accounts Committee, Instructions regarding the uploading
of vetting comments on APMS as soon as the Action Taken Notes are uploaded
by the concerned Ministries are again being issued to the concerned audit
offices/wings."
20. Asked if any instructions have been issued by the Department of Expenditure
to the Ministries/Departments concerned prescribing the time schedule to be adhered
to for finalization of audit paragraphs, it was submitted as follows:—
"The Monitoring Cell had circulated the time schedule prescribed by the
Lok Sabha Secretariat (PAC Branch) to all the Ministries/ Departments vide
O.M. dated 10.06.2004, which inter-alia stated that Remedial/Corrective action
taken notes on all paras of the C&AG's Reports be submitted to the Lok Sabha
Secretariat through Monitoring Cell within stipulated period of four months
from the date of laying of Audit Reports on the Table of the House, as otherwise
the very purpose of seeking Remedial/Corrective A TNs would get defeated if
the submission of ATNs is delayed inordinately... Monitoring Cell has been
issuing regular communication to the Secretaries/Financial Advisors to ensure
timely resolution of pending paras. As a result of various measures taken, the
number of pending audit paras has been reduced from 1494 as on 30.03.2012 to
491 as on 31.10.2014."
21. Replying to a query whether any instructions to the Ministries/Departments
concerned have been issued for fixing responsibility on the concerned officials for
delay on their part in timely submission of A TNs, the Ministry submitted:—
"Department of Expenditure has been following up with all Ministries /
Departments emphasizing on the need to make special efforts to clear the pending
ATNs/ATRs on CAG Audit Paras and PAC Recommendations... In pursuance
of the CoS meetings held on 05.03.2010 and 17.06.2010, it was communicated to
Secretaries of all Ministries / Departments that as Chief Accounting Authorities
that they will be personally responsible for ensuring that ATNs/ATRs on Audit
Paras / PAC Reports are finalized within the prescribed time frame. They were
also asked to include timely submission of A TRs/ATNs as one of the targets in
the RFD of their Ministry/Department as the direct responsibility of the Chief
Accounting Authority... In addition, the Financial Advisors have been advised
to ensure that status of pending A TNs in respect of paras selected by PAC is
furnished on Quarterly basis to the Department of Expenditure."
**Appendix III

9
III. NON-COMPLIANCE IN TIMELY SUBMISSION OF A TNs ON NON-SELECTED
AUDIT PARAGRAPHS RELATING TO MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT/
FORESTS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
22. As on 20.01.2015, the total number of Action Taken Notes on Audit
paragraphs not selected by PAC due to be submitted to the Committee by Ministry of
Environment, Forests and Climate Change stood at eleven. Out of these two were
those on which A TN have not been received even for the first time, three on which
revisions were awaited and six which were pending with Audit.
23. A statement of pendency as on 31.3.2015 of the Ministry as obtained from
the C&AG is given in the following table:—
Comparative Number of Audit Paras for which A TNs are pending
As on 31.10. 2014 15
As on 31.03.2015 19
From the comparative figures given on the table above, it could be seen that the
pendency of the A TNs on Audit paras in respect of Ministry has increased.
24. During the oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry, the Sub-
Committee desired to be apprised whether they have taken leverage of the advances
in Information Technology towards speedy finalization and submission of Action
Taken Notes on Audit Paragraphs. The Ministry stated they are yet to have a system
for electronic management of replies to Audit observations. While expressing certain
reservations on the efficiency and reliability of the APMS portal which is in use in
certain Ministries, the representative of the Ministry admitted the absolute need to
leverage IT for faster disposal of replies/action taken notes to Audit and promised to
put in place a system for electronic management of Action Taken Notes in the Ministry.
The Sub-Committee were also informed that the Ministry have not so far sent its
officials for training on APMS organized for handling ATNs.
25. However, subsequently the Committee noted that the Ministry responded
in the positive in their post-evidence replies to queries on whether they have started
using the APMS and whether they have sponsored their officials for training on
APMS operation.
26. Asked to explain the monitoring mechanism in the Ministry for timely
submission of A TNs keeping in view the pending Audit paragraphs pertaining to the
years 1998 and 1999, the Ministry representative submitted as follows:—
"Generally, what happens when we get an ATN it is marked to the Division
concerned in the Ministry. If they do have the information with them in the
Division, then, those are compiled and then we respond to each of the points
referred to in that audit para... If we need to go back to any subordinate offices
of ours, then we get the information from them. We take into account their
response and then the concerned division, they work on this and after they

10
have examined that in detail with reference to the response given by the
subordinate office, duly scrutinized by the concerned divisions, it comes to my
division, that is, the Integrated Finance Division. We also see the veracity of
the information and after that has been vetted by us, we respond to the Audit.
This is the mechanism. Apart from this, we have a Standing Audit Committee in
the Ministry. What we do is, since it might pertain to different divisions once in
a quarter this Committee meeting takes place which is chaired by the Secretary
and all these things which are under examination or are being monitored at that
level, we take that into account and as per the directions given by the Standing
Audit Committee we respond. More or less that is a monitoring committee to
respond. Notwithstanding the monitoring committee the activities relating to
the response of Audit goes on in the concerned division duly vetted by the
Finance Division."
27. Asked if the Ministry has any mechanism to avoid delay in submission of
A TN on Audit Paras and whether it is effective enough, the Ministry in their reply,
stated:—
"Upon receiving information about laying of the reports in the Parliament, the
paras are furnished to the divisions for submission of A TNs in time."
28. The Sub-Committee also found that the Ministry did not reply to some
important questions that were sent to them, in particular to questions like whether
they have evolved any system, to ensure that irregularities pointed out by C&AG do
not recur in subsequent audits, whereby systemic deficiencies, wherever pointed
out, may be remedied. They also evaded answers on the question whether they have
identified officers responsible for delays in timely submission of A TNs, whether
inter-ministerial consultations were held with concerned Ministries to resolve audit
objections involving other Ministries, etc.
29. The Committee also went into some detail on the contents of the various
Audit Paragraphs outstanding against the Ministry. The Committee were especially
concerned over the huge amount of Compensatory Afforestation Fund (CAF) to the
tune of Rs. 23,607.67 crore placed under the Ad-hoc Compensatory Afforestation
Management and Planning Authority (Ad-hoc CAMPA) without any legislative
sanction and diversion of funds from CAMPA. The standalone report No. 21 of
2013 on 'Compensatory Afforestation in India' was discussed in detail on which the
Ministry agreed to send detailed information. Asked to furnish a comprehensive
statement on the status of Action Taken Notes on audit's observations on
Compensatory Afforestation Management Fund and Planning Authority (CAMPA)
and Compensatory Afforestation Fund (CAF) based on audit report No. 21 of 2013,
the Ministry submitted as follows:—
"The C&AG's Report on 'Compensatory Afforestation in India' (21 of 2013) was
tabled in the Parliament on the 6th September, 2013. Immediately on receipt of
the said Report, the following action was taken viz.:—
(1) Principal Secretaries, Forest Departments in all States/ UTs were addressed
by a letter dated 16th September, 2013 from the Inspector General of Forests

11
(Forest Conservation), Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government
of India; and Chief Executive Officer, Ad-hoc CAMPA in which it was
requested that the comments of the State/ UT on the contents of the Executive
Summary, Chapter IV to Chapter VI, and also the portions concerning the
State in Chapter VII of the Report may kindly be sent very early, to reach in
any case by the 30th September, 2013, without fail; and
(2) The above communication was followed by a D.O.letter dated
17th September, 2013 from the Director General of Forests and Special
Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India
(Chairman, Ad-hoc CAMPA) in which attention was drawn to the
communication dated 16th September, 2013, and it was requested to issue
suitable instructions to ensure that the time schedule that has been
prescribed, viz., 30th September, 2013 is adhered to, so that requisite action
at our end is completed well in time.
Comments were received from various States/ UTs. The last of the comments
were received as recently as in August, 2014. As and when the comments
of the C&AG Report were received, these were transmitted onwards to the
concerned officer in the FC Division, Ministry of Environment and Forests,
for forwarding the Ministry's comments on the State Government's
reactions... Concurrently, the replies received from the States/UTs were
examined in the Ad-hoc CAMPA. It transpired that the States had mostly
offered comments on the State specific observations under Chapter VII of
the Report. Further, the replies of many of the States required in-extenso
revision and updation and essential details/ specifics were wanting.... It
was felt that in view of the 'gaps' in the replies received, interaction with the
States/UTs would be necessary. As individual interactions with all the 30
States/UTs involved was not practicable, it was considered appropriate
that the interactions be held in meetings to be taken by the Additional
Principal Chief Conservators of Forests in the Regional Offices of the
Ministry of Environment Forests and Climate Change in which the
concerned officers from the States in their territorial jurisdiction will be
asked to participate... In terms of the above decision, interaction was held
in separate meetings held under the Chairmanship of the Addl. Principal
Chief Conservators of Forests, in-charge of the Regional Offices of the
MoEF&CC. The concerned Nodal Officers dealing with FCA matters in the
States (at the level of Addl. PCCF/ CCF); and also the officers concerned
with CAMPA matters, attended these meetings. Where necessary,
repeat meetings were also held with the Addl. PCCFs in-charge of the
Regional Offices of the MoEF&CC, and/ or officers of the State
Governments......Efforts to obtain the completed replies from the other
States/UTs is in progress. In view of the fact that responses from 30 States
have to be coordinated, the PAC may be pleased to allow some more time
for finalization of the responses."

12
30. The Sub-Committee noted further irregularities including purchase of cars
and construction of forest range office buildings with CAMPA funds reported by
Audit. They took strong objection to the gross mismanagement of CAMPA funds
meant for compensatory afforestation (CA). They also noted that the Forest
Conservation Act, 1980, mandates collection of money from user agencies given
forest lands for compensatory Afforestation, that the funds were earlier used by State
Governments, and that in 2002, the Supreme Court ordered to constitute authorities
for handling the fund after expressing concern that a large amount of funds were not
being realised from the user agencies in states. The Sub-Committee observed with
serious concern that the fundamental raison d'etre, for which the Hon'ble Supreme
Court had observed that the Compensatory Afforestation Fund (CAF) would not be
a part of general revenues of the Union, of the States or part of the Consolidated Fund
of India was to ensure that no diversion of the funds meant for Compensatory
Afforestation takes place and that compensatory Afforestation is effectively
implemented, and the same seems to have been undermined, if not defeated, by the
mismanagement, inaction, delays and even diversion of funds under Ad-hoc CAMPA
for non-core Compensatory Afforestation activities, as pointed out in report of the
C&AG.
IV . NON-COMPLIANCE IN TIMELY SUBMISSION OF ATNs ON NON-SELECTED
AUDIT PARAGRAPHS RELATING TO MINISTRY OF RAILW AYS
31. The Sub-Committee took evidence of representatives of Ministry of Railways
on 2.2.2015. The Committee were pleased to note that the pendency of A TNs with the
Railway Ministry is on the decline. From an outstanding of 429 in 2010, the figure has
dropped to 92 as of 29.01.2015.
32. A comparative statement of pendency as on 31.10.2014 and 31.3.2015 of the
Ministry as obtained from the Ministry is given in the following table:—
As on 31.10.2014 As on 31.3.2015 (Reports
 (Reports upto 2011-12) upto 2011-12)
No. of Audit Paras for which 9 6 83*
A TNs are pending
*7 paras have been vetted by audit and will be sent to monitoring cell shortly after Hindi
translation. Hence, the actual pendency is only 76.
From the comparative figures given on the table above, it is seen that the
Ministry had been able to clear only 20 additional Paras since October, 2014.
33. Explaining the efforts of the Ministry during the last few years to clear all
pending Audit Paras and the reason for delays, the representative of the Ministry
stated:—
"Over the years, I am happy to tell you, that the number of outstanding ATNs,
which was 429 in 2010, has been brought down to 121 in January, 2015. All
efforts are being made to see that we send the replies and get our final closure.

13
Secondly, in the past four years, we have closed 458 audit paragraphs. Coming
to the current outstanding of 122 paragraphs, the position is that out of 122, we
have replied for 92 paras to Audit. Out of that, Audit's closure advice is awaited
for 56 paras and in 36 cases; Audit has raised further queries on which replies
are under issue from the Ministry of Railways. I would like to re-assure the
Committee that there is no effort which is being spared in this regard. However,
the Railways do have some constraint because of the vast network involving
17 Zonal Railways and so many divisions and field units where we have to
collect data from and then, compilation also takes some time. It is especially
so when it comes to the issues for which we have to get information from all
the Railways. ...Recently in the first PAC Report of this year, there are also
some cases where recovery is due. We accept the audit contention in this
regard. In the latest PAC Report of 2015, it is recommended that where the
Ministry of Railways have accepted the recoveries, pending those recoveries,
the Audit could consider closure and thereafter, the matter related to those
recoveries awaited by the Railways should be reported to the Audit. With
this, I think things could also improve... .We do have a number of steps taken
for closing these audit paras. An office order has been issued prescribing the
time schedule for finalisation of paras in 2013. In this Report again the PAC
has drawn a reference to that saying that the Railways has a good system and
the Ministry of Expenditure may also probably follow suit and issue such
instructions for other Ministries to follow and ensure that timelines are set.
There was a concept of Standing Audit Committees which are held with the
Board Members concerned. From the beginning, 17 meetings have been held.
Recently, even on this, the PAC has said—now it is convened at the JS
level—that we should have a once a month regular system of meetings so
that followup could be expedited. We have our own internal systems of
sending reminders Railway-wise, getting their replies and periodically meetings
are being held. This is also being occasionally discussed in the Board meetings
when there are very high outstanding of draft paras....Recently, the CGA has
started the audit para monitoring system wherein after the audit paras are
issued and the first ATN is sent, we upload it on the system. It was a good
monitoring mechanism. After that, I think, the replies on the remarks are not
forthcoming. So, this system of monitoring has not achieved the desired
levels which it could have probably achieved. Otherwise, from our side, we
are trying our best to bring down the number of paras. From 429, we have
brought it down to 122 and there is no lacking in effort to try to see that these
are closed. For 2008-09, there were 38 paras and for 20 cases we have sent
replies. They are with the audit. On 18, they have come back for which we
have to send back the response. Our effort is to see that they are replied as
expeditiously as possible. There was one item you had mentioned about
2010-11 paras vetted by audit but not submitted to PAC. We will have to
check on this and we will c ome back."

14
34. Asked to state the difficulties faced by the Ministry in adhering to the time
limit of 4 months for submission of duly vetted ATNs to the PAC on the Audit
Paragraphs pertaining to them, the Ministry submitted:—
"Following difficulties are being faced by this Ministry in finalizing the paras
within the stipulated time:—
(i) In cases of Performance Review Paras or Thematic/Special Audit Paras,
A TNs are to be framed after collecting information from more than
140 accounting units involving 68 division and 16 zonal railways and also
from different Directorates of this Ministry. The information to be collected
is also extensive and framing of ATN is held up for want of replies from all
field units.
(ii) The time taken to finalize the paras increases further when Audit makes
observations on the ATNs sent by the Ministry of Railways requiring back
references to the field units/divisions/Zonal Railways which delays the
finalization of the reply to audit.
(iii) Based on a suggestion of Ministry of Finance, a request was made to PAC
by Ministry of Railways for increasing the time limit for submission of
vetted A TNs from 4 months to 6 months. This was, however, not agreed to.
(iv) In a lot of cases, audit directs Railways to recover the outstanding dues.
The recovery is done by following the due process including settling of
court cases/arbitration cases etc. which often takes a lot of time and the
para remains pending till the recovery is completed. PAC in its 1st Report
have recommended that in such cases, A TNs may be submitted and
recovery position advised in due course. Pursuant to this recommendation,
action is being taken to submit to audit the paras that are pending for
completion of recovery drawing their attention to the aforesaid
recommendation and requesting for closure.
(v) Sometimes audit objections involve policy issues. Resolving these matters
take time. For example, many paras are pending for want of review of siding
agreements especially with Coal sidings. The revised format of siding
agreement is under deliberation in consultation with Ministry of Coal for
several years. In such cases vetting of ATNs get delayed.
(vi) In view of the complexities of many of the cases, a fairly long time is taken
by the audit for checking up with their field audit officer and also in field
verification/observations on A TN/final vetting. In some cases, audit's further
comments are received after more than one year.”
35. The Sub-Committee desired to know if the Ministry has put in place a
Computerized Audit Para Monitoring System. The representative of the Ministry
informed the Sub-Committee that though they have well trained personnel to service

15
the APMS system put in place by the Ministry of Finance, the system is rendered
useless because the response of C&AG to first Action Taken Notes uploaded by
them are not uploaded on the portal. The Committee sought the comments of the
C&AG on the issue and they submitted:—
"....all the concerned audit offices/wings were instructed to ensure the optimal
usage of APMS for online vetting of A TNs vide this office U.0. No. 262 dated
10.07.2014 ... and requested to submit status update on the usage of the portal.
In response, certain issues were raised by the field offices which needed to be
addressed by the Monitoring Cell. These issues were communicated to
Monitoring Cell-e vide this office letter No. 351/93/Rep. C/PAC/2014-15 dated:
02.09.2014.... A list of officers who required further training on the APMS usage
was also forwarded along with this letter. However, no response regarding the
resolution of these issues or holding of training sessions was received from
Monitoring Cell. In compliance of the directions of Public Accounts Committee,
Instructions regarding the uploading of vetting comments on APMS as soon
as the Action Taken Notes are uploaded by the concerned Ministries are again
being issued to the concerned audit offices/wings."
36. The Sub-Committee during evidence of the Ministry had expressed particular
concern over some rather significant issues highlighted in the Audit Paras pending
submission of remedial action taken notes by the Ministry. Some of these issues
are:—
1. Para 3.2.1 of C&AG Report No. 9 of 2002 on "Non-recovery of cost and
maintenance charges of deposit works (NR)".
2. Para 2.2.3 of C&AG Report CA 6 of 2008 on "loss due to irregular booking of
traffic at trainload class rates".
3. Para 5.1 of Report No. CA 6 of 2008 (Railways) on "Non-recovery of cost and
maintenance charges on ROBs/ RUBs".
4. Para 2.2 Chapter 3 of C&AG Report No. 25 of 2013 (Railways) (Union
Government-Compliance Audit Report) on "Revenue loss due to irregular
grant of concessional tariff rate for booking of iron ore traffic".
5. Para 2.3 of C&AG Report No. 25 of 2013 (Union Government-Compliance
Audit Report) on "Avoidable payment of lease charges due to ambiguity in
agreement clause".
6. Report No. 25 of 2013 (Volume II) of the C&AG on "Maintenance of
Locomotives in Indian Railways".
V. NON-COMPLIANCE IN TIMELY SUBMISSION OF A TNs ON NON-SELECTED
AUDIT PARAGRAPHS  RELATING TO MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
37. Ministry of Home Affairs had 22 Paras and an entire report on which A TNs

16
are pending as on 31.10.2014. It is also seen from the information provided by the
Office of the C&AG that up to 29.01.2015, Action Taken Notes on 22 Audit Paragraphs
pertaining to the year 2011-12 to 2013-14 have not been submitted to the PAC by the
Ministry of Home Affairs. The Sub-Committee took evidence of its representatives on
11.02.2015. A comparative statement of pendency as on 31.10.2014 and 31.3.2015 of
the Ministry as furnished by the Ministry is given in the following table.
Comparative Table of Number of Audit paras for which Action Taken notes are
Pending as on 31.10.2014 and 31.03.2015
Number of Pending Number of New Number of Paras Number of Pending
Paras as on Paras rece ived settled between Paras as on
31.10.2014 between 31.10.2014 31.10.2014 and 31.03.2015
and 31.03.2015 31.03.2015
D=A+B-C
18 Paras 8 Paras 9 Paras 17 Paras
From the comparative figures given on the table above, it is clear that only
9 Paras had been cleared by the Ministry since October, 2014.
38. Drawing a distinction between pending Paras and delayed paras, and
elaborating on their efforts and achievements to dispose the paras, the Ministry's
representative submitted:—
"Sir, the delay is in context of 13 audit paras, but as on date, we have 18 on hand
and five of them are the ones which we received in the month of December....
Against these 13, 4 paras have been sent to Monitoring Cell. Seven audit paras
have been referred for the first time. So, that makes it 11. In case of two, revised
A TNs have been sent. This is what we have done with respect to 13 audit paras
where we are already delayed. Against the remaining 5 paras, one first reference
we have sent last week."
39. Even though the pendency in the Ministry appeared less as compared to
those of Ministries of Defence and Railways, the issues involved and highlighted by
audit were considered critical to public good by the Sub-Committee. The failures also
pertain to services for the public who are in the margins of the nation both physically
and economically. Asked to explain the lapse, the representative submitted:—
"...I would like to humbly admit that there has been undue delay in processing
the Audit Paragraphs in this Ministry. I would not present any reason or
justification for the delay but I would like to ensure that it will be ensured in
future that the requisite timeframe is strictly adhered to."
40. Appraising the Sub-Committee on the steps taken for timely submission of
remedial action taken notes on Audit Paras, the representatives of the Ministry
stated:—
"I would like to apprise the hon. Committee that the review meetings to review

17
the progress made in finalization of these pending paragraphs and to expedite
the finalization of these pending paragraphs are being held regularly. In the
year 2014, four such meetings had been held on 15th of January, 5th of May,
5th of August and 26th of November respectively. The next review meeting will
be held by me on 18th February.... out of 23 pending audit paras or so, 5 paras
with final action taken notes, duly vetted by Audit, have been sent to the Office
of the Director-General of Audit. In case of 2 paras, revised A TNs incorporating
audit observations have been sent for final vetting. In case of 10 paras, they
have been lately submitted, as reported on 3rd of February, to Audit. The
remaining 6 paras of C&AG Report No. 25 of 2014 have been received in the
Ministry on 9.12.2014 and the due date for submission is in the month of March.
We will surely submit the replies within the scheduled time-frame, by the last
week of March....I submit before the hon. Committee that effective steps have
already been initiated in this Ministry for speedy disposal of the pending audit
paras and necessary instructions for strict compliance of the time-limit have
been issued. We have also commenced a strict monitoring regime where pending
audit paras will be reviewed quarterly with the concerned head of the
Administrative Division. We have, in the meanwhile, connected to the APMS,
Audit Para Monitoring System, software and phase-wise training is being
conducted by the Monitoring Cell of the Finance Ministry. The next phase of
APMS training is scheduled to be held on 12 and 13th February, 2015. With this
mechanism in place, I am sure, there will not be any further delay in submission
of ATNs in future. I assure that the Ministry will comply with the prescribed
timelines for submission of ATNs in respect of all the pending audit paras. ..I
may also say that instructions have been issued by the Joint Secretary (UT) in
case of undue delay to all the Union Territories not to have such delayed report
and also to take immediate necessary action where there is an irregularity."
41. The Sub-Committee also delved into some specific issues on which Audit
have given their observations from the Paras that were pending with the Ministry.
One issue on which the Sub-Committee sought explanation from the Ministry relates
to Avoidable expenditure on an outlived vessel (A&N, Administration) as per Para 8.2
of C&AG Report No. 13 of 2012-13. Asked to throw light on the subject, the
representative of the Ministry submitted:—
"There were two passenger ferries. Unfortunately, the organization which
constructed them was a Government body, Garden Reach Shipbuilders. The
problem also lies with the design given by the erstwhile NSDRC. They gave a
wrong sort of design. .... the thing got delayed. It is a vehicle ferry from one
place to the second. They had a faulty design. To rectify that, we kept
corresponding with them and they had given it to a third party and so on and so
forth... for about three to four years, these vehicle ferries were lying there.
Then, I persuaded the Department that we have to do something. They, on their
own, rectified one of the ferries. It is now working without costing the Government
anything."
42. The Committee also asked for clarifications on the action taken relating to air

18
ambulance facility for Lakshadweep (Non-commissioning of Radar transponders-
Para No. 14.8 of Report No. 19 of 2013) and recovery from Vipul Shipyards Private
Limited (Failure to procure Landing Barges resulted in wasteful expenditure of
Rs. 12.21 crore as contained in Para No. 14.7 of Report No. 19 of 2013) based on the
audit's observations. The Ministry submitted as follows:—
"Lakshadweep islands are situated and scattered in the Arabian Sea
400 Kilometres off the coast of Kerala. In case of an emergency, patients from
other islands have to be evacuated to Kavaratti or RGSH, Agatti. Further all
those cases which the Government Hospital at Kavaratti and Agatti cannot
attend to are referred to mainland for emergency medical treatment. In the given
circumstances, the only way by which emergency medical evacuations can be
effected are by relying on the helicopter. In fact, the helicopter which is now
operating in Lakshadweep is functioning primarily as an ambulance helicopter
for emergency medical evacuations. If for want of helicopter the serious patients
have to be evacuated by the normal schedules of the ships, precious lives
would be lost. Alternatively, in the event of helicopter being withdrawn from
service, the Administration will have to requisition helicopters from Indian Air
Force or Indian Navy for emergency medical evacuation of serious patients..
The Helicopter operations since its introduction are carried out by Dauphin
Helicopter provided by Pawan Hans Helicopter Ltd. and the same has been
replaced with Dauphin N3 Model from 31st August 2006. Dauphin N Model
Helicopter was deployed as Second Helicopter which started operation on 10th
January 2009. Both these helicopters are basically used for medical evacuations
for serious patients. The evacuation sorties are performed as per the requisitions
made by the Department of Medical and Health Services. Besides operation of
these helicopters for patient evacuation, the service is also utilized for connecting
Kavaratti (Headquarter Island) with Agatti (only Airport Island) for the
connectivity of flight passengers. During monsoon period when all fair-weather
vessels are withdrawn, these helicopters are also operated for inter-island
connectivity after meeting the requirements of evacuations. No. of evacuations
carried out for the last five years is as follows:—
Y ear No. of evacuations
2008-2009 161
2009-2010 198
2010-2011 189
2011-2012 357
2012-2013 416
2013-2014 348
2014-2015 416

19
Status on recovery of payments made to Vipul Shipyard, Goa
The payments made to Vipul Shipyard, Goa is pending for recovery. The
Administration has already filed proceedings under Arbitration and
Reconciliation Act seeking attachment of assets of M/s. Vipul Shipyard, Goa in
the District Court of Ernakulam. Moreover the matter is also referred to CBI and
CBI have initiated preliminary enquiry on the matter."
43. When the Sub-Committee pointed out that the DSS had ignored the
applicable provision of Inland V essels and Merchant Shipping Act while preparing
their initial proposal for construction of the vessels and violated the instructions of
SFC and MoS, compromising the safety of passengers thereby, the representative of
the Ministry submitted:—
"..we have fully surveyed and got the necessary certificate of safety. The
question is that it is not generating adequate power to generate the speed. So,
speed is one limitation and we are not able to ply it in very busy routes as of
now."
44. The Sub-Committee also highlighted other specific Audit observations during
evidence of the Ministry. Some of the issues include:—
1. Unclaimed deployment charges of SSB as contained in Para 8.1 of Report
No. 25 of 2014.
2. Non-achievement of objectives due to non-utilization of cess of Rs. 28.04
crore collected for welfare of construction workers as contained in Para
No. 14.12 of Report No. 19 of 2013.
45. While the Sub-Committee delved on some specific issues on certain pending
paras and observed that most of the Audit observations could have been avoided
had the Ministry put in place a system of internal audit, the Ministry representative
admitted:—
"Internal Audit is very short staffed and we have not enough manpower for
internal audit of all the UTs that we have."
46. Asked as to what initiatives have been taken by the Ministry for expeditious
submission of A TNs in the past, the Ministry informed:—
"Regular Review Meetings to review the progress made in finalizations of
pending Audit Paras and to expedite the finalization of pending paras are being
held. To ensure timely submission of A TNs on audit paragraphs, regular review
meetings are held at the level of Special Secretary & Financial Adviser (Home)
and Chief Controller of Accounts (Home)... It is felt that there is a need for more
effective co-ordination among the divisions and more stringent monitoring to
be undertaken. ...It has been decided that concrete steps will be taken for
effective coordination and follow-up with the organizations for timely receiving
of the requisite information and documents required for preparing the ATNs.
The matter of reviewing of Audit Paras will also be included in agenda of
seniors officers meeting chaired by Home Secretary."

20
47. Asked about the mechanism the Ministry has for timely forwarding of Audit
Paragraphs to various field formations and for obtaining the replies from them so as
to avoid delay in preparation of A TNs, the Ministry submitted in writing as under:—
"As and when the Audit Reports are laid on the Table of both the Houses, the
same is then downloaded from the C&AG's website and immediately forwarded
to the concerned Head of the Divisions advising them to strictly follow the
prescribed time frame. Reasons for the pendency are because preparation of
the Action Taken Notes necessitates compilation of information/credentials
from many .different organizations and even requires involvement of other
ministries/departments which essentially devour lot of time in this course of
action."
48. Asked, if any system has been evolved/devised in the Ministry to ensure
that irregularities pointed out by C&AG do not recur in subsequent cases and remedial
action taken where systemic deficiencies have been pointed out, the Ministry
replied:—
"The content of Paras where such issues have been pointed out by C&AG , the
para is communicated at Special Secretary and Financial Adviser (Home) level
to higher authority that may be DG of CAPF or Administrators of Union
Territories. Besides this, we have issued a compendium of advice on delegation
of financial powers so that no violation happens. Ministry wants to bring
system in place by issuing instructions like this compendium of orders on time
to time basis."
49. The Sub-Committee pointed out that there are various stages in which the
Ministry has sufficient time to give response to Audit observations before their
inclusion in the Report which eventually will help in minimizing the number of Audit
objections. Asked if they agree that more attention needs to be given during the
course of audit to take corrective action before finalization of the Audit Report to
minimize audit objections, the Ministry in a reply wrote:—
"Yes .... Divisions of the Ministry are instructed to give suitable replies to the
Paras of the Inspection Reports, Draft paras and Audit observations within the
specific time period i.e. four weeks to the audit and also are advised to coordinate
with the 0/o audit in case of their observations so as to settle the audit objections
in their initial stage. Maximum draft paras are settled within the prescribed time
frame but in few cases the audit observations fail to settle. However, it is
submitted that a very few number of audit paras are pending in respect of this
Ministry as also going by the size of this Ministry."
VI. NON-COMPLIANCE IN TIMELY SUBMISSION OF A TNs ON NON-SELECTED
AUDIT PARAGRAPHS RELATING TO MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
50. The Ministry of Defence had 21 Paras and four entire reports on which
ATNs are pending as on 31.10.2014. The Sub-Committee took evidence of its
representatives on 19.02.2015. A comparative statement of pendency as on 31.10.2014
and 31.3.2015 furnished by them is given in the following table.—

21
No. of ATNs No. of ATNs No. of ATNs Total ATN not sent
sent to vetted by Audit sent to Audit for O/S to Audit even
Monitoring Cell pending for vetting once
of MoF submission to
MC
As on 21 3 44 122 12
31.10.2014
As on 38 5 47 104 16
31.03.2015
From the comparative figures given on the table above, it could be seen that the
Ministry had not made much progress during the last five months. The number of
A TNs not sent to audit even for the first time in fact registered an increase. The total
outstanding had marginally fallen from 122 to 104.
51. Asked to explain the Ministry's lapse in timely submission of remedial action
taken notes on the large number of Audit Paras, the representative of the Ministry
submitted:—
"At the outset, I would like to accept that the progress in respect of the A TNs
concerning this Ministry has not been even up to our satisfaction, though we
have made some improvements from the time the Committee last called us for
evidence in September 2013. At that time, we had 46 cases outstanding where
A TNs had not been sent even for the first time to the audit whereas the number
has reduced to 31 at the stage as on 31st January 2015. Out of that also only 25
paras relate to last year's audit and only six are from the prior years..... We have
tried to make some improvement. There is a scope of a lot of improvement.
I definitely assure that we will regularly monitor it and ensure that the situation
improves drastically. As far as delay in submission of audit is concerned, the
Ministry of Defence by the very structure, despite our efforts, takes a lot of time
to get information from the units because it, travels through the entire channel
of the formations of Army, Air Force and Navy. At times it becomes very difficult
to adhere to these timelines stipulated as four months. But we will try to adhere
to that timeline. At the same time, in case of the performance audit reports, as
they have an all India perspective and the number of units is very large, especially
in case of Army and Air Force, it becomes very difficult to keep the timelines
particularly in those cases. So, we submit it for consideration of the Committee
whether in case of performance audit the timeline could be a little more for
submission of the A TNs. That is for the kind consideration of the Committee."
52. The Sub-Committee impressed upon the Ministry that the timeline of four
months for submission of A TNs cannot be considered by the Sub-Committee as the
decision was taken by the full Committee of PAC in consultation with the Ministry of
Finance. Thereafter, the Ministry representative promised to try to adhere to the
existing timeline.
53. Making further submissions on the pendency in the Ministry, the
representative stated:—

22
"As on 31st March, as there are a large number of reports, the figure which
DGDS may have a little difference because everyday reports go and come back.
As far as our available data as on 31st January 2015 is concerned, there are a
total of 112 paras outstanding. Out of that 31 have already been sent to
Monitoring Committee. Five cases have been vetted by audit and we are in the
process of sending it to the Monitoring Committee. Forty two cases have been
sent to audit for vetting and 55 paras are pending in the Ministry at different
levels. It makes it to 112."
54. When it was pointed out that the total figure of pending Paras submitted by
them differed with the figure that is with the Sub-Committee which stands at 117, the
representative explained:—
"The figure which we have compiled is based on 31st January 2015 figure.
in last 15-20 days it may have changed but more or less the figures remain the
same and there is no discrepancy as such in that term. About 31 cases, where
we have not sent the ATNs even for the first time, as I told you, there are 25
cases relating to last year, four cases are relating to 2013 and two cases are
relating to 2010, The two audit paras have been examined by the PAC and A TNs
have been submitted after consideration by PAC."
55. During evidence, it has come to light that there prevails some confusion as
to the treatment to be given to Paras selected by the PAC. The Ministries were found
taking umbrage of the selection of the Paras by PAC as the reason for their failure to
submit ATNs on time. Seeking the Sub-Committee's guidance on the matter, the
representative of the Ministry submitted:—
"In some of these cases, the Action Taken Notes have not been submitted to
the Audit Para but the information that the PAC has given whether in the
questionnaire form or whether ATRs were to be submitted on the PAC reports,
in that there has been no delay. In fact, we would seek your guidance as to what
progress we should make in these cases because once they are selected by the
PAC, the ATN on the Audit Para does not progress unless the PAC deliberations
are completed."
56. To this, the Sub-Committee stated as follows:—
“Let us be clear. There need not be any confusion. Perhaps there is a lack of
communication between us. If an Audit Report is selected by the PAC, you
need not wait for the questionnaires to come to you. You have to be prepared
within four months' time with your Action Taken Report on that report. You
need not depend on our Secretariat to submit you certain questions."
57. The Sub-Committee also took note of some important issues in the pending
Paras for discussion with the representatives. One such Para relates to avoidable
expenditure of Rs. 227 crore on procurement of 100 aero engines for AN-32 aircraft
(Para 2.3 of Report No. 4 of 2014 of the C&AG). Asked to submit a detailed statement
on the audit's observation, the Ministry submitted:—
"The draft Action Taken Note on the subject Audit Para 2.3 regarding "Avoidable

23
expenditure in procurement of aero-engines" has already been sent to the office
of principal Director of Audit (Defence Services) on 09.03.2015...The contract
for procurement of aero engines of AN- 32 aircraft was concluded in consonance
with the periodicity of Provisioning Review (PR) as per provisions of IAP 1541
leaflet 11, which is 03 years cycle based on Maximum Potential Establishment
(MPE) period of 39 months for non-perishable Class-A items, consisting of
15 months stock at Depot and 24 months stocks in pipeline. It is further stated
that aero engines are high value lifed units which have defined warranty and
shelf life. IAF does not anticipate the total requirement for the life cycle at one
go while provisioning for aero engines. The cost of stocking aero engines and
losing their shelf life/warranty is a major point which is taken into account while
anticipating arisings...The initial life of the D-30 KP II aero engine was 6000
hours/10 years. Hence, in the first instance, the case for Total Technical Life
Extension (TTLE) in respect of Al-20 D Serious — 5 aero engines for AN-32
aircraft was taken up with the original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM), M/s
Motor Sich, Ukraine in June, 2004. The company informed that such extension
was not possible. Accordingly, it was decided to carry out Provisioning Review
of all engines with respect to their authorization, current holding, engines getting
life expired in the next 03 years (2006-07, 2007-08, 2008-09) to arrive at the net
requirement for procurement, in accordance with the provisioning regulations
as laid down in Leaflet No. 11, IAP 1541 .....The census of subject aero engines
was received from 3 Base Repair Depot (BRD) in September 2005 and taking
into account the arisings and holdings a net requirement of Oty-17 was projected
for Procurement Action. Accordingly, the case for procurement of 17 aero
engines was initiated in October 2005.....In February 2006, a presentation was
coordinated by M/s Spects Techno Export (STE), Ukraine for Total Technical
Life Extension of AN-32 aircraft. During presentation, M/s Motor Sich, Ukraine,
the OEM of Al- 20D aero engines informed that assigned life of aero engines
could be extended upto 20000 hours from 6000 hours... .The matter was followed
up with the firm, however, in the first instance, they backtracked stating that it
was erroneously mentioned. Subsequently in March 2006, the firm agreed that
the Total Technical Life could be extended upto 9000 hours from 6000 hours and
requested Air HQ provide 10-15 Total Technical Life expired aero engines for
study. The possibility of Life Extension was reiterated by the firm in June 2006.
The firm also informed that the first batch of such Total Technical Life extended
engines would be delivered to IAF in 1
1/2 to 02 years. Air HQ was of the view
that undertaking Total Technical Life Extension of the aero engines would be a
better option. Thus, the procurement of Qty-17 aero engines was held in
abeyance in August, 2006... .Later in September 2006, M/s Motor Sich informed
that the decision on life extension could be confirmed only after 1 to 1
1/2 years
from the date they received the engines for investigation. Further on their
request, the photocopies of Total Technical Life expired aero engine Log Books
were also forwarded to them. Despite repeated reminders, the firm resorted to
delays on flimsy grounds and did not provide non- obligatory quotes for Total
Technical Life Extension.. .The final position on the refusal of the firm to extend
life of engines from 6000 hours to 9000 hours became clear only in October, 2006

24
and not June, 2004 as stated in the Audit Para. The actions taken during the
entire process was based on the existing provisions laid down in IAF and the
presumptions that the Original Equipment Manufacturer would extend the life
of engines from 6000 hours to 9000 hours.... The situation was reviewed in
October 2006 and decision was taken to goahead with the procurement. The
quote for procurement of 17 aero engines had already been received and it was
felt prudent to enter into contract for the operational requirements of IAF. The
contract was, thereafter, signed on 21st June 2007 with delivery period of 210
days....A special Review of the entire assets of aero engines operating in AN-32
aircraft was carried out (for 2008-09, 2009-10, 2010-11), and the net requirement
emerged as Qty.-113 to cater to the requirements up to year 2011 against the
arisings due to life expiry. The calculations undertaken to arrive at the net
requirements was based on the life of AN-32 aircraft as 25 years, the then
existing life of the aircraft...Out of the requirement of 113 aero engines, 13 were
procured through the Option Clause of 17 aero engines procurement contract
at the same terms and conditions. The case for procurement of remaining 100
aero engines, as required, was progressed separately and finalized in December,
2009.... The steps taken by IAF under above circumstances were, therefore, in
accordance with the provisioning philosophy taking into account the cost of
stocking aero engines and the risk of losing their shelf life/warranty. Thus, the
decision taken was as per established procedure and bonafide."
58. The Sub-Committee also highlighted some important cases of violation of
rules and financial impropriety observed by Audit during evidence. Some of the
issues were:—
1. Acquisition of helicopters for VVIPs (No. 10 of 2013)
2. Performance of Ordinance Equipment Group of Factories [No. 24 of 2013
(Performance Audit)]
3. Inordinate delay in procurement and integration of Radar Warning Receiver
System based on Para 2.2 of Report No. 17 of 2012.
59. The Sub-Committee impressed upon the Ministry that even with paras
selected for detail scrutiny by the PAC, the ATNs have to be furnished to Audit
anyways within the stipulated period of four months. Thereafter, if and when the PAC
follows through with comprehensive scrutiny of the Paras and submit its report, the
Action taken notes on the report can be furnished separately.
VII. NON-COMPLIANCE IN TIMELY SUBMISSION OF ATNs ON NON-SELECTED
AUDIT PARAGRAPHS RELATING TO MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCES
DEVELOPMENT
60. The pendency status of A TN in the Ministry as on 31.10.2014 as received
from Audit was three Paras, two chapters and an entire report. The status Report on
Pending Action Taken Notes (A TNs) for the Ministry received up to 28.02.15 by the
C&AG was as given below.

25
(Ministry-wise) Pendency of ATN as on 28.02.15
No. of A TNs No. of ATNs No. of A TNs
Sl. Name of NOT RECEIVED BUT which have been No. of
No. the RECEIVED RETURNED WITH finally VETTED ATNs T otal
Ministry from the observations and by audit but have Pending Pending
Ministry even Audit is awaiting their not been submitted with
for the first resubmission by the by the Ministry Audit
time Ministry to PAC
Civil & Autonomous Bodies
1. HIRD 14 4 8 Nil 26
A comparative statement of pendency as on 31.10.2014 and 31.3.2015 of the
Ministry furnished by them is given in the following table:—
Comparative Pendency status
As on 31.10.2014 22
As on 31.03.2015 24 (includes 8 paras newly added pertaining  to
Report No. 25 of 2014)
From the comparative figures given on the table above, it could be seen that the
Ministry have failed to clear a single A TN since 30.10.2014.
61. Asked to explain their lapse during the evidence taken on the 23.03.2015, the
representative of the Department of Higher Education submitted:—
"...the reply to the audit paras has been submitted today and I would also like to
inform you that most of the paras are either with DG audit or there on Hindi
translation. We are not very proud of the delay but at the same time I will seek
the kind of indulgence hon. Chairman and Members to give us some more time.
We will give you the replies in the Action Taken Report."
62. Thereafter, the representative of the Department of School Education &
Literacy made the following submission:—
"We have one Para from the School Education & Literacy side. This was
regarding release of funds to Madarsas in Jammu & Kashmir Government and
we regret that we have not been able to finalize the report and make it available
but we have looked at it and we have some issues which were raised earlier. One
was the irregularity in sanction and the other was about the compliance of the
utilization. The reason why we deeply regret but we could not finalize it is that
my Department has written to the Jammu & Kashmir Government10 times
including me. We have also called a meeting with them on 30th of June this year
to be able to finalize this and to be able to submit it for vetting.... We seek your
indulgence for this one issue. We are continuing to lean on the J&K Government.
I will do another effort to get their compliance on this."
63. On being asked about the penalty if some State Governments do not comply,
the representative stated:

26
"We try to give the State Government an opportunity to plead or state their
case but in this case as I said about ten times over the last three years we have
been pursuing with them. We even called a meeting which was partially attended;
only the Jammu part could be sorted out but the Kashmir part could not be
sorted out. I would appeal to you that we should give them one more opportunity
failing which if the State Government does not comply. We normally would cut
their funds against some other releases. It is an effort which we would not like
to do because it would deprive the State Government of funds for some other
scheme."
64. The Sub-Committee noted that Audit's observation, stating that the Ministry
did not ensure fulfilment of the eligibility condition of the madarsas while releasing
the grants, was as a result of the Central Ministry's reliance on the certification by the
State Government, and the primary responsibility in that aspect was of the State
Government. Nevertheless, the Sub-Committee felt the need to have some mechanism
in place through which the Ministry can have some amount of control and
responsibility after funds have been released to programmes executed in States.
Asked to give a detailed statement on the issue of irregular release of grant to Madarsas
in J&K, the Ministry in their reply submitted:—
"The Government of J&K had submitted a proposal covering 372 Madarsas
under SPQEM benefiting 722 teachers... .As per the scheme guidelines the J&K
Government had submitted a proposal covering 372 Madarsas under the SPQEM
Scheme benefiting 722 teachers. Member Secretary of the State GIAC had certified
that the proposal is within the parameters of the said scheme. It may be mentioned
here that it is the responsibility of the State GIAC to certify that the proposal is
within the parameters of the said scheme The State Government vide its letter
dated 22.01.2013 had requested for release of further recurring grant under the
scheme. From the utilization certificate enclosed with the request, it was observed
that out of the total grant of Rs. 886.45 lakh, only Rs. 149.256 lakh have been
utilized and the remaining amount of Rs. 737.194 lakh is still unutilized with the
State Government. As this utilization certificate was signed by the Joint Director,
Planning, Education Department of J&K, they were requested to furnish the UC
under the signatures of Commissioner/Secretary, Education Department. The
State Government was also requested to furnish reasons for non utilization of
this amount till date and also to certify that all the 372 madarsas recommended
by the State Government fulfilled the criteria for coverage under the scheme...........
A number of reminders were sent on 19.02.2013, 15.03.2013, 08.07.2013, 02.08.2013
and 29.05.2014, at various levels, in Education Department, Government of J&K
for furnishing the utilization certificate of Rs. 737.194 Lakh duly signed by the
Commissioner/Secretary............. Economic Advisor, Department of SE&L had
vide letter dated 12.06.2014 requested the Commissioner cum Secretary J&K,
Government to depute an officer well versed with all the facts of the case.
Consequently, Mr. H.R. Pakhroo, Joint Director (Training) attended the meeting
on 30.06.2014. However he represented Jammu only. It was also informed by
him that Rs. 70.64 lakh have been utilized and Rs. 134.05 lakh were lying unspent

27
with Jammu region. There was neither any representation nor any information
about Kashmir region. It was once again requested that the representative from
Kashmir region may be deputed for a meeting on 14.08.2014........ Economic
Advisor, Department of SE&L again requested Commissioner cum Secretary,
J&K, State Government, on 01.08.2014 to furnish the details of the releases and
utilization of the funds with respect to Kashmir region or to depute an officer of
the Kashmir region for a meeting on 14.08.2014 in view of the audit para. It may
be mentioned here that no representative came for the meeting nor any
communication/letter was received from the State Government Therefore, another
reminder was sent on 10.09.2014 to Commissioner cum Secretary, J&K, State
Government, requesting again to depute any officer well versed with the facts
and figure for a meeting on 16.09.2014 to expedite the matter. It was once again
requested to utilize the unspent balance of Rs. 134.05 lakh for the Jammu
region......... Again reminder was issued on 25.02.2015 from Secretary (SE&L) to
Commissioner cum Secretary to expedite the matter.......... On 24th March 2015
Additional Secretary (SE&L) requested chief Secretary to depute Senior Officers
for a meeting with her along with all documents and relevant information
immediately......................It is pertinent to mention here that there has been
constant follow up on the basis of the Ministry of HRD and constantly reminders
were issued to the J&K State Government. However, there was no response
from the State Government in this regard........................Consequent to the meeting
of the Sub-Committee — IV (Non compliance by Ministries/Departments in
timely submission of the Action Taken Notes (ATN) on the non selected Audit
Paragraphs (Civil and Other Ministries) of Public Accounts Committee was
held on 23rd March, 2015, Commissioner/Secretary to School Education
Department, Government of Jammu and Kashmir vide letter No. Edu/NC-
Department, Government of Jammu and Kashmir vide letter No. Edu/NC-SE/25/
2015 dated 31.03.2015 received on 31.03.2015 has informed that funds to the
tune of Rs. 886.47 lakhs were released by the MHRD to the State for 372 Madarsas
during 2009-10 & 2010-11 under the Scheme Providing Quality Education in
Madarsas (SPQEM). ....... The Scheme being a purely voluntary one, only 103
Madarsas (58 in Kashmir Division and 45 in Jammu Division) were disbursed
the amount of Rs. 149.256 lakhs (Rs. 100.323 Kashmir Division and 48.933 in
Jammu Division) & accordingly Utilization Certificate (UC) was submitted on
22.01.2013 to the MHRD. The balance amount of Rs. 737.214 lakhs remains
unutilized with the State.......................They have further requested for revalidation
of the unspent amount, Secretary to GOI, Department of (SE&L) has been
requested to revalidate the unspent amount of Rs. 737.214 lakhs and authorize
the State to utilize the same, as per norms, during 2015-16 which will be examined
as per norms, of the scheme of SPQEM....................... In view of the position
explained above, there has been no irregular release of grant to Government of
J&K. The draft ATN is also being prepared and will be sent to DGACE for
vetting."
65. The Sub-Committee also noted with concern the issue brought to light by
the Audit, of UGC's negligence of its regulatory functions leading to the decline in

28
standards and accountability in some Central Universities. The Ministry stated that it
has since submitted final A TN duly vetted by Audit on the relevant paras on 9.4.2015.
66. The Sub-Committee pointed out that there are various stages in which the
Ministry has sufficient time to give response to Audit observations before their
inclusion in the Report which eventually will help in minimizing the number of Audit
objections. Asked if they agree that more attention given during the course of audit
to take corrective action before finalization of the Audit Report could minimize audit
objections, the Ministry in reply wrote:—
"A sound and fool proof mechanism should be implemented by the Ministry
urgently to ensure prompt and timely action in future. The Committee have
desired that action should be initiated against the officers responsible for the
serious lapse on their part in furnishing the remedial/corrective ATNs on all the
non-selected paragraphs pertaining to the Ministry."

PART II
OBSERV ATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The Committee at the outset would like to place on record their observation
that one of the major reasons for pendency of ATNs is the failure of the Ministries to
prioritize policy issues and policy related decisions, which, because they have wider
ramifications, often have a cascading effect resulting in delays at every point in the
governance system. The Committee felt that the Government/Ministries need to
focus on policy matters and take decisions expeditiously failing which the pendency
of ATNs would be difficult to liquidate.
As per the procedure evolved by the Public Accounts Committee, the Action
Taken Notes on all the paragraphs of the Reports of C&AG of India should be
furnished to the Committee through the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure-Monitoring Cell) within a period of 4 months from the date of laying of
Audit Reports on the Table of the House, starting from 31st March, 1996 onwards.
Public Accounts Committee (2008-09) and (2010-11) had reviewed the position in
their 11th and 58th Reports and recommended that all the Ministries/Departments
should chalk out an effective and time bound procedure to reduce the pendency of
ATNs. The Committee had also recommended setting up of Standing Audit Committee
(SAC) and introduction of Audit Para Monitoring System (APMS) by all the
Ministries.
The PAC (2013-14) also reviewed the position with respect to timely submission
of Action Taken Notes on the non-selected Audit Paragraphs of the C&AG of India by
the Ministries/Departments and constituted a Sub-Committee (Sub-Committee-IV)
to pursue the matter. The PAC 2014-15 carried over the examination and submitted
its first report on the subject. The Sub-Committee also continued and after accessing
the position of pendency of ATNs in various Ministries as on 31.10.2014, which was
514 paras, decided to take evidence of specific Ministries to identify problems faced
by Ministries and systemic flaws, if any, and to explore remedial solutions. In the
meantime as on 31.03.2015, the pendency increased to 639 audit paras, as per the
C&AG office. However, the Sub-Committee noted the pendency figure cited by the
Monitoring Cell as 869. They would like to be apprised of the reasons for the
discrepancy in both the figures.
Role of Monitoring Cell, Ministry of Finance
1. The Committee observe that the efforts of Monitoring Cell, Department of
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance to get 76 Ministries and Departments having
pending ATNs to adopt APMS, while appreciable, needs to be extended to all Ministries
and Departments of the Government of India irrespective of whether or not they have
pending ATNs. The portal is meant to show compliance by all Ministries in timely
submission of ATNs as much as it is to monitor non-compliance by some Ministries.
29

30
C&AG conducts random and sample audits of any Ministry/Department and its
units. Thus, all Ministries and departments are liable to have Audit Paras for ATNs
at some point or the other. So, the operation of APMS should not be confined to
Ministries/Departments having pending Audit Paras alone. Therefore, the
Committee recommend that Monitoring Cell should ensure that all Ministries and
Departments of the Government of India are included in the Audit Para Monitoring
System (APMS) and involved in the training programmes organized by the Ministries
on utilization of APMS for their officers. The Committee desire that this exercise
may be completed within six months from the date of presentation of this report to
Parliament.
2. The Committee are aware of certain technical improvisations required in
the APMS portal based on the feedback taken from the Audit field offices, for instance,
requirement of C&AG Branch Offices for a sub-user facility, editing facility for
letters/reference numbers and date of uploading of replies/vetting comments, facility
for classifying ATNs which require vetting comments, those requiring no comments
and those on which Final comments of Audit have been given, etc. so as to make the
portal serve its intended purpose of being an online and updated source of information
on current status of submission of remedial action taken notes by various Ministries
on Audit Observations/Paras. The Committee recommend that Monitoring Cell-e of
the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, must take steps in a time-bound
manner to further upgrade the APMS portal to accommodate the requirements of all
stakeholders so as to facilitate usage of APMS by all the Ministries/Departments
concerned as well as the audit field offices.
3. The Committee note the stand taken by Monitoring Cell that they cannot fix
responsibility for non-compliance as its mandate is only to coordinate and monitor
progress across Ministries of the efforts to submit remedial action taken notes on
Audit Paras within the stipulated period of four months from the laying of C&AG
Reports in Parliament. The Committee also note that Secretaries of concerned
departments/ministries, as Chief Accounting Authorities (CCA) have absolute
responsibility to ensure timely submission of ATNS. Legal propriety of expenditure
and efficient execution being equally important, if not more, to effective
implementation of Government programs, the Committee recommend that a suitable
mechanism to make the CCAs accountable may be put in place. The Committee
desire that such mechanism should incorporate a range of stringent disincentives
for the CCAs for graded levels of non-compliance, keeping in view the importance of
strengthening the system of audit and financial accountability in the country. Among
other things, the Committee desire that such a mechanism incorporate allocation of
adequately high points to submission of ATNs on time, second only to effective
execution of programs. The Committee further note that the Department of
Expenditure had asked all the Ministries, way back in the year 2010, to include
timely submission of ATNs as one of the targets of Result Framework Document
(RFD) of their Ministry, as the direct responsibility of their CAA. However, the
Committee found that even though five years have elapsed, very few Ministries like
Ministry of HRD have reflected it as one of their priorities in their RFDs. The
Committee, therefore, desire that the initiating of such a mechanism in the RFDs by

31
all Ministries may be reported to them within six months from the presentation of
this report.
Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change
4. The Committee while examining the pendency of ATNs in the Ministry of
Environment, Forests and Climate Change have found that most of the delays were
unwarranted and could have well been submitted in time with a little more commitment
and attention given to the monitoring mechanism within the Ministry. This observation
of the Committee is buttressed by the fact that most audit objections could have been
explained to the Audit team during Audit Inspections, thereafter while replying to
Inspection reports of Audit and then within four months after the Audit reports are
laid in Parliament. Further delays whatsoever defy all logic and manifests sheer
negligence by the Ministries. The Committee, however, noted with some satisfaction
that the Ministry have lately adopted the online Audit Para Monitoring System
(APMS) operated by the Monitoring Cell, Ministry of Finance after having admitted
to non-utilization of the system during their evidence before the Sub-Committee. At
the same time the Committee note with concern the shortcomings in the NIC-
developed system for Computerized Audit Para Monitoring that the Ministry had
highlighted during their evidence and desire that continuous efforts are essential to
perfect the portal meant to facilitate timely submission of ATNs by Ministries. They,
therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change
take up the matter with the Monitoring Cell, which, in turn can get the shortcoming
addressed through the developer of the software for APMS.
5. While examining various pending ATNs, the Committee noted with great
concern the gross mismanagement, inaction, delays and even diversion of CAMPA
funds meant for Compensatory Afforestation. They express disappointment over the
failure of the Ministry to submit remedial action taken notes on the Audit's
observations, especially keeping in view the responsibility of the Ministry to have
taken proactive steps to check such mismanagement even before Audit has taken it
up. The Committee are surprised that ATNs having serious ramifications were left
unattended by the Ministry. They, therefore, recommend that the Ministry expedite
the submission of ATNs on the said report on CAMPA as well as all pending Paras of
the C&AG reports.
6. The Committee were constrained to note a lackadaisical and casual approach
of the Ministry towards the system of financial accountability mandated in the
Constitution of the country under which the Public Accounts Committee has been
recognized as the apex audit authority.
The Committee, therefore, having considered all the issues at length, and in
reaffirming the importance of ensuring financial accountability of the executive,
recommend:—
(a) That, the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change should
put in place a more robust mechanism to monitor and ensure timely
submission of remedial Action Taken Notes to Audit observations and
objections.

32
(b) That, the Ministry should take necessary action to train and maintain
adequate number of trained officials to handle ATNs for timely submission.
7. The Committee further recommend that henceforth, the Ministry of
Environment, Forests and Climate Change, and all other Ministries having
outstanding ATNs should issue a Standing Order to all their divisions and units
across the country to the effect that Audit objections at the time of actual audit
should be taken note of and shared with all their divisions and units which are liable
to such objections by virtue of similarity of functions. Thereafter, as soon as the
C&AG reports are tabled in Parliament, concerned units/divisions should promptly
process and submit the Action Taken Notes for approval without awaiting instructions
from the Ministry Headquarters. The Heads of each divisions/units should be
acquainted with audit obligations and made accountable to ensure necessary action
in this regard.
8. The Committee further desire that the Ministry of Finance may coordinate
with all Ministries regarding compliance to this recommendation of the Committee
and apprise the Committee of the progress achieved within six months.
Ministry of Railways
9. The Committee note the improvements affected in the mechanism in place
in the Ministry of Railways to deal with the pendency of ATNs. They nevertheless
reiterate the need for a mechanism within each Ministry especially the larger ones
like the Ministry of Railways to internally share Audit observations and Action
Taken Notes thereon among all their divisions/units. The Committee, while
reiterating its recommendation in the earlier Report, further desire that the system
of prescribing the time schedule for finalisation of paras as practised in the Railway
Ministry should be adopted by all Ministries and Departments.
10. The Committee recall that during evidence, a number of Paras concerning
Railways had been discussed in detail due to either the importance of issues involved
or the unusually long delays for instance, para 3.2.1 of C&AG  Report No. 9 of 2002
regarding "Non-recovery of cost and maintenance charges of deposit works (NR),
para 2.2.3 of C&AG Report No. CA 6 of 2008 on ‘loss due to irregular booking of
traffic at trainload class rates’’.  ATNs on the same are still awaited from the Ministry.
The Committee are of the opinion that such long delay prove that adequate
prioritization of timely submission of ATNs is, perhaps, still lacking in the Ministry.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that keeping in view the vast network of the
Ministry enhanced mechanisms should continue to be evolved and put in place for
timely submission of ATNs by all units/field/zonal offices of the Ministry.
Ministry of Home Affairs
11. The Committee observe that the system in place in the Ministry of Home
Affairs with regard to monitoring the distribution of Audit paras to concerned
divisions/units, the monitoring of progress in timely submission of remedial action
taken notes and instructions for giving suitable replies to inspection reports of
Audit for minimizing Audit objections is appreciable and needs to be maintained,

33
improved and replicated in other ministries. The Committee, therefore, desire the
good practices of the Ministry to be notified to all Ministries by the Monitoring Cell.
The Committee also recommend that all good practices of any Ministry/Department
relating to timely submission of ATNs may be collected by the Ministry of Finance
and notified to all other Ministries/Departments. Further, that while notifying Civil
Service Awards, the Government may consider one or two officials who have been
instrumental in bringing about the good practices for recognition.
12. The Committee however note with concern that there is a severe shortage
of staff for internal audit in the Ministry. Observing that a strong system of internal
audit would greatly reduce audit objections and consequently, pendency with respect
to submission of remedial ATNs subsequently, the Committee recommend that
Ministry should take immediate steps to provide adequate staff to its internal audit
division and that the Ministry of Finance should take necessary steps to ensure that
the internal audit system of all Ministries are adequately strengthened.
13. The Committee delved in to, in some detail, the issues highlighted by Audit
during the evidence and considering the importance of the issues on which objections
were raised, express their concern over the Ministry of Home Affairs as well as UT
Administration's failure to submit suitable ATNs on time. The Committee also note
that there are numerous other Paras on the Ministry on which ATNs are pending for
long, despite the Ministry's claims of having a structured and functional mechanism
to monitor progress in timely submission of ATNs. The Committee were particularly
concerned about the audit observations on failure to procure landing barges and
non-commissioning of radar transponders which showed the administration of UTs
in very poor light. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry must take
steps not only to clear all audit Paras on time, and clear the pendency with regard,
especially, to those the Committee had dwelled on during evidence, but also strengthen
the administrative machinery of Union Territories and make them accountable for
lapses committed by them.
Ministry of Defence
14. The Committee observe that one of the reasons as to why the Ministry, as
also other Ministries/Departments of the Government of India, have not been attending
to the preparation of ATNs on Paras/Subjects selected by the PAC for examination
due to a misconstrued assumption that the ATN on such Paras need to be prepared
only after the PAC finalize their report, and the presumption that the PAC will be
able to follow through with the detailed examination of all the selected Paras. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that henceforth, all the Ministries and
Departments shall furnish ATNs to Audit observations within the stipulated period
of four months irrespective of whether a particular Para has been selected or not, by
the PAC, for detail scrutiny. In the rare instance where the recommendations of
Audit and the PAC differ with reference to a Para on which the Ministry had already
submitted ATN based on Audit's recommendations and the PAC later on had taken
up the Para for detail scrutiny, it needs to be noted that the PAC is the apex Auditing
institution of the country and the remedial action taken shall have to be modified
according to the PAC recommendations. The Committee desire that the Ministry of

34
Finance (Department of Expenditure) should issue necessary instructions to all
Ministries for better clarity and necessary compliance in future.
15. The Committee observed that the Ministry have failed to submit ATNs on
several entire reports on functioning of important units of the Ministry, not to
mention the numerous Audit Paras on which ATNs are pending, particularly, those
concerning mismanagement in procurement processes. They feel alarmed at the
serious gaps between the actual requirement and procurement of Defence equipment
highlighted in several audit paras and reports. The Committee, therefore, desire
that the Ministry should take timely steps towards expeditious submission of ATNs
on Audit Paras, especially on the Standalone Reports of C&AG on the Ministry's
functioning, while making earnest efforts to take decisions well in time so as not to
compromise on the country's Defence preparedness.
Ministry of Human Resource Development
16. The Committee note that from the depositions made by the Ministry during
evidence and their replies to questions post evidence, most of which are not reproduced
in this report for purposes of brevity, the Ministry had adopted the APMS operated by
the Monitoring Cell, had trained officials on its use and had satisfactory mechanisms
for timely preparation and submission of remedial ATNs to audit objections. During
the evidence, the Audit Para No. 8.2 of C&AG Report No. 19 of 2013 concerning
irregular release of grant of Rs. 8.86 crore to State Government of Jammu and
Kashmir for 372 Madarsas was discussed in detail, which was not accepted by the
Ministry. However, subsequent to the Sub-Committee's evidence, the matter was
pursued by the Ministry and the Committee note that the State Government having
sent utilization certificate for Rs. 149.256 lakh disbursed to 103 Madarsas and
having sought revalidation for unspent balance of Rs. 737.214 lakhs, the irregularity
has now been rectified. The pendency of ATNs concerning UGC based on Para 1.3 of
C&AG Report No. 4 of 2002 and its larger ramifications was discussed in detail.
The Committee are pleased to note that the Ministry has finally settled the same.
However, the Committee found the number of other pending and delayed ATNs on
several other Paras unacceptable. They further feel that the Ministry needs to focus
on policy matters and take decisions expeditiously failing which the pendency of
ATNs concerning HRD would be difficult to liquidate.
The Committee further recommend that the Ministry expedite the
implementation of their Standing Audit Committee (SAC) recommendation to have
action initiated against officers responsible for serious lapses in furnishing remedial/
corrective ATNs on Audit paras. The Committee, further reiterating its earlier
recommendation, desire that a system of fixing responsibility for serious lapses be
put in place by all Ministries. The Committee also desire that Monitoring Cell of the
Ministry of Finance may communicate this recommendation to all Government of
India Ministries/Departments and monitor its implementation.
   N
EW DELHI; PROF. K.V. THOMAS
27  April, 2015 Chairperson ,
7 V aisakha, 1937 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

ANNEXURES
MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF SUB-COMMITTEE-IV OF THE PUBLIC
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2014-15) HELD ON 5TH NOVEMBER, 2014
The Sub-Committee sat on Wednesday, the 5th November, 2014 from 1100 hrs.
to 1200 hrs. in Room No. ‘G-074’, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  —  Convenor
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jayant Sinha
3. Shri Nishikant Dubey
 S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Jayakumar T. — Additional Director
2. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja — Deputy Secretary
3. Smt. Anju Kukreja — Under Secretary
Representatives from the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
           1. Shri A.K. Singh — Dy.    C&AG   (Report  Central   &  LB)
2. Shri S. Nandkeolkar — Director General (Railways)
3. Shri P.K. Mishra — Director General
4. Shri Parag Prakash — Director General (Defence Services)
5. Shri L.S. Singh — Principal Director
6. Shri Manish Kumar — Principal Director
2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the Members of the Sub-Committee
and the Audit officers to the sitting of the Sub-Committee. He informed the Members
that the sitting had been convened to chalk out the future programme of action to
examine the subject 'Non-compliance by Ministries/Departments in timely submission
of Action Taken Notes on the Non-selected Audit Paragraphs (Civil and other
Ministries)'.
3. The Convenor, then explained in brief about the procedure for submission of
Action Taken Notes on the non-selected Audit paragraphs of the C&AG of India. He
also apprised the Members that as per procedure evolved by the Public Accounts
Committee in their 105th Report (10th Lok Sabha) the ATNs on all the paragraphs of the
35

Reports of C&AG of India should be furnished to the Committee through the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Expenditure-Monitoring Cell) within a period of 4 months
from the date of laying of Audit Reports on the Table of the House with effect from
31st March, 1996. However, Ministry of Railways had requested to increase the
prescribed 4 months period for submission of ATNs on non-selected audit paras to
6 months. The request of the Ministry was placed before Hon’ble Chairperson, PAC
for his kind consideration, who, inter-alia opined that ‘status quo may continue’.
4. Thereafter, the Officers of the C&AG of India briefed the Sub-Committee on
the various issues concerning the subject. They had also apprised the Sub-Committee
about the pendency of Action Taken Notes with various Ministries/Departments as
on 30 September, 2014. Further they advised the Sub-Committee on certain more
significant paragraphs/Audit Reports which can be taken up for detailed examination.
The Officers of the C&AG of India also clarified various issues raised by the Members
and assured that the information sought by them would be furnished to the Sub-
Committee expeditiously.
5. The Convenor, then informed the Members that those Ministries/Departments,
which have the maximum number of Audit paragraphs pending, would be called for
evidence before the Sub-Committee. However, the Sub-Committee decided to first call
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure), which is the Nodal/Co-ordinating
Ministry, for evidence before the Committee.
6. The Convenor then thanked the officers of the C&AG of India for providing
valuable assistance in examination of the subject.
The Sub-Committee, then, adjourned.
36

MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF SUB-COMMITTEE-IV OF THE  PUBLIC
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2014-15) HELD ON 18TH NOVEMBER,  2014
The Sub-Committee sat on Tuesday, the 18th November, 2014 from 1500 hrs. to
1630 hrs. in Committee Room No. 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  —  Convenor
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
3. Shri Nishikant Dubey
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja — Deputy Secretary
3. Smt. Anju Kukreja — Under Secretary
Representatives from the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Dy. C&AG (Report Central & LB)
2. Shri Purushottam Tiwari — Principal Director
Representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure)
Smt. Anjuly Chib Duggal — Special Secretary (Expenditure)
Shri. Jawahar Thakur — Controller General of Accounts
Smt. Archana Nigam — Addl. Controller General of Accounts
Smt. Annie George Mathew — Joint Secretary
2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the Members of the Sub-committee
and the Audit officers to the Sitting of the Sub-Committee. The Convenor then apprised
the Members that the Sitting had been convened to take oral evidence of the
representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) on the subject
“Non-compliance by Ministries/Departments in timely submission of Action Taken
Notes on the Non-selected Audit paragraphs (Civil and other Ministries). Thereafter,
Sub-Committee discussed about the important paragraphs/Audit Reports which can
be taken up for detailed examination. Then, the representatives of the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Expenditure) were called in. Before commencing the examination,
the Convenor made it clear that the deliberations of the Sub-Committee were confidential
and were not to be divulged to any outsider until the Report on the subject was
37

38
presented to Parliament. The Sub-Committee then proceeded with the examination of
the subject.
3. Members sought clarifications on various issues which  inter-alia included
introduction of Para Monitoring System (APMS) by all the Ministries/Department,
status of establishment of Standing Audit Committees (SAC), Monitoring of Pending
Audit Paras by the Committee of Secretaries, reasons for delay in preparation and
submission of A TNs, reasons for not attending the Training Programmes by the
Ministries/Departments that was organized by the Monitoring Cell (Department of
Expenditure) and monitoring of Pending Audit Paragraphs by the Controller General of
Accounts (CGA) etc. The representatives of the Ministry clarified many issues raised
by the Members and assured that the information sought by them would be furnished
to the Sub-Committee expeditiously.
4. Before concluding. the Convenor thanked the representatives of the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Expenditure) and also asked them to furnish the requisite
information that was sought by the Members. The Convenor also thanked the
representatives of the Office of the C&AG of India for providing valuable assistance
to the Sub-Committee in the examination of the subject.
The witnesses then withdrew
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the Sitting was kept on record.
                                           The Sub-Committee, then, adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-IV NON-
COMPLIANCE BY  MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS IN TIMELY
SUBMISSION OF ACTION TAKEN NOTES ON THE NON-
SELECTED AUDIT PARAGRAPHS (CIVIL AND OTHER
MINISTRIES) OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2014-15) HELD
ON 28th JANUARY , 2015
The Sub-Committee sat on Wednesday, the 28th January, 2015 from 1130 hrs. to
1250 hrs. in Room No. 63, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab — Convenor
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nishikant Dubey — Alternate Convenor
3. Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi
4. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri A.K Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Director
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Deputy CAG (Report Central)
2. Smt. Gurveen Sidhu — Principal Director (Scientific
Department)
3. Shri L.S. Singh — Principal Director (RC)
4. Shri P Tiwary — Principal Director (PAC)
Representatives of the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change
1. Shri Shashi Shekhar — Special Secretary
2. Shri S.S. Mohanty — AS & FA
3. Dr. Rashid Hasan — Advisor
4. Dr. D.K. Sharma — DIGF (RT)
5. Shri Ashwani Kumar — Director General, Indian Council of
Forestry Research and Education,
Dehradun
6. Shri B.K. Singh — Director (Parl.)
39

40
2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the representatives of the Office of
the C&AG to the sitting of the Sub-Committee. Apprising that the sitting had been
convened to take oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Environment,
Forests and Climate Change on the subject "Non-compliance by Ministries/
Departments in timely submission of Action Taken Notes on the non-selected Audit
Paragraphs of the C&AG (Civil and other Ministries)", the Convenor invited the
Audit Officers to brief the Sub- Committee on the finer points of the subject. The
Audit Officers accordingly briefed the Sub-Committee explaining various audit paras
pertaining to the Ministry on which A TNs/Revised A TNs were pending.
3. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Environment, Forests and
Climate Change were called in. Welcoming them, the Convenor called for their
explanation to the Sub-Committee on their position regarding Non-compliance by
them in timely submission of Action Taken Notes on the non-selected paragraphs of
the C&AG of India including one stand alone Report No. 21 of 2013 (Union Government)
on "Compensatory Afforestation in India" and another paragraph relating to repeated
unauthorized creation and upgradation of posts in Central Pollution Control Board.
The Convenor also sought the reasons for the pendency and difficulties being faced
by them in not adhering to the time limit of four months for submission of A TNs to the
Committee. Members also emphasized upon the need to train officers in the Ministry
in monitoring Audit Paras so as to submit their A TNs well in time. The Ministry
apprised the Committee of the initiatives taken by them in ensuring the timely
submission of remedial action taken notes by the Ministry.
4. The Convenor also specifically raised the issue of the stand alone Report
No. 21 of C&AG which was submitted to Parliament in September, 2013 on
"Compensatory Afforestation in India" (CAMPA). However, even after 16 to 18 months,
the Ministry had not submitted their A TNs to the Committee. The Sub-Committee
also enquired about status of the CAMPA Fund, which according to the Ministry,
was set up as per orders of the Supreme Court. The Sub-Committee then decided to
take up the Audit Report No. 21 of 2013 for detailed examination separately. The
representatives of the Ministry assured the Sub-Committee to send detailed
information on the matter. The Convenor also directed the representatives of the
Ministry to furnish written information to the questions which they could not answer
or answered partly.
5. The Convenor then, thanked the representatives of the Ministry of
Environment, Forests and Climate Change for appearing before the Sub-Committee
and for furnishing information in connection with the examination of the subjects.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record.
The Sub-Committee, then, adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-IV NON-
COMPLIANCE BY MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS IN TIMELY
SUBMISSION OF ACTION TAKEN NOTES ON THE NON-
SELECTED AUDIT PARAGRAPHS (CIVIL AND OTHER
MINISTRIES) OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2014-15) HELD ON
2ND  FEBRUARY , 2015
The Sub-Committee sat on Monday, the 24nd February, 2015 from 1135 hrs. to
1245 hrs. in Committee Room No. G-'074', Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
     Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab — Convenor
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nishikant Dubey — Alternate Convenor
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri A.K Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Director
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri S. Nandkeolyar — Director General of Audit (Railways)
2. Shri T. Theethan — Director General of Audit (RBA)
Representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board)
1. Ms. Rajalakshmi Ravikumar   — Financial Commissioner
(Railways)
2. Shri Navin Tandon — Member (Electrical)
3. Shri Pradeep Kumar — Member (Staff)
4. Shri Ajay Shukla — Advisor (Commercial)
5. Shri N.K. Sinha — A dvisor (Bridges)
6. Shri P.V. V aidialingam — Advisor (Finance)
2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the representatives of the Office of
the C&AG to the sitting of the Sub-Committee. Apprising that the sitting had been
convened to take oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Railways
(Railway Board) on the subject "Non-compliance by Ministries/Departments in timely
41

42
submission of Action Taken Notes on the non-selected Audit Paragraphs of the
C&AG (Civil and other Ministries)", the Convenor invited the Audit Officers to brief
the Sub-Committee on the finer points of the subject. The Audit Officers accordingly
briefed the Sub-Committee explaining various issues pertaining to the subject.
3. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Railways were called in.
Welcoming them, the Convenor called for their explanation to the Sub-Committee on
their position regarding Non-compliance by them in timely submission of Action
Taken Notes on the Non-selected paragraphs of the C&AG of India. The representative
of the Ministry apprised that as against the pendency of 429 Paras in 2010, the figure
as in January 2015 is 122, which shows good progress in reducing pendency. Further
the Sub-Committee were apprised of the initiatives taken by them in ensuring timely
submission of remedial action taken notes by the Ministry. The Convenor directed
the representatives of the Ministry to furnish written information after reconciling
certain discrepancies in consultation with Audit, to the questions raised by the
Members during evidence.
4. The Convenor then, thanked the representatives of the Ministry of Railways
(Railway Board) for appearing before the Sub-Committee and for furnishing information
in connection with the examination of the subjects.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record.
The Sub-Committee, then, adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-IV NON-
COMPLIANCE BY MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS IN TIMELY
SUBMISSION OF ACTION TAKEN NOTES ON THE NON-
SELECTED AUDIT PARAGRAPHS (CIVIL AND OTHER
MINISTRIES) OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2014-15) HELD ON
11TH  FEBRUARY, 2015
The Sub-Committee sat on Wednesday, the 11th February, 2015 from 1500 hrs.
to 17.00 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘53’, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
     Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab — Convenor
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nishikant Dubey — Alternate Convenor
3. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
SECRETARIA T
1.  Shri Jaya Kumar T. — Additional Director
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Deputy CAG (RC & LB)
2. Ms. Shubha Kumar — Director General (RC)
3. Shri B.P. Yadav — Principal Director (RC)
Representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs and Home Affairs (UT)
1. Shri Suresh C. Panda — Special Secretary & FA (H)
2. Shri B. Nanda — CCA
3. Shri H. Atheli — CA (H)
4. Shri Rakesh Singh — JS (UT)
5. Shri V .Vumlunmang — JS (PM)
6. Shri Anand Prakash — Chief Secretary, A&N
7. Shri Rajeev Yaduvanshi — Commissioner, A&N
8. Shri Rakesh Bali — Secretary, A&N
9. Shri H. Rajesh Prasad — Administrator, Lakshadweep
10. Ms. Bhawna Garg — Special Finance Secretary, Chandigarh
43

44
11. Shri Vijay Dev — Adviser to the Administrator,
Chandigarh
12. Shri R.P. Upadhyaya — IGP, Chandigarh
13. Shri A.S. Cheema — DIG, Chandigarh
2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the Officers of the C&AG of India to
the sitting of the Sub-Committee-IV to take oral evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Home Affairs and Home Affairs (U.T.) on non-compliance by them in
timely submission of Action Taken Notes on non-selected Audit Paragraphs/Reports
tabled in Parliament by the C&AG. Then, the Deputy C&AG briefed the Sub-Committee
about the pending position of the A TNs with the Ministry.
3. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs and Home
Affairs (U.T.) were called in. The Convenor welcomed the representatives of the
Ministry and briefed them about the purpose of convening the evidence, i.e. the
pendency of Action Taken Notes on Audit paragraphs/Reports, informing them that
22 A TNs pertaining to the year 2011-12 and 2013-14 were yet to be submitted to PAC
by the Ministry. As per the statement forwarded by the C&AG's Office, 4 paragraphs
were related to Home Affairs and 18 paragraphs were related to UT Division of the
Ministry. In 15 cases, A TNs on 7 paragraphs of various Reports and one entire Report
on 'Disaster Preparedness in India' were not submitted for vetting of the C&AG by the
Ministry even for the first time. Revised ATNs were pending in respect of 3 paragraphs
(1-Home Affairs and 2-UT) and in case of 4 paragraphs (4-UT) the Ministry was
required to submit final remedial/corrective ATNs.
4. Then, the Sub-Committee discussed in detail the reasons for inordinate delay
in timely submission of A TNs on various Audit Reports/paragraphs by the Ministry
relating to Border Security Force and three Union Territories viz. Andaman and Nicobar
Islands, Lakshadweep and Chandigarh, with their representatives. Members raised
various queries on Report No. 5 of 2013 pertaining to 'Disaster Preparedness in India'
as well as audit paragraphs on 'Failure to procure landing barges' resulting in wasteful
expenditure of Rs.12.21 crore and non-commissioning of already installed radar
Transponders in Lakshadweep island resulting in inconvenience to passengers as
well as critically ill patients, based on para Nos. 14.7 & 14.8 of C&AG Report No. 19 of
2012. The representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs resolved the queries and
assured the Committee that in future the requisite time frame for submission of A TNs
shall be strictly adhered to. The Convenor directed the representatives of the Ministry
to furnish written information to the Committee after reconciling discrepancies, if any,
in consultation with the Audit, to the questions raised by the Members during evidence.
5. The Convenor then, thanked the representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
and Home Affairs (UT) for appearing before the Sub-Committee and for furnishing
information in connection with the examination of the subjects.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record.
The Sub-Committee, then, adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-IV OF THE
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2014-15) ON THE SUBJECT "NON-
COMPLIANCE BY MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS IN TIMELY
SUBMISSION OF ACTION TAKEN NOTES ON THE NON-
SELECTED AUDIT PARAGRAPHS (CIVIL AND OTHER
MINISTRIES)" HELD ON 19TH  FEBRUARY , 2015
The Sub-Committee sat on Thursday, the 19th February, 2015 from 1500 hrs. to
1615 hrs. in Committee Room No. '62', Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
     Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab — Convenor
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nishikant Dubey — Alternate Convenor
3. Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri Jaya Kumar T. — Additional Director
2. Shri G .C. Dobhal — Deputy Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor  General of India
1. Shri Parag Prakash — Director General of Audit (Defence)
2. Shri Rajiv Pandey — Principal Director (Air Force)
3. Shri Purushottam Tiwary — Principal Director (PAC)
Representatives of the Ministry of Defence
1. Shri Ravikumar — Additional Secretary
2. Ms. Vandana Srivastava — Financial Advisor (Defence Services)
3. Shri P.K. Kataria — Joint Secretary and Addl. FA
4. Shri Kanwaldeep Singh — OSD (Budget)
5. Dr. Arun Kansal — AFA (Budget-II)
2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the representatives of the Office of
the C&AG to the sitting of the Sub-Committee. Apprising that the sitting had been
convened to take oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Defence on
the subject "Non-compliance by Ministries/Departments in timely submission of
45

46
Action Taken Notes on the non-selected Audit Paragraphs of the C&AG (Civil and
other Ministries)", the Convenor invited the Audit Officers to brief the Sub-Committee
on the finer points of the subject. The Audit Officers accordingly briefed the Sub-
Committee explaining various issues pertaining to the subject.
3. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Defence were called in.
Welcoming them, the Convenor called for their comments to the Sub-Committee on
their position regarding non-compliance by them in timely submission of Action
Taken Notes on the Non-selected paragraphs of the C&AG of India. The Convenor
also mentioned that the information provided by the Office of the C&AG upto
16th February, 2015, revealed that the Ministry of Defence had not submitted 127
A TNs in violation of the laid down rules of the House. In all cases, the Action Taken
Notes on the Report were to be presented to Public Accounts Committee by the
Ministry within the stipulated period of four months. Several paragraphs of the Audit
Reports were delayed more than 10 to 20 years. Further, 20 ATNs though vetted by
the Audit, were pending with the Ministry of Defence for final Action Taken Notes.
Among the most important cases, the Committee particularly pointed out the delay on
the submission of Action Taken Notes on the Audit Report No. 6 of 2010-11 on
'Performance Audit of Supply Chain Management of Rations in Indian Army', Audit
Report No. 14 of 2010-11 on 'Canteen Stores Department', Audit Report No. 10 of 2013
on 'Acquisition of Helicopters', several paragraphs of Audit Report No. 30 of 2013
and Audit Report No.4 of 2014. The representatives of the Ministry apprised the Sub-
Committee of the initiatives taken by them in ensuring timely submission of remedial
action taken notes by the Ministry. They also explained the reasons for delay in some
cases that those were selected by the Public Accounts Committee for detailed
examination and the Ministry would take action as per the Committee's directions.
The Sub-Committee refuted the reason proffered by the Ministry for not submitting
Action Taken Notes on the plea that those were selected by the Public Accounts
Committee for detailed examination. The Sub-Committee clarified that 'selection of the
subjects for detailed examination by the Public Account Sub-Committee is one aspect
whereas submission of Action Taken Notes on Audit Reports/Paragraphs is another
aspect and the Ministry should address both the aspects separately'. The Committee
directed the representatives of the Ministry to submit Action Taken Notes on all
reports pertaining to their Ministry within four months of presentation of such reports
by the C&AG in Parliament irrespective of the fact that the same has been taken up for
examination by the committee or not. The Convenor directed the representatives of
the Ministry to furnish written information after reconciling certain discrepancies in
consultation with Audit, to the questions raised by the Members during evidence.
4. The Convenor then, thanked the representatives of the Ministry of Defence
for appearing before the Sub-Committee and for furnishing information in connection
with the examination of the subjects.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record.
The Sub-Committee, then, adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-IV OF
THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2014-15) ON THE SUBJECT
"NON-COMPLIANCE BY MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS IN TIMELY
SUBMISSION OF ACTION TAKEN NOTES ON THE NON-
SELECTED AUDIT PARAGRAPHS (CIVIL AND OTHER
MINISTRIES)" HELD ON 23ND MARCH, 2015
The Sub-Committee sat on Monday, the 23rd March, 2015 from 1430 hrs. to
1615 hrs. in Committee Room No. 'G-074', Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
     Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab — Convenor
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nishikant Dubey — Alternate Convenor
3. Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri Jaya Kumar T. — Additional Director
2. Shri G .C.Dobhal — Deputy Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor) General of India
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Dy. C&AG (RC/LB)
2. Ms.  Shubha Kumar — Dir.  (RC)
3. Shri B.P. Yadav — Principal Director (AB/LB)
4. Ms. K. Mani — Director
Representatives of the Ministry of Human Resource Development
1. Shri Satyanarayan Mohanty — Secretary, Department of
Higher Education
2. Smt. Vrinda Sarup — Secretary, Department of School
Education & Literacy
3. Prof. V ed Prakash — Chairman, UGC
4. Shri Avinash Pant — Chairman, AICTE
5. Ms. Reena Ray — Additional Secretary
2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the representatives of the Office of
the C&AG to the sitting of the Sub-Committee. Apprising that the sitting had been
47

48
convened to take oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Human
Resource Development on the subject "Non-compliance by Ministries/Departments
in timely submission of Action Taken Notes on the non-selected Audit Paragraphs of
the C&AG (Civil and other Ministries)", the Convenor invited the Audit Officers to
brief the Sub-Committee on the finer points of the subject. The Audit Officers
accordingly briefed the Sub-Committee explaining various issues pertaining to the
subject.
3. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Human Resource
Development were called in. Welcoming them, the Convenor called for their comments
to the Sub-Committee on their position regarding Non-compliance by them in timely
submission of Action Taken Notes on the Non-selected paragraphs of the C&AG of
India. The Convenor also mentioned that the information provided by the Office of
the C&AG upto 28th February, 2015, revealed that the Ministry of Human Resource
Development had not submitted 26 A TNs in violation of the laid down rules of the
House. In all cases, the Action Taken Notes on the Report should have been presented
to the Public Accounts Committee by the Ministry within the stipulated period of four
months. Out of these 26 ATNs, in 14 cases, Action Taken Notes have not been
submitted by the Ministry to C&AG even for the first time, including 8 paragraphs of
Audit Report No. 25 of 2015 which have been selected by the Public Accounts
Committee (2014-15) for detailed examination. Similarly, 4 revised Action Taken Notes
are yet to be submitted by the Ministry. Further, 8 Action Taken Notes vetted by the
Audit but final Action Taken Notes are still pending with the Ministry. It is regretted
that Action Taken Notes on two paragraphs are of the Audit Reports pertaining to the
Ministry have been delayed for more than 12 years. As informed by C&AG, no
paragraph is pending with them for vetting as on 28th February, 2015.
The representatives of the Ministry apprised the Sub-Committee of the initiatives
taken by them in ensuring timely submission of remedial action taken notes by the
Ministry. They also explained the reasons for delay in some cases. The Sub-Committee
also went into some of the important issues that Audit has reported. The Sub-
Committee directed the representatives of the Ministry to submit Action Taken Notes
on all reports pertaining to their Ministry within four months of presentation of such
reports by the C&AG in Parliament irrespective of the fact that the same has been
taken up for examination by the Committee or not. The Convenor directed the
representatives of the Ministry to furnish written information on the questions raised
by the Members during evidence.
4. The Convenor then, thanked the representatives of the Ministry of Human
Resource Development for appearing before the Sub-Committee and for furnishing
information in connection with the examination of the subjects.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record.
The Sub-Committee, then, adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-IV OF
THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE (2014-15) ON THE SUBJECT
"NON-COMPLIANCE BY MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS IN TIMELY
SUBMISSION OF ACTION TAKEN NOTES ON THE NON-
SELECTEDAUDIT PARAGRAPHS (CIVIL AND OTHER
MINISTRIES)" HELD ON 6th APRIL, 2015
The Sub-Committee sat on Monday, the 6th April, 2015 from 1400 hrs. to
1500 hrs. in Chairman's Chamber, Room No. '51', Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab — Convenor
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nishikant Dubey — Alternate Convenor
3. Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Director
3. Shri Paolienlal Haokip — Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the members and apprised them of the
work done so far on the subject. He stated that the Sub-Committee had so far taken
Oral evidence of Ministries of Environment, Forests and Climate Change, Railways,
Home Affairs, Defence and Human Resource Development. The Sub-Committee then
deliberated on further course of action and decided to prepare a report. They also
delved on the broad outlines and content of the report which will be considered for
adoption during the next sitting of the Sub-Committee.
3. The Convenor then thanked the members and concluded the meeting after
giving directions for the draft report to be compiled.
The Sub-Committee, then, adjourned.
49

MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2014-15) HELD ON 27th APRIL, 2015
The Public Accounts Committee sat on Monday, the 27th April, 2015 from
1000 hrs. to 1045 hrs. in Room No. '51', Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. K.V. Thomas — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nishikant Dubey
3. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Neiphiu Rio
6. Shri Dushyant Singh
7. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
8. Dr. Kirit Somaiya
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
10. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Director
3. Shri T. Jaya Kumar — Additional Director
4. Shri P. Haokip — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri A.K. Yadav — Under Secretary
Representatives  of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Ms. Shubha Kumar — Director General
2. Shri L.S. Singh — Principal Director (PAC)
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the representatives
of the Office of the C&AG of India.
50

51
3. The Chairperson, then, apprised that the meeting had been convened to
consider the Draft Report of the Sub-Committee-IV on "Non-Compliance by Ministries/
Departments in Timely Submission of Action Taken Notes on the Non-Selected Audit
Paragraphs (Civil and Other Ministries)".
4. Giving an overview of the issues contained in the Draft Report, the Chairperson
solicited the views/suggestions of the Members.
5. After some discussions, the Committee adopted the above-mentioned Report
without any modification and authorized the Chairperson to finalize the report in the
light of factual verification received from the Audit and present the same to the House
on a date convenient to him.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

52
Appendix I
Consolidated Pending CAG Paras as on 31.10.2014
Sl. Name of the 88- 89- 90- 91- 93- 95- 96- 97- 98- 99- 00- 01- 02- 03- 04- 05- 06- 07- 08- 09- 10- 11- 12- 2013 Total
No. Ministry/Department 89 90 91 92 94 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13
1 2 3456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 2 0 2 1 2 2 2 3 2 4 2 5 2 6 2 7
1. Administrative Reforms
and public grievances
2. Agri. Res. Education ICAR 1 1
3. Animal Husbandry, Dairy & 11
Fisheries
4. Agri. & Coop. 0
5. Atomic Energy 2 2 1 3 1 4 13
6. AYUSH 0
7. Bio-Technology 11
8. CBDT 21 3 1 5
9. CBEC (CE&ST) 333333431 3 2 9
10. Chemical and Petrochemical 0
11. Civil Aviation 11 1 3
12. Coal 0
13. Commerce 1 2 21272 1 1 2 8
14. Consumer Affairs 11
15. Corporate Affairs 0
16. CSIR 2 3 1 1 1111 4 13 1 9
17. Culture 12111 1 2 9

53
18. Custom 1 2 10 13
19. Defence 1 1 1 1 1 3 2 2116 1 3 1 0 2 2 2 8 9 3
20. Development of North- 11
Eastern Region
21. Disinvestment 0
22. DSIR 111 3
23. Drinking Water & Sanitation 11 2
24. Earth Sciences 12 1 4
25. Economic Affairs 0
26. Environment & Forest 1 1 1 1 3 6 1 1 15
27. Expenditure 0
28. External Affairs 22 2 6
29. Fertilizers 11
30. Financial Services 31 4
31. Food Processing Industries 0
32. Food & Public distribution 21 3
33. Health 11 1 2 5 1 0
34. Health Research 11 1 1 1 5
35. Heavy Industry 0
36. Higher Education 11 1 12124 6 1 9
37. Home Affairs 31 4 1 7
38. Housing and Urban 0
Poverty Alleviation
39. Industrial Policy & Promotion 11 2
40. Information Broadcasting 1 1 1 3

41. Electronics & Information 11
Technology
42. Justice 11
43. Labour & Employment 11 1 3
44. Legal Affairs 0
45. Legislative 0
46. Land Resources 0
47. Micro, Small & Medium 0
Enterprises
48. Mines 11
49. Minority Affairs 0
50. NACO 11 2
51. New & Renewable Energy 0
52. Overseas Indian Affairs 11
53. Panchayati Raj 0
54. Parliamentary Affairs 0
55. Pension & Pensioners 0
Welfare
56. Personnel & Training 11
57. Petroleum & Natural Gas 0
58. Pharmaceuticals 0
59. Planning Commission 0
60. Posts 11 2
54
1 2 3456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 2 0 2 1 2 2 2 3 2 4 2 5 2 6 2 7

55
61. Power 11
62. Public Enterprises 0
63. Personnel, Public 0
Grievances & Pension
64. Railways 1 241349 1 0 8 1 1 1 6 3 2 4 9 6
65. Revenue 11 1 3
66. Road Transport & Highways 0
67. Rural Development 11 2
68. School Education and Literacy 11
69. Science and Technology 11115 1 2 1 2
70. Shipping 11 1 3
71. Social Justice & Empowerment 1 1 1 3
72. Space 1 1 1223 1 0
73. Statistics & P.I. 11
74. Steel 0
75. Telecommunications 1 2 1 1 1 3 9
76. Textiles 12 1 4
77. Tourism 0
78. Tribal Affairs 1 1 2
79. Urban Development 11
80. Water Resources 11 2
81. Women and Child 1 1 2 1 5
Development
82. Youth Affairs & Sports 11 1 3
T o t a l 1100022756 1 0 1 0 1 3 1 2 1 4 1 5 2 1 5 0 2 4 5 7 6 7 3 9 1 3 5 4 9 1

APPENDIX  II
Comparative table of Number of Audit Paras for which Action Taken Notes are
pending as on 31.10.2014 and 31.03.2015
Sl. Name of the Ministry/Department As on As on 
No. 31.10.2014 31.03.2015
1                    2 3 4
1. Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances 0 0
2. Agri. Res. Education 1CAR 1 1
3. Animal Husbandry, Dairy & Fisheries 1 1
4. Agri. & Coop. 0 0
5. Atomic Energy 13 13
6. AYUSH 0 0
7. Bio Technology 1 1
8. CBDT 15 76
9. CBEC  (CE & ST) 29 111
10. Chemical And Petrochemical 0 0
11. Civil Aviation 3 3
12. Coal 0 0
13. Commerce 28 7
14. Consumer Affairs 1 2
15. Corporate Affairs 0 0
16. CSIR 19 21
17. Culture 9 11
18. Custom 13 102
19. Defence 93 185
20. Development of North-Eastern Region 1 0
21. Disinvestment 0 0
22. DSIR 3 0
23. Drinking Water & Sanitation 2 1
24. Earth Sciences 4 7
25. Economic Affairs 0 0
26. Environment & Forests 15 21
27. Expenditure 0 0
28. External Affairs 6 11
29. Fertilizers 1 1
30. Financial Services 4 4
31. Food Processing Industries 0 3
32. Food & Public Distribution 3 2
33. Health 10 13
56

57
1                    2 3 4
34. Health Research 5 5
35. Heavy Industry 0 0
36. Higher Education 19 22
37. Home Af fairs 17 17
38. Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation 0 0
39. Industrial Policy & Promotion 2 0
40. Information Broadcasting 3 1
41. Electronics & Information Technology 1 2
42. Justice 1 1
43. Labour & Employment 3 3
44. Legal Affairs 0 0
45. Legislative 0 0
46. Land Resources 0 0
47. Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises 0 2
48. Mines 1 1
49. Minority Affairs 0 0
50 NACO 2 0
51. New & Renewable Energy 0 0
52. Overseas Indian Affairs 1 1
53. Panchayati Raj 0 0
54. Parliamentary Affairs 0 0
55. Pension & Pensioners Welfare 0 0
56. Personnel & Training 1 2
57. Petroleum & Natural Gas 0 1
58. Pharmaceuticals 0 2
59. Planning Commission 0 2
60. Posts 2 7
61. Power 1 2
62. Public Enterprises 0 0
63. Personnel, Public Grievances & Pension 0 0
64. Railways 96 110
65. Revenue 3 8
66. Road Transport & Highways 0 1
67. Rural Development 2 5
68. School Edu. and Literacy 1 1
69. Science and Technology 12 14
70. Shipping 3 5
71. Social Justice & Empowerment 3 3
72. Space 10 23
73. Statistics & P .I. 1 0
74. Steel 0 0
75. Telecommunications 9 12
76. Textiles 4 5
77. Tourism 0 2

78. Tribal Affairs 2 2
79. Urban Development 1 0
80. Water Resources 2 2
81. Women and Child Development 5 4
82. Y outh Affairs & Sports 3 4
Total 491 869
58
1                    2 3 4

APPENDIX III
Hkkjr ds fu;a=d&egkys[kkijh{kd dk No. 59/71/RC/PAC/2014-15
dk;kZy; OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER &
9] nhu n;ky mik/;k; ekxZ] AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
ubZ fnYyh&110 124 9, DEENDAYAL UPADHAY AYA MARG ,
NEW DELHI-110 124
13 .04 2015
fnukad @ Date ___________
From: L.S. Singh
Principal Director (PAC)
To: Sh. A.K. Singh
Joint Secretary
Lok Sabha Secretariat
Subject: Uploading of vetting comments on APMS portal.
With reference to your D.O. letter No. 27/4/2/2014/PAC dated 07.04.2015, it is
stated that all the concerned audit offices/wings were instructed to ensure the optimal
usage of APMS for online vetting of ATNs vide this office U.O. No 262 dated 10.07.2014
(copy enclosed) and requested to submit status update on the usage of the portal.
In response, certain issues were raised by the field offices which needed to be
addressed by the Monitoring Cell-e. These issues were communicated to Monitoring
Cell-e vide this office letter no 351/93/Rep C/PAC/2014-15 dated: 02.09.2014(copy
enclosed). A list of officers who required further training on the APMS usage was
also forwarded along with this letter. However, no response regarding the resolution
of these issues or holding of training sessions was received from Monitoring Cell-e.
In compliance of the directions of Public Accounts Committee, instructions regarding
the uploading of vetting comments on APMS as soon as the Action Taken Notes are
uploaded by the concerned Ministries, are again being issued to the concerned audit
offices/wings.
Sd/-
(L.S. Singh)
Principal Director (PAC)
59

OFFICE  OF  THE  COMPTROLLER  AND  AUDITOR  GENERAL  OF  INDIA,
NEW DELHI
Subject: Current status. on the usage of APMS portal for vetting of ATNs.
On the recommendations of PAC, Audit Para Management System (APMS) was
launched by the Ministry of Finance to streamline and speed up the process of
submission of A TNs on C&AG paras. In order to report its progress to the PAC,
Ministry of Finance has requested for a status report on the use of APMS by all the
concerned stakeholders. It is, therefore, requested that current status on the use of
APMS may kindly be furnished urgently so that the same could be made available to
Monitoring Cell (MoF) for further submission to PAC.
2. Recently, training sessions were also conducted by Monitoring Cell-e for
audit officers to familiarise them with the usage of APMS web portal. This must have
facilitated the online process. of vetting of A TNs. It is, therefore, requested that all
the wings/field offices rnay ensure optimal usage of this online systern for vetting of
A TNs. In case there is requirement of further training, a list of such staff may kindly
be sent to us.
Sd/-
(Purushottam Tiwary)
Principal Director (PAC)
Director General (Def. & Comm.); O/o the CAG, New Delhi
Director General (Report Central), O/o the CAG, New Delhi
Director General (Direct Taxes); O/o the CAG, New Delhi-A .
Director General (Railways); O/o the CAG, New Delhi.
Principal Director INDT—Central Excise, O/o the CAG, New Delhi
Principal Director (INDT—Customs), O/o-the CAG, New Delhi
Principal Director (INDT—Service tax, O/o the CAG, New Delhi
Principal Director (Report Central—O/o the CAG, New Delhi
Director General of Audit (Central Expenditure), New Delhi
Director General of Audit (Defence Services), New Delhi
Director General of Audit (Post and Telecommunications) New Delhi
Principal Director of Audit (Scientific Departments), New Delhi
Principal Director of Audit (Air Force), New Delhi
Principal Director of Audit (Ordnance Factories), Kolkata
Principal Director of Audit (Economic and Service Ministries), New Delhi
Principal Director of Audit (Navy), Mumbai
Copy to: Under Secretary-MC (Mr. Rajesh Kumar Jain), O/o the CAG, New Delhi
CAG UO  No.: 7262/93/Report©/PAC/2012/V ol. II dated:10.07.2014
60

Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India,
 New Delhi
No: 351 /93/Report © /PAC/2014-15
Dated: 02.09. 2014
Subject: Usage of APMS portal for vetting of ATNs.
With reference to the usage of APMS for online vetting; a feedback was called
for  from the concerned, field offices in which the following issues have emerged:—
(1) Field offices dealing with the ATNs relating to Ministry of Defence have
stated that the ATNs on their paras are not being uploaded on the portal.
They have further requested that a break-up of paras relating to different
wings (Army, Navy, Air Force, Ordnance Factory) may be displayed against
the paras on the portal.
(O/o Director General Audit Def. Services, Principal Director Audit -AF&
Navy, Principal Director Audit -Ordn. Fact.)
(2) (a) While uploading the vetting comments, the letter/reference No. and the
date of upload remains static and cannot be edited/updated.
(b) Many A TNs are to be vetted by the concerned  branch  offices  located
in different cities such as Bangalore, Mumbai, Kolkata. A facility for
adding a sub-user for uploading the initial vetting comments, which can
then be finally vetted by the field office before being-made accessible to
the Min./Deptt. for further comments, may be provided.
(c) Some Min./ Deptts. are uploading the A TNs in pdf format.
(O/o Principal Director Audit Scientific Department)
(3) A TNs in which ‘no comments’ have been offered or those in which final
comments have been issued by audit, are being uploaded on the portal.
(O/o Director General Central Expenditure, Director General Direct Taxes)
(4) A TNs are not being signed by Sect'y/ Jt.Secty.
(O/o Director General Central Expenditure)
61

62
These issues may kindly be looked into to facilitate the increased use of APMS
for vetting of ATNs.
Further, many field officers have requested for training of more officials in the
usage of this system. It is requested that training sessions may kindly be arranged for
such training. An office-wise list of nominated officials is enclosed.
Sd/-
O/c  Administrative Officer (PAC)
To
Smt. Renu Kakkar,
Under Secretary,
Department of Expenditure,
O/o CGA, Monitoring Cell-e,
4th  Floor, B-.Wing,
Lak Nayak Bhawan,
Khan Market, New Delhi-110 003.
GMGIPMRND—1195LS(S-3)—24.10.2015.