54

RAILWAYS FINANCES

[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their Fifteenth Report (16th Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(Railway Board)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

FIFTY FOURTH REPORT

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


FIFTY-FOURTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

RAILWAYS FINANCES

[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/ ~
Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their Fifteenth Report (16th Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(Railway Board)

Presented to Lok Sabha on:

Laid in Rajya Sabha on:

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

November, 2016/ Kartika. 1938 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2016-17)

INTRODUCTION: “५. ७७.२७४४/४३४४४६२४६४६ ४८ + २1 72273: 227
CHAPTER | ROBO spencer seiariairansawoiexenancoasinmon let eunees
CHAPTER II* Observations/Recommendations which have been

CHAPTER III*

CHAPTER IV*

CHAPTER V*

accepted by the Government ............. ०० न्‍्>न्‍्>

Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
replies received from the Government ...............+

Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration

Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which the Government have furnished interim
PO PUES 57% ००४०००४४४४८७ ०७० ४००२६ ०-२ हैक) ods

APPENDICES*

Minutes of the 11" Sitting of Public Accounts
Committee (2016-17) held on 23 August, 2016.

Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on

the Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their Fifteenth
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

*Not appended to the cyclostyled copy of the Report


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2016-17)
Prof. K.V. Thomas - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

Pies rs

* Elected w.e.f, 09.08.2016 vice Shri Vijay Goel, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f.

Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
Shri Nishikant Dubey

Prof. Richard Hay

Shri Gajanan Kirtikar

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Smt. Riti Pathak

Shri Neiphiu Rio

Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
Shri Abhishek Singh

Dr. Kirit Somaiya

Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
Shri Shivkumar Udasi

Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Naresh Agrawal

Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Shri Shantaram Naik

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
Shri Ajay Sancheti

Shri Bhupender Yadav*

SECRETARIAT
Shri A.K. Singh - Additional Secretary
Shri S.C. Chaudhary - Joint Secretary
Shri TirthankarDas = - Additional Director
ShriA.K. Yadav | - Deputy Secretary

05.07.2016.

(ii)


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2016-17) having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Fifty-Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
on action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Fifteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Railways
Finances’ based on the C&AG Report No. 12 of 2013 (Performance Audit) Union
Government for the year ended March, 2012 related to the Ministry of Railways.

2. The Fifteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 27 April, 2015 and laid in
Rajya Sabha on 28 April, 2015. Replies of the Government to the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report were received on 11 July, 2016. The Public
Accounts Committee considered and adopted the Fifty-Fourth Report at their sitting held
on 23 August, 2016. Minutes of the sittings are given at Appendix-I.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the C&AG of India.

5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on _ the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha) is given at Appendix-l.

NEW DELHI; PROF. K.V. THOMAS
/é November,2016 Chairperson,
2S Kartika, 1938 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

(v)


Sa Sn aa oer

=" = -/s ||
- AOR ME - ०-5. -- a eet
- = - 7 ¥ 7 =
५2 5 7 ७. दल ले
“Soh की जा = = 9.

Se eee oly 7
meg” Seu eatin 1 Te oa sare es
3 Ls ao
1

‘ali e=4=— PS aa Bae en छः oe a ah
; मजा pete ee Se भार Dera छा —_—=
aii
Pr gad a | ist _— '



CHAPTER -।
REPORT

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the action taken by
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Fifteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on “Railways Finances”
based on the C&AG Report No. 12 of 2013 (Performance Audit) Union Government
for the year ended March, 2012 relating to the Ministry of Railways.

2. The Fifteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha on
27 April, 2015 and laid in Rajya Sabha on 28 April, 2015. It contained 10
Observations/ Recommendations. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the
Observations/ Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Railways
(Railway Board) almost after an year’s delay from the date of presentation of the
original Report and categorized as under:

(i) Observations/Recommendations, which have been accepted by the
Government:

Paragraph Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9 and 10 ‘
Total: 08
Chapter- ॥

(li)  Observations/Recommendations, which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from Government:

Paragraph Nos. 7 and 8

Total: 02
Chapter- ॥

(iil) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which teplies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which required
reiteration:

- Nil -
Total: NIL
Chapter- IV

(iv) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government have
furnished interim replies:

- Nil -

Total: NIL
Chapter- IV


3. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Railways (Railway
Board) on the observations/recommendations of the Committee contained in their
Fifteenth Report (16"" Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of
this Report, In the succeeding paragraphs, the Committee have dealt with the
Action Taken by the Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations
made in the Original Report which either need further commend or reiteration.

Need to explore measures for revenue generation fo explore measures for revenue generation
(Recommendation Para No. 3)

4. The Committee in their original Report had expressed concern that the
losses incurred by the core activity of passenger and other coaching services
increased from Rs. 7309.26 crore in 2006-07 to a huge Rs. 20,948.35 crore in
2010-11. The rail fare is comparatively lower to Government controlled bus fares in
the country. The IR has since increased its fare on freight as well as passengers
including the suburban one and the Committee were assured that loss incurred
previously is likely to be overcome in the current year. The Committee expected that
the steps taken by IR to increase on their earnings through their core activities i.e.
freight and passenger traffic, would improve their financial position. On the other
side, the Committee note that since IR has about 13 lakh employees and it has
incurred expenditure of Rs 58,680 crore as on 31.03.2012 towards their salary and
Pensions etc. there is a need to review their contribution towards enhancing IR’s
financial health too. The Committee had, therefore, desired the Railways not only to
continue rationalizing both freight and passenger tariffs, which should
commensurate with the facilities provided but also to ensure optimum utilization of
its manpower, They had also desired the Indian Railways to continue exploring new
avenues to recover the cost from its services to generate surplus to meet its future
requirements. The Committee also concurred with the view that the rollback of
increase in fares, once decided upon and implemented, upsets the estimation and
thus should be avoided. They liked to be apprised of the tangible impact these
measures had on the railway earnings in the next fiscals, ie., 2012-13 and 2013-14,
at the action taken stage.


6.

The Ministry of Railways in their teply have furnished as under:

“It has been a continuous endeavour of the Railways to increase earnings
from passenger and freight segments by targeting higher throughput and
tesorting to revision/rationalisation of fare and freight rates. Passenger fares
were revised during 2012-13, 2013-14 and 2014-15 while the freight rates
were revised during 2013-14, 2014-15 and 2015-16. The above increases
had a positive impact on Railways’ earnings which helped its financial
position to improve. Passenger earming grew by 16.6% and 15.5% during
2013-14 and 2014-15 respectively compared to just 9.5% and 10.9% during
2011-12 and 2012-13 respectively. Freight earning grew by 10.1% and
12.6% during 2013-14 and 2014-15 respectively. Further, with a’ view to
raising resources to meet the increasing working expenses and to generate
higher internal resources for plan expenditure, freight rates were rationalized
during 2015-16 also. Despite the above measures, Railways are estimated to
bear a net loss of about Rs. 25,912 cr during 2014-15 (Revised Estimates)
on coaching services and on essential commodities carried below cost of
operation.

In Budget 2015-16, various initiatives have been announced for the
improvement of management processes, systems and HRD. It has been
proposed to link key activities to global benchmarking, to audit train
operations, and to undertake a human resource audit. Further, it has been
proposed to set up a mechanism which will be entrusted with making
regulations, setting performance standards and determining tariffs.

Due emphasis is being given to manpower planning and staff rationalisation
on Indian Railways. Zonal Railways are consistently asked to surrender
vacancies in non-safety non-essential categories, identify pockets of
surpluses and redundancies for activities which have become redundant or
obsolete due to technological upgradation and changes in working system,
and right size activities as per benchmarking norms. Zonal Railways have
also been given a target to achieve 1% reduction in staff sanctions annually,
assuming a 3% annual natural attrition, to reach an equilibrium level of right-
sized staff strength. To improve staff productivity, it is proposed to analyse
manpower deployment by reviewing activity-based yardsticks of all
departments to arrive at adequate number of staff requirement. Further, to
rationalise manpower it Is proposed to conduct a study of the manpower
pattern as existing on Indian Railways and given the technological
development/changes in operational and maintenance practices, what should
be the optimal level of manpower for each activity centre and what should be
the overall manpower requirement on Indian Railways in the coming years.”

The Ministry of Railways have further informed that regarding Human

Resource Audit, they have entrusted the study for preparation of rational manpower

policy with reference to gazetted cadre on Indian Railways by engaging an outside

consultant for the purpose. National Academy of Indian Railways/Vadodara will


4
coordinate the entire exercise of preparation of rational manpower policy. Tender
has since been finalized and awarded. The study is restricted to Gazetted officers
Cadres only.

% The Committee have been informed that there is a continuous
endeavour on the part of Railways to increase earnings from passenger and
freight segments by targeting higher throughput and resorting to
revision/rationalization of fares and freight rates. The Committee are of the
opinion that instead of increasing rates of fare & freight charges for
improving its financial position and burdening common man with fare-hike
and consequential rise in prices of essential commodities, the Railways
should explore other measures of revenue generation such as commercial
publicity and commercial usage of idle/vacant land so that the revenue
earnings can be utilized for upkeep and development of Railway
infrastructure. The Committee feel that such an effort on the part of the IR will
not only augment the earnings but will also help minimize its losses to a great
extent. With respect to Human Resources Audit, the Committee are dismayed
to note that Ministry of Railways have entrusted the study for preparation of
rational manpower policy with reference to only the gazette cadre on Indian
Railways by engaging an outside consultant for the purpose. They feel that
considering the size and nature of the workforce among the non-gazetted
cadre in the Railways, rationalization of manpower would be more appropriate
for the non-gazettted cadre. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
outcome of the proposed study undertaken for the gazetted cadre on Indian
Railways. They also urge upon the Ministry to devise a definite timeline for
conducting a similar study for the non-gazetted cadre in Indian Railways
under intimation to this Committee.

Commercial Publicity and earnings through assets of Railways Publicity and earnings through assets of Railways
(Recommendation No. 5)

8. The Committee in their original Report had expressed their view there is
considerable scope to increase revenue earned by IR through efficient utilization of
its huge land bank and other assets. They had noted from the audit review that
sundry earnings of IR can be augmented if bills from realization of rent of buildings,
license fee are raised and realized ina timely manner with proper revision wherever


5

due. A drop in such earnings was noticed in 201 1-12 when it grew around 8 percent
only as against 15 per cent in 2010-11. The Committee, therefore, recommends
Railways to conduct an assessment of all the cases of licensing/renting of its assets
for timely revision/taising of bills and realization of dues including arrears if any.
They also liked the Railway to effectively pursue the cases of unrealized earnings
pending under traffic suspense mainly on account of traffic and demand
recoverable. The Committee were of the view that the Railways can generate good
revenue by selling space for advertising in its coaches, stations, tickets, information
booklets etc. They had urged the Ministry of Railways to urgently assess their
potential in this direction and prepare a suitable plan for early implementation.

9. The Ministry of Railways have furnished their reply as under:

“It is Railway's constant endeavour to reduce the arrears of execution of land
lease agreements/licensing agreement etc. on railway land, Railway's
concerted efforts in this regard have resulted in total earnings of Rs. 1313
crores during 2014-15 from conventional usage of railway land which is
about 20.5% more than the earnings of 2013-14.

Accretion and clearance of unrealized earnings under Traffic Suspense and
Demands Recoverable is a continuous process. Railways have standing
instruction to review all the cases of licensing/renting of its assets for timely
revision/raising of bill and concurrent realization of dues including arrears.
Instructions have been reiterated to the Railways in this regard (Annexure-!).

To facilitate effective monitoring of contractual receipt and ensure timely
payment and prompt renewal of contract a computer based Commercial
Contract Management System (CCMS) has been sanctioned in the Works
Programme 2014-15 at the cost of Rs. 4.17 crores. Centre for Railway
Information System (CRIS) will be developing the software.

In view of the perceived high potential earnings from Commercial Publicity, a
Force under the Chairmanship of Member Traffic has been constituted for
realistic assessment of potential and to suggest strategies for enhancement
of revenue through commercial publicity by leveraging the 88828 owned by
Indian Railways.”

10. The Ministry of Railways have further informed that a Task Force on revenue
enhancement through publicity in Indian Railways was constituted with the approval
of Hon'ble Minister for Railways. The Task Force comprised of GM/Central Railway,
Adviser (Infra), Adviser (Finance), CMD/IRCTC, MD/RITES, Member Traffic and
Executive Director (Passenger Marketing) as Member Secretary. In pursuance of


6
in principle approval accorded by Railway Board to the recommendations made by
the Task Force, RITES has been directed to initiate the process of hiring a
Professional Media Market Evaluation Agency (PMMEA) which would assess the
earning potential/value of select media assets of Indian Railways.

11. The Committee note that constant endeavour on the part of Railways to
reduce the arrears of execution of land lease agreements/licensing agreement
et. on railway land have resulted in total earnings of Rs. 1313 crores during
2014-15 from conventional usage of railway land which is about 20.5 percent
more than the previous year. To facilitate effective monitoring of contractual
receipt and ensure timely payment and prompt renewal of contract, a
computer based Commercial Contract Management System (CCMS) has been
sanctioned in the Works Programme 2014-15 at the cost of Rs. 4.17 crore and
Centre for Railway Information System (CRIS) has been entrusted with the
task of developing the software. Further, a Task Force on revenue
enhancement through publicity in Indian Railways was constituted and in
pursuance of in-principle approval accorded by the Railway Board to the
recommendations made by the Task Force, RITES has been directed to
initiate the process of hiring a Professional Media Market Evaluation Agency
(PMMEA) which would assess the earning potential/value of select media
assets of Indian Railways. Appreciating the  efforts/initiatives
made/undertaken by the Indian Railways in this regard, the Committee desire
the Railways to ensure that the development of CCMs and hiring of PMMEA is
completed in a time bound manner. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the development in this regard,

Need to reduce subsequent additions and alternations in sanctioned works, to reduce subsequent additions and alternations in sanctioned works

over over utilization of funds and timely and realistic assessment of funds and timely and realistic assessment
(Recommendation No. 9)

12. The Committee had noted that IR deviated from its own laid down guidelines
for making investment decision as cases of excess/savings in doubling, new line
and gauge conversion projects as well as inclusion of works as Material
Modification Works to an existing work have been pointed out by the Audit. The
Ministry, however had defended its decisions before the Committee by emphasizing
that no new work/investment was undertaken without the approval of the Parliament


7

and that modifications to existing work are undertaken as Material Modification to
sanctioned work, which is in line with the Indian Railways Engineering Code 10188.
The Committee had, however, find that despite taking approval of the competent
authority by following laid down procedure, excess expenditure and
savings/surrender of funds were noticed to a large extent which itself is indicative of
the fact that funds allocated were not optimally utilized for the desired purpose thus
defeating the objective of judicious allocation of available resources. The Committee
had, therefore, urged the IR to reduce the need for subsequent additions and
alterations in sanctioned works to the minimum and improve its monitoring
mechanism over utilization of funds and timely and realistic assessment of their
requirement particularly at the Zonal Railway level.

13. The Ministry of Railways in their reply furnished as under:

“Point is noted. Indian Railway is predominantly following the guidelines while
undertaking material modification/additions and alterations in sanctioned
works. Generally those works are considered for addition/alterations which
can enhance the benefits of original sanctioned works. Periodic meeting at
regional, zonal and Board level take place to analyze and monitor the
utilization of funds.

Addition/alternatives is generally necessitated by new developments, change
in traffic pattern, new projects in contiguous area, to reap full benefit of the
project in question etc. However, it is endeavour of Indian Railway to reduce
the need for subsequent addition/alteration to the extent possible. As regards
utilization of funds, Railways have effective monitoring mechanism in place.
On overall basis, there is no surrender/saving of funds allocated to project
and excess, if any, is incurred after approval at different budgetary stages
such as August review, Railway Budget etc.” ;
14. The Committee find that although the Ministry have noted the point
made by them in their recommendation, yet the reply tendered by them were
indicative of the fact that additions and modifications to the original
sanctioned work are taking place without approval of the competent authority
in contravention of the laid down guidelines. The Committee feel that while
according approval for any project/scheme, a proper survey is undertaken by
taking into account all existing and future parameters and cost is determined
after a careful scrutiny. They, therefore, express their displeasure over not
determining either the cost or the scope of work realistically which

necessitate subsequent alternation/addition thereby causing time and cost


8
overrun in various projects. Such lapses, they feel also point towards the
existence of ineffective monitoring mechanism. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that MOR should make all out efforts to reduce the instances of
subsequent addition and alternation in the sanctioned projects so the cost
overrun and time overrun is minimized and the work is completed in
scheduled time.


APPENDIX-II
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
CONTAINED IN THEIR FIFTEENTH REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations - 10
(ii) | Observations/Recommendations of the Committee -- Total : 08
which have been accepted by the Government: Percentage: 80%

Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,6, 9 & 10

(iii) | Observations/Recommendations which the -- Total : 02
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of Percentage: 20%
the reply of the Government:

Para No.7 & 8

(iv) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of - Total: NIL
which replies of the Government have not been Percentage: 0%
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

-NIL-

(v)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of oo Total : NIL

which the Government have furnished interim replies: Percentage: 0%

-NIL-


a0. एफ,

= o 1p

ee ee : हु a a ok
a pa जछः a:
— it

ut at ature ea eae हल paless pen tiem ree
“ "alll ॥
SE aarnke ee ST नव ५. -