1 
 
    118  
 
PRESERVATION AND CONSERVATION OF 
MONUMENTS AND ANTIQUITIES  
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their 39th Report (16th Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CULTURE  
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
              
  
                      
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 

2 
 
PAC NO. 2157  
 
O N E  H U N D R E D  A N D  E I G H T E E N T H  
R E P O R T 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(201 8-19) 
( SI XTEENTH LO K S ABH A)  
 
 
 
 
 
                           
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their 39th Report (16th Lok Sabha)] 
MINISTRY OF CULTURE  
 
                                      
   
                                                                          
Presented to Lok Sabha on:  ………….…… 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   ………………. 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
December, 2018 /Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka) 
 
 
PRESERVATION AND 
CONSERVATION OF MONUMENTS 
AND ANTIQUITIES  
 
 

3 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2018-19)   (iii) 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………... …………………….. 
  
(iv) 
CHAPTER I              
  
Report ………………………………………………. 1 
C H A P T E R  
I I *  
Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government …………………….. 
 
CHAPTER III* Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
replies received from the Government ..………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV* Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration ……………………………………………. 
 
CHAPTER V* Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which the Government have furnished interim 
replies ………………………………………………… 
 
 
APPENDICES*  
 
I Minutes of the 20 th sitting of the Public Accounts 
Committee (2018 -19) held on   
5th December, 2018 
 
II Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public 
Accounts Committee contained in their  39th   
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
 
 *Not appended to the cyclostyled copy of the Report 

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
 Shri Mallikarjun Kharge   - Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria  
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra 
5.  Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar   
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
7. Smt. Riti Pathak 
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank” 
9. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
10. Shri Abhishek Singh 
11. Shri Gopal Shetty 
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
15. Dr. Ponnusamy  Venugopal 
 R A J Y A  S A B H A  
16. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda 
17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
18. Shri Shwait Malik 
19. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
21. Shri C.M. Ramesh 
22. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
 SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A.K. Singh - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Paolienlal Haokip- Additional Director 

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2018 -19), having been 
authorised by the Committee, do present this One Hundred and Eighteenth Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Thirty-ninth Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on “Preservation and conservation of Monuments and 
Antiquities” based on the C&AG Report No. 18 of 2013 relating to Ministry of Culture. 
 
2. The Thirty -ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on  
26th April, 2016.  Replies of the Government to all the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report were received.  The Public Accounts Committee considered 
and adopted the One Hundred and Eighteenth Report at their sitting held on 5 th 
December, 2018.  Minutes of the sitting are given at Appendix I. 
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the 
Report. 
4. The Committee place on record their apprecia tion of the assistance rendered to 
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty -ninth Report ( Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given 
at Appendix. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                        MALLIKARJUN KHARGE 
      December, 2018                                                                               Chairperson, 
   Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)                                     Public Accounts Committee 

6 
 
CHAPTER – I 
R E P O R T 
 
This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
their Thirty-ninth Report (16 th Lok Sabha) on the subject “Preservation and 
Conservation of Monuments and Antiquities”  based on the C&AG Report No. 18 of 
2013 relating to the Ministry of Culture.  
2.  The Thirty-ninth Report (16th Lok Sabha), which was presented to Lok Sabha and 
laid in Rajya Sabha on 26th April, 2016 contained 2 5 Observations and 
Recommendations. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations and 
Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Culture and are broadly 
categorized as under:  
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Paragraph Nos. 1-5, 10-14, 16-25  
Total: 20  
Chapter - II  
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
 
Paragraph No. 15  
Total: 1  
Chapter - III  
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
 
 Paragraph No. 6-9              Total: 4  
Chapter - IV  
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies:  
 
Nil        Total: 0  
Chapter – V 
 

7 
 
3. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Culture in respect of all 
Observations and Recommendations of the Co mmittee have been reproduced in the 
relevant Chapters of this Report. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by 
the Government on the Observations and Recommendations made in the Original 
Report which either need reiteration or merit comments. 
4. Before dwelling on the Action Taken Replies furnished by the Ministry, it is 
pertinent to bring out the issue of delay in furnishing of the Action Taken Replies to the 
Committee.  The original Report on the Subject was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in  
Rajya Sabha on 26 th April, 2016.   The Action Taken Replies on the Report were 
required to be furnished within six months, i.e., by 25.10.2016.  Contrary to the 
stipulated date, the ATRs were received in the Secretariat on 30th August, 2018.  
5. The Committee are appalled to note the tepid response of the Ministry in 
furnishing the Action Taken Replies.  It goes without saying that such a delay of 
almost two years has hampered not only the work of the Committee but also it is 
evident that delay withou t any justified reason is against the principles of the 
Committee system as well as that of Parliamentary oversight on the Executive 
through this Financial Committee.   At this stage, they can only recommend that 
due care should be taken in future while fu rnishing the Action Taken Replies.  
They, in no uncertain words, recommend that they be apprised of the reasons of 
this delay and also some kind of responsibility be fixed for indulging in such acts 
of procrastination on the part of erring officials.   At least now, the Committee feel 
that the Ministry will take this recommendation of the Committee seriously and 
furnish the Final Action Taken Statements within six months of the presentation 
of this Report in Parliament. 
 6. Further the Committee are of the firm opinion that Ministry have shown 
gross laxity in implementation of some of the recommendations as action on 
them are stated to be under process even after two and a half years since the 
presentation of the original Report.  These instances are specifi cally brought out 
in the succeeding paragraphs of this Report.  

8 
 
II. Shortage of Manpower and Restructuring 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 6) 
 
7. The Committee had noted with grave concern the severe shortage of manpower 
in the ASI and taken strong exception to some posts being left vacant for years together 
without even any ad -hoc arrangements. They had been apprised of an ongoing cadre 
restructuring process which had been submitted to the Ministry of Finance for financial 
approval. Taking into account the debilitating handicap faced by ASI in fulfilling its 
primary functions due to the acute shortage of manpower, and taking cognizance of a 
proper r estructuring of the organization being essential to overcome its deficient 
functioning in the important mandate to preserve our cultural heritage, the Committee 
had recommended that the Ministry of Culture should pursue the matter with the 
Ministry of Fina nce for early clearance of the restructuring proposal and finalize the 
same at the earliest to overcome the shortage of manpower at the earliest under 
intimation to the Committee and also to ensure adequate financial allocation for 
Archaeological Survey of  India to help and strengthen future archaeological survey, 
excavations and proper maintenance of ancient monuments in archaeological sites and 
remains. 
8. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:  
“The proposal for cadre restructuring  of ASI has been revised in the light of 
discussions with the officers concerned in the Ministry of Finance and has been 
submitted to Ministry of Culture for submission to Ministry of Finance. However, 
the Department has also continued its efforts to get t he vacancies filled up as 
expeditiously as possible and in the last 2 years, 364 vacancies were got filled 
up, in addition to the same the Staff Selection Committee (SSC) has further 
recommended names of 8 candidates for the post of Assistant Archaeologist , 15 
candidates for the post of Stenographer for appointment in ASI on Direct 
Recruitment basis. The SSC has also recommended the names of 33 no. of 
candidates against the vacant post of MTS under the Physically Handicapped 
(PH) category. The SSC is also i n the advanced stage for conducting 
examination for the remaining 1314 no. of vacant post of MTS on Direct 
Recruitment basis.” 
9. Audit in their vetting comments stated as under:- 
“Final outcome of the cadre restructuring of ASI may be appraised to PAC”. 

9 
 
10. The Ministry, in their Final Action Taken Note have stated as under:  
“The proposal for cadre restructuring of ASI in line with the suggestions made by 
Ministry of Finance, Dep artment of Expenditure was submitted for further 
consideration of Ministry of  Culture in March, 2017. However, the proposal has 
been received back with the direction to re -submit the proposal in line with the 
instructions issued by Ministry of Finance vide their O.M. dated 12.04.2017. The 
revised proposal in accordance with the said instructions will be submitted shortly 
to Ministry of Culture.” 
11. The Committee note that the proposal for cadre restructuring of ASI was 
submitted to the Ministry of Culture in March 2017, and received back with 
direction to re-submit the same in line  with the instructions issued by Ministry of 
Finance vide OM dated 12.04 .17.   The response of the Ministry is not acceptable 
to the Committee as, again they feel that the Ministry is not serious enough in 
cadre restructuring of ASI.  It is evident from la ckadaisical attitude of the Ministry 
that even after an elapse of 16 months, the revised proposal in accordance with 
the Ministry of Finance O.M. has not yet been submitted by the Ministry of 
Culture.  What can be more disturbing than the fact that this hi atus of time is 
being taken by the Ministry for just finalizing a revised proposal.  They, therefore, 
recommend that ASI expedite the submission of revised proposal in accordance 
with instructions and further recommend that the Ministry of Culture, upon 
receipt of the revised proposal, expedite the process for final implementation of 
the restructuring within ASI to facilitate the organization to meet its challenges 
and expectations efficiently.  Such a proposal be finalized forthwith and not later 
than one month after the presentation of this Report and that too under intimation 
to the Committee.     
 
III. Filling current vacancies 
(Recommendation Para No. 7) 
12. The Committee had been apprised that the restructuring exercise was aimed at 
strengthening all wings of ASI . As far as encadered posts are concerned, there were 
existing vacancies in the organization which need to be filled. The Committee had 
observed that the Ministry had opted to outsource jobs that are not directly related to the 

10 
 
spheres of archa eology, conservation and excavation, while also entering into MoUs 
with institutions and Universities for sharing professionals on deputation and training 
basis to meet current shortage in technical manpower. The Committee , however, had 
noted with great co ncern that the Ministry had not been able to fill the vacancies as 
pointed out by audit in a report laid in 2013. While deprecating this lackadaisical attitude 
on the part of the Ministry, the Committee had recommended that the Ministry should 
make concert ed effort s to fill all vacant posts in ASI and a compliance report be 
submitted to the Committee within six months of this report being laid on the table of the 
House of Parliament. 
 
13. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:  
“The details of sanctioned and filled up posts in ASI as on 15.2.2017 and the 
number of vacancies filled up in the last 2 years through concerted efforts taken 
in this regard is indicated below:  
 
S.No. Classification of 
posts 
Sanctioned 
Strength 
Filled Vacant Post  
 
1 Group ‘A’ 233 183 50 
2 Group ‘B’ 875 609 266 
3 Group ‘C’ 1164 819 345 
4 MTS 6152 3899 2253 
 Total 8424 5510 2914 
 
Cadre-wise number of posts filled in the last 2 years: (All Groups, excluding MTS)  
Archaeology 93 
Conservation 63 
Others 208 
Total 364 
 
The Department has continued its efforts to get the vacancies filled up as 
expeditiously as possible. In addition to the details of vacancies filled up given as 

11 
 
above, the Staff Selection Committee (SSC) has further recommended names of 8  
candidates for the post of Assistant Archaeologist, 15 candidates for the post of 
Stenographer for appointment in ASI on Direct Recruitment basis. The SSC has also 
recommended the names of 33 no. of candidates against the vacant post of MTS under 
the Physically Handicapped (PH) category. The SSC is also in the advanced stage for 
conducting examination for the remaining 1314 no. of vacant  post of MTS on Direct 
Recruitment basis. ASI is constantly pursuing the matter with the UPSC/SSC for filling 
up the vacancies.” 
 
14. Audit in their vetted comments stated as under:- 
“Efforts of the Ministry for signing of MoUs with Institutions and Universities for 
sharing professionals on deputation and training basis to meet current shortage 
in technical manpower in ASI may be apprised to PAC.” 
15. The Ministry in their Final Action Taken Note have stated as under:  
“The vacant posts in ASI are filled up in accordance with the recruitment rules in 
respect of each post. As ASI has been facing difficulties in attracting sui table 
candidates for the technical posts, the recruitment rules of some of these posts 
have been framed keeping the method of deputation in case of failure of the first 
method of direct recruitment or promotion, as the case may be. The field of 
selection o f candidates for deputation has been kept wide open from officers 
under Central or State Government or Union Territories or Universities or 
recognized Research Institutions / Semi -govt. statutory and autonomous 
organizations. Two officers have been appoint ed on deputation basis in the 
Conservation Branch of ASI. However, even after circulating the vacancies of 
Jt.DG(Arch.) twice, there has been not much response. ASI has not been able to 
attract candidates from universities where officers with appropriate q ualification 
and appropriate service are available for the reasons that the pay structures 
available in the universities are higher than what is available under the Central 
Govt.” 
16. The Committee are not happy to note the position in regard to filling up  of 
vacancies on a few major grounds.  Before analyzing them, the Committee, here, 
would like to state that the staff strength which has been conveyed to them is as 
old as 18 months.  It is disconcerting to note that the concrete developments 
since 15.02.2017 have not been intimated to the Committee.  Although the posts 
have been filled in ASI, nevertheless it is evident vacant posts in all Groups are 
as high as 34.6%.  The emphasis seems to be more in filling up of the posts of 
MTS rather than in the techn ical side.  The backbone of the work of ASI lies in 
their technical cadre.  The Committee also find that the Ministry has taken note of 

12 
 
the fact that the pay structure in the Universities is higher than what is available 
under the Central Government.    Th ey, therefore, recommend that all -out efforts 
may be made by the Ministry by raising the bar of salaries to attract technical 
manpower which would enable them to fill up the vacancies of technical side. The 
matter be pursued at the highest level; otherwise the very purpose of existence of 
ASI would be defeated.  More emphasis should be given to the recruitment of 
technical experts rather than auxiliary manpower.  Then only, the full potential 
and service delivery of ASI would come into light. 
IV. National Monument Authority 
(Recommendation Para No. 8) 
17. The Committee had noted that pursuant to Audit comments on the delays in 
establishment of NMA and appointments of members therein, the Ministry had taken 
steps to expedite the entire matter. The Committee had felt that it was desirable for 
authorities to pursue their tasks earnestly without awaiting Audit’s comments and 
desired that the Ministry evolve an internal mechanism to set targets and monitor 
timelines for tits various agencies and units in consulta tion with units concerned. The 
committee had urged the Ministry evolve proper systems to fill vacancies in important 
position in a time bound manner 
18. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:  
“The National monuments Authority (NMA) came into existence in  2011 as a 
statutory body, Constituted under provision of AMASR Act, 2010. It consists of a 
Chairperson, 05 Whole Time Members, 05 Part Time Members, with a fixed 
tenure o f 3 years, and a Member Secretary. The first Chairperson Prof. 
Himanshu Prabha Ray was appointed on 31st Aug. 2012 and she demitted her 
office on 31st Aug, 2015. Dr. Susmita Pande has been appointed w.e.f. 
18.4.2016. Initially, out of 05 sanctioned posts of Whole Time Member, only one 
was filled w.e.f. 21.11.2011 by M s. Meena Ishwar Dass  till 20.11.2014. 
Thereafter, Mohd. Saleem Beg was appointed as Whole Time Member on 
05.11.2013 who demitted office on 04.11.2016.  At present, three posts of Whole 
Time Member are filled by Sh. Arya Bhushan Shukla, Sh, Uma Kant Sadhav a nd 
Sh. Satish Kumar who joined on 29.03.2016, 01.06.2016 and 15.0 7.2016, 
respectively. Further, out of the 05 posts of Part Time Member, two posts were 
filled by Mrs. Rima Hooja and Mrs. Sanghamitra from 23.11.2011 till 22.11.2014, 
then Ms. Shalini Mahajan  and Shri Bharat Bhu shan were appointed w.e.f 

13 
 
30.10.2013 and Dr. Pukhraj Maroo on 06.01.2014. At present two posts of Whole 
Time Member and 05 posts of Part Time Member are vacant . Process has 
already been initiated to fill these posts.” 
 
19. Audit in their vetting comments stated as under:- 
“The Committee recommended that Ministry evolve an internal mechanism to set 
targets and monitor timelines for its various agencies and units in consultation 
with units concerned. Efforts in this regard may be apprised to PAC. 
 
20. The Ministry in their Final Action Taken Note have stated as under:  
“Action has already been initiated by the National Monuments Authority to fill 2 
posts of Whole Time Member and 5 posts of Part Time Member. In this regard 
the posts were adv ertised in the leading national newspapers on 10.1.2018 for 
which the last date to submit the application was 9.2.2018. The Hon’ble Culture 
Minister formed a Selection Committee on 20.4.2018 as per the AMASR Act. A 
complete set of applications were sent to  the Ministry of Culture on 1.5.2018 and 
a preliminary meeting of Experts was held on 9.5.2018. The Ministry of Culture 
has sent a letter on 14.5.2018 to the Cabinet Sec retariat requesting the Cabinet 
Secretary, being the Chairman of the Selection Committe e, to hold a meeting for 
selection of Whole Time Members and Part Time Members of National 
Monuments Authority. The Ministry has also sent a reminder to the Cabinet 
Secretariat on 12.6.2018.” 
21. The Committee are distraught to note that while the Ministry have already 
claimed to have expedited the establishment of NMA and appointment of 
members therein during evidence before the Committee, there still remains two 
vacant posts of Whole Time Members  and five of Part Time Members in the NMA 
since the last three years.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry may 
furnish a detailed explanation for such an inordinate delay, and a note explaining 
inter alia as to why such a lapse should not be construed as misleading to 
Parliamentary Committee. They also recommend that the remaining vacant 
positions may be expeditiously filled by convening the Selection Committee 
headed by the Cabinet Secretary at the earliest, and in no case later than two 
months from the presentation of this Report to Parliament. The Committee in no 
uncertain words reiterate their earlier recommendation for the Ministry to evolve 

14 
 
an internal mechanism to set targets and monitor timelines for its various 
agencies and units. 
 
V. Security and Safeguard arrangements 
(Recommendation Para No. 9) 
22. The Committee had observed that there were huge gaps in the management of 
security and safeguard around important monuments and museums 'arising out of lack' 
of proper attention. They had noted with concern the lack of effective monitoring in 
removing of encroachments and absence of any coordinated effort to check 
unauthorized constructions within conservation areas. The Committee , however, had 
noted with appreciation that the Ministry had formed a Committee to suggest security 
measures at monuments to strengthen protection of monuments from possible damage, 
loss or destruction through terror attacks and weak monitoring of visitors, etc. The 
Committee had recommended that the ASI should cons titute a ‘coordination 
mechanism’ with representatives of respective State Governments at each Circle to 
check the incidents of encroachments with the cooperation of District and Police 
authorities and there should be regular monitoring of progress on exis ting 
encroachments. While they felt that efforts should have been made by the Ministry to 
strengthen the manpower for security, the Committee also had felt that the ASI lagged 
behind in leveraging the advances in IT for enhancing security of the monuments.  They, 
therefore, recommended that  the Ministry should develop a comprehensive security 
policy for all monuments and museums under its control by addressing the shortage of 
security personnel and at the same time exploring the possibility of taking the hel p of 
ISRO for aerial survey and installation of satellite cameras and other agencies like 
Electronics and IT department for IT-based security modules. They also desired that the 
Ministry should apprise this Committee of the status of implementation of 
recommendations of the Committee on Security. The Committee had further 
recommended that all monuments, archaeological sites maintained by A.S.I. must have 
Clean and Modern toilets, Eateries, Medical Shops and other urgent conveniences in 

15 
 
and around their prec incts and also accessible motorable roads to the benefit of both 
domestic and foreign tourist. 
23. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:  
“The security and watch and ward at monument is being provided through 
regular monument attendants, private security guards and CISF guards. Further, 
ASI has moved a proposal for increasing number of private security guards. A 
policy on security & safety of museums has already been prepared by the 
Ministry of Culture in 2016. Steps are being taken for formation of State Level 
Coordination Committee (SLCC) involving representative of State Governments 
for removal of encroachments. A few States i.e. Assam, Rajasthan, J&K, Odisha, 
Chhattisgarh, Puducherry (UT), Kerala, Gujarat, Punjab and Meghalaya hav e 
already been responded in this regard . So far as use of ISRO maps or satellite 
camera for security may not be advantage for security purpose. However, Geo 
maps are being prepared with the help of ISRO indicating prohibited, protected 
and regulated areas of centrally protected monuments for grant of permission 
and to monitor constructions related activities in the area. ASI has identified 100 
monuments as Adarsh monuments for upgrading existing amenities (drinking 
water & toilets) and providing additional facilities like cafeteria, cloak room, Wi.Fi, 
interpretation center, Braille signages, facilities for differently abled, ramps, etc. 
Further, the facility of cafeteria is also being provided at important tourist visited 
monuments. The cafeteria at Red Fort , Delhi, Old Fort and Safdarjung Tomb to 
be started soon as all the formalities have been completed in this regard. ASI has 
outsourced the work of construction of toilets at important monuments and highly 
visited monuments to WAPCOS and TCIL who are Govern ment undertakings. 
Necessary funds for such work have already been released to these two firms. 
24. Audit in their vetting comments stated as under:- 
“The Ministry stated that steps are being taken for formation of State Level Co -
ordination Committee (SLCC) involving representative of State Governments for 
removal of encroachments. As the SLCC has not been formed yet, final results in 
this regard may be apprised to PAC.” 
25. The Ministry in their Final Action Taken Note have stated as under:  
“Steps ar e still underway in forming the State Level Coordination Committees 
(SLCC) for removal of encroachments. On assessing the ground realities, multi -
level check mechanism has been evolved for monitoring the encroachment 
activities, in the form of security gua rds, monument attendants, and CISF in a 
few cases. The Court of Laws are also approached for checking the 
encroachment and in a few cases, they have been removed after specific court 
orders.” 
 

16 
 
26. The Committee are highly disappointed to note that State Le vel 
Coordination Committees for removal of encroachments upon monuments are 
yet to be set up even after a lapse of three years. They, therefore, recommend that 
the Ministry to furnish details of actions initiated/taken so far for setting up the 
SLCCs, including copies of communications sent to state governments, meetings 
held on the subject, etc. They also reiterate their earlier recommendation for 
expeditious setting up of State Leve l Coordinating Committees at th e earliest 
without any further loss of time and that too under intimation to the Committee. 
VI. Revenue Generation  
(Recommendation Para No. 12) 
27. The Committee were dismayed to note that there was no structured system of 
determining whether protected Monuments are to be placed under ticketed Monuments 
category or not. They had also noted that the Ministry was dithering on the issue of 
increasing the rates for film shooting, which has not been revised since 1991. During 
deliberations, the Committee also dwelt on other possible avenues of Revenue 
generation including renting out premises of well -known monuments like Red Fort, Taj 
Mahal, and Victoria Memorial Hall for premium social and family events. The Committee 
had recommended that a structured system for categorization of Monuments as ticketed 
or non -ticketed must be developed and a comprehensive review carried out to bring 
more monuments in the tic keted category. Further, the rates of entry tickets should be 
reviewed and suitably revised upwards at par with the rates at Monuments in other 
countries. The Committee had also recommended that rates for film and documentary 
shoots in premises of monument s must also be appropriately revised upwards and 
promotional short films can be produced by ASI separately in coordination with the 
Tourism Ministry. The Committee had also recommended that the Ministry/ASI should 
seriously explore enhancing revenue generation through premium renting of well-known 
sites for social and family events with proper guidelines.  
 
28. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:  
“The entry fee at protected monuments is imposed as per provision of Rule 6 of 
AMASR Rules, 1959. While imposing entry fee at any monument a notification 

17 
 
has to be published. ASI has imposed entry fee by the way of notification and 
publishing the list in Gazette of India. The list of ticketed monuments is already 
available on ASI website. Further the ‘Must See’ portal of ASI specifies the 
monument is ticketed or not. The rates of entry fee and filming at centrally 
protected monuments have been revised from 1.4.2016. So far as imposing entry 
fee at few more monuments is concerned, the same s hall be taken up after 
assessment on ground and report from field office. So far as steps for revenue 
generation are concerned, ASI has already enhanced entry fee at ticketed 
monuments and action is being taken up for bringing new monuments under 
ticket category. Renting of well -known heritage monuments for social and family 
events would not be a suitable step in the interest of monuments just for revenue 
generation. The position of revised entry fee is as under: 
 
 
   
Category of 
Visitor 
monument 
 Entry fee  (per 
head) 
 
  Before 1.4.2016 After 1.4.2016 
World 
Heritage 
Monuments 
Citizen of India 
and Visitor from 
SAARC & 
BIMSTEC 
counties and 
Overseas  
Citizens of India 
Rs 10/- Rs 30/- 
 Other foreigners Rs 250/- Rs 500/- 
Other 
Ticketed 
Monuments 
Citizen of India 
and Visitor from 
SAARC & 
BIMSTEC 
counties and 
Overseas  
Citizens of India 
Rs 5/- Rs 15/- 
 Other foreigners Rs 100/- Rs 200/- 
 

18 
 
Further, fee for filming of centrally protected monuments has been increased from Rs 
5000/- per day (for all types of monuments) to Rs.1, 00,000/ - for World Heritage 
Monuments and Rs 50,000/ - per day for other monuments. Rs.50, 000/ - per day with 
Rs.10, 000/ - refundable security deposit. The revenue generated for entry fee for the 
year 2015 -16 was Rs.  93.72 Crore and up to 31 st December, 2017 was Rs.166.14 . 
Crore”  
 
 
29. The Committee note with satisfaction that the ambiguity on whether a 
monument is ticketed or not has been dispelled by issuance of a notification by 
the ASI and the fees for film shoots have been revised as per their 
recommendation. They  are, however, constrained to  note that steps to bring in 
more monuments under ticketed category have still not been taken.  
 Further, the committee also note their recommendation for the Ministry/ASI 
to explore enhancing revenue generation through premium renting of well -known 
sites for social and family events with proper guidelines has not been brooded 
upon with seriousness.  The Ministry have stated that ‘renting of well -known 
heritage monuments for social and fa mily events would not be suitable in the 
interest of monuments just for revenue generation. ’ The Committee had 
deliberated the issue in -depth and considered and opined that certain areas of 
some well-known monuments like the Red Fort, Taj Mahal, Victoria M emorial hall, 
etc. could very well be earmarked and rented out for events like marriages, plays 
and musicals at premium rates without hurting the monuments by developing 
strict guidelines and close supervision. They , therefore, reiterate their 
recommendation and desire that the Ministry/ASI form an expert group to 
examine the feasibility of not only generating revenue, but bringing such 
monuments into the limelight.   If ASI is not in favour of renting heritage 
monuments for social and family events, then possibilities be explored if such 
events can be held in the backdrop of those monuments.  For instance, in 1990s, 
the Music Concert of one Greek composer was held in the backdrop of Taj Mahal 
on the river bed between r iver Yamuna and Taj precincts which brought 
international fame to the monument.   
      
 

19 
 
 On the issue of ticketing, the committee recommend that apart from online 
ticketing of monuments, the ASI should also consider offering a single pass 
allowing entry t o all monuments within a city  at attractive bunch rates for the 
convenience of tourists and facilitating more footfalls in each of the monuments.   
Also, the Committee would like to recommend that parallels should be drawn with 
other developed countries wh ere a single pass entry ticket is invariably used for 
all forms of public transport too, such as Hop-on-hop-off busses, metros, city bus 
services, ropeways, waterways transport, etc.  For the ease of convenience of the 
visitors, probability should be worke d out if these entry tickets are available at 
airports, railway stations, metro stations and in the city bus services, category 
hotels, apart from all Regional Tourist Offices.   
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                    MALLIKARJUN KHARGE  
17thDecember,2018                                                                                     Chairperson, 
27 Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)                                            Public Accounts Committee. 
 
 
 
 

20 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
CONTAINED IN THEIR THIRTY- NINTH REPORT  
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations  25 
 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee     Total : 20  
which have been accepted by the Government:        Percentage: 
80% 
Para Nos. 1-5, 10-14, 16 -25 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the       Total : 4  
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of       Percentage:4% 
 the reply of the Government: 
 
 Para Nos.   15 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of         Total : 4 
which replies of the Government have not been  Percentage:16% 
 accepted by the Committee and which require  
 reiteration: 
  
 Para Nos.   6-9 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of          Total : Nil 
which the Government have furnished interim 
replies:              Percentage: 0  
 Para Nos.    -  Nil 
 
 