      107  
 
UNFRUITFUL EXPENDITURE ON 
ESTABLISHMENT OF SPECIFIC 
PATHOGEN FREE SHRIMP SEED 
MULTIPLICATION CENTRE – (NFDB)"  
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in their 33rd Report (16th Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS 
WELFARE  
(DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, DAIRYING 
AND FISHERIES) 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
              
  
                      
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 

PAC NO.  2141 
 
 
O N E  H U N D R E D A N D  S E V E N T H 
R E P O R T 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(20 18-19) 
 
(SIXTEENTH  LOK SABHA)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in their 33rd Report (16th Lok Sabha)] 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS 
WELFARE  
(DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, DAIRYING 
AND FISHERIES) 
 
 
                                       
   
                                                                            
Presented to Lok Sabha on:  ………….…… 
 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   ………………. 
 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
August, 2018 /Shravana, 1940 (Saka)  
 
UNFRUITFUL EXPENDITURE ON 
ESTABLISHMENT OF SPECIFIC 
PATHOGEN FREE SHRIMP SEED 
MULTIPLICATION CENTRE – 
(NFDB)"  
 
 

CONTENTS 
 
  PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS  
COMMITTEE (2018-19)      
(iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………... ……………………..   
(iv) 
CHAPTER I              
  
Report 
………………………………………………. 
1 
C H A P T E R  
I I *  
Observations/Recommendations which have 
been accepted by the Government 
…………………….. 
 
CHAPTER III* Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the replies received from the Government 
..………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV* Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
……………………………………………. 
 
 
CHAPTER V* Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which the Government have furnished interim 
replies 
………………………………………………… 
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES*  
 
I Minutes of the 10 th sitting of the Public 
Accounts Committee (2018 -19) held on 30 th 
July, 2018. 
 
II Analysis of the Action Taken by the 
Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Public 
Accounts Committee contained in their  Ninety-
third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
______________________________________________________________
__ *Not appended to the cyclostyled copy of the Report 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (18-19) 
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge   - Chairperson 
 
 M E M B E R S  
 
L O K  S A B H A  
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria  
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra 
5.    Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar   
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
7. Smt. Riti Pathak 
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank” 
9. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
10. Shri Abhishek Singh 
11. Shri Gopal Shetty 
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya  
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
15. Dr. Ponnusamy  Venugopal 
 
 
 
R A J Y A  S A B H A  
 
16. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda 
17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
18. Shri Shwait Malik 
19. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
21. Vacant 
 
22. Vacant 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri T. JayaKumar - Director 
3. Smt. Anju Kukreja - Under Secretary 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2018 -19), having been 
authorised by the Committee,  do present this One Hundred and Seventh 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Thirty -
third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on “Unfruitful Expenditure on 
Establishment of Specific Pathogen Free Shrimp Seed Multiplication Centre – 
(NFDB)" relating to Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department 
of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) 
 
2. The Thirty -third Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajy a 
Sabha on 22nd December, 2015.  Replies of the Government to all the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received.  The 
Public Accounts Committee considered and adopted the One Hundred and 
Seventh Report at their sitting held on 30 th July, 2018.  Minutes of the sitting 
are given at Appendix I. 
 
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the 
body of the Report. 
 
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance 
rendered to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India. 
 
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Thirty -third Repo rt 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix. 
 
 
 NEW DELHI;                                             MALLIKARJUN KHARGE 
   1 August,2018                                                                           Chairperson, 
 10  Shravana, 1940 (Saka)                     Public Accounts Committee 
 

REPORT 
PART – I 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations and Recommendations contained in their 
33rd Report (16 th Lok Sabha) on the subject "Unfruitful Ex penditure on 
Establishment of Specific Pathogen Free Shrimp Seed Multiplication 
Centre – (NFDB)" based on Para 2.1 of the C&AG Report No. 23 of 2013 
relating to the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of 
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries). 
 
2. The Thirty -third Report (16 th Lok Sabha) was presented to the Lok 
Sabha on 22nd December, 2015/laid in Rajya Sabha on 23 rd December, 2015.  
It contained 13 Observations/Recommendations.  Action taken Notes in 
respect of all the Observations/Rec ommendations have been received from 
the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal 
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) and these have been categorized as 
under:   
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee which have 
been accepted by the Government: 
 
  Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,10,11,12 & 13 
 
Total: 13           
        Chapter – II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
Government: 
 
  Para Nos. NIL  
           
         Total:    NIL      
         Chapter – III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration: 
 
  Para Nos. NIL 
        Total:     NIL 
                                                       Chapter – IV 
 

(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Government have furnished interim replies: 
 
  Para Nos. NIL 
           
         Total:     NIL 
         Chapter – V 
 
 
3. In their 33rd Report (16th Lok Sabha), the Committee observed that due 
to shortage of disease-free shrimp brood stock, Ministry of Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare decided on 27 th June, 2006, to set up a Specific Pathogen 
Free Multiplication Centre (SPF -MC) in India as a join t programme by 
importing quality seed of Penaeus monodon  from reputed international 
companies. The primary objective of setting up of SPF -MC in India was an 
extremely well- intended, the purpose being to produce disease - free seed of 
black tiger shrimp ( Penaeus monodon) and to supply them to shrimp farmers 
who were facing acute shortage of disease -free shrimp breed stock. In the 
same meeting it was decided that the proposal of M/s MOANA Technologies, 
Hawaii, USA (the firm) of bringing the seed to India may be considered. 
 
Further the records of NFDB revealed that though an amount of `5.82 crore 
was incurred on various activities relating to the establishment of SPF -MC, the 
facility had not been set up till April 2013. Further, scrutiny by Audit disclosed 
the following shortcomings in the award of work: 
• Responding to a simple proposal, the project was awarded to MOANA 
after evaluating the technical capabilities but without assessing its 
financial capabilities. The auditor of MOANA, M/s Ernst & Young, Hong 
Kong, which conducted the audit of the Financial Statements of 
MOANA from 18.11.2005 (date of incorporation to 31.12.2009, gave 
(December, 2011) disclaimer of opinion and observed that the 
company’s ability to continue on going concern basis was doubtful. 
 

• The agreement did not provide for any performance related security to 
ensure performance of the terms of agreement and for safeguarding the 
interest of the Government in the event of default by MOANA. As per 
the agreement MOANA in addition to providing of dra wings was 
required to perform supervision of the construction and commissioning 
of SPF-MC. The decision to make payment of 90 percent of the agreed 
amount upon mere submission of the drawings without construction and 
commissioning of SPF-MC and without any security was injudicious. 
 
• No date for completion of and operation of SPF -MC was mentioned in 
the agreement. 
 
• Neither any time -frame for MTIPL -JVC to sign the license agreement 
nor any penalty clause in the event of not signing the agreement was 
included in the agreement. 
 
4. The Committee in their 33 rd Report (16th Lok Sabha) on the subject had 
made the following important observations/recommendations: 
(i) The Committee had desired the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare to look into all the circu mstances and facts which 
restrained them to consider the other four companies for the same 
project. 
(ii) The Committee had emphasized that in case of continuance of 
the project, suitable security clause be incorporated in the revised 
agreement to ensure accountability of the company in case of delay. 
(iii) Taking note of the inordinate delay in setting up and operation of 
SPF-MC, the Committee recommended that in future such agreements 
need to be addressed threadbare to ensure completion of such projects 
within the barest possible time.  
(iv) The Committee recommended that measures be implemented 
expeditiously with a view to optimum utilization of the land acquired.  

(v) The Committee desired that either the amount paid to the 
MOANA be obtained from them or the project be completed 
expeditiously.  
(vi) The Committee also desired the Ministry to chalk out a detailed 
plan for the time bound execution of the project so as to ensure early 
setting up of SPF -MC to facilitate supply of disease free seeds of 
Penaeus monodon to shrimp farmers in the country.  
 
5. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) to 
each of the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contain ed in 
their 33 rd Report (16 th Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant 
chapters of this Report.  In the succeeding paragraphs, the Committee have 
dealt with the action taken by the Government on some of their 
Observations/Recommendations. 
 
  
A. Delay in Submission of Action Taken Notes 
    
6. The 33 rd Report (16 th Lok Sabha) of the Public Accounts Committee 
was presented to Lok Sabha on 22nd December, 2015 and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 23 rd December, 2015.  As per procedure, the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) 
were required to furnish the Action Taken Notes duly vetted by Audit, on the 
observations and recommendations as contained in the Report within a period 
of six months from the pre sentation/laying of Report in Parliament i.e. by 22 nd 
June, 2016.  However, the vetted Action Taken Notes were received in this 
Secretariat only on 6th July, 2018. 
  
7. The Committee note that as per prescribed procedure the Ministry 
of Agriculture  and Far mers Welfare  (Department of Animal Husbandry, 
Dairying and Fisheries) were required to furnish the Action Taken Notes 
on the observations/recommendations as contained in 33 rd Report  

(16th Lok Sabha) within six months of the presentation/laying of the 
Report in Parliament i.e. by 22nd June, 2016.  However, the Committee are 
constrained to observe that the Ministry have submitted the Action 
Taken Notes after an inordinate delay of more than two years.  The 
Committee are concerned over the inexplicable delay in submission of 
Action Taken Notes.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
reasons for their failure in timely submission of Action Taken Notes and 
fix responsibility against the concerned officials.   
   
(B) Demarcation and fencing of Land acqui red for establishment of 
 SPF Shrimp Seed Multiplication Centre (MC)  
(Recommendation Para No. 11) 
 
8. The Committee were anguished to note that as there had been no 
decisions to give up the project, there were no plans of the Ministry  for 
utilizing the l and of 97.45 acres acquired at Srikakulam District in Andhra 
Pradesh at a cost of ` 2.85 crore for any alternative purpose.  Upon noticing 
that though several alternatives were explored by the Ministry, the land 
acquired was not put to use as of June, 2015 to achieve the intended objective 
of setting up a SPF -MC, the Committee had recommended that such 
measures be implemented expeditiously with a view to optimise utilization of 
the land acquired.  
 
9. In the Action Taken Notes, the Ministry of Agriculture a nd Farmers 
Welfare (Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) have 
stated as under: 
 
“Matter of Fact. The Committee’s recommendations are noted. In future 
measures as suggested by the Committee would be considered for 
optimum utilization of the land acquired.  
 

2. Further, it is stated that a meeting was held with the 
representatives of the M/s. MOANA Technologies, at NFDB, Hyderabad 
on 13th January, 2016 and the following position emerged:  
 
a) Moana Technologies is no longer willing to move for ward on the 
committed project: ‘SPF -Shrimp Seed Multiplication Centre’ in view 
of the changed circumstances. 
 
b) Further, the entire amount paid in Indian rupees by the NFDB to 
the Moana Technologies would  be refunded in a single instal ment 
soon after an approval to that effect is communicated to them by the 
NFDB/ Government of India. 
    
3. As for the alternative steps to be taken up in the event of the 
Moana project not coming up, as suggested by the PAC, the Core 
Committee constituted in the Ministry felt that the site may be utilized for 
any of the following projects as below, subject to the decision by the 
Ministry:  
 
• Selective breeding programme for Penaeusindicus with suitable 
modifications in design, on a PPP mode,(or) 
• Promoting alternative indigenous/ commercially important 
shrimp/fin fish, (or) 
• Establishment of an Institute for Fisheries Resource 
Development for running extension training centers /skill –up 
gradation centers for all categories for Fishers, Students, 
Professions giving more emphasis on fisheries HRD programs, 
(or) 
• Establishment of Technology Demonstration projects in 
collaboration with RGCA/ MPEDA/ICAR Fisheries Institutes. 
 
4. The Chief Executive, NFDB visited the SPF MC project site on 
23rd September, 2015 and conducted meeting with the concerned State 
department officers and the District Collector, Srikakulam. The land has 
been demarcated and CPWD submitted a proposal and estimate for 
constructing a fencing/boundary wall for the site.”                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
 
   
10. In their 33 rd Report (16 th Lok Sabha) the Committee had 
recommended the Ministry of Agricultu re and Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) to ensure that 
the suggested measures be implemented expeditiously with a view to 
optimum utilization of land acquired for the project at Srikakulam for 
other alternative purpo ses despite leaving it vacant for such a long 

period.  National Fisheries Development Board (NFDB) had taken 
possession of 97.45 acres of land at Mulapolam village, Sompeta Mandal 
of Srikakulam Distt. of AP from the Revenue Department, Government of 
AP on 10.03.2007 against payment of `2.85 crore.  In their Action Taken 
Notes the Ministry have stated that on 23 September, 2015, Chief 
Executive of NFDB held meeting with concerned State Department and 
District Collector, Srikakulam and accordingly the land ha s been 
demarcated and CPWD submitted a proposal and estimate for 
construction of a fencing/boundary wall for the site.  The Committee are 
appalled to note that inspite of encroachments of Government land in 
various parts of the country, the NFDD took 8 yea rs even to get the land 
demarcated and arriving at a decision to construct fencing/boundary 
wall of the acquired land, which is yet to materialized.  What is further 
disquieting is that the Ministry failed to intimate the Committee the 
precise date by whic h fencing would be completed.  While expressing 
deep concern over the failure of the Ministry to expedite the construction 
of fencing/boundary wall for the site, the Committee would like the 
Ministry to address the matter seriously and ensure that the land  is 
fenced and put to use for other alternative purposes at the earliest.  
 
______ 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                             MALLIKARJUN KHARGE 
 1 August,2018                                                                             Chairperson, 
 10 Shravana, 1940 (Saka)                                Public Accounts Committee 
 
 
 