Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana

MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2017-18)

NINETY-SECOND REPORT

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

92


PAC NO. 2126

NINETY-SECOND REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2017-18)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

| Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana |

MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT

area qt
\ .
Presented to Lok Sabha on: 28 [pd las
Laid in Rajya Sabha an: Eh 22032

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

March 2018/ Chaitra 1940 (Saka)


CONTENTS

PAGES
REPORT
PART-1
1 INTRODUCTORY 1
i] AUDIT REVIEW 2
ul PREVIOUS AUDIT FINDINGS . / 7
Vv CHAPTER - 3: PLANNING 10
District Rural Road Plan (DRRP) 12
Deficiencies in the District Rural Road Plan 12
Core Network 14
Deficiencies in Core Network 15
Non-approval of Gore Network 18
Non-Participation by Local Elected Representatives 19
Non-integration of Geographical Information System 19
Comprehensive New Connectivity Priority List/Comprehensive 20
Up-gradation Priority List
Clearance of works in excess of allocation of funds 22
Vv CHAPTER - 4: PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION 26
Transect walks not organised 26
Works dropped/abandoned 27
Tendering Process - Irregularities in inviting tenders 29
Non-recovery of mobilisation and equipment advance 30
Works shown as completed without complete connectivity to 31
targeted habitations
Multiple connectivity of habitations हि 34
Release and utilisation of maintenance fund 32
Vi CHAPTER - 5: FUND MANAGEMENT 34
Financial Progress . 35
Physical Progress 36
Shortcomings in release of funds to States 37
Delay in transfer of funds by State Governments 38
Diversion of funds 39
vit CHAPTER - 6: QUALITY CONTROL, MONITORING AND 40
EVALUATION
State Level standing Committee 42.

Second tier quality control mechanism - Shortfall in inspections 44

by SQMs
ci


Non-conduct of joint inspection 45

Delay in submission of ATRs 46
Sociai Audit 47
vill CHAPTER - 7: JOINT PHYSICAL VERIFICATION 48
Introduction 48
Summary of findings of joint physical verification 49
IX CHAPTER - 8: ONLINE MANAGEMENT, MONITORING AND 50
ACCOUNTING SYSTEM
PART ~ li
Observations/Recommendations §3-80
ANNEXURES

1. Minutes of the sitting of Sub-Committee - VI (Social Sector) of the Public
Accounts Committee (2018-1) held on 257 October, 2016

1. Minutes of the sitting of Sub-Committee - VI (Social Sector) of the Committee
(2017-18) held on 14" March, 2018

IWL® Minutes of the sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2017-18) held an 23”
March, 2018.

IV. Glossary of Terms and Abbreviations

* Mot (००३०4.

CY)


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC AGGOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2017-18)
Shri Maltikarjun Kharge - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

2 Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay

3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey

6 Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
7 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

8. Smt, Riti Pathak

9. Shri Neiphiu Rio”

है।' Shri Abhishek Singh

11... Prof. Ram Shanker

12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya

13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur

14... Shri Shivkumar 0. Udasi

15. Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA

16, Shri Naresh Agrawal

47. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
18. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
19. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan?

20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy*
21... Shri Ajay Sancheti

22, Shri Bhupender Yadav

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri 8.1९. Singh _> Additional Secretary
2. Shri T.Jayakumar  - Director
3. Smt. Anju Kukreja = - Under Secretary

* Ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon acceptance of his resignation from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 22
February, 2018.

* Elected w.e.f. 29 December, 2017 in lieu of vacancy caused due to retirement of Shri Shantaram Naik.

+ ceased to be ॥ Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 18 August, 2017 and
re-elected w.e.f. 29 December, 2017.

५४)


COMPOSITION OF THE SUB COMMITTEE - Vi OF THE PAC (2016-17)

Sub-Committee — Vi (Social Sector)

Convenor : Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi
Alternate Convenor : Shri P. Venugopal
Members : Shri Neiphiu Rio

Shri Naresh Agrawal
Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita

90 छा + ४०1७ a

Wi


COMPOSITION OF THE SUB COMMITTEE- Vi OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2017-18)

Sub-Committee ~ ४] (Social Sector)

Convenor : Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi
Alternate Convenor ; Shri P. Venugopal
Members : Shri Neiphiu Rio’

Shri Naresh Agrawal
Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita

छा छा ओी ०7७:

ei)

* Ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon acceptance of his resignation from Lok Sabha w.e.f, 22
February, 2018.



INTRODUCTION

1, the Chairperson, “Public Accounts Committee (2017-18), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Ninety-second Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha) on ‘Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana” based on C&AG Report No. 23 of
2016, Union Government (Performance Audit) relating to Ministry of Rural
Development.

2. The Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid on the Table
of the House on 12" August, 2016.

3. The Public Accounts Committee (2016-17) tock up the subject for detailed
examination and report. The Sub-Committee VI (Social Sector) took evidence of the
representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development on the subject at their sitting held
on 25" October, 2016. As the Report on the subject could not be finalised due to paucity
of time, the PAC (2017-18) reselected the subject. Based on the evidence taken by the
previous Sub-Committee a draft Report was prepared and placed before the Sub-
Committee for their consideration.

4, The Sub-Committee considered and adopted this draft Report at their sitting held
on 14" March, 2018. Minutes of the sitting form appendix | to the Report.

5. Thereafter, the main Committee considered and adopted this draft Report at their
sitting held on 23" March, 2018. Minutes of the sitting form appendix - ॥ to the Report.

6. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.

7. The Committee thank their predecessor Sub-Committee VI for taking oral
evidence of the Ministry of Rural Development and obtaining the requisite information
on the subject.

(४४)


8. The Committee would also like to express their thanks to the representatives of
the Ministry of Rural Development for tendering evidence before thern and furnishing
information in connection with the examination of the subject.

9. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

. NEW DELHI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE
2. March, 2018 Chairperson,
{, Chaitra, 1946 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

(४ )


REPORT
PART-i

1. INTRODUCTORY

Rural roads constitute a basic infrastructure requirement and play a vital role in
the socio-economic growth of the rural community, They contribute significantly to rural
development by providing access to goods and services located in nearby villages or
major towns and market centres. The increased mobility of men and materials facilitates
economic growth, thereby assisting in reducing poverty and leading to over all social
development

Development of rural roads received a major thrust under the Fifth Five Year
Plan (1974-79) when it was made a part of the erstwhile Minimum Needs Programme
(MNP). 65,000 villages with population of 1,500 and above were connected during the
Fifth and Sixth Plan (1980-85) periods, From the Seventh Plan (1986-90) onwards, the
larget was to connect villages with population of 1,000 and above. In the terminal year
of the Eighth Plan (1 992-97), the MNP was merged with the Basie Minimum Services
(BMS) programme.

Rural roads, despite given thrust since Fifth Five Year Plan, suffered greatly due
10 lack of systematic planning. Quality assurance and quality control were also not taken
seriously resulting in poor quality and ultimately resulting in premature loss of the assets
created.

With a view to redressing these issues, Gol launched a rural road programme
known as Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) in December 2000 with the
objective of providing single all-weather road connectivity to all eligible unconnected
habitations in rural areas with population of 1,000 persons and above by 2003 and alt
unconnected habitations with population of 500 persons and above by 2007. The
eligibility criteria for the programme is given below:

“ Areas/Siates “Population sligibility of habitations (as
per Census 2001)
plain areas ~ =| [77० 560 parsons and above”
Special catagory siates (in October 2013, 280 parsons and above
“Special Category States” were adopted
under PMGSY in place of “Hill States” for
inclusion of Assam. Special catego



a

: includ =| Assam
Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland,
Sikkim, Tripura, Himachal Pradesh,
Jammu & Kashmir and Uttarakhand.),
Desert areas, Tribal areas (Schedule-V of
Indian constitution) and selected tribal and
backward districts

Most intensive Integrated Action Plan 100 persons and above

(AP) blocks

Government of India decided to prioritise the provisions of all-weather road
connectivity to all habitations with a population of 1000 persons (500 persons in the
case of hilly and tribal areas) by the year 2009, and accordingly, linked this sub-set of
PMGSY under a new programme "Bharat Nirman” launched in February 2005 to
provide a time-bound plan for action in rural infrastructure in the area of Irrigation,

Roads, Electricity, Housing, Drinking Water and Telecommunication.

In May 2013, with the aim to consolidate the entire rural road network, PMGSY-H
was launched for upgrading existing selected through Routes and Main Rural Links.
Selection of roads was based on their economic potential and their role in facilitating the
growth of rural market centres and rural hubs. At present, PMGSY-II is running
simultaneously with ongoing PMGSY. The allocation of fund for PMGSY-I! was within
the annual budget of PMGSY.

il. Audit Review

2. The Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) was reviewed between ~
January and June 2005 covering the period April 2000 to March 2005; the audit findings
were incorporated in the C&AG's Report No, 13 of 2006, Audit observed deficiencies in
physical and financia! planning, fund utilisation, implementation, tendering process,
quality assurance, maintenance of roads, monitoring and efficacy of the Online
Management and Monitoring System (0५४8), Since then, expenditure on the
_ programme has increased manifold. States had utilized = 63,877.78 crore on
implementation of the programme during performance audit period (2010-18). With a
view to review the progress, it was decided to take up the performance audit of the

programme. This performance audit covered the period from April 2010 to March 2015


covering 4,417 packages involving expenditure of = 7,734.93 crore in 176 districts of 29

States.

The performance Audit highlighted various shoricomings/lapses in the
implementation of the PMGSY. The gist of the Audit's main findings are enumerated
below:- |
(i) In seven States (Andhra Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka,

Meghalaya, Mizoram and Telangana), discrepancies in District Rural Road Plan

such as absence of basic information on population of habitations, status of

connectivity, road inventory and maps, non-approval by District Panchayat,
taking village instead of habitation as unit of connectivity, etc., were observed.

(i) In 19 States (Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh,
Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Manipur, Meghalaya, Odisha,
Rajasthan, Sikkim, Telangana, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand and West
Bengal), discrepancies such as unconnected habitations shown as connected,
eligible habitations not included, habitations placed in wrong population size, etc.,
were observed in Core Networks (CNWs).

(ii) In seven States (Andhra Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Kerala, Meghalaya,
Punjab, Tripura and Uttar Pradesh), Core Networks (CNWs) were not approved
in selected districts either by Biock level Panchayat or District Panchayat or State
Level Agency.

(iv) ॥ nine States (Bihar, Gujarat, Himachal! Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Madhya
Pradesh, Odisha, Sikkim, Tami! Nadu and Uttarakhand), road projects of less
than 500 metres in plain areas and 1.5 km in hilly areas were included in CNWs.
in Meghalaya, 22 habitations lying within 1.5 km from an all weather
road/connected habitations were included in the CNW.

{v) In 11 States (Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Himacha! Pradesh, Jharkhand, Manipur,
Meghalaya, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand),
deficiencies such as inclusion of road projects both in Comprehensive New
Connestivity Priority List (CNCPL) and Comprehensive Upgradation Priority List
(CUPL), exclusion of road projects, inclusion of ineligible habitations, etc., were
observed in preparation of CNCPL and CUPL.

(vi) In 13 States (Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir,
Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram,


(vii)

(vill)

(ix)

(x)

(xi)

(xii)

(xiii)

(xiv)

Is

Telangana, Tripura and Uttarakhand), annual proposals were not prepared in
selected districts

The Ministry cleared proposais valued much more than indicative allocations of
fund.

In 12 States (Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka,
Kerala, Manipur, Meghalaya, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tripura and Uttar Pradesh), 109
toad works were selected beyond CNW. ह

372 works in 11 States (Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Chhattisgarh, Madhya
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Odisha, Rajasthan, Telangana, Uttar
Pradesh and West Bengal), were abandoned/proposed to be abandoned rnid-
way due to non-availability of land or land disputes after incurring expenditure of
¥ 280,01 crore. . वि

In five States (Bihar, Himachal Pradesh, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh and
Uttarakhand), 490 road works were executed/upgraded with incorrect technical
specifications

in nine States (Arunachal Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Manipur, Odisha,
Sikkim, Telangana, Tripura and Uttar Pradesh), irregularities in award of
contract such as award of work to ineligible contractor, change in criteria to
assess bid capacity, non-finalisation of works within validity period, award of work
without tendering process, non-obtaining of additional performance security
for unbalanced bid, etc., were observed.

In five States (Assam, Bihar, Himachal Pradesh, Mizoram and Sikkim), हैं 1.80
crore on account of mobilisation and equipment advance in respect of eight road
works/packages remained urirecovered. In four States (Haryana, Jammu &
Kashmir, Jharkhand and Uttar Pradesh}, हैं 9.46 crore was not recovered even
after the initial scheduled dates for completion of works.

Road works were completed without required bridges or cross drainage
structures thereby depriving targeted habitations with all weather road
connectivity. . है

In 28 States, 4,496 works were delayed for period ranging froni one manth to 129
months due to land disputes, non-receiving of forest clearance, paucity of funds,
non-availability/difficulty in transportation of material, shortage of labour, delay in

mining permission, etc.


(xv)

(xvi)

(xvii)

(xvii)

(xix)

(xxi)

(xxii)

(xxiii)

in 16 States, in 459 works/packages, recoveries of iiquidated damages
amounting to = 131.66 crore were not imposed.

In seven States (Bihar, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Tamil Nadu,
Tripura and West Bengal), 73 road works were executed and shown as
completed without providing comptete connectivity to the targetted habitations.
Out of this, 72 road works were executed at a cost of F 120.03 crore.

In five States (Assam, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand and
Madhya Pradesh), = 132.20 crore spent on. 68 works remained unfruitful as
targetted habitations were not provided with all weather road connectivity due to
land disputes, non-clearance from forest department, damaged by flood,
contractors’ defaults, etc.

In nine States (Arunachal Pradesh, Gujarat, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand,
Karnataka, Nagaland, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal), 38
habitations were provided with more than one connectivity. Out of this, 34
habitations were provided multiple connectivity at a cost of € 29.49 crore.

in seven States (Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu
& Kashmir, Jharkhand and Tripura), less than 50 per cent of the maintenance
fund required was used.
In three States (Himachal Pradesh, Tripura and Utara hand), ९ 33.72 crore was
transferred from maintenance funds to Programme funds and also to maintain
toads not constructed under the programme.
in 12 States, maintenance of roads during defect liabi ity period was not carried

out in 1,580 road works. Further, in 18 States, zonal maintenance contracts were

not entered into after expiry of five years of defect liabilt ity period.

Cages of non/short/delayed release of funds to the States due to non-availability
of funds, non/late submission of documents by the States, non-fulfillment of the
conditions laid down for release of second instalment and slow progress of road
works were observed.

in six States (Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashnilr. Odisha, Punjab, Tripura
and Uttarakhand), due to non-availing of income tax exemption, TDS amounting
to 245.30 crore on interest receipts earned by State Rural Road Development
Agencies (SRRDAs) was deducted by the banks.


(xxiv)

(xxv)

(xxvi)

In eight States (Haryana, Karnataka, Kerala, Mizoram, Sikkim, Tarai! Nacu, Uttar
Pradesh and Uttarakhand), programme fund of = 25.16 crore was diverted
towards maintenance fund, administrative expenses fund, salary and wages,
restoration of damaged properties, etc. Further, in five States (Kerala, Manipur,
Tamil Nadu, Tripura and Uttarakhand), administrative funds of ९ 11,78 crore
were diverted towards inadmissible items.

n 12 States, {Assam, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand,
Karnataka, Mizoram (four districts), Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Tripura,
Uttarakhand and West Bengal}, irregularities such as non-establishment of field
laboratories, non-availability of equipments, non-deployment of trained
manpower and non-conducting of required tests were observed.

n 14 States (Arunachal Pradesh, Chhaitisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Jammu &
ashmir, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Sikkim, Telangana,
Tripura, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand), out of 6,288 Action Taken Reports on
he inspections carried out by the State Quality Monitors, 1,411 were pending for

action.

(xxvii) In 17 States (Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Himachal

(xxviii)

(xXxIx)

(xxx)

Cxxxi)

Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Meghalaya,
Mizoram, Odisha, Punjab, Sikkim, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand),

joint inspections of the PMGSY works with the public representatives were not
carried out during 2010-11 to 2014-15.

National Quality Monitors (NQMs) carried out 16,856 inspections during 2010-14
to 2014-15, of which, 6,452 works were graded ‘Unsatisfactory’ or ‘Satisfactory
Requiring Improvement’. Remedial action on 1,938 was pending with States.

in 10 States (Arunachal Pradesh, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu &
Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala, Meghalaya, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh and
Uttarakhand), State Level Standing Committee meetings were not held regularly
to monitor the implementation of the programme.

In 10 States {Arunachal Pradesh, Gujarat, Haryana, Jharkhand, Karnataka,
Kerala, Meghalaya (Prior to April 2012), Tripura, Uttarakhand and West Bengal},
no grievance redressal mechanism was in place.

The concept of social audit was still to be incorporated in the programme
guidelines.


(xxxil) Joint physical verification of completed roads showed cases of mukiple-
connectivity, mid-way abandonment of werks, work shawn completed without
providing full connectivity, poor maintenance of toads, roads not functional for
vaffic, conclusion of contracts without rectification of defects, non-planting of fruit
bearing trees on both sides of PMGSY roads, ete.

(xxiii) Out of 14 modules, Ontine Fund Processing (OFP) and Analysis of Rate for Rurai
Roads (ARRR) Module had not been implemented in any State. Receipt &
Payment Bank Module to'link banks with Pragramme Implementation Units
(PiUs) for transactions and reconciliation had been implemented only in six
States.

(xxxiv) Even after 13 years of introduction of OMMAS, the Ministry still relied on manual

Monthly Progress Reports for decision making, as the basic requirement of data
updating on Online Management, Monitoring and Accounting System (OMMAS)
was not achieved, MIS reports generated through the system were inaccurate
and unreliable,

(xxxv) Lack of validation controis in OMMAS application led io incorrect data entries
which resulied in generation of unreliable MIS reports.

(xxv) IT Nodal Officers were not appointed in threa States (Gujarat, Karnataka and
Jammu & Kashmir). In four States (Arunachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Tarnil Nadu
and Uttar Pradesh), there were no supervisory controls for
verification/authentication of data entry.

3. Against the above backdrop and report based on report No, 23 of 2016 of the

C&AG of India, the Committee selected the subject for examination. In the process, the
Committee obtained the requisite information/materialAvritten replies from the Ministry of
Rural Develapment. The Committee also fook oral evidence of the representatives of
the Ministry of Rural Development on 257 October, 2016. Based on the information
gathered from the Ministry and the Audit inputs, the Committee have dealt with the Audit

findings and other relevant issues in detail in the succeeding Paragraphs.
WH. Previous Audit Findings

4. Performance audit of the PMGSY for 2000-01 to 2004.08 was conducted by the
C&AG between January and June 2005 and the audit findings were reported to
Partiarnent in its Report No. 13 of 2006 (Union Government-Civil). The Public Accounts



Domania (90५

of valuable observations/recommsndaiions on ihe same. Further, We Axia

(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) in their 32 Report (2008-09) discussed the Action Taken

Notes furnished (October 2008) by the Ministry oa the recommendations and

observations coniained in their 727 Report. The present performance audit of PMGSY

for the period 2010-11 ta 2014-15 revealed that most of the deficiencias as pointed out
ie in the earlier CAG's Repart persisted despite assurances rendered by the Ministry to the

4 PAC as brought out in the Table given below.

Siatus of the Implementation of some important Observations/Recommendations of
the Public Accaunts Committee contained in their 72" Report (1 4" Lok Sabha)

| Hol Recommendations of the Public Response . the Ministry "Status as per current aul report

Committee (2008-08)
7" Replieale the modalities .of social avait [The Ministry accaptect
incorporated in the guidelines of Naliofal Rural | recommendation and stated that based
Employment Giiarantee Act (NREGAY scheme it [on thé Pilot project takén up IN 1
respect of tha PMGSY. (Recommendation | Kamataka ‘and Qdisha with’ thé
involvement uf Jocal NGOs fer sample

‘he I'Goneest af social audit hes nol been
included ‘jn ..the, programme, |
quiselines.(Para 6,7) 75 ।

No, 3)
“ ° audit exercise and citizens monitoring of * ,
a projects, decision would be faken te!"
} seernuldte appropriate methodology fot,
: docial audit of PMGSY projects, me : ‘
“Tag एफ frame for preparation and The Ministry In thelr ation taken note | Gore Nelwock has sill not Tabitised

implementation of dist/icHstate-wise plans with | stated Hat Core Network af all states | 35 43,208 habitations not included
a view ta avold duplication of expenditure on | had heen finalized aid frozen excep! for | earker mainly due to inadequacies
i हु existing roads, (Recommendation No. 4) Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Kerala and की surveys by tha states were added

West Bengat who requested for jurtner | in the Gore Network. (Pata 3.3.1)



9 taken up under the
hy. part of, the Core

The) Ministry. accepted ~ the
Tecommeridation’ and stated that
KS would be applied to

“all the proposal form pa

of the Core Network. पर हि

Ministry should take up the matter. with the
siates 50 as to’ fix, responsibility on the
Concerted duthorities for’ inordinate delay in
finalisation of tenders. (Recommendation No.

18) पु

The Ministry accepted the
fécommendation and stated that states
had been advised to closely moniter the
delays In tendering every menth and in
case of inordinate delays the action for
fixing responsibility be taken,

In.14 States, 2,961 tenders were
finalised with delays ‘up ‘to 974
days. (Para 4.5.4) है

पता

हर

‘essary to ensure the
the projects.

“to. support

mpletion, of

Sanctioned. projects Within’ stipulated
le schedule 10 avoid Cost and ti

4/496" works ” were
found to have been completed with

‘delays ranging’ trom one forth io

129 months. (Para 4.4.8) ”



10

Recommendations of the Public = Response af the Ministry as per current a report
Committee
against the contrac
|_| behind schedule. (Recommend:
The Ministry जाए" explore all ‘explore all possibilities for | NRRDA has daveloped a mechanism to] In 12 states, Instances of: non.
setting up and maintenance of Quality.Contral | monitor operationalisation of first tier establishment of field laboratories,
Laboratories Jn ail states, for the p ‘odical fest | of. quality mechanism. ‘Thé Issue of non-| non-availability 0

: establishment of, fidl i

jes. are not

CHAPTER - 3: PLANNING

5. PMGSY has implemented the model of decentralized network planning for rural
roads involving all the three tiers of Panchayati Raj Institution (PRI) and local
tepresentatives of the State Legislative Assembly and the Parliament. States were
required to prepare a master plan at district level for the rural roads called the District
Rural Road Pian (ORRP). Based on the position of connectivity of habitations in the
DRIP, the Core Network (CNW) indicating the shortest single connectivity was to be

extracted from the DRRP. The whole planning process is shown below:-


13.

Préparation of DRRP and its approval by district
_ Panchayat and state level standing committee

Drawing out CNW from the DRRP and Its approval by
district panchayat and state level standing committee

Preparation of Comprehensive New: — Prepamtion of Comprehensi
Connectivity Priority List for all New |... Upgradation Priority List for all
_ Connecti हे _ Upgradation

i. ‘ ; Preparation of district-wise Annual Proposal

. Consolidation of proposals at state level and its approval by —
State Level Standing Committee

Preparation of Detailed Project Report

mission of Annual Proposal to the NRRDAVMinistry

Co

Clearance of projects by the Ministry :

6. Providing details of the planning process for connectivity of rural roads, the
Ministry of Rural Development submitted as under:

“Rural Roads’ is a State subject and Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana
(PMGSY) is a one-time special intervention to provide rural connectivity, by way
of a single all-weather road, to the eligible unconnected habitations in the core
network. As per the PMGSY guidelines, the preparation of Detailed Project
Reports for all roads under PMGSY is carried out by the concerned State
Governments. Ministry of Rural Development has, however, issued the
guidelines for the Empanaiment and Engagement of consultants for preparation
of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs),

Surveys for preparation of DPRs are carried out as per the process suggested by
IRC in Rural Roads Manual. The selection of roads under PMGSY is as per the
procedures laid in PMGSY guidelines which states that the proposals are
prepared by the selection of roads from Comprehensive New Connectivity


a2

Priority List (CNCPL) or Comorehensive Up-gradation Priority List (CUPL) after
due cansuitation with Hon'ble Members of Pariiament and approval from the Zila
Panchayat and State Level Standing Committee (SLSC), The consultants /
survey agencies are not involved in the selection of roads under PMGSY. A copy
of the CNCPL/CUPL is given to Hon'ble Members of Parliament for their
suggestions and suggestions of lower level Panchayat institutions are given the
fullest consideration by the District Panchayat while according its approval. Once
the proposals are approved by the Zilla/District Panchayat and same will be
approved by the State Level Standing Committee (SLSC) and sent to Ministry for
approval.

As per the guidelines of the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY), the
proposals sent by the State Governments are considered in the Ministry by the
inter Ministerial Empowered Committee (EC), constituted by the Ministry of Rural
Development, after due technical scrutiny by National Rural Roads Development
Agency (NRRDA) for recommendation. The recommendations of the EC are
made keeping in view the availability of funds, existing liability of unexecuted
works which were already sanctioned under the programme, progress of works,
absorption capacity of the States, works in hand, etc. The State Governments
are required to communicate its compliance on the observations of the
Empowered Committee to the Ministry and seek a formal clearance of road
works on that basis. In case the proposals meet all the programme requirements,
the proposals are formally cleared by the Ministry with the approval of the
Competent Authority."

District Rural Road Plan (DRRP)

7. The DRRP is a compendium of the existing and proposed road network systems
in the district, The DRRP is required to clearly identify ihe proposed roads for
connecting the yet unconnected habitations with all weather roads in an economic and
efficient manner and is prepared at two levels i.e., block and district. The plans of all the
blocks in a district, after approval of the respective intermediate panchayat, are to be
integrated into the DRRP. This is placed before the district panchayat or District Rural
Development Agencies (DRDA) for consideration and approval. The DRAP, thereafter,
is required to be submitted to the Nodal Department/State Rural Roads Development
Agency (SRRDA) for the approval of the State Level Standing Committee (5150).
Approved DRRPs form the basis for selection of road works under the PMGSY through
the CNW.

Deficiencies in the District Rural Road Plan Rural Road Plan

8. Test check of records in the selected districts revealed that in seven states,
DRRPs had deficiencles such as insufficient or incorrect data, non-approval of district

panchayat, etc. The deficiencies in detail are discussed below:-


13

is Andhra Pradesh, DRRPs of three districts did not have the basic
information viz., details of the population of habitations, connectivity status of the
habitations, major district roads, state and national highways, etc. Further,
DRRPs were approved by the district panchayat without involving the
intermediate panchayat.

. In Jammu & Kashmir, ORRP of disirict Anantnag was not approved by the
district panchayat.

. In Jharkhand, DRRP and CNW of the districts were prepared taking into
consideration village instead of habitations as a unit of connectivity. Further,
DRRP did not identify the proposed roads for connecting the yet unconnected

habitations.

The Ministry replied that DRRP of Jharkhand was revised in 2013 on the basis of
habitations and the state had also reconciled the unconnected habitations. The
reply of ihe Ministry was not acceptable to Audit as CNW stil! depicted some

villages instead of habitation as a unit of connectivity,

. In Karnataka, the district panchayat had not approved the DRRP of Sira
district.

: In Meghalaya, in district West Garo Hills, DRRP was not approved by the
ORDA whereas in East Garo Hills, evidence of approval by DRDA was not found,

’ In Mizoram, nodal department prepared the DRRP without approval of

district level authorities.

. In Telangana, there was no evidence of approval of DRRP from
intermediate panchayat, district panchayat and State Level Standing Committee.
The State Government replied (December, 2015) that since elected bodies did
“not exist at the time of preparation of DRRPs, Special Officers holding the charge
of elected bodies approved the DRRPs. The reply of the government was not
acceptable to Audit as the elected bodies were in existence between 2001 and
2011,


9 While furnishing their comments on the aforesaid audit observations, the Ministry
of Rural Development in their written replies submitted as under:

"As per guidelines, the DRRP and Core Network are to be approved by the
District Panchayat duly considering recommendations of public representatives
and the same will be approved by State Level Standing Committee. This process
has been followed by the States except in some cases where district panchayats
are not available. MoRD has verified the DRRP and Core Network of all States
on random basis. At present, all the States have updated their Core Network on
OMMAS. :
At present, all the States have reconciled thelr eligible number unconnected
habitations in consultation. with MoRD/NRRDA. However, certain States
represented that some eligible unconnected habitations were inadvertently
wrongly shown by them as connected in the original Core Network.

Also, necessary provision has been made on OMMAS to verify the Core Network
roads and mapped habitations on Core networks. Now proposals cannot be
finalized by the PIU, if the road is not a part of the Core Network and habitations
are not mapped on the same CNW road. Also, if the proposed length is more
than 50% of Core Network length, the State/PIU cannot finalize the proposal
without approval of Ministry/NRRDA.

Further, provision for generation of CNCPL with order of priority based on
population of habitations and CUPL based on population served and PCI has
been developed on OMMAS. State Governments have been asked to conduct
Pavement Condition index for all rural roads, once in every two years and
necessary advisory also issued to verify the Pavement Condition Index through
independent consultart/STA as a third party verification in order to ensure the
CUPL as per order of Priority mentioned in the PMGSY guidelines. STAs were
also advised to verify the CNCPL and CUPL at the time of scrutiny of DPRs.
These are also verified randomly at the time of scrutiny of proposals.

Ministry has recently initiated a pilot project through C-GARD of NIRD using
space technology for monitoring of PMGSY roads as well as ascertain the cost
effective, optimal alignment of executed PMGSY roads in 10 districts of 5 states
viz Rajasthan, Assam, Chhattisgarh, Qdisha and Telangana. The report of pilot
project is now available and the States have been asked to provide further details
wherever deviations are reported with respect to the sanctions.

CORE NETWORK

10. A Core Network (CNW) is a set of roads, extracted from the DRRP, to cover
targeted habitations with single all-weather road connectivity. In the identification of the
CNW, the priorities of elected public representatives are to be given full consideration.
The CNW shall be approved at all levels viz., Intermediate Panchayat, District
Panchayat and SLSC.


Deficiencies in Core Network

11. The records of the Ministry showed that the Core Network (CNW) of all the
States was fo be finalised by November 2005. The Ministry, further, in their Action
Taken Note informed (October 2008) the Public Accounts Committee (82" Report of
2008-09 to the Fourteenth Lok Sabha) that CNW had been finalised and tozen after
receiving revised data from states, According to the CNW finalized by States, a total of
1,72,772 eligible unconnected habitations were identified.

12. Audit observed that data discrepancies still existed in the CNW as the Ministry
modified (May 2012) the CNW and the number of eligible unconnected habitations due
to reconciliation of data was reduced from 1,72,772 to 1,868,268, Further, 32,798

habitations were deleted from CNW on account of non-teasibility. 14,369 habitations of
Bihar, Manipur and Rajasthan were added as their CNWs were based on revenue
village instead of habitation. In. addition to this, 6,000 habitations in 78 Tribal and

backward districts under the Integrated Action Plan (AP) in nine States were added as
these were earlier left out or wrongly shown as connected. For all these reasons, the
CNW was revised at 1,64,849 eligible unconnected habitations

13, The Ministry further included (February 2013) 13,209 habitations as these
habitations were not included eartier mainly due to inadequacies in surveys by the
Statés. This led to upward revision of number of eligible unconnected habitations to
1,78,184, The Ministry stated (April 2016) that the data of eligible uncennected
habitations within the States had again been reconciled: however the overall number
remained 1,78, 184. ,

14. It is, therefore, evident that the assessment of eligible unconnected habitations
based on Census 2001 was not frozen though informed by the Ministry to the PAC in
October 2008.

15. Test check of records further showed that in 19 States (Andhra Pradesh, Assam
Bihar, Gujarat, Hitnachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala
Manipur, Meghalaya, Odisha Rajasthan, Sikkim Telangana, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh
Uttarakhand and West Bengal), discrepancies such as unconnected habitations shown
as connected, eligible habitations not included, habitations placed in wrong population


size, showing emerging and tarmination point one and the same, variation in data of
CNW maintained by Pils, SRRDA and OMMAS, eic., were observed in preparation of
CNW

16, . Explaining the reasons for the abovesaid Audit observations, the Ministry of
“Rural Development in their written replies stated as under:

"Core Network of PMGSY was expected to be prepared considering habitation as
a unit based on Census 2001. Earlier, the States prepared their Core Network
based on Census data of 1990, factored with decadal growth rate and
considered it as population of 2001, as Census data was not available. Later on,
when the 20071 Census data was made available, the population of
villages/habitations was revised in the Core Network.

At different tines some of the States indicated that many of these habitations
were left out from inclusion in Core Network. Moreover, some of the States like
Bihar, Jharkhand, Rajasthan and Manipur etc indicated that, their Core Network
is based on revenue villages with population from Census 2001. Accordingly,
Ministry allowed such States to revise their Core Networks for including left-out
habitations as well as including habitations in place of Revenue Villages.
Further, the eligibitity criteria for unconnected habitations was 250 population and
above for hill States and Schedule V areas and later on number of LWEAAP
(88)/DDP districts were. also considered eligible with 250+ population. Also, the
unconnected habitations with population range of 100-249 in 267 LWE affected
blocks as identified by the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) became eligible under
PMGSY. This led to changes in number of eligible unconnecied habitations for
different States in different categories. Also, the number of sanctioned
habitations changed when the Core Network was revised fram Revenue Village
to Habitation.
Now the States have reconciled their eligible unconnected habitations categary-
wise on paper in consultation with MinistryNRRDA"

17, Elaborating on the steps contemplated to avoid such deficiencies in future, the
Ministry submitted: |

"Certain States had earlier prepared their DRRP and Core Network based on
revenue village as a unit (with population of Census 2001), instead of habitation
as a unit and certain eligible habitations were inadvertently left-out from the Core
Network. During the verification of Core Network and regional review meetings at
different point of time, these deficiencies emerged fram the States. At present, all
the States have reconciled their eligible number of unconnected habitations in
consultation with MoRD/NRRDA. However, certain States informed that some
eligible unconnected habitations were inadvertently wrongly shown as
connected, by them, in the original Core Network, With a view to fully reconcile
the status of connected habitations, the States have been asked to update the
connectivity status of habitations connacted through State Government funded
programmes on OMMAS as well.

All the States have updated their Core Network and DRRP on OMMAS.
Necessary provision has been made (as inbuilt systemic check), on OMMAS ta
verify the Core Network roads and mapped habitations on Core networks. Now


18.

WW

Proposals cannot be finalised by the PIU, if the road is not a part of the Core
Network and habitations are not Mapped on the same CRW road Also, if the
proposed length is more than 50% of Cora Network length, the State/PIU cannot
finalise the proposal without approval of Ministry/NRRDA,

Also, provision for generation of CNCPL with order of priority based on
population of habitations and CUPL based on population served and PCI has
been developed on OMMAS. State Governments have been asked to conduct
Pavement Condition Index for all rural roads, once in every two years and
necessary advisory also issued to verify the Pavement Condition Index through
independent consultanvSTA as:a third party verification in order to ensure the
CUPL as per order of Priority mentioned in the PMGSY guidelines. STAs were
also advised to verify the CNCPL and CUPL at the time of scrutiny of DPRs.
These are also verified randomly at the-time of scrutiny of proposals.

In respect of involvement of elected representatives in planning process,
necessary guidelines for consulting Hon'ble MPs and other elected
representatives in the rural road construction under PMGSY were again issued
by the Ministry vide circular No. No. P-17025/2/2014-RC dated 23.07.2015 and
31.07.2015. .

State Governments have been advised to prepare the GIS data base for Rural
Roads. In this regard various training programmes have been conducted by the
Ministry and MoU has been signed by the Ministry with Centre for Development
of Advanced Computing (CDAC)

The completion period of PMGSY works fixed as 12 months for plain States and
18 months for Hill States and it is 24 months if the road has a bridge work
exceeding 25 meter length. As per the Operation Manual of PMGSY the
cumulative frame for completion of tendering process is 86 days (120 days in
case of re-tendering). It is worth mentioning that, certain States were not in a
position to submit the proposals within the financial year. As per PMGSY
guidelines and decisions taken in the cabinet, unconnected habitations are to be
connected within the target period. Accordingly, proposals have been sanctioned
based on the executing capacity of the State Governments and considering the
tender finalization time period.”

Further, as regards the steps taken to ensure that deficiencies in DRRP/CNW

are removed by the States so that all eligible unconnected habitations are covered

under the programme, the Ministry stated as follows:

"States have reconciled their number of eligible unconnected habitations
category-wise to be covered under PMGSY and expected to freeze on OMMAS
as well. Necessary provisions have been made on OMMAS to verify the Core
Network roads and mapped eligible habitations on Core Networks. Now
proposals cannot be finalised by the PIU, if the 10980 is not a part of the Core
Network and habitations are not mapped on the same CNW road. Also,
habitations mapped ‘on éarlier sanctioned roads cannot be mapped on new
proposals by the PiUs and this will avoid to Proposing multi connectivity to a
habitation.

Following actions have been taken to rectify deficiencies in the OMMAS:


18

i, Rectification of deficiencies in already updated data (basic detail such as
habitations, Care Network, sanctioned proposals etc) by the Stales based on
reconciliation in hard copy and already sanctioned proposals

it, Selection of the proposals from DRRP, Core Network, length of road and
mapping of relevant habitations are verified by the system at the time of proposal
entry.

ii, Generation of road list for issuing the sanction from the proposal module
after scrutiny by STAs.

iv. OMMAS generated MPRs and reviews

Vv. All procurements are made through e tendering and all states are
following e tendering system from 2012.

vi. All payments through E-payment system only. 24 States are being
followed e payment system through OMMAS till October, 2016.

vil. Generation of annual balance sheet of the States from data entry in R&P
module.

viii, Similarly several other modules have been daveloped and put in place for
analysis and verification of data.”

19. On being asked about the reasons for such a long delay in revision of Core
Network by States and the action taken against those States, the Ministry stated that:

“In the initial years of PMGSY, provisions have not been made on OMMAS to
verify the data entered by the PIUs on the proposal module of OMMAS and
projects were sanctioned based on the manuai data provided by the State.
Verification of the particulars provided by the State in accordance with the
approved DRRP and Core Network was taken up on sample basis and States
were asked to update fhe data on OMMAS. However, as data being huge could
not be verified at the time due to limited organisational setup and limitations on IT
infrastructure, The sanction of roads was also not from OMMAS and manual
verification was difficult for large number of proposals.

Invalid data has been removed and necessary checks have been made in
OMMAS 2.0 and reliable MIS reports are generated through system. Majority of
MIS generated through system are most accurate and reliabie."

Non-approval of Core Network

20. In seven States (Andhra Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Kerala, Meghalaya,
Punjab, Tripura and Uttar Pradesh), CNWs were not approved in selected districts
either by intermediate Panchayat or District’ Panchayat and State Level Agency. Thus,
there was no grass root participation in the preparation of the CNW in these States.


19

Non-Participation by Local Elected Representatives

21 In two states (Andhra Pradesh and Jammu & Kashmir), local elected
representatives were not involved in preparation of CNW. In Arunachal Pradesh and
Meghalaya (three districts), records showing participation . of local elected
representatives were not furnished. In Jharkhand, the Executive Engineers concerned
Stated that no proposals were recaived from Members of Parliament or Members of the
State Legislature. The reply was not acceptable as audit observed that during revision
of CNW in 2010, in district Deoghar, proposals of 27 roads were received from MPs and
MLAs for inclusion in revised CNW. Only seven roads were included in the CNW
without recording any reason for leaving out the remaining 20 roads. In Tripura, there

was no evidence of involvement of local elected representatives in preparing the CNW,

22, On being asked as to why the procedure of bottom-up approach-in preparation
and approval of DRRP and CNW. and involvement of elected local public
fepresentatives was not adhered to, the Ministry of Rural Development in their replies
stated as under:

"PMGSY provides key role to the intermediate and District Panchayat for
consideration and approval of the Core Network including selection of roads. The
role of Intermediate Panchayai, District Panchayat and Hon'ble MPs are defined
in PMGSY Guidelines as well as PMGSY Operations Manual regarding
preparation of DRRP, Core Networks and formulation of annual Proposals, As
per guidelines, the DRRP and Core Network are to be approved by the District
Panchayat, Necessary guidelines for consulting Hon'ble MPs and other elected
representatives in the rural road construction under PMGSY were reiterated by
the Ministry vide circular No. P- 17025 /2 / 2014-RC dated 23.07.2015 and
31.07.2015. Now it has been ensured that all annual proposals received from the
States are considered by the Ministry, only if, they are accompanied by the
requisite certificate of consultation with the local elected public representatives.”

Non-integration of Geographical Information System System

23. The Public Accounts Committee (PAC) in their 72™ Report to the Fourteenth Lok
Sabha (2007-08) recommended that the Ministry should take necessary steps to cut
delays, reconcile data prepared at various levels and rectify other deficiencies 80 as to
ensure that accurate-and reliable data of unconnected habitations was available, The
Committee also recommended that a comprehensive Geographical Information System
(GIS) data base of Rural Roads Information System should be created for each state


20

which could be shared ai different levels and by different agencies involved in

construction and maintenance of rural roads

24. The Ministry in their Acton Taken Notes to (October 2008) the PAC (82 Report
to the Fourteenth Lok Sabha-2008-09) informed that they had initiated the development
of stand-alone and web based GIS database for Rural Roads Information System and
selected Rajasthan and Himachal Pradesh as pilot States. The system development
was entrusted to C-DAC and refined based on user feedback. In the meantime, all the
States had been advised to initiate steps to go in for GIS Database Management

System.

25. ‘it was observed that despite the assurance to the PAC, Ministry did not create
the web-based GIS database for Rural Roads information System. The Ministry stated
(April 2016) that a MoU was signed with C-DAC in October 2015 with time of completion
in two years from date of advance payment (February 2016). Thus, web-based GIS
database for Rural Roads Information System was still to be implemented despite

assurance given to PAC in 2008.

26, When the Committee sought to know about the status of creation of web based
GIS database for Rural Roads Information system in all the States, the Ministry
submitted as under:

"State Governments have been advised to prepare the GIS data base for Rural
Roads in collaboration with C-DAC who have been entrusted this work. In this
regard various training programmes have been conducted for State officials, by
the Ministry and MoU has been signed by the Ministry with CDAC. In first phase,
8 States would create GIS database by October, 2017."

Comprehensive New Connectivity Priority LisComprehensive Up-gradation
Priority List

27. Para 3.3.1 of the Operations Manual (OM) envisages that once the CNW is
ready, the States are required to prepare Comprehensive New Connectivity Priority List
(CNCPL), at block and district level of all proposed road links, grouping them in the
order of priority based on population size i.e., 1000+ habitations first, 500+ habitations
second and 250+ habitations fast. The programme guidelines provide that a
Comprehensive Upgradation Priority List (CUPL) is prepared in respect of those districts
where no new connectivity is required ta be done. The CUPL 18 10 be verified on sample


4a
basis through the State Technical Agencies (STA) and the National Quality Monitor
(NQM).

28. The CNCPL/CUPL shall be placed before the district panchayat for its approval,
The MP/MLA is to be given a copy of the CNCPL/CUPL and their suggestions and
suggestions of lower level panchayati Institutions shall be given the fullest consideration
by the district panchayat while according its approval.

29, Test chack of records by the Audit in the selected districts in the states disclosed
deficiencies in CNCPL/CUPL which are discussed below:

. ॥ 11 States (Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Manipur,
Meghalaya, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand), the
deficiencies such as inclusion of road projects both in CNCPL, and CUPL, exclusion of

road projects, inclusion of habitations below admissible population size, CNCPL having
mare eligible habitations than CNW, inclusion of already connected habitations in
CNCPL, inclusion of Through Routes in CNCPL, CUPL prepared without conducting
PC! survey, etc, were observed in CNCPL and CUPL. The Ministry while admitting the
facts stated that efforts are being made for removing the deficiencies.

: In six States {Arunachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Kerala (except Malappuram),
Manipur, Meghalaya (except West Garo hills) and Tripura}, evidence of
obtaining/considering suggestions and recommendations of elected representative viz.,
Members of Parliament, Members of the State Legislative Assembly and Panchayati
Raj Institutions was not on record. In Sikkim, the nodal department stated (November
2015) that records were misplaced by districts.

. In three States {Arunachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashrnir, Jharkhand (five
districts)}, CNCPL/CUPL were not approved by district panchayat. In Manipur and
Meghalaya (four districts), there was no evidence of approval of CNCPL and CUPL from
district panchayaDRDA. In Sikkim, the nodal department stated (November 2015) that

. records were misplaced by districts.

. In three States (Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka and Meghalaya), the CUPL was
not verified by STA and NQM. In Arunachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Manipur and Tamit
Nadu, there was no evidence of verification of CUPL from STA/NQM. In Uttar Pradesh,


22

the CUPL was verified by STA in only three out of 18 districts. However, the required
verification of CUPL by NQM was not done in any district. In West Bengal, none of the
five districts had any documents to indicate that STAs carried out any ground

verification of CUPL.

30. On being asked as fo whether the Ministry has taken up the matter with the
States to remove the deficiencies in CNCPL and CUPL lists, the Ministry stated:

"Provision for generation of CNCPL based on population and on order of priority
and CUPL based on Pavement Condition Index (PCI) has been developed on
OMMAS, The State Governments have been asked to conduct PC! surveys for
all rural roads evety two years. Necessary advisory has also issued to verify the
Pavement Condition Index through independent consultant/STA (third party
verification) to ensure that the CUPL is drawn as per order of Priority mentioned
in the PMGSY guidelines. State Technical Agencies (STAs) have also been
advised to verify the CNCPL. and CUPL at the time of scrutiny of DPRs."

Clearance of works in excess of allocation of funds

31. Para 4.4.1 of the OM stipulates that states may, each year, distribute the State’s
allocation among the districts giving at least 80 per cent for providing new connectivity and
up to 20 per cent for upgradation. The district wise allocation of funds will also be
communicated to the NRRDA and STAs in order to enable them to scrutinize the DPRs of the
district. Depending on the extent of new connectivity backlog, absorption capacity, position
of the ongoing works, etc., the State will be asked to prepare DPRs for upto twice the

allocation.

32. The Ministry initiated the process of making indicative annual allocation. of fund for
States since 2012-13 on the basis of overall budget allocation under the programme,
balance works in hand with the States, their execution capacity and unspent balance
available with them. The Ministry cleared proposals valued much more than indicative

allocations as depicted in the Charts given below:


Chart-3.2: Proposals cleared, works in har 7 and indicative allocation for 2042-13

Tincrove

506,00)
0.00 a ४
Andhra Jaramu &
Pradesh Kashmir Karnataka Maharashtra Punjab
sen 85,00 7 749,00 16.00 94.00
Works in hand 873.85 2160.18 41.72 $62.60 3 900.27
Proposals clearel 850.40 ॥7/452 6.00 1077 BY 11035 00

इठ%6 66

2000.00

7000.90

6000.00 F

5000,00

4000.00

3000.00

Zin crore

2000.09

000.00 |

0.00

= Harysna Kerata

tn | 285 था, 2 2० ० 1.00 | 2100. | age satan
AMoritS in.barich..._| 125 =i IRE B24 7 2292 BE 25 | 2954.58, —?R 7D 353.48 | 1399 २4. Une
Prposiecleared 132146 1.0008 | aspa.gal seszno.s vires Laser 6७ | sugar], pose | segz inl azz 7540 1 oags7 fae L



24

2.4: Proposals cleared, works 13 hand and indicative allocation for 2014-15

1000.00
900.00
800.00
700.00
600,00
500.00
400.00

10 ००1

300.00
260.00

100,00
0.00

t

———
700.00

ber in hand S06 38
Broposals cleared 246.89

33. The Ministry stated that it was 8 usual practice to do over-programming under
PMGSY and in order to achieve the objective of the programme, a large number of
clearances were given to various States. The reply is not acceptable as the quantum of
Ministry’s clearances ranged between 107 to 1,134 per cent in excess of guidelines.

34. On being asked as to why the propasals were cleared beyond the permissible
indicative fund allocation of the States, the Ministry of Rural Development replied as
under:

"The State Governments are required to submit Detailed Project Reports (DPRs)
along with the proposals of necessary cross drainage works/bridges to the
Ministry for consideration/approval of projects under PMGSY. The project
proposals are scrutinized by National Rural Roads Development Agency
NRRDA) to ensure that the proposals have been made duly keeping in view the
programme guidelines and that they have been duly verified by the State
Technical Agencies (STAs). The proposals of the State are then put up before
he Inter Ministerial Empowered Committee chaired by Secretary (RD) in the
Ministry of Rural Development, for its consideration. The proposals
recommended by the Inter Ministerial Empowered Committee and approved by
he Competent Authority are conveyed to the State Government to take further
necessary action before seeking funds. There have been some financial years
when the Budgetary Estimate (BE) of PMGSY was substantially reduced at the
Revised Estimate (RE) stage. The consideration and approval of the States
proposals was guided by the indicative allocation based on BE.



35,

25

For accelerated execution of PMGSY, the Ministry of Rural Development in
consultation with the Ministry of Finance and the State governments, has
formulated an Action Plan to achieve the target of the Scheme early, with
enhanced financial atocation to the States and modified funding pattern in the
Scheme. The fund sharing pattern of PMGSY has been made in the ratio of
80:40 between the Centre end States for all Siates except for 8 North Eastern
and 3 Himalayan States for which it will be 90:10. In view of the availability of
Substantial additional funds under the Scheme with the new funding pattern
between Centre and the State and enhanced allocation by the Government of
india, all the States have been asked to get approval for sanctions of balance
works under PMGSY as per the mandate of the Scheme by December, 2046 and
to substantially complete them by March, 2019, $0 as to provide connectivity to
target habitations."

The Committee further sought to know about the impact on the availability of

funds with the States where the proposais were cleared bayond the permissible

indicative fund allocation of the States. In this regard, the Ministry stated as follows:

36.

“it is difficult to clear proposals every year with their value restricted to the annual
allocation of the States and then expect the States to complete the projects well
within time. The pace of implementation of the scheme does get affected with
lesser release of funds. However, this has less to do with the fact that proposal
with value beyond fund allocated to the States were cleared and has been
affected more because of frequent and drastic budget cuts that PMGSY saw
during 2012-13 till 2014-45. Consequently, the annua! allocation for PMGSY was
lesser than what was approved as Gross Budgetary Support by Planning
Commission for the 12" Five Year Pian. PMGSY has received approx. है 70,076
crore (till the year 2016-17) against €1,05,000 crore approved by the Planning
Commission for the 12" Five Year Plan period (i.e. 2012-2017). Such a deficit
188 affected the pace of Implementation of the scheme.”

Upon asking about the action that has been taken by the Ministry to restrict the

clearance of proposals within permissible indicative fund allocation, the Ministry replied

that:

“The Ministry does keep the budgetary allocation of PMGSY in view, Due to
frequent budget cuts from 2012-13 till 2074-15 and the liability that PMGSY had
already generated by giving clearances during the past few years, the Minisiry
decided not to clear any new Projects during 2014-15 and substantial part of
2015-16. As a result, PMGSY gave no clearance to the States till Decernber
2015, after which the annual allocation was enhanced by Ministry of Finance and
a commitment to keep it at higher levels was also made. Keeping this
commitment in view, the Ministry has envisaged completing the objectives of
PMGSY by 2019, 3 years prior to the previous target of 2022,"


CHAPTER - 4: PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION

37, The Programme Implementation Units (PIUs) are required to prepare the detailed
project report (DPR) for each proposed read work in consultation with the local
community. The proposals of each state are to be considered by the Empowered
Committee of the Ministry and after their clearance, works should be tendered as per
Standard Bidding Document. The execution of work and management of the contract is
required to be done strictly as per condition of the contract. All PMGSY roads should be
covered under five year maintenance contract along with construction contract.

Maintenance funds are to be budgeted by the State governments.

Transect walks not organised

38. Programme guidelines prescribe that Programme Implementation Units (PIU) will
organise transect walk to discuss and finalize the issues relating to alternative
alignments, land requirements for the road and {ts Impact on land owners, etc., with the
members of the loca! community. A copy of the proceedings along with digital

photographs of the transect walk shall be attached with the finalised DPR.

39. la 17 States (Andhra Pradesh, Assam; Bihar, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu &

Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Meghalaya, Nagaland,

Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal), transect walk
was either not organised or required certificate/documents were not found attached with
DPRs.

40. Failure to implement this significant procedure at the time of project preparation
led to dropping or abandoning of works mid-way. due to land disputes, non- availabitity

of required land and other reasons.

41... 118 Ministry stated (April 2016) that the advisories regarding transect walk were
issued to the States. The reply is not acceptable as the Ministry has not taken sieps to

ensure that States mandatorily conduct transect walks.

42, Asked as to’ how the Ministry ensured that whether the important procedure of
transect walk has been carried out or not, the Ministry of Rural Development replied as

under:


“As part of PMGSY process, all States are required to include a simple, non-
formal “transect watk" to be organized by the Assistant Engineer along with
Panchayat Pradhan, 10091 patwari and Junior Engineer at ihe time of preparation
of Detailed Project Reports (011२9). Ministry has regularly pressed upon the
State Governments to carry out Transect Walk along the proposed alignment of
the road, Consultation of Key stakeholders and the jocal community at the time of
preparation of DPRs, as mandated in the Programme Guidelines vide circutar
No. P-17017/1/2010-RC dated 28.4.2011 & 27.7.2017 Ministry had also
amended its guideline vide circular No. P-17025/49/2011-RC dated 02.09.2014
directing all the States to include Women PRI members and representatives of
Women Self Help Groups (SHGs) in the transect walk at the time of preparation
of DPRs. All OPRs also mention the fact of transect walk having been taken and
append photographs of the same."

Works dropped/abondoned

43. In 12 States {Assam (5), Bihar (12), Gujarat (14), Jharkhand (23), Madhya
Pradesh (73), Meghalaya (2), Odisha (268), Telangana (20), Tripura (16), Uttar Pradesh
(13), Uttarakhand (56) and West Bengal (36)}, 538 works were not commenced and
were subsequently dropped or proposed to be dropped due to non-availability of fand or
land disputes, Besides this, 372 works in 11 States {Andhra Pradesh (1), Assam (22),
Chhattisgarh (1), Madhya Pradesh (2), Maharashtra (5), Meghalaya (1), Odisha (107),
Rajasthan (213), Telangana (4), Uttar Pradesh (7) and West Bengal (9)}, were
abandoned/proposed to be abandoned mid-way on similar grounds after incurring
expenditure of F 280.01 crore.

44, Further, in 13 States {Andhra Pradesh (27), Assam (2), Bihar (319), Gujarat (11),
darnmu & Kashmir (53), Jharkhand (278), Karnataka (19), Kerala (50), Madhya Pradesh
(253), Tripura (8), Uttar Pradesh (502), Uttarakhand (3) and West Bengal (25)}, 1,550
works were dropped of proposed to be dropped for the reasons such as works executed
under other State schemes, transfer of roads to other departments, deficient planning,
remote location to carry the material, works already sanctioned in earlier years, works

executed by other agencies, naxal problem, no response to the bid, ete.

45, — In Kerala, out of 503 works in hand as of March 2015, 56 works valued at ₹ 40.04
crore (which included works sanctioned from 2001-02 onwards) were identified as 'non-
feasible for execution’, ‘taken up by other agency’, etc., and proposed to be dropped
from the list of works in August 2015. Out of these 56 works, an expenditure of ३ 2.40

crore had already been incurred on 17 works rendered wasteful.


AG,

22

The Ministry replied (April 2016) that a circular was issued to states in November

2013 for recouping the amount incurred on dropped roads under the PMGSY. The reply

of the Ministry was not acceptable as the deficiencies in the preparation of DPRs

continued and no remedial action was taken to minimize the dropping of projects.
$

47.

On being enquired as to why the Ministry has failed to ensure availability of land

before commencement of construction of roads rather than abandoning the same

midway after spending crores of rupees, the Ministry replied as under:

48.

49.

"As per guidelines, tracking the land available, along the entire proposed
alignment, free from all encumbrances is the responsibility of the State
Government / District Panchayat for the proposed road works. A certificate that
land is available along the entire alignment is to be furnished by the State with
each DPRs to the Ministry. PMGSY does not provide funds for Land Acquisition.
The State Government lay down guidelines for voluntary donation, exchange or
other mechanisms to ensure availability of land. Ministry is closely monitoring the
projects which are pending for want of foresi/land clearance seeking pravide
status from all the States Governments. Regular meetings have been held with
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MOEF&CC) for expediting
he pending clearance. States have also been advised to pursue the local forest
department office for fast-tracking the approval of pending clearance for land
requirement of less than one-hectare for which special dispensation has been
given by MOEF&CC."

ntimating about the steps initiated to prevent the same, the Ministry stated:

"In order to avoid dropping of works at later stage, necessary guidelines have
een issued to the States that, the mew proposal will be considered only with the
‘ollowing documents appended with the proposals:-

i. Land availability certificate stating that the land required for the proposed
rojects will be made available, free from all encumbrances before the
commencement of the projects.

i. The projects proposed have not been funded or sanctioned ‘under any
other scheme/programme of the Central or State Government.

tii. Ten digital photographs of the Transect Walk and minutes of transect walk

meeting.

iv. Minutes of the Gram Sabha meeting held on culmination of Transect Walk
and having recommendations of Gram Sabha about the proposed alignment and
DPR,

v. Proof of consultations with the concerned Hon'ble Member of Parliament
and duly filled in forms MP1 and MP-2."

Asked about the steps taken to get the incomplete works completed on priority

basis, the Ministry submitted as under:

"The Ministry holds regular review meetings of all the States, region-wise in
which the incomplete and problematic works are thoroughly reviewed to expedite
the balance works on priority. Such works are also reviewed during the Pre-


he
ies

Empowered Cormmiliee and Empowered Committee Mestings in which the
further sanctions are linked with the complstion of such warks. The Ministry alse
issues periodical advisories to the States which have such incomplete works.

As a strategy to ensure completion of long pending PMGSY works, the Ministry
in collaboration with NRRDA has impressed upon the States to prepare PlU-wise
montti-wise completion plan for such pending PMGSY works. These completion
plans are then reviewed in Regional Review Meetings."

Tendering Process

Irreqularities in inviting tenders

50. According to para 11.1 of the programme guidelines, after the project proposals
have been cleared and technical sanction has been accorded the Executing Agency
would invite tenders.

51, In 11 States {Andhra Pradesh (35), Haryana (1), Himachal Pradesh (14), Jammu
& Kashmir (138), Jharkhand (38), Manipur (69), Meghalaya (58), Rajasthan (158),
Telangana (15), Tripura (4) and Uttarakhand (78)}, tenders for 608 works were invited
prior to their technical sanction by the competent authority,

52. According to provision 8.2 of the OM, in cases where variation between DPR and
technical sanction exceeds 10 per cent, prior approval of the NRRDA is required to be
sought before tendering the works. In six States fAssam (12), Himachal Pradesh (3),
Kerala (30), Tamil Nadu (183), ‘Telangana (1) and Tripura (4)}, despite variation ranging
from 11 to 500 per cent in 213 road works/packages, prior approval of the NRRDA was
not obtained before inviting tenders.

53. Further, as per para 7.11 of the OM, tendering process shall begin within 15 days
of getting approval of the praposals by the Ministry.

54. In nine States (Arunachal Pradesh (16), Jammu & Kashmir (161), Jharkhand
(94), Manipur (469), Meghalaya (85), Rajasthan (3767), Telangana (1), Uttar Pradesh
(132) and West Bengal (467)}, tenders for 5,172 works/packages, were invited with a
delay ranging between 2 to 971 days which in turn delayed the award and execution of
works.

55, On being asked about the action taken by the Ministry on the cases of
irregularities in tendering Process, the Ministry stated that:

"In cage the irregularities committed in tendering process are established to have
happened, the State Government Concerned are required to take necessary
action against the contractor /bidder as per the provisions of biding document
and impose penalties such as debarring the contractor from future bidding under


30

PMGSY and can also blacklist the contractor. In case the lapses are committed
on the part of Government oftciais, necessary disciplinary action Is io be taken
by the respective State Governments as per their conduct rule."

Non-recovery of mobilisation and equipment advance

56. As per para 9.4 of the OM, the contractor is required to mobilize men, material
and machinery within 10 days after the date of issue of the work order. Further, clause
45 of the General Conditions of Contract provides that the employer will make interest
free mobilisation advance (five per cent of the contract cost) and equiprnent advance
(up to 90 per cent of the cost) to the contractor, These advances shall be repaid by
deducting proportionate amounts from payments otherwise due to the contractor.
Guidelines of the Central Vigilance Commission (April 2007) provide that recovery of
interest free mobilisation advance shall be time-based and not linked to the progress of

work.

57. In five States {Assam ( 0.37 crore), Bihar (€ 0.50 crore), Himachal Pradesh (६
0.25 crore), Mizoram (% 0.30 crore) and Sikkim @& 0.38 crore)}, % 1.80 crore of
mobilisation and equipment advance in respect of eight road works/packages was not
recovered despite termination of contract/dropping of work.

58. In four States {Haryana (© 2.75 crore), Jammu & Kashmir & 0.44 crore),
Jharkhand (€ 1.51 crore) and Uttar Pradesh (© 4.76 crore)}, = 9.46 crore remained

unrecovered even after initial stipulated date of completion of work.

59. In Sikkim, 1750 works, mobilisation and machinery advance of ¢ 18.06 crore was
not recovered due to non-cammencement of works even after one to six years of their

sanction.

60. Audit also observed irregular grant of mobilisation and equipment advances as

given below:

61. In Rajasthan, PWD Circle, Dungarpur, under package RJ-14-WB-BN-12,
machinery advance of हैं 9.44 crore was given for the machinery hypothecated io a

private bank.

62. In Uttarakhand, in 16 cases, mobilisation advance of 7 4.91 crore was provided in

excess of maximum ceiling of five per cent of the initia! contract prices. Bank guarantee


31

was not obtained from the contractor against mobillsation advance of = 0.66 crore in two
cases and equipment advance of £0.64 crore in one case, Further, in one case, invoice
of machine purchased was not obtained for equipment advance of ¥ 0.58 crore, Thus,

undue benefits were extended to the contractors in the above cases.

63.  Apprising the Committee about the recovery of mobilization and equipment
advances where the contracts had been terminated, the Ministry submitted:

"The matter is regularly reviewed and taken up with the States during pre-EC, EC
and RRMs. The status is also monitored at the time of submission of Annual
Audit reports to the various SRRDA. There is an effort to reduce such advances
at the earliest. States have been time and again asked for recovery of
mobilization and equipment advances.”

Works shown as completed without ut complete connectivity to targeted habitations

64. The intended benefit of the programme can only be achieved if the targeted

habitations are provided complete connectivity through an all-weather road,

65. In seven States (Bihar, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Tami Nadu,
Tripura and West Bengal), 73 road works were executed and shown as completed
without providing complete connectivity to the targeted habitations due 0 non-
availability of required land, non-clearance by railways, non-construction of required

bridges, etc. Out of this, 72 1080 works were executed at a cast of F 120.03 crore.

66 When asked about the action taken on the abovesaid cases, where works were
shown completed without providing complete connectivity to the targeted habitations the
Ministry replied that: ह

"The Ministry of Rurat Development has engaged Centre for Geo-informatics
Application in Rural Development (CGARD) of National Institute o Rural
Development & Panchayati Raj, Hyderabad to use Space Technology in the
monitoring of PMGSY works on sample basis (5 States, 10 districts). Based on
the outcome of the Report, the Ministry has decided to universalize the scheme
in all the States/districts."

Multiple connectivity of habitations

767, 7 Para"3.10 Of programme quidelines envisage that only single road connectivity
will be provided to eligible unconnected habitations. if a habitation is already connected
by way of an all weather road, then no new work can be taken up under the PMGSY for
that habitation


2

can

68. Audit found that in nine States (Arunachal Pradesh, Gujarat, Jammu & Kashmir,
Jharkhand, Karnataka, Nagaland, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal, 36
habitations were provided with more than one connectivity. Out of this, 31 habitations

were provided multiple connectivity ai a cost of € 29.49 crore.

69, As regards the action taken on cases where multi-connectivity had been provided
to the habitations under the scheme, the Ministry submitted that:

“The State Governments are required to submit Detailed Project Reports (DPRs)
to the Ministry after following due procedures as per the programme guidelines
for consideration/approval of projects under PMGSY. The project proposals are
duly vetted by the State Technical Agencies (STAs) before being sent to National
Rural Roads Development Agency (NRRDA), Government of India for scrutiny to
ensure that the proposals have been made keeping in view the programme
guidelines. If any case comes to the notice of the Ministry where multiple
connectivity has been provided to the habitation, the concerned State
Government is asked to conduct enquiry of the road through a team of State
Quality Monitors (SQM) and share the report with the Ministry. Based on the
findings of the report, State is required fo take appropriate action against the
erring officials. State is also expected to bear the cost of the road from its own
fund and the same is adjusted in the further releases to be made to the State."

Release and utilisation of maintenance fund

70. According to para 17 of the guidelines, State governments are required to
undertake the maintenance of the entire CNW and develop sustainable sources of

funding for undertaking the maintenance functions.

71. It was seen that details of maintenance fund collected from State governments
- showed variations in the figures of release and expenditure as compared to-the figures

maintained by the NRRDA, Details in this regard are given below:


33

Variation in figures of release and utilisation of maintenance fund

(@ in crore)

=
tod 25

Pradesh

hal Pradesh

at [ tae 291.4 ae :

Haryana

Jharkhand
Manipur

Punjab

है Rajasthan |

“Sikkim

Tamil Nac Nady

“Tipura |

Uitarakhand.
.. Bengal |.

[ 22501 |

72. Information provided by NRRDA showed that 27 States released २ 3,018.10
crore in maintenance fund from 2010-11 te 2014-15 as against requirement of =
3,279.97 crore. It reveals from the above figures that in three States (Bihar, Haryana
and Punjab) short release was more than 40 per cent of the fund required for
maintenance, States as a whole utilized 66 per cent of the requirements during this
period. However, in’ seven States (Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Haryana, Himachal
Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand and Tripura), tess than 50 per cant of the fund
required was used. The audit observation was confirmed by NQMs who found that out


34

of 7,144 road works, 1,370 works were not maintained at all and 3,095 works were
poorly maintained.

73 Thus, inadequate provision towards maintenance besides its poor utilisation
defeated the purpose of creating institutional measures io ensure systematic
maintenance. Non/poor maintenance of the roads may be evident from the photographs

taken during joint physical verification.

74. When asked as to how the Ministry ensure that the States provide funds for the
crucial maintenance of the roads constructed under PMGSY, the Ministry of Rurat
Development in their written submission stated as under:

“As per PMGSY Programme Guidelines, all PMGSY roads are covered by 5-year
maintenance contracts, to be entered into along with the construction contract,
with the same contractor, in accordance with the Standard Bidding Document
(SBD), Maintenance Funds to service the contract will be budgeted by the State
Government (as committed by the States at the time of getting sanctions from
Ministry) and placed at the disposal of the State Rural Roads Development
Agency (SRRDA) in a separate maintenance account.

Various advisories to the States have been issued regarding maintenance.
States have been requasted to conduct Pavement Gondition Index (PCI) Survey
for prioritization of roads for upgradation and maintenance. The PCI survey is to
be repeated every two years, States have been requested to regularly monitor
the release of requisite funds required for maintenance and utilization of funds by
SRRDA. During Regional Review Meetings and Empowered Committee
Meetings, State Governments are being requested to ensure proper
maintenance and upkeep of PMGSY roads and full utilization of maintenance
funds, States have also been requested for having a dedicated Rural Road
Maintenance Policy. So far, 14 States i.e. Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Uttar
Pradesh, Punjab, Rajasthan, Bihar, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,
Tamil Nadu, Assam, Meghalaya, West Benga! and Haryana have formulated
their State Rural Roads Maintenance Policy. Balance States are being regularly
requested during various meetings to formulate and notify Maintenance Policy.

Simplified rural road maintenance contracting has been piloted in various States.
For example, performance based maintenance contracts have been
implemented in Madhya Pradesh, Assam, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and
community based maintenance contracts have been implemented in
Uttarakhand, Punjab and Meghalaya.”

CHAPTER - ४ - FUND MANAGEMENT

75. The Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) is a 100 per cent Centrally
Sponsored Scheme and PMGSY-!I (launched in May 2013) is on cost sharing basis

between the Centre and states in the ratio of 75:25 in normal areas and 90:10 in special


areas. Til 2013-14, Government of India released funds directly to the State Rural Road

Develapment Agency (SRRDA). Hawever, from 2014-15 onwards, funds are routed

through the Consolidated Fund of State and the State governments are required to

transfer these funds to SRRDA within three working days cf receint of funds.

Financial Progress

76, During 2010-14 to 2014-15, year-wise provision, release and utilisation of funds are

as under:

(Zin crore)

“Budget ॥ Release

Budget Revised

Estimates | Estimates

Utilisation

12,000. पिओ 20,366.04

| 4810. | शक

20,000 mer] me 15,809.40[- 3,832.50 ne

[eee | ** 3,624.87 [“

pps 4,388.93 er 8,864.00

eel. 4546.17 | 12,931 92

| शतक | -s.8023 [ 4aaa 4 9.804.975)

| 5908520 4410.54 [/17.50560

"44,301 fa] aes oe " °

16,538.35 |“ 4227.03

92.031 | 74,766 | 56,864.10 i

uw i also included expenditure from state share and
interest earned, £ : for repayment of lean and interest thereon,

“63,877.78 | 18,000.32 pe

: Excess release was due to tappropriation of funds from. saving of other schames to

§
PMGSY. However, this was not incorporated in the figures of Revised Estimates,


36

It was evident from the above ihat during 2010-12, States did not fully utilize the Central

assistance which led to its reduction during 2012.14. The Ministry aitributed the huge

eduction at revised estimate stages during 2012-13-and 2013-14 mainly, due to availability

of huge unspent balances with the States and slow pace of implementation of the

programme,

77.

Elaborating further on this aspeci, the Ministry submitted as under:

“During the year 2013-14, the States were having sufficient funds owing to interest
accrued on programme funds released by the Ministry. This lead to budget cut of
PMGSY at Revised Estimate Siage thereby leading fo reductions in annual
allocation to the States. Overall allocation of PMGSY at 5.2. stage during 2013-14
was 7 21,700 crore which was reduced to ¥ 9700 crore (excluding % 3050 crore of
interest accrued) at R.E. Stage. Following this the overall allocation of PMGSY for
the year 2014-15 was reduced to २ 14,391 crore which was further reduced at R.E.
Stage to 14,200 crore. The reduced allocations and increase absorption capacity
lead the States into fund starved conditions and the pace of implementation of the
scheme got affected. Due to this, Ministry of Rural Development demanded for
additional allocation during 2015-16 which was acceded to by Ministry of Finance
and the overall allocation of PMGSY for the year 2015-16 was increased from हैं
14,291 crore to 18,291 crore. Also, a changed funding pattern helped in putting the
scheme back on track with enhanced pace of implementation.”

Physical Progress.

78,

The physical progress during last five years 18 given as under:

Length (kr)

Achievernent of physical targets during the last five years was more than target.
This indicated that targets were not realistically fixed. The Ministry stated (April
20168) that allocations had beeh changed sibstantially from budget estimate to
revised estimate but the corresponding physical targets remained the samme. The
reply was not relevant as despite Jower allocation, achievement was still higher as
compared to targets.


3?

72. The Committee desired to know as to how the Ministry monitor the Siates to
meet their annual financial and physical largeis. In rasponse, the Ministry submitted as
under:

"The Mitisiry conducts tégular regional review meetings to moniter these targets
of the States, These matters are also raised in Empowered committee meeting
before clearing new projects to the States. Physical performances are also kept
in view for deciding the annual allocations of the States every year. Also, funds
during a year are released on the basis of utilization of funds by the State which
is reported through Utilization Certificates. States need to ensure 60% utilization
of funds available with them for becoming eligible to receive further funds."

Shortcomings in re! in release of funds to States

80. The funds to the States are released in two equal instalments. While the first
instalment is released at 50 per cent of the cleared value of Projects (ar annual
allocation, whichever is lower), the release of second instalment is subject to utilisation
of 60 per cent of the available funds and completion of at least 80 per cent of the road
works awarded in the year previous to the preceding year and 100 per cent of the
awarded works of all the years Preceding that year and submission of the required
documents.

81... Audit observed instances of non/short/delayed release of funds to the States.
The Ministry attributed (February 2016) these to non availability of funds, non/late
submission of docurnents by the States, non-fulfillment of the conditions laid down for

release of second instalment by the States and slow progress of road works.

82. The Ministry accepted (April 2016) the fact of short release and replied that
works sanctioned to the States were two to three times their allocation resulting in
spillover to subsequent years anid reduction in the allocations in the revised estimate

stage,

83... Explaining the reasons for non-release/delay in release of funds to the Staies,
the Ministry stated as under:

“Funds under PMGSY are released on the basis of certain documents, as
specified in the guidelines and as intimated from time to time by the Ministry, that
the States are-required to submit along with their demand/proposal for release of
funds. These'docurnents are then submitted for scrutiny to Integrated Finance
Division (JFD) of the Ministry. At times, IED raises certain issues that the States
have to clarify before the proposal of release can be concurred, This process at
times leads to delays,


3B

Ministry has put a lot of efforts in streamlining the process of release. From the
year 2015-16, the Ministry nas started to release Vote on Account allocation ot
PMGSY without obtaining any documents from States to ensure smooth
functioning at the onset of financial year. Further releases during the year are
made on the basis of 60% utilization of funds by the States and only after
documents proving the same are submitted fo the Ministry along with. certain
other mandatory requirements, the funds are released to the Consolidated Fund
of the State with the directions to release this fund to the bank account of State
Rural Road Development Agency (SRRDA) within three working days."

Delay in transfer of funds by State Governments

84. As per the programme guidelines (as modified from time to time), from 2014-15
onwards, funds are released to the State Consolidated Fund with directions to transfer
these funds to SRRDA's account within three days from the date of its receipt failing
which the State government is liable to pay interest at 12 per cent per annum for the
period of delay beyond the specified period.

85. Audit observed that in 11 States (Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam,
Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Punjab, Rajasthan and
Uttarakhand), funds amounting to % 2,693.89 crore released during 2014-15 were
transferred to the SRRDAs with delays ranging from 7 to 202 days. As a result, the
States were liable to pay interest of हैं 50.37 crore to the SRRDAs. In three States
(Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal ‘Pradesh and Karnataka), funds amounting to & 89.32
crore, received during 2014-15, were not transferred to the respective SRRDAs as of
May/September 2015.

86. The Ministry accepted (April 2016) the fact of delays in release of funds to
SRRDAs and replied that after the rigorous intervention of the Ministry, the delay was

being reduced considerably.

87.  Apprising the Committee about the monitoring mechanism in the Ministry to
watch delayed release of funds by the States to implementing agencies, the Ministry
submitted that:

"The Ministry allocates funds to the States out of the overall budgetary allocation
of PMGSY.. Further, division of these funds among the districts/Programme
Implementation Units (2109) at their own discretion as implementation of the
scheme is the responsibility of the State Government. Monitoring of funds divided
among the PiUs is therefore not done by the Ministry. The broad monitoring of


39

funds utilization by the States is done during the Regional Review Meetings
(RRMs) and the Inter M =-Mpowered Comrnittee meetings.

88. On being asked as to whether the Ministry has asked the States to pay interest
for delay in transfer of programme funds ta SRRDA, the Ministry replied as under:

"Prior to the year 2014-15, the Ministry used to release funds directly to the
SRRDAs In respective States. However, on the directions of Ministry of Finance,
the funds released under alt the Centrally Sponsored Schemes were directed to
be routed through the State Governments to the beneficiaries. Therefore, since
then the funds under PMGSY are first released 10 the State Government with a
request to release it further fo SRRDA within a period of 3 days. Further, the
State is directed that in case of non-transfer beyond the stipulated period, the
Ministry may consider ceasing further releases to the State. Besides, the State
Government is also liable to pay interest @12% per annum for the period of
delay beyond the specified period to SRRDA.”

89. In eight States (Haryana (रे 0.02 crore), Karnataka (सै 3.48 crore), Keraia ( 2.74
crore), Mizoram (₹ 1.33 crore), Sikkim (€ 3.83 crore), Tamil Nadu (%.5.66 crore), Uttar
Pradesh (© 4.64 crore) and Uttarakhand (₹ 3.45 crore)}, programme fund of ₹ 25.15
crore was diverted towards maintenance fund, administrative expenses fund, activities
such as testing of material, State government schemes, salary and wages and
transportation of soil, plantation, restoration of damaged properties, ete., which were not

covered under the programme.

80. In two States {Rajasthan (है 1.50 crore) and Uttar Pradesh (€ 0.02 crore}, 74.52
crore was utilized for land acquisition from the PMGSY funds in violation of the

programme guidalines.

$1. In five States {Kerala (र 7.25 crore), Manipur (@ 0.42 crore), Tamil Nadu 0.44
crore), Tripura (€ 2.54 crore) and Uttarakhand (2 1,13 crore)}, adrninistrative funds of =
11.78 crore were diverted towards inadmissible iterns such as purchase of vehicles,

payment of salaries and wages and purchase or construction of buildings, etc.

82. On being asked as to how the Ministry ensure that funds released for specific
purpose are not diverted, the Ministry stated that NRRDA has got a separate division
which examines the Audit reports received on yearly basis from the States. The
discrepancies found are then raised for rectification with the States.


ag

93. Upon asking about the action taken by the Minisiry to ensure ihat Siaie
Governments recoup the programme funds diverted for the purpose not covered under
the programme guidelines, the Ministry Stated:

"This is monitored regularly by analysis of the annual audit reports submitted by
all the States to NRRDA and the Ministry. The issue of timely recoupment of
temporary diversions 5 also reviewed in RRMs and Inter Ministerial Empowered
Committee meetings. This issue 18 also reviewed at the time of release of funds
to the States." है

CHAPTER - 6: QUALITY CONTROL, MC MONITORING AND EVALUATION

94, Audit pointed out that quality and monitoring contro! mechanisms were deficient
in all the tiers of PMGSY. Field laboratories were either not set up or inadequately
equipped at work execution sites. Inspections of roads at prescribed stages were not
conducted. Action Taken Reports on the rectification of defects painted out by the State
Quality Monitors and National Quality Monitors were pending. Joint inspections with
elected representatives were not conducted, Performance Evaluation Committee
meetings to evaluate the performance of the National Quality Monitors were not held at
prescribed intervals. State Level Standing Committee meetings to monitor progress of
ongoing works, quality cantrol, budgeting of maintenance fund, ete were not held
regularly. The concept of social audit was not ingorporated in the programme
guidelines.

95. Submitting their justification in regard to above said Audit observations, the
Ministry stated as follows:

“Mandatory establishment of field laboratories by the contractor is a contractual
provision under PMGSY contracts. With a view fo closely monitor the status of
establishment of field laboratory, a provision has been made in OMMAS wherein
the PIU is required to upload the geo-referenced photograph of the field lab
established by the contractor for the package along with the date of
establishment of the field lab.

As regards, inspection of SQMs as per guidelines, in most of the States, required
number of inspections is being carried out at different stages. In some States,
short fall has been reported due to various reasons Including that of shortage of
technical personnel. In order to address the issue, the States have been advised
to engage outsourcing agencies for discharging the functions of State Quality
Monitor (SQM) inspections, increase the number of SQMs, The use of mobile
application for quality reporting of works by SQMs have been made mandatory
and various MIS reports have been developed in OMMAS to monitor the road-
wise SQM inspections. The status in this regard is clasely monitored by


96.
systemic flaws in the quality control system to address deficiencies, the Minis ry
submitted as follows:

respeciive States and Ministry through various review meetings held from time to
ime.

With a view to initiate the corrective actions (ATRs) on SQM/NQM observations
immediately upon inspection, the NQM/SQM are required to handover inspection
report to the PIU immediately after completion of inspection. The time taken to
furnish the Action Taken Report by PIU depends upon the nature of defects
ointed cut by the SQM/NOMs in their reports. In majority of the cases, the
Action Taken Report is furnished within the stipulated time period. However, in
few cases the defects remain unaddressed for a longer period due to reasons
such as termination of contract, litigation and pending forest clearance issues
etc, which at times are beyond the control of PIU.

Further, an e-governance initiative to fast track the submission of Action Taken
Reports (ATRs) and communication of decisions taken thereon has been taken,
The submission of ATRs is not in a-manual form but has been moved to the MIS
platform i.e. OMMAS. The States are now required to submit the ATRs “online”
and acceptance/rejection/clarification on these ATRs is also communicated to the
State “online”. This has reduced considerably the time taken in this exercise. The
status of pendency is closely monitored by the State and the Ministry.

PMGSY Guidelines clearly mandate for joint inspection of PMGSY works by the
officials of SRRDA/PIUs and elected representatives (MPs, MLAs and Village
Sarpanch) in order to strengthen the quality monitoring mechanism, Ministry has
regularly advised the State Government (latest circular dated 25" July, 2016) to
adopt this system and issue suitable instructions to their field agencies to ensura
that joint inspection of PMGSY works with public representatives are regularly
carried out. With a view to enable the States and the Ministry to ensure that
these joint inspections are periodically carried out and the necessary follow-up
action on these 18 taken, a data repository module has been developed recently
in OMMAS where the details of joint inspection carried are updated by the
concerned PIUs along with photographs, Necessary instructions have also been
given to ail the State Governments vide Ministry's letter No. R-13015/3/2016-P-
Ui dated 168.2016,

The initial system of independent Performance Evaluation of the NQMs was
framed in year 2006 and was firrned up in the year 2007 which required that the
meeting of the Performance Evaluation Committee be held at every six months
The periodicity of PEC Meeting could not be Maintained as envisaged in the PEC
guidelines in initial years. However, now the same is being done on the
prescribed basis. The fast three meetings have been held on पद - 167
May,2014, I*.4" September 2015 and 297.31४ August, 2016,"

On being asked as to whether any review has been undertaken to find the

"Periodic reviews. with all the States on quality issues are undertaken by the
Ministry from time to time. In these periodic reviews, deficiencies observed in
quality control mechanism, based on SQM/NQM observations, are brought to the
notice of concerned States. in order to assist the States to identify and address
the systemic issues, reports have been developed in programme MIS ie,
OMMAS. Based on the observations of quality monitors, issues like unsuitabla
sub-grade soil, non-conforming grading of base and sub-base course material,



42

inadequate compaction etc. have been observed in a few cases which are
rectified by the respective PIUs.

To strengthen the quality contro! system, the Ministry and NRRDA has initiated
following steps:

i Mobile app has been developed fo facilitate easier upload of
georeferenced, stamped & date stamped photos of labs established by
contractor for each package of PMGSY roads. This has left to higher number of
such lab photos being uploaded on OMMAS and higher degree of compliance.

ii. Regular orientation trainings of State Quality Monitors (SQMs) are done at
State level, NRRDA separately trains the SQMs on use of Mobile apps to upload
their inspection report on OMMAS. This reduces delay and promote
transparency.

ili. NQMs are also trained by NRRDA at Indian Academy of Highway
Engineers (IAHE) to equip them to council and handhold the field engineers to
ensure better quality standards in execution of work.

iv. Separate trainings on quality issues are organised for field engineers from
all States at IAHE, Central Road Research Institute (CRRI), State Technical
Agencies, which are either IITs or NITs.

v. The Action Taken Reports (ATRs) submitted by States on NQM reports
are carefully monitored by NRRDA. Some of the ATRs after due consideration
are not accepted and such portions of roads are characterised as suffering from
“Non rectifiable defects’ and commensurate money is recovered from the
contracting agency/State Government.

Experience gained during the last 15 years implementing the programme, it has
emerged that the quality contro! system is functioning well and many States have
adopted similar quality monitoring structure for their State Funded Rural Road
Schemes and also for those rural roads schemes which have been directly
funded by World Bank in the State." ह

State Level standing Committee

97. According to Para 2.4 of the OM, a State Level Standing Committee (SLSC) shall
be set up preferably under the chairmanship of tha Chief Secretary for quarterly review
of progress of works, quality control, capacity enhancement, land availability, budgeting

of maintenance fund, etc.

$8. In 10 States (Arunachal Pradesh, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu &
Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala, Meghalaya, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand),
SLSC meetings were not held regularly thereby defeating the effective monitoring of the

programme.

99. When asked as to why the State Level Standing Committee meetings were not

held regularly and as to how in the absence of such meetings, the Ministry monitor the


43

Progress of ongoing works, quality control, budgeting of maintenance fund etc, the
Ministry replied as under:

"The States are holding SLSC meetings based on the requirement of sending
annual proposals to the Ministry.
The Ministry regularly monitors the progress of ongoing works, quality control,
budgeting of maintenance fund through various channels systernatically built in
the programme structure of PMGSY. For example, OMMAS provides real time
updates on each State's physical progress, Regional Review Meetings (RRMs),
which are held for two days, twice a year for regional cluster of States, provide a
platform for reviewing physical and financial progress. There is also provision for
three-tier quality control mechanism and Empowered Committee Meetings. The
State Governments are required to submit Detailed Project Reports (OPRs) to
the Ministry for consideration/approval of projects under PMGSY, The project
proposals are scrutinized by National Rural Roads Development Agency
(NRRDA) to ensure that the proposals are in accordance with the pregramme
guidelines and duly verified by the State Technical Agencies (STAs). These
proposals are examined for consideration by the Empowered Committee chaired
by Secretary (RD) in the Ministry of Rural Development. The proposals approved
by the Competent Authority are conveyed to the State Government to take
further necessary action before seeking funds.
Ministry regularly conducts Regional Review Meetings (RRMs) with the nodal
department of the State governments, as a measure to monitor the progress and
for effective implementation of PMGSY scheme in the States These RRMs also
provides a platform for better co-ordination between Centre and State for
monitoring of ongaing works, quality inspection and budgeting maintenance fund.
For effective monitoring of roads constructed under PMGSY, programme
guidelines also envisages a three tier Quality Assurance Mechanism to ensure
quality of road works during construction. First-tier of this mechanism is in-house
quality control at Programme [Implementation Unit (PIU) level. Second-tier is
structured as an independent quality Monitoring at State level through State
Quality Monitors (SQMs) in which provision of regular inspection of PMGSY
works has been envisaged. The third-tier is an independent monitoring
mechanism at the Central level. Under this tier, independent National Quality
Monitors (NQMs) are engaged for inspections of PMGSY toads, selected at
random. Action Taken Reports of the road works graded as Satisfactory
Requiring Improvement (SRI) and Unsatisfactory (U) by the State Quality
Monitors are monitored by the respective State Governments. Similarly, for
works graded as Satisfactory Requiring Improvement (SRI) and Unsatisfactory
(U) on the basis of observations of National Quality Monitors, Action Taken
Reports are monitored and processed by National Rural Roads Development
Agency (NRRDA)}.
The quality monitors (State as weil as National) report about the quality of the
works in a standardized format. Based on the inspections, the works are
| Categorized as ‘Satisfactory’ (8), ‘Satisfactory Requiring improvement’ (SRI) and
‘Unsatisfactory’ (U). Roads with non-structural defacts are categorized as
‘Satisfactory Requiring Improvement’ and that of with structural defects as
‘Unsatisfactory. Based on the reports of the quality monitors, the State
governments carry out necessary rectification in the road works."


Second tier quality control mecha!

Shortfall in inspections by SOMs

4100, Para 11.5.7 of the OM envisages that State Quality Coordinator (SQC) draw up
inspections in such a way that every work is inspected at least three times. The first two
inspections of every work should be carried out during the execution of work spaced at
least three months apart and the fast inspection should be carried out on the completion
of every work, within one month of its completion. The schedule should be monthly,

specifying Block and preferably the road, so as to ensure systematic coverage.

101. Analysis of the OMMAS data showed that SQMs carried cut Inspections for
51,521 road works during 2010-15 in 29 States. Out of these, 1,677 road works (3.24
per cent) were not inspected even once. 26,691 road works (61.81 per cent) were
inspected only once. Audit also observed that some of the road works were inspected
moré than 10 times as detailed below:

. in Andhra Pradesh, 48 road works were not inspected whereas seven road
works were inspected 10 to 18 times.

* In Assam, 124 road works were not inspected whereas four road works were
inspected 10 to 13 times.

. in Gujarat, 47 road works were Aot inspected whereas 21 road works were
inspected 10 to 26 times. ,

न In Madhya Pradesh, nine road works inspected 10 to 16 times, whereas 193 road
works were never inspected.

. In Maharashtra, 77 road works were not inspected whereas five road works were

inspected 10 to 11 times.

402. It is therefore, evident that SQMs did not carry out the prescribed inspections

uniformly.

403. NRRDA accepted the facts and stated that one of the reasons for the shorifall in
SQM inspections relate to shortage of trained manpower with inadequate domain
knowledge. As regards the exceptionally large number of SQM inspections for a
particular work, this needed verification from the States. One of the reasons could be


45

the multiple entries of the same roads by novice SQMs while trying to upload the quatity

grading in OMMAS through Mobile Application

104. Infermation obtained from the States also showed that the prescribed three

inspections were not carried out in 24 States,

105. When asked as to why the SQMs were not conducting required inspections at all
prescribed stages, the Ministry stated that:

“In most of the States, required number of inspections is being carried out by
SQMs at defined stages. In some States, short fall has been reported due to
various reasons including that of shortage of technical personal. In order to
address the issue, the States have been advised to engage outsourcing
agencies for State Quality Monitor (SQM) inspections, increase the number of
SQMs and use the mobile application developed by NRRDA for such
inspections."

105. The Committee asked as to whether the Ministry has put any mechanism to
ensure that the SQMs carried out required inspections of roads at all Prescribed rates.

In response, the Ministry replied:

"In order to ensure that each work is inspected at defined stages, a provision has
been made in OMMAS, wherein, the State / NRRDA monitors the SQM
inspection history of each work. The States during the Regional Review Meetings
and Pre-Empowered-Committea Meetings are required to explain the reasons for
fal in SQM inspection, 7 any. Further, NRRDA has set annual/monthly targets for
each State, for SQM inspections and communicated in the beginning of financial
year. The progress in SQM inspections is also monitored by NRRDA on monthly
basis and the matter is taken up with the States lagging in achieving the target,"

Non-conduct of joint inspection of joint inspection

107, Para 18.10 of the programme guidelines provides that Joint inspection of the
PMGSY works shall be fixed by engineering staff as per the convenience of elected
public representatives, once in six months with Member of Parliament and Zilla
Pramukh, once in three months with Member of Legislative Assembly and Chairperson
of Mandals concerned and once in two months with Sarpanch of Gram Panchayat

concerned,

4108. In 17 States (Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Himachal
Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Meghalaya, Mizoram,
Odisha, Punjab, Sikkim, Telangana, Utlar Pradesh and Uttarakhand), joint inspections
of the PMGSY road works with the public representatives were not carried out.


46

109. The Ministry stated that as a follow-up of provision of Joint inspection, a Cirowar

No. 10/2014 dated 28 July 2011 requesting the State government to ensure joint
inspections of field functionaries with public representatives was issued. This has also
been insisted at various fora including Regional Review Meetings (Apri 2016). It is

evident however, that the instructions of ihe Ministry were not followed.

410. The Committee sought to know as to why the joint inspections with the elected
public representatives were not fixed and carried out. In response, the Ministry replied:

"PMGSY Guidelines clearly mandates for joint inspection of PMGSY works by
the officials of SRRDA/PIUs and elected representatives (MPs, MLAs and Village
sarpanch) in order to strengthen the quality monitoring mechanism. Ministry has
regularly advised the State Government (latest circular dated 25th July,2016) to
adopt this system and issue suitable instructions to their field agencies to ensure
that joint inspection of PMGSY works with public representatives are regularly
carried out. With a view to enable the States and the Ministry to ensure that
these joint inspections are periodically carried out and the necessary follow-up
action on these is taken, a data repository module has been developed recently
in OMMAS where the details of joint inspection carried could be updated by the
concerned PiUs, Necessary instructions have also been given to all the State
Governments vide Ministry's letter No. R-13015/3/2016-P-IIl dated 16.8.2016,"

Delay in submission of ATRs

411. “As per para 11.6.3 of the OM, on completion of inspection by NQM, PIU shail
furnish Action Taken Report (ATR) to SQC after a period of one month of inspection by
NQM. The compilation of ATRs will be carried out by SQC for submission to NRRDA
within one month of receipt of grading of the work.

° In Andhra Pradesh, ATRs for two works inspected by NQM in January 2010 and
August 2011 were submitted with delays ranging from 8 to 15 months. In Karnataka,
under PIU, Kalburgi, NQM inspected one road work in January 2015, ATR was
submitted only after 10 months and the same is yet to be accepted by NRRDA.

° In Manipur, in four sampled districts, there was delay ranging from one to 24
months in submitting 11 ATRs by SQC to NRRDA.
« In Sikkim, ATRs in 21 unsatisfactory works reported by NQMs during Apri} 2011

to January 2015 were submitted with a delay of 42 to 721 days.
. In Tripura, there was delay of 3 to 42 months in submitting ATRs. ATRs for seven

road works were yet to be submitted.


a7

‘112, Asked about the reasons for pendency of Action Takén Reports on rectification of
defects pointed out by SQMs and NOQMs, the Ministry submiited

"With a View to initiate corrective actions on SQM/NQM observations, the
SQM/NQM is required to handover inspection report fo the PIU immediately after
completion of inspection. The time taken to furnish the Action Taken Report by
PIU depends upon the nature of defects pointed out by the SQM/NQMs in their
reports. In majority of the cases, the Action Taken Report Is furnished within the
stipulated time period. However, in few cases the defects remain unaddressed
for a longer period due to reasons such as termination of contract, litigation
cases and forest clearance issues etc. which are beyond the control of PIU.

As regard to compliance of SQM observations, since, each work is to be
inspacted thrice during its execution, the action taken by the PIU on the earlier
observations of SQM is independently verified by SQM and during the second
and subsequent inspection. The effect of earlier quality grading is not taken into
account. If the work is graded ‘unsatisfactory’ upon completion by SQM, the
State does not accept the work and the PIU is required to carry out rectification
and get the work re-inspected.

As regards ATRs on NQM observations, the pendency has been reduced
substantially. Out of the total 7446 ATRs required initially up-to March 2016, 758
are pending with the States. Some of these pending ATRs are for the reasons
explained above. However, NRRDA is closely monitoring the pendency status of
ATRs with the concerned States,

Further, NRRDA also has issued directions to all States for early submission of
pending ATRs. NRRDA has also transited from physical submission of ATRs to
“online” submission and acceptance/rejection/clarification on these ATRs is also
communicated to the State “online’."

Social Audit

113. The PAC in their 72nd Report on the PMGSY (2007-08) to the Fourteenth Lok
Sabha recommended that the Ministry should teplicate the modalities of social audit
incorporated in the guidelines of the MGNREGS. The Ministry in their Action Taken
Note (PAC 8277 Report 2008-09, presented to Fourteenth Lok Sabha) stated that a pilot
project had been taken up in Karnataka and Ocisha with the involvement of focal NGOs
for sample audit exercise and citizens monitoring of the PMGSY projects. Based on the
findings of this project, decision would be taken to formulate appropriate methodology
for social audit of the PMGSY projects involving of Panchayati Raj and Civil Society
Organisations.

114. The.Ministry; in response to the audit observation on progress made so far,
stated (April 2016) that the social audit of PMGSY roads, through Citizen Monitoring
had now been extended to Jharkhand, Meghalaya, Rajasthan, Assam and Uttarakhand.


48

In these seven States, 603 Citizen Volunteers were irained for monitoring of quality
construction and maintenance of PMGSY roads with the toolkit and training, the
volunteers surveyed PMGSY roads in these States for producing data on various
qualitative and quanifiaiive aspects of the roads on the condition of roads in both the
ongoing and completed works frorn citizen perspective. The interim report was received

and circulated to all the concerned states for taking corrective action.

115. This indicated that the concept of social audit was still at pilot stage. Replicating
the modalities of social audit of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme in this programme was yet to be finalised and incorporated in the

programme guidelines.

116. Apprising the Committee about the progress made so far in this regard, the
Ministry submitted:

"Public Affairs Center (PAC) was entrusted a pilot project for social audit of rural
roads under PMGSY. The PAC had a background of Citizen monitoring of
quality of road works in Bengaluru. The project “Citizen monitoring of tural roads
under PMGSY" has been implemented in collaboration with NRRDA and
SRRDAs and with the technical support frorm IR RASTA Centre for road
technology, Bengaluru, in two phases. The first phase of the pilot project aimed
at:

a) Conceptualization and exploration of Citizen Monitoring of road works
under PMGSY. 7
b) Development and trial of monitoring quality and testing equipment kit.
Under this phase, three States viz, Jharkhand, Meghalaya and Rajasthan were
covered. 70 roads in the three States (both ongoing & completed) were identified.
PAC facilitated monitoring of rural roads in these States with the help of citizen
yolunteers. In ail, 177 citizen volunteers were trained

Under phase-iI of the project, 20 roads (including 10 ongoing & 10 completed)
from each of the 7 States were taken up. tn all, 420 citizen volunteers and 49
master trainers were trained.

The final report of the project has been received and shared with all the 7 States
with the request to adopt the system of monitoring the road by citizen
volunteers,"

GHAPTER -7: JOINT PHYSICAL VERIFICATION

Introduction

117. To assess the implementation of the PMGSY, Joint Physical Verifications of 528
roads in 173 districts of 28 States (except Nagaland) constructed at a cost of 1,223.76

crore were cartied out by audit teams in the presence of staff of the implementing


49

agencies. For this purpose, three roads completed during 2010-15 in each selected
district were selected randomly. The verification covers execution of work as per iaid
down specifications, work abandoned mid-way, connectivity to the targeted habitation,
maintenance of the road, installation of citizen information boards, PMGSY lego,

planting of fruit bearing trees ete,

Summary of findings of joint physical verification

118. 166 road works (31.44 per cent) were not constructed as per the length provided
in DPRs which includes 112 cases where variation was more than 100 metres. 20
habitations were provided multiple connectivity. 15 road works were abandoned mid
way. Specifications of DPRs wére not adhered to in 59 road works, of which, in 44
cases approval of competent authority was not obtained. 46 habitations were not
provided all weather road connectivity. 179 roads were not maintained. In 21 road
works, boards/logas were not Installed. In 485 road works (91.85 per cent), fruit bearing
trees were not planted. Out of 71 road works requiring acquisition of land, in 13 road
works, land was not acquired. 40 roads were not functional for traffic due to non
construction of causeways, culverts, bridges, to complete stretch, etc. In 77 road works,

contracts were concluded without rectification of the defects,

119. While furnishing their views in regard to abovesaid Audit observations, the
Ministry stated:

"Before finalisation of Core Network and absence of data on OMMAS, State may
have proposed roads providing multiple connectivity to a habitation. Also, there
may be a possibility that, after providing connectivity to the unconnected
habitations under PMGSY, some of the roads tay be improved by the State
governments at their own resources. At present, if the habitation is already
mapped on the sanctioned roads, PIUs cannot finalise the proposal on OMMAS
at the time of proposal entry itself. This will ensure to avold proposing multi
connectivity to a habitation."

120. Upon asking about the action initiated by the Ministry to avoid such inadequacies
in future, the Ministry stated:

he Ministry have issued necessary guidelines to ensure the land availability to
construct the proposed roads by the State Governments through transect walk,
approval of Gram Sabha and involvement of public representatives in the
planning process,

ii, States have been asked to provide connectivity to a habitation, the road
must be taken upto a prominent point within the habitation such as a schoal,
public health centre, Panchayat office atc.


50

iii, in the initial Phase of PMGSY, the States have not proposed especially
Long Span bridges on the PMGSY reads. in order to overcome this difficulty and
ensuring all weather connectivity to the habitations, Ministry had issued advisory
to the States that, the roads should be proposed with all necessary cross
drainage structures and a certificate to this effect should also be appended with
the proposal. Alsa, in case any CD works leftout, in future proposals, no funding
will be made from Government of India for inclusion of any CD works. Also, the
left out bridges on the sanctioned PMGSY roads prior to 28.04.2011 have been
sanctioned by the Ministry based on the proposal received from the States time
to time."

CHAPTER - 8; ONLINE MANAGEMENT, MONITORING AND ACCOUNTING
SYSTEM

121. Out of 14 modules, Online Fund Processing (OFP) and Analysis of Rate for Rural
Roads (ARRR) Module had not been implemented in any State. Receipt & Payment
Bank Module to link banks with Programme Implementation Units (PIUs) for
. transactions and reconciliation had been implemented only in six States. Even after 13
years of introduction of OMMAS, the Ministry still relied on manual Monthly Progress
Reports for decision rnaking, as the basic requirement of data updating on OMMAS was

not achieved.MIS reports generated through the system were inaccurate and unreliable

122. Lack of validation controls in OMMAS application led to incorrect data entries
which resulted in generation of unreliable MIS reports.

123, IT Nodal Officers were not appointed in three States (Gujarat, Karnataka and
Jammu & Kashmir). In four States (Arunachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Tami! Nadu and
Uttar Pradesh), there were no.supervisory controls for verification/authentication of
data entry.

124. The Committee desired to know as to whether the Ministry had analysed the
reasons for the non-updation of data by the States and whether the problem has been
ideniified and being addressed. The Ministry in this regard stated as under:
"The Ministry has analyzed this issue and has found that the typical reasons are
as follows: “

, States have mapped wrong habitations on already sanctioned roads.

. States have wrongly entered the connectivity status of habitations on
OMMAS.

. Certain States have prepared their core networks taking village as a unit
instead of habitations as per PMGSY guidelines,


125.

51

Connectivity status of States connected habitations through their State
funded scheme have not been updated en OMMAS.
The updating of data was done by the States and is being monitored regularly by
the Ministry through various regional review meetings and Empowered
Committee mestings. Now most of the States have reconciled their habitations
and finalized. At present, rigorous checks have been made on OMMAS to
identify the wrongly mapped habitations in the proposal module at the time of
making proposals and system would not allow the State to map wrong
habitations which are not mapped in the Core Network. State Governments have
been asked to update their physical Progress, completed length and financial
progress then and there and being reviewed on monthly basis."

On being asked about the action taken by the Ministry to rectify deficiencies in

the Application control so that data is validated at the time of entry, the Ministry replied

that:

126.

“The deficiencies if any received from the State have been rectified immediately
and necessary Instructions have been passed to the State for correcting their
data. Rigorous checks have been developed in the Software to check the
Proposed length and habitations with reference to the Core Network in the initial
stage of proposal entry itself. Also, the checking of length variation between
sanctioned length and completed length has 8180 been made on OMMAS. State
cannot enter the compieted length in more/less than 10% of sanctioned length for
which state should get online approval from the Ministry. In such cases,
necessary provision has been made on OMMAS for giving online approval. The
software issues have been rectified by C-DAC then and there."

The Committee further desired to know as to whether the Ministry has any

mechanism to ensure that IT infrastructure including presence of [T Nodal office,

presence of supervisory provisions for verification and aut entication of data is put in

place by the States and what action has been taken against the defaulting States. In

response, the Ministry submitted as follows:

"The PMGSY programme encompasses a wide fange of activities and its
success depends on the clear allocation of responsibilities at various levels. As
far as data entry in OMMAS is concerned, the data is entered at point of origin,
i.e. Programme Implementation Unit (PIU) level. Additions & modifications to
data and status are made through role based login by PIUSTA/SRRDA ete. The
State IT Nodal Officer (11900) is responsible in order to oversea the regularity &
accuracy of the data being furnished by the PIUs. The main functions of the IT
Nodal officer are as follows:

. Monitoring the progress of data entry at PIU level and apprising the CEO
of the SRRDA in case of persistent delay/failure to update data,

. Coordination with the Financial Controller for continued and accurate
Operating of the payrnent & fund flow module,

. Coordination with the State Quality Coordinator for ensuring updating of
SQM inspection data on OMMAS.


52

States have been advised fo ensure placement of Independent ITNOs, though in
some States, ihis responsibility is discharged by an engineer posted in SRRDA,
as an additional charge. है

Monthly Progress Reports in hard copy are received from the States and verified
in respective Division(s) of NRRDA and the differences, if any are, pointed out to
the States through e-mails and also discussed in Regional Review Meetings held
almost twice every year for each of the States. It is also to mention, NRRDA has
now decided to consider Monthly Progress Reports generated through OMMAS
wef tst January, 2016 and no manual report will be entertained. It is expected
that, these will close the issue of data differences in MPR & OMMAS.
Programme and Administrative Fund releases are linked with OMMAS."


PART - {I
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

1. Rural road connectivity is not only a key component of rural davelopment
by promoting access to economic and social services and thereby generating
increased agricultural incomes and productive employment opportunities, It is
also a key ingredient in ensuring sustainable poverty reduction. Notwithstanding
the efforts made, over the years, at the State and Ministry levels, through different
programmes, a large number of habitations were not connected by ail-weather
roads. Even where connectivity has been provided, the roads constructed are of
such quality that they cannot always be categorized as all-weather roads, With a
view to redressing the situation, the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana
(PMGSY), a flagship scheme of the Government of India, was introduced on 25
December, 2000 to provide all-weather rural road connectivity and to access
- eligible unconnected habitations as a strategy for poverty alleviation and to
overcome deficiencies in rural road plarining, inadequacy and unpredictability of
funds and lack of maintenance of rural roads. The primary objective of PMGSY is
to provide connectivity by way of an थी weather road, to the eligible unconnected
habitations as per Core-Network with a population of 1000 persons and above by
2003 and all unconnected habitation with Population ef 500 persons and above by
2007. In respect of ‘special category States' (North-East, Sikkim, Himachal
Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir and Uttarakhand), the Desert areas, the Tribal
(Schedule V) areas and 88 selected Tribal and Backward districts as identified by
the Ministry of Home Affairs/Planning Commission, the objective is to connect
eligible unconnected habitations as per Core-Network with a population of 250
persons and above. In critical LWE effected Blocks (as identified by Ministry of
Home Affairs), additional relaxation have been given to connect habitation with

population of 100 to 249 persons too,

2. Examination of the PMGSY by the Committee has. revealed several
deficiencies in its monitering and implementation. It was found that some States
deviated from the prescribed procedures while preparing District Rural Road Plan
and Core Network, Consequently, eligible habitations were either left out or
wrongly shown as connected. Some of the road works were taken beyond Core


Network. Involvement of elected public representatives in planning process was
also found lacking. Geographical information system data base for rural roads
was not created. Project proposals were cleared beyond the permissible
indicative fund allocation. As regards the programme implementation, the
Committee found that the execution of road work suffered badly due to non-
organisation of transect walk which led to dropping and abandonment of works
because of land disputes, non-availability of required land and works were shown
completed without providing complete connectivity to ‘the targeted habitations.
Instances of providing multiple connectivity to habitations in violation of
guidelines were also observed. Maintenance funds were neither adequately
provided nor fully utilised. Roads constructed under the programme were not
properly maintained. Further in case of fund management of PMGSY, the
Committee observed that funds released 10 States for implementation of the
programme were considerably reduced during 2012-15 due to unutilized balance
with the States. There were instances of non/short delayed release of programme
funds. In certain States, Programme funds were diverted and utilized on
inadmissible items. Figures of release and expenditure under the Programme
maintained by the Ministry did not match with those maintained by the State
Governments. The Committee also found that quality and monitoring control
mechanisms ‘were deficient in all the tiers of PMGSY. Field laboratories were
either not set up or inadequately equipped at work execution sites. Inspections
of roads at prescribed stages were not undertaken. Joint inspections with elected
Public representatives were not undertaken. Performance Evaluation Commitiee
meetings to evaluate the performance of the National Quality Monitors were not
held at prescribed intervals. State Level Standing Committee meetings to monitor
progress of ongoing works, quality control, budgeting of maintenance fund etc.
were not held regularly. In regard to Online Management, Monitoring and
Accounting System (OMMAS), the Committee observed that even after more than
13 years, States were In the process of updating the data, Fund Processing and
Analysis of Rate for Rural Roads (ARRR) modules were not implemented.
Similarly, absence of zpplication controls led to invalid data entry. MIS reporis
generated through the system were inaccurate and unreliable. The Committee's

scrutiny of the subject and evidence of the Ministry revealed a number of


35

lacunae, lapses and deficiencles and their findings are dealt with at tength in the

succeeding paragraphs,

3. in their 72" Report (147 Lok Sabha) on 1550 the PAC had recommended
that Ministry should replicate the modalities of social audit incorporated in the
guidelines of National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA) in the PMGSY.
They had further recommended that time frame should be fixed for preparation
and implementation of district/State-wise plan with a view to avoid duplication of
expenditure on existing roads, all cases of financial irregularities should be
thoroughly probed into, a comprehensive GIS database of Rural Roads
Information System should be created for each State, ways and means should be
devised to verify and cross check the works sanctioned under the scheme with
that of State PWD before embarking on the execution of the works etc. The
Committee also recommended that all the works taken up under the scheme
should invariably form part of the Core Network, responsibility should be fixed for
inordinate delay in finalisation of tenders, States should sponsor those project
proposals where there is clear availability of land and necessary Clearance from
the forest department and other authorities, Ministry should constantly monitor
the works undertaken by States and also review the contracting capacity of the
States and strengthen the same so 4s to ensure timely completion of the projects.
The Committee desired that the Ministry should closely monitor all cases of
liquidated damages in coordination with States so that damages are fully
recovered within a definite time period, all possibilities should be explored for
setting up and maintenance of quality contro! Laboratories in all States for
periodical test of raw materials used at different stages of roads constructions so
as to ensure that quality of roads constructed conform to the Specified standards
and functioning of OMMS should be reviewed with a view fo remove the
deficiencies by evolving a practicable action plan. Even though the accounting
module of OMMS recommendations were substantially accepted by the
Government, most of the deficiencies in the implementation of PMGSY persisted.
Expressing serious displeasure over the state of affairs even after 17 years of its
existence and nori-fulfillment of the commitments made and assurances given,

the Committee exhort the Ministry to initiate the requisite measures urgently so


56

that persisting shortcomings in implementation of PMGSY can be wiped out

effectively and efficiently.

4. District Rural Road Plan (DRRP) and Core Network

The Committee observe that District Rural Road Plan (DRRP) is required to
clearly identify the proposed roads for connecting the yet un-connected
habitations with all weather roads in an economic and efficient manner and is
prepared at two levels i.e. block and district. The Committee are constrained to
find that in seven States (Andhra Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand,
Karnataka, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Telangana) discrepancies in District Rural
Road Plan such as absence of basic information viz details of the population of
habitations, status of connectivity, road inventory and maps, non-approval by
District Panchayat, taking village instead of habitation as unit of connectivity etc.
were observed, Further the Committee find that in 19 States (Andhra Pradesh,
Assam, Bihar, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu &Kashmir, Jharkhand,
Karnataka, Kerala, Manipur, Meghalaya, Odisha, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Telangana, |
Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand and West Bengal), discrepancies such as
unconnected habitations shown as connected, eligible habitations not included,
habitations placed in wrong population size, etc., were observed in Core
Networks (CNWs). In seven States (Andhra Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Kerala,
Meghalaya, Punjab, Tripura and Uttar Pradesh), CNWs were not approved in
selected districts either by Block Level Panchayat or District Panchayat or State
Level Agency. In nine States (Bihar, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu &
Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu and Uttarakhand), road
projects of less than 500 metres in plain areas and 1.5 km in hilly areas were
included in CNWs. tn Meghalaya, 22 habitations lying within 1.5 km from an all
weather road/connected habitations were included in the CNW. The Committee
are appalled to note that the lack of monitoring mechanism ‘in the Ministry
contributed to such a large number of irregularities in the PMGSY programme
implementation in aforesaid States. Explaining the reasons for these
shortcomings the Ministry submitted that certain States had earlier prepared their
DRRP and Core Network based on revenue village as a unit (with population of
census 2001), instead of habitation as a unit and certain eligible habitations were

inadvertently left-out from the Core Network. The Committee are unable to


understand as to why clear guidelines in this regard were not issued to the
States. The Comimliies desire to know as io whether any stringent measures were
taken against the erring States for this omission. Now, the Ministry stated that at
Present all the States have reconciled their eligible number of unconnected
habitations in consultation with MoORD/NRRDA and updated their Core Network
and DRRP on OMMAS. Now proposals cannot be finalised by the Programme
Implementation Unit (PIU), if the road is not a part of the Core Network and
‘habitations are not mapped on the same CNW road. Also, if the proposed length
is more than 50% of Core Network length, the State/PIU cannot finalise the
proposal without approval of Ministry/NRRDA. The Committee regret to find that
these steps have been contemplated by the Ministry only after being pointed out
by Audit. The Ministry remained as a mute spectator through all the 17 years of
implementation of this important scheme. Had these steps been taken earlier, the
aforesaid irregularities/inadequacies could have been avoided. Further, as
regards the involvement of elected local public representatives in preparation and
approval of DRRP and CNW, the Committee have been informed that necessary
guidelines in this regard were reiterated by the Ministry vide circular No. P-
17025/2/2014-RG dated 23.07.2015 and 31.07.2015. The Committee regret to
observe that even though guidelines were issued twice within a week of 2015 na
other concrete action was taken by the Ministry of Rural Development to ensure
that those guidelines were actually implemented in fetter and spirit, The
Committee, therefore, urge upon the Ministry to take effective steps in constantly
monitoring to ensure that guidelines issued are scrupulously followed and
implemented by the States. ‘

5. Non-inteqration of Geographical Informa’ Information System (519)

The Committee in their 7277 Report (14 Lok Sabha) had recommended the
Ministry to create a comprehensive Geographical Information System (GIS)
database of Rural Roads information System for each State which could be
shared at different levels and by different agencies involved in construction and

‘maintenance of rural reads. In their Action Taken Notes, the Ministry informed
(October 2008) that they had initiated the development of stand-alone and web
based GIS database for Rural Roads Information System and selected Rajasthan
and Himachal Pradesh as pilot States. The system development was entrusted to


58

C-DAC. It was also conveyed that all the States had been advised to initiate steps
to go in for GIS Database Management System. However, Audit in their present
review of PMGSY found that despite its assurance to PAC way back in 2008, the
Ministry. could not create the said system till date. In their reply to Audit the
Ministry stated (April, 2016) that a MOU was signed with C-DAC in October 2015
with time of completion in two years from date of advance payment (February,
2016). Thus, the Committee are aghast to observe that as a result of. its
lackadaisical attitude web based GIS database Management system is yet to be
implemented despite assurance given to PAC. They are further constrained to
point out that the Ministry had delayed considerably in acting upon the earlier
recommendation of the Committee and thereby allowed = serious
irregularities/distortions to be crept into this vital programme. The Committee
would, therefore, desire to take stringent measures against the officials for
inexplicable delay in its implementation, As regards the present status of creation
of GIS, the Committee have been informed that State Governments have been
adviged to prepare the GIS database in collaboration with C-DAC. In this direction
various training programmes have been conducted for State officials. In first
phase, 8 States would create GIS database by October, 2017. While welcoming
the steps taken to create the GIS database in 8 States the Committee hope that
the Ministry would keep unremitting vigil over its timely completion as the target
date of completion i.e October, 2017 had already been elapsed. The Committee
_are constrained to observe that the Ministry have again failed to fulfill its own
commitment to ensure the C-DAC to complete the GIS Database Management
System in all States by February, 2018. The Committee, therefore, desire that,
PNIGSY being one of the prestigious schemes of Central Government almed at
creating all weather roads in rural areas of the country, the Cabinet Secretary may
take the lead in ensuring scientific, transparent and timely implementation of the

programma.

6. Comprehensive New Connectivity Priority List (CNCPL)/Comprehensive up-
gradation Priority List (CUPL) है

The Committee note that Para 3.3.1 of the Operations Manual (OM)
envisages that once the CNW is ready, the States are required to prepare
Comprehensive New Connectivity Priority List (CNCPL), at block and district level


59

of all proposed road finks, grouping them in the order of priority based or
population size ie, 1000+ habitations first, 300+ habitations second and 280+
habitations last. The programme guidetines provide that a Comprehensive
Upgradation Priority List (CUPL) is prepared in respect of these districts where
ho hew connectivity is required to be done. The CUPL is to be verified on sample
basis through the State Technical Agencies (STA) and the National Quality
Monitor (NQM). The CNCPL/CUPL shall be placed before the district panchayat
for its approval. The MP/MLA is to be given a copy of the CNCPL/CUPL and their
suggestions and suggestions of lower level panchayati raj institutions shall be
given the fullest consideration by the district panchayat while according its
approval. The Committee observed several deficiencies in CNCPL/CUPL. The
Committee are appalled to note that in 14 States (Arumacha! Pradesh, Bihar,
Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura,
Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand), the deficiencies such as inclusion of road
projects both in CNCPL and CUPL, exclusion of road projects, inclusion of
habitations below admissible population size, CNCPL having more aligible
habitations than CNW, inclusion of already connected habitations in CNCPL,
inclusion of Through Routes in CNCPL, CUPL prepared without conducting PC!
survey, etc., were observed in CNCPL and CUPL. In six States {Arunachal
Pradesh, Jharkhand, Kerala (except Malappuratn), Manipur, Meghalaya (except
West Garo hills) and Tripura}, evidence of obtaining/considering suggestions and
recommendations of elected representative viz., Members of Parliament,
Members of the State Legislative Assembly and Panchayati Raj Institutions was
not on record. Arunachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir and Jharkhand (five
districts), CNCPL/CUPL were not approved by district panchayat, In Manipur and
Meghalaya (four districts), there was no evidence of approval of CNCPL and
CUPL from district panchayatDRDA. In Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka and
Meghalaya, the CUPL was not verified by STA and NOM. In Arunachal Pradesh,
Jharkhand, Manipur and Tamil Nadu, there was no evidence of verification of
“CUPL ‘from STA/NQM. In Uttar Pradesh, the CUPL, was verified by STA in only
three out of 18 districts. However, the required verification of CUPL by NOM was
hot done in any district. In West Bengal, none of the five districts had any
documents to indicate that STAs carried out any ground verification of CUPL. The

Committee cannot help expressing their serious concern over thé manner in


60

which this matter was dealt with by the Minisiry. They are surprised as to how
funds were released to these States without ensuring that their guidelines in this
regard were properly followed or not. the Committee note that in order to remove
aforesaid deficiencies several steps were reported to have been taken by the
Ministry viz, provision for generation of CNCPL based on population and on order
of priority and CUPL based on Pavement Condition Index (PCI) developed on
OMMAS. The State Governments have been asked to conduct PCI surveys for all
rural roads every two years. Necessary advisory has also been issued to verify
the Pavement Condition Index through independent consultantvSTA (third party
verification) to ensure that the CUPL is drawn as per order of priority mentioned
in the PMGSY guidelines. State Technical Agenciés (STAs) have also been
advised to verify the CNCPL and CUPL. at the time of scrutiny of DPRs.” The
Committee have serious concern over the manner in which the Ministry released
funds without satisfying themselves that the CNCPL and CUPL are properly
verified by the State Technical Agencies on the basis of the prescribed
guidelines. The Committee are of the considered view that proper connectivity of
all weather roads in rural areas being the foundation of PMGSY, any ‘law in the
system will gravely vitiate its very objective. They, therefore, desire the Ministry
of Rural Development to deal the issue with more seriousness and take
appropriate corrective measures to clean up the system. The Committee exhort
that all cases of irregularities should be thoroughly investigated and
responsibility of the erring officials fixed for the lapses. The Ministry should also
consider withholding of financial assistance to the defaulting States.

7. Clearance of Works in excess of allocation of funds

Para 4.4.1 of the OM stipulates that States may, each year, distribute its own
allocation among the districts giving at least 80 per cent for providing new
connectivity and up to 20 per cent for upgradation. The district-wise allocation of
funds will also be communicated to the National Rural Road Development Agency
(NRRDA) and STAs in order to enable them to scrutinize the DPRs: of the district.
Depending on the extent of new connectivity backlog, absorption capacity, position
of the ongoing works, etc., the State will be asked to prepare DPRs for up to twice
the allocation. The Committee find that the Ministry cleared proposals valued
much more than the indicative allocations. According to the Ministry it was a


62

usual practice to do over-programming under PMGSY and in order to achieve the
objective of the programme, a large aumber of clearances were given to various
States. The Committee are surprised to note that Ministry's clearances ranged
between 107 to 1,134 percent in excess of guidelines. {n this regard Committee
have been informed that it is difficult to clear proposals avery year with their
value restricted to the annual allocation of the States and then expect the States
to complete the projects well within time. According to the Ministry the pace of
implementation of the scheme does get affected with lesser release of funds,
Thus, for accelerated execution of PMGSY, the Ministry of Rural Development in
consultation with the Ministry of Finance and the State Governments have
formulated an Action Plan to achieve the target of scheme early, with enhanced
financial allocation to the States and modified funding pattern in the Scheme.
Therefore, in view of the availability of substantial additional funds under the
scheme with the new funding pattern between Centre and the State and enhanced
allocation by the Government; all the States have been asked to get approval for
sanctions of balance works under PMGSY as per the mandate of the scheme by
December, 2016 and to substantially complete them by March, 2019, so as to
provide connectivity to target habitations, While welcoming the steps taken to
enhance the budget allocation to States and awaiting their impact on the
achievement of targets by March, 2019, the Committee would like to know
whether any analysis of present level of fund requirement of States, expenditure
incurred by them and funds remained unutilised therewith was done by the
Ministry before enhancing the allocation of funds. The Committee desire the
Ministry to keep constant vigil over the States to ensure proper synchronisation
of available excess funds and fixation of targets for better achievement of the
objectives. They would also like to be apprised of the present pesition of the
targets set for completion of work in all the States, achievement made so far,

States lagging behind in achievement of targets and action taken thereagainst.

8. Trangect Walks not organised

Programme guidelines prescribe that Programme Implementation Units
(PIU) will organise transect walk to discuss and finalize the issues telating to
alternative alignments, land requirements for the road and iis impact on land

owners etc., with the members of the local community, A copy of the proceedings


G2

atong with digital photographs of the transect walk shall be attached with the
finalised DPR. The Committee are constrained to observe that in 17 States
(Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir,
Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Weghaiaya, Nagaland, Sikkim,
Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal), transect walk
was either not organised or required. certificate/documents were not found
attached with DPRs. Failure to implement this significant procedure at the time of
project preparation led to dropping or abandoning of works mid-way due to land
disputes, non- availability of required land and other reasons. In this regard, the
Ministry stated that they had regularly pressed upon the State Governments to
carry out transect walk along the proposed alignment of the road, consultation of
key holders and the local community at the time of preparation of DPRs as
mandated in the Programme Guldelines dated 28.04.2011 & 27.07.2011. Ministry
had also amended its guidelines on 62.09.2014 directing all the States to include
women PRI members and representatives of Women Self Help Groups (SHGs) in
the transect walk at the time of preparation of DPRs. All DPRs also mention the
fact of transect walk having been taken and append photographs of the same.
The Committee feel that mere issuance of guidelines would not yield the desired
results unless these are complied with both in letter and spirit. The Ministry also
did not apprise as to whether they had received any feedback from the State
Governments on transect walk and whether it undertook any study in this regard.
While expressing their concern over this the Committee desire the Ministry of
Rural Development to Jook into this vital area and take effective steps to ensure
that transect walks are organised by the States as prescribed in the guidelines,
failing which, penalty should be imposed on States for abandoning the works
mid-way due to non-conducting of transect walk. Quarterly Reports from the
States should be obtained in. order to regularly monitor the transect walk
organised by them. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the impact of
including women Panchayati Raj Institution members and representatives of

women Self Help Groups in the transect walk.

9. Works dropped/abandoned

The Committee are constrained to note that in 12 States {Assam (5), Bihar
(12), Gujarat (14), Jharkhand (23), Madhya Pradesh (73), Meghalaya (2), Odisha


63

(268), Telangana (20), Tripura (18), Uttar Pradesh (13), Uttarakhand (86) and West
Bengal (36}}, 535 works were not commenced and were subsequently dropped or
proposed to be dropped due to non-availability of fand or land disputes. Besides,
372 works in 11 States {Andhra Pradesh (1), Assam (22), Chhattisgarh (1), Madhya
Pradesh (2), Maharashtra (5), Meghalaya (1), Odisha (107), Rajasthan (213),
Telangana (4), Uttar Pradesh (7) and West Bengal (9)), were abandoned/proposed
to be abandoned mid-way on similar grounds after incurring expenditure of =
280.01 crore. Further, in 13 States {Andhra Pradesh (27), Assam (2), Bihar (319),
Gujarat (11), Jammu & Kashmir (53), Jharkhand (278), Karnataka (19), Kerala (50),
Madhya Pradesh (253), Tripura (8), Uttar Pradesh (502), Uttarakhand (3) and West
Bengal (25)}, 1,550 works were dropped or proposed to be dropped for the
reasons such as works execufed under other State schemes, transfer of roads to
other departments, deficient planning, remote location to carry the material,
works already sanctioned in earlier years, works executed by other agencies,
naxal problem, no response to the bid, etc. In Kerala, out of 503 works in hand as
of March 2015, 56 works valued at हैं 40.94 crore (which included warks
sanctioned from 2001-02 onwards) were identified as ‘non-feasible for execution’,
‘taken up by other agency’, etc., and proposed to be dropped from the list of
works in August 2015. Out of these 56 works, an expenditure of ¥ 2,40 crore had
already been incurred on 17 works rendered wasteful. Surprisingly, no
mechanism exist in the Ministry and the States to monitor the works dropped or
abandoned mid-way. The Committee are not convinced with the reasons given for
non-completion of works. Proper consultation, advance planning and
farsightedness could have prevented wastage of money, The various
deficiencies/shortcomings that have been noticed for dropping or abandoning the
works mid-way points to the lack of effective scrutiny, absence of monitoring
mechanism either at States or at Ministry level. The Committee, therefore,
tecommend that Ministry should streamline/strengthen their monitoring
mechanism so that the works are reviewed periodically, completed properly and
expeditiously. The Ministry have now stated that as per guidelines, tracking the
land available along the entire proposed alignment, ensuring the land free from
all encumbrances etc. is the responsibility of the State Government/District
Panchayat. PMGSY does not provide funds for land acquisition. The State


Government lay down guidelines for voluntary donation, exchange or other
mechanisms to ensure availability of land. However, the Ministry is closely
monitoring the projects pending for want of land. Regular meetings have been
held with Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change for expediting the
pending clearance. The Committee find the explanation given by the Ministry as
totally untenable since being a nodal agency, ‘the Ministry should have
anticipated these issues and adequate measures taken for removal of the same
well before sanctioning of the scheme. The Committee are constrained to note
that in their 72"? Report qa" Lok Sabha), they had recommended the Ministry to
ensure that State sponsor only those project proposals where there is clear
availability of land and necessary clearance from the forest department and other
authorities are obtained so that the works are not abandoned or left incomplete
mid-way. While accepting the recommendation, the Ministry had stated that
instructions that a certificate of land availability must accompany the proposal for
each road had been reiterated, Clear availability of land would be kept tn view
while sanctioning projects so that in future works are not dropped due to non-
availability of land, That this had not been done is inexplicable. Now, as regards
the steps taken to get the incomplete works completed on priority basis, the
Committee have been apprised that the Ministry holds requiar review meetings of
all the States, region-wise in which the incomplete and problematic works are
thoroughly reviewed to expedite the balance works completed on_ priority.
Further, as a strategy to ensure completion of long pending PMGSY works, the
Ministry in collaboration with NRRDA has impressed upon the States to prepare
PIU-wise, month-wise completion plan for such pending PMGSY works, In view of
this, the Committee expect the Ministry to hold reguiar review meetings with the
States to finish pending works. In this regard, guidelines may be suitably
amended by prescribing periodical review meetings, imposition of strict penalty
etc, so as to have purposeful monitoring and control over the pending projects.
The Committee would ike to be apprised of the conclusive action taken by the
Ministry to prevent dropping/abandonment of works midway thereby saving

valuable money of the exchequer.


10. Irrequiarities in inviting tenders

According to Para 11.1 of the programme guidelines, after clearance of the
project proposals and technical sanction accorded the Executing Agency would
invite tenders. The Committee find that in 14 States, {Andhra Pradesh (35),
Haryana (1), Himachal Pradesh (14), Jammu & Kashmir (138), Jharkhand (38),
Manipur (69), Meghalaya (58), Rajasthan (158), Telangana (15), Tripura (4) and
Uttarakhand (78)}, tenders for 608 works were invited prior to their technical
sanction by the competent authority. According to provision 8.2 of the OM, in
cases where variation between DPR and technical sanction exceeds 10 per cent,
Prior approval of the NRRDA is required to be sought before tendering the works.
The Committee observe that in six States {Assam (12), Himachal Pradesh (3),
Kerala (30), Tamil Nadu (163), Telangana (1) and Tripura (4)), despite variation
ranging from 11 to 500 per cent in 213 road works/packages, prior approval of the
NRRDA was not obtained before inviting tenders. Further, as per para 7.11 of the
OM, tendering process shall begin within 15 days of getting approval of the
Proposals from the Ministry. In nine States (Arunachal Pradesh (18), Jammu &
Kashmir (161), Jharkhand (94), Manipur (469), Meghalaya (65), Rajasthan (3767),
Telangana (1), Uttar Pradesh (132) and West Bengal (467)}, tenders for 5,172
works/packages, were invited with a delay ranging between 2 to 974 days which
in turn delayed the award and execution of works. The Committee regret to point
out that this is yet another classic example of lack of monitoring on the part of
Ministry resulting in irregularities in tendering process under PMGSY. Further,
they have not attributed any reasons for these delays/shortcomings. The
Committee are distressed to observe that in their 72™ Report (147 Lok Sabha)
they had recommended the Ministry to take up the matter with the States so as to
fix responsibility on the concerned authorities for inordinate delay in finalisation
of tenders. The Ministry accepted the recommendation and stated that States had
been advised to closely monitor the delays in tendering every month and in case
of inardinate delays action for fixing responsibility be taken. However, the
present Audit Report revealed that no concrete measures have been taken by the
Ministry in this regard since 2008. The Committee, are dismayed to note that the
Ministry of Rural Development are yet to fix responsibility on the officials of the -

concerned State for inordinate delay in finalisation of tenders. The Committee


66

strongly deprecaie the failure of the Minisiry to act sternly against euch
omissions, They desire that the matter should be vigorously pursued for
investigation and to fix responsibility. In this regard, the Ministry stated that in
case the irregularities committed in iendering process are establisned to have
happened, the State Government concerned are required to take necessary action
against the contractor /bidder as per the provisions of bidding document and
impose penaities such as debarring the contractor from future bidding under
PMGSY and can also blacklist the contractor. In case the lapses are committed
on the part of Government officials, necessary disciplinary action is to be taken
by the respective State Governments as per their conduct rule. The Ministry have
shirked away from taking any responsibility in this regard. The Committee feel
that the Ministry should suitably take up the matter with the State Governments
for ensuring to prevent delays/irregularities in tendering process in future
besides apprising States to take stringent action against the officials responsible
for such omissions. The Committee may be apprised of the details of action taken

against the erring States within six months of presentation of this report.

Non-recovery of mobilisation and eq) and equipment advance

44, The Committee note that in five States, {Assam (है 0.37 crore), Bihar (६ 0.50
crore), Himachal Pradesh (% 0.25 crore), Mizoram (% 0.30 crore) and Sikkim (र 0,38
crore)}, % 1.80 crore of mobilisation and equipment advance in respect of eight
road works/packages was not ‘recovered despite termination of contract/dropping
of work. In four States {Haryana (® 2.75 crore), Jammu के Kashmir (सै 0.44 crore),
Jharkhand (€ 1.51 crore) and Uttar Pradesh (% 4.76 crore)}, % 9.46 crore remained
unrecovered even after initial stipulated date of completion of work. In Sikkim, in
50 works, mobilisation and machinery advance of हैं 18.08 crore was not recovered
due to non-commencement of works even after one to six years of their sanction.
There were cases of irregular grant of mobilisation and equipment advances viz.
- in Rajasthan, PWD Circle, Dungarpur, under package RJ-14-WB-BN-12, machinery
advance of हैं 0.44 crore was given fot the machinery hypothecated to a private

bank. In Uttarakhand, in 16 cases, mobilisation advance of ₹ 4.91 crore was

provided in excess of maximum ceiling of five per cent of the initial contract

prices. Bank guarantee was not obtained from the contractor against mobilisation

advance of € 0.66 crore in two cases and equipment advance of ९0,654 crore in one


a7

case. Further, in ons case, invoice of machine purchased was not obtained for
equipment advance of है. 8.58 crore, Thus, undue benefits were extended to the
contractors in the above cases rendering joss to the Government exchequer. The
Committse are concerned te note that no information regarding recovery of
mobilisation and equipment advances have been made available to them by the
Ministry, Rather they have informed that there is an effort to reduce such
advances at the earliest and States have been time and again asked for recovery
of mobilisation and equipment advances, The Committee desire that the Ministry
of Rural Development should tighten their control and take effective steps for
recovery of mobilisation and equipment advances. They further recommend that
ail cases as pointed in the Audit Paragraph should be thoroughly investigated
and action taken against those found guilty. The Committee would like to ba
informed of the action taken in the matter. The Committee desire to be apprised

of the present status of recovery of such advances.

12. Works shown as completed without complete connectivity to targetted

habitations

, The Committee note that in seven States (Bihar, Gujarat, Jharkhand,
Madhya Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Tripura and West Bengal), 73 road works were
executed and shown as completed without providing complete connectivity to the
targetted habitations due to non-availability of required fand, non-clearance by
railways, non-construction of required bridges, etc. Out of this, 72 road works
were executed at a cost of हैं 120,03 crore, The Committee regret to point out yet
another instance of casual and lackadaisical attitude displayed by the Ministry in
implementing the PMGSY scheme. The Committee are perturbed to note that the
Ministry of Rural Development have neither spelt out the reasons for the same
hor they have apprised the Committee about the action taken against the States
for these lapses. Rather the Ministry were unaware of lapses or kept silence until,
these were pointed out by Audit and the subject was subsequently taken up for
detailed examination by the Committee. The Committee cannot but deplore the
Ministry and concerned State Governments in wasting public money due to
improper planning and for not making serious attempts to provide complete
connectivity to the targetted habitations. In order to aveid such instances the
Ministry have now informed that they had engaged Centre for Geo-Informatics


68

Application in Rural Development (C-GARD) of National Institute of Rural
Development & Panchayati Raj, Hyderabad to use space technology in the
monitoring of PMGSY works on sample basis (5 States, 10 districts). Based on
the outcome of the Report, the Ministry have decided to universatize the scheme
in all the States/districts.” The Committee are concerned to note that the Ministry
have not provided the data as to when they had engaged the C-GARD and in
which States/districts the PMGSY works were monitored on sample basis and
what was the outcome of such monitoring based on which the Ministry decided to
universalize the scheme in all the States/districts. The Ministry also did not
mention as to whether any recent survey was undertaken to identify unconnected
habitations and the parameters for monitoring the achievements of the scheme,
The Committee would like to be informed of such details and recommend that all
the 73 road works should be probed into and stringent penal measures taken
against the responsible officials, The Ministry should also take up the matter with
the concerned States/Railways for timely completion of connectivity of roads to
the targetted habitations and apprise the Committee about the present status of
connectivity within three months from the presentation of the Report. The
Committee hope that the Ministry will be able to identify unconnected portions
and deficiencies in the quality of roads.

13. Multiple connectivity of habitations

Para 3.10 of programme guidelines envisage that only single road
connectivity will be provided to eligible unconnected habitations. If a habitation is
already connected by way of an ali weather road, then no new work can be taken
up under the PMGSY for that habitation. The Committee find that in nine States
(Arunachal Pradesh, Gujarat, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka,
Nagaland, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal), 36 habitations were
provided with more than one connectivity. Out of this, 31 habitations were
provided multiple connectivity at a cost of हैं 29.49 crore. In this regard, the
Committee have been apprised that if any case comes to the notice of the
Ministry where multiple connectivity has been provided to the habitation, the
concerned State Government Is asked to conduct enquiry of the road through a
team of State Quality Monitors (SQM) and share the report with the Ministry.
Based on the findings of the report, State is required to take appropriate action


69

against the erring officials. State is also expected to bear the cost of the road
from its own fund and the same is adjusted in ihe further releases to be made to
the State. The Committee, therefore, desire to know whether any enquiry of these
36 cases by SQM was done, if so, what were thelr findings and suggestions to
overcome such instances in future. Whether any responsibility has been fixed
against the erring officials. The Committee would also like to know if the cost of
the multiple connectivity has been borne by the State Governments concerned.
The Committee are of the considered view that accurate identification of
habitations is necessary for achieving intended benefits of the programme and
any flaws in this process particularly multiple connectivity which would vitiate its
objective. Thus, the Committee desire that the Ministry should evolve a suitable
mechanism to avoid such instances in future.

14. Release and utilisation of maintenance fund

According to Para 17 of the guidelines, State Governments are required to
undertake the maintenance of the entire CNW and develop sustainable sources of
funding for undertaking the maintenance functions. Details of maintenance fund
collected from State Governments showed variations in the figures of release and
expenditure as compared to the figures maintained by the NRRDA. Information
previded by NRRDA showed that 27 States released ¥ 3,018.10 crore in
maintenance fund from 2010-11 to 2014-15 as against requirement of = 3,279.97
crore. In three States (Bihar, Haryana and Punjab) short release was more than 40
per cent of the fund required for maintenance. The Committee consider it a sad
state of affairs that the States are not releasing proper funds for the maintenance
works and no action has so far been taken by the Ministry against them for short
release of maintenance funds. The Committee are further constrained to observe
that the States as a whole utilized 66 per cent of the requirements during this
period. However, in seven States (Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Haryana, Himachal
Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand and Tripura), less than 50 per cent of the
fund required was used. The audit observation was confirmed by NOMs who
found that out of 7,144 road works, 1,370 works were not maintained at all and
3,095 works were: poorly maintained. From the facts stated above, it is evident
that there was failure on the part of the Ministry of Rural Development to properly
monitor the release/utilization of funds by the States under the scheme, The


70

Commities are distressed to note that even though the scheme was introduced
way back in 2000, the Ministry have not yet been able to eveive any mechanism
for ensuring proper allocation/utilisation of funds by the States. Considering the
fact that the PMGSY was meant to piay a Vital role in the secie-economic growth
of the rural community by providing them roads; the Committee consider it
unfortunate that no mechanism was evolved by the Ministry to ensure full
utilisation of funds for intended purposes. As regards the steps taken to ensure
that the States provide funds for crucial maintenance of roads constructed under
PMGSY, the Ministry informed that “during regional review meetings and
Empowered Committee Meetings, State Governments are being requested to
ensure proper maintenance and upkeep of PMGSY roads and full utilization of
maintenance funds. States have also been requested for having a dedicated Rural
Road Maintenance Policy. So far, 14 States i.e, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand,
Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, Rajasthan, Bihar, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh,
Chhattisgarh, Tamil Nadu, Assam, Meghalaya, West Bengal ahd Haryana have
formulated their State Rural Roads Maintenance Policy. Remaining States are
being regularly requested during various meetings to formulate and notify
Maintenance Policy. While expressing their dissatisfaction over the steps taken in
this regard, the Committee urge upon the Ministry to investigate in coordination
with State Governments all such cases of short release/non-utilisation of funds
and ask them to fix responsibility against the officials for omissions. They also
recommend that in future penalty should be imposed on the defaulting States
who fail to release/utilise funds for maintenance. Ministry should also consider
withholding of Grants to State Governments upon noticing such irregularities.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the present status of formulation of

Rural Road Maintenance Policy by all the States.

45. Shortcomings in release of funds fo Stares of funds to States

The Committee observe cases of non/shortidelayed release of funds to the
States due to non-availability of funds, non/late submission of documients by the
States, non fulfillment of the conditions laid down for release of second
instalment and slow progress of road works, While accepting the fact of short
release, the Ministry replied that works sanctioned to the States were two to three

times their allocation resulting in spillover to subsequent years and reduction in


74

the allocations in the revised estimate stage, From the year 2015-16, the Ministry

nis from

have started to *elease funds of PMGSY without obtaining any है

States to ensure smooth functioning at the onset of financial year. Further
releases during the year are made on the basis of 60% utilization of funds by the
States and only after documents proving the same are submitted to the Ministry
along with certain other mandatory requirements, the funds are released to the
Consolidated Fund of the State with the directions to release this fund to the bank
account of State Rural Road Development Agency (SRRDA) within three working
days. The Committee therefore, desire that the Ministry should take all possible
measures to ensure that sufficient release of funds to the States in time and ail
cases of financial irregularities probed into and appropriate action against the

erring officials.

16. ‘Delay in transfer of funds by State Governments

As per the programme guidelines (as modified from time to time), from
2014-15 onwards, funds are released to the State Consolidated Fund with
directions to transfer these funds ta SRRDA’s account within three days ‘from the
date of its receipt failing which the State Government is lable to pay interest at 12
per cent per annum for the period of delay beyond the specified period. Audit
observed that in 11 States (Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Jammu
& Kashmir, Karnataka, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Punjab, Rajasthan and
Uttarakhand), funds amounting to T 2,693.89 crore released during 2014-15 were
transferred fo the SRRDAs with delays ranging from 7 to 202 days. As a result,
the States were liable to pay interest of 7 50.37 crore to the SRRDAs. In three
States (Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh and Karnataka), funds amounting to
€ 89.32 crore, received during 2044-15, were not transferred to the respective
SRRDAs as of May/September 2015. The Committee are deeply concerned over
non-transferring of funds to SRRDA within three days of its receipt by the States.
The Commitiee observe that unauthorised parking of funds by the States and
non-utilisation thereof would lead to nonfdelayed achievement of targets thereby
defeating the objectives of PMGSY. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
specific cases as reported by Audit should be enquired into and funds lying with
States are disbursed along with interest at 42% per annum for the period of delay
and utilised for the intended purpose. The Ministry have now stated that apart


72

from other measures to watch delayed release of funds by the States, the States’
have been directed that in case of non-transfer beyond the stipulated period, the
Ministry may consider withholding further releases to the State, The Committee
taking note of these steps desire that in future suitable measures should be taken
by the Ministry against the States for such violation. The Committee would await
a report on the precise action taken by the Ministry on each of the specific cases
unearthed by the Audit as well as similar such cases which came to the notice of

the Ministry.

17. Diversion of funds

_ The Committee find that in eight States, {Haryana (€ 0.02 crore), Karnataka (©
3.48 crore), Kerala (© 2.74 crore), Mizoram (= 1.33 crore), Sikkim (है 3.83 crore),
Tamit Nadu (¥.5.66 crore), Uttar Pradesh (€ 4.64 crore) and Uttarakhand (€ 3.45
crore)}, programme fund of € 25.15 crore was diverted towards maintenance fund,
administrative expenses fund, activities such as testing of material, State
Government schemes, salary and wages and transportation of soil, plantation,
restoration of damaged properties, etc., which were not covered under the
programme. tn two States, (Rajasthan (= 1.50 crore) and Uttar Pradesh (% 0.02
crore)}, %1.52 crore was utilized for land acquisition from the PMGSY funds in
violation of the programme guidelines, In five States, {Kerala है 7.25 crore),
Manipur (है 0.42 crore), Tamil Nadu (₹ 0.44 crore), Tripura [है 2.54 crore) and
Uttarakhand (© 1.13 crore)}, administrative funds of हैं 11.78 crore were diverted
towards inadmissible items such as purchase of vehicles, payment of salaries
and wages and purchase or construction of buildings, etc. In this regard, the
Ministry apprised that NRRDA has got a separate division which examines the
audit Reports received on yearly basis from the States and discrepancies found
are then raised for rectification with the States. Further, the issue of timely
recoupment of temporary diversions is also reviewed in RRMS and inter
Ministerial Empowered Committee meetings. The issue is also reviewed at the
time of release of funds to the States. However, the Committee observe that
provisions of PMGSY Accounts Manual provides that the Chartered Accountant
while conducting audit of SRRDA should pay special attention that SRRDA used
all the funds in accordance with the relevant financing arrangements, with due

attention to economy and efficiency and only for the purpose for which they were


73

pravided. The Committee are constrained to find that the Ministry did not apprise
about the mechanism available with them to ensure that funds released for
specific purpose are not diverted. The Commitiee therefore, desire ta be apprised
of as to whether cases of diversion of funds, which came to the notice of the
Ministry after certification of accounts did not form a part of audit report of the
Chartered Accountant and also the cases pointed out by Audit have ever been
taken up with the Chartered Accountant who certified the accounts. Since
diversion of funds from intended purposes reflects poor fund management
besides reducing the fund availability for the desired purposes, the Committee
recommend that in future the Ministry should ensure that suitable penal actions
are taken to check diversion of funds and steps like withholding of funds to such
States should be done.

18. Quality control, Monitoring and Evaluation

The Committee are constrained to observe that quality and monitoring
contra! mechanisms were deficient in all the tiers of PMGSY. Field laboratories
were either not set up or inadequately equipped at wark execution sites.
Inspections of roads at prescribed stages were not conducted. Action Taken
Reporis on the rectification of defects pointed out by.the State Quality Monitors
and National Quality Monitors were pending. Joint inspections with elected
representatives were not conducted. Performance Evaluation Committee
meetings to evaluate the performance of the National Quality Monitors were not
held at prescribed intervais. State Level Standing Committee meetings to monitor
progress of ongoing works, quality control, budgeting of maintenance fund, ete
were not held regularly. The concept of social audit was not incorporated in the
programme guidelines. The Committee are constrained to observe as to how with
a large number of deficiencies in quality control, monitoring and evaluation,
absence of joint inspection with elected representatives etc, the Ministry as well
as State Governments are ensuring proper and effective implementation of such
a vital programme. In this regard, the Ministry submitted that the deficiencies
observed in the quality control mechanism, based on SQM/NQM observations are
brought to the notice of concerned States. In order to assist the States to identify
and address the systemic issues, reports have been developed in programme

MIS i.e. OMMAS. Further several steps are stated to have been taken by the


74

Ministry and NRRDA to strengthen the quality contra! system viz. developing of
Mobite app to facilitate easier upload of geo-referenced, stamped & date stamped
photos of labs established by contractor for each package of PMGSY, roads,
holding of orientation trainings of SQMs on use of mobile apps to upload their
inspection report on OMMAS, organising trainings of NQMs and field engineers,
careful monitoring of ATRs submitted by States etc. The Ministry have, therefore,
stated that the quality contro! system is functioning well and many States have
adopted similar quality monitoring structure for their State Funded Rural Road
Schemes and also for those rural roads schemes which have been directly
funded by World Bank in the State. While appreciating the steps taken by the
Ministry, the Committee ‘expect the Ministry to constantly monitor the same and
ensure that quality monitoring structure is established in all States so that
systemic flaws in quality control, monitoring and evaluation are timely detected
and sorted out. Since quality contro! is a vital component of PMGSY to maintain
quality of roads, the Committee desire that Ministry should exercise quality
control at three stages viz. firstly at the stage prior to construction, secondly
during the construction phase and thirdly quality checks by the field engineers
after completion of each stage of construction so that the roads get longer fife
and do not get damaged immediately after the construction. The Comunittee also
desire the Ministry to advise the States to devise a suitable mechanism for fixing
responsibility and accountability on the erring officials. The Committee further
urge the Ministry to investigate all the cases pointed out by audit and apprise
them about the action taken thereon.
419.  Shortfatlin inspections by pls inspections by SQMs

Para 11.5.7 of the OM envisages that State Quality Coordinator (SQC) draw

up inspections in such a way that every work is Inspected at least three times.

The first two inspections of every work should be carried’ out during the
execution of work spaced at least three months apart and the last inspection
should be carried out on the completion of every wark, within one month of its
completion. The schedule should be monthly, specifying Block and preferably the
road, so as fo ensure systematic coverage. The Committee observe that SQMs
carried out inspections for 51,521 road works during 2010-15 in 29 States. Out of
these, 1,671 road works (3.24 percent) were not inspected even once. 26,691 road


works (51.81 percent} were inspected only once. From the detalled scrutiny, the
Commitiee find that in Andhra Pradash, 48 road works were not Inspected
whereas seven road works were inspected 10 to 18 times. In Assam, 124 road
works wera not inspected whereas four road works were inspected 10 to 13
times. In Gujarat, 47 road works were not inspected whereas 21 road works were
inspected 10 to 26 times. In Madhya Pradesh, nine road works inspected 10 to 16
times, whereas 193 road works were never inspected. In Maharashtra, 77 road
works were not inspected whereas five road works were inspected 10 to 11 times.
It is therefore, evident that SQMs did not carry out the prescribed inspections
uniformly, According to Ministry, in some States, short fall has been reported due
to various feasons including that of shortage of technical personnel. In order to
address this issue, the States have been advised to engage independent
agencies for State Quality Monitor inspections, increase the number of SQMs and
use the mobile application developed by NRRDA for such inspections. Further,
NRRDA has set annual/monthly targets for each State for SQM inspections and
the progress of the same is also monitored by NRRDA on monthly basis and the
matter is taken up with the States lagging in achieving the target. The Committee
while welcoming these steps taken by the Ministry for streamlining the process of
inspections, recommend that the Ministry should ensure that the inspections are
carried out as per the specifications mentioned in the guidelines and any
aberration noticed in this regard should be dealt with sternly. Penal measures
should be taken against the States in the aforesaid cases pointed out by Audit.

20, Delay in submission of Action Taken Reports (ATRs)

As per para 11.6.3 of the OM, on completion of inspection by NQM, PIU
shall furnish Action Taken Report (ATR) to SQC after a period of one month of
inspection hy NQM, The compilation of ATRs will be carried out by SQC for
submission to NRRDA within one month of receipt of grading of the work. In
Andhra Pradesh, ATRs for two works inspected by NOM in January 2010 and
August 2011 were submitted with delays ranging from 8 to 15 months. In
Karnataka, under PIU, Kalburgi, NOM inspected one road work in January 2015,
ATR was submitted only after 10 months and the same is yet to be accepted by
NRRDA,. In Manipur, in four sampled districts, there was delay ranging from one
to 24 months in submitting 11 ATRs by SQC to NRRDA. In Sikkim, ATRs in 21


76

unsatisfactory works reported by NQMs during April 2014 to January 2015 were
submitted with a delay of 42 te 721 days, In Tripura, there was deiay of 3 ६० 42
months in submitting ATRs. ATRs for seven road works were yet to be submitted.
Evidently, the system of submission of Action Taken Reports was totally
inadequate and leaves a lot to be desired. The Committee, therefore, desire that
the Ministry of Rural Development should ensure regular and effective monitoring
of receipt of Action Taken Reports at various levels. The Ministry stated that in
majority of cases, the ATR is furnished within the stipulated time period.
However, in few cases the defects remained unaddressed for a longer period due
to reasons such as termination of contract, litigation cases and forest clearance
issues ete. which are beyond the control of PIU. The Gommittee have now been
informed that out of total 7446 ATRs required upto March, 2016, 758 are pending
with the States. However, NRRDA is closely monitoring the pendency status of
ATRs with the concerned States. In this regard NRRDA issued directions to all
States for early submission of pending ATRs. NRRDA has also transited from
Physical submission of ATRs to ‘online’ submission and
acceptance/rejection/clarification on these ATRs is also communicated to the
State ‘online’. The Committee, however, regret to note that neither pena!
measures have been initiated against those States where ATRs are pending for
submission for such a long time nor any responsibility has been fixed in this
regard. The Committee deplore the failure of the Ministry on this aspect and
would like to be furnished with a detailed Report about remedial/corrective action
taken against the States as well as officers responsible for the omission. The
Committee would also like to be apprised of the present status of receipt of 758
ATRs pending with the States.

21. Social Audit
The Public Accounts Committee in their 7277 Report (14 Lok Sabha) on

PMGSY had recommended that the Ministry should replicate the modalities of
social Audit incorporated In the guidelines of the MGNREGS, The Committee are
constrained to observe that the concept of social audit was still at pilot stage in
PMGSY. Replicating the modalities of social audit of the Mahatma Gandhi
National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme in this programme was yet to be

finalised and incorporated in the programme guidelines. However, the Ministry


77

accepted the Cammittee's recommendation and stated that based on the pilot
project taken up in Karnataka and Gdisha with the involvement of local NGOs for
sample audit exercise end citizens monitoring of projects, decision would be
taken to formulate appropriate methodology for social audit of PMGSY projects.
Now, the Ministry submitted that a project named ‘Citizen monitoring of rural
roads under PMGSY" has been implemented in collaboration with NRRDA and
SRRDAs and with the technical support from IR RASTA centre for road
technology, Bangaluru. The final report of the project has been received and
shared with all the seven States with the request to adopt the system of
monitoring the road by citizen volunteers. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the final Report of the Project. They would also desire the Ministry to
ensure proper monitoring of the conduct of social audit by citizen volunteers
regularly. Further, in order io achieve the goals of social Audit, the Ministry
should also ensure that volunteers are aware of their rights to participate in the
ongoing process of social audit, their entitlements and obligations under the
scheme. The Committee while reiterating their earlier recommendation desire the
Ministry fo replicate the modalities of social audit of the MGNREGS be
incorporated in the guidelines of PMGSY with immediate effect.

22. Joint Physical Verification

As regards the joint physical verification, the Committee found that 166
road works (31.44 per cent) were not constructed as per the length provided in
DPRs which includes 112 cases where variation was more than 100 metres. 20
habitations were provided multiple connectivity. 15 road works were abandoned
mid way. Specifications of DPRs were not adhered to in 59 road works of which, in
44 cases approval of competent authority was not obtained, 46 habitations were
not provided with al] weather road connectivity. 179 roads were not maintained, In
21 road works, boards/logos were not installed. In 485 road works (91.85 per cent),
fruit bearing trees were not planted. Out of 71 road works requiring acquisition of
land, in 13 road works;dand-was not acquired. 40 roads were not functional for
traffic due to nor-construction of causeways, culverts, bridges, to complete
stretch, etc. In 77 road works, contracts were concluded without rectification of
the defects. In this regard, the Ministry have informed the Committee that at
present, if the habitation is already mapped on the sanctioned roads, PIUs cannot


78

finalise the proposal on OMMAS at the time of proposal entry itself. This wilt
ensure to avoid proposing multi connectivity to a habitation. Ministry have also
issued necessary guidelines to ensure the land availability. States have been
asked that in order to provide connectivity to a habitation, the road must be taken
upto a prominent point within the habitation such as school, Public health centre,
Panchayat office etc. Ministry had also issued advisory to the States that, the
roads should be proposed with all necessary cross drainage structures and a
certificate to this effect should also be appended with the proposal. In case any
CD work left out, in future proposals, no funding will be made frem Government of
India for inclusion of any CD works, Also the left out bridges on the sanctioned
PMGSY roads prior to 28.04.2011 have been sanctioned by the Ministry based on
the proposal received from the States from time to time. The Committee hope that
with the initiation of aforesaid measures the Ministry of Rura! Development would
be able to avoid such instances in future. They also desire that the Ministry would
take suitable steps so as to ensure that their advisory/instructions would be
followed by all the States in letter and spirit and any aberration noticed should be
sternly dealt with. The Committee are perturbed to observe that as per the joint
physical verification, 179 roads were not maintained, in 21 road works
logos/boards were not installed and in 485 roads (91.85 per cent), fruit bearing
trees were not planted. The Ministry have failed to furnish any reply to the above
shortcomings. The Committee, therefore, desire to be apprised of the punitive
action taken and the measures adopted to ensure that such irregularities are not
repeated in future. Action taken in all the cases pointed out by Audit and present
position thereof may also be intimated to the Committee within three months of

the presentation of the Report.

23, Need for reliable data on Online Management, Monitoring and Ac Monitoring and Accounting
System |

The Committee are constrained to observe that out of 14 modules, Ontine
Fund Processing (OFP)'and Analysis of Rate for Rural Roads (ARRR) Module had
net been implemented in any State. Receipt & Payment Bank Moduie to link
banks with Programme Implementation Units (PlUs) for transactions and
reconciliation had been implemented only in six States. Even after 13 years of

introduction of OMMAS, the Ministry still relied on manual Monthly Progress


79

Reports for decision making, as the basic requirement of data updating on
OMMAS was not achieved. In this regard the Committee have been informed that
NRRDA has decided to consider Monthly Progress Reports (MPRs) generated
through OMMAS w.e.f. 1" January, 2016 and no manual report will be entertained.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the present status of generating of
Monthly Progress Report through OMMAS, They also sought to know whether all
the States upload their MPRs through OMMAS or not and what stringent
measures have been taken against the defaulting States. The Committee further
find that MIS reports generated through the system Were inaccurate and
unreliable. Lack of validation controls in OMMAS application led to incorrect data
entries which resulted in generation of unreliable MIS reports. In their 7274 Report
(14 Lok Sabha) the Committee had recommended that the Ministry should review
the functioning of OMMAS with a view to remove deficiencies by evolving an
action plan. it was also recommended that the accounting module of OMMAS
should be urgently implemented. The Committee also desired that the States
should take necessary steps to update the online information and wherever
OMMAS had not been installed, the Ministry should take hecessary steps to
install the system immediately. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry submitted
that an overall review of the functioning of the OMMAS was carried. out in
consultation with the States, The deficiencies in the system were assessed and
an action plan has been prepared. The software issues have been addressed by
C-DAC. The performance of the States in updating data on OMMAS is being
reviewed regularly. However, the present Audit review revealed that Monitoring of
Programme through OMMAS was still ineffective as data fed into the system was
hot updated or reliable. While deploring for misleading the Committee in this
tegard, the Committee recommend the Ministry to effectively monitor the
functioning of OMMAS with a view to remove the deficiencies pointed out by
Audit in its operationalisation without further toss of time so as to make it an
effective tool for monitoring of the Programme, The Committee would also like to
apprised of as to whether any target date has been fixed by the Ministry for fully
shifting to online system (COMMAS) and any mechanism is in place to reconcile
the financial figures with its data. The Committee further find that IT Nodal
Officers (ITNOs) were not appointed in three States (Gujarat, Karnataka and
Jammu & Kashmir). In four States (Arunachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu


80

and Uttar Pradesh), there were no supervisory controls _ for
verification/authentication of data entry. In this regard, the Committee have been
informed that the States have been advised to ensure placement of Independent
1409, The Committee feel that mere advisories to the States would hot yield the
desired results unless some stringent penalties are imposed on them for not
appointing the ITNOs. The Gommittee would like to be apprised of the present
status of appointing the ITNOs in all the States and availability of reliable data on
OMMAS of all States.

NEW DELHI; MALLIKARJUN KHARGE
RT_March, 2018 Chairperson,

4 Chaitra, 1940 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


— 2} — PaRESESt
ANNERGRE<ID

MINUTES OF SECOND SITTING OF SUB-COMMITTEE VI (SOCIAL SECTOR)
OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2016-17) HELD ON 25" OCTOBER,
2016,

The Sub-Committee sat on Thursday, the 25" October, 2016 from 1530 hrs to 1700

hrs in Committee Room 'B’, Parliament House Annexe, New QDethi.

छा Ae we a

PRESENT

Shri Shiv Kumar 0, Udasi - Convenor

Members

LOK SABHA

Dr. P. Venugopal
Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Shri T. Jayakumar - Director
Smt. Anju Kukreja - Under Secretary

OFFICERS OF THE OFFICE OF THE ee Ve OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL AND AUDITOR GENERAL
OF INDIA

Shri Mukesh Prasad Singh ~ DG (Central Expenditure)
Shri V. Ravindran ~ DG (Report Central)

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY ES OF THE MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
{DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT:

Shri Amarjeet Sinha - Secretary

Smt. Seema Bahuguna - Special Secretary

Shri Rajesh Bhushan ~ Joint Secretary

Smt. Alka Upadhyay - Joint Secretary

Shri Ajay Shanker Singh - Chief Controller of Accounts

Dr. Nagesh Singh - Chief Economic Advisor


m— 2०
2, At the outset, Hon'ble Convenor पे the Members and Officers of the 0६१७5
of India to the sitting of the Sub-Committee, The Convenor then apprised the Members
that the sitting had been convened to take oral evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development) on the subject
"Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana” based on C&AG Report No. 23 of 2016.

3. The Officers of the C&AG of India briefed the Sub-Committee on the issues relating
to the subject "Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana". Thereafter, the representatives. of
the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development) were called in, The
Convenor during his introductory remarks highlighted the several deficiencies in planning
process, programme implementation, fund management, quality control, monitoring and
evaluation, online management and accounting system etc of the PMGSY.

4. The Convenor further observed that some States deviated from the prescribed
procedures while preparing District Rural Road Plan and Core Network. Some of the road
works under the 'Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana’ were taken beyond Core Network.
He pointed out that involvement of elected representatives in planning process was alsa
found missing.

5. As regards programme implementation, the Convenor pointed out that the
execution of road work suffered due to non-organisation of transect walk. Works were
shown completed without providing complete connectivity to the targeted habitations.
Instances of providing multiple connectivity to habitations were also observed,
Maintenance funds were not adequately provided and utilized,

6. He further observed that quality and monitoting contro! mechanisms were deficient
in all the tiers of PMGSY. Field laboratories were either not set up or inadequately
equipped. inspections of roads were not conducted. Performance Evaluation Committee
meetings and State Level Standing Committee meetings were not held regularly.

7. Before commencing the examination, the Convenor made it clear that the
deliberations of the Sub-Committee were confidential and were not to be divuiged to any
outsider until the Report on the subject was presented to the Parliament, The Sub-
Committee then proceeded with the examination of the subject.

8. The Convenor and Members sought clarifications on various issues which inter-alia
included rectification of complaints lodged through the application "Meri Sadak",
corinectivity of Western Part to the Eastern Part of the country, ¢-tendering of projects,


penalising of contractors who run away in completion of the work, amount of funds
allocated for rural roads during the last five years under PMGSY, percentage of its
utilisation and reagons for the non-utilisation of funds earmarked for this purpose. The
Convenor also sought to know about the study, if any, done by the Ministry in regard to
transect walk, Questions were also raised about survey of unconnected habitations,
parameters for monitoring the achievement of this scheme, reasons for delayed release of
funds by the States to the implementing agencies etc. The representatives of the Ministry
clarified the various issues raised by the Convenor as well as the Members and assured
that the remaining information sought by them would be furnished to the Sub-Committee
expeditiously. The Convenor has also directed the Secretary, Rural Development to inform
the Chief Secretary of Jharkhand Government that Member of Parliament of the area
should invariably be invited during the inauguration of PMGSY.

8. Before concluding, the Convenor thanked the representatives of the Ministry of
Rural Development (Department of Rural Development) and also asked them to furnish
the information that was sought during the sitting within 14 days. The Convenor also
thanked the Officers of the office of the C&AG of India for providing valuable assistance to
the Sub-Committee in the examination of the subject. The Convenor also informed that the
Sub-Committee will have one more sitting in connection with examination of this subject.

The witnesses, then, withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record.

The Sub-Committee then adjourned.

etki


~ ९५ -- अपर - या |
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE Vi (SOCIAL
SECTOR) OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2017-18) HELD ON 14™
MARCH, 2018.

The Sub-Committee VI (Social Sector) of Public Accounts Committee sat on
Wednesday, the 147 March, 2018 from 1600 his to 1540 hrs in Committee Room 'B’,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT

Shri Shiv Kumar CG. Udasi - Convenor

Members
LOK SABHA
2. छा. P. Venugopal
3. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
RAJYA SABHA
4, Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

1. Shri T. Jayakumar - Director

2, Smt. Anju Kukreja - Under Secretary
OFFICERS OF OFFICERS OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL
OF INDIA :

41. Shri. K. Ghose ~ Dy CAG (RC/LB)

Ms. Mamta Kundra ~ DG Audit (Central Expenditure)
Shri J. 8. Karape हु ~ Pr, Director (PAC)

2. At the outset, Hon'ble Convenor welcomed the Members and Officers of the office

of C&AG of India to the sitting of the Sub-Committee. Thereafter, he invited suggestions of

the Members on the draft Report relating to the subject "Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak

Yojana" based on C&AG Report No. 23 of 2016. After some deliberations, the Sub-

Committee adopted the draft Report with minor amendments/modifications and authorised
_ the Convenor to finalise the Report in the light of factual verification done by the Audit.

The Sub-Committee then adjourned.

weNRN KA


RepentMe.23-062016
“8४० ANN xu QE I

Glossary of Terms and Abbreviations

Average Annual Daily Traffic

Asian Development Bank

Annual Maintenance Contract

Analysis of rate for rural roads

Action Taken Notes

Border Area Development Programme

Backward Region Grant Fund

Black Topped

California Bearing Ratio is a test to evaluate the strength of earth surface,

Cross Drainage (CD) is 8 structure constructed to allow a free passage to water
under the road surface from one side to the other.

Centre for Development of Advanced Computing

An imaginary line used to measure distance, often corresponding to the centre
of a straight road (surveying). A distance measured along such a line.

Comprehensive New Connectivity Priority List

Core Network

Control Objectives of Information and related Technology published by IT
Governance Institute, formed by information Systems Audit and Control
Association, USA

Central Public Sector Undertakings

Comprehensive Upgradation Priority List

Commercial vehicle per day

Desert Development Programme

District Level Vigilance and Monitoring Committee

Detailed Project Report “|

District Rural Road Plan indicates the entire existing road network system in
the district and also clearly. identifies the proposed roads to provide
connectivity to eligible unconnected habitations.

Earnest Money Deposit

Gross Budgetary Support

Performance Audit o Page 141


Report No, 23 of 2016

| General Condition of Contract

Geographical Information System

Gram Panchayat

Granular Sub-base is sub-base of the road which is constructed with Granular
4 material,

~ | A cluster of population, living in an area, the location of which does not
1 change over time.

High Speed Diesel
| Integrated Action Pian (Naxal Affected Districts)

Indian Road Congress

Information Technology

| information Technology Nodal Officer

Block Level Panchayat

Distance for which material was carried

Link Route
Long Span Bridge

Left Wing Extremist

Measurement Book

Major District Road
Management Information System

“| Minimum Needs Programme

Ministry of Rural Development

1 Memorandum of Understanding

Monthly Progress Report

-| ॥ Link Route emerging directly from Through Roads (TR) of category National
Highway or State Highway or Major District Road (MDR).

3 Mahatama Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme.
| Main Rural Link

Notice Inviting Tender

National Quality Monitors are independent monitors (individuals/agency)
engaged by the NRRDA. हु

५७ ७५४७५७७७७०४४४५७५४०५ »»»०००७५०८:> न a ee eee ee eae
Performance Audit of Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana पु Page 142


Report No. 23 of 2016

a 87

National Rural Road Development Agency
Other District Road

Online Fund Processing

Operations Manual

| Online Management and Monitoring System

Online Management, Monitoring and Accounting System

LU

Public Accounts Committee

Group of works put te tender in one lot

Ee i .| Poverty Alleviation Unit

Pavement Condition Index (PCi) indicates the condition of a road and is
derived from Pavement Condition Survey. Three methods have been
prescribed to conduct the survey. These are based on Visual Inspections,
Riding Comfort and Driving Speed. The survey yield pavement condition index
of 1 to 5. Under Visual inspection method, PC/ value 1,2,3,4 and 5 reflects the
condition of a road as Very Poor, Poor, Fair, Good and Very Good respectively,

Performance Evaluation Committee

Programme Implementation Unit (Work executing agency in the field)

[ee eed Premix Carpet

:| Probability Proportional to Size Without Replacement-A sampling procedure
vo under which the probability of a unit being selected is proportional to the size
ee “=| of the ultimate unit, giving larger clusters a greater probability of s@lection and
smaller clusters a lower probability. In this method, once a unit is selected, It is
removed from the population and selection of another unit is done from the
remaining population

Panchayati Raj Institution
Public Works Department
pore 1 Quality Control Register

a

Reinforced Cement Concrete

=o ee Roller Compacted Cement Concrete Pavement
Pos 10001 Rural Road Manual

Standard Bidding Document

State Highway

State Level Standing Committee

ua) Schedule of Rates

radhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana Page 143


Report No. 23 of 2016 ह

State Quality Coordinator J

State Quality Monitor

Satisfactory Requiring Improvements

: _ State Rural Road Development Agency

“4 Simple Random Sampling Without Replacement - Data collection in which
each package in the population has normally an equal chance of being

State Technical Agency -Reputed Technical Institutions and have beer
4 identified by NRRDA in consultation with each state government to provide
technical support to the Programme Implementation Units 1

Where the value of the tender received exceeds the estimated cost of the
work,

Through Routes (TR) callect traffic from several link routes {LR} or a fong chain }
of habitations and lead it to marketing centres either directly or through the |
“4 higher category roads i.e., District Roads or State/National Highways.

"I This is organised by the Assistant Engineer to ensure land availability
finalise the ———

Where quoted bid value is lower than the estimated cost.

‘| Value Added Tax
Water Bound Macadam

Zila Parishad

erformance Audit of Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana Page 144