AQ

NON-COMPLIANCE BY MINISTRIES!
DEPARTMENTS IN TIMELY —

NOTES ON THE NON-SELECTED |
AUDIT PARAGRAPHS (CIVIL AND
' OTHER MINISTRIES)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2015-16)

FORTY-SECOND REPORT.

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

के

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

SUBMISSION OF ACTION TAKEN _


PAC No.2074

FORTY-SECOND REPORT

- . PUBLIC-ACCOUNTS CONIMITTEE.
(2015-16)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

NON-COMPLIANCE . BY MINISTRIES/
|BEPARTMENTS IN TIMELY SUBMISSION
OF ACTION TAKEN NOTES ON THE NON-
SELECTED AUDIT PARAGRAPHS (CIVIL
AND OTHER MINISTRIES) ~ .

marae

. ©
; Ge,

Presented fo Lok Sabha on: 2 हि

जन Op

Laid in- Rajya Sabha on:

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI:
April 2015/ Vaisakha 1838 (Saka)


CONTENTS
. ; PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2015-16) (iii) ©

COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE IV OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS {iv)
COMMITTEE (2015-16) tens जन | nes

INTRODUCTION cbecvuusseseuedectavanesueveceeses seseuetetaeviesenseeseenss (v)
REPORT
_PART 1

Io introductary 1

to . _ Non-compliance in timely submission of ATNs on non- 2

selected Audit paragraphs by Ministies and the role of
Monitoring Cell, Ministry of Finance in ensuring
compliance .

fl Non-compliance in timely submission of ATNs on non 3
selected Audit paragraphs relating to CBEC, Ministry of
Finance (Department of Expenditure)

Iv Non-compliance in timely submission of ATNs on non- 6
selected Audit paragraphs relating Ministry of Defence

Vv Non-compliance in timely submission of ATNs on non- 9
selected Audit paragraphs relating Ministry of
Communications and (nformation Technology
(Department of Telecommunications) : हि

VI Non-compliance in‘timely submission of 811४5 on non- 14
selected Audit paragraphs relating Ministry of Railways :

Vil Non-compliance in timely submission of ‘ATNs on non- - 18
selected Audit paragraphs relating to Department of
Atomic Energy

. t
Vill, 5... Non-compliance in timely submission of ATNs on non- 20
selected Audit paragraphs relating to Ministry of Tribal
Affairs


PART Tk

‘Observations/ Recommendations..........0. जन जल हज 5 22

*

“ay

“I

“Hl:

iY

8५

Ml

NII
“VIEL

*IX

Not appended to the Report.

_A pendices

Minutes of the First Sitting of Sub-Commitiee IV of
PAC (2015-16) held णा02-07-2015

हु Minutes of the Second Sitting of Sub-Committee IV

of PAG (2015-16) held on 10-07-2015

Minutes of the Third Sitting of Sub-Committee [V of
PAC (2045-16) held on 29-09-2015

Minutes of the Fourth Sitting of Sub-Committee IV of
PAC (2015-16) held on 06-10-2015

Minutes of the Fifth’ Sitting. of Sub-Committee IV of
PAC (2015-16) held on 14-10-2015 हे

Minutes of the Sixth Sitting of Sub-Committee IV of

PAG (2045-16) held on 28-10-2015

Minutes of the Seventh Sitting of Sub-Committee IV - .
of PAC (2015-16) held on 09-11-2015 .

Minutes of the Eleventh Sitting of Sub-Committee [V
of PAC (2015-16) held on 08-04-2016

Minutes of fhe का Fifth Sitting of PAC (2015-16)
held on 18-04-2016


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2015-16)
Prof. KV. Thomas : Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

2. छा 9.8. Ahluwalia

3 Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
4. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura
5... Shri Nishikant Dubey

8 Shri Gajanan Kirtikar

प्र Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

8. . ‘Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal. “Nishank'
9... Shri Neiphiu Rio

40. Shri Dushyant Singh.

11. ShriJamardan Singh Sigriwal
12, ~ Dr. Kirit Somaiya

43. ShriAnurag Singh Thakur
14. Shri Shivkumar Udasi

45. Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA. 7

16. ShriNaresh Agrawal:

47. _ Shi'Satyavrat Chaturvedi

48.  ShriAnilMadhav Dave

49. Shri Vijay Goel है ct

20. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita हद

21. Shri Shantaram Natk
_22,.  Shti Sukhendu Sekhar Roy

SECRETARIAT -

1. Shri A.K. Sigh - Additional Secretary
2. Shri Tirthankar Das - Additional Director
3. ° ShiPaolienlalHackip =~ - Depuly Secretary
A. Shri Shankarnath: Sharma Laimayum Committee Assistant


Composition of Sub-Committee ~1V [Non-compfiance by Minisiries/Departments th

fimely submission of Action Taken Notes on the Non-selecfed Audit Paragraphs — .

(Civil and other Ministries]] of the Public Aecounfs Committee (2015-16)

"Shri Bhartnihari Mahtab

Convenor :
Alternate Convenor : Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
: Shri Nishikant Dubey °

_. Members ube
हैं Shri.Shiv Kumar Udasi- ~~~
Shrt Anit Madhav Dave

PF RONS


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, 70016 Accounts Committee (2015-16) having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Forty-second Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha) on “Non-compliance by Ministries/Departments in timely submission of
Action Taken Notes on the Non-selected Audit Paragraphs (Civil and other
Ministries)” related to the Ministry of Finance(Department Expenditure).

2. Due fo inordinate delay on the part of various Ministries/Department in timely
submission of Action Taken Notes on the non-selected Audit Paragraphs of the Reports
of the C&AG of India, the Public Accounts Committee (2015-16) took up the subject for
detailed examination and report. A Sub-Committee was specifically constituted under
the convenorship of Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab, MP and a Member of the PAC. The Sub-
Committee procured written replies and took evidences of the representatives of various
Ministries on the subject at their sittings held on 02.07.2015, 10.07.2015, 29.09.2015,
14.10.2015, 28.10.2045 and 09.11.2015, The Draft Report on the subject was prepared
and approved by the Convenor and subsequently approved by the Chairperson, PAC.
The Committee considered and adopted this Draft Report at their sitting held on 18"
April, 2016. The Minutes of the Sittings are appended to the Report.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been ‘printed in thick type and form Part- fl of
the Report.

4. The Committee thank the Sub-Committee for taking oral evidences of the various
Ministries and obtaining information on the subject.

5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
various Ministries for tendering evidence before the Sub-Committee and furnishing the
requisite information to the Sub-Committee in connection with the examination of the

subject.

6. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General.of India.

NEW DELHI; ; ; . PROF. K.V, THOMAS

_* April,2016 . Chairperson,

Vaisakha,t938 (Saka) है "Public Accounts Committee.


REPORT
PART: [

oh INTRODUCTORY

One of the central purposes behind audit of public finances lies in the improvement of
systems by taking remedial action on the shortcomings and or loopholes identified by auditors,
apart from the primary purpose of ensuring accountability and efficiency of public-expendifures,
This can only be achieved when the executive gives sufficient attention fo the task of
examining audit observations and taking remedial/corrective actions to redress lapses and to
ensure non-recurrence of the same or similar lapses. The PAC, taking cognizance of this fact,
had over the years evolved a system whereby the timely submission of action taken notes by
Ministries/Departments of the Government of India is closely monitored, Owing to the
consistent efforts of the Public Accounts Committee, the compliance by government in timely
submission of remedial notes to the PAC, duly vetted by C&AG, has seen tremendous
improvements over the last two decades. Nevertheless, some Ministries continue to fail to
comply. This report deals with the examination of the Non-compliance by Ministries/
Departments in timely submission of Action Taken Notes on the nonselected Audit
paragraphs of C&AG (Civil and other Ministries) during the year 2015-16.

2. The C&AG was requested 10 furnish a Background Note on the subject which contains
Status of the pending Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes pertaining to various
Ministiies/Departments as on 30.04.2015. As per the information furnished by Audit the fotal
number of paras pending with the various Ministries stood at 644 as on 30.04.2015. The
follow-up action by the Ministries/Departments concerned on the C&AG’s -Reports still
continues to be highly unsatisfactory as large number of Remedial/Corréctive Action Taken
Notes are still pending submission by the Min istries/Departments concerned, some for several
years.

3. The Committee, therefore, again formed a Sub-Committee (Sub-Committee-lV) under
the same Convener. in order to pursue and thus minimize the non-compliance of ATNs not
selected by the PAC.. This time, the Sub-Committee decided to focus on the non-compliance
in timely submission of ATNs on non-selécted Audit paragraphs relating to Ministry of Tribal
Affairs, Ministry of Finance (CBEC), Department of Atomic Energy, Ministry of Communication
and Information Technology (Department of Telecommunications), Railways (Railway Board)



me

ase

fine

CSN

2

and Defence. Oral evidences of respective Ministries were taken by the Sub-Committee in the
meetings held on 02-07-2045, 10-07-2015, 29-09-2015, 06-10-2015, 14-10-2015, 28-10-2015
and 09.11.2015 respectively to take an overall view of the pendency of Audit Paras with
concerned Ministries of the Government of India, Monitering Cell and to assess the measures
taken to coordinate and monitor the progress by the Ministries. ,

I. Non-compliance in timely submission of ATNs on non-selected Audit paragraphs in timely submission of ATNs on hon-selected Audit paragraphs
by Ministries_and the role of Monitoring Geli, Ministry of Finance in ensuring Ministries_and the role of Monitoring Celi, Ministry of Finance in ensurin:

compliance
4. The Monitoring Cell, undér the Department of Expenditure (Ministry of Finance) has

been entrusted to coordinate and collect the Remedial/Corective Action Taken Notes on the
various Audit Paragraphs contained in different Audit Reports from all the
Ministries/Departments concerned duly vetted by Audit and forward the same to the Public
Accounts Committee within the stipulated period of four months from the date of presentation
of Audit Reports to the Parliament. The Sub-Committee noted that since 21.05.2010 when the
PAC had for the first time selected "Non-Compliance by the Mintstries/Departments in timely
submission of replies to the Audit paragraphs of the C&AG” as a subject for detailed
examination, there have been a noticeable decline in the number of pending paras. According
fo the Ministry, from 4216 paras of pending ATNs as on 30.06.2010, the number had come
down to 1651 as uploaded in the APMS portal on 02.03.2016 as against figure of 644 given by
the office of C&AG on 30.04.2015,

5. Later, a statement of pendency as on 30.11.2015 of the various Ministries was obtained
from Audit. Same is given in the following table.

Total Number of Reports | paras on which ATNs are pending as on 30.11.2015

No of Reports/| No. of Reports/ | ATNs finaily | No. of ATNs | Total
Paras onwhich | paras on which | vetted by Audit| with Audit
ATNs have not | revised ATNs 998 | but pending | for Vetting
been received | awaited | from | with Ministry /
even for the | Ministry/Department | Monitoring Cell
first time from for submission
the Ministry? to PAC
Department

[148 | | 270 84 413° 615

Thus, from the figures given on the table above, it is noted that the total pendency of
ATNs has slightly decreased from 644 to 615, The figures furnished by Monitoring Cell,



3

Ministry of Finance again differed from that furnished by the C&AG to 1651 as on 02.03.2016,
which showed that the reconciliation of pendency figures between the two have not been fully
redressed. However, some new paras, which have in the meantime become due, have been
added to the total pendency. Ministry-wise pendency as on 30.11.2015 as furnished by Audit is
at Appendix-Il, :

6. The Sub-Committee noted the efforts of the Department of Expenditure in upgrading the
web-based Audit Para Monitoring System (APMS) and in organizing training for officers of
Ministries on the usage of the APMS. However, they were concerned with the lukewarm
response of certain Ministries to the directions for adopting APMS and sponsoring officers for
training on APMS.

In. Non-compliance in timely submission of ATNs on non-selected Audit paragraphs in timely submission of ATNs on non-selected Audit paragraphs
relating to CBEC, Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) to CBEC, Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure

7, As on 30-04-2015, the total number of Action Taken notes on Audit Paragraphs वर्ण
selected by PAC due to be submitted to the Committee by CBEC, Ministry of Finance
(Department of Expenditure) stood at 129. Out of these 67 were those on which ATN have not
been received even for the first time, 39 on which revisions were awaited and 23 which were
pending with Audit.

8. A statement of pendency as on 30.11.2015 of the Ministry as obtained from the C&AG
is given in the following table.

Comparative Number of Audit Paras for which छाए are pending
As on 30.04.2015 [129 /$फ _./7_./“/?$“ 7 फझखएखझ$
As on 30.41.2015 [4p

From the comparative figures given on the table above, it could be seen that the pendency of
the ATNs on Audit paras in respect of Ministry of Finance, CBEC has increased,

9. When the Sub-Committee asked to give a detailed statement, quarterly, of the

pendency of ATNs relating to the Ministry during the past one year, it was submit ied as under:
A detailed statement of Action Taken Notes of Previous 4 Quarters Central Bxeise & Service Tax,

॥ [aes व व्ि्टण्ाण 30.06.2015
Department | ATNs not ATNs under process Tatel ATNs not . ATNSs under process "J Total
of Revenue | received for received for first. -
(Central | first time ATNs TATE time ATNs pending ‘ATNs
Excise & pending with | pending with with Ministry | pending with
Service Ministry Audit Audit
Tax’



(Compliance P| | | | | a 3 3 4 ||
© Audit
Report}
{Performan a | | 2 2 2 3 | _ ! | |
ec audit
report}
ae fiz fs | | [७ | | [5 [| [os | | _ ४ | 8
——1
> 30.09 205 [IS
ATNs not received for first ATNs under process Tota | ATNs not received ATNs under process Tolad
time Tins AINs 1 for first time. Zine aie
Pending with | pending with pending with | pending
__| Minis Audit Minist with Audit
(Compliance Audit | | 1s | _* | [2 | eo 7 11 18
Report) : 1
(Performance pudit | | | 13 22 eo P| | | 3 22
report)
Total 7 | 3 | 21 [| jo [78 | [™¥ | [ao |

Nate: 4) The above data is taken from the pendency statement takcn from Office of the CRAG

2. First Action Taken Notes have beeo sent in all Une paras by Noveraber, 2015, thus report as on 31.12.2015 showing NIL
pendency,
३, The details of pendency of each quarter received ftom C&AG is enclased,

The statement was prepared on the basis of detailed pendency report received from Office of

the C&AG.

Supplementing the above, the Secretary, Department of Expenditure deposed during

evidence as under: -

“Subsequent to the receipt of the notice, subsequent to 31/7, we have been giving some
replies, including some of the replies which you have got yesterday and today. We are
trying to give as many replies as possible, We will reconcile separately with the audit
officers. Our present pendency is just 15 where the first report itself has not been given,
We will separately sit with the officers and do it. But as on today, it is 15 - three in
Central Excise, three in service tax and nine in customs, where the first report itself has
not been received. So, when we got these details, we started reviewing the process
itself as fo how we are giving our replies and what are the flaws in our own system, in.
our monitoting process.-We are trying to ensure that this does not happenin future. So,
even this 15 we are hoping that in.the-next two months we will try and give a reply, The
latest is 31st December. But | am trying to say it would be November end because each
one of these paras again has multiple sub-paras, They ate not a single para. So, my
submission is that we will be attempting to settle these paras, where the first repott itself
has not gone. The second issue which you have raised is about the replies which have
been given where the audit in turn has sent them back to us for our comments. We are
working on those also. We will eliminate and reduce them. We have reviewed the
functioning of our system. We have a Commissioner exclusively for the PAC-related
work, We will strengthen his hands and ensure that this does not happen in future. All |
can submit is that this has happened. This should not happen. We will do our best to
ensure that we reduce the pendency and concerns of the Audit specifically on the two ,
areas which are mentioned both, public-private bonded warehouse and the incorrect.
availing of Central excise exemption. We do have our views on this issue."



11. When the Sub-Committee enquired about the mechanism in place in the Ministry for
timely submission of ATNs within the stipulated period of 4 months from the date of laying of
Reports in the Parliament, the Ministry submitted that the audit gives 4 weeks time to
replyfcomments on Draft Audit Paras and Draft Performance Reports. Each Draft Audit Report
consists of number of Audit Paras including various annexures covering hundreds of
units/assessees and recommendations and taking comments from almost all zones (23 in
number) was a lengthy process. Ministry forwards each Draft Audit Report to all the
concerned zones with the request to furnish comments of the Commissionerates falling under
the jurisdiction fo the Ministry. The zonal Chief Commissioners in-turn gets the reply from the
Commissionerate who in-turn had ta get it from the Division office. The Jurisdiction of zone
‘was geographically large and often it was seén that inspite of sincere efforts made by all
concerned Officers, it was not possible to meet the deadline of 4 weeks, In the meantime,
without considering Ministry's comments, the CRAG publish its report and present the same in
the Parliament. This difficulty was brought to the notice of the C&AG by Ministry on 6%
October, 2015. If adequate time (i.e. three months) was given to Ministry at draft Stage then
10. of paras would be reduced and the published report would contain much lesser no, of Audit
Paras, This would help the Ministry to timely submit ATNs to C&8AG

72. When the Sub-Committee further desired to know as to whether the Ministry have
adopted any good practices of other Ministries in timely disposal of pending ATNs, it was
submitted that the Ministry had adopted receiving the communications from the field formations
through official e-mail address that preferably in word file so that repeat typing could be
avoided at the Ministry level. This reduces the delay considerably in submitting Ministry's
comments to Audit. हैं

13, 00 being asked as to whether the Ministry would be able to comply if ATNs were
fequired to be supplied to Public Accounts Cornmittee electronically to reduce délay and
reduce usage of paper, the Ministry submitted 'in the affirmative and stated that it would be
convenient to supply electronically the ATNs to PAC as this would reduce the delay and usage
of paper work

14. When the Sub-Committee wished to know as to whether any decision had been taken
by the Ministry to reflect performance in timely submission of ATNs in the ACRs of Officers, it


was submitted that necessary instructions sensitizing the officers for timely compliance of
ATNs were under process,

15. On being enquired as to whether the Ministry have adequate manpower having
operational knowledge of Audit Para Monitoring System Portal launched by the Monitoring Cell
of Ministry of Finance, the Ministry submitted in the affirmative and stated that Ministry had
adequalé manpower to deal and operate the Audit Para Monitoring System (APMS) Portal.

Iv, Non-compliance in timely submission of ATNs on non-selected Audit paragraphs in timely submission of ATNs on non-selected Audit paragraphs
felating to Ministry of Defence है .

16. The Sub-Committee took evidence of representatives of Ministry of Defence on
2.2.2015. The Committee note that the pendency of ATNs with the Defence Ministry is on the
decline but not satisfactory. From an outstanding of 153 in July, 2015 the figure has dropped to
142 as of 30.11.2045. ;

17. # comparative statement of pendency as on 31.07.2015 and 30.11.2015 of the Ministry
as obtained from the Audit is given in the following table.

| As on 31.07.2015 _ | As on 03.2016

No, of Audit Paras for which | 153 142
ATNs ase pending 1.

From the comparative figures given on the table above, it is seen that the Ministry had been
able to clear only 9 additional Paras since July, 2015.

18, Apprising the reasons for the delay in submission of pending ATNs, the representatives
of the Ministry deposed as under: है

"Sir, as you recall that | had appeared before this hon. Committee in February this year
and we had discussed in detail about the pendency in the Ministry of Defence. After the
meeting of the Committee, | had taken two meetings at my level with all the officers
concerned, Joint Secretaries of the Ministry, and | am doing it on a regular basis. The
last meeting was done in August and before that we had a meeting in April, After
Teconciling the data which related to pending paras, as on 6" October, there is a total

of 28 paras only where the ATNs have hot been sent even once. So, you have
mentioned that there is a large number of cases, around 48, but those were pending at
different stages for Hindi translation and things like that, They have all been cleared,
There are 28 cases in which the ATNs have not been sent even once. We have
Teviewed these cases also. | will assure you that we should be able to clear majority of
these cases in the next one-and-a-half months, where the ATNs have not been sent
even once. These pertained to specifically two or three wings of the Ministry. So, we
have already fixed up a meeting with the concerned Joint Secretaries where the
pendency is large and we will definitely fry to reduce this number drastically, About the



fotal paras which are pending as on date, of the total carry forward, there were 110 as
on 17 April, 2015 and there are another 69 paras added out of the reports, 34/2014 and
35/2014. There are a total of 179 cases. These include also paras of the performance
audit. They are 15 in number. Out of those, we have already sent 26 to the
Monitoring wing of the Ministry of Finance. One has been vetted by the Audit and that is
pending for sending to the hon, Committee. There are 75 which have been sent to the
Audit for vetting and there are 75 which are pending at different levels in the Ministry.
These figures may keep changing but we will reconcile and maybe, we will sit with the
DG, Audit and we can reconcile these figures’so that at least there are no discrepancies
as far as the numbers are concerned. We understand that the number of paras is still
very large and we need to drastically reduce it and we need to work hard towards
this. But the problem, in the Ministry of Defence is that it is a very huge Ministry with.a
Jarge number of units spread all across the country. That does not give us any excuse
not to do it. But definitely sometimes it gets delayed because we tend to collect
information and it takes a litfle fonger than any other place. But definitely, as | pointed
out, | have been reviewing it at my level regularly. We have asked all the Joint
Secretaries to review at their level with all the concerned Service Headquarters’
fepresentatives so that these are expedited in a time bound manner. You mentioned
about the old cases pertaining to 1991, There are 24 cases of old vintage and we had
discussed that in the last meeting of the Committee. You had identified that many
of these reports belong to 1985-86 and onwards. One of the cases in that you have
“kept for discussion today. Now we have also been hunting for our records. In same of
these cases we have identified and at least got some information including in this
. particular case that an ATN was sent some time in 1994 but there are other cases
also where we have got some evidence that it has been sent. In same cases;
because they are too old, maybe, the records are not readily available but we have
.also taken a stock of these 25 cases which are really old and we will come back to
" the Committee regarding the status of all these cases in a comprehensive manner. "

19. When the Sub-Committee asked to furnish a detailed statement, quarterly, of the
pendency of ATNs relating to the Ministry during the past one year, it was submitted as under:

Details of the Audit Paras on which ATNs are pending as on date
Position as No, of ATNs [ No. of ATNs | No.of ATNs | No. of ATNs | Totat

on quarter not sent to sentto Audit | sent but which have outstanding
ending Audit even for | for vetting returned with | been finally ~ { Audit Paras
हा the first tine observations | vetted by

and Auditis | Audit but
awaiting their | have not
resubmission | been

by the + | submitted to
Ministry Monitoring
Cell
Aprii2o1s ie 47 36 5 __} 104
July 2015 48 17 a oe 153
October 2015 | 28 79 49 ee eT)
January 2016 | 13 55 67 [gd 14

Efforts were being made to reduce the number of ATNs not sent to Audit even once.
Considerable progress had been made in last one year on this front. For this purpose,
the concerned Addl. Secretary was regularly chairing meeting of concerned JSs, wha



had been further directed to discuss these ATNs with Service HQrs. All the concerned

agencies had been directed to submit ATNs in timely manner.
20. When the Sub-Committee desired to know whether the Ministry would be able to
comply if ATNs were required to be supplied 10 PAC electronically to reduce delay and reduce
usage of paper, it was stated that Ministry of Defence very well appreciated the endeavor of
PAC for reducing delay and’ usage of paper and would ensure its compliance in a gradual
manner in definite time-frame, However, due to the extremely sensitive nature of data being
handled in the Ministry, internet access was restricted at certain levels in the Ministry of
Defence, Not withstanding this, efforts would be made to implement electronic communication
to PAC from Ministry of Defence.

21. When asked about the mechanism in place in the Ministry for timely submission of
ATNs within the stipulated period of 4 months from the date of laying of Reports in Parliament,
it was submitted that the Budget Division of the Ministry had been mandated with the
responsibility of maintaining a database of outstanding audit paras. The progress was
monitored at the level of Addl. Secretary, FA (DS).and the Defence Secretary and through the
mechanism of the standing Audit Committee. Concerned Divisional Heads ie. Joint
Secretaries had been directed to hold regular monthly meetings within their Divisions as also
with Service HQrs fo sort out outstanding issues. However, the Ministry of Defence, unlike
other Ministries/Departments could seldom tespond to an audit para on its own. it has to first
make a reference to service Headquarters, and often to concerned field formations ©
subsequently, as the original records in most cases were held with Service Headquarters or
agencies subordinate to them. The reply to an audit para was prepared after consultations
among the various agencies concerned. The response of Service Headquarters was vetted by
Finance Division of the Ministry, approved by Administrative wing of Ministry of Defence and
then sent ta Audit for finat vetting. Once the Audit clears the Audit Para, the same was
forwarded to monitoring Cel/PAC aiter its translation and other formalities, In view of above,
the major constraint in ensuring timely submission of ATNs was the long processing time
involved due to the involvement of multiple agencies in formulation of the ATNs.

22. When asked as fo whether any decision have been taken by the Ministry to reflect
performance in timely submission of ATNs in the ACR of officers, it was submitted that ACR
(Mow APAR) contained many columns where the officer concerned had to mention about his
work, achievements, timely action taken tasks and shortfalls, etc. These columns reflect the


overall performance of an officer. As the format or Act (APAR) were introduced and approved
by DOP&T or the concerned cadre controlling Department/Ministry, Ministry of Defence was
not competent to introduce a new column in APAR format.

23. When the Sub-Committee asked whether the Ministry had adopted any good practice of
other Ministries in timely disposal of pending ATNs, it was stated that the constraints faced by
Ministry of Défence were entirely different from other Ministries. However, so far , no other
Ministry had been approached to provide solutions in timely disposal of pending ATNs. but it
Was’ proposed to approach Ministry of Finance to ascertain good practices being adopted by
other Ministries, if any. As an initiative towards adopting best practices, Ministry of Defence
was proposing to implement an IT-based database system in respect of draft paras: and ATNs
to ensure more efficient Monitoring of their timely disposal. ह :

24. When enquired as fo whether the Ministry have adequate manpower having operational
knowledge of Audit Para Monitoring System Portal launched by the Monitoring Cell of Ministry
‘of Finance, it was stated that Ministry of Defence had sent 28 officials fo attend APMS training
programme organised by Monitoring Celt, Ministry of Finance during 2013 and 2014. Some of
these officials had since been transferred, Ministry of Defence had’ again requested the
Monitoring Cell, Ministry of finance to organise more such trainings.

Ve Non-compliance in timely submission of ATNs on non-selected Audit paragraphs in timely submission of ATNs on non-selected Audit paragraphs
felating to Minigtry of Communications and Information Technology (Department to Ministry of Communications and Information Technology (Department

of Telecommunications)

25. The Ministry of Communications and Information Technology (Department of

Telecommunications) had 20 Paras are pending as on 31.08.2015. It is also seen from the
information provided by the Office of the C&AG that Up to 31.08.2015, Action Taken Notes on
1 Audit Paragraphs pertaining to the year 2006 and’ 3 Action Taken Notes pertaining to the
year 2010-11 have not been submitted to the PAC by the Ministry of Communications and
Information Technology (Department of Telecommunications). The Sub-Committee took
evidence of its representatives on 28.10.2015. A comparative statement of pendency as on
31.08.2018 and 31.11.2015 of the Ministry as furnished by the Audit is given in the following
table:



‘| Number of Pending Paras as on | Number of Pending Paras as on 31.11.2015

10

COMPARATIVE TABLE OF NUMBER SOMPARATIVE TABLE OF NUMBER OF AUDIT PARAS FOR WHICH ACTION TAKEN NOTES ARE AUDIT PARAS FOR WHICH ACTION TAKEN NOTES ARE

PENDING AS ON 31.08.2015 AND 31.11.2015

31.08.2015

20 Paras [Paras id Paras

From the comparative figures given on the table above, it is clear that the number of paras

have increased.

26. When the Sub-Committee asked to furnish a detailed statement, quarterly of the
pendency of ATNs relating to the Ministry during the past one year, the Ministry submitted that

quarterly statement of all pending ATNs relating to C&AG were as stated below for kind
perusal: :
SL. | Para No Report No. | Position as on| Position as ०71 [Rem]
No 28/10/2015 18/01/2016
| 2 of 2004 1.3 Sent to Audit Case closed on. Sent to Monitoring
10/2/15 Cell MoF, for onward
62 | 20f2004| 1.1.12 Sent to Audit Case closed on | submission to PAC
L ,__3onwis |
03 |9072006 | 2.6.27 Under Modification Case closed on
11/0116
2.6.32 Under Modification | Under Modification
| 19 of | 3.1103.3 Sent for copy रस Caseclosedon | Sent to Monitoring
2010-11 09/11/5 Cell Mo, for onward
05 | 19. of 4] 04.11 Sent for copy Case closedon | submission to PAC
2010-11 . 09/1/15
| 19 of | 5.21055 Sent for copy Case closed on
2010-11 है 09/11/15
07 17 of 21 Under Modification | Sent to Audit 2.1.6.1. & 2.1.6.2 is
2014 on 02/07/15 UM on 18/12/15
2.16.3 & 2164 is
SA on 15/01/16
| | 7 ०ए।| 23 Sent to Audit Under Modification
2014 -_on 21/10/2014 on 18/12/15
iW 17 of 2.3 Under Madification Under Modification | (Sent to Audit on
2014 14/07/2015 on 18/12/15 1610/15 and returned
. . by Audit with
| observations
.10 | 20 of 21 Sent to Audit Sent to Audit (Returned by Audit with
2015 on 25/08/15 On 24/1 1/15 observations > on
03/11/15 and again Seat
to Audit
11 | 20 of 22 Sent to Audit on Under Modification
2015 OG/LO/15 on 23/11/15


12 | 20 of 23 Sent to Audit on Under Modification
2015 6/10/15 on F6/12/15
33 | 20 of 24 Under Modification on Sent to Aadit on
2015- 13/10/15 15/12/15
14 | 20 of 25 Under Modification on | Under Modification
2015 O8/09/15
15 | 20 of 2.6 Sent to Audit on Sent to Audit on (Returned by Audit with
2015 23/1115 15/12/15 observations on
5. | 2311/15 and again Sent
to Audit)
| 20 of 2.7 Sent to Audit on Sent to Audit on {Returned by Andit with
2015 27/1015 15/01/16 observations on
23/11/15 and again Sent
_} to Audit}
17 | 20 of 2.8 Under Modification on Sent to Audit on
2015 16/09/15 15/12/15
P&T Quarterly report w.e.f from 01/01/2015 to 31/12/2015
पु
Status Ason 1 Ason 17 July | Ason 1* October | As on 01" January 2016 ~]
_ | April 2015 | 2015 2015 है
Sent to Audit 7 ; _ 5 | 1_ 4 __ |; 4
Sent for Copies Nil 3 - 3 Nil
Under | 6 |
Modification 5 3 6 75
pst Reply Not | yr Nil | 4 | जमा
Total 12 12 17* 11.5

* 8 Paras from CAG Report No. 20 of 2015 have been added on 7” September 2015

27. Supplementing the above, the Secretary depased during the oral evidence as under :

"At the moment, you have told about some of the paras which are pending after 31° of
August and as on 30" of September. | have not brought that position of 30" September.
But as we have brought the position of 311 August, | would say that 16 paras were
there. When you see, the first reply out of these 16 replies which were pending for
vetting the reply, six replies were sent in tire; 11 replies were delayed for the first reply
to be sent; five of them were delayed by only one month, three of them were delayed by
three months and two of them were delayed by two months one of them which is listed
today for oral evidence was delayed for more than a year. This was basically regarding
the Enforcement Bureau to be set up. Delays are there. We understand that thing and
we understand our responsibility. We aré trying hard to see to it that delays are not
there and they are replied as much as possible in time."

28. Drawing a distinction between pending paras and delayed paras, and elaborating on
their efforts and achievements to dispose the paras, the Secretary submitted as under



29.

12

“But | would like to bring to your notice some of the reasons why these delays are there.
As you know, this Department 5 quite huge and there is large number of functionaries
in the field. Audit is taking place all over fhe country. When the Audit paras are there,
we have to collect the replies from all over the country. Sometimes, we have to
reconcile our records with the records of the different Government Departments also,
For example, one of the paras for the Audit is here today and which we will be replying
during the oral evidence. It pertains to GAIL and another Government agency.
Sometimes, the reconciliation takes long time. We have to give them due time. Because
of that also, sometimes the paras are delayed. But, by and large, the delay is there. We
would like to bring it down as much as possible, But in most of the cases, delay is
normally limited frarn one month te five months."

When the Sub-Committee desired to know the mechanism is place in the Ministry for

timely submission of ATNs within the stipulated period of 04 months from the date of Jaying of

Reports in Parliament, it was stated ‘that a separate section was constituted in DoT for

coordination of replies to audit para with nodal wings of DoT and CAG. The extracts of the

were immediately forwarded to Nodal Wings for replies and coordination was made with O/o
DG Audit (P&T), Monitoring Cell and Lok Sabha Secretariat.

30.

Supplementing the above the Secretary during evidence deposed as under :

"The | take all these points which you have told. There is no dispute about those things.
As you very rightly told that if we increase the time frame from four months to six
months, that does not mean that delays will not be there, Delays will still be there,
Probably, it is best ta keep the time to four months only. By and large, if you say four
months, the things are done fairly well in time. If you see these 16 paras, six paras were
replied well in time in‘less than four months; further, five paras were replied within five
months. That means, out of 16, 11 paras were replied within five manths. The first reply
on the 11 paras was sent within five months; six were sent within four months is well in
time. Further, three mare paras were sent within three months after that. By and large, |
would say that delay even for month should not be there. We must always try that
delays ate not there. We will always keep a check. As far as passible, we will try to do it
in time. But sometime it is not possible to do it well in time. You have asked what the
reasons were. | told you these reasons are there. Basically reasons are manifold.
Sometime there is non-availability of records. That also becomes a reason for delay.
When there is non-availability of records, then we have to collect the record or try to
construct it from whatever information is available. So, sometime that becomes the
reason for delay. Sometimes multiple units are involved for oné audit para. There is a lot
of coordination involved in that. When that coordination is going on, it takes time.
Sometimes, the matter is sub judice. If a matter is sub judice, we cannot complete the
teply to the para because then we are waiting for the decision of the courts to come.
We are mentioning that at times. Even today when we are sending ATNs some of the
cases are such which are pending in the court and we have mentioned that in the ATN
para." हे



an 13

31. When the SUB-Committee further asked as to whether any decision had been taken by
the Ministry to reflect performance in timely submission of ATNs in the ACR of officers, it was
Stated that the instructions regarding the timely submission received from Department of
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance had been circulated to all concerned.

32. When asked as to whether the Ministry had adopted good practice of other Ministries in
timely disposal of pending ATNs, the Ministry submitted that the pendency in DeT was at a
very minimal level, Paras of only two current C&AG Reports No. 17 of 2014 and Report No. 20
of 2015 were under finalization. :

33, When the Sub-Committee desired to know whether the Ministry would be able to
comply if ATNs were required to be supplied to PAC electronically to reduce delay and reduce
usage of paper, it was submitted in the affirmative.

34. When enquired as to whether the Ministry had adequate manpower having operational
knowledge of Audit Para Monitoring System Portal launched by the Monitoring Cell of Ministry
of Finance, it was stated that there were severe Manpower constraints.

35. The Secretary during evidence deposed as under:

“Secondly, we are doing the regular monitoring here. | am myself taking a meeting
every three months and the Telecom Commission meetings are there and it reviews
the pendency of the Audit paras. Then there is a Coordination Gornmittee with the Audit
at the level of Director. The recent meeting has taken place only around one and a half
months back in September. That meeting is also taking place regularly where the
officers from the Audit also come. That takes place at the DDG level and regularly
monitoring is done of alt the pending paras. But nonetheless we will ensure that all the
efforts are made to ensure that paras are replied in time." हे

36. When asked about the measures being put in place to reduce the pendency of ATNs,
. the Secretary during evidence deposed as under:

"Sir, you have asked what are the measures we have put in place. As | told you, there is
a coordination committee which is at the senior DDG's level in which the Director from
the audit also comes. Those meetings are held regularly. That is different, There you
interact on the complaints or objections or certain issues which come to the notice of the
CAG and you finalise it. To understand the situation they interact. We have a fullfledged
Audit Coordination Wing which is basically coordinating with all audits. Our officer sitting
here is basically doing that job. She is quite a senior ranking officer. She is responsible
for seeing that all the audit paras are replied in time..She is the one who puts up for the
meeting at my level or Member (Finance) level in addition to this Audit Coordination
Committee. And those meetings are taking place regularly. Even the Telecom



14

Commission which has four more Secretaries other than me also review after every
three months the pendency of audit paras. That mechanism is there."

VI. Non-compliance in timely submission of ATNs on non-selected Audit paragraphs
relating to Ministry of Railways

37. The Ministry of Railways had 90 paras of which 5 paras have not been submitted even
for the 1st time since 2012-13 and 2013-14. Of these three ate of entire Report and one on
one full chapter as on 30.09.2015. The Sub-Committee took evidence of its representatives on
19.11.2015. A comparative statement of pendency as on 30.09.2015 and 30.11.2015 furnished
by Audit is given in the following table, है

No. of ATNs not| No. of revised | No. of pending | Total O/S | ATN vetted but pending
received even for | ATNs awaited | ATNs” with with Ministries/Deptt.
the first time from the Ministries | Audit for vetting

As on | | | 74 fe | | | 4

30.09.2015

AS on |. | | fe | 45 | P| | 2

31.11.2016

‘From the comparative figures given on the table above, it could be seen that the Ministry had
not made much progress during the last two months.. The total outstanding had marginally
fallen from 89 to 80.

38. When the Sub-Committee asked fo furnish a detailed statement, quarterly, of the
pendency of ATNs relating to the Ministry during the past one year, it was submitted that the
quarterly statement for the last one year (Jan 2015 to Dec. 2015) was given below:

Position as | Paras Pending with Paras Total Paras Pending
* {| Ministry Pending with | (ie. . yet to be
on Audit ‘| submitted to PAC)
Initial Comments on | Vetted and
audit's है awaiting Hindi
ATNs observations/ | transiation
31.3.2015 12 18 | ४ | 76 114
30.6.2015 ov a | 04 44 | ७ |
[236 | 05 70 72 | छ |
34.12.2015 43%" 32 छा 42 124
—t



15

*4 more paras-added with new Report laid an 08.5,.2015
“43 more paras added-with 2 new Reports laid on 08.12.2015 and 2 more
reports laid on 18.12.2075 है

39. Supplementing the above the representative of the Ministry deposed as under:

"Sir, as you are aware and as you have also said, in 2011, there were as many as 429
paras pending but as of today, you have said 90, but we have come fo a net position of
84. We took a special drive and we have been able 0 give till last week 26 more replies
to the audit and that leaves us with 58 left with us. Of course, there is a dynamic
process as you know because some of the references come back from audit. These
include 2 of the 4 ATNs initial replies also, Out of these, 3 paras have now been
finalised. Today, out of 58, 21 replies are available and therefore, we have 37 paras
over the last one week which have been exchanged, Thus we have now got 39 minus 4
that is 35 paras net with us.Within our system, our interest is two-fold. One is
preventive. We should be able to satisfy all the items on which the CAG has sought
Clarifications, for which the replies should be cogent and complete. Now, for that we
have the standing audit committees. This year itself, from March onwards, we have held
16 meetings of the standing audit committees within the Railway Board along with
representatives from the.zones. This is the preventive part. The corrective part is to
obviously reduce the discrepancies or reasons for it to be referred back. So, to that
extent also we have succeeded because as you know our nurnber has teally reduced to
58 and we do want to bring it down even further. One more issue which the first Report
of the PAC has raised is that wherever there is a fecovery involved, we have already, |
think, implemented, that this can be recommended for closure after keeping Audit
informed at all stages regarding the progress of the recoveries. So, that has also been
implemented. This is one thing. However, | still feel that at least for thematic ones, this
is just a request to the hon. Committee, whether we could have a little bit more time to
have the final replies. That is for your kind consideration although you have not agreed
fo it earlier. | know that. But still on behalf of the Ministry | would request you again
because of the large dispersion of the Ministry."

40." When asked to state the mechanism in place in the Ministry for timely submission of
ATNs within the stipulated period of 4 months from the date of laying of Reports in Parliament,
the Ministry submitted that ali matters relating to audit paras of C&AG were handled by a
centralized directorate in the Ministry of Railways under the overall Supervision of a very senior
officer of the level of Additional Secretary with intermediate level officers of the ranks of JS,DS
and US. This Cell works in close co-ordination with Executive Officers of various Directorates
within the Ministry, the Zonai Railways, Ministry of Finance (Monitoring Cell} and the Audit.
Similarly, at the Zonal Railway level, Accounts Department, headed by a senior officer of the
rank Higher Administrative Grade (HAG) or Sr. Administrative Grade rank, functions as the
nodal officer for processing matters related to C&AG for co-ordinating with various Heads of
the executive Departments(HODs) of different functional areas. Action Takén Notes on Audit
Paras were required to be submitted to the Ministry of Finance within four months of


16

presentation of the C&AG’s Report to the Parliament. On teceipt of CAG’s Report in the
Ministry, Audit Paras were immediately circulated to the Executive Officers concerned for
preparation of ATNs, Constraints/difficulties were, however, experienced in finalizing ATNs as
per above schedule in cases of Performance Review Paras or Thematic/Special Audit Paras
where all Railways were invelved requiting extensive collection of information. The time
consumed gets multiplied when Audit makes observations on the ATNs proposed by. the
Ministry of Railways requiring back references to the Zona! Railways/Divisions and sometimes
further to field units. In some eases, in the event of a disagreement between the Audit and the
Executive, ATNs get held up and a lot of avoidable time was consumed in the finalization
process. The Cell in the Ministry of Railways worked in close coordination with all concerned
with a view to meeting the target dates stipulated in each case and regular follow up was done
at appropriate levels, The mechanism that was in place and the levels at.which interaction and
monitoring takes place were adequate. Due to this close monitoring the Ministry had been
able to finalise 325 paras in the last 4 years (2012-2015), The initiatives/improvements had
been made to strengthen the mechanism of monitoring viz, an Office order was issued in 2013
prescribing the time schedule to be adhered to stage-wise for finalization of audit paras. After
the PAC meeting on 02.2.2015, another Office Order had been issued on 13.2.15 for strict
adherence to the time schedule prescribed earlier and also for fixing of responsibility in cases
of delay to the replies as well as. for missing records; Standing Audit Committee (SAC)
meetings were regularly held to review the pending position. Pursuant fo recommendations of
1° Report of Public: Accounts Committee(16" Lok Sabha), the SAC meetings were now being
held at the level of Additional Secretary level officer. In the year 2015, seventeen (17) SAC
meetings were held with the executives concerned, With these efforts, replies to 46 paras had
been finalized and many more replies were sent 0 audit for vetting. As on 14.1.2016, 50°
paras were pending with audit for vetting; the executives concerned were reminded regularly
through written reminders, fax message, telephonic reminders and informal meetings were
also held with them at the level of Adv(F)/AM(Finance) for expediting the replies; and A D.O.
communication had also been sent on 10.2.2015 to the General Managers of all Zonal
Railways and Production Units for giving utmost attention to audit paras and in sending prompt
replies in this regard.


17

41... Explaining the constrained faced by the Ministry in submitting the Action Taken Notes
within the stipulated four months, the representatives of the Ministry during oral evidence
deposed as under:

"Now let me come to the constraints and its solutions and why we have these
problems. in the recent past, the CAG office has been conducting several thematic
reviews and all India level surveys. Now this change which has come about than what it
was earlier, involves collection of data from all the zonal railways and production units.
This is one of the reasons where even if one unit has not been able fo supply the data
on time, there is an element of delay, although we try our best to pursue them. We
have a regular monitoring machinery for them. The second issue which does affect us
is that sometimes the replies tay not be to the full satisfaction of the CAG office. Then
there is a question of back reference." हे

42. When enquired as to whether the Ministry had adopted any good practices of other
Ministries in timely disposal of pending ATNs, it was stated that the mechanism that was in
place and the leveis at which interaction and monitoring takes place in the Ministry, were
adequate. The Committee, in their Twentieth Report, had appreciated the improvements
affected in the mechanism in place in the Ministry of Railways to deal with the pendency of
ATNs.

_ 43. When asked as to whether any decision had been taken by the Ministry to reflect
performance in timely submission of ATNs in the ACR of Officers, it was submitted that while
the need for fimely submission of ATNs on audit paras was impressed upon the executives
through circulars, reminders, Standing Audit Committee etc., no specific provision had been
made in the Annual Performance Appraisal Reports to reflect the performance in regard to
disposal of audit paras.

44... When enquired as to whether the Ministry would be able to comply if ATNs were
fequired to be supplied to PAC electronically to reduce usage of Paper, it was submitted that
the Ministry of Railways had complied with the instructions of Ministry of Finance and Sfarted
uploading initial ATNs on the Web Portal “Audit Para Monitoring System” of audit paras
relating to Reports of 2010-11 onwards, However, since audit have still not started uploading
their observations/remarks on the ATNs, further remarks/clarifications of the Ministry could not
be uploaded, Accordingly, the finalized ATNs were being sent in paper form only to PAC
through Monitoring Cell of Ministry of Finance. Ministry of Railways would be in a position to
comply and send ATNs slectronically to PAC only if audit play their rote in the process.

SSE EE ROR RE SENSES EP TTS NIE CONTAC DET TTR RET OORT DASE YO IOSORIOS!
,



45.

18

When the Sub-Committee desired to know as to whether the Mintstry have adequate

manpower having operational knowledge of Audit Para Monitoting System Portal launched by

the Monitoring Cell of Ministry of Finance, it was submitted in the affirmative.

46,

When the Sub-Committee asked as fo whether the Ministry have any internal

mechanism for uploading the data, the representatives of the Ministry during evidence

deposed as under:

Vil.

47.

" Sir, if you see, | am just giving reasons which are generic in nature and it is not 100
per cent. We have an internal mechanism.’ We have a concept of standing audit
committees which are available not only in the Ministry of Railways’ level but also af the
level of the zonal railways. That is why, this number has come down. | assure you that
we will bring if down even further. As you have very correctly said, there is a system of
on [78 where data is available and it is uploaded, Sn fact, even between CAG and
ourselves, we do have a automatic audit para monitoring system which is on line. So,

not onty within the system but even between the audit and us we have an on line

monitoring system. Yes, Sir, you are very correct that it should not be a problem. We
are tightening up the whole thing. In fact, over the last 5 years, we have uploaded even
143 ATNs. But within us, it is our day-to-day monitoring system which is there. We
have got dedicated officers at every point who are working on line. But ! arm only trying
to say that the system is such if it is an individual para for individual zone it is much
faster than having a thematic view. No doubt about it that thematic reviews have done
a lot to improve and tightening of the system in the Indian Railways itself. We appreciate
this. In fact, we have instituted an internal audit mechanism also which is thematic in
nature so that systems which are not working properly are solved by multi-disciplinary
methods. As | said, we have an issue of writing and getting back written replies from the
Audit and the reference back. We have recently requested the Audit and | am sure they
will help us is that when there is a difference in perception, instead of writing to each
other again and again it would be a good idea if we could sit together and solve it
across the table. | am trying to incentivise that kind of a system so that any clarification
along with papers can be done across the table. | think this will speed up the process.
Our time is four months for final reply. But we have found that when we reply and then
there is a reference back for further clarification, if it goes through a letter and then after
our explanation is not really accepted, then instead of replying back if we have meetings
fogether to clarify our stand, the paper work will reduce and the speed will increase.
This is my only submission. To that extent, we have started this - although we have
already a system like that - but we are trying to request for more and more such
meetings to come together."

Non-compliance in timely submission of ATNs on non-selected Audit paragraphs
relating to Department of Atomic Energy

The pendency status of ATN in the Ministry as on 31.07.2015 as received from Audit

was seven Paras. The status Report on Pending Action Taken Notes (ATNs) for the Ministry

received up to 30.11.15 by the C&AG was as given below:



19

No. of ATNs not . No. of pending | Total | ATN vetted but pending
received even | awaited from the | ATNs with Audit for | O/S | with Ministries? Depts
for the first time | Ministries * vetting

As on | 5 74 fe | [| [fo

30.09 2015

As on po 33 45 | [० | |... |

31,11.2015 : -

From the comparative figures given on the table above, it could be seen that the pendency

status of ATNs have not dropped satisfactorily since 31.07.2045.

48. When the Sub-Committee asked the Ministry to furnish the details of the pending Audit
paras, the Secretary during evidence deposed as under:

“Initially there were as many as 147 paragraphs which were there in the audit report
and thereafter we have given responses on two occasions. The last one was in June
2014 and thereafter, after audit has accepted many of them, the remaining paragraphs
were 29. These paragraphs contain some of the issues which are repeated. The net is
now that we are left with 14 issues. Initially it was 147 in 2009."

49. When the Sub-Committee further asked the Ministry to furnish the details of the Audit
Paras which have not been complied at all, the Secretary during evidence deposed as under:

“Taday we are not prepared for this. Only the reading of the OM which called for

_ attendance, we somehow felt that the discussion would be mainly on the management
of fuel for pressurised heavy water reactor. But! think, within fwo weeks' time, we
should be ready with rest of the material as well, Sir, the problem is that we have come
to this specific Sub-Committee for the first time. It was not familiar fo us as fo what
could be the domain of discussion over here. The communication, which was
received by us from the Secretariat over here, specifically mentioned the management
of fuel for pressurised water reactor in addition to Action Taken Notes on non-selected
audit paragraphs, It was not very clear to me, at that time, as to what are those things
which we need to discuss in addition to that. That is why, we have come prepared with
the people who are dealing with that. " .

50. When the Sub-Committee sought the pendency status of ATNs, the Ministry stated that
the final ATN on Para No. 2.4 of Report No.5 of 1999, duly vetted by Audit had already been
sent to the Monitoring Cell, Lok Sabha Secretariat. It was further emphasised that the final
ATNs for 4 paras viz. Para No. 10.1 of the report No. 13 of 2012-13, Stand Alone Pata (1.1) of
the Report No, 19 of 2008, Para 5.4 of the Report-No. 5 of 2001 and Para No. 9.1 of the
Report No. 5 of 2002 have already been sent to C&AG for vetting. On receipt from C&AG, the
duly vetted ATNs will be forwarded to Monitoring Cell, Lok Sabha Secretariat. Presently, there
are 5 Non-Selected paras pending with the Department, Out of 5 ATNs for 4 paras were
initially prepared and sent to Audit which-were received back recently with their comments.

SO a IOI ९:२८ ०५ SS SNR


20

Revised ATNs for these paras are under process and will be sent to C&AG for vetting

expeditiously. However, the latest sfatus of all 10 Non-selected paras intimated by the Ministry

of Finance, Department of Expenditure would be sent in due course,

51.

When the Sub-Committee desired the Ministry to furnish the number of paras pending

with respect to the standalone C&AG Report No. 19 of 2008, the Secretary during evidence

stated

Vill.

52.

paras.

as under:

"Sir, these paragraphs, which were raised in 2008, have been studied and the number
has come down from 147 in 2009 to 29, The unique issues which are reflected in these
29 paragraphs are actually 14 in number. Among these 14 also, there are quite a few
which are generally simitarly in terms particularly of site specific progress in terms
of development of different mines. Sir, | may summarise the issues. The first one is the
operation of 12 pressurised water reactors fuelled by indigenous uranium. In India, we
are today having 21 reactors under operation. Out of them, 11 are under JAEA
safeguards, After the Civil Nuclear Cooperation Agreement, India became eligible to
feceive international fuel supplies in spite of. having been non-signatory to the NPT,
having already tested nuclear devices, With this Unique opportunity, we have been able:
to grow our programme much faster than which could be otherwise possible. Our
programme has been mainly hindered by non-availability of adequate quantity of
uranium which is the fuel for first generation reactors. So, under the Civil Nuclear
Cooperation Agreement, we had sought and got the right fo determine for ourselves,
under 8 separate plan, which of the reactors would be kepf outside the IAEA
safeguards and which one could be kept within the IAEA safeguards. Those reactors
which have been declared to be eligible for IAEA safeguards are receiving fuel from
international sources and there is no issue on their performance geiting hindered
because of shortage of fuel. "

Non-compliance in timely submission of ATNs on non-selected Audit Paragraphs in timely submission of ATNs on non-selected Audit Paragraphs

relating fo the Ministry of Tribal Affairs fo the Ministry of Tribal Affairs

The pendency Status of ATN in the Ministry as 30.04.2015 as received from Audit was 1
The status Report on Pending Action Taken Notes {ATNs) for the Ministry received up

to 30.11.15 by the C&AG was a given below: ~

No. of ATNs | No. of No. of | Total [ATN vetted but pending

not received | revised pending O'S with Ministries/
even for the | ATNs ATNs— with Department
first time awaited Audit for
from the vetting
Ministries
As on 14 eo | eo | 1 eo
30.04.2015 .
As on 2 P| | 2 |! [|
31.11.2015



21

From the comparative figures given on the table above,

it could be seen that the
Ministry have not done anything to clear the pending para which is of 2007 more over, one _

more para has been added so seen from the above table since 31.04.2015,



22

PART II

Observations and Recommendations

1. The Committee note that the Reports of C&AG of India telating to the audit of
Union accounts must be submitted to the President of India as per Article 151 of the
Constitution of India who directs them to be laid on the table of the House. Thereafter,
the Reports of the C&AG (Civil) stand referred to the Public Accounts Committee for
detailed examination. However, due to paucity of time the Committee is not in a
position to examine every Report and therefore adopts a selective approach by
.Scrutinizing the more important Reports/Paras, The Audit Reports which are not
selected for In-depth examination by the Committee are being dealt with by a well
devised or accepted procedure. The Commiftee, in their 105th Report (Tenth Lok
Sabha}, have evolved a procedure whereby the Action Taken Notes in all the paragraphs
of the Reports of the C&AG of India are required to be furnished to the ‘Committee
through the Monitoring Cell, Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure within a
period of 4 months from the date of laying of the Audit Reports on the table of the
House w.e.f, 317 March, 2016. :

2. The Committee note that pendency of ATNs have not improved much despite the
recommendations of the Committee, mainly due to lack of genuine and consistent
efforts by the various Ministries/Departments, The Public Account Committee (2008-09),
(2010-11) {2013-14) and 2014-15 reviewed the position with respect fo timely submission
of ATNs on the non-selected Audit paragraphs by the Ministries/Departments. The PAC
{2014-15) selected and examined the subject and submitted its 1९ and 207 Report (16""
Lok Sabha) because of the shortcomings meted out in furnishing the ATNs on the Audit
Paragraphs. As the Pendency did not improve much, the Sub-Committee IV of the PAC
(2015-16) was constituted for detailed examination, The Sub-Committee after procuring
the pendency status of ATNs in various Ministries/Departments as on 30.04.2015 from
the Audit, which stood at 644 paras, decided to take oral evidence of the
concernedispecific Ministries to take stock of the pendencies/difficulties faced by the
Ministries and the flaws in furnishing the ATNs, if any, and to explore the possible

corrective/remedial actions taken in this regard.



23

Monitoring Cell, Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure.

3, The Committee appreciate the effort of the Monitoring Cell, Ministry of Finance,
Department of Expenditure in sensitizing the Ministries/Oepartments for timely
submission of the ATNs within the stipulated period of 4 months and ensuring
compliance of the recommendation of PAC, considerably reducing the pendency of
ATNs from 4216 paras as on 30.06.2010 to 644 paras as on 30.04.2015. The Committee
however, note with concern that the pendency of ATNs furnished by Audit reveal that
the number of ATNs pending as on 30.04.2015 was 644 and 615 paras as on 30.11.2045,
Though the pendency of ATNs have slightly declined/decreased, the Committee feei
that ATNs pending with the various Ministries/Departments are almost stagnant despite
regular meetings of the various stake holders such as the Committee of Secretaries,
constitution of Standing Audit Committee chaired by the Secretary of the Ministries
concerned. The Committee, therefore, wish the Monitoring Cell, Department of
Expenditure to expedite the process of clearing the pending ATNs by issuing strict
instructions to the Mintstries/Departments in consultation with of the office of the C&2AG
within the stipulated period of 4 months. They also wish the Ministries to understand
and comprehend the same as part of their statutory obligation to furnish the ATN on the
Audit para to the PAC after getting them vetted by Audit.

4. The Committee appreciate the effort of the Monitoring Cell, Ministry of Finance in
upgrading the need based Audit Para Monitoring System (APMS) and organising
training Programmes for the officers of the Ministries on its USAGE, The Committee
hote with concern that since officers have a specific tenure within the Ministry and get
transferred after a specific period of service, the Committee also note with concern that
certain Ministries have shortage of manpower for operating the APMS. The Committee
feel that the complete operationalisation of the APMS should be done at the earliest
with all the Ministries as it gives a correct picture regarding real status of the pending
ATNs with respect to various Ministries. The Committee desire the Monitoring Cell to
give instructions to all the Ministries for adopting the APMS which could considerably
help in access of the status. The Committee also recommend that the Monitoring Cell
should conduct training of officers on Quarterly basis so that they are acquainted with
the working of APMS to ensure availability of tralned officers to those Ministries with



see
ORGS.

24

deficient manpower for the same. The Committee may be apprised of the action faken
in this regard within six months of the presentation of this Report.

5. The Committee recall that the Public Accounts Committee at their sitting held on
7.4.1982 and subsequently on 19.4,1982, had decided that the various Audit Reports be
referred to the various Ministries concerned for furnishing notes, duly vetted by Audit,
showing the Remedial/Corrective Action Taken on all the Paragraphs contained therein
within: four months of the presentation of the Report. Subsequently, the Ministry of
Finance was enjoined as the nodal agency to coordinate among various Ministries with
respect to furnishing of Action Taken and forward the same to the Lok Sabha
Secretariat. The.Committee also caused a system of online monitoring of timely
submission of ATNs by Ministries to be put in place and mandated the Ministry of
finance, Department of Expenditure, to act as the nodal Ministry to monitor and
coordinate timely submission of ATNs, using the ¢-monitoring system called Audit
Paras Monitoring System or APMS. The Committee are apprised that several Ministries
are yet to comply to the requirement of uploading ATNs on the portal and obtaining
vetting comments online despite repeated instructions from monitoring cell. This
failure to comply by some Ministries, who still resort to Manual clearance of Audit Paras
has rendered the e-monitoring portal's data unreliable and therefore makes the entire
effort useless. The Committee, therefore, recommend that all Ministries, henceforth,
should upload all ATNs at every stage on to the APMS portal, obtain vetting comments
thereon from the C&AG online, and furnish final ATNs also online by uploading onto the
portal. The Committee also recommend that the C&AG may also process ATNs on the
portal only and decline to accept ATNs submitted manually by Ministries. Further, the
C&AG may also suo moto categorise the final ATNs once uploaded by Ministries and
upload such categorisation on the APMS portal for the use. of the Public Accounts
Committee.

Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue

6. The Committee note that as on 30.042015, the total humber of Action taken Nofes '
pending with the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) was 150, out of which
ATNs. on 67 paras have not been furnished even for the first time. The Secretary, during
evidence on 29,09.2015 however, stated that the total paras pending with the


25

Department of Expenditure was 15 only, ie. 3 in Central Excise, 3 in Service Tax and 9
in Customs. The Committee further observe that as per the information furnished by
Audit the number of pending ATNs have increased: to 141 as on 30.14.2045. The
Ministry again submitted that as on $1.12,2015 the total number of Paras pending with
Central Excise and Service Tax was 40 and 82 out of which 50 ATNs have not been
furnished even for the first time. The Committee are perturbed to note the Ministry's
lackadaisical approach in settling the Audit paras despite the clear cut guidelines to
furnish the ATNs within 4 months after the Audit Reports are laid on the Table of the
House. The Committee have noted that in the case of non-selected paras by the Public
Accounts Committee, the Ministries have shown a very casual attitude in sending the
Action Taken Notes and hence, the pendency of the ATNs have increased over a period
of time. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to take appropriate
measures to furnish the ATNs at the earliest within the prescribed period and bring
down the pendency status, The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this
regard within six months of the presentation of the Report.

Ministry of Defence

7. The Committee observe that the pendency of ATNs of the Ministry of Defence
has not declined satisfactorily from 153 in July, 2015 to 142 as on 30.11.2015, The
Secretary during evidence on 06.10.2015 had stated that a total of 179 paras were
pending out of which ATNs for 28 paras have not been sent to Audit even for once. The
Committee are dismayed at the slow. progress of the Ministry in furnishing the pending
ATNs. The Committee also note that the Ministry was proposing to implement an IT
based data system in respect of draft paras and ATNs to ensure more stringent
monitoring of their timely disposal of ATNs. The Committee therefore urge the Ministry
to take stock of the ATNs pendency and evolve adequate strength of its moniforing
mechanism for timely disposal of ATNs, The Committee also wish the Ministry to
expedite the implementation of the IT based data system which could be of immense
hefp in reducing the pending ATNs. This wil! not only reduce duplication of typing work
but also will result in ensuring a paperless office work.

8. The Committee note with concern that the Action Taken Notes on 20 paras were
pending with the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology (Department
of Telecommunications) as on 31.08.2015 out of which Action Taken Notes on 1 Audit


26

Paragraph pertaining to the year 2006 and 3 paras pertaining to 2010-14 were stilt
pending. The Committee further note that the number of paras pending with the
Ministry have increased to 22 as on 30.11.2015. Explaining the reasons for the delay in
submitting the Action Taken Notes, the Secretary during evidence on 28.10.2015 had
stated the existence of large number of field functionaries and collection of the replies
from the same. Moreover, the reconciliatory process with Audit also consume a Jot of
time. The Committee are not convinced with the reply of the Ministry that existence of
large number of field functionaries is the cause for delay in submitting the Action Taken
Notes. They feel that for a Ministry such as the Communication and Information
Technology, it must be comparatively easier to have a sound mechanism to have a
better co-ordination with its field units than other Ministries. They, therefore, urge upon
the Ministry to ensure better co-ordination amongst its field units by using its core
areas of [T modules and communication networks so that such information on
submission of Action Taken Notes on Audit Paras be obtained quickly and be forwarded
to the Lok Sabha Secretariat after getting them vetted by the Audit. Moreover, the
Committee are dismayed to note the non-committal effort of the Ministry in clearing the
pending paras and that too even of the year 2006 though it has been almost a decade
since the Report was presented to the House. The Committee, therefore, urge the
Ministry to take stringent action against the erring officials and fix responsibility for
such a lapse. The Committee also desire the Ministry to beef up the mechanism for
timely submission of ATNs and apprise the Committee of the action taken in this regard
within six months of the presentation of this Report.

Ministry of Railways

9. The Committee observe that the tofal number of Paras pending with the Ministry
of Railways was 89 out of which ATNs on 5 paras have not been submitted even for the
first time since 2012-13 and 2013-14 as on 30.09.2015. The Committee further observe
that the number of pending paras have further increased to 124 as submitted by the
Ministry on 31.12.2015. The Committee also note the constraints of the Ministry in
finalising the ATNs on thematic/performance Review Paras where all Railways were
involved and extensive collection of information is required. The Committee are
however unimpressed with the effort of the Ministry in clearing the pending paras,
(though 43 new paras were added) with them furnishing ATNs only on 8 paras from


27

April 2015 till 08.12.2015, The Committee deplore the callous attitude of the Ministry in
failing to comply within the stipulated period of 4 months on so many paras. The
Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to adhere to the timeline of 4 months
fixed for submission of ATNs.

10. Failure to recover huge sum is yet another issue which was pointed out by the
Sub-Committee. The Sub-Committee observe that the Railways had failed to recover
huge sums due on account of maintenance charges for Road over Bridges and Road
under bridges. They also note that only हैं 371 crore of = 811 crore had been recovered,
The Committee desire that the entire unrecovered amount should be recovered
expeditiously, They recommend that the ambiguities in contracts entered into within
various agencies which in the past had led to disputes concerning liability for
maintenance charges may be avoided in future, with insertion of clear contractual
provisions. The Committee feel that wherever Public Money is involved,. the
Ministry!Departments should act with caution and see that funds are being spent in
accordance with sound monetary principles and prudent practices

11. The Committee also note that loss of revenue suffered on account of moving
traffic by longer route and charging by shortest route. which has been embedded as a
policy by the railways. The Committee were not satisfied with the reasoning that route
feasibility is what prompts them: to transport-goods using longer route, and
rationalizing charges might result ‘in losing the market. They, therefore, recommend
that this matter may be investigated thoroughly and suitable penal actions be initiated
against the erring officials for loss of revenue to the Railway exchequer. Further, the
Committee recommend that all efforts should be made by the Railways to explore all
possibilities to find out shortest rail routes which will Prove to be beneficial for
transporters so that this will result in extra revenue generation for the Railway
Exchequer. The Committee may be informed of the actions taken by the Railways in
this regard

Department of Atomic Energy of Atomic Ener:

12, The Committee observe that the Department of Atomic Energy had 9 Action
Taken Notes pending as on 31,07.2045 which included a standalone Report No. 19 of
2008. It was also observed that there were 5 Paras.on which Action Taken Notes have



Suu 27 02221 27202

रु

28

not been submitted even for the first time. The Committee also observe that the number
of pending ATNs have also increased to 11 as on 30.14.2015. Of these, again, the
Department have not furnished ATN on 2 paras even for the first time. When asked ta
submit the pendency status within the Department was stated that only 5 paras were
pending as of 18.02.2016 and that the latest status of 10 non-selected paras intimated
by the Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure would be submitted in due
course, The Committee note that the lackadaisical approach on the part of the
Department in dealing with furnishing of timely ATNs and deplore the attitude of the
Department in sidelining the recommendations of the Committee, The Committee,
therefore, reiterate that appropriate steps should be taken up for timely submission of
the Action Taken Notes within 4 months of the presentation of the Report. The
Committee also urge the Department to take action-on the erring officials for the lapses

teading to the delay in submission of ATNs.

Ministry of Tribal Affairs

13. The Committee observe that the pendency status of Action Taken Notes of the
Ministry of Tribal Affairs as on 30.04.2015 was only on the entire C&AG Report No. 14 of
2007. . It is also observed that the pendency of ATNs have increased to 2 as on
30.11.2015, The Committee are astounded to note that Ministry has done nothing to
rectify the mistake even after a lapse of more than 7 years that too when the issue is

. that of the vulnerable section of the society, The Committee also note with concern that

there was inadequate publicity, cases of grant to ineligible beneficiaries and delayed
payment of scholarship, depriving the eligible beneficiaries and defeating the
objectivefpurpose of the scheme with delayed payment. The Committee therefore,
recommend the Ministry to expeditiously furnishireconcile with Audit of the pending
paras and also urge the Ministry to roll out the e- scholarship portal at the earliest so
that the scholarship amount goes directly into the beneficiary's account. The
Committee also recommend that the Ministry should arrange to have properly trained
personnel to handle the APMS related work at al! times.

14. This Sub-Committee, as the name itself suggests, has been tasked primarily to
ensure compliance by Ministries/Departments of the Union Government in timely

submission of Remedial Action Taken Notes on the Audit Examination. However, as.


29

mentioned | the preceding paras, ATNs ona large number of paragraphs pertaining to
various Ministries selected by earlier Committees are still bending with the Ministries.
Ministries are certainly aware of the importance our Constitution has attached to public
financial accountability and the elaborate mechanism it has put in place for the same,
The Committee would like to be apprised of the mechanism in place within the
Ministry!Department to attend to timely submission of ATNs and the efforts made in
tecent years fo ensure compliance in timely submission of remedial/correction ATNs on

Audit observations on Ministry's functioning.

15. The Committee also observe that a large number of audit paragraphs
are pending against social sector Ministries, and considering these Ministries have
substantial budgetary allocations and the proper utilization of grants to these Ministries -
having a direct bearing on the livelihood of millions, timely submission of remedial
‘Action Taken Notes by them needs stringentfconstant monitoring. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure should
further strengthen their monitoring of non-compliance by social sector Ministries in
timely submission of remedial Action Taken Notes. Further, failure on the part of the
Officials in ensuring timely submission of these Action Taken Notes may be entered into

the ACRs of the concerned officials.

NEW DELHI; PROF, K.V. THOMAS
April, 2016 Chairperson,
Chaitra, 1937 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee