114 
DESIGN, DEVELOPMENT, MANUFACTURE AND 
INDUCTION OF LIGHT COMBAT AIRCRAFT (LCA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


2 
 
DESIGN, DEVELOPMENT, MANUFACTURE AND 
INDUCTION OF LIGHT COMBAT AIRCRAFT (LCA) 
 
PAC NO. 2153 
 
O N E H U N D R E D A N D 
F O U R T E E N T H R E P O R T 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE  
( 2018  - 19 ) 
 
( SIXTEENTH LOK S ABH  A) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on: 14.12.2018 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 14.12.2018 
L O K S A B H A S E C R E T A R I A T 
N E W  D E L H  I 
DECEMBER, 2018 /AGRAHAYANA, 1940 (Saka) 


3 
 
CONTENTS 
 
PAGES 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2018-19)…… (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION……………….. (iv) 
 
 
 REPORT  
 PART- I  
I Introductory 1 
II Audit Review 2 
III Project Progress 3 
IV Manufacture and Induction of LCA 38 
  
PART - II 
 
 Observations/Recommendations 43 
  
APPENDICES 
 
I Minutes of the 15th sitting of the PAC (2018-19) held on 17th November, 
2018 
II* Minutes of the 20th sitting of the PAC (2018-19) held on 5th December, 
2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*to be appended at the time of printing 

4 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay  
4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra  
5. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar 
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab   
7. Smt. Riti Pathak   
8. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal ―Nishank‖  
9. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal  
10. Shri Abhishek Singh   
11. Shri Gopal Shetty   
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya   
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur  
14. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
15. Dr. Ponnusamy Venugopal  
RAJYA SABHA 
16. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda  
17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita   
18. Shri Shwait Malik   
19. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya  
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy  
21. Shri Bhupender Yadav   
22. Shri C.M. Ramesh   
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A.K. Singh - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri T. Jayakumar - Director 
3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Deepankar Kamble - Committee Officer 

5 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee, having been authorised by the 
Committee, do present this One Hundred and Fourteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) 
on "Design, Development, Manufacture and Induction of Light Combat Aircraft 
(LCA)" based on the C&AG's Report No. 17 of 2015 relating to Ministry of Defence. 
 
2. The above -mentioned Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
was laid on the Table of the House on 8th May, 2015. 
 
3. The Public Accounts Committee (2018 -19) took up the subject for detailed 
examination and report. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the  
Ministry of Defence (MoD), Defence Research and Development Organization (DRDO), 
Aeronautical Development Agency (ADA), Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL), Bharat 
Electronics Limited (BEL) and Indian Air Force (IAF) on the subject at their sitting held 
on 17 th November, 2017. Accordingly, a draft Report was prepared and placed before 
the Committee for their consideration. The Committee considered and adopted this draft 
Report at their sitting held on 5 th December, 2018. The minutes of the Sittings are 
appended to the Report. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type and form Part - II of 
the Report. 
 
5. The Committee would also like to express their thanks to the representatives of 
the Ministry of Defence (MoD) , Defence Research and Development Organization 
(DRDO), Aeronautical Development Agency (ADA), Hindustan Aeronautics Limited 
(HAL), Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL) and Indian Air Force (IAF) for tendering 
evidence before them and furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in 
connection with the examination of the subject. 
 
7.  The Committee place on record their appreci ation of the assistance rendered to  
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India and the 
Committee Secretariat in preparation of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; MALLIKARJUN KHARGE 
12 December, 2018 Chairperson, 
21 Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee. 

6 
 
 
 
REPORT 
PART-I 
 
CHAPTER - I 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
1. Government of India (GoI) sanctioned in August 1983, design, development and 
manufacture of Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) over 8 to 10 years from 1983 at an 
estimated development cost of ` 560 crore including six flying prototypes. 
 
2. In June 1984, GoI constit uted Aeronautical Development Agency (ADA) as a 
dedicated institution for the management of LCA project. MoD, besides sanctioning 
funds for LCA project, is involved in the decision making process through the General 
Body and Governing Body of ADA. The Gene ral Body of ADA presided over by Raksha 
Mantri annually review the progress of LCA project, while the Governing Body chaired 
by the Secretary, Department of R&D manages all affairs and funds of the society. 
Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL), a Defence Pu blic Sector Undertaking is the 
principal contractor for the LCA project. 
 
3. Subsequently after the completion of the feasibility study and project definition, 
the Cabinet Committee on Political Affairs (CCPA) in February, 1991, approved to 
execute the project in two phases of Full Scale Engineering Development (FSED). The 
FSED Phase-II was taken up in February 2000 even before the closure of Phase -I and 
the FSED Phase-I was retrospectively closed with effect from 31 March 2004 within the 
sanctioned cost of ` 2,188 crore by carrying forward the pending activities to FSED 
Phase-II. The project was assessed to be completed by 2004. 
 
4. Government of India, in November 2009, sanctioned FSED Phase-III at a cost of 
` 2431.55 crore (FE ` 818.60 crore) for design and dev elopment of two prototypes of 
LCA Mk-II with an imported alternate engine with a delivery schedule of 31 December 
2018. Thus, LCA development can be termed as completed only when the LCA Mk -II is 
developed under FSED Phase -III, productionised and inducted into IAF squadrons 
thereafter, as LCA Mk-II is expected to meet the ASR. 

7 
 
 
 
5. A total amount of ` 10397.11 crore (FE ` 3800.01crore) was sanctioned for the 
three FSED phases of LCA programme, against which, ADA had incurred a cumulative 
expenditure of ` 8294.39 crore (FE ` 2768.18 crore) in October 2014. This sanction and 
expenditure are exclusive of cost of Kaveri engine (` 2,839 crore) and Electronic 
Warfare Suite (EWS) (Mayavi) ( ` 154.74 crore) developed for LCA as development of 
Engine and EWS were sanctioned in 1989 and 2005 as separate projects by DRDO. 
 
CHAPTER - II 
AUDIT REVIEW 
6. The execution of the LCA programme was examined to assess the extent of: 
(a) Achievement of Air Staff Requirement (ASR) and Weaponisation of LCA; 
(b) Indigenous capability developed through LCA programme; 
(c)  Development and manufacturing of LCA (AF) including setting up of 
manufacturing facilities at HAL; and 
(d)  The preparedness of IAF to induct LCA into Service and consequent 
operational impact. 
The records of ADA, Air HQ, HAL and DRDO Headquarters and its laboratories 
affiliated to design and development of LCA were seen for conducting the review. 
 
7. Delays in execution of LCA project with respect to project definition, deficiencies 
in planning and financial management were commented upon in Para 50 of Report No. 
3 of 1989 of the C&AG of India, Union Government Defence Services (AF&Navy) for the 
year ended 31 March 1988. Delay in execution of Phase-I of LCA project which included 
development of Multi Mode Radar, Flight control system, Digital Electronic Engine 
Control, integration of Kaveri engine on LCA, etc and consequent up -gradation of MiG- 
Bis airc raft, import of Su -30 MKI aircraft to cover the shortfall in fighter aircraft, were 
highlighted in para 28 of the Report No. 8 of 1999 of the C&AG of India, Union 
Government, Defence Services (Air Force & Navy) for the year ended 31 March 1998. 

8 
 
 
8. The PAC (2017 -18) selected the subject as reported in the C&AG's Report No. 
17 of 2015 which covered issues relating to design, development, manufacture and 
induction of Light Combat Aircraft (Airforce) for detailed examination and report. 
Subsequently, the Committee obtained requisite information and some other 
clarifications from the Ministry of Defence (MoD). The Committee, as a part of their on 
the spot Study Visit programme to Chennai, Hyderabad and Bengaluru from 30.10.2017 
to 02.11.2017, had discussed the subject at Hyderabad on 01.11.2017 to gain in -depth 
knowledge and also took oral evidence of the representatives of MoD, Defence 
Research and Development Organization (DRDO), Hindustan Aeronautics Limited 
(HAL), Bharat Electronics Lim ited (BEL), Aeronautical Developmental Agency (ADA) 
and the IAF on 17.11.2017 in New Delhi to obtain further information on the subject. 
Based on the information gathered, the Committee proceeded with examination of the 
relevant issues in detail as outlined in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
CHAPTER - III 
PROJECT PROGRESS 
9. Cabinet Committee on Political Affairs, in February 1991, approved in principle, 
execution of the LCA project in two Full Scale Engineering Development (FSED) 
phases as detailed below: 
(i) FSED Phase-I: Building and limited flight testing of two LCA Technology 
Demonstrator (TD1 and TD2) aircraft to demonstrate confidence levels in 
critical technologies through 210 hours of test flying and parallel 
development of other technologies and proving the m on  ground  
rigs/flying test beds. 
(ii) FSED Phase-II: Building further five prototypes and integration of other 
technologies developed in parallel in Phase I, Integration of Kaveri engine, 
Flight- testing and weapon integration to achieve IOC and FOC. 
FSED Phase-I 
 
10. It was, however, seen that from the approval in November 1995 of the General 
Body, ADA, during the course of FSED Phase-I, ADA had, on the ground of 

9 
 
 
accelerating the development process of LCA, advanced the manufacture of two 
prototypes (PV1 and PV2) from FSED Phase -II to FSED Phase -I so as to utilise the 
savings in FSED Phase -I occurred due to shifting of certain systems from import list to 
indigenous development list. ADA‘s decision was in contravention of the Cabinet 
approval for Phased development, wherein the building of PVs was to be taken up in 
FSED Phase -II only after TDs had been built and flight tested for 210 hours to 
demonstrate confidence levels in critical technologies. 
11. As a result of ADA‘s decision, the two PVs viz. PV1  and PV2, building of which 
was taken up even before the first flight of TDs and development of other technologies, 
could not be integrated with systems such as Multi -Mode Radar (MMR), Internal Self 
Protection Jammer (SPJ)/Radar Warning Receiver (RWR) whic h had not been 
developed till 1995 to 2006. These systems were required to be developed and proved 
on ground rigs/flying test beds in FSED Phase -I and integrated on the PVs in FSED 
Phase-II as per the phased development sanctioned in June 1993. Subsequentl y, as 
per the sanction in November 2001 for FSED Phase -II, remaining three PVs and eight 
Limited Series Production (LSP) aircraft were to be manufactured and the LSPs were 
required to be delivered between May 2006 and May 2008 to IAF. Besides, the PVs 
were also required to be integrated with the MMR, SPJ, RWR technologies. 
12. In response to the above, the Ministry submitted as under: 
 
"The decision to advance prototype vehicles PV1 & PV2 in FSED Phase-I has 
given technology edge for proving critical systems like Weapon integration (R73 
E), Drop Tank Integration, Avionics Architecture Upgrades, Extensive use of 
Carbon-Carbon composites, Aircraft Performance and Envelope Expansion flight 
testing, open system architecture (PV2). The critical on board systems like MMR, 
RWR etc. were initially planned to be integrated on PV-1 & PV-2 based on 
schedules provided by the work centres. However, timelines could not be met by 
the work-centres due to the technological complexities. The delays are primarily 
due to the technology challenges, US sanctions in 1998 and change in scope by 
IAF." 

10 
 
 
13. However, Audit observed that decision of ADA to advance the development of 
PV1 and PV2 had a cascading effect on the remaining PVs viz. PV3, PV4 (converted as 
PV6 and PV5), which were also rendered deficient of these systems (MMR, SPJ,  
RWR). As a consequence of this, ADA had to resort to utilisation of even the LSP 
aircraft, which were to be handed over to IAF, towards flight testing/evaluation. The 
decision to advance build ing of two PVs was got ratified by ADA from GoI in January 
1998. The development of other technologies (MMR, SPJ, RWR) and development of 
Kaveri engine was also delayed. Various milestones under FSED Phase -I and their 
actual achievements are indicated below: 
 
SI.No. Milestone Scheduled date 
of completion 
Actual date of completion 
1. Roll out of first aircraft 
(TD1) 
June 1995 November 1995 
2. First flight of first aircraft 
(TD1) 
December 1996 January 2001 
3. First flight of second 
aircraft (TD2) 
September 1997 June 2002 
4. First flight of PV1 December 1999 November 2003 
5. First flight of PV2 June 2000 Shifted to FSED Phase II 
6. Completion of 210 
hours of flying (TD1 and 
TD2) 
June 1998 124 hours completed by 31 
March 2004 and balance shifted 
to FSED Phase II 
 
 
14. Department of Defence R&D, MoD, in April 2005, had requested approval of 
Cabinet Committee on Security for post -facto closure of FSED Phase -I with effect from 
31 March 2004 and within the sanctioned cost of ` 2,188 crore while the remaining flight 
testing of TDs, flight testing of PV2 and completion of development of Multi -Mode Radar 
(MMR) would be carried out as part of LCA FSED Phase -II. Based on CCS approval, 
GoI accorded post -facto sanction in July 2005 for the closure of FSED Phase -I with 
effect from 31 March 2004. In August 2005, ADA also carried forward balance work of 

11 
 
 
42 ongoing work packages valuing ` 65.16 crore as on 31 March 2004 to FSED Phase- 
II. These 42 work packages pertained to development of MMR, Flight control System 
actuators, Digital Flight Control Computer, Jet Fuel Starter, Drop Tanks, etc. 
15. The Ministry stated that as per FSED Phase -I objectives, TD -1 and TD -2 had 
completed 124 hours of flying by March 2004 and by then all critical systems were 
proven with a dditional prototype models, PB -1 and PB -2. Critical Technologies which 
were required for prototype and subsequent production of LCA Mk -I were successfully 
developed indigenously and demonstrated. All the major objectives of FSED Phase -I 
were achieved. 
16. As per Audit, in spite of the fact that FSED Phase -I was delayed by six years and 
treated as completed in March 2004 as against the scheduled completion of June 1998, 
the intended objectives of the phased development were not met completely. ADA‘s 
decision in 1995 to advance two PVs from FSED Phase -II to FSED Phase -I in order to 
accelerate the LCA programme failed to yield the desired results, as other technologies 
(MMR, SPJ, RWR) to be integrated on PVs were yet to be developed and proved. 
17. The Ministry replyin g to the Committee's concern regarding the operational 
vehicles with requisite sensors and weapons not being included in Phase -I considerable 
delay, replied as under: 
"the programme of indigenous development of Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) was 
initiated in 1983 when there was no Technology base in the country. The 
feasibility studies and Project Definition Phase (PDP) studies were completed in 
1988. Based on the report of a Specialist Committee consisting of Chief of Air 
Staff (CAS) & Secretary, Dept. of Def ence (R&D) which examined the 
complexities of the project, it was decided by CCPA at its meeting held on 27 -02- 
1991, that LCA development programme would be executed in two phases - in 
the first phase to build Two Technology Demonstrators (TDs) along with  
development of critical technologies including Multi Mode Radar (MMR) and in 
the second phase to build five Prototype Vechicles (PVs), integrate Weapons, 
Sensors and flight test the aircraft leading to Initial Operational clearance (IOC) 
and Final Operational Clearance (FOC). there was a risk mitigation considering 

12 
 
 
the lack of availability of various technologies in the country. The LCA FSED 
Phase-I was sanctioned in June 1993 to develop Technologies in view of 
technology complexities & their demonstration. Build of Prototype Vehicles with 
the requisite Sensors and Weapons was sanctioned in LCA FSED Phase -II, after 
flight of the Technology Demonstrator in 2001 which proved the above critical 
technologies." 
FSED Phase-II 
 
18. Various milestones under FSED Phase-II and their actual achievements are 
indicated in Table II below: 
 
SI. 
No. 
Milestone Original date of 
completion 
(November 
2001) 
Revised date of 
completion 
(November 
2009) 
Actually 
achieved date 
1. PV2- first flight (Carried 
forward from Phase-I) 
December 
2002 
- December 
2005 
2. PV3-first flight July 2003 - December 
2006 
3. PV4-first flight December 
2003 
Jan-Feb 2010 November 
2014 
4. PV5-first flight (Trainer) October 2004 August 2009 November 
2009 
5. Achievement of IOC December 
2005 
December 
2010 
December 
2013 
6. Creation of facilities for 
achieving LSP of 8 aircraft 
per annum at HAL 
May 2006 May 2006 Facilities 
created at HAL 
only for 
manufacture of 
four aircraft 
7. Manufacture of eight LSP 
standard LCA by HAL and 
delivery to IAF 
May 2006 - 
May 2008 
May 2006 - 
May 2008 
HAL 
manufactured 
seven LSP 
aircraft during 
April 2007 to 
March 2013 
8. Achievement of FOC December 
2008 
December 
2012 
Not achieved 

13 
 
 
Audit observed that delays pertaining to achievement  of milestones of FSED Phase -II 
were mainly on account of continued design modifications on LCA and low availability of 
aircraft. 
19. The Ministry explained the delays as under: 
 
i. Change in Avionics architecture demanded by customer; 
 
ii. Addition of new systems (HMDS) and Weapon Suite by customer; 
 
iii. Delayed decisions by customer in finalizing of GUN, Air to Air Refuelling & 
BVR missiles; 
iv. LCA programme has taken abinitio development & LSP is blessing in 
disguise; 
v. Delay in flight testing due to the grounding of Aircraft for Escape System & 
pipe-line butting Mods; 
vi. This development and flight testing has been planned in concurrently on 
various LSP aircraft to achieve IOC & FOC goals quickly; 
vii. During the course of development, the changes in the critical system like 
communication system, Radar & Helmet Mounted Display System has 
forced SOP change staggered on different LSPs; and 
viii. Awaiting maturity of all the systems on PV series aircraft and completing 
IOC task involving around 2500 sorties with three numbers of PV series 
aircraft would have resulted in further delays. 
20. As per the MoU entered into between HAL and ADA in June 2002, HAL was to 
manufacture and supply eight LSP aircraft between 2006 and 2008. Against this, HAL 
supplied seven LSP aircraft during April 2007 -March 2013 with a delay ranging from 4 
to 51 months, mainly due to design changes by ADA, which resulted in equipping each 
of the LSPs with different configuration. Audit also observed that ADA had  utilised 
these LSP aircraft towards flight testing/evaluati on for achieving IOC/FOC, instead of 
handing over these aircraft to IAF, in contravention to the commitment given in October 
2001 while obtaining GoI sanction for building these LSPs under FSED Phase-II. 
21. The Ministry stated that advancement of 2 prototypes had given technology edge 
for proving critical technologies which required extensive flight testing for maturity, and 

14 
 
 
awaiting maturity of these technologies with only two TDs would have resulted in further 
delays in the programme. 
22. When reasons for using the LSPs for flight testing/evaluation instead of handing 
them over to IAF were enquired in July 2014, ADA stated in October 2014 that due to 
shortcomings on TD/PV aircraft, LSP aircraft were built in a phased manner  with 
specific capabilities. As such the transfer of technology to the production agency (HAL) 
was executed in batches by identifying the LSP-1 to LSP-8 to resolve design issues and 
conduct the flight test towards finalization of standard of preparation (SOP) for 
production. 
23. Audit observed that building of PVs before development of other technologies 
resulted in these aircraft having shortcomings, compelling ADA to utilise even the LSPs 
towards flight testing of LCA. Thus, the purpose of manufacturing of LSPs for the usage 
by IAF has not been met till January 2015 and these aircraft have been used by ADA as 
additional prototypes for evaluation purposes, in contravention to the commitment given 
in October 2001 while obtaining sanction for building these LSPs. 
24. In November 2009, Go I extended the milestones of LCA project up to end of 
December 2012 (IOC -December 2010 and FOC -December 2012) and additional 
amount of ` 2475.78 crore (FE ` 581.92 crore) was sanctioned to cover extended 
programme cost, expenditure towards Programme Manage ment, maintenance and 
operational cost of 15 aircraft (2 TDs, 5 PVs and 8 LSPs), foreign flight test consultancy 
for optimizing the flight testing, spares for LSP aircraft, etc. Out of this, the major portion 
of the cost towards maintenance of 15 aircraft (` 187.78 crore) during this extended 
period was due to ADA utilising the LSP aircraft along with TDs/PVs towards flight 
testing/evaluation. However, even these extended timelines could not be adhered to by 
ADA as LCA achieved IOC only in December 2013 and FOC is yet to be achieved. 
25. When the Committee sought reasons for the above, the Ministry furnished that 
objectives beyond FSED Phase I like incorporation of Composite Structure, Drop Tanks 
capability, Open Architecture based avionics and weapon system wer e developed and 
integrated in advance on PV1 and PV2 aircraft which otherwise would have led to more 
delay in the programme. Moreover, additional two prototypes contributed to the flight 

15 
 
 
testing which enabled the capabilities for achieving in time, LSP aircraft were also used 
for integration of newer and modern weapons and Air to Air Refuelling Probe during the 
development of Tejas. 
26. The Vice Chief, IAF, while furnishing details regarding FSED Phase II, submitted 
during oral evidence as under: 
"Sir, an aircraft first undergoes for trail and then it is upgraded. So, the first stage 
is Initial Operational Configuration (IOC) in which some weapons are cleared. 
Like, Chairman, HAL has brought out, clearing a weapon in an aircraft is a flight 
safety issue and it is a very complex process. In this process, currently we are 
happy to report that as IOC goes, Tejas is quite well -equipped. Yes, Sir. It is 
combat ready in Initial Operational Configuration (IOC). That means, it can fire 
dummy missiles; it can fire the laser guided bombs; it can fire the dumb bombs 
and rockets. Sir, for final operational clearance, these capabilities will have to be 
enhanced. It will be carrying the missiles that are now being developed by DRDO 
and other new weapons we are buying from outside. They will be integrated with 
it. It will have a jammer; it will have the new radar on it that DRDO is making and 
its Fatigue Life will be extended. This is the Final OperationalConfiguration. Even 
the Mirage 2000 upgrade that we ar e using, it comes as Initial Operational 
Configuration. Even the Rafale and all other aircrafts always come with Initial 
Operational Configuration and then are upgraded into Final Operational 
Configuration. " 
 
27. Regarding the delay, the CMD-HAL, during oral evidence, submitted as under: 
"Sir, with regard to the road map for LCA, yes, we took time to develop the state - 
of-the-aircraft, 4 ½ generations straight away. Very few countries are there in the 
world who could claim this and we are proud to create such a product of 4 ½ 
generation fighter light weight aircraft. Sir, yes, there were delays. But today, the 
production agency, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited has spent money to create 
32,000 sq. m. of controlled environment area, all the jigs and fixes are calib rated 
to 50 to 80 microns and these are the state-of-the-art facilities. We are ready now 
to produce 8 aircraft per year and we are enhancing the rate of production to 16 
by spending ` 1,331 crore, 50 per cent by HAL, 25 per cent by IAF and 25 per 
cent by Navy. By 2019 -20, the country will have the capacity of producing 16 
aircraft deliverable per year. In addition, as a model, we are encouraging the eco- 
system in the country, whoever the private vendor who could not make it, the 
major modules like wing, f ront fuselage, centre fuselage, rear fuselage, four 
pieces of an aircraft have already been contracted to four major vendors in India 
and if they start supplying us in the next eight to nine months, the capacity could 
be enhanced further more. By the end o f 2020 or 2021, depending upon the 
requirement of the user and the improvements which need to be put on to it, we 
would be able to deliver about 16 to 24 aircraft. All the facilities are in place 
except the developmental work and the modifications which is  required to be 
complied  which  is  stage-wise.  So,  initially,  you  would  appreciate,  when  the 

16 
 
 
engineers of HAL and DRDO started making the aircraft, first the belief was not 
there. This is the second phase. So, that is how the progra mme might look to be 
a little longer, but the kind of an achievement where we are releasing beyond 
visual range missiles from this aircraft is the proof that Indian scientists and the 
engineers could demonstrate these capabilities. Today, we have a very cl ear 
road map. Depending on the requirement of  our customer and depending on  
the performance achievements, the industry is ready to make; not only HAL,    
but in total India there are 200 agencies who have contributed in the 
development of LCA." 
 
28. The Mini stry further submitted that delays were evident due to various 
uncertainties encountered during the phase of development such as: 
i. Change of Scope or Change of Requirements from User 
ii. Need for Continual Design Improvements 
iii. Sanctions and Policies 
iv. Grounding  of specific LSP aircraft for detailed analysis of snags 
experienced, modifications and improvements. 
v. Delay in availability of LRUs in time in addition to Obsolescence, Failure of 
LRUs, PI checks and reliability issues 
vi. Air effort spent on flying other than developmental flight trials 
vii. Delays in short periods related to period specific testing (cold weather, 
cross wind, hot weather, air to ground range, etc.) 
 
INADEQUATE EXPERTISE IN FLIGHT TESTING AND CONSEQUENT FLIGHT TEST 
CONSULTANCY WITH A FOREIGN FIRM 
29. An Empowered Committee (EC) was constituted in November 2006 with Chief of 
Air Staff as its chairman to monitor the flight development activity and all issues for 
smooth induction of LCA on a quarterly basis. Audit observed from the minutes of the 
very first meeting of the EC in December 2006 that there was inadequate expertise in 
flight testing within the Indian design community; and therefore EC felt that consultancy 
with reputed design centres in advance nations would be needed for flight testing to 
meet th e IOC and FOC schedules. Accordingly, ADA concluded in March 2009 a 
consultancy contract with M/s EADS, Germany at a cost of 18.5 Million Euros (` 127.65 
crore) which comprised two Phases: 

17 
 
 
(i) Phase I of the consultancy contract was to be completed by July 2011 
along with the achievement of IOC of LCA; and 
(ii) Phase II of the consultancy contract was to be completed by January 2013 
along with the achievement of FOC. 
30. ADA could not implement all the recommendations of the consultancy contract 
pertaining to both Phase-I and II during its currency by January 2013 as detailed below: 
i. Pertaining to IOC Release Sequence of carrier Bomb, Light 
  Stores; 
ii. Pertaining to FOC a. System test philosophy, test process, rig test 
  
b. 
environment, 
BVR Missile and usage of Air-to-Air 
  
c. 
Identification of Friend or Foe, 
ADA Rig improvements using the Test Support 
  System 
 
 
31. During oral evidence, Secretary, DRDO, while justifying the consultancy contract 
with a foreign firm furnished as under: 
"      As you know, the aircraft design is new which happened for the first time in 
the country. The certification aspect is also new. So, when that aircraft started 
flying from 2001 onwards, there were series of trials to be conducted, series of 
test points to be covered and there to economise and to safely do it, we need to 
have some consultant. That is the reason Air Bus Industries were employed to 
support and help as a consultant and they will be telling the test points and what 
to do, what not to do, how to do safely, and how they have done in their case.  
So, there is a first phase of contract which was employed to do certain types of 
trials for Phase I or IOC configuration. Once it is completed, we have never 
continued them though the contract had a provisi on for extension. So, the 
contract once it is completed, trials for the IOC configuration was over, FoC 
configuration was still not completed. That means, when we try out certain angle 
of attack, certain steep climbing has to be done. IOC asked for some cl imb and 
the FOC asked for still further climb. So the topic, the heading is the same, the 
angle of attack or the flight trails. Due to that, after a delay of one year, they were 
re-employed to do the same topic. But if you look at the report – we can submit – 
it is an entirely different angle. Probably the Vice Chief of Air Force can tell about 
it. So, when the heading is the same, it was done for an entirely different aspect. 
We have not continuously employed them because there were some 
developments which we were doing. We have sent them home and we brought 

18 
 
 
them back after more than a year. So, to that extent, we effectively reduced the 
cost, we have not wasted the money. That is what we would like to submit." 
 
32. Supplementing the above, the Vice Chief of Indian Air Force during oral evidence 
submitted as under: 
"................But from the pilot‘s perspective, sometimes in case of the 
recommendations that are made, there is a trade off whether the technology has 
to be implemented and at what cost. So, that is best understood by the scientists 
but we have seen many times that a recommendation made by a company after 
it is discussed further, it is not necessary that recommendation is to be 
implemented every time, and exactly in the manner that t he company has said.   
It is just like the example you gave about research. That is how the 
recommendations are there because he might take a little more risk in 
recommending something whereas we might demur from taking that risk. 
Alternatively, we may wan t to take more risk and we may ignore his 
recommendation." 
 
33. In March 2013, ADA signed the Closure Report of the consultancy contract 
treating the contract closed with retrospective effect from January 2013, as PDC of 
consultancy contract had since expired in January 2013. Responding to an audit 
observation, in October 2014, seeking the reasons for not implementing the 
recommendations of the consultant and acceptance of the closure of the contract, ADA 
clarified in October 2014 that it could not implement th e consultant recommendations 
during the period of the contract as IOC schedules were shifted because of major safety 
related snags, ejection related issues, etc. ADA further stated in January 2015 that task 
wise recommendations of consultant were since imp lemented for achieving IOC and in 
respect of Phase II of the contract (FOC), it was stated that these were understood and 
work was in progress. 
 
34. The Ministry submitted that this task was being attempted for the first time in the 
country, and estimate of th e flight test effort required for achieving IOC/FOC was 
completely understood only after the consultancy. Delay was due to US Govt. 
restrictions. 
 
35. Audit further observed in October 2014 that ADA concluded, in August 2014, 
another contract with the same firm viz. EADS, Germany for consultancy in flight testing 

19 
 
 
for achieving FOC and Post -FOC activity for a period of 16 months with consultation 
charges of 3.7 Million Euros ( ` 30.34 crore). The scope of work included consultancy 
for: 
(i) Flight test envelope expansion and carefree maneuvering; 
(ii) separation of weapons and stores from LCA; and 
(iii) design improvement of the Crew Escape System. 
 
Out of the three tasks, two tasks at (i) and (ii) were already included as part of the scope 
of the first consultancy contract in March 2009. In October 2014, Audit enquired reasons 
for conclusion of another contract in August 2014 with the same firm for two tasks which 
should have been completed under the first contract. ADA while admitting the fact of re- 
inclusion of the two tasks in the scope of work, clarified in October 2014 that the Phase 
III included not only FOC related tasks, which would be completed within six months, 
but also post–FOC activity related to design improvements of Crew Escape System. 
 
36. The Ministry furnished that extension of consultancy was to seek help of some 
high risk activities and the currency consultancy was primarily a risk mitigation plan for 
support during flight tests and accelerating the same. Grounding of aircraft further 
delayed s chedules. They further furnished that in the earlier contract, all the 
recommendations of the consultant had been received and the implementation of same 
was in progress. During final stages of FOC, some of the more high risk and technically 
complex activi ties were being attempted for the first time and towards end of IOC -2 
some new critical issues involving disciplines not included in the original consultancy 
came up. These new activities were identified in phase III as new consultancy areas. 
 
37. The Ministry further furnished that all recommendations of EADS consultancy 
from the earlier contract were already implemented prior to achieving IOC. 
Subsequently, next phase of consultancy contract was signed for new critical tasks for 
issues related to crew escape, lightning protection, Air to Air (A to A) refuelling which 
were not covered in earlier contract. In addition, limited support during flight testing for 
FOC High AoA expansion was also sought as it was a very high risk activity. This was 
because ADA had adopted a unique and efficient approach for this task as suggested 

20 
 
 
by EADS which saved cost and time involved for building a separate additional aircraft 
for high A to A tests. 
38. When asked about the reasons for not signing a consultancy contract earlier so 
that IOC/FOC could have been achieved much earlier, the Ministry stated that though 
the flight testing was commenced by the design team, this task was being attempted for 
the first time in the country, some bottlenecks were encountered during the flight testing 
and the overall effort appeared to be very large. Hence Consultancy was sought for 
Flight Test optimization towards achieving IOC/FOC at this stage in Flight Testing. 
SHORTFALL IN ACCOMPLISHMENT OF AIR STAFF REQUIREMENT (ASR) 
39. Air Staff Requirement (1985) prescribes the physical parameters of LCA such as 
aircraft weight, fuel capacity, load carrying capacity of weapons, missiles, survivability, 
navigation, etc and features l ike single point defueling, pilot protection system, all 
weather operations, fuel system protection etc. to make the aircraft capable of 
performing its role of multi mission fighter aircraft and have increased survivability 
against battle damage. The ASR a lso envisages timeline for induction of LCA, quantity 
of LCA fighter and trainer required. There were no revisions to the ASR by IAF, except 
in respect of weapon requirements. 
 
40. The Project Definition Phase (PDP) document of LCA prepared by ADA in 
December 1988 had been reviewed by Air HQ in March 1989 who found it deficient in 
the crucial parameters of aerodynamic configuration, volume and weight as set in ASR, 
particularly with reference to significant increase in weight of LCA, which could 
adversely affect performance. To resolve the deadlock, it was decided in March 1990 
that the development may be executed as FSED in a phased manner. However, LCA 
which had achieved IOC in December 2013 did not meet the ASR in terms of increased 
weight, reduced internal f uel capacity, non -compliance of all -weather operations, non - 
achievement of single point defueling, fuel system protection, pilot protection, etc., for 
which, ADA obtained from Air HQ altogether 53 temporary concessions/permanent 
waivers in December 2013. 
41. Audit observed during the course of audit that LCA which had achieved IOC in 
December 2013 did not meet the ASR in terms of increased weight, reduced internal 

21 
 
 
fuel capacity, non -compliance of all -weather operations, non -achievement of single  
point defueling, fuel system protection, pilot protection, etc., for which, ADA obtained 
from Air HQ in December 2013 altogether 53 temporary concessions/permanent 
waivers. IAF replying to Audit's observation stated that the concessions/permanent 
waivers would adversely impact the operational performance. 
42. The Ministry stated that at the time of IOC, 53 concessions were accorded by Air 
HQ/IAF. 20 out of 53 were permanent waivers provided by Air HQ/IAF which were 
technologically unachievable and 33 remaining  ones were not safety critical and had 
insignificant impact on the combat performance of the Aircraft towards service use out 
of these 33, 8 had been closed. MK-I has successfully demonstrated combat potential. 
 
43. The 20 permanent waivers granted for ASR par ameters which the current 
configuration of LCA Mk -I with GE -F-404-IN20 engine could not achieve. The 
performance shortfalls applicable to 20 IOC aircraft under production at HAL will also be 
applicable 20 FOC aircraft as these waivers were granted for LCA Mk-I in its current 
configuration. The 33 temporary time bound concessions were granted for ASR 
parameters which were still under design/development and testing and would adversely 
affect LCA's combat potential. 
44. The views expressed by Air HQ as early as in  March 1989 that the aircraft 
planned to be developed by ADA would be deficient in crucial parameters of 
aerodynamic configuration, volume and weight adversely affecting its performance have 
not been overcome in LCA Mk -I developed by ADA as it does not mee t the 
requirements of IAF fully in terms of combat potential and survivability. It was precisely 
with this forethought that the Empowered Committee headed by Chief of Air Staff had 
recommended in October 2007 for the building of LCA Mk II under FSED Phase -III in 
order to meet the ASR parameters. Consequently, till the LCA Mk -II is developed, 
manufactured and inducted into squadrons, the IAF would be constrained to use the 40 
aircrafts of LCA Mk-I with reduced operational capabilities. 
 
45. The Ministry stated that at the time of IOC, 53 concessions were accorded by Air 
HQ/IAF. 20 out of 53 were permanent waivers provided by Air HQ/IAF were 

22 
 
 
technologically unachievable and 33 remaining ones were not safety critical and had 
insignificant impact on the combat performance of the Aircraft towards service use. Out 
of the 33 concessions, 8 had been closed as they were applicable to IOC and out of t he 
8, 6 were closed. The remaining two concessions are linked with weapon accuracies 
above tactical Mach nos. which has no impact on combat potential of the aircraft as  
LCA MK-I had successfully demonstrated combat potential. 20 Permanent waivers are 
technologically unachievable because of the need of having a small light combat 
aircraft. Notwithstanding this, operational capability of LCA is comparable to any other 
contemporary aircraft of this class. 
 
DELAY IN DEVELOPMENT AND SUPPLY OF TRAINER AIRCRAFT A ND 
SIMULATOR 
46. The ASR envisaged a total requirement of 200 fighters and 20 trainer aircraft of 
LCA. The trainer variant of the LCA was to retain all attributes of the fighter variant 
except for the changes necessary to accommodate a second seat for impartin g training 
to IAF pilots and was to enter IAF service by 1994. 
 
47. Out of the five prototypes to be built under FSED Phase -II, PV5 was to be the 
trainer prototype. However, based on the requirement projected in December 2005 by 
IAF for an additional trainer p rototype, ADA decided in March 2006 to convert PV4, a 
fighter variant prototype, to a trainer variant as PV6. These trainer prototypes PV5 and 
PV6 were also to be built and flight tested along with the fighter prototypes PV1, PV2 
and PV3 towards achieving IOC/FOC and consequent production of trainer aircraft 
against 20 IOC and 20 FOC contracts of 2006 and 2010 at HAL, with each of these 
contracts included 4 trainers along with 16 fighters. However, first test flight of PV5 was 
achieved only in November 2009  and PV6 achieved its first flight only in November 
2014. Consequently, trainer LCA was yet to achieve IOC/FOC till January 2015. Air HQ 
had expressed in Empowered Committee meeting held in April 2013 that availability of 
operational trainer aircraft was essential for pilot training. 
48. Replying to the Committee's concern on the adverse impact on pilot training in 
absence of training aircrafts, the Ministry submitted that the present trend in fighter 
aircraft development is to use high fidelity simulators to train pilots. Towards induction 

23 
 
 
and acceptance of Series Production (SP1) aircraft, IAF pilots are also being trained on 
high fidelity simulator. Also, IAF is funding for development of another Full Mission 
Simulator for LCA in 20 Aircraft IO C contract. Trainer PV6 aircraft has been built 
equivalent to Production standard Trainer and is being utilised for Squadron Pilot's 
training besides being used for FOC tasks. Also state of the art, full -fledged high fidelity 
mission simulator has been built for the Squadron for Pilot training. It may be noted that 
the proposal of handing over of Trainer aircraft - PV6 has been accepted by IAF and 
change in scope has been approved in 55 th Governing Body and subsequent General 
Body. 
49. The Ministry also stated that towards induction and acceptance of series 
production aircraft, IAF pilots were trained on high fidelity simulator. Hence, the non - 
availability of trainer was not a serious concern towards induction. So far in LCA 
programme fifteen pilots had been tr ained on high fidelity simulator developed by ADA. 
Proposal of handing over PV -6 had been accepted by IAF and change in scope 
approved. 
50. Audit pointed out in May 2014 delays in attaining IOC/FOC of trainer prototypes 
and their consequent non -availability to IAF, Air HQ stated in December 2014 that non - 
availability of trainer aircraft would have adverse impact on pilot training. In response to 
an audit query in December 2014 regarding non availability of trainer LCA, ADA stated 
in January 2015 that PV -6 would be handed over to IAF for pilot training. ADA‘s reply 
was not tenable as a prototype trainer is not a substitute for a production standard 
trainer which had undergone flight testing/certification towards meeting the operational 
standards. 
51. The Ministry st ated that the trainer aircraft was a spinoff of the fighter variant.  
The critical system like avionics, flight control, sensors, propulsion system, etc were the 
same as the fighter aircraft. Hence, delays attributed in realising fighter aircraft had 
direct implication in achieving FOC of Trainer. 
52. The Ministry also submitted that the trainer PV6 aircraft had been built equivalent to 
production standard trainer as it was being utilised for Squadron Pilot‘s training, besides 

24 
 
 
being used for FOC tasks. Also, state -of-the-art, full -fledged high -fidelity mission 
simulator had been built for the squadron for pilot training. 
53. Audit pointed out that HAL would not be able to produce production standard 
trainer aircraft against IOC/FOC contracts for IAF t ill the achievement of IOC/FOC of 
trainer aircraft and its finalization of Standard of Preparation (SOP). Thus, trainer variant 
as specified in ASR was yet to be handed over to IAF till January 2015, and resultantly, 
IAF would be constrained to induct figh ter LCA without availability of trainer aircraft 
which would have adverse impact on pilot training. 
54. ASR specifies that a full mission flight simulator of the LCA single seater variant 
was to be developed and delivered in advance of production aircraft as part of training 
requirement in 1994. However, Audit pointed out that HAL forwarded in November 
2006, a proposal for manufacture and supply of Full Mission Simulator (FMS) in respect 
of LCA to Air HQ. While the proposal was pending for clearance by MoD, AD A 
sanctioned in July 2010, a project to Aeronautical Development Establishment (ADE), 
Bangalore to upgrade the existing Real Time Simulator (RTS) at their end to the 
standard of FMS at a cost of ` 4.50 crore in order to meet the training requirements of 
the IAF pilots. 
 
55. ADE in October 2014, in response to an audit observation regarding the status of 
FMS, stated that the existing RTS had been upgraded to FMS and was being used by 
NFTC/HAL test pilots for evaluation and training. However, Air HQ stated that t hough 
technical evaluation of HAL‘s proposal had been accepted by MoD, a case for 
procurement of FMS from ADE was being processed as per the decision taken in July 
2014 in the Empowered Committee. IAF would be using the RTS upgraded as FMS at 
ADE, till a f ull fledged FMS was manufactured by HAL and supplied for the usage at 
LCA operating base. 
56. The Ministry replied that towards induction and acceptance of series production 
aircraft IAF pilots are trained on high fidelity simulator and hence, the non -availability of 
trainer is not a serious concern towards induction. So far in the LCA programme, fifteen 
pilots had been trained on high fidelity simulator developed by ADA. Proposal of 

25 
 
 
handing over PV-6 had been accepted by IAF and change in scope was approved. The 
Ministry further stated that the trainer aircraft was spin -off of the fighter variant and the 
critical systems like avionics, flight control, sensors, propulsion system, etc were same 
as in the fighter aircraft. Hence, delays attributed i n realising fighter aircraft has direct 
implication in achieving FOC of Trainer. Trainer PV -6 aircraft had been built equivalent 
to production standard trainer for utilizing it for Squadron Pilot‘s training, besides being 
used for FOC tasks. 
 
MEETING OF WEAPON REQUIREMENT ON LCA AS PER ASR 
57. When the delays caused due to changes in the weapons by IAF was pointed out 
in September 2014 by Audit, Air HQ stated in December 2014 that the extended 
schedule of design and development of LCA had resulted in several we apons and 
systems becoming obsolete/out of stock/operationally irrelevant and to retain 
operational edge, newer weapons had to be included. It was also stated that ADA being 
the programme manager could have inducted additional resources to realize the 
integration of the changed weapons in time. Due to design and development of LCA 
programme getting extended from time to time, IAF had to opt for newer weapons to 
retain operational edge of LCA. This consequently had a further impact on the timelines 
of the LCA programme. 
58. The Ministry further submitted that Air HQ had specified changes in weapon suite 
for more than 10 occasions which indicated lack of clarity towards finalisation of weapon 
suite. New weapon integration is a continuous process occurring during life cycle of the 
aircraft. The continuous process of integration of newer and modern weapons has 
happened during the development of Tejas. As a result, LCA is one of the few aircraft in 
Indian inventory to have capability of firing the most modern BVR missiles. This pr ocess 
would have taken much longer for an aircraft already in service. 
STATUS OF INTEGRATION OF WEAPONS ON LCA 
 
59. Delayed development of LCA by ADA, coupled with delayed identification/go - 
ahead of specific BVR missile by IAF had impacted the FOC schedule of  LCA, which 
was expected to be achieved by December 2015. 

26 
 
 
60. The Ministry furnished that the funding towards Derby integration was not 
available in the original sanction and re -appropriation of funds and sanctions thereof 
had further caused delay. 
61. During oral evidence, the Vice Chief, IAF, submitted as under: 
"...........One of the reasons why LCA got delayed —I will be very candid to 
admit—is that the weapons have changed. The LCA started with R -60 MCOM air 
to air missile that I have flown as a pilot officer. Then, thereafter in 2005 --of 
course, the project was delayed when this missile became obsolete --we asked 
them to induct R -73 missile. I am happy to report that unlike  most  of  the  
aircraft that are in initial operational configuration, th is particular aircraft can   
drop all 1000 pound of  bombs. That can drop 250 kilogram  bomb. That can  
drop LGB. That can fire an Astra, and it can fire a derby missile too. So, 
combination of missile and combination of radar, which is very important for this 
long range missile, has been done." 
 
 
62. Supplementing the above, the CMD-HAL furnished as under: 
"...... When we start developing an aeroplane, we have to take into account all 
the configurations. When an aeroplane has to fly, while flying it needs to be filled 
with 5000 kg of fuel, or we need to fit a bomb on it, we have to take everything 
into consideration. And, when the pilot goes, we have to ensure absolute safety, 
not even one machine should be failing. First, we design with all its 
configurations. Then, we do drop a dummy bomb. So, the trial itself is time 
consuming. Any failure may take us again at the beginning and re-invention." 
 
63. Further, the Vice Chief, IAF, submitted as under: 
" Like, Chairman, HAL has brought out, clearing a weapon in an aircraft is a 
flight safety issue and it is a very complex process." 
 
64. The Ministry further submitted that due to changes in design and delay in 
establishment of manufacturing facilities, HAL could not adhere to the committed 
delivery schedule. As a result, 72 5 litre drop tank was not integrated on LCA, an IOC 
requirement, and ADA had to obtain concession towards this while achieving IOC in 
December 2013. 
65. The Ministry stated that as per AHQ letter Air HQ/S/96056/6/11/ASR dated 10 th 
Jan 2012, 725 litre Drop Tank  integration was not a mandatory requirement to achieve 
IOC-2. Hence ADA has not sought any concession on this regard. 

27 
 
 
66. The Ministry further submitted that IOC certification includes R73,1000 lb bombs, 
laser guided bombs, Drop Tanks and practice bombs. The SoP of the IOC series 
production aircraft will include the above weapon as agreed between AHQ and ADA. 
Further delay in realisation of Pylon and Drop Tank is due to the delays in procurement 
of Raw material. Vendor identification and es tablishment of manufacturing setup and 
Test environment by HAL. All IOC weapons and stores have been integrated and flight - 
tested. 
 
ELECTRONIC WARFARE CAPABILITIES FOR LCA 
 
67. Combat aircraft are equipped with Electronic Warfare (EW) capabilities to 
degrade the effectiveness of enemy radar and radio systems. ASR specified that LCA 
should be capable of carrying an Electronic Counter Measures (ECM) Pod. In addition, 
provision was to be made for an internally mounted Self Protection Jammer (SPJ) in the 
LCA with provision for future updates. In March 1997, Air HQ revised the EW capability 
on LCA to include SPJ, Radar Warning Receiver (RWR) and Counter Measures 
Dispensing System (CMDS). 
 
68. Development of SPJ by DARE was not successful, and as a result, the LCA Mk -I 
will be deficient of this system. As regards the other two EW components - RWR and 
CMDS - till the performance issues are resolved, these two systems will also have 
performance shortfalls. Consequently, LCA Mk-I remains deficient in full EW capabilities 
as specified in the ASR. 
69. The Ministry/IAF stated that internal SPJ was not part of FOC and shall be 
integrated on LCA AF MK II. Presently, Tejas is equipped with RWR and flares (CMDS). 
All the performance issues have been overcome and it is certified to use o n SP Aircraft. 
EW suite draws more power and requires lot of real estate in fighter aircraft. 
70. During oral evidence, the Secretary, DRDO, submitted as under: 
"As far as the avionics is concerned, the main thing is radar......... we failed to 
complete at that point of time. Even there, the present radar also, though the rest 
of the thing, that is the transmitter and the receiver and the senior person is from 
ELTA whereas the radar and the front end is within India. We are still producing 
those antennae. That antennae portion is within the country itself. Even in the 

28 
 
 
existing one. As far as the radar is concerned, today we have got the next 
version not mechanical scanning, electronically scanning radar which is already 
established in the LCA which is also accepted by the services. The same type in 
a higher frequency band is already made and it is fitted on to the aircraft. The 
ground trials are going and it will be taken up for flight trials subsequently. We 
are also simultaneously trying to p ut another aircraft modified for this purpose so 
that we will get a much more flight trial type. So, to that extent, we are ready with 
that. The other main constituent is jammer. As you are telling about jammer, 
jammer comes under weapon category, not on the main system." 
 
71. Supplementing the above, the Vice Chief, IAF submitted as under: 
"      there is a radar that is being manufactured. That will have AESA technology, 
Active Electronically Scanned Array System. That will substantially improve its 
performance. In regard to both radar and jammer, first you have to develop the 
radar because both radar and jammer do not work together. Jammer can work 
only when the radar does not operate. Aircraft cannot do without radar. Radar 
has to be there. .....I said that r adar has a mode. The aircraft‘s radar, which is 
currently in 45 squadron, is working fine. There is absolutely no problem with 
those radars. If you want to improve the performance of the radar that is in 45 
squadron further, we want to change the radome of  the aircraft. That is also 
being done. So, from currently where I can pick up a Su-30 at 60 kilometres, I will 
pick up at close to 70 kilometres     Sir, the current radar is an Elta radar but our 
own radar is also being developed. .........As far as the jammer is concerned, first 
the radar has to be developed and then the jammer can be integrated with the 
radar. There are many jammers - radar available. Towed jammers and Towed 
Decoy jammers are available. They can be carried on the wing stores and that 
does not inhibit the aircraft‘s performance in any way. Once we are getting a 
jammer with Rafale type, we could always see how it performs." 
 
72. The Ministry submitted that MK -I is equipped with RWR and Passive jammer. 
The podded active jammer was planned in MK-IA to meet the EW capabilities as agreed 
with AHQ. 
 
73. The Committee highlighted the fact that as per ASR, Electronic Counter Measure 
(ECM) suite should have self protection jammer (SPJ) as role equipment though LCA is 
not integrated with SPJ. They wanted to know why the development agency was 
deviating from the ASR which specified the need for SPJ and sought the merit behind 
such a move? The Ministry replied that Integration of SPJ pod as a role equipment 
would essentially mean reduced weapon carrying capabil ity, due to the SPJ pod 
occupying one store location. Internal EW system demanded more real estate and 
therefore was not feasible in Tejas Mk1 class of aircraft. Therefore, integration of EW 

29 
 
 
system on light aircrafts of Tejas class would have an adverse impact on other aspect of 
the aircraft performance and capability. 
 
74. The Ministry further submitted that as per ASR para 4.13, ECM (Electronic 
counter Measure) suite should have self protection jammer as role equipment. IAF vide 
their letter no AHQ/S96056/6/7/ASR dated 19 th March 1997 defined the EW capability 
on LCA as Self Protection Jammer, preferably internal or podded, RWR and CMDS. IAF 
had issued further letter dated 24 th Dec 2009 stating that internal SPJ was not part of 
FOC and shall be integrated on LCA AF MK2. At present Tejas is equipped with RWR 
and passive jamming with chaff and flares (CMDS), only Jammers deferred and all the 
performance issues have been overcome and it is certified to use on SP Aircraft. 
However, the external po dded Jammer was planned to be integrated on LCA Mk1A 
variant and the same could be retro -fitted on LCA Mk1 if required. In addition to this 
MMR and communication system has built-in features of advanced features of ECCM to 
avoid jamming though LCA Tejas is  not integrated with active self protection Jammers. 
It can be noted that major fighters of Air Force fleet like MIG 21BIS, MIG 29, Su 30 etc 
are not equipped with any EW systems. Russian combat doctrine has jammers 
escorting fighters. 
75. As per the Ministry, the test results of Defence Avionics Research Establishment 
(DARE) EW suite which completed its first flight on Tejas PV1 LCA in early 2015 by 
furnishing as under: 
"UEWS integration on LCA PV1 was successful and  performance  of  the  
system was satisfact ory against single and limited emitter environment (five 
emitters). It is to be noted that PV1 was specially modified to incorporate the EW 
suite by removing some LRUs. Moreover, the performance of the aircraft was 
highly compromised by the EW suite. Since  this system was not feasible to 
integrate on production versions of LCA, due to space constraint, further upgrade 
and detailed evaluation of the upgraded system was carried out by DARE on 
other aircraft platforms of IAF". 
 
76. The Committee sought the Ministr y's opinion on electronic protection and attack 
capabilities of the LCA squadron as fighter aircraft with EW capabilities would be far 

30 
 
 
more effective than a single -mission, dedicated electronic attack support aircraft. The 
Ministry furnished as under: 
"any fighter aircraft will always have a power, payload carrying/real estate 
constraint. Optimisation of power payload/real estate, between attack capability 
in terms of weapons/sensors/datalink etc. and self-protection Jammer would be a 
design choice. Therefore the effectiveness of either strategy depends on the 
attack doctrine followed by the forces". 
 
WORK PACKAGES FOR LCA PROGRAMME 
77. As per the Memorandum of Association (1984), ADA was to execute the LCA 
development by utilising the capabilitie s of national agencies/institutions, referred as 
work centers, working in Aerospace technology. There were/are 152 work centres in all, 
viz. DRDO labs (38), Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) (22), Government 
organizations (36), educational institutes (14) and other private agencies (42). 
78. ADA had awarded 503 WPs amounting to ` 1,112.39 crore for FSED Phase -II. 
Out of 503 WPs, ADA had identified 110 WPs valuing ` 630.21 crore as critical based 
on the basic functionality requirement for the safe flight of the aircraft. ADA entrusted all 
the work packages from 2002 to 2013 to 152 work centres and out of which, only 27 per 
cent of the WPs were completed within the schedule and remaining 73 per cent of the 
WPs were delayed. Among the critical WPs, only 13 per cent  were completed within 
schedule. Even the on -going 62 WPs related to FOC activities were also behind 
schedule with delays ranging from 2 months to 11 years. Audit on a sample review of 
execution of 194 WPs (51 critical, 143 non -critical) valuing ` 632.23 crore ( ` 338.37 
crore - critical, ` 293.86 crore - non-critical) noticed instances of delayed completion of 
work packages. 
 
79. Upon enquiry by Audit in September 2014 about delays in completing the WPs 
by the entrusted work centres and basis for selection of work centres, ADA stated that it 
had no authority/control on the working of work centres. ADA also admitted in October 
2014 that the delay in development of WPs had affected the LCA programme schedule. 
ADA also stated in January 2015 that work packages/pro ject sanctions were 
continuously reviewed and monitored by ADA through participation in Project Review 

31 
 
 
Committee (PRC) meetings. However, the priority accorded by these work centres was 
depending upon the production targets set by their mana gement on which ADA had no 
authority. As regards the basis for selection of work centres, ADA stated in October 
2014 that during 1990s selection of vendor for development of strategic aviation 
equipment was very limited in the country, hence it had no choi ce but to go with the 
vendors who had past experience in the related field. 
 
80. As non -maintenance of data on work packages was a serious issue, the 
Committee sought to know whether complete details/data of work packages sanctioned 
in LCA FSED Phase -I was available. The Ministry replying to the Committe's concern 
replied as under: 
"ADA had sanctioned around 600 work packages to various work centres under 
LCA FSED Phase -I programme. A centralised computerised accounting system 
was put in place in ADA in 2007 . Since FSED Phase -I programme was started 
way back in 1993 and closed in 2004; details on remaining work packages were 
not readily available. Subsequently, they have been traced from various 
archives". 
 
81. Further, they observed abnormal delay in completion of work packages 
sanctioned in FSED Phase -II programme, leading to delay in LCA programme and 
sought reasons and actions taken for completing work packages in time. The Ministry 
replied that: 
(i) large number of Government work centres are involved in development of 
LCA; 
(ii) ADA believes that delay in project is partly attributed to the lack of direct 
control of ADA on the working priorities of the work centres in the early 
stages; 
(iii) to achieve project timelines and accord priority to LCA work, ADA feels 
that effective control at higher management of PSUs and Government 
organizations would have definitely helped in accelerating the programme; 
and 

32 
 
 
(iv)  notwithstanding, regular reviews at higher level management of the work 
centres are held and performance is satisfactory. 
82. When asked about the reasons for not providing for direct control on the working 
priorities of the work centres thought of at the earliest by the Ministry which very well 
knew that a large number of Government labs/agencies were involved, the Ministry 
submitted as under: 
"ADA expected that the work packages sanctioned to various work centres would 
be given the same high priority by the work centres that ADA gives to 
development of LCA. But over the period of time it was noticed that there w ere 
delays in completion of the work packages. Hence ADA felt that direct control on 
the working priorities of the work centres would have yielded better results for 
some of the work packages. However, the delays in many of the work packages 
were due to technological complexities of developing ab-initio technologies". 
83. Further, when the Committee sought to know what suitable measures had been 
take to rectify the above mentioned, the Ministry furnished that regular reviews at higher 
level management of the work centres are held and performance is satisfactory. 
Towards realization of future projects, the work packages are planned in a modular 
manner instead of sub-system approach followed for Mk-1. Further, periodicity of higher 
level reviews has been increased to accelerate execution of work packages. 
LACK OF USER INVOLVEMENT 
 
84. Audit observed that in September 2014, that the LCA PDP Review Committee, 
which examined the work done at Project Definition Phase, had strongly recommended 
early establishment of a sta nding Liaison Group between Air HQ and ADA to ensure 
closer interaction between the design team and the user for better appreciation of 
mutual perception, including appropriate trade -offs in performance, weight, time frame, 
cost, technological complexity and operational considerations of LCA. 
85. However, no such liaison group was formed. As a result, IAF played limited role 
as a member in Governing Body and General Body meetings. The active user 
participation in the LCA Programme was started only after the for mation of an 
Empowered Committee, LCA Review Committee consisting of ADA, HAL and IAF and 

33 
 
 
LCA Project Management Team (LCA -PMT) at ADA. The Empowered Committee 
chaired by Chief of Air Staff and co -chaired by Secretary (DP) and SA to RM/DG AD A 
met Quarterly to review the complete programme with the sole objective to monitor the 
flight development activities. The LCA Review Committee headed by Deputy Chief of  
Air Staff met every month to review all the issues concerning the programme. LCA 
Project Management Team (LCA -PMT) headed by Air Vice Marshal to function as a 
single point interface between the IAF and ADA/NFTC/HAL for co -ordination of flight 
test activities, positioning of weapons stores for LCA, etc. 
 
86. Audit sought in September 2014 the reasons for non -formation of standing 
Liaison Group between Air HQ and ADA to ensure closer interaction between the 
design team and the user as recommended by the LCA PDP Review Committee. In 
reply, Air HQ stated (Dec 2014) that expertise of IAF personnel was not in the area of 
design of aircraft, but in capability to guide the programme in terms of user requirement 
of operations and maintainability. Hence formation of standing Liaison Group earlier 
than 2007 may not have been fruitful. It was also stated t hat IAF test pilots and test 
engineers were involved in the project as part of National Flight Test Centre (NFTC), 
Bangalore since 2001. 
87. Thus, non -formation of a standing Liaison Group between Air HQ and ADA to 
ensure closer interaction between the design team and the user for better appreciation 
of mutual perception, including appropriate trade -offs in performance, weight, time 
frame, cost, technological complexity and operational considerations of LCA also 
impacted the LCA development timelines. 
88. The Minis try, in reply, furnished that due to the above reasons, maintenance 
related issues were not pointed out during early stages of the design & development 
programme by the test crew as well as test engineers. The CSDO RFAs has been 
raised only after involveme nt of IAF -PMT from year 2007. This has impacted design 
modes/timeline. 
89. The Ministry further submitted that IAF involvement to Tejas D&D programme 
was through quarterly reviews from beginning of Tejas programme. However, to 
accelerate induction activities, PMT team of IAF was formed in 2007 by IAF. IAF pilots 

34 
 
 
were directly involved in the flight test programme for technology development during 
FSED phase -1 from the beginning for flight test related activities. Subsequently, to 
address operatio nal and maintenance issues, IAF PMT was formed in addition in the 
year 2007 at ADA. 
90. During oral evidence, the Vice Chief of IAF submitted as under: 
"     the question on Air Force‘s association with LCA and establishment of project 
management group as the first question, I would like to assure the Chairman that 
Air Force has been intimately involved with LCA‘s development right from writing 
its QRs. In fact, where LCA is today would not have been possible without 
intimate association of Air Force people int o the LCA project. I have a living 
example here. The second person to fly LCA was our Air Force officer who is 
now our Deputy Chief of Air Staff. We have established NFTC in the late eighties 
with  a  view  to  ensuring  that  the  LCA  project  moves  at a  quicker  pace  We 
established NFTC. Subsequently when series production was beginning and that 
is where rest of the people from the Air Force not the test pilots and flight test 
engineers of AST and on deputation to HAL and to ADA but when the aircraft 
was inducted into the Air Force, for pre -induction we also put our project 
management group that would look at issues related to line maintenance and 
induction of the aircraft." 
 
91. On being asked about the reasons for not involving the end user viz. IAF fully for 
maintenance/operational issues impacting design modifications thereby directly 
affecting the project timeline; the Ministry replied as under: 
"IAF pilots were directly involved in the Flight test programme for Technology 
Development during FSED P hase 1 from the beginning for flight test related 
activities. In addition PMT team consisting of IAF Personal was formed in 2007 
by IAF at ADA. Air HQ felt that formation of Standing Liaison Group earlier than 
2007 would not have yielded fruitful results s ince expertise of IAF personnel was 
not in the area of design of aircraft. However, Air HQ personnel were 
participating in major Program reviews". 
ABSENCE OF INDIGENISATION PLAN 
 
92. The GoI sanction of LCA project in August 1983 envisaged use of as many sub - 
systems as were readily available in the world market. However, GoI sanction in June 
1993 for FSED Phase-I required to shift the focus on maximising the indigenous 

35 
 
 
development, even if it meant increase in cost and time, partly because of se vere 
foreign exchange crunch faced by the country in early 1990s and partly for attaining 
self-reliance in critical areas. Accordingly, ADA had proposed in June 1993 to undertake 
indigenous development of items such as Jet Fuel Starter, Gear Box, avionics software 
development and mechanical systems of LCA. In addition, import content was planned 
to be reduced in design and development of Carbon Fibre Composite (CFC) Wing, 
Multi-Mode Radar, General systems, import of components instead of systems, apart 
from increase of import content in infrastructure and aircraft manufacturing activities. 
 
93. In response to Audit observation in July 2014 regarding indigenisation plan for 
LCA, ADA stated in August 2014 and January 2015 that no indigenization plan/ 
roadmap for LCA was made because the scope of the Project was to develop advanced 
technologies/components along with LCA development. ADA, however, further stated in 
January 2015 that sufficient emphasis had been given towards indigenous design and 
development of various critical systems right from the beginning of the programme. 
94. In response to an Audit query in July 2014 regarding the extent of indigenisation 
in LCA, ADA claimed in August 2014 that indigenous capability developed worked out to 
70 per cent of the LCA content in terms of value. 
95. The Ministry justified that it was not practical to indigenise the all -electronic 
components in India due to the lack of infrastructure of manufacturing and such huge 
investments are not part of LCA Programme. No country aimed at 100% indigenous 
contents. Indigenous contents of all strategic equipment was enhanced. 
96. In response to audit query in August 2014 on the extent of indigenous content, 
ADA clarified in October 2014 that the LRUs were built in -house using imported 
components with indigenous design qualifications and certification efforts and hence 
indigenous content had been worked out at LRU level. ADA, however, further stated 
that the indigenous content of LCA worked out to about 35 per cent considering the use 
of imported components and accessories in LRUs. ADA also confirmed in October 2014 
the continued dependency on imported electronic components, accessories etc. for 
LCA. 

36 
 
 
97. The Ministry submitted that with regard to the figure of 35 percent, ADA had 
stated that approximately 35% of the parts had indigenous source of raw material and 
remaining 65% parts were made from imported raw material (Metallic and composite 
raw material). The Ministry also stated that the figure of 35% was cited by ADA only in 
the context of raw material of LCA airframe and not for the entire LCA development. 
98. As per Audit, in the absence of a roadmap for indigenous development, the 
efficiency and effectiveness of the indigenous development achieved in the LCA 
programme could not be assess ed. Audit also observed in December 2014 that ADA 
had further initiated in February 2014 a proposal for indigenous development of 109 
LRUs at an estimated cost of ` 479 crore. 
DEVELOPMENT OF ENGINE FOR LCA 
 
99. Even after incurring a development expenditure of ` 2020 crore by GTRE till 
January 2015, indigenous development capability for LCA propulsion was not 
successful and ADA would continue to depend on GE imported engine for LCA. 
However, the Ministry did not comment on the issue raised by Audit in their Report. 
 
100. Inordinate delay in fructification of Kaveri engine and cost overrun of the 
programme was also commented upon in Paragraph 5.1 of the Report No 16 of 2010 - 
11 of the C&AG of India, Union Government, Defence Services (Air Force and Navy) for 
the year ended March 2009. 
 
101. The Ministry replied that Kaveri engine development is an indigenous effort for 
mastering one of the most complex technologies. Kaveri Engine Development Project 
was sanctioned in March 19 89 with project cost of ` 382.81 crores at 1987 price level 
and PDC of December 1996. The project PDC and cost was revised from time to time 
up to December 2009 and Rs 2839 crore respectively, with ` 2105 crore (FE element of 
` 1227 crore), earmarked for i nterim flight trials with LCA 'Tejas' and balance ` 734 
crore for development of final flight standard engine. The Kaveri engine progress so far: 
 9 full prototype engines and 4 core engines have been built so far. 
 A total of 2882 hours of engine testing have been completed. 

37 
 
 
 Kaveri engine has been tested for 73 hours of Altitude testing at CIAM, Russia 
and 57 hours of flight testing in IL76 aircraft at GFRI, Russia. This is the first  
time that an indigenously developed military gas turbine engine was flight tested. 
 The engine has attained a technical maturity as concluded from recent Kaveri 
engine technical audit by M/s Safran Aircraft Engine Ltd. The certification tests 
are under progress at GTRE test bed. 
 12 Materials (Titanium, Steel and super alloys) have been indigenously 
developed and type certified. 
 Adequate manufacturing bases have been established at GTRE, HAL and other 
private/public sector undertakings for fabrication of various engine components. 
 Testing infrastructure has been built at GTRE for gas turbine engine and 
components. 
 The engine will be used for an Unmanned Aircraft. 
102. Responding to the query whether the important components of Kaveri Engine 
were being imported and how many were being imp orted and what was the  
expenditure, the Ministry replied as under: 
"a few of the accessories like lubrication, pump, integrated nozzle actuation 
system, variable guide vane actuation system etc. are being imported. The 
expenditure on imports is to the tun e of ` 500 crores (approximate) which is 25% 
of the total sanctioned project cost ( ` 2105 crore). However, the import content 
will be further reduced once the Kaveri engine is under production". 
DEVELOPMENT OF RADOME 
 
103. ADA had to depend on imported source for meeting the requirement of Radome 
as the one developed indigenously by ASL, Hyderabad and manufactured by HAL was 
not found suitable for LCA. This had impacted testing of MMR with cascading effect on 
accomplishment of FOC. 
 
104. Seeking information on the development of Radome by ADA/HAL with Kevlar 
material selected in first instance by the Committee, the Ministry submitted as under: 
"DoAC, ASL (DRDO), Hyderabad were the designers of LCA indigenous 
Radome. Glass fiber an d Kevlar fibre were considered during the design phase. 
Kevlar was the best available radome material at the time of finalising the 
radome development. Kevlar fibre with Low Loss Polyester (LLP) resin gives 
good electromagnetic properties that are comparable to glass fiber composites. 

38 
 
 
Further, Kevlar has lower density resulting in lower weight for the Radome. 
Hence, Kevlar with LLP resin was selected for LCA Radome. Kevlar fibre 
(Generic name – Aramid fibre) was available from import sources.  Also, the 
facility & technology for preparing socks from Kevlar fibre was available within 
country. Socks of various dimensions were used to make the LCA Radome". 
 
105. When enquired about all the six Radomes were supplied by M/s Cobham, 
England by January 201 5, the Ministry submitted that first two Radomes were supplied 
by August 2015 for performance evaluation. Last Radome was supplied by December 
2016. 
106. Regarding the present status of testing of Radome supplied by Cobham along 
with MMR on LCA, the Ministry re plied that flight testing of Cobham Radome has been 
completed with MMR on LCA and Radar performance meets Air Staff Requirements. 
Quartz Radome procured from Cobham UK, has been successfully integrated on LCA 
AF MK1 and various aspects have been tested on ground and in flight. The Radome 
has now been certified for and being used on series production fighters. 
 
107. When asked whether the Radome developed by HAL was usable on any other 
aircrafts, the Ministry submitted that Radome developed by HAL for LCA is specific to 
LCA airframe. So the same Radome cannot be used in other aircraft platforms/aircrafts. 
However, the basic technology can be adapted for another platform. 
 
108. On being asked whether ADA/HAL would continue to depend on M/s Cobham, 
England for furthe r supply of Radome in order to meet the requirement of LCA or was 
there any plan for indigenisation of the same, the Ministry replied that ADA/HAL will 
depend on Quartz Radome developed by M/s. Cobham for Mk1 series production 
aircrafts. DRDO has initiated LCA quartz radome development with ASL Hyderabad and 
R&D Engineers Pune. These radomes will be integrated in LCA Mk1A when ready. 
CEMILAC has approved the fitment of M/s Cobham Radome from 11 th Series 
Production Aircraft onwards, as Line Compliance, and as Retro-fit on SP1– SP10. HAL 

39 
 
 
has already placed the order on M/s Cobham for supply of 20 sets of Radomes. Further 
orders for FOC requirement will also be placed. 
 
109. The Ministry also stated that Quartz radome integrated and flight tested. The 
performance achieved ASR targets. 
DEVELOPMENT OF MULTI-MODE RADAR (MMR) 
 
110. Indigenous development of MMR for LCA could not be accomplished even after 
22 years. Further, pending testing of MMR with the newly developed Radome, the 
performance testing and integration of MMR would remain incomplete, which would 
impact the combat employability of LCA. 
111. The delay in development of MMR despite consultancy from Ericsson and 
consequent import of three antenna was also commented in Paragraph No 28 of 
C&AG's Report No. 8 of 1999 for the year ended March 1998. 
 
112. ADA decided to continue co -development with M/s ELTA with the indigenously 
developed Antenna Platform and antenna, sub -systems as a part of MMR integrated on 
LCA. 
 
113. The CMD, HAL, during oral evidence, submitted that: 
"Coming to the one specific issue on MMR, as the hon. Member has said, always 
R & D may not result in success. This is one of such MMR development which 
was assigned by ADA to HAL. HAL has developed three rotables, LRD has two 
rotables including ante nna. When it was flight tested for about 75 sorties, the 
performance was not as per the required norms. So, to meet the requirement of 
IOC, FOC, the decision was taken by the then Scientific Advisor to Raksha 
Mantri that we would go ahead in a ‗go developm ent‘ mode with M/s ELTA of 
Israel and they said, ‗If HAL is interested, you continue with indigenous 
development‘. But as our product will not find a market after development, we 
could not develop it and we stopped. So, that is an unsuccessful story of ant enna 
development." 
 
114. When asked about the structural requirement of front fuselage and design of 
MMR could not be planned in tandem so as to avoid structural changes of LCA front 
fuselage later, the Ministry furnished that the front fuselage was designed to 

40 
 
 
accommodate indigenous radar LRUs (being developed by HAL, Hyderabad and LRDE, 
Bangalore). Subsequently, it was modified to accommodate imported radar (ELTA) 
LRUs which were selected later. The airframe was modified to suit the system LRUs as 
identified by programme. 
115. As regard the present status of performance testing of MMR with imported 
Radome and on LCA, the Ministry submitted that the MMR performance test with 
respect to imported Radome has been completed. MMR performance as a sensor in 
various modes of operation for FOC is in the final stages of completion and  
performance of the Radar is found to be excellent. 
 
MULTI-FUNCTIONAL DISPLAY SYSTEM (MFDS) 
 
116. HAL was unable to manufacture MFDS either in -house or through the JV 
Company formed for  the specific purpose of developing MFDs and had to resort to 
procurement from foreign source. 
 
117. The Ministry, while furnishing information on MFDS, stated that plan for 
realisation of indigenisation of major items/schedule of activities were under financia l 
scrutiny. 
118. The Ministry further stated that HAL had already procured 20 sets of multi 
function display system (MFDS) for 20 IOC series production aircraft. Study conducted 
by HAL (Korwa Division) for indigenisation, indicated that it is not economically f easible. 
However, indigenous development of different MFDS called Smart MFDS had been 
initiated by ADA for further requirements. 
 
JET FUEL STARTER (JFS) 
 
119. Development of JFS as required by IAF with three consecutive starts was still 
pending as of January 20 15 and even after the induction of LCA into IAF, the aircraft 
would continue to operate under concessions in respect of the JFS until it was retrofitted 
with modified JFS. 

41 
 
 
120. On being asked whether the modified Jet Fuel Starter (JFS) developed by HAL 
was flight tested and whether JFS achieved three consecutive starts as required by IAF, 
the Ministry replied in positive by stating that JFS, developed by HAL, was flight tested 
with three consecutive starts had been successfully demonstrated. 
 
121. The Ministry also stated that JFS GTSU -110M1 had been successfully tested at 
Leh and three consecutive starts had also been demonstrated successfully and 
certified. 
 
122. Further when enquired about the modification kits being retrofitted with JFS 
during March/Apri l 2015 and its subsequent result, the Ministry submitted that as per 
sanction, units were retrofitted and tested during 2015. The oil consumption limits were 
established. Single start ail consumption limit is 75 ml and for three consecutive start 
max limit is 250±50ml. These units shares lube oil with AMAGB. JFS GTSU 110 and 
110 M1-1 have been flight tested and certified so far. GTSU 110 M2 with self lubrication 
system is planned for integration and flight test on LCA AF MK1 during August 2018. 
 
123. The Ministr y explained that SP -1& SP -2 were retro -modifiable with GTSU  
110M1. Further improved JFS GTSU 110M2 with integral lubrication had been 
developed and integrated on aircraft. 
 
FLIGHT CONTROL SYSTEM ACTUATORS 
 
124. The indigenously developed flight worthy actuator s were delivered to HAL by 
DALIA, LCA would depend on imported source for these items. 
 
125. When asked about whether HAL completed the supply of actuators and if the 
indigenous actuators had since been tested on LCA, the Ministry submitted as under: 
"ADA has enabled the productionisation of the indigenous Primary Actuators i.e 
Elevon & Rudder through a consortium approach of Private industries i.e M/s 
Godrej & Boyce Mfg co. Ltd and M/s Mumbai MTAR, Hyderabad. HAL, Lucknow 
which is a nodal agency has placed a purchase order for 13 ship sets actuators. 
Upon completion of ToT by ADA, currently 2 ½ ship set actuators have been 

42 
 
 
assembled, tested & delivered to ADA. The 2 nd batch of 2 ½ ship set actuators is 
getting assembled at Godrej Works, Mumbai and PDC is scheduled for June 
2018. The balance 8 sets shall be assembled & delivered by HAL and PDC is 
scheduled for December 2018. Integration of indigenous actuators involves 
modifications to the aircraft. Since aircrafts were involved in FOC activities, these 
modifications were not feasible to be done earlier. On completion of FOC 
activities on LSP2, by May 2018, this aircraft will be modified for indigenous 
actuator fitment and the actuators will be type certified". 
 
126. The Ministry stated that Indigenous Actuators were realised and qualified. Flight 
testing was planned from August 2016 onwards. Indigenous actuators along with 
modified DFCC integrated on LSP2 and Flight test planned. 
 
CHAPTER IV 
MANUFACTURE AND INDUCTION OF LCA 
 
LOW AVAILABILITY OF LCA FOR FLIGHT TESTING TOWARDS ACHIEVING 
IOC/FOC 
 
127. HAL was to provide TDs and PVs for flight testing to achieve IOC and FOC as 
per the MoU of December 2006. However, due to deficiencies in the PVs, LSPs were 
included for flight testing activities by an amendment in November 2010. 
128. Delays in execution of Phase -I activities of LCA programme was also highlighted 
in Para 28 of the Report No. 8 of 1999 of the C&AG of India, Union Government, 
Defence Services (Air Force & Navy) for the year ended 31 March 1998. 
129. The Ministry stated that low serviceability was linked to concurrent development 
activities which resulted in increased downtime between sorties as per the requirement 
of the programme coo rdinator ADA. Further, each of the LSP aircraft were built to 
different standards and only specific aircraft could be used for specific test points. The 
activity of data debriefs and snag analysis for increasing the sortie rate was delayed due 
to issues in  FOC Build Standard document and production drawings planned to be 
released by October 2017. Build of FOC standard aircraft would begin in FY 2018-19. 

43 
 
 
DELAY IN PROCUREMENT OF PLANT AND MACHINERY 
 
130. On account of delayed creation of manufacturing facilities, and that too limited to 
four aircraft per annum as against required eight aircraft per annum the production of 20 
IOC LCA has been delayed although IOC was achieved in December 2013. 
131. When ascertained about the reasons for such delay, the Ministry furnished status 
and stated that delay in IOC contract are attributed to continuous changes in design, 
change of SOP, rejection of parts manufactured to lower issues drawings and launching 
manufacturing parts to new issues drawing frequent ly, new requirements warranting 
changes in jigs and fixtures which were already established, non -establishment of 
programme developed vendors to manufacture 52 indigenised non -DPSU LRUs to 
series production standard, delay in supply of CFC parts by NAL etc . LCA Tejas  
division is geared up for production of 8 aircraft per annum. This can be achieved only 
after clearance of all D&D issues. Ministry/HAL stated that programme coordinator is yet 
to release the finalised build standard document for FOC till date  for production group to 
manufacture the aircraft. Delivery will commence on release of build standard document 
by ADA. HAL has handed over the first IOC SP aircraft to IAF in January 2015. FOC 
Build Standard document planned to be released for production by Oct 2017. 
132. On being asked to provide the present status of procurement of plant and 
machinery and the position regarding supply of aircrafts to Air Force by HAL, the 
Ministry submitted that HAL had completed the establishment of plant and machinery as 
per FSED Phase-II. HAL has already delivered nine Series Production Fighter aircraft to 
Air Force. 
133. The Air Staff Requirement (ASR) (October 1985) envisaged that LCA was 
required to be inducted in IAF squadrons by 1994 as a replacement of Mig -21. The 
requirement projected by Air HQ was for 200 fighters and 20 trainers, with a view to 
form 11 squadrons of LCA in order to overcome depletion of squadrons due to phasing 
out of ageing fleet. However, inordinate delay in development of LCA (as discussed in 
Chapter II) has delayed the induction of LCA into service and impacted formation of the 
squadron. 

44 
 
 
134. During the oral evidence, the CMD-HAL, submitted as under: 
 
"Sir, the progress has not been that good till last year and we just gave them five 
fighters in the last two years. This depends on how the standard of preparation 
gets cleared. I can only make an aircraft which would be acceptable to the Indian 
Air Force. Today, I have an order for IOC configuration of 20 aeroplanes. Out of 
it, by this year end, I will complete 11 and next year four, and four more trainers. 
For trainers, we are still defining the final standard in which we have to prepare 
them. The next thi ng is that I can cut the material only when we reach the FOC, 
which is sooner. So, it goes stage -wise, but notwithstanding the order book. 
Normally, it is an industry which takes order and then invests the money. Today, 
HAL has invested the money. I am pre pared for any eventuality of supplying 
minimum 16. Today, I do not have an order." 
 
IAF HAD TO RESORT TO ALTERNATE MEASURES TO MAINTAIN THE FORCE 
LEVEL 
135. Audit enquired (June 2014) regarding steps taken by Air HQ to overcome the 
depletion of squadron level i n view of delay in induction of LCA. In reply, Air HQ stated 
(February 2015) that the following measures had been taken by them, apart from 
revising the phasing out of MiG-21 squadrons: 
a.  Up-gradation (November 1995) of 125 MiG BIS aircraft at a cost of 626  
million USD (equivalent to ` 2135 crore) 
b. Up-gradation (March 2008) of 62 MiG -29 aircraft into multi role MiG -29UPG 
standard aircraft at a cost of 964 million USD ( ` 3841.87 crore).  
Upgradation was in progress (February 2015) 
c. Up-gradation (December 2009) of 61 Jaguar Aircraft at a cost of ` 3113.02 
crore. Upgradation was in progress (February 2015) 
d. Up-gradation (2011) of Mirage 2000 aircraft through OEM and HAL at a total 
cost of ` 10947 crore. Upgradation was in progress (February 2015) 
Due to delay in development and induction of LCA, IAF had to up -grade other aircraft at 
a cost of ` 20,037 crore. Besides, phasing out of MiG -21 was also revised (January 
2013) to utilise the ageing fleet for extended period. 
136. The Ministry furnished that due to the technological complexity and associated 
hurdles, which had to be overcome, there was a delay in development and induction of 

45 
 
 
LCA into IAF. Investments made in LCA Programme have led to the establishment of 
indigenous capability for contempor ary 4.5 generation aircraft development programme 
which is essential for future aeronautical development programmes in the country. 
137. When the Committee wanted detail on the action plan to overcome operational 
issues of the Indian Air Force arising due to th e delayed induction of LCA, the Ministry 
replied that IAF has carried out major design upgrades to MIG, Jaguar and Mirage fleets 
to address operational needs during past 15 to 20 years. 
 
138. As there had been an invariable delay in the formation of LCA squadro n, the 
Ministry apprised the Committee about the steps taken/proposed to fast track the same 
by furnishing the following: 
(i) Phased development approach for LCA development was changed to 
Concurrent Development approach. 
(ii) Following reviews are held continuously to avoid further delay: 
a. Daily reviews at LCA Assy. hanger, 
b. Weekly Review in ADA, 
c. Special Review Committees have been set up by Honourable 
d. Raksha Mantri to review the Progress of the programme; 
e. Every month by Deputy Chief of Air Staff. 
f. Half yearly review by Governing Body chaired by Secy, Dept. 
Defence R&D. 
g. Quarterly review by Empowered Committee, Chaired by Chief of 
Air Staff. 
h. Annual Review by General Body chaired by Honourable Raksha 
Mantri. 
(iii) Formation of Project Monitoring Team (PMT) with Air Force officers at 
ADA. 
(iv) Formation of Quick Reaction Teams (QRT) to resolve design/production 
issues. 
(v) The programme is rescheduled to suit the Induction Programme of Indian 
Air Force. 

46 
 
 
(vi) Private partners, modular assembly, etc. 
 
 
DELAY IN FORMATION OF LCA SQUADRON 
 
139. Air HQ had planned to have two squadrons of LCA and placed two contracts 
(March 2006, December 2010) with HAL for supply of 40 aircraft (20 IOC and 20 FOC 
aircraft). However, forming of LCA squadrons could not materialize (Januar y 2015) due 
to delay in LCA programme (as discussed in Chapter II) as delivery of aircraft was 
pending. 
140. During oral evidence, the Vice chief of IAF, replying to the specific query of the 
Committee as to how many years will it take for the IAF to replenish all the fighter 
aircrafts in its fleet, submitted as under: 
"Sir, we had placed an order for 123 aircraft. While there could be, more or less, 
six or nine in the squadron, the other things are already under air -test. Compared 
to what we have seen in the fi rst six aircraft, the time that it takes in the air -test 
has reduced considerably. If we get 20 aircraft, within five to six years, we will 
have all aircraft. ................ Sir, I agree with you." 
 
 
********* 

47 
 
 
PART-II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
The Committee note that Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) programme was 
initially sanctioned in 1983 with a development schedule of eight to ten years 
against Indian Air Force (IAF’s) requirement of induction by 1994. However, the 
project schedules sl ipped, mainly on account of design changes necessitated 
due to change in weapon requirements, non -availability of Kaveri engine, delay in 
completion of work packages by the work centres, etc. The Committee observe 
that LCA achieved Initial Operational Clea rance (IOC), as late as, in December 
2013 with 53 concessions/permanent waivers that reduced its operational 
employability considerably. Notably, the project is still in progress. The 
Performance Audit (PA) No. 17 of 2015 covered issues relating to Design,  
Development, Manufacture and Induction of Light Combat Aircraft (Air Force) 
since the last Review, i.e., Para 28 of the Report No. 8 of 1999 of the C&AG of 
India, Union Government, Defence Services (Air Force & Navy) for the year ended 
31 March 1998. The Committee find that delays in execution of LCA project with 
respect to project definition, deficiencies in planning and financial management 
were commented upon by the Audit in Para 50 of Report No. 3 of 1989. Further, 
delay in execution of Phase-I of LCA project which included development of Multi 
Mode Radar, Flight control system, Digital Electronic Engine Control, integration 
of Kaveri engine on LCA, etc and consequent up -gradation of MiG -Bis aircraft, 
import of Su -30 MKI aircraft to cover the shortfall in fighter aircraft, were 
highlighted in Para 28 of the Report No. 8 of 1999. The Committee also note that 
the inordinate delay in fructification of Kaveri engine and cost overrun of the 
programme was pointed out by the Audit in Paragraph 5.1 of the Report  No 16 of 
2010-11 of the C&AG of India, Union Government, Defence Services (Air Force 
and Navy) for the year ended March 2009. The Committee’s examination of the 
subject revealed that inspite of being pointed out by the Audit in 1999 and again 
in 2010 -11, several shortcomings persist and accordingly they made 
observations/recommendations on the issues relating to the Ministry of 

48 
 
 
Defence/Aeronautical Development Agency (ADA) as detailed in the succeeding 
paragraphs. 
2. The Committee note that the  ADA advanced building of two prototypes 
(PVs) from Full Scale Engineering Development (FSED) Phase -II to FSED Phase -I 
on the ground of accelerating the development process of LCA, however, the 
decision failed to yield the desired results. The FSED Phase -I was closed in  
March 2004 after a delay of six years and without completing all the activities 
which were carried forward to FSED Phase -II. Further, building of PVs was 
completed three to eleven years beyond scheduled date delaying IOC from 
December 2005 to December 2013. The Committee find that all the major 
objectives of FSED Phase -I i.e. 42 work packages pertaining to development of 
Multi-Mode Radar, Flight Control System, Actuators, Digital Flight Control 
Computer, Jet Fuel Starter, Drop Tanks, etc. we re not achieved and were carried 
forward to FSED Phase -II and resultantly, prototypes were rendered deficient of 
critical onboard systems {Multi -Mode Radar (MMR), Self -protection Jammer  
(SPJ), Radar Warning Receiver (RWR)} which eventually led to using t he Limited 
Series Production (LSP) aircraft (meant for IAF use) towards flight 
testing/evaluation of the critical on board systems, in contravention of the 
commitment given to the GoI while obtaining sanction (November 2001) for 
building of these aircraft.  The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that 
the timelines in respect of critical on -board systems like MMR, RWR etc. initially 
planned to be integrated on Prototype Version (PV) -1 & Prototype Version (PV) -2, 
based on schedules provided by the w ork centres, could not be met by the work 
centres due to technological complexities. The Committee reproach the ADA for 
taking decisions that lacked scientific basis by advancing building of prototypes 
overlooking the fact that neither the critical technol ogies were developed by then 
nor the Technology Demonstrators flight tested for specified 210 hours. The 
Committee while noting that the decision resulted in deficient prototypes further 
leading to diversion of LSP towards flight testing, desire to be appr ised of the 
details of the expenditure incurred on deficient aircraft. 

49 
 
 
3. The Committee observe that the ADA could not complete flight testing 
activities for FOC during the currency of the consultancy contract (March 2009 to 
January 2013) with M/S European Aeronautic Defence and Space (EADS) 
comprising of two phases to be done along with the achievement of IOC and Final 
Operational Clearance (FOC) respectively, at a cost of ` 127.65 crore and had to 
go in for a second consultancy contract costin g ` 30.34 crore (August 2014) for 
completing the activities. The Committee note with serious concern from the 
reply of the ADA that recommendations of the consultant could not be 
implemented during the period of contract as IOC schedules were shifted 
because of major snags, ejection related issues etc. and another contract was 
concluded with same firm for two tasks which should have been completed under 
the first contract itself. The Committee opine that the money spent on first 
consultancy was rendered was teful as the ADA could not complete flight testing 
activities and subsequent induction of aircraft and had to close the contract 
without implementing the recommendations. The Committee admonish the ADA 
for not doing proper homework before engagement of con sultants resulting in 
non-implementation of the task -wise recommendations of the consultant during 
the currency of the first contract, huge delays in meeting the IOC/FOC schedules 
and wasteful expenditure incurred on the first consultancy contract. 
4. The Committee note that the addition of new weapons by Air HQ for giving 
an operational edge to the LCA (March 1997, December 2009) necessitated design 
changes on the aircraft, coupled with specification of integrating R -73E missile 
(December 2009) with Multi -Mode Radar/Helmet Mounted Display and Sight and 
identification (December 2009) of Beyond Visual Range Missiles delayed the 
achievement of IOC/FOC. The Committee note from the reply of the Air HQs that 
inclusion of newer weapons was necessitated due to systems/weapons becoming 
obsolete/irrelevant in the backdrop of extended schedule of design and 
development of LCA. The Committee take serious note of the delays at each  
stage of the project that rendered the original specifications obsolete and new 
requirements and their integration delayed the programme, further. The 
Committee note that while LCA programme is being monitored by multiple 

50 
 
 
agencies/bodies like General Body, Governing Body, involving the representation 
of MoD, Ministry of Finance at the highest level, various committees at 
ADA/Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) and Empowered Committee chaired by 
Chief of Air Staff. The delays in completion of work packages seriously affected 
the LCA programme schedules which could not be contained du e to lack of 
coordination at various levels and ineffective monitoring of the programme by all 
the agencies involved. The Committee are of the view that casual approach of the 
monitoring agencies in enforcing the timelines led to inexplicable delays of mor e 
than 30 years on an ambitious Defence project. The Committee exhort the 
Ministry to fix realistic timelines, taking into account technological complexities, 
for completion of remaining works urgently and apprise the Committee thereof. 
The Committee also desire to be apprised of details of the recommendations 
made by various review committees and action taken thereon within six months 
of presentation of this report. Further, the Committee while opining that the 
committees at the highest level cannot deciph er routine ground level difficulties 
due to preoccupations and other constraints desire that a core team, fully 
responsible for day -to-day decision making, be constituted with dual 
responsibility of achieving goals within timelines and ensuring that the en d 
product complies with the standards specified by the user group . The function of 
this core team may be separated from monitoring and guidance given by other 
committees by making it responsible for tracking the day to day progress, 
resolving cross functional issues and making decisions about course corrections 
in case of delays, excess expenditure or major alterations in specifications. 
5. The Committee observe that LCA Mark (MK) -I, which achieved Initial 
Operational Configuration (December 2013) had signifi cant shortfalls (53 
permanent waivers/concessions) in meeting the Air Staff Requirement (ASR) 
resulting in reduced operational capabilities and survivability, limiting its 
operational employability. The Committee note from the reply of the ADA that 20 
out of 53 concessions that were accorded by Air (Headquarter) HQ/IAF at the time 
of IOC were permanent waivers being technologically unachievable and 
remaining 33 were not safety critical and had insignificant impact on the combat 

51 
 
 
performance of  the Aircraft. However, as per the reply of IAF, the 
concessions/permanent waivers would adversely impact the operational 
preparedness and the 33 temporary concessions would affect LCA's combat 
potential. Resultantly, the IAF would be constrained to use th e LCA MK -I with 
reduced operational capabilities. The Committee note the apprehensions 
expressed by Air HQ, as early as in 1989 that aircraft planned to be developed by 
ADA would be deficient in crucial parameters, volume and weight adversely 
affecting its performance and find that the same have not been overcome in LCA 
MKI developed by ADA. 
The Committee further note that LCA Mk -I is deficient in Electronic Warfare 
(EW) capabilities as specified by IAF, as the Self Protection Jammer could not be 
fitted on the aircraft due to space constraints and the Radar Warning 
Receiver/Counter Measure Dispensing System (CMDS) fitted on the aircraft are 
having performance issues, which are yet to be overcome. The Committee 
observe from the reply of the IAF that EW suite draws more power and requires 
lot of real estate in fighter aircraft and an internal SPJ shall be integrated on LCA 
Air Force(AF) MK-II. Further, a podded active jammer is planned in MK -IA to meet 
the EW capabilities. 
The Committee are disappointed to note that even after almost three 
decades, the ADA has not been able to develop the indigenous aircraft as per 
requirements of IAF in terms of combat potential and serviceability and opine that 
non fulfilling of requiremen ts of the users has rendered investment of both time 
and money in the project, so far, infructuous. The Committee desire to be 
apprised of the total costs incurred on the project till date and the estimated 
costs until the FOC is achieved. The Committee ex pect that development of LCA 
Mk-II being done by ADA will overcome the shortcomings in LCA MK  I  and 
desire that the same may be done within fixed timelines to restore confidence in 
the LCA project. 
 
6. As per the Audit Report, the Air Staff Requirement (ASR ) envisaged a total 
requirement of 200 fighters and 20 trainer aircraft of LCA. The trainer variant of 
the LCA was to retain all attributes of the fighter variant except for the changes 

52 
 
 
necessary to accommodate a second seat for imparting tr aining to IAF pilots. The 
ASR had envisaged that the fighter and trainer aircraft should enter the IAF 
service by 1994. Further, a full mission flight simulator of the LCA single seater 
variant was to be developed and delivered in advance of production air craft 
(1994) as part of training requirement. However, production of trainer aircraft at 
HAL was delayed as the trainer LCA had not achieved IOC/FOC. As regards flight 
training simulator, IAF was using an upgraded Full Mission Simulator (FMS) at 
Aeronautical Development Establishment (ADE) for pilot training, pending supply 
of a FMS by HAL at LCA operating base. The Committee note from the reply of the 
Ministry that towards induction and acceptance of series production aircraft, IAF 
pilots are trained on hi gh fidelity simulator, and, therefore, the non -availability of 
trainer is not a serious concern towards induction. However, AIR HQ had 
expressed in Empowered Committee (EC) meeting that availability of operational 
trainer aircraft was essential for pilot training. The Committee are appalled at the 
casual reply of the Ministry that non-availability of trainer is not a serious concern 
towards induction as the reply undermines the usefulness of trainer aircraft. 
Further, as per reply of the Ministry, the Trai ner PV -6 aircraft had been built 
equivalent to production standard trainer being utilised for Squadron Pilot’s (SP) 
training, besides being used for FOC tasks. However, Audit has stated that since 
build-standard document was planned to be released only by March 2018, the 
Ministry’s contention that Trainer PV6 aircraft had been built equivalent to 
production standard didn’t hold true. The Committee while reproving the Ministry 
for such baseless replies desire to be apprised of the correct and updated details  
regarding development of trainer aircraft. Further, the Committee desire that 
trainer variant of LCA be productionized in a time bound manner,  preferably 
along with the combat variant, so that the pilots get the requisite exposure and 
training for flying the LCA. 
 
7. The Committee note that the LCA Project Definition Phase (PDP) Review 
Committee, which examined the work done at Project Definition Phase, had 
strongly recommended (September 1989) early establishment of a standing 
Liaison Group between Air HQ and ADA to ensure closer interaction between the 

53 
 
 
design team and the user for better appreciation of mutual perception, including 
appropriate trade -offs in performance, weight, time frame, cost, technological 
complexity and operational consid erations of LCA. However, no such liaison 
group was formed and active user (Air HQ) participation in the LCA Programme 
started only after a long delay of 17 years in November 2006. The Committee note 
from the Action Taken Notes that due to non formation of  liaison group, 
maintenance related issues were not pointed out during early stages of the 
design and development programme by the test crew as well as test engineers 
impacting design modes and timelines. The Committee are of the view that sound 
project management involves preparation of a detailed requirement specification 
document which is complete description of the system to be developed 
containing all interactions users will have with the system as well as non - 
functional requirements at the planning s tage itself i.e. well before execution of 
the project. The Committee while noting with dismay the belated involvement of 
users in the project which eventually delayed achievement of IOC/FOC and 
wastage of tax payers money and resources opine that user invo lvement right 
from inception would have gone a long way in effective and efficient completion 
of the project. The Committee desire that the requirements as specified by the IAF 
for LCA MK -IA and LCA MK -II be understood and incorporated urgently to avoid 
further delays in achieving the timelines. 
Further, the Committee observe from the reply of the Ministry that AIR HQ 
felt that formation of Standing Liaison Group earlier than 2007 would not have 
yielded fruitful results since expertise of IAF personnel was not in the area of 
design of aircraft. Since provisions for induction of weapon systems, RWRs, 
Pods etc have to be made in the design stage of the aircraft itself the Committee 
are not convinced with the plea of the Ministry that formation of Standing Liai son 
Group comprising IAF personnel earlier than 2007 would not have yielded fruitful 
results. The Committee while observing that change in scope and user 
specifications led to huge delays are shocked at the reluctance of IAF in actively 
involving itself during the design stage. The Committee, therefore, desire the 
Ministry to fix responsibility upon officers who failed to ensure involvement of 

54 
 
 
IAF personnel in the initial years of design of the aircraft and see that such 
instances are not repeated in projects involving thousands of crores of rupees 
and country's security. 
8. The Committee find that Government of India had emphasized (June 1993) 
increasing the indigenous content of LCA while sanctioning Full Scale 
Engineering Development (FSED)  in phased manner, but ADA did not make any 
roadmap for indigenization during LCA development. As a result, indigenous 
content of LCA estimated by ADA as 70 per cent actually worked out to about 35 
per cent only (January 2015). The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry 
that indigenisation of the all-electronic components in India was not practical due 
to the lack of infrastructure of manufacturing and such huge investments are not 
part of LCA programme and the total indigenisation content of 70% in LCA as 
claimed by ADA is valid. Further, the Ministry stated that no country aims at 100% 
indigenous content and only indigenous contents of all strategic equipment is 
enhanced. The Committee observe that the prototype version of LCA was to be 
developed wi th a proven imported engine, while the production version of LCA 
was to use indigenous engine. However, the Committee find that Gas Turbine 
Research Establishment (GTRE), could not develop Kaveri engine as per the LCA 
schedule and specifications. The Commi ttee are constrained to note that even 
after incurring an expenditure of more than ` 2000 crore on this project, 
indigenous development capability for LCA propulsion had not been successful 
and resultantly, LCA has been made perennially dependant on GE imp orted aero 
engines throughout its service life. The Committee while opining that GTRE has 
failed miserably in its attempt to develop an indigenous engine desire that since 
GTRE has been entrusted with development of strategic equipment it may be 
upgraded f rom merely a lab under DRDO to a fully autonomous organisation 
empowered to take decisions on its own capable of attracting and recruiting best 
talents in the field. Similarly, a review of the functioning and achievements of 
DRDO and HAL may also be carrie d out to suggest ways to improve their 
working. 

55 
 
 
The Committee also note that the LCA programme suffered major setbacks 
in the indigenous development of Multi -Mode Radar, Self -Protection  Jammer, 
etc.; development of Jet Fuel Starter, though achieved indigenously, had 
unresolved performance issues and the proposal for indigenous development of 
109 LRUs has been pending for approval since February 2014. The Committee are 
dismayed to note that even after more than twenty five years after the 
Government of India shifted the focus on maximising the indigenous 
development, only a few fully indigenised components/systems could be 
developed. The Committee are of the view that with the IAF placing such bulk 
orders involving thousands of crores of rupee s for supply of aircraft, 100% 
indigenisation of the components/systems has to be encouraged. The Committee 
are of the considered opinion that a clear roadmap be developed to ensure that 
indigenous components/systems are maximized before productionization of LCA 
MK-IA and LCA MK -II. Further, setting targets against which the performance can 
be evaluated, positively impacts the efficiency and efficacy. Given that India has 
abundant brain power and is a shining star in the field of space with indigenously 
developed technology, the Committee desire that adequate financial support and 
encouragement from the Government of India be provided so that indigenisation 
of components/engine/systems be earnestly developed with the help of 
committed research and development. 
9. The Committee note that due to huge delays in development and induction 
of LCA, forming of two LCA squadrons could not materialize, IAF had to up -grade 
MiG-BIS, MiG -29, Mirage -2000 and Jaguar aircraft at a cost of ` 20,037 crore, 
phasing out of MiG -21 had to be revised and IAF is operating with 35 squadrons 
as against 42 squadrons sanctioned out of which squadrons for MiG -21 aircraft 
and MiG -27 aircraft would retire over the next ten years. The Committee are 
disappointed to note that the failure of HAL/ADA and Ministry of Defence (MoD) to 
provide the required number of aircraft has adversely affected the combat 
potential of the IAF resulting in security threat to the country. The Committee  
note with serious concern that due to lack of R&D in the aviation  sector the 
country has to shell out thousands of crores of rupees for procurement of both 

56 
 
 
combat as well as civil aircraft from foreign countries. It is needless to mention 
that at times of war it would be difficult for the nation to procure combat aircraft 
from unfriendly countries. The HAL, ADA and its work stations are miserably 
failing in its R&D to have the much needed technology in the aviation sector. The 
Committee while noting the temporary measures taken by the IAF to maintain  the 
operational preparedness and to overcome the drawdown of squadron strength 
exhort the Ministry to take urgent steps to expedite development of LCA to cater 
to the needs of the IAF so as to restrict imports of fighter aircraft of this class  
and ensure self-reliance of the country in the long run. The Committee desire to 
be apprised of the schedule for induction of aircraft for overcoming depleting 
squadron strength of IAF. 
10. The Committee observe that the LCA project was sanctioned in 1983 to 
provide rep lacement aircraft for MiG -21 series which were to complete their 
technical life and were to be phased out in 1990s. As specified in ASR (Air Staff 
Requirement) specified in 1985, the LCA was to be inducted into IAF by 1994. The 
Committee note that the Depa rtmentally related Standing Committee on Defence 
in their Seventh report, thirteenth Lok Sabha had desired the Ministry of Defence 
to come out with a fixed and irrevocable date of induction of LCA. The Committee 
had hoped that all possible steps would be t aken to put the LCA on the 
production line at the earliest possible after reviewing at the prototype stage so 
that it can be inducted into IAF during the 10 th Plan period i.e. by 2007. The 
Committee note that despite repeated observations of the Audit and the 
Parliamentary Committee on Defence on the delays in the project, the situation 
has not been improved much. The Committee are aghast to note that, as on 31 
July, 2018, IAF has only got 9 out of the 200 fighter and 20 trainer aircraft 
envisaged in ASR. T hese 6 aircraft have been productionised after only an Initial 
Operational Clearance (IOC) and are not combat ready, as yet. The Committee are 
perturbed to note that the Final Operational Clearance (FOC) has still not been 
achieved by the LCA even after more than 5 years of IOC. The ADA/HAL have also 
not been able to provide IAF with even a single production standard trainer 
aircraft till date. Further, since HAL could not augment its capacity in line with the 

57 
 
 
demand of the IAF, the IAF will have to depend on imported aircraft for a longer 
time, given its dwindling squadron strength. The Committee are disappointed at 
the progress of the project as even after three and a half decades, the country  
has not been able to get its first combat ready indigenous fighter aircraft. The 
Committee opine that these delays have, besides increasing the costs, limited the 
combat potential of the IAF. The Committee exhort the Ministry to actively 
monitor the project to ensure that FOC is achieved within it s timeline, capacity is 
increased as soon as possible, much needed trainer aircraft are supplied to IAF, 
better coordination is ensured and costs are optimised. 
11. The Committee note that air operations by any Air Force involve 
employment of air assets by themselves or in concert with other assets which are 
a part of the overall strategy in case of a war. They observe that development of 
LCA was to arrest the falling number of fighter aircraft due to the ageing and 
obsolete MiG-21 and MiG-27 fleet and to maint ain minimum squadron strength of 
the Indian Air Force. However, the project was plagued with various technical 
issues resulting in timelines being extended due to which the Government had 
issued Request for Information (RFI) under the framework of the Defe nce 
Procurement Procedure (DPP), 2016 to global vendors for the procurement of 
other combat aircrafts such as the American F -16 Block 70 and Globemaster C-I7, 
Russian Sukhoi Su -30 and Su -35, European Eurofighter Typhoon, Swedish 
Gripen-E, French Rafale etc . The Committee while noting that Light Combat 
Aircraft (LCA) are effective for combat missions requiring light strikes and other 
interdiction roles opine that a multi role combat aircraft is still required to 
effectively counter any aerial threats during war or peace time to maintain overall 
security of the nation as evident from the inventories of the air forces of the 
developed nations like USA and Russia. The Committee are of the view that it is 
high time that indigenous development and production of ot her combat aircraft 
such as aerial refuelling, bombers, transport, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) 
electronic warfare, airborne early warning and control system may be initiated so 
that the bouquet of air assets in the Indian Air Force's inventory may be c omplete 
and dependence on combat aircraft of foreign origin may lessen and eventually 

58 
 
 
brought down to nil. While signing contracts with foreign vendors, it should be 
ensured that transfer of technology permeates within the Indian production and 
manufacturing sector thereby giving a boost to indigenous production. 
Further, the Committee recommend that more emphasis should be laid on 
the indigenous research and development (R&D) of complex military 
technologies by involving premier institutions  like IITs, IISc, etc., and private 
sector, creating dedicated agencies, supported by a think -tank, for development 
of critical components and providing adequate funds so that these institutions 
may develop cutting edge technologies which is eventually pas sed on to defence 
production sector to make the country self sufficient and reliant. 
Also, the Committee recommend that while developing and producing next 
Generation Fighter  Aircraft,  the  negotiations  be  made  for  full -scale  transfer 
of technology (ToT), including the fighter's source codes, full system and 
software control and the establishment of a production assembly line in the 
country, so that the country's own engineers get a hands -on experience of 
learning the art of constructing and designin g a plane by paving way for future 
indigenous manufacture and production. 
 
12. The Committee are constrained to observe that the Ministry have failed to 
ensure proper coordination among its own different wings, like ADA, HAL and 
IAF, to develop our indigen ous combat worthy LCA aircraft which ultimately 
resulted in half hearted approach on country's security and incurring huge 
expenditure for procurement of fighter aircraft from foreign countries. The 
Committee, therefore, exhort the Ministry to imbibe the s uccess stories of our 
own committed space scientists who are working steadfastly to achieve their 
targets. 
 
************ 
 
NEW DELHI; MALLIKARJUN KHARGE 
12 December, 2018 Chairperson, 
21 Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee. 