 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Seventy-eighth Report (16th Lok Sabha)] 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES) 
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
NEW DELHInew LY  
8_ 
  
  
 
  
 
 
STRESSED ASSETS STABILISATION 
FUND (SASF) 
125 

2 
 
 
 
 
            ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT 
     
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
  
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Seventy-Eighth Report (16th Lok Sabha)] 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(Department of Financial Services) 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on: 19.12.2018 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 19.12.2018 
 
 
L O K    S A B H A    S E C R E T A R I A T 
N E W  D E L H I  
 
December, 2018/      Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka) 
 
 
 
STRESSED ASSETS STABILISATION FUND 
(SASF) 
 
PAC NO. 2164 

3 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS  
COMITTEE (2018-19) 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
   
 
CHAPTER I              
  
Introductory  
CHAPTER II* Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
 
 
 
CHAPTER III* Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from 
Government   
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV*  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration  
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Government have furnished interim replies/no replies 
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I** Minutes of the twenty -first sitting of Public Accounts Committee 
(2018-19) held on  14.12.2018. 
 
II Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts 
Committee contained in their Seventy -Eighth Report (Sixteenth 
Lok Sabha) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Not included to the cyclostyled copy of the Report 
** To be appended at the time of Printing. 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2018-19) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge   - Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria  
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra 
5.    Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar   
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
7. Smt. Riti Pathak 
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank” 
9. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
10. Shri Abhishek Singh 
11. Shri Gopal Shetty 
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya  
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
15. Dr. Ponnusamy  Venugopal 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
16. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda 
17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
18. Shri Shwait Malik 
19. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
21. Shri C.M.Ramesh 
22. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A.K. Singh       - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Director 
3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja     -            Deputy Secretary 
  

5 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (201 7-18), having been authorised by  
the Committee, do present this  One Hundred and Twenty-fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Commit tee 
contained in their Seventy -Eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Stressed Assets 
Stabilisation Fund (SASF) ' relating to the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services). 
 
2. The Seventy-Eighth Report was presented to the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 6 June, 2017 
and thereafter presented to Lok Sabha /laid in Rajya Sa bha on  
18 July, 2017. Replies of the Government to the Observations/  Recommendations contained in 
the Report were received on 30 October, 2018. The Public Accounts Committee considered and 
adopted the One Hundred and Twenty-fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) at their sitting held on 
14 December, 2018. Minutes of the Sitting are given at Appendix-I. 
 
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
  
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to them in 
the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Seventy-Eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                               Mallikarjun Kharge                
18 December, 2018                                                                                           Chairperson                                                 
27Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)                                                          Public Accounts Committee 
 
 

6 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
 This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Commi ttee contained in 
their Seventy-eighth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on "Stressed Assets Stabilisation Fund 
(SASF)" relating to the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Sevices). 
 
2. The Seventy-eighth Report which was presented to the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 
6th June, 2017 and both the Houses on 06 June, 2017 and 18 July, 2017 respectively  
contained 10 Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken Notes on all the 
Observations/Recommendations received from the Department of Financial Services  
are categorized as under: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 Para Nos. 1, 2, 4 & 6 
           
          Total:     04       
          Chapter – II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
NIL 
          Total:    NIL      
          Chapter – III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
  Para Nos. 3, 5 & 10 
           
           Total:    03 
          Chapter – IV 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies/no replies: 
  Para No. 7, 8 & 9 
           
          Total:    03         

7 
 
          Chapter -V 
3. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee , inter-alia, included 
detailed examination of Stressed Assets Stabilisation Fund (SASF), a Trust created by 
the Government of India for the Stressed Assets of IDBI .  The examination of the 
subject had revealed several highlighting inadequacies/lapses  and accordingly, the 
Committee had inter-alia given Observations/Recommendations on issues ranging from  
Expeditious recovery of Net Loan Outstanding (NLO), Delay in entrusting Audit of SASF 
Accounts to C&AG, Expenditure incurred on Trust administration, Inadm issible 
Exchange of Assets and surrendering of securities for the losses on Exchanged cases, 
Need for transparent g uidelines on obtaining of Personal Guarantees for loans , 
Recovery of NLO cases with mor e than ` 25 crore, Settlement below NLO and need for 
proper valuation of assets, securities and liabilities, Organisational set -up Manpower 
planning and deployment of staff in SASF and IDBI Bank’s rising Non -Performing 
Assets (NPAs).  
4. The Action Taken Notes fur nished by the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Financial Services) have been reproduced in the relevant c hapters of this Report. The 
Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on their 
Observations/Recommendations which either need reiteration or merit comments. 
5. The Committee desire the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services) to furnish Action Taken Note in respect of 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter I and final/conclusive 
action taken replies in respect  of the Observation s/Recommendations contained 
in Chapter V for which interim reply had  been given by the Government within six 
months of the presentation of the Report to the House.  
6. The Committee strongly deplore the apathetic attitude of the Department of 
Financial Services for not submitting the  final Action Taken Replies on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 78th Report (16th Lok Sabha) of 
the Public Accounts Committee presented to the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 06 June, 
2017. Despite , having been directed to submit  the final Action Taken Replies 
within six months of the presentation of the Report, the Ministry on 30 October, 

8 
 
2018 had only furnished vetted Action Taken Notes and sought extension till 19 
November, 2018 for submission of final ATNs.  However, the same are yet to be 
received despite Ministry’s own commitment. The Committee take strong 
exception to the insensitivity of the Ministry in furnishing the final Action Taken 
Replies and condemn it as a deliberate act of disregar d to the Parliamentary 
direction.  The Committee, therefore, desire that explanation may be sought from 
the officer(s) responsible for the delay and be apprised of the action taken  in the 
matter. The Committee further desire that suitable instructions be iss ued to all 
concerned to adhere to the Committee’s timelines. 
 
7. Delay in entrusting Audit of SASF accounts to C&AG 
 (Recommendation No. 3) 
 
  The Committee in their original Report noted that the Trust had requested C&AG 
in June 2005 to appoint an auditor in pursuance of the provisions of the Trust Deed.  
Since the provisions of C&AG’s Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service (DPC) Act 
1971 stipulate that the C&AG would undertake audit only after receipt of a formal 
proposal from the Ministry, SASF was advised to forward a proposal through the 
Ministry and the audit of SASF was entrusted to CAG by the Ministry, for the period 
2004-05 to 2013 -14, only in May 2013, that too, after the intervention of the Mumbai 
High Court in February 2013. Moreover, subsequent Audit of the SASF from 2014 -15 
onwards was not entrusted to C&AG despite their taking up the matter with the Ministry 
in January, 2014, February, 2015, May 2015 and February, 2016.  The Committee 
arewere aghast to observe that in spite of the request from the Trust in June, 2005, the 
Ministry deliberately did not pay any attention to make a formal request to the C&AG for 
the audit of SASF.  The Ministry arose from its pretentious slumber after long eight 
years in 2013,  only when the Mumbai High Court directed them to do so.  The 
conscious attitude of the Ministry was vividly clear from the fact that they ignored similar 
requests of the C&AG repeatedly in January, 2014, February, 2015, May, 2015 and 
February, 2016 to ent rust the audit of SASF.  The Committee took serious note of the 
lackadaisical attitude of the Ministry during the evidence and now as per the Ministry’s 
submission the audit of SASF for the period of 2013 -18 was entrusted to the C&AG. 
The Committee were of the considered view that the conspicuous delay to entrust timely 
Audit of SASF to the C&AG directly puts responsibility of the lapses made by SASF 
during these years on the Ministry. The Committee desire d that the Ministry may 
ascertain the reasons for th e deliberate delays, on both occasions, in entrusting the 
Audit of SASF to C&AG and fix responsibility on erring officials in both the cases. The 

9 
 
Committee also note d that Clause 17(a) of the Trust Deed states that "the accounts of 
the fund shall be mainta ined and audited by the C&AG of India". The Committee note d 
from the C&AG’s observation in this regard that the provision of maintenance of 
accounts by the C&AG ha d been mistakenly placed as the C&AG only audits the 
accounts prepared by the Executive. The Committee desire d that necessary 
amendments may be incorporated in the Trust deed and may clearly provide for vivid 
and concise provisions in the clause so that no further mis -interpretation may be read in 
future. The Committee further desired that the Ministry in order to secure the interests of 
the Government take prompt and timely action in entrusting the audit to the C&AG, 
taking remedial action on their observations and apprise the position within six months 
of the presentation of this Report.     
8. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services)  in their Action Taken 
Note have stated as under:- 
" The matter of audit of SASF was raised before Bombay High Court in PIL 
no. 65 of 2011 Madhav Balwant Karmakar vs. Union of India & Others. Ministr y 
of Finance submitted on 6.3.2012 that as per paragraph 17 of the Trust Deed, 
the accounts of SASF shall be maintained and audited by CAG.CAG submitted 
on 21.6.2012 that under the Constitutional scheme, CAG does not maintain 
accounts. However, if directions are given by Union of India to audit the accounts 
of SASF, CAG would have no difficulty in doing so. The Court sought to know on 
30.1.2013 whether Union of India intends to instruct CAG to audit the SASF’s 
accounts. Thereupon, on 8.2.2013, Ministry of F inance requested CAG to 
arrange for audit of SASF’s accounts for the period 2004 -05 to 2013 -14. As 
regards audit for the period 2014 -15 to 2018 -19, Ministry of Finance, vide letter 
dated 13.7.2016,requested C&AG to conduct the audit, and C&AG has 
concurred vide letter dated 30.11.2017 to undertake the audit of SASF for the 
said period. Accordingly, Department of Economic Affairs, vide letter dated 
5.12.2017, has conveyed re-entrustment of audit of SASF’s accounts by CAG for 
the said five-year period to CAG.  As regards action on CAG’s observation, CAG 
Report no. 5/2014 on SASF , action taken on  thereport has been communicated 
to CAG vide letter dated 13.7.2017." 
9. While vetting the above ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:- 
“The reply of the ministry was silent on the issue that “The committee desires that 
the Ministry ascertain the reasons for the deliberate delays, on both occasions, in 
entrusting the Audit of SASF to C & AG and fix responsibility on erring officials in 
both the cases ”. The reply of the same may please incorporated in the ATN for 
the better appreciation of the PAC. ” 
 

10 
 
10. The Committee noted that there was conspicuous delay to entrust timely 
audit of SASF to the C& AG and desired that the Ministry may ascertain the 
reasons for same, on both occasions for the periods 2004-05 to 2013-14 and 2014-
15 to 2018 -19 respectively and fix responsibility on erring officials.  The 
Committee also noted that the Trust Deed mistaken ly contained provision of 
maintenance of accounts of SASF by the C&AG of India and desired that 
necessary amendments may be incorporated in the Trust Deed and Ministry to 
clearly provide for vivid and concise provisions in the clause to avoid 
misinterpretation. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that the 
C&AG was entrusted with the audit of SASF’s account for the period 2004 -05 to 
2013-14 in May, 2013 and for the period 2014 -15 to 2018 -19 in December, 2017.  
However, the Committee are appalled to note the silence of the Ministry regarding 
fixing of responsibility on erring officials for deliberate delays in entrusting the 
audits to C&AG and also whether necessary amendments have been 
incorporated in the Trust Deed to avoid  future misinterpretation of the Trust 
Deed. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire 
that the Ministry may take prompt and timely remedial action on their 
observations and apprise them within two months of the presentation of the 
Report.   
 
11. Inadmissible Exchange of Assets and surrendering of securities for the 
losses on Exchanged cases 
 (Recommendation No. 5) 
 
The Committee in thei r original Report noted that between September 2004 and 
May 2005, IDBI, by executing six transfer/assignment/transfer of mortgage deeds, 
assigned 636 stressed assets with NLO of  ` 9004 crore to SASF.  IDBI Bank submitted 
(February 2006/April 2006) proposals to GoI for exchange of turnaround cases for other 
stressed assets.  Exchange of cases w as not permissible as the objective of formation 
of SASF was to take over the NPAs/potential NPAs existing as on March 2004 only. 
The GoI intimated (May 2006) IDBI Bank that the Stressed Assets Stabilisation Fund 
was created for a specific purpose, i.e., f or stressed assets for that point of time and it 
would not be proper to extend the scope and life of SASF.  Despite this, the Board of 
IDBI Bank decided (June 2006) and Board of Trustees approved (24 June 2006) 

11 
 
exchange of eight turnaround cases with NLO o f `1522 crore for three fresh cases with 
NLO of `1335.29 crore.  The transfer deed was executed between IDBI Bank and SASF 
for exchange of cases.  Audit noticed that in eight cases, which were transferred to IDBI 
in 2006, against a total NLO of `1522.29 crore, the recovery made was `1659 crore.  
On the other hand, the position of the three cases transferred to the Trust against a total 
NLO of `1335.29 crore, the recovery made was just `360.32 crore.  Thus, this 
inadmissible exchange which was not approved b y the Government of India, benefitted 
IDBI.  On the assets transferred to IDBI, the recovery was even more than the NLO and 
on the assets received by the Trust in exchange, the recovery was minimal.   
 The Ministry in their r eply to the Audit observation  stated that the 
exchange of assets was not in line with the objective and scope of formation of SASF 
and the Bank took a business decision in the interest of the Bank to save some stressed 
assets in which there was a scope for revival . The Committee note d from the 
submission made by the IDBI Bank that Ratnagiri Gas & Power Pvt. Ltd. (RGPPL) was 
set up to take over and revive the assets of Dabhol Power Company Project on the 
direction of Government of India. Further, the Ministry submitted that the restruc turing 
would not have been possible with account remaining with SASF as it had no mandate 
or capacity to provide additional funds to carry out day -to-day monitoring of the 
operation of the accounts.  The transfer of equivalent amount of stressed assets to 
SASF was done to bring about parity of exchange.  The Committee were dismayed to 
know that the Ministry did not take immediate appropriate action at the time when SASF 
and IDBI exchanged assets in violation of the GoI orders. The Committee note d from 
the r eply of Ministry to their specific query regarding the exchange of assets that 
Ministry came to know about exchange of Assets only from the C&AG Report (i.e., 
exactly 8 years from the date of execution of transfer deed in June 2006 and the C&AG 
Report on t he subject tabled in July 2014). However, the Ministry in their written 
submission in the same document has justified the exchange stating that SASF did not 
have mandate other than recovering the amounts due on the assets. The Committee 
were shocked to not e the confusing statements made by the Ministry on the issue of 
inadmissible exchange. The Committee while taking serious view of the decision of IDBI 
Bank and SASF to execute the transfer deed in contravention of the Ministry's direction 
felt that the lackadaisical approach of the Ministry to monitor the progress made by the 
SASF and failure to follow -up on its own direction resulted in loss to the SASF. The 
Committee were of the view that SASF should have insisted on redeeming equal 
amount of bonds in exc hange of stressed assets in case of RGPPL, which was 
restructured.  The Committee also took serious note of the inadmissible exchange. The 
MD &CEO, IDBI during the sitting of the Committee held on 12 July, 2016 committed 
that securities worth ` 1064.27 crore would be surrendered to the GoI . The Committee 
found that the IDBI Bank has provided to surrender securities worth ` 198.50 crore in 
last two quarters upto December 31, 2016 and has assured that the remaining 
securities worth ` 870.77 crore would be pr ovided in the following 9 quarters. The 

12 
 
Committee we re dismayed to note that despite repeated requests made by the 
Committee Secretariat to provide specific information and their views of the matter of 
surrender of securities, the Ministry has failed to re spond.  This show ed the utter non -
serious attitude of the Ministry towards managing the affairs of SASF with due diligence 
and promptness.  In view of lack of any inputs from the Ministry on the matter, the 
Committee were of the considered view that the ab ove request of IDBI Bank for 
surrender of securities in installments may be considered by the Ministry after reviewing 
the financial position of the IDBI Bank and the Committee may be apprised of the same 
at the earliest. The Committee desire d the Ministry  to initiate an independent 
investigation into the matter and take penal action against the officials of the Ministry/ 
IDBI Bank/ SASF responsible for taking action in violation of the directions of GoI 
resulting in huge financial losses to the exchequer.  The Committee further reprimanded 
the Ministry towards their non-serious attitude in non-furnishing of desired information to 
the Committee and desired that recurrence of such instances be strictly avoided and fix 
the responsibility against the concerned officials in the matter.   
 
 
12. In this regard, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services)  in their 
Action Taken Note stated as under:- 
" Vide its letter dated 27.7.2017, IDBI Bank Ltd. has started reimbursement of 
Rs.1,064.27 crore, on account of loss on exchange of assets, in 11 equal 
quarterly instalments starting from September 2016 and Rs.483.75 crore has 
been paid up to 30.9.2017."       
(Reply to Para 1 of the Recommendation) 
 
“Vide letter dated 27.7.2017, IDBI Bank Ltd. has started reimbursement of 
Rs.1,064.27 crore, on account of loss on exchange of assets, in 11 equal 
quarterly instalments starting from September 2016, and Rs.483.75 crore (5 
instalments) has already been paid up t o 30.9.2017. Through reimbursement by 
the Bank, loss on account of the transfer is expected to be neutralised.” 
(Reply to Para 2 of the Recommendation) 
 
 
 
13.  While vetting the said ATNs, Audit made the following comments:- 
“The total amount of reimbursement as on 31.3.2018, was Rs. 677.25 crore 
towards inadmissible exchange of assets. However and amount of Rs. 387.02 
crore is pending from IDBI Bank. Progress in this regard may be intimated to 
PAC. ” 

13 
 
(Vetting comments to Ministry’s reply at Para 1 of the Recommendation) 
“Till 31.3.2018, IDBI has surrendered security worth Rs. 677.25 crores towards 
redemption/ written off of securities. 
An amount of Rs. 387.02 crore is pending from IDBI Bank. Further the reply of 
the ministry is silent on the follo wing aspect i.e. The committee desire the 
Ministry to initiate an independent investigation into the matter and take penal 
action against the officials of the Ministry/ IDBI Bank / SASF responsible for 
taking action in violation of the directions of GoI re sulting in huge financial losses 
to the exchequer. The same may be incorporated in the ATN for the better 
appreciation of the PAC.” 
(Vetting comments to Ministry’s reply at Para 2 of the Recommendation) 
 
14. The Committee were dismayed to note that the Ministry had not taken  
immediate action when SASF and IDBI exchanged assets in violation of the 
Government of India ( GoI) orders.  However after the matter came to scrutiny, 
IDBI committed to surrender securities to GoI worth `1064.27 crore in 
installments.  The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that IDBI Bank 
has started reimbursement of `1064.27 crore, on account of loss on exchange of 
assets, in 11 quarterly installments starting from September, 2016.  Thus, the total 
amount reimbursed stood at ` 677.25 crore (as on 31.3.2018) and an amount of  
`387.02 crore is pending from IDBI Bank.  The Committee are , however, not in 
agreement with the Ministry’s s ubmission that through reimbursement by the 
Bank, loss on account of the transfer is expected to be neutralized, as had the 
matter not been taken-up by the Committee, IDBI Bank would not have agreed for 
the reimbursement , apart from corrective action for procedural lapses .  The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earli er recommendation and desire the 
Ministry to initiate independent investigation into the matter and also take penal 
action against the officials of the Ministry/IDBI Bank/SASF for violating GoI’s 
directions.  The Committee desire to  be apprised of the progress of the  
independent investigation and expect time-bound completion of the same, both in 
cases of inadmissible exchange of cases and non -furnishing of information by 
the Ministry on surrender of securities to the Committee. 

14 
 
 
15. Settlement below NLO  and need for proper valuation of assets, securities 
and liabilities: 
  (Recommendation Para 8) 
 
The Committee observe d that as per the recovery policy, valuation of the 
secured assets of the borrower should be carried out by a valuer  engaged by SASF / 
other secured lender/Court.  The policy also provided that value of security including 
collaterals available (on pro rata basis) and also amount of statutory liabilities and 
workers’ dues shall form the basis for settlement amount. Fresh  valuation could be 
sought if circumstances such as vintage of existing valuation, volatility of asset value, 
etc. so warranted.  Where the value of securities was sufficient to cover the dues, the 
endeavour should be to recover the maximum amount. The Com mittee while taking 
note of the 21 settled cases examined by Audit where settlement amount was lower by 
`587.47 crore as compared to NLO of `1144.64 crore, observe d that substantial short 
recovery (below NLO) occurred on large NLO accounts. Although, perso nal guarantees 
of some of the promoters of the firms were available with the Trust, the Trust did not 
make efforts to ascertain the net worth/income of the promoters before arriving at the 
settlement amount.   Thus such settlements below NLO, without asses sing the financial 
capability of the promoters actually benefitted the promoters.  At the same time in 20 out 
of the 21 settled cases, personal guarantees were taken from the promoters/borrowers, 
however, no property details were available on record of the  Trust.  The Committee 
were dismayed to note that in such cases the Trust also did not bother to collect the 
income tax returns from the guarantors.    
 In 15 resolved cases selected by Audit for examination, in 10 cases the 
settlement amount/amount receiv ed was below the NLO amount, aggregating to short 
recovery of `1590.49 crore as compared to NLO of `2171.92 crore.  In these 10 cases, 
only in one case personal guarantees with property details were available and in 
another one case no personal guarantees were obtained.  Further, in the remaining 
eight cases, though personal guarantees were obtained, property details were not 
available on the records of the Trust.  The Trust also did not collect the income tax 
returns from the guarantors.  It is particularl y noticed that in this category, the steel 
sector companies are the major defaulters and the Trust has taken a substantial hit.  In 
respect of Malvika Steel Ltd. and Usha Ispat Ltd. the settlement amount is only `41.78 
crore and `48.07 crore as against the  NLO of `594.54 crore and `321.80 crore 
respectively.  It was really surprising that in both the cases, the Trust, inspite of having 
personal guarantees from the promoters of various borrowing companies did not try to 
ascertain the net worth of the promoters to realize optimum amount.   
 In 36 out of the 39 unresolved cases selected by Audit for examination, 
the Trust could recover only `150.54 crore against NLO of `1888.69 crore.  The short 
recovery in these cases was to the tune of `1738.14 crore.  The Au dit analysis of the 

15 
 
shortlisted 39 cases revealed that in 11 cases personal guarantees were taken from the 
promoters/borrowers and only in four cases property details were available and the 
Trust  also did not collect the income tax returns from the guaran tors.  Further, the 
Committee note d that most of these cases may be sub judice, referred to BIFR or 
initiated/invoked under SARFAESI Act/ SFC Act. 
 The Committee, while looking at the cases too k note of the fact that there 
are substantial number of cases where recovery has been made below NLO. The 
Committee express ed strong displeasure and direct the Ministry to look into all such 
cases where settlement below NLOs have been approved and fix responsibility of the 
officers responsible for the same. The Commi ttee also desire d to know whether the 
Trust’s guidelines were in consonance of GoI/RBI guidelines laid from time to time and 
whether any provision for settlement below NLO was placed before and overseen by 
the Ministry.  The Committee desire d that the Mini stry may investigate and ascertain 
whether Trust officials, involved in the cases, settled without determining the value of 
assets, are in connivance with the borrowers/ promoters and if so, take stringent action 
against the erring officials.  The Committe e further desire d that CBI enquiry may be 
instituted to go into the entire gamut of events with a view to unearth criminality in the 
lapses on the part of the officials where short recovery was accepted. 
      The Committee further recommended that since the remaining cases are 
more complicated in nature, the Ministry may, under its aegis, directly oversee the 
progress made in those cases by forming a Coordination Committee. The new 
appointments to the Trust also may be made only after ascertaining their pa st record 
and that the official has no affiliation with the borrowers. The Committee further 
recommended that although the focus should entirely remain towards full recovery from 
every asset, considered view may be taken in genuine cases. The Committee fur ther 
desired that the SASF’s stated three pronged resolution strategy of Debt Restructuring, 
Compromise settlement and Legal measures along -with fast -track system may be 
timely monitored and reviewed by the Ministry.   
 
16. In this regard, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) in their 
Action Taken Note have stated as under:- 
“SASF has apprised that the settlement amount was arrived after considering 
SASF’s pro -rata share in valuation of assets, statutory liabilities and worker’s 
dues, pending litigations etc. As per SASF’s Recovery Policy, emphasis was laid 
on early exit from the accounts and there was no specific restriction for 
settlement below NLO. The settlement in respect of 21 cases below NLO was 
mainly on account of value of asse ts not being adequate to cover NLO, statutory 
liabilities having priority over secured dues, unit lying closed since long, charged 
assets not available/traceable, settlement under aegis of BIFR/CDR, workers’ 

16 
 
issues/dues and settlement amount being discount ed to arrive at the NPV in 
order to avoid delayed realization after 5-6 years. 
SASF has informed that there are no specific guidelines from RBI regarding 
obtaining details of the assets of the guarantors offering personal guarantee as 
security for a loan. It was only in  the year  2000 that as a matter of prudent 
practice, IDBI ,vide Circular No. 7 dated 10 .5.2000, put in place the system of 
obtaining particulars of assets owned by the guarantors at the time of execution 
of the Deed of Guarantee. The Deed of G uarantee also incorporated suitable 
covenants that the Guarantor shall not dispose of the assets without prior 
approval of IDBI and also undertakes to inform IDBI regarding acquisition of new 
assets acquired by him. 
SASF has further informed that it has be en subsequently collecting the net worth 
statements, income tax returns and bank account statements whenever 
settlement with the borrower/guarantor is being discussed and the same is 
factored in while arriving at the settlement amount.” 
(Reply to Para 1 of the Recommendation) 
 
“SASF has informed that the term “Resolved cases” includes (a) cases wherein 
settlement has been arrived but recovery is pending, (b) assets have been sold 
by DRT/OL/Other lenders but distribution of sale proceeds is pending. Hence, in 
such cases there is potential for further recovery and same is being pursued by 
SASF. 
In respect of Malvika Steel Ltd., the assets were sold through public auction 
under SARFAESI by IFCI (the lead) for Rs.209 crore and IFCI distributed partial 
sale proc eeds of Rs.143 crore, in which SASF’s pro-rata share amounted to 
Rs.41.78 crore. However, IFCI instead of releasing the entire share, released 
only Rs.29.11 crore to SASF. Subsequently, on follow -up, further amount of 
Rs.25.61 crore has been received towards SASF’s share in sale of assets of the 
said company, resulting in aggregate recovery of Rs. 54.75 crore (including 
interest for delayed receipt). SASF is still following up with IFCI for release of its 
pro-rata share in balance sale proceeds.  
In respect  of UshaIspat Ltd., the amount of Rs. 48.07 crore is only partial 
recovery made by sale of assets through SARFAESI. Subsequently,an amount 
of Rs.16.14crore has been recovered as SASF’s pro-rata share in balance sale 
proceeds. An amount of Rs.64.21 crore has been recovered till date. 
SASF has further informed that it is pursuing for further recovery in both the 
cases and has appointed detective agency for ascertaining details of properties 
of guarantors and as per preliminary report, few assets of the guaran tors have 
been identified.  SASF is pursuing with concerned authorities for verifying the 

17 
 
ownership of the identified assets, for attachment and enforcing the same 
through DRT.” 
(Reply to Para 2 of the Recommendation) 
 
“SASF has apprised that out of 39 cas es, action has been initiated in 9 cases 
under SARFAESI (including 3 cases where sale notices have been issued), 7 
cases have been referred / are being referred to NCLT, settlement has been 
reached and payments are being received in 7 cases, 10 cases are f iled before 
DRT (wherein Recovery Certificate received in 4 cases) and recovery has been 
hampered in 5 cases due to attachment of assets under/by  EOW, MPID Act, 
Central Excise, PML Act and injunction/investigation against the company, 
disputes regarding the mortgaged property. The action could not be 
initiated/pursued in remaining 1 casedue to abatement of the matter in BIFR as 
the mortgaged property lies in the tribal area.  
 
Recovery in these 39 unresolved cases between April 2013 and March 2017 
stood at Rs.231.10 crore. 
 
SASF has apprised that as per the RBI directions, settlement of are governed by 
bank-specific internal policy guidelines duly approved by the Board. Accordingly, 
settlement of dues in SASF is guided by Board -approved Recovery Policy. The 
Recovery Policy of SASF does not have any specific stipulation that settlements 
may not be done below NLO. Settlements are negotiated based on SAS F’s pro-
rata share in value of assets, priority of statutory liabilities and workers’ dues, 
time value of money, and ‘realisability’. 
 
SASF has further apprised that keeping in view that cases are already NPA, 
having no cash flows, any recovery from these accounts is limited to the 
realisation from the liquidation of secured assets and identified/attachable 
assets of the personal guarantors. With the passage of time, a majority of the 
units have closed down/partially working leading to deterioration in the value of 
secured assets and hence adversely affecting recoverability.  
 
As far as connivance of staff is observed, SASF has apprised thatstern action is 
initiated by IDBI internally as also by external agencies such as CVC, CBI as per 
established systems a nd policies.Ministry of Finance has asked SASF to take 
appropriate action in the matter, as per established system and policies, while 
taking due note of the observations of the Public Accounts Committee in this 
connection.” 
(Reply to Para 3 & 4 of the Recommendation) 
 

18 
 
“A Monitoring Cell for monitoring recovery of dues against assets transferred to 
SASF has been set up as recommended.” 
(Reply to Para 5 of the Recommendation) 
 
17.  While vetting the said ATNs, Audit made the following comments:- 
“Factual statement. Hence, no further comments. 
No further recovery has been made in these 21 cases is pending and further 
progress in this regard may please be intimated to PAC. 
It is seen that SASF has been able to realise an amount of Rs. 12.47 crore in 
three ca ses through sale of shares, allotted to SASF under settlement, having 
acquisition cost of Rs.5.83 crore. Accordingly, SASF has made further recovery 
of Rs.6.64 crore (i.e. the amount recovered over & above the acquisition cost of 
shares) during the period 1 April 2013 to 31 March 2018. 
The recovery of above mentioned 21 cases is pending and para may be retained 
and further progress intimated. 
The facts remains that personal guarantees were enforceable instruments to 
safeguard financial interests of lenders/ Financial Institution.” 
(Vetting comments to Ministry’s reply at Para 1 of the Recommendation) 
“In respect of M/s Malvika Steel Limited, an amount of Rs.25.61 crore as on 
31.3.2018, has been effected and further recovery with IFCI for release of 
SASF’s pro-rata share in balance sale proceeds is being followed-up with IFCI. 
The recovery from M/s Malvika Steel Limited case, SASF share from IFCI is 
pending. Progress in this regard may be intimated to PAC. 
In respect of Usha Ispat Ltd., the amount of Rs.48.17 crore is recovered towards 
partial recovery against the sale of assets through SARFAESI. Further an 
amount of Rs. 15.50 crore towards balance sale proceeds was received. Thus 
the total amount of Rs. 63.67 crore has been recovered till date. 
However, full recovery from M/s Usha Ispat Ltd. case is still pending. Progress in 
this regard may be intimated to PAC. 
The ownership of the identified assets is in process. Progress in this regard may 
be intimated to PAC.” 
(Vetting comments to Ministry’s reply at Para 2 of the Recommendation) 

19 
 
“Factual statement. Hence, no further comments. 
Subsequent to audit, settlement was arrived in 6 cases which was above NLO. 
Further recovery of Rs.11.36 crore has been made during April 2017 to March 
2018 in 5 cases out of these 39 unresolved cases at present. Thus there are 34 
unresolved cases at present. 
The management stated (in May 2018) that the categorisation “unresolved 
cases” indicate the potential for recovery. However, the specific reply on the 
official responsible, if any,  for the short recovery pertaining to 39 unresolved 
cases has not been furnished by SASF. The same may be intimated for better 
appreciation of PAC.  
Recovery of above mentioned 34 cases is pending. Action on the same may be 
intimated to PAC.” 
(Vetting comments to Ministry’s reply at Para 3 & 4 of the Recommendation) 
“The reply is silent regarding formation of an oversight committee by the ministry 
to directly oversee the progress made in the recoveries. The same may be 
intimated now for better appreciation of the PAC. 
Further progress made by SASF may be intimated to PAC.” 
(Vetting comments to Ministry’s reply at Para 5 of the Recommendation) 
 
18. The Committee on examination of 21 settled cases, 15 resolved cases and 
39 unresolved cases found  that there were substantial number  of cases where 
recovery was made below Net Loan Outstanding ( NLO).  The Committee directed 
the Ministry to look into all such cases and inter -alia institute CBI enquiry to 
unearth criminality in the lapses on the part of officials where short recovery was 
accepted.  The Committee also recommended for setting up of a Coo rdination 
Committee to oversee the progress made in remaining cases.  The Committee 
note from the reply of the Ministry that the SASF's Recovery Policy emphasized 
on early exit from the accounts and there was no specific restriction for 
settlement below NLO.  The Committee also take note that the Deed of Guarantee 
has suitable covenants (i.e., no disposal  of the assets without prior approval and 
to inform acquisition of new assets) and are of the view that the instruments of 

20 
 
personal guarantees may be made enforceable and utilised to ascertain net 
worth/income of the promoters before arriving at the settlement amount. The 
Committee desire to be apprised of the updated status of the inqui ry instituted by 
the Ministry into the lapses. The Committee also desire that the recovery process 
may be expedited and completed in time -bound manner  in respect of all the 
resolved cases.  The Committee further note from the reply of the Ministry that a 
Monitoring Cell (instead of the desired Coordination Committee) has been set up 
to monitor recovery of dues against assets transferred to SASF.  The Committee 
desire that the Ministry may directly oversee the role and functioning of the 
Monitoring Cell and evaluate the progress made in remaining cases on quarterly, 
half-yearly and on annual basis. 
 
19. Organisational set-up, Manpower planning and deployment of staff in SASF
 (Recommendation Para 9) 
 
The Committee noted that that SASF is managed by a Board of Trustees (BOT) 
appointed by the C entral Government.  The Board consist of one Chairperson, one 
Executive Trustee and three Members.  Since 1 January 2013, the posts of Chairperson 
and Executive Trustee were merged.  The Board of Trustees was also assisted by one 
Chief General Manager, one General Manager and 22 officials.  It  was seen that from 
the inception of the Trust till December 2012, the posts of Chairman and Executive 
Trustee of the Trust were held by Chairman and Managing Director and Executive 
Trustee respectively of IDBI Bank Limited.  Besides, Deputy Managing Direc tor of IDBI 
Bank Limited was the Alternate Chairman and Trustee of the Board of Directors from 
June 2011 and December 2012. It was, thus, evident that for all purposes, the Board of 
Trustees of SASF, in one way or the other, was related to IDBI which refle cted a 
“revolving door” policy.  The Committee was also surprised to observe that a partner of 
the Chartered Accountants firm, who certified the stressed assets and loan documents 
of IDBI before transfer to the Trust, was also the Trustee of Board of Trust ees of SASF 
from October 2004 to June 2011.   
 The Committee noted from the reply of the Ministry that the BOT entrusted 
with general management of affairs and business had 3 eminent professionals and 2 
representatives of IDBI. According to the Ministry, s ince IDBI had long experience in 
both rehabilitation and recovery and the stressed assets transferred to SASF were 
earlier dealt with by IDBI, it was felt that continuity of management is essential for 
recovery of such stressed assets having long experienc e in both rehabilitation and 

21 
 
recovery.  The Ministry in their further submission stated that initially it was thought that 
the full amount may be realized if separate organization looks after recoveries as IDBI 
Bank management would be busy in running of t he Bank.  However, post C&AG Audit, 
a considered view has been taken by the Ministry that as losses are to be borne by IDBI 
Bank, they may look after SASF. 
 The Committee we re of the considered view that the IDBI h ad an over -
riding presence in management of SASF and that a neutral and professionally managed 
SASF would had  been able to achieve better results. Further, the powers delegated to 
the Committee of Officers (COO), Executive Committee (EC), Board of Trustees (BOT) 
and Screening Committee (SC) may be thoroughly revamped by the Ministry keeping in 
mind that the cases left with recovery are more complex and tricky and need to be dealt 
with more focused attention.  Also, before appointing a partner of the Chartered 
Accountants Firm which verified and cer tified the stressed assets, as Trustee of SASF, 
the Ministry may look into the issue of conflict of interest, any financial consequences 
considering their earlier involvement with IDBI, complicity in its appointment and take 
appropriate disciplinary action against the responsible officials of the Ministry/IDBI. 
  The Committee further note d that the Trust did not make any realistic and 
scientific assessment of requirement of manpower for its functions.  The number of 
officials deployed was 50 in 2005 and ca me down to 24 in 2013.  The Trust made 
proposals during different periods for additional manpower on ad -hoc basis, though 
there was no written proposal.  During 2005 to 2013, 121 officials of the parent body, 
IDBI, were deputed at some point of time or oth er to serve the Trust.  62 out of 121 
employees worked in less than two years with SASF.  Similarly, out of 62 officials, 25 
worked for less than one year.  Interestingly, only 16 out of 121 officials possessed 
recovery experience and four officials who ha ve been deputed by IDBI were facing 
disciplinary proceedings.  
 The Ministry submitted that the SASF had scientifically assessed the staff 
requirement at SASF taking into account the number of cases handled at various levels 
i.e., resolved, unresolved and chronic NPA cases.  Th e response of the Ministry was 
seen in the light of frequent proposals for manpower requirement indicating that the 
assessment was inadequate and unscientific and there were no written proposals prior 
to July 2012 indicating that the proposals made by SASF were on ad-hoc basis.  
 The Committee further deplore d the appointment of staff who were 
inexperienced and untrained in corporate banking and recovery of stressed assets.  The 
Committee also noted that the interviews for deputation in SASF were conducted by the 
IDBI and not by the SASF. The response of the Ministry that the responsibility of 
providing staff to SASF was given to IDBI Bank and it was not specified in the 
arrangement that SASF would i nterview the candidates.  Further, the officers were 
directly posted in SASF by the Bank after seeing requisite qualification and experience 
required by an officer for de puting to SASF.  The Committee we re of the firm view that 
the staff with SASF were not  scientifically placed as frequent staff proposals were 

22 
 
made. The Committee were of the view that an independent team trained in realization 
of NPAs would have been a better choice for taking care of the interests of the 
Government.  The Committee felt that the non-realisation of balance NPAs may be seen 
as non -performance of SASF owing to the temporary organizational set -up and 
inadequate manpower deployment at the SASF. The Committee opine d that the 
recoveries are majorly  dependant on the efficiency of t he officials deployed for 
recoveries and therefore incentives should be given for good performances. The 
Committee desire d that the existing manpower deployment may be reviewed in a 
scientific manner and staff with dynamic experience and expertise in recov ery of 
unresolved and chronic NPAs be placed/engaged at the disposal of SASF for optimum 
recovery of balance NPAs.    
 
20. In this regard, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services)  in their 
Action Taken Note have stated as under:- 
 
“SASF has apprised that the Chairperson/ alternate Chairperson /Executive 
Trustee were the CMD/DMD/ED of the Bank who was very senior functionaries 
of IDBI with long experience in banking and handling of rehabilitation and 
recovery of stressed assets. Their  understanding of the industry, asset portfolio 
and the specific cases had helped the SASF in resolution of the cases. Apart 
from the two IDBI officials on the Board of Trustees of SASF, there were, initially 
three and subsequently two, independent professionals appointed by DFS, GoI. 
SASF has further apprised that M/s Haribhakti  & Co., the CA firm had only 
carried out a limited due diligence for the purpose of verifying and certifying the 
correctness of information, set out in the data profiles, prepared b y IDBI with 
regards to the assets identified for transfer to SASF.  Ministry of Finance has 
advised SASF to ensure strict separation of functions in future while engaging 
Chartered Accountants for accountancy or audit purposes, and to avoid any 
potential co nflict of interest in assigning work to Chartered Accountants by 
ensuring due disclosures and proper scrutiny of past engagement” 
(Reply to Para 1 of the Recommendation) 
 
“Observations are factual.” 
(Reply to Para 2 of the Recommendation) 
 
“SASF has apprised that a draft paper for revision/modification of Delegation of 
Powers as also Recovery Policy, to be in line with market practices and current 
situation has already been finalised. The same shall be placed before the Board 
of Trustees for their consideration.” 

23 
 
(Reply to Para 3 of the Recommendation) 
 
“SASF has informed that a manpower assessment had been undertaken from 
time to time andrequested  IDBI Bank Ltd. to depute the required manpower with 
requisite skills/background. SASF is presently dealing with 277 cases, which are 
being handled by a team of 4 DGMs assisted by 18 officers, including legal and 
accounts. The officers deputed by IDBI Bank over the years had work experience 
of corporate finance which is useful for dealing with NPA cases as also in 
negotiating settlements with the defaulting borrowers and/or dealing with other 
lenders. The existing manpower is adequate to handle the present portfolio of 
SASF.However, considering legal issues and complexity of the remaining cases 
as also in order to strengthen the team, it has specifically sought for posting of 
additional experienced legal officers. 
SASF has apprised that subsequent to modific ation of Deputation Policy of IDBI 
Bank, the Selection Committee constituted for selection of officers for deputation 
to SASF on two instances, was comprised of Executive Trustee/CGM of SASF 
as one of the panel members.” 
(Reply to Para 4, 5 & 6 of the Recommendation) 
 
21. While vetting the said ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:- 
“It is verified that two independent professionals, retired from banking sector, are 
the trustees of SASF. However, the chairman and other two trustees are from the 
IDBI Bank. As such, the concern endorsed by PAC has not been addressed. The 
reason for this may please be intimated to PAC.” 
(Vetting comments to Ministry’s reply at Para 1 of the Recommendation) 
 
“ Factual statement. Hence, no further comments.” 
(Vetting comments to Ministry’s reply at Para 2 of the Recommendation) 
 
“The reply on the draft paper for revision/modification of Delegation of Powers as 
also recovery policy, to be in line with market practices and current situation has 
already been finalised in not factual as SASF’s revised/modifying, DoP and 
Recovery Policy is yet not finalised. 
 
The modification in DoP and Recovery Policy is in the process and yet have not 
completed. Progress in this regard may be intimated to PAC. 
 
Factual statement. Hence, no further comments.” 
 

24 
 
(Vetting comments to Ministry’s reply at Para 3 of the Recommendation) 
 
“The manpower strength of SASF is at 21 officers as on 25.5.2018. SASF is also 
following up with IDBI Bank for posting of additional officers. 
 
As manpower is declining, additional experienced officers need to be posted. 
Progress in this regard may be intimated to PAC. 
 
Officers to SASF are being posted by HRD, IDBI in consultation of CGM and 
Executive Trustee, SASF.” 
 
(Vetting comments to Ministry’s reply at Para 4,5 & 6 of the Recommendation) 
 
 
22. The Committee in their original report had noted the 'revolving door' policy 
as IDBI had an over -riding presence in management of SASF.  The Committee, 
therefore, asked the Ministry to thoroughly revamp the powers delegated to 
Committee of Officers (COO), Executive Committee (EC), Board of Trustees (BoT) 
and Screening Committee ( SC) to have focused attention on remaini ng complex 
cases for recovery. The Committee while observing complicity in appointment  of 
the Chartered Accountant (CA) firm had desired disciplinary action against those  
responsible in the Ministry/ IDBI.  The Committee had also noted that the 
assessment for deployment of staff at SASF was unscientific and desired that 
persons with expertise in recovery of unresolved and chron ic NPAs be placed at 
disposal of SASF.  The Committee note from the reply of Ministry that SASF has 
prepared a draft paper for revision/modification of Delegation of Powers (DoP) as 
also Recovery Policy for placing before the BoT & reiteriate their  earlier stand to 
thoroughly revamp the powers delegated to COO, EC, BoT and SC to achieve the 
larger perspective of recovery in remaining complex cases.  The Committee note 
from the reply of the Ministry that it has advised  SASF to ensure due disclosures 
and proper  scrutiny of pa st engagement of CAs while assigning the work  in 
future. The Committee desire to be apprised of the action taken against those 
responsible in Ministry/ IDBI for engaging a CA firm having a Trustee of the SASF 
Board as a partner. Further, regarding the Comm ittee's concern to review the 
deployment of manpower to SASF, they are constrained to note from the reply of 
the Ministry that SASF is yet to get additional experienced legal officers.  The 

25 
 
Committee desire the Ministry to fast track the process of deployment of 
professionals at the disposal of SASF as  the Trust has a mandate of 20 years  i.e. 
2024 for redeeming GoI securities. 
23. IDBI Bank’s rising Non-Performing Assets (NPAs) 
 (Recommendation Para 10) 
 
The Committee note d that the RBI has placed IDBI Bank under Prompt 
Corrective Action (PCA) on the basis of the IDBI Bank’s financial position as on 
December 31, 2016. The Committee further note d that as on December 2016   the Net 
NPA at `20949 constitute 9.61 per cent of the net advance of IDBI Bank.  Further the 
increasing Gross NPA and Net NPA of IDBI Bank at `44752 crore (21.25 per cent) and 
`25206 crore (13.21 per cent) respectively as on March 2017 as compared to Gross 
NPA of `24875 crore (10.98 per cent) and Net NPA of `14643 (6.78 per cent) as on 
March 2016, are indeed alarming.   The Committee we re shocked to note that in less 
than 20 years after the Government cleared the Balance Sheet of IDBI, it has again 
fallen into the debt trap of NPA. The Committee  were of the considered opinion that the 
huge NPAs of the Public Sector Banks point towards their faulty lending policies. The 
Committee observed that the creation of SASF, mergers, capital infusions are not able 
to address the problem of rising NPAs and now the Governmen t would have to think 
innovatively for a long - term solution. The Committee, therefore, desire d that after 
analyzing the sectors where NPAs are rampant, insurance of the loans may be made 
mandatory for those sectors and since personal guarantees and securi ties are also not 
yielding desired results professional bodies may be engaged for underwriting the loans 
and the collaterals should be mandatorily insured. The Committee wh ile acknowledging 
that this will  increase the cost of loans, desire d that incentives may be offered, at the 
time of payment of last installment, for the borrowers who pay off their loans timely.  The 
Committee exhort ed that exemplary punishments should be awarded to the officials 
who worked in tandem with big corporate and siphon off the money of public exchequer 
without adequate collaterals or personal guarantees. 
 

26 
 
24. In this regard, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) in their 
Action Taken Note have stated as under:- 
" SASF has apprised  that erstwhile IDBI was a development financial institution 
and major part of its exposure was in large scale industries including 
infrastructure, steel, telecom, textiles, roads etc. Because of historical reasons, 
IDBI Bank Ltd. continues to have higher level of exposures in these sectors. NPA 
position of IDBI was in control till FY 2012 -13. However, because of general 
economic slowdown, many large projects got stalled. There were issues relating 
to various clearances, cancellation of coal mines/spectrum etc. which dented 
performance of many infrastructure projects which slowly turned stressed/non -
performing. This is a general trend across banking industry. IDBI Bank has been 
impacted more severely because of its limited exposure to retail (24%). Even out 
of corporate loan book, major exposure is in core/infrastructure sectors. 
SASF has apprised that wherever connivance of staff is observed, stern action is 
initiated by IDBI internally as also by external agencies such as CVC, CBI etc.as 
per established systems and policies." 
25. While vetting the said ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:- 
 “  Factual Statement.  Hence no further comments. 
The specific reply on wherever connivance of staff is observed, if any, and action 
taken by IDBI has not been furnished by SASF. The sam e may be intimated now 
for better appreciation of the PAC.” 
 
26. The Committee had noted that even after Government cleared the Balance 
Sheet of IDBI, i t again fell in to the deb t trap of Non-Performing Assets ( NPAs) 
and were of the considered opinion that huge NPAs of Public Sector Banks 
(PSBs) pointed towards their faulty lending policies.  The Committee, therefore , 
desired the Government to analyse sectors where NPAs are rampant and make 
insurance of loans of mandatory for those sectors as also to engage professional 
bodies for underwriting the loans and collaterals be mandatorily insured.   The 
Committee desired that although it would increase cost of loans, incentives may 
be offered, at the time of payment of last  instalment, for the borrowers who pay 
off their loans timely.  The Committee also exhorted for exemplary punishments 
to the officials who work in tandem with big corporate and siphon off the money 

27 
 
of public exchequer without adequate collaterals or person al guarantees.  The 
Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that because of historical reasons, 
IDBI Bank Ltd. continues to have higher l evel of exposures in large scale 
industries and due to general economy slowdown  impact on IDBI Bank has been 
severe because of its limited exposure to retail.  Also stern action is initiated by 
IDBI internally as also by e xternal agencies wherever conni vance of staff is 
observed.  The Committee are dismayed to note that no reply has been furnished 
by the Ministry on  the issue of 'insurance of loans to be made mandatory' and 
engaging professional bodies for underwriting the loans and collaterals.  The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation  for providing 
incentive to the borrowers who pay off thei r loans timely and exemplary 
punishment be awarded to officials who have maligned the image of the Bank. 
 Further with the recent developments in IDBI Bank wherein Life Insurance 
Corporation of India  (LIC) has acquired majority shares of the IDBI Bank, the  
Committee desire that the arrangement should not come in the way of providing 
robust back-up to SASF for recovery of money from the remaining stressed 
assets. 
 
-------- 
  

28 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
The Report No.5 of 2014 of the C&AG contains the results of audit of Stressed 
Assets Stablisation Fund (SASF), a Trust created by the Government of India (GoI)  to 
acquire by transfer the Stressed Assets of Indust rial Development Bank of India (IDBI) 
and for managing these assets with a view to recovering the amounts due on these 
assets. As of March 2004, IDBI accumulated Non -Performing Assets (NPA) stood 
approximately at ` 9000 crore. The IDBI ceased to exist with  effect from 1 October, 
2004 and in its place IDBI Bank came into being as an entity registered under the 
Companies Act, 1956. The Government, as settlor, set up a special purpose vehicle in 
the form of a Trust and created the SASF for Stressed Assets of I DBI in September 
2004. The Government invested ` 9,000 crore in SASF in the form of Non -Interest 
bearing Government of India IDBI Special Securities 2004 redeemable in 20 years. 
SASF assigned these Special Securities of ` 9,000 crore to IDBI Bank, which in  turn 
transferred NPAs with Net Loan Outstanding (NLO) of ` 9,000 crore to SASF. In terms 
of the provisions of the Trust Deed, SASF is required to remit the amounts recovered 
out of the Stressed and Non -Performing Assets to the GoI, and GoI at the end of 
February / March every year to pay IDBI Bank the amount received from SASF against 
surrender (for redemption) of Special Securities of equivalent amount. SASF since 
October 2004 till Financial Year 2015 -16 has recovered and remitted to the GoI ` 4,514 
crore for redemption of the special securities and the balance securities that are yet to 
be redeemed are ` 4,486 crore (as on March 31, 2016).  
 The Committee note that audit of SASF was entrusted to the CAG of India by the 
Ministry of Finance in May, 2013 alm ost eight years after the setting up of the Trust. 
Audit has pointed out a number of deficiencies in managing the Trust including delay in 
entrusting the Audit of SASF to C&AG, inadmissible exchange of cases between SASF 
and IDBI and ineffective personal g uarantees owing to absence of income and property 
details, not ascertaining the net worth/ income of the promoters for settling the accounts 

29 
 
and short recoveries etc.. The examination of the subject by the Committee brought out 
several shortcomings which have been dealt with in the succeeding paragraphs. 
[Observation/Recommendation No. 1 of the 78th Report of Public Accounts 
Committee (16th Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
Action taken by the Ministry 
Observations are factual. Till date, aggregate amount remitted by SASF to GoI is 
Rs.4,654 crore for redemption of the special securities. In addition, regarding 
inadmissible exchange of cases between SASF and IDBI ,IDBI Bank Ltd. has 
agreed to reimburse GoI to the tune of Rs. 1,064.27 crore, in 11 equal quarterly 
instalments starting from September 2016, for transfer of the assets referred to in 
Sl. No. 5, Paragraph No. 1 of the PAC Report, and against this the bank has 
remitted to GoI Rs.483.75 crorein five instalments till September 2017. Thus, a 
total amount of Rs. 5,137.75 cro re stands remitted to GoI till September 2017, 
with remittance of a further amount of Rs. 580.52 crore from the Bank in six 
quarterly instalments till March 2019 tied up. 
(Reply to Para 1 of the Recommendation) 
Observations are factual. Response to the var ious observations of PAC is given 
in the succeeding paragraphs where details have been brought out. 
(Reply to Para 2 of the Recommendation) 
 
Vetting Comments of the Audit 
As on 31.3.2018, aggregate amount remitted by SASF to GoI was Rs.4774 crore 
towards redemption of the special securities. 
Rs.4226 crore is still to be recovered and remitted to GoI. Progress in this regard 
may be incorporated in the ATN. 
Regarding inadmissible exchange of cases between SASF and IDBI, IDBI has 
surrendered security worth Rs.  677.25 crore towards redemption/written off. 
Securities till 31.3.2018. 
An amount of Rs.387.02 crore regarding inadmissible exchange cases is pending 
from IDBI Bank. Progress in this regard may be incorporated in the ATN. 
 

30 
 
(Vetting Comments to Ministry’s reply at Para 1 of the Recommendation)  
 
Factual Statement. Hence no further comments. 
(Vetting Comments to Ministry’s reply at Para 2 of the Recommendation) 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
The Committee note that SASF was created as a special purpose vehicle to acquire the 
stressed assets of IDBI Bank and recover the NLO dues against these assets. At first, 
636 Non Performing Assets (NPA)/ stressed loan assets with a net loan outstanding 
(NLO) of ` 9,004 crore of IDBI Bank was transferred to SASF. The Government then 
provided ` 9,000 crore to SASF which in turn was invested in Government securities, 
redeemable in 20 years and pledged back the securities with IDBI. In this regard 
Government securities amounting to only ` 4514 crore have been redeemed (FY 2015 -
16) against a balance of ` 4486 crore. Further noting that the bulk of recovery ( ` 
2608.29 crore) was effected in the initial period of the Trust i.e. during 2005-06, 2006-07 
and 2007 -08  (with highest recovery of  `  927.68 crore in 2006 -07) and the recovery 
amount thereafter declined significantly since then indicate that the cases left now are 
more complex and difficult. The Committee are of the opinion that with the declining 
pace, the p rospect for recovery of remaining NLOs seems to be bleak.    The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that SASF make all -out efforts on cases pending 
recovery, engage specialized and experienced professionals/staff to facilitate 
expeditious settlement of all NL O cases within the maturity term of the Government 
securities.  More importantly, the Government needs to monitor the progress made by 
SASF and speed -track the recovery of balance NLO and make timely intervention for 
any lapses noticed in the process.  The  Committee further recommend that the Ministry 
may form a high level Monitoring Cell which may be entrusted with the responsibility to 
review on monthly, quarterly and annual basis every aspect related to SASF towards 
meeting its stated objective.   
[Observation/Recommendation No.2  of the 78th Report of Public Accounts 
Committee (16th Lok Sabha)] 
 

31 
 
 
Action taken by the Ministry 
Observations are factual. 
SASF has apprised that it is pursuing action under the Securitisation and 
Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest 
(SARFAESI)Act, 2002 in 116 cases, while simultaneously exploring One Time 
Settlement (OTS) or Negotiated Settlement (NS) in 76 cases. SASF is also 
pursuing 222 cases through DRT suits/recovery certificates and9 c ases are 
under reference to National Company Law Tribunal(NCLT). Further, follow -up 
with OL is being made in 61 cases for expeditious release of SASF’s share lying 
with OL and for sale of assets under possession of OL. In addition, SASF has 
reported that i t is regularly identifying cases, based on prospects of recovery. 
Focussed attention is being given for early recovery in 97, 55 and 78 cases for 
FY 2015-16, 2016-17 and 2017-18 respectively.  
SASF has apprised that during the course of recovery action, it  engages services 
of professionals/specialised agencies which, inter-alia, include Enforcement 
Agencies/Recovery Agents for SARFAESI, valuers for valuation of the assets 
charged to lenders, e -auction providers for conducting public auction through the 
e-auction platform and private detective agencies to identify unencumbered 
assets of guarantors, to enable it to maximise recovery in a timely manner. 
A Monitoring Cell for monitoring recovery of dues against assets transferred to 
SASF has been set up as recommended. 
Vetting Comments of the Audit 
Recovery is not yet completed. The status of recovery may be brought to the 
notice of PAC. 
Factual statement, as stated by the management (May 2018) subsequent to 
CAG audit in May 2013, out of 312 cases, 48 cases have since been closed and 
6 cases have been re -categorised as unresolved. Out of 76 cases mentioned 
under OTS/NS, OTS/NS has already been completed in 52 cases and payment 
is being received in 5 cases (timely in one case and with delay four cases). 
The Recover y of above mentioned 24 out of 76 cases is pending and the 
progress of recovery may be intimated. Progress in this regard may be intimated 
to PAC. 

32 
 
SASF had identified 97, 55 and 78 cases for focused recovery actions during the 
year 2015-16, 2016-17 and 201 7-18 respectively. There is overlapping of these 
cases and these are total 136 cases. An amount of Rs.172.33 crore has been 
recovered from 58, focused cases from April 2015 to April 30, 2018. 
Recovery from focused cases is pending. Progress in this regard may be 
intimated to PAC. 
SASF had engaged the services of the professional agencies for marketing of the 
assets in two cases, however, the experience  has not been encouraging in this 
regard. In one account, where SASF is also a lender, ARCIL had engaged 
services of professional agencies, but there was no success in that case also. In 
all these cases professional agencies have failed to sell the assets at the 
indicated Reserve Price. Progress in this regard may be brought to the notice of 
PAC. 
The monitoring cell has been set-up in January 2018. 
A note on the activities undertaken by the monitoring cell and its effectiveness 
may be added for appreciation of the PAC. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
The Committee note that as per Clause 18C of the Trust Deed, all the costs of 
administering the Trust are to be borne by the IDBI. However, the expenditure of ` 
72.86 crore for the period from 2004 -05 to 2011 -12 pertaining to safeguarding the 
borrowers assets was reimbursed to IDBI from the recoveries made from the borrowers. 
The Committee are of the view that had the Trust been not established, the expenditure 
on safeguarding the asset would have been borne by the IDBI and moreover, there is 
no provision i n the Trust Deed to recover such amount from the realization of stressed 
assets. The Committee observe that the Clause 18(c) of the Trust Deed categorically 
mentions that all costs of administering the Trust have to be borne by IDBI or its 
successors. The Committee further find that the Ministry had accepted the audit finding 
and issued direction to IDBI in August 2014 itself to return the amount to SASF. 
However, IDBI only agreed to reimburse the amount only when the matter was raised 
during the evidence o f the Committee held on 17.7.2015 and finally reimbursed the 
amount on 8.7.2016. The Committee are dismayed to note that IDBI took almost two 

33 
 
years after the Ministry's directive and one year after their own commitment to the 
Committee for reimbursing ` 72.86 crore just before the second evidence was to be 
taken by the Committee.  The Committee feel that IDBI had deliberately ignored the 
explicit provisions in the Trust Deed for bearing the cost of administering the Trust. It is 
further surprising that, the  Ministry also took more than 10 years in deciding that IDBI 
Bank has to bear all the expenses incurred on administering the Trust. The Committee 
view with disappointment the apathy of the Ministry, SASF and the IDBI Bank towards 
the interests of the Government of India and earnestly desire that the Ministry be prompt 
in its approach and clear instructions be issued to the IDBI Bank that all the expenses 
incurred on safeguarding borrowers assets may be borne by the Bank.   
[Observation/Recommendation No. 4 of the 78th Report of Public Accounts 
Committee (16th Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
Action taken by the Ministry 
Subsequent to the Audit, all expenses incurred by SASF towards security, 
advocate fees, publication of notices etc. in respect of the borrower’s accounts 
have been paid by IDBI Bank Ltd. and SASF has not reimbursed any amount to 
IDBI Bank. IDBI Bank has refunded an amount of Rs.72.86 crore on 8.7.2016 to 
SASF as directed.  The recovery of such amount from the borrowers, as and 
when made, is included in the remitt ance made by SASF to GoI. Further, 
instructions as per committee’s recommendation have been issued to IDBI Bank. 
 
Vetting Comments of the Audit 
The IDBI Bank has remitted an amount of Rs. 111.72 crore (Rs.72.86 crore in 
July 2016 and Rs.38.34 crore in Marc h 2018) to SASF as per the 
recommendations of the PAC committee. Hence, no further comments. 
(Vetting Comments to Ministry’s reply at Para 1 of the Recommendation)  
Observation/Recommendation 
The Committee note that no personal guarantees were obtained by IDBI in eight cases, 
in 27 cases, copies of personal guarantee were not produced and in 47 cases, property 

34 
 
details were not available against the loans. Further, there was no system of obtaining 
copies of the income-tax returns and property details of the guarantors. The Committee 
further note that there was no mechanism to check the capability and competence of 
the guarantors to give such guarantee in the absence of relevant details or documents. 
The Committee feel that in absence of the property and income details of the guarantors 
the personal guarantee obtained are of no use which is evident from the failure of the 
Trust in enforcing these guarantees while making recoveries. The Committee further 
note that no specific guidelines were issued by the Trust for treatment of personal 
guarantees.  In many cases, the Trust did not collect the details of assets of the 
guarantors or copies of their income -tax returns. The Committee observe that obtaining 
personal guarantee is not mandatory and RBI have no specific  guidelines as far as 
personal guarantees on general lending is concerned as it is individual Bank’s 
commercial decision. The Committee further understand from the submission made 
during the evidence by the representative of the IDBI Bank that the policy a t that time 
did not envisage getting all the details or getting personal guarantee in all the cases. 
The Committee are of the considered opinion that the instrument of personal guarantee 
is an effective tool to prevent loans from becoming NPAs/bad loans as  it acts as a 
deterrent for those taking advantage of limited liability entities. The Committee exhort 
that IDBI should have initially taken adequate precautionary measures to safeguard its 
interests for recovery of loans thereby protecting the commercial interest of the Bank. 
The Committee are of the opinion that had the SASF not failed in obtaining details of 
assets of guarantors, net worth of the borrowers, Income Tax returns, affidavit of assets 
filed by the guarantors in the Courts / DRTs besides net w orth certificate by a Chartered 
Accountant and liability statements, maximum recovery would have been assured 
without any complexities. The Committee note that the Trust has revised the policy and 
stipulated the requirement for furnishing full details of t he means of guarantors and 
desire that disciplinary action be taken against officials responsible for lack of 
seriousness in collecting the required collaterals and guarantees while sanctioning the 
loans resulting in huge loss to the exchequer. 
[Observation/Recommendation No. 6 of the 78th Report of Public Accounts 
Committee (16th Lok Sabha)] 
 

35 
 
Action taken by the Ministry 
SASF has apprised that all loans had been granted by IDBI while functioning as 
a Developmental Financial Institution (DFI), based on proj ect viability and cash 
flows, and not on the basis of personal guarantee(s) or collateral securities. Many 
of the projects could not generate enough cash flows due to adverse business 
cycles, policy changes and other external factors beyond their control a nd hence 
were identified as NPA and shifted to SASF for focussed attention for recovery.  
SASF has further apprised that IDBI, as a DFI, was incorporated as a statutory 
corporation under the Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964 and it 
continued to function as a DFI till its reverse merger with IDBI Bank in October 
2004. IDBI Act, 1964 authorised IDBI’s Board of Directors to frame policies 
relating to conduct of its business, including for sanction of assistance to 
borrower companies. Pursuant to the same, the Board of the erstwhile IDBI had 
approved and modified the Direct Finance Manual of  policies and procedures 
relating to extension of finance to assisted companies from time  to time. As per 
the manual, personal guarantee / corporate guarantee ( if any) was to be 
stipulated as an additional security wherever considered necessary, on a case to 
case basis. This was true for all types of assistance  ,viz. project/non-
project/equipment finance or asset credit schemes of the institution. As per the 
then prevailing policy, the Deed of Guarantee to be executed by the guarantor 
did not require furnishing of Statement of Assets and Liabilities by the guarantor 
to IDBI. 
In addition, SASF has apprised that there are no specific guidelines from RBI 
regarding ob taining details of the assets of the guarantors offering personal 
guarantee as security for a loan. It was only in 2000 that as a matter of prudent 
practice, IDBI, vide Circular No. 7 dated 10.5.2000, put in place a system of 
obtaining particulars of assets  owned by guarantors at the time of execution of 
the Deed of Guarantee, which also incorporated suitable covenants that the 
Guarantor shall not dispose of the assets without prior approval of IDBI and also 
undertakes to inform IDBI regarding acquisition of new assets acquired by him. 
Relevant extracts of supporting documents are at Annex. 
SASF has added that although details of personal assets of the guarantors were 
not available, SASF was continuously pursuing with the company/promoters 
concerned for recovery of the dues either as sole lender or as part of consortium. 

36 
 
SASF has informed that it has since revised its procedures and has been 
obtaining net worth certificate of the guarantors duly certified by Chartered 
Accountant, detail of Income Tax Returns a s also bank account statements while 
considering settlement of the dues of the borrower company/ guarantors. 
 
Vetting Comments of the Audit 
Factual statement. Hence no further comments. 
------ 
  

37 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
 
- NIL - 
  

38 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION  
 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
The Committee in their original Report noted that the Trust had requested C&AG in 
June 2005 to appoint an auditor in pursuance of the provisions of the Trust Deed.  Since 
the provisions of C&AG’s Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service (DPC) Act 1971 
stipulate that the C&AG would undertake audit only after receipt of a formal proposal 
from the Ministry, SASF was advised to forward a proposal through the Ministry and the 
audit of SASF was entrusted to CAG by the Ministry, for the period 2004-05 to 2013-14, 
only in May 2013, that too, after the intervention of the Mumbai High Court in February 
2013. Moreover, subsequent Audit of the SASF from 2014 -15 onwards was not 
entrusted to C&AG despite their taking up the matter with the Minis try in January, 2014, 
February, 2015, May 2015 and February, 2016.  The Committee arewere aghast to 
observe that in spite of the request from the Trust in June, 2005, the Ministry 
deliberately did not pay any attention to make a formal request to the C&AG for the 
audit of SASF.  The Ministry arose from its pretentious slumber after long eight years in 
2013, only when the Mumbai High Court directed them to do so.  The conscious attitude 
of the Ministry was vividly clear from the fact that they ignored simila r requests of the 
C&AG repeatedly in January, 2014, February, 2015, May, 2015 and February, 2016 to 
entrust the audit of SASF.  The Committee took serious note of the lackadaisical 
attitude of the Ministry during the evidence and now as per the Ministry’s submission the 
audit of SASF for the period of 2013 -18 was entrusted to the C&AG. The Committee 
were of the considered view that the conspicuous delay to entrust timely Audit of SASF 
to the C&AG directly puts responsibility of the lapses made by SASF durin g these years 
on the Ministry. The Committee desired that the Ministry may ascertain the reasons for 
the deliberate delays, on both occasions, in entrusting the Audit of SASF to C&AG and 
fix responsibility on erring officials in both the cases. The Committ ee also noted that 
Clause 17(a) of the Trust Deed states that "the accounts of the fund shall be maintained 
and audited by the C&AG of India". The Committee noted from the C&AG’s observation 
in this regard that the provision of maintenance of accounts by t he C&AG had been 
mistakenly placed as the C&AG only audits the accounts prepared by the Executive. 
The Committee desired that necessary amendments may be incorporated in the Trust 
deed and may clearly provide for vivid and concise provisions in the clause so that no 
further mis-interpretation may be read in future. The Committee further desired that the 
Ministry in order to secure the interests of the Government take prompt and timely 

39 
 
action in entrusting the audit to the C&AG, taking remedial action on the ir observations 
and apprise the position within six months of the presentation of this Report.   
  [Observation/Recommendation No. 3 of the 78th Report of Public Accounts 
Committee (16th Lok Sabha)] 
 
Action taken by the Ministry 
 The matter of audit of SASF was raised before Bombay High Court in PIL no. 65 of 
2011 Madhav Balwant Karmakar vs. Union of India & Others. Ministry of Finance 
submitted on 6.3.2012 that as per paragraph 17 of the Trust Deed, the accounts of 
SASF shall be maintained and audited by CAG.CAG submitted on 21.6.2012 that under 
the Constitutional scheme, CAG does not maintain accounts. However, if directions are 
given by Union of India to audit the accounts of SASF, CAG would have no difficulty in 
doing so. The Co urt sought to know on 30.1.2013 whether Union of India intends to 
instruct CAG to audit the SASF’s accounts. Thereupon, on 8.2.2013, Ministry of Finance 
requested CAG to arrange for audit of SASF’s accounts for the period 2004 -05 to 2013-
14. As regards aud it for the period 2014 -15 to 2018 -19, Ministry of Finance, vide letter 
dated 13.7.2016,requested C&AG to conduct the audit, and C&AG has concurred vide 
letter dated 30.11.2017 to undertake the audit of SASF for the said period. Accordingly, 
Department of E conomic Affairs, vide letter dated 5.12.2017, has conveyed re -
entrustment of audit of SASF’s accounts by CAG for the said five -year period to CAG .  
As regards action on CAG’s observation, CAG Report no. 5/2014 on SASF , action 
taken on thereport has been communicated to CAG vide letter dated 13.7.2017. 
Vetting Comments of the Audit 
 The reply of the ministry was silent on the issue that “The committee desires that the 
Ministry ascertain the reasons for the deliberate delays, on both occasions, in entrusting 
the Audit of SASF to C & AG and fix responsibility on erring officials in both the cases”. 
The reply of the same may please incorporated in the ATN for the better appreciation of 
the PAC.  
Observation/Recommendation 
The Committee in their original Report noted that between September 2004 and 
May 2005, IDBI, by executing six transfer/assignment/transfer of mortgage deeds, 
assigned 636 stressed assets with NLO of ` 9004 crore to SASF.  IDBI Bank submitted 

40 
 
(February 2006/April 2006) proposals to GoI for exchange of turnaround cases for other 
stressed assets.  Exchange of cases was not permissible as the objective of formation 
of SASF was to take over the NPAs/potential NPAs existing as on March 2004 only. 
The GoI intimate d (May 2006) IDBI Bank that the Stressed Assets Stabilisation Fund 
was created for a specific purpose, i.e., for stressed assets for that point of time and it 
would not be proper to extend the scope and life of SASF.  Despite this, the Board of 
IDBI Bank d ecided (June 2006) and Board of Trustees approved (24 June 2006) 
exchange of eight turnaround cases with NLO of `1522 crore for three fresh cases with 
NLO of `1335.29 crore.  The transfer deed was executed between IDBI Bank and SASF 
for exchange of cases.  Audit noticed that in eight cases, which were transferred to IDBI 
in 2006, against a total NLO of `1522.29 crore, the recovery made was `1659 crore.  
On the other hand, the position of the three cases transferred to the Trust against a total 
NLO of `1335.29 crore, the recovery made was just `360.32 crore.  Thus, this 
inadmissible exchange which was not approved by the Government of India, benefitted 
IDBI.  On the assets transferred to IDBI, the recovery was even more than the NLO and 
on the assets received by the Trust in exchange, the recovery was minimal.   
 The Ministry in their reply to the Audit observation stated that the 
exchange of assets was not in line with the objective and scope of formation of SASF 
and the Bank took a business decision in the interest of the Bank to save some stressed 
assets in which there was a scope for revival . The Committee noted from the 
submission made by the IDBI Bank that Ratnagiri Gas & Power Pvt. Ltd. (RGPPL) was 
set up to take over and revive the assets of Dabhol Pow er Company Project on the 
direction of Government of India. Further, the Ministry submitted that the restructuring 
would not have been possible with account remaining with SASF as it had no mandate 
or capacity to provide additional funds to carry out day -to-day monitoring of the 
operation of the accounts.  The transfer of equivalent amount of stressed assets to 
SASF was done to bring about parity of exchange.  The Committee were dismayed to 
know that the Ministry did not take immediate appropriate action at  the time when SASF 
and IDBI exchanged assets in violation of the GoI orders. The Committee noted from 
the reply of Ministry to their specific query regarding the exchange of assets that 
Ministry came to know about exchange of Assets only from the C&AG Rep ort (i.e., 
exactly 8 years from the date of execution of transfer deed in June 2006 and the C&AG 
Report on the subject tabled in July 2014). However, the Ministry in their written 
submission in the same document has justified the exchange stating that SASF  did not 
have mandate other than recovering the amounts due on the assets. The Committee 
were shocked to note the confusing statements made by the Ministry on the issue of 
inadmissible exchange. The Committee while taking serious view of the decision of ID BI 
Bank and SASF to execute the transfer deed in contravention of the Ministry's direction 
felt that the lackadaisical approach of the Ministry to monitor the progress made by the 
SASF and failure to follow -up on its own direction resulted in loss to the S ASF. The 
Committee were of the view that SASF should have insisted on redeeming equal 

41 
 
amount of bonds in exchange of stressed assets in case of RGPPL, which was 
restructured.  The Committee also took serious note of the inadmissible exchange. The 
MD &CEO, IDBI during the sitting of the Committee held on 12 July, 2016 committed 
that securities worth ` 1064.27 crore would be surrendered to the GoI . The Committee 
found that the IDBI Bank has provided to surrender securities worth ` 198.50 crore in 
last two qu arters upto December 31, 2016 and has assured that the remaining 
securities worth ` 870.77 crore would be provided in the following 9 quarters. The 
Committee were dismayed to note that despite repeated requests made by the 
Committee Secretariat to provide specific information and their views of the matter of 
surrender of securities, the Ministry has failed to respond.  This showed the utter non -
serious attitude of the Ministry towards managing the affairs of SASF with due diligence 
and promptness.  In view of lack of any inputs from the Ministry on the matter, the 
Committee were of the considered view that the above request of IDBI Bank for 
surrender of securities in installments may be considered by the Ministry after reviewing 
the financial position of the  IDBI Bank and the Committee may be apprised of the same 
at the earliest. The Committee desired the Ministry to initiate an independent 
investigation into the matter and take penal action against the officials of the Ministry/ 
IDBI Bank/ SASF responsible f or taking action in violation of the directions of GoI 
resulting in huge financial losses to the exchequer.  The Committee further reprimanded 
the Ministry towards their non-serious attitude in non-furnishing of desired information to 
the Committee and desired that recurrence of such instances be strictly avoided and fix 
the responsibility against the concerned officials in the matter.   
 
[Observation/Recommendation No. 5 of the 78th Report of Public Accounts 
Committee (16th Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
 
 
Action taken by the Ministry 
 Vide its letter dated 27.7.2017, IDBI Bank Ltd. has started reimbursement of 
Rs.1,064.27 crore, on account of loss on exchange of assets, in 11 equal quarterly 
instalments starting from September 2016 and Rs.483.75 crore has been paid up to 
30.9.2017.       
(Reply to Para 1 of the Recommendation) 
 
Vide letter dated 27.7.2017, IDBI Bank Ltd. has started reimbursement of Rs.1,064.27 
crore, on account of loss on exchange of assets, in 11 equal quarterly instalments 
starting from September 2016, a nd Rs.483.75 crore (5 instalments) has already been 

42 
 
paid up to 30.9.2017. Through reimbursement by the Bank, loss on account of the 
transfer is expected to be neutralised. 
(Reply to Para 2 of the Recommendation) 
 
 
 
Vetting Comments of the Audit 
 The total amount of reimbursement as on 31.3.2018, was Rs. 677.25 crore towards 
inadmissible exchange of assets. However and amount of Rs. 387.02 crore is pending 
from IDBI Bank. Progress in this regard may be intimated to PAC.” 
(Vetting comments to Ministry’s reply at Para 1 of the Recommendation) 
Till 31.3.2018, IDBI has surrendered security worth Rs. 677.25 crores towards 
redemption/ written off of securities. 
An amount of Rs. 387.02 crore is pending from IDBI Bank. Further the reply of the 
ministry is silent on the following aspect i.e. The committee desire the Ministry to initiate 
an independent investigation into the matter and take penal action against the officials 
of the Ministry/ IDBI Bank / SASF responsible for taking action in violation of the 
directions of GoI resulting in huge financial losses to the exchequer. The same may be 
incorporated in the ATN for the better appreciation of the PAC. 
(Vetting comments to Ministry’s reply at Para 2 of the Recommendation) 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
The Committee noted that the RBI has placed IDBI Bank under Prompt 
Corrective Action (PCA) on the basis of the IDBI Bank’s financial position as on 
December 31, 2016. The Committee further noted that as on December 2016   the Net 
NPA at `20949 constitute 9. 61 per cent of the net advance of IDBI Bank.  Further the 
increasing Gross NPA and Net NPA of IDBI Bank at `44752 crore (21.25 per cent) and 
`25206 crore (13.21 per cent) respectively as on March 2017 as compared to Gross 
NPA of `24875 crore (10.98 per cen t) and Net NPA of `14643 (6.78 per cent) as on 
March 2016, are indeed alarming.   The Committee were shocked to note that in less 
than 20 years after the Government cleared the Balance Sheet of IDBI, it has again 
fallen into the debt trap of NPA. The Commit tee were of the considered opinion that the 
huge NPAs of the Public Sector Banks point towards their faulty lending policies. The 
Committee observed that the creation of SASF, mergers, capital infusions are not able 

43 
 
to address the problem of rising NPAs an d now the Government would have to think 
innovatively for a long - term solution. The Committee, therefore, desired that after 
analyzing the sectors where NPAs are rampant, insurance of the loans may be made 
mandatory for those sectors and since personal gu arantees and securities are also not 
yielding desired results professional bodies may be engaged for underwriting the loans 
and the collaterals should be mandatorily insured. The Committee while acknowledging 
that this will increase the cost of loans, desi red that incentives may be offered, at the 
time of payment of last installment, for the borrowers who pay off their loans timely.  The 
Committee exhorted that exemplary punishments should be awarded to the officials 
who worked in tandem with big corporate and siphon off the money of public exchequer 
without adequate collaterals or personal guarantees. 
[Observation/Recommendation No. 10 of the 78th Report of Public Accounts 
Committee (16th Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
Action taken by the Ministry 
SASF has apprised  that erstwhile IDBI was a development financial institution and 
major part of its exposure was in large scale industries including infrastructure, steel, 
telecom, textiles, roads etc. Because of historical reasons, IDBI Bank Ltd . continues to 
have higher level of exposures in these sectors. NPA position of IDBI was in control till 
FY 2012-13. However, because of general economic slowdown, many large projects got 
stalled. There were issues relating to various clearances, cancellation of coal 
mines/spectrum etc. w hich dented performance of many infrastructure projects which 
slowly turned stressed/non-performing. This is a general trend across banking industry. 
IDBI Bank has been impacted more severely because of its limited exposure to retail 
(24%). Even out of cor porate loan book, major exposure is in core/infrastructure 
sectors. 
SASF has apprised that wherever connivance of staff is observed, stern action is 
initiated by IDBI internally as also by external agencies such as CVC, CBI etc.  as per 
established systems and policies. 
 

44 
 
Vetting Comments of the Audit 
Factual Statement.  Hence no further comments. 
The specific reply on wherever connivance of staff is observed, if any, and action taken 
by IDBI has not been furnished by SASF. The same may be intimated now for b etter 
appreciation of the PAC. 
 
--------- 
 
  

45 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES  
 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
The Committee note that during the period from 1 October 2004 to 31 March, 2014, out 
of the total 631 cases, 319 accounts were settled, 101 cases resolved and 211 cases 
were unresolved.  Subsequently, as per the information received from the Ministry, 
during the period from 1 April 2014 to 31 March 2016, 13 more cases were resolv ed 
and the Trust has been able to settle these accounts by way of settlement/assignment 
of dues/sale of assets.  Further, Audit analysis indicated that out of 52 cases with NLO 
of more than ` 25 crore, 19 cases were settled, nine cases were resolved and 24  cases 
remained unresolved.  Further, out of the 319 settled cases, 300 cases were with NLO 
less than ` 25 crore indicating that the Trust was able to settle small cases and a large 
number of big cases remained unsettled. The Committee also observe that in  79 
unresolved cases, SASF have failed to recover any amount. The Committee have 
serious doubt that full recovery of stressed assets is unlikely as the remaining accounts 
consist of chronic NPAs for more than at least a decade and are under various stages 
of litigation in Courts/Debt Recovery Tribunals.  The Committee, therefore, impress 
upon the Ministry to revisit these cases and make proper valuation of the assets and 
explore all possibilities for maximum recovery of NLO. 
  
[Observation/Recommendation No. 7 of the 78th Report of Public Accounts 
Committee (16th Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
Action taken by the Ministry 
SASF has apprised that out of 24 cases indicated as unresolved, recovery of 
Rs.145.19 crore has been made in six cases from April 2013 to March 2017. 
Secured lenders (including SASF) have taken possession under SARFAESI Act 
in five cases. In respect of nine cases, there have been hindrances in recovery 
action on account of attachment of assets under/byEconomic Offences Wing 

46 
 
(EOW), Maharashtra Protection of Interest of Depositors Act (MPID Act), Central 
Excise, Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PML Act), 
injunctions/investigations against the company and disputes regarding the 
mortgaged property. In respect of the remaining four cases, the action has 
been/being initiated at various forums i.e.NCLT, Official Liquidator (OL), Debt 
Recovery Tribunals(DRT) etc. 
 
SASF has further submitted that out of 79 cases with nil recovery, SASF has 
made part recovery of Rs.29.09 crore in 16 cases subsequent to completion  of 
the audit. The reason for no recovery in remaining cases are multiple litigations, 
attachment/injunction by various authorities, loans secured by only movable 
assets, mortgaged assets being located in tribal area, assets sold by OL/DRT but 
proceeds yet  to be distributed, delay in obtaining District Magistrate’s order for 
physical possession under SARFAESI, share of SASF in overall exposure being 
minuscule etc. 
SASF has apprised that the sale of assets under DRT/SARFAESI/OL is made 
only after valuation o f the secured assets. Valuation of secured assets forms the 
basis for any settlement/sale of assets by SASF and it is ensured that the 
valuation is of recent date to arrive at a realistic recovery estimate. 
SASF has further apprised that it has completed v aluation in respect of 75 
accountsin the last three yearsand the valuation in respect of remaining accounts 
would be completed shortly. 
 
Vetting Comments of the Audit 
Factual statement. 
Of the 24 cases, further recovery of Rs.10.30 crore has been made in 3  cases, 
during April 2017 to March 2018. 
 
Recovery of above mentioned 24 cases is still pending. Progress in this regard 
may be intimated to PAC. 

47 
 
Of the 16 cases, further recovery of Rs.17.62 lakh has been made in one case 
through OL in FY 2017 -18. In another case, SASF recovered Rs. 8.31 crore in 
FY 2017-18. SASF is pursuing recovery action in respect of these companies as 
well as guarantors under DRT/OL/ SARFAESI, NCLT, etc. 
Recovery of above mentioned 16 cases is still pending. Progress in this regard 
may be intimated to PAC. 
SASF has informed (May 2018) that remaining cases were reviewed and found 
valuation in two more cases and 41 cases have been identified for carrying out 
valuation. Quotations have been called from the valuers in 21 cases. Out of 
these 21 cases, valuers, valuers have already been appointed in three cases  and 
valuation would be carried out shortly whereas in remaining cases, only one or 
two quotations have been received, because of which valuer could not be 
appointed. Follow-up is b eing made for obtaining quotations and appointment of 
valuer thereafter. Out of remaining 20 cases, where quotations have not been 
called, four cases are being referred to NCLT wherein valuation will be carried 
out by Interim Resolution Professional once c ase is admitted. In remaining 16 
cases the valuation is not possible due to various reasons i.e. assets attached by 
ED/ OL, assets sold, assets not available/accessible etc. 
The recovery of remaining accounts consists of chronic NPAs for more than at 
least a decade is pending. Progress in this regard may be intimated to PAC. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
The Committee observed that as per the recovery policy, valuation of the 
secured assets of the borrower should be carried out by a valuer engaged by SASF / 
other secured lender/Court.  The policy also provided that value of security including 
collaterals available (on pro rata basis) and also amount of statutory liabilities and 
workers’ dues shall form the basis for settlement amount. Fresh valuation could be 
sought if circumstances such as vintage of existing valuation, volatility of asset value, 
etc. so warranted.  Where the value of securities was sufficient to cover the dues, the 
endeavour should be to recover the maximum amount. The Committee while taking 
note of the 21 settled cases examined by Audit where settlement amount was lower by 
`587.47 crore as compared to NLO of `1144.64 crore, observed that substantial short 
recovery (below NLO) occurred on large NLO accounts. Although, personal guarantees 
of some of the promoters of the firms were available with the Trust, the Trust did not 
make efforts to ascertain the net worth/income of the promoters before arriving at the 
settlement amount.   Thus such settlements below NLO, without assessing the financial 

48 
 
capability of the promoters actually benefitted the promoters.  At the same time in 20 out 
of the 21 settled cases, personal guarantees were taken from the promoters/borrowers, 
however, no property details were available on record of the Trust.  The Committ ee 
were dismayed to note that in such cases the Trust also did not bother to collect the 
income tax returns from the guarantors.    
 In 15 resolved cases selected by Audit for examination, in 10 cases the 
settlement amount/amount received was below the NLO  amount, aggregating to short 
recovery of `1590.49 crore as compared to NLO of `2171.92 crore.  In these 10 cases, 
only in one case personal guarantees with property details were available and in 
another one case no personal guarantees were obtained.  Further, in the remaining 
eight cases, though personal guarantees were obtained, pro perty details were not 
available on the records of the Trust.  The Trust also did not collect the income tax 
returns from the guarantors.  It is particularly noticed that in this category, the steel 
sector companies are the major defaulters and the Trust h as taken a substantial hit.  In 
respect of Malvika Steel Ltd. and Usha Ispat Ltd. the settlement amount is only `41.78 
crore and `48.07 crore as against the NLO of `594.54 crore and `321.80 crore 
respectively.  It was really surprising that in both the cas es, the Trust, inspite of having 
personal guarantees from the promoters of various borrowing companies did not try to 
ascertain the net worth of the promoters to realize optimum amount.   
 In 36 out of the 39 unresolved cases selected by Audit for examinat ion, 
the Trust could recover only `150.54 crore against NLO of `1888.69 crore.  The short 
recovery in these cases was to the tune of `1738.14 crore.  The Audit analysis of the 
shortlisted 39 cases revealed that in 11 cases personal guarantees were taken fr om the 
promoters/borrowers and only in four cases property details were available and the 
Trust  also did not collect the income tax returns from the guarantors.  Further, the 
Committee noted that most of these cases may be sub judice, referred to BIFR or 
initiated/invoked under SARFAESI Act/ SFC Act. 
 The Committee, while looking at the cases took note of the fact that there 
are substantial number of cases where recovery has been made below NLO. The 
Committee expressed strong displeasure and direct the Ministry to look into all such 
cases where settleme nt below NLOs have been approved and fix responsibility of the 
officers responsible for the same. The Committee also desired to know whether the 
Trust’s guidelines were in consonance of GoI/RBI guidelines laid from time to time and 
whether any provision fo r settlement below NLO was placed before and overseen by 
the Ministry.  The Committee desired that the Ministry may investigate and ascertain 
whether Trust officials, involved in the cases, settled without determining the value of 
assets, are in connivance  with the borrowers/ promoters and if so, take stringent action 
against the erring officials.  The Committee further desired that CBI enquiry may be 
instituted to go into the entire gamut of events with a view to unearth criminality in the 
lapses on the part of the officials where short recovery was accepted. 

49 
 
      The Committee further recommended that since the remaining cases are 
more complicated in nature, the Ministry may, under its aegis, directly oversee the 
progress made in those cases by forming a Coordination Committee. The new 
appointments to the Trust also may be made only after ascertaining their past record 
and that the official has no affiliation with the borrowers. The Committee further 
recommended that although the focus should entirely rema in towards full recovery from 
every asset, considered view may be taken in genuine cases. The Committee further 
desired that the SASF’s stated three pronged resolution strategy of Debt Restructuring, 
Compromise settlement and Legal measures along -with fast -track system may be 
timely monitored and reviewed by the Ministry.   
[Observation/Recommendation No. 8 of the 78th Report of Public Accounts 
Committee (16th Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
Action taken by the Ministry 
SASF has apprised that the settlement amount was arrive d after considering SASF’s 
pro-rata share in valuation of assets, statutory liabilities and worker’s dues, pending 
litigations etc. As per SASF’s Recovery Policy, emphasis was laid on early exit from the 
accounts and there was no specific restriction for settlement below NLO. The settlement 
in respect of 21 cases below NLO was mainly on account of value of assets not being 
adequate to cover NLO, statutory liabilities having priority over secured dues, unit lying 
closed since long, charged assets not availab le/traceable, settlement under aegis of 
BIFR/CDR, workers’ issues/dues and settlement amount being discounted to arrive at 
the NPV in order to avoid delayed realization after 5-6 years. 
SASF has informed that there are no specific guidelines from RBI regarding obtaining 
details of the assets of the guarantors offering personal guarantee as security for a loan. 
It was only in the year 2000 that as a matter of prudent practice, IDBI,vide Circular No. 7 
dated 10.5.2000, put in place the system of obtaining particulars of assets owned by the 
guarantors at the time of execution of the Deed of Guarantee. The Deed of Guarantee 
also incorporated suitable covenants that the Guarantor shall not disp ose of the assets 
without prior approval of IDBI and also undertakes to inform IDBI regarding acquisition 
of new assets acquired by him. 
SASF has further informed that it has been subsequently collecting the net worth 
statements, income tax returns and ban k account statements whenever settlement with 
the borrower/guarantor is being discussed and the same is factored in while arriving at 
the settlement amount. 
(Reply to Para 1 of the Recommendation) 
 

50 
 
SASF has informed that the term “Resolved cases” includes (a) cases wherein 
settlement has been arrived but recovery is pending, (b) assets have been sold by 
DRT/OL/Other lenders but distribution of sale proceeds is pending. Hence, in such 
cases there is potential for further recovery and same is being pursued by SASF. 
In respect of Malvika Steel Ltd., the assets were sold through public auction under 
SARFAESI by IFCI (the lead) for Rs.209 crore and IFCI distributed partial sale proceeds 
of Rs.143 crore, in which SASF’s pro -rata share amounted to Rs.41.78 crore. H owever, 
IFCI instead of releasing the entire share, released only Rs.29.11 crore to SASF. 
Subsequently, on follow -up, further amount of Rs.25.61 crore has been received 
towards SASF’s share in sale of assets of the said company, resulting in aggregate 
recovery of Rs. 54.75 crore (including interest for delayed receipt). SASF is still 
following up with IFCI for release of its pro-rata share in balance sale proceeds.  
In respect of UshaIspat Ltd., the amount of Rs. 48.07 crore is only partial recovery 
made by sale of assets through SARFAESI. Subsequently,an amount of Rs.16.14crore 
has been recovered as SASF’s pro -rata share in balance sale proceeds. An amount of 
Rs.64.21 crore has been recovered till date. 
SASF has further informed that it is pursuing for furt her recovery in both the cases and 
has appointed detective agency for ascertaining details of properties of guarantors and 
as per preliminary report, few assets of the guarantors have been identified.  SASF is 
pursuing with concerned authorities for verify ing the ownership of the identified assets, 
for attachment and enforcing the same through DRT. 
(Reply to Para 2 of the Recommendation) 
 
SASF has apprised that out of 39 cases, action has been initiated in 9 cases under 
SARFAESI (including 3 cases where sal e notices have been issued), 7 cases have 
been referred / are being referred to NCLT, settlement has been reached and payments 
are being received in 7 cases, 10 cases are filed before DRT (wherein Recovery 
Certificate received in 4 cases) and recovery has been hampered in 5 cases due to 
attachment of assets under/by EOW, MPID Act, Central Excise, PML Act and 
injunction/investigation against the company, disputes regarding the mortgaged 
property. The action could not be initiated/pursued in remaining 1 casedue to abatement 
of the matter in BIFR as the mortgaged property lies in the tribal area.  
 
Recovery in these 39 unresolved cases between April 2013 and March 2017 stood at 
Rs.231.10 crore. 
 
SASF has apprised that as per the RBI directions, settlement of are governed by bank-
specific internal policy guidelines duly approved by the Board. Accordingly, settlement 
of dues in SASF is guided by Board -approved Recovery Policy. The Recovery Policy of 
SASF does not have any specific stipulation that settlements ma y not be done below 

51 
 
NLO. Settlements are negotiated based on SASF’s pro -rata share in value of assets, 
priority of statutory liabilities and workers’ dues, time value of money, and ‘realisability’. 
 
SASF has further apprised that keeping in view that cases  are already NPA, having no 
cash flows, any recovery from these accounts is limited to the realisation from the 
liquidation of secured assets and identified/attachable assets of the personal 
guarantors. With the passage of time, a majority of the units hav e closed down/partially 
working leading to deterioration in the value of secured assets and hence adversely 
affecting recoverability.  
 
As far as connivance of staff is observed, SASF has apprised thatstern action is initiated 
by IDBI internally as also by  external agencies such as CVC, CBI as per established 
systems and policies.Ministry of Finance has asked SASF to take appropriate action in 
the matter, as per established system and policies, while taking due note of the 
observations of the Public Accounts Committee in this connection. 
(Reply to Para 3 & 4 of the Recommendation) 
 
A Monitoring Cell for monitoring recovery of dues against assets transferred to SASF 
has been set up as recommended. 
(Reply to Para 5 of the Recommendation) 
 
 
Vetting Comments of the Audit 
Factual statement. Hence, no further comments. 
No further recovery has been made in these 21 cases is pending and further progress in 
this regard may please be intimated to PAC. 
It is seen that SASF has been able to realise an amount of Rs. 12.47  crore in three 
cases through sale of shares, allotted to SASF under settlement, having acquisition cost 
of Rs.5.83 crore. Accordingly, SASF has made further recovery of Rs.6.64 crore (i.e. the 
amount recovered over & above the acquisition cost of shares) during the period 1 April 
2013 to 31 March 2018. 
The recovery of above mentioned 21 cases is pending and para may be retained and 
further progress intimated. 
The facts remains that personal guarantees were enforceable instruments to safeguard 
financial interests of lenders/ Financial Institution. 
(Vetting comments to Ministry’s reply at Para 1 of the Recommendation) 

52 
 
In respect of M/s Malvika  Steel Limited, an amount of Rs.25.61 crore as on 31.3.2018, 
has been effected and further recovery with IFCI for release of SASF’s pro -rata share in 
balance sale proceeds is being followed-up with IFCI. 
The recovery from M/s Malvika Steel Limited case, SA SF share from IFCI is pending. 
Progress in this regard may be intimated to PAC. 
In respect of Usha Ispat Ltd., the amount of Rs.48.17 crore is recovered towards partial 
recovery against the sale of assets through SARFAESI. Further an amount of Rs. 15.50 
crore towards balance sale proceeds was received. Thus the total amount of Rs. 63.67 
crore has been recovered till date. 
However, full recovery from M/s Usha Ispat Ltd. case is still pending. Progress in this 
regard may be intimated to PAC. 
The ownership of the identified assets is in process. Progress in this regard may be 
intimated to PAC. 
(Vetting comments to Ministry’s reply at Para 2 of the Recommendation) 
Factual statement. Hence, no further comments. 
Subsequent to audit, settlement was arrived in 6 cases which was above NLO. 
Further recovery of Rs.11.36 crore has been made during April 2017 to March 2018 in 5 
cases out of these 39 unresolved cases at present. Thus there are 34 unresolved cases 
at present. 
The management stated (in May 2018) that the categorisation “unresolved cases” 
indicate the potential for recovery. However, the specific reply on the official 
responsible, if any, for the short recovery pertaining to 39 unresolved cases has not 
been furnished by SASF. The same may be intimated for better appreciation of PAC.  
Recovery of above mentioned 34 cases is pending. Action on the same may be 
intimated to PAC. 
(Vetting comments to Ministry’s reply at Para 3 & 4 of the Recommendation) 
The reply is silent regarding formation of an oversight comm ittee by the ministry to 
directly oversee the progress made in the recoveries. The same may be intimated now 
for better appreciation of the PAC. 
Further progress made by SASF may be intimated to PAC. 
(Vetting comments to Ministry’s reply at Para 5 of the Recommendation) 
 

53 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
The Committee noted that that SASF is managed by a Board of Trustees (BOT) 
appointed by the Central Government.  The Board consist of one Chairperson, one 
Executive Trustee and three Members.  Since 1 January 2013, the posts of Chairperson 
and Executive Trustee were merged.  The Board of Trustees was also assisted by one 
Chief General Manager, one General Manager and 22 officials.  It was seen that from 
the inception of the Trust till December 2012, the posts o f Chairman and Executive 
Trustee of the Trust were held by Chairman and Managing Director and Executive 
Trustee respectively of IDBI Bank Limited.  Besides, Deputy Managing Director of IDBI 
Bank Limited was the Alternate Chairman and Trustee of the Board o f Directors from 
June 2011 and December 2012. It was, thus, evident that for all purposes, the Board of 
Trustees of SASF, in one way or the other, was related to IDBI which reflected a 
“revolving door” policy.  The Committee was also surprised to observe t hat a partner of 
the Chartered Accountants firm, who certified the stressed assets and loan documents 
of IDBI before transfer to the Trust, was also the Trustee of Board of Trustees of SASF 
from October 2004 to June 2011.   
 The Committee noted from the reply of the Ministry that the BOT entrusted 
with general management of affairs and business had 3 eminent professionals and 2 
representatives of IDBI. According to the Ministry, since IDBI had long experience in 
both rehabilitation and recovery and the stre ssed assets transferred to SASF were 
earlier dealt with by IDBI, it was felt that continuity of management is essential for 
recovery of such stressed assets having long experience in both rehabilitation and 
recovery.  The Ministry in their further submissi on stated that initially it was thought that 
the full amount may be realized if separate organization looks after recoveries as IDBI 
Bank management would be busy in running of the Bank.  However, post C&AG Audit, 
a considered view has been taken by the Ministry that as losses are to be borne by IDBI 
Bank, they may look after SASF. 
 The Committee were of the considered view that the IDBI had an over -
riding presence in management of SASF and that a neutral and professionally managed 
SASF would had been able to achieve better results. Further, the powers delegated to 
the Committee of Officers (COO), Executive Committee (EC), Board of Trustees (BOT) 
and Screening Committee (SC) may be thoroughly revamped by the Ministry keeping in 
mind that the cases left with recovery are more complex and tricky and need to be dealt 
with more focused attention.  Also, before appointing a partner of the Chartered 
Accountants Firm which verified and certified the stressed assets, as Trustee of SASF, 
the Ministry may look into the  issue of conflict of interest, any financial consequences 
considering their earlier involvement with IDBI, complicity in its appointment and take 
appropriate disciplinary action against the responsible officials of the Ministry/IDBI. 
  The Committee further noted that the Trust did not make any realistic and 
scientific assessment of requirement of manpower for its functions.  The number of 
officials deployed was 50 in 2005 and came down to 24 in 2013.  The Trust made 

54 
 
proposals during different periods for additional manpower on ad -hoc basis, though 
there was no written proposal.  During 2005 to 2013, 121 officials of the parent body, 
IDBI, were deputed at some point of time or other to serve the Trust.  62 out of 121 
employees worked in less than two years with SASF.  Similarly, out of 62 officials, 25 
worked for less than one year.  Interestingly, only 16 out of 121 officials possessed 
recovery experience and four officials who have been deputed by IDBI were facing 
disciplinary proceedings.  
 The Ministry submitted that the SASF had scientifically assessed the staff 
requirement at SASF taking into account the number of cases handled at various levels 
i.e., resolved, unresolved and chronic NPA cases.  The response of the Ministry was 
seen in the  light of frequent proposals for manpower requirement indicating that the 
assessment was inadequate and unscientific and there were no written proposals prior 
to July 2012 indicating that the proposals made by SASF were on ad-hoc basis.  
 The Committee fur ther deplored the appointment of staff who were 
inexperienced and untrained in corporate banking and recovery of stressed assets.  The 
Committee also noted that the interviews for deputation in SASF were conducted by the 
IDBI and not by the SASF. The respo nse of the Ministry that the responsibility of 
providing staff to SASF was given to IDBI Bank and it was not specified in the 
arrangement that SASF would interview the candidates.  Further, the officers were 
directly posted in SASF by the Bank after seeing  requisite qualification and experience 
required by an officer for deputing to SASF.  The Committee were of the firm view that 
the staff with SASF were not scientifically placed as frequent staff proposals were 
made. The Committee were of the view that an independent team trained in realization 
of NPAs would have been a better choice for taking care of the interests of the 
Government.  The Committee felt that the non-realisation of balance NPAs may be seen 
as non -performance of SASF owing to the temporary o rganizational set -up and 
inadequate manpower deployment at the SASF. The Committee opined that the 
recoveries are majorly  dependant on the efficiency of the officials deployed for 
recoveries and therefore incentives should be given for good performances. The 
Committee desired that the existing manpower deployment may be reviewed in a 
scientific manner and staff with dynamic experience and expertise in recovery of 
unresolved and chronic NPAs be placed/engaged at the disposal of SASF for optimum 
recovery of balance NPAs.    
 
[Observation/Recommendation No. 9 of the 78th Report of Public Accounts 
Committee (16th Lok Sabha)] 
 
Action taken by the Ministry 
SASF has apprised that the Chairperson/ alternate Chairperson /Executive Trustee 
were the CMD/DMD/ED of the Bank who was very senior functionaries of IDBI with long 

55 
 
experience in banking and handling of rehabilitation and recovery of stressed assets. 
Their understanding of the industry, asset portfolio and the specific cases had helped 
the SASF in resolution of the cases. Apart from the two IDBI officials on the Board of 
Trustees of SASF, there were, initially three and subsequently two, independent 
professionals appointed by DFS, GoI. 
SASF has further apprised that M/s Haribhakti  & Co., the CA firm had only carried out a 
limited due diligence for the purpose of verifying and certifying the correctness of 
information, set out in the data profiles, prepared by IDBI with regards to the assets 
identified for transfer to SASF.  Ministry of Finance has advised SASF to ensure strict 
separation of functions in future while engaging Chartered Accountants for accountancy 
or audit purposes, and to avoid any potential conflict of interest in assigning work to 
Chartered Accountants by ensuring due disclosures and proper scr utiny of past 
engagement. 
(Reply to Para 1 of the Recommendation) 
 
Observations are factual. 
(Reply to Para 2 of the Recommendation) 
 
SASF has apprised that a draft paper for revision/modification of Delegation of Powers 
as also Recovery Policy, to be in line with market practices and current situation has 
already been finalised. The same shall be placed before the Board of Trustees for their 
consideration. 
(Reply to Para 3 of the Recommendation) 
 
SASF has informed that a manpower assessment had been under taken from time to 
time andrequested IDBI Bank Ltd. to depute the required manpower with requisite 
skills/background. SASF is presently dealing with 277 cases, which are being handled 
by a team of 4 DGMs assisted by 18 officers, including legal and account s. The officers 
deputed by IDBI Bank over the years had work experience of corporate finance which is 
useful for dealing with NPA cases as also in negotiating settlements with the defaulting 
borrowers and/or dealing with other lenders. The existing manpowe r is adequate to 
handle the present portfolio of SASF.However, considering legal issues and complexity 
of the remaining cases as also in order to strengthen the team, it has specifically sought 
for posting of additional experienced legal officers. 
SASF has apprised that subsequent to modification of Deputation Policy of IDBI Bank, 
the Selection Committee constituted for selection of officers for deputation to SASF  on 
two instances, was comprised of Executive Trustee/CGM of SASF as one of the panel 
members. 

56 
 
(Reply to Para 4, 5 & 6 of the Recommendation) 
 
 
Vetting Comments of the Audit 
It is verified that two independent professionals, retired from banking sector, are the 
trustees of SASF. However, the chairman and other two trustees are from the IDBI 
Bank. As such, the concern endorsed by PAC has not been addressed. The reason for 
this may please be intimated to PAC. 
(Vetting comments to Ministry’s reply at Para 1 of the Recommendation) 
 
 Factual statement. Hence, no further comments. 
(Vetting comments to Ministry’s reply at Para 2 of the Recommendation) 
 
The reply on the draft paper for revision/modification of Delegation of Powers as also 
recovery policy, to be in line with market practices and current situation has already 
been finalised in not factual as SA SF’s revised/modifying, DoP and Recovery Policy is 
yet not finalised. 
 
The modification in DoP and Recovery Policy is in the process and yet have not 
completed. Progress in this regard may be intimated to PAC. 
 
Factual statement. Hence, no further comments. 
 
(Vetting comments to Ministry’s reply at Para 3 of the Recommendation) 
 
The manpower strength of SASF is at 21 officers as on 25.5.2018. SASF is also 
following up with IDBI Bank for posting of additional officers. 
 
As manpower is declining, additional experienced officers need to be posted. Progress 
in this regard may be intimated to PAC. 
 
Officers to SASF are being posted by HRD, IDBI in consultation of CGM and Executive 
Trustee, SASF. 
 
(Vetting comments to Ministry’s reply at Para 4,5 & 6 of the Recommendation) 
 
NEW DELHI;                 MALLIKARJUN KHARGE 
18 December, 2018             CHAIRPERSON 
27 Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)     PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
------- 
 
 
 

57 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
CONTAINED IN THEIR SEVENTY-EIGHTH REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations 
 
 
- 10 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
which have been accepted by the Government:  
 
- Total : 04 
Percentage: 40% 
 Para Nos. 1,2,4 & 6  
  
  
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of  
the reply of the Government:  
 
- Total : Nil  
Percentage:0% 
 
 -Nil- 
 
  
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of  
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration:  
 
Para Nos. 3,5 & 10 
- Total : 03 
Percentage:30% 
 
     
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of  
which the Government have furnished interim 
replies/no replies:  
 
- Total : 03 
Percentage: 30% 
 Para Nos. 7,8 & 9 
 
  
 