98

RATNA AND R-SERIES HYDROCARBON
FIELDS

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Sixty-second Report (167 Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2017-18)

NINETY-EIGHTH REPORT

eerie ee

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

सत्यनेद जयते

' LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


NINETY-EIGHTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS EEL ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2017-18)

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

RATNA AND R-SERIES HYDROCARBON

FIELDS

[Action Taken by the Governm

ent on the Observations/ Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Si

ixty-second Report (16" Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS

vente oat

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELH}

March, 2018/ Chaitra, 1940 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2047-48)

INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER | Introductory
CHAPTER II* Observations/Recommendations which have

been accepted by the Government

CHAPTER III* Observations/Recommendations which _ the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the replies received from Government

CHAPTER Iv* Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration

CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which Government have furnished interim
replies/no replies

APPENDICES

1 Minutes of the Twenty-second sitting of Public
Accounts Committee (2017-18) held on 23.03.2018

I Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their Sixty-second
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

* Not included to the cyclostyled copy of the Report

PAGE


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2017-18)
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

2 Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay

3 Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey

6 Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
7 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

8. Smt. Riti Pathak

9. Shri Neiphiu Rio”

10. Shri Abhishek Singh

11... Prof. Ram Shanker

12, Dr. Kirit Somaiya

13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur

14... Shri Shivkumar 0. Udasi

15. Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Naresh Agrawal

17... Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
18. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
19... Shri Mohd. Ali Khant

20. — Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy*
21... Shri Ajay Sancheti

22. Shri Bhupender Yadav

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri AK. Singh - Additional Secretary
2. Shri T. Jayakumar ~ Director

3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary

* Ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon acceptance of his resignation from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 22
February, 2018.

1 Elected w.e.f, 29 December, 2017 in lieu of vacancy caused due to retirement of Shri Shantaram Naik.

ई ceased to bea Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 18 August, 2017 and
re-elected w.e.f. 29 December, 2017.


INTRODUCTION

1, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2017-18), having been
authorised by the Committee, do Present this Ninety-eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Sixty-Second Report(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Ratna
and R-Series Hydrocarbon Fields' relating to the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural
Gas.

2. The Sixty-Second Report was presented to Lok Sabhallaid in Rajya Sabha on
16 December, 2016. Replies of the Government to the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report were received on 97 November, 2017. The
Public Accounts Committee considered and adopted the Ninety-eighth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) at their sitting held on 23 March, 2018. Minutes of the Sitting
are given at Appendix-I.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixty-Second (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
is given at Appendix-tl.

NEW DELHI; Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
23 March, 2018 Chairperson

2 Chaitra, 1940 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


REPORT

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the

Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their Sixty-second Report (16" Lok Sabha) on "Ratna and R-Series Hydrocarbon

Fields".

2.

The Sixty-second Report which was presented to Lok Sabha on 16" December,

2016 contained six Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken Notes on all the

Observations/Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Petroleum

and Natural Gas and are categorized as under:

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 3 and 4

Total: 02
Chapter — It

Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:
NIL
Total: NIL
Chapter — Ill

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

Para Nos. 1, 2 and 5

Total: 03
Chapter — IV

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim.replies/no replies:
Para No. 6 J
Total: 01
Chapter -V


3. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed certain
shortcomings/deficiencies on the part of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas which
inter-alia included detailed examination of award of contract in respect of Ratna and R
Series (R&RS) medium sized hydrocarbon fields to a Consortium of Successful Bidders
(CoSB), mandate to Negotiating Team of Secretaries (NTS) to finalise and conclude
Production Sharing Contract (PSC) for R&RS fields, non-conclusion of PSC resulting in
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) approving cancellation of award to
CoSB and reverting the R&RS fields to the original allottee i.e., ONGC in March, 2016.
The Committee while dealing with the issues mentioned above primarily made
recommendations/observations on failure of NTS to execute PSC with respect to R&RS
fields; delay in decision making leading to repeated assessing financial capability of
bidders; deliberations on the Issues — Techno-legal and Royalty & Cess; reimbursement
of past-cost and non — maintenance of idle facilities; and fixing of responsibility towards
delay in non — execution of mandate.

4, The final Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural
Gas (vide OM No. O-32011/2/2016-ONG-I (FTS-41507) dated 9 November, 2017) have
been reproduced in the relevant chapters of this Report. The Committee will now deal
with action taken by the Government on their Observations/Recommendations which

either need reiteration or merit comments.

5. The Committee desire the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas to furnish
Action Taken Notes in respect of Observations/Recommendations contained in
Chapter I and final action taken replies in respect of
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter V for which interim reply
has been given by the Government within six months of the presentation of the

Report to the House.

Recommendation No. 1

6. Opining that exclusive high-powered body i.e. NTS failed miserably in its

mandate and could not conclude PSC for R&RS fields in 17 years which eventually

resulted in CCEA (10 March 2016) approving cancellation of the award letter (12 March

1996) issued in favour of the consortium and reverting the R&RS fields to ONGC, the
2


Committee on detailed examination of the decision making process found that the non-
. &xecution of PSC was due to unfruitful deliberations held by NTS with various
stakeholders on the issues that had already been laid down hy the CCEA. Tho
Committee noted that frequent deliberations made on the issues of techno-legal, royalty
and cess and references to various agencies and consequent delays necessitated”
repeated re-assessment of financial capability of the successful bidders. The Committee
also noted that other issues that held-up the signing of PSC related to reimbursement of
past-cost and non-maintenance of idle facilities by the ONGC. The Committee were of
the opinion that serious delays in decision making for more than 20 years, after the
CCEA approval, deprived .the country of the much needed fuel from the R&RS fields.

7. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in their Action Taken Notes have
stated as under:-

In the wake of the policy of economic liberalization introduced in 1991,
Government took certain initiatives to attract private investment capital in the
upstream oil sector to augment the production of oil and gas in the country.
“Small and Medium Sized Discovered Policy” was evolved in 1992 on this basis
and to make recommendations for award of fields, a Negotiating Committee of
Secretaries (NCS) was constituted by CCEA on 02.07.1992. In the first round of
bidding for discovered fields in 1992, 5 medium and 15 small sized fields were
awarded and contracts were signed.

Gol invited the Second Round of bids for the development of discovered
oil and gas fields in 1993. The consortium of Essar Oil Limited (EOL) and
Premier Oil Pacific (UK) Ltd. (POL) were recommended to be awarded the Ratna
& R Series fields by NCS in the meeting held on 26.12.1995, subject to certain
conditions. On 20.2.1996, CCEA approved the recommendation of NCS. In
pursuance to the CCEA approval, Letter of Award dated 12.3.1996 was issued to
the successful bidder i.e. consortium of EOL-POL, subject to the following
stipulations:

(i) The use of .ONGC’s storage facility at Nhava would need to be directly
negotiated by the consortium with ONGC.

(ii) The gas can be received by ONGC with certain modifications subject to
settlement of other commercial issues with ONGC. The oil has to be
evacuated through SBM as the ONGC cannot receive oil at Heera complex
upto 2001-02 due to capacity constraints.

(iii) The creation of appropriate storage facilities-for crude at the offshore loading
point would be at the cost of the contractor and can be charged as a project
cost.


(iv) The phrase “any abnormal situation” mentioned at point No.8 in Consortium's
letter dated 8” February 1995 under the head “Capital Expenditure
(CAPEX)/Operating Expenditure (OPEX) will have to be dropped.

(v) Bidders were requested to send their comments on the draft Production
Sharing Contract and Joint Operating Agreement (copies enclosed) by qa
April, 1996 so that the PSC and JOA can be finalized at the earliest.

Thus, the award of Ratna & R Series Fields was conditional subject to
fulfilment of the above conditions.

Contract negotiations with the successful bidders for the purpose of signing
production sharing contracts did not commence till 1999, as there were concerns
expressed in many quarters about tenets of the Discovered Field Policy. An
earlier C & AG Report had raised several issues, some of which were specific to
Panna & Mukta Fields awarded under the above Policy, whereas others had
wide bearing on this policy of the Government. The CAG had submitted its final
report in December, 1996. In November, 1997, the Parliamentary Committee on
Public Undertakings (COPU) examined ONGC on participation of private parties
with ONGC in the production of crude oil and natural gas. Moreover, there were
legal implications as a Public Interest Litigation (PIL) was filed by Centre for
Public Interest Litigation (CPIL) before the Delhi High Court and, subsequently, a
Review Petition in the Supreme Court. All these developments contributed to an
initial delay of three years.

Subsequently, CCEA-in its meeting held on 9" March, 1999 authorized
Negotiating Team of Secretaries (NTS) to conclude the PSCs after due
negotiations with the Consortium in respect of 11 small sized fields and one
medium sized field i.e. Ratna and R-Series Fields offered under second round of
bidding. CCEA. NTS comprising Secretary (P& NG), Finance Secretary and Law
Secretary undertook negotiations with the consortiums, based on .a Model
Production Sharing Contract (MPSC) approved in November, 1999 as the basis
for negotiation and finalization of the PSC with the Consortiums.

NTS held a series of meetings on several complex issues related to
negotiations and bringing convergence on the technical, commercial, legal and
financial issues. 19 NTS meetings were held from November 1999 to June 2013.
Based on outcome of the NTS meetings, PSC for 11 small sized fields were
signed (9 in February, 2001 and 2 in February, 2004). However, PSC for Ratna &
R-Series Fields could not be finalised by NTS for many reasons, viz the
conditions stipulated in the Letter of Award (LoA) above financial capability of
EOL, departure from Model Production Sharing Contracts (MPSC) as observed
by MoL&J, payment of Royalty and Cess at old rates, Cost Recovery Limit (CRL)

4


9.

and creation of charge by EOL on its P! for construction of refinery. NTS in
Minutes of the Meeting held on 2.3.2000 even observed that, “Despite the best
efforts to expedite finalization of PSC, the Consortium appears to be not
interested in expediting the PSC.”

While vetting the above ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:-

The Ministry did not explain the reasons as to why the high-powered body
(NTS) failed in its mandate to negotiate/ resolve the issues which inter-alia
included conditional award dated 12.3.1996, financial capability of EOL, Royalty
and Cess rates, Cost Recovery Limit (CRL) and creation of charge by EOL on its
PI for construction of Refinery etc for concluding PSC- Ratna R-Series. It kept
setting targets for completion of negotiations and signing of PSC and did not
adhere to its own targets. It took nearly 17 years. (from the date of mandate
given (March, 1999 to date of cancelation of award March, 2016)."

In their further comments to the above said Audit observation, the Ministry stated

as under:-

CCEA mandated NTS vide approval in the meeting held on 9" March,
1999 for concluding the PSCs in respect of 11 small sized fields and one medium
sized field i.e. Ratna and R-Series Fields, offered under second round of bidding.
NTS made prolonged and concerted efforts in accordance with the mandate for
17 long years, commencing from as early as 22.11.1999 when the first NTS
meeting was held to adopt a uniform procedure based approach. in negotiations
with all the successful bidders. Model Production Sharing Contract (MPSC) was
approved as a basis for negotiating conditions stipulated under various articles of
the individual contracts.

19 NTS meetings were held from November 1999 to June 2013. Based on
outcome of the NTS meetings, PSC for 11 small sized fields were signed (9 in
February, 2001 and 2 in February, 2004). However, PSC for Ratna & R-Series
Fields could not be finalised by NTS for many reasons due to various deviations
in the established procedure set by NTS, including the conditions as brought out
in the Letter of Award (LoA) and others viz. financial capability of EOL, departure
from MPSC as observed by MoL&J, payment of Royalty and Cess at old rates,
Cost Recovery Limit (CRL) and creation of charge by EOL on its Pl for
construction of refinery. NTS in Minutes of the Meeting held on 2.3.2000 even
observed that, “Despite the best efforts to expedite finalization of PSC, the
Consortium appears to be not interested in expediting the PSC.”

Thus, failure for non execution of Ratna PSC cannot be attributed to NTS.”


10. The Committee found that the non-execution of Production Sharing
Contract (PSC) was due to unfruitful deliberations held by Negotiating Team of
Secretaries (NTS) with various stakeholders on the issues that had already been
laid down by the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) and that the
frequent deliberations made on the issues of techno-legal, royalty and cess,
references to various agencies and consequent delays necessitated repeated re-
assessment of financial capability of the successful bidders. The Committee,
therefore, opined that serious delays in decision making for more than 20 years,
after the CCEA approval, deprived the country of the much needed fuel from the
Ratna & R- Series (R&RS) fields. The Committee note from the reply of the
Ministry that 19 meetings were held by NTS from November 1999 to June 2013 ,
however, PSC for Ratna & R-Series Fields could not be finalised for many
reasons like deviations in the established procedure set by NTS, including the
conditions as brought out in the Letter of Award (LoA) and others viz. financial
capability of EOL, departure from Model Production Sharing Contract (MPSC) as
observed by Ministry of Law and Justice (MoL&J), payment of Royalty and Cess
at old rates, Cost Recovery Limit (CRL) and creation of charge by Essar Oil
Limited (EOL) on its Participating Interest (Pl) for construction of refinery. The
Ministry has further referred to the Minutes of the meeting of NTS held on
2.3.2000 where it has been stated that, “Despite the best efforts to expedite
finalization of PSC, the Consortium appears to be not interested in expediting the हु
PSC". The Committee are of the view that a high powered Committee with all the
heads of the Departments concerned on board, could not finalize the PSC even in
a period as long as fourteen years(1999-2013). The Committee find it
incomprehensible that when the NTS was well aware of the fact that ‘the
Consortium was not interested, the decision to revert the oil field should have
been taken in 2000 itself.. The Committee are of the considered opinion that such
inaction at that time resulted in unfruitful deliberations for the next thirteen years
(i.e 2000-2013). The Committee, therefore, reiterate their observation that serious
delays in decision making for more than 20 years (1996-2016), after the CCEA
approval, deprived the country of the much needed fuel from the R&RS fields.


11. Failure of Negotiating Team of Secretaries (NTS) to execute Production of Negotiating Team of Secretaries (NTS) to execute Production

(Recommendation Para No. 2)

The Committee in their Original Report noted that due to disagreements on
multiple issues and irregularities on the part of the consortium partner there was
inordinate delay in concluding the contract and it was finally decided with the approval
of CCEA to cancel the contract. The Committee, therefore, were of the view that the
purpose of formation of such high-powered body like NTS with as many as six
Secretary / CMD level officers of the Ministries / National Oil Company was defeated as
these highest level officers could not adhere to their own timelines and reach a decision
after several rounds of meetings. The Committee were also of the view that timely
intervention by the Government/ CCEA into the issue could have helped in taking
decision on the issues. The Committee felt that it was high time that the country has a
mechanism to review the efficiency of high-level Government officials associated/
nominated in Inter-Ministerial Groups/High-Level Committees independently of the help
of regular bureaucracy. The Committee, therefore, desired that the Government to
consider this issue as an eye-opener and establish adequate mechanism to review the
performance of all such officers nominated on various Committees. The Committee
further observed that the delay was mainly attributable to the anxiety of the officers to
avoid ‘dispute in future’ and no concern was raised at the fact that no production was
happening for about two decades. The Committee also felt that NTS unable to resolve
the issue on its own should have sought the help of experts or Cabinet Secretary. The
Committee, therefore, strongly deprecated the rationale of NTS keeping calculated
silence and inaction. The Committee observed that the delays by these officials
resulted in a huge loss of ® 26200 crore to the exchequer and deprived the country of
scarce resources for more than two decades that tantamount to criminal negligence.
The Committee had also directed that the responsibility for causing inordinate delays in
decision making may be fixed and action be taken against the officials concerned.

12. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in their Action Taken Notes have
stated as under;-

" Due to concerns expressed in many quarters about tenets of the
Discovered Field Policy, MOP&NG sought necessary policy directions from
CCEA vide note dated 28.2.1999. Approval of CCEA was sought for concluding
the contracts in respect of 12 discovered fields awarded under the Second
Round in 1995 after due negotiations are held with parties by the Negotiating
Committee of Secretaries (NCS). (The final paragraph of the proposal mentioned
NCS as Negotiating Team of Secretaries (NTS) comprising Petroleum Secretary,
Finance Secretary and Law Secretary). The CCEA in its meeting held on
9.3.1999 in Case No.44/CCEA/99 (Item No.4) considered the note dated

7


18.2.1999 of MOP&NG and approved the proposals contained in paragraph 26,
wherein one of the proposal was for “concluding contracts in respect of 12
discovered fields awarded under the second round in 1996 after due
negotiations are held with the parties by the Negotiating Team of
Secretaries’. Ratna & R-Series field was one of the 12 discovered fields for
which contract was to be negotiated.

NTS undertook negotiations with the Consortiums, based on a Model
Production Sharing Contract (MPSC) approved in November, 1999 as the basis
for negotiation and finalization of the PSC with the Consortiums.

NTS had several meetings (15) from 1999 to March, 2008 and various
issues were deliberated in the meetings like the negative net worth of EOL;
creation of charge by EOL with its bankers for its Refinery project before signing
the Contract; POLs negotiation with ONGC for assigning its 71 and Operatorship;
applicable rates of Cess and Royalty; transfer of pipeline asset by ONGC to the
Consortium etc. In 2008, a CCEA note was circulated by this Ministry with NTS
recommendation of signing PSC with the EOL — POL consortium, maintaining old
rates of cess and royalty with old Cost Recovery Limit (CRL). It was suggested
by Cabinet Secretariat that NTS may identify alternate courses of action available
in the light of conflicting legal opinions and make its recommendation after taking
into account all the pros and cons including the feasibility of re-inviting the bids,
settlement of the issues by NTS, etc.

Number of options were explored by NTS, including cancellation of the
Letter of Award and consequently re-inviting of bids or revert the field back to
ONGC. There were four (4) more NTS meetings from 2009 to 2013 to deliberate
on these options and a draft CCEA Note on “Issues relating to Finalization of
Production Sharing Contract (PSC) for Ratna and R-Series” dated 28.10.2013
was circulated for Inter Ministerial Consultations (IMC) which was sent to the
Cabinet Secretariat on 20 May, 2014. This was returned by the Cabinet
Secretariat with comment that this may be put up for new Minister In Charge after
‘ormation of new government.

After taking over in May, 2014, present Government considered this issue
‘or award of the Ratna & R-Series Fields earnestly. Various alternatives were
evaluated and a draft CCEA Note was circulated for Inter Ministerial
Consultations. Based on outcome of various inter-ministerial consultations,
CCEA on 10" March, 2016 approved the cancellation of the award letter dated
12.3.1996 issued in favour of the consortium of M/s. Essar Oil Limited and M/s.
Premier Oil Pacific UK Ltd. and revert the Ratna & R Series fields to ONGC,
subject to payment of cess and royalty at the current rates, as applicable under
he nomination regime. .

8


Rs. 26,200 crores was an estimation of value of reserves by CAG
considering crude oil prices ranging from US$ 55 to US$ 130. The reserves are
still in place and available for production. The present decision of the
Government taken vide CCEA meeting held on 107" March-2016 to revert the
field to ONGC for further development and production and to realize cess and
royalty at current rates applicable under nomination regime, interest of the
Government is protected with the present decision. Delay in decision making is
not due to lack of exercising due diligence on the part of any official but due to
complexity of issues involved including financial incapability of EOL during
negotiation stage. "

13. While vetting the above ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:-

The reply of the Ministry may be viewed in the light that in March, 1999,
CCEA approved negotiations and concluding PSC in respect of 12 discovered
fields (11 small sized blocks and one medium sized R&RS block) to be held by
the NTS for negotiating and fina izing PSC with the consortium within six months.
PSC in respect of the 11 small sized fields were signed in February, 2001 and
February, 2004. Ratna & R-Series could not be concluded. On 10" March, 2016
CCEA approved the cancellation of the award letter dated 12.3.1996 issued in
favour of the consortium of M/s. Essar Oil Limited and M/s. Premier Oil Pacific
UK Ltd. and reverted the field back to ONGC,

Further, the reply did not mention the action initiated for fixing
responsibility of the officials for delay in decision making which resulted in a huge
loss of Rs. 26,200 crore to the exchequer and deprived the country of scarce
resources for more than two decades tantamount to criminal negligence. Action
taken in this regard may be incorporated in the ATN for better appreciation of the

PAC.”
14. In their further comments to the above said audit observation, the Ministry stated
as under:-

“ NTS made all out efforts to execute the Ratna & R Series PSC. NTS may
not be held responsible for deviations to the adhered procedure followed in
respect of 11 other PSCs. Non adherence to the agreed and approved
procedures set by NTS by one particular private consortium may be viewed as
only one off case. Fixing responsibility of the individuals would only discourage
those upright officers who protected government commercial interests by
eventually realizing royalty and cess at the current rates rather than freezing at
the old rates. Even the EOL-POL consortium also agreed to pay royalty and cess
at current rates subsequently. However, PSC could not be concluded due to

other deviations from the agreed norms and intentions of the Consortium, which
9


has clearly been brought out in the Minutes for the NTS meeting held on

2.3.2000.”
45. The Committee observed that the delay in finalizing the PSC was mainly
attributable to the anxiety of the NTS to avoid ‘dispute in future’ and that they
maintained calculated silence and inaction. The Committee further observed that
the delays resulted in a huge loss of 26200 crore to the exchequer which
tantamount to criminal negligence and directed that the responsibility for
inordinate delays in decision making may be fixed and action be taken against
the officials concerned. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that
CCEA on 10 March, 2016 approved the cancellation of the award letter dated 12
March, 1996 issued in favour of the Consortium of Mis. Essar Oil Limited and Mis.
Premier Oil Pacific UK Ltd. and reverted the R&RS fields to the original allottee
ie., ONGC and the reserves are still in place and available for production. Further,
the Ministry stated that the PSC could not be concluded due to other deviations
from the agreed norms and intentions of the Consortium, which has clearly been
brought out in the minutes for the NTS meeting held on 2.3.2000. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the action taken by the Cabinet Secretariat on the
above findings of the NTS which was recorded in the minutes. The Committee are
of the strong view that the country was deprived of scarce resources for more
than two decades due to inaction of the NTS which did not take a decision
regarding finalization of PSC/ cancellation of award when it had gauged the
intention of the Consortium in 2000 itself and, therefore, it is a clear case of
criminal negligence of the officers responsible for concluding the PSC. The
Committee do not agree with the argument of the Ministry that non-adherence to
the agreed and approved procedures set by NTS by one particular private
Consortium may be viewed as only one off case since the performance of
Secretaries of Departments should be exemplary in every task assigned to them.
The Committee while noting the reply of the Ministry that fixing responsibility of
the individuals. would only discourage those upright officers who protected
Government commercial interests by eventually realizing royalty and cess at the
current rates rather than freezing at the old rates opine that this does not absolve

the NTS of the responsibility it was shouldered with. Further it does not provide
10


sufficient ground to shield the members of NTS respo & for delays in
finalization of PSC/ cancellation of award with respect to R&RS fields. The
Committee, therefore, while reiteratitig their recommendation direct the Ministry
to fix responsibility of the officials concerned towards loss to the Gol exchequer
and depriving the country of if its own resources and the Committee be apprised

of the action taken thereof.

16. Reimbursement of Past — Cost and au rsement of Pasi — Cost and non ~ maintenance of idle facilities
(Recommendation Para 5)

The Committee in their original Report found that MoPNG had not evolved
modalities for past cost compensation to ONGC and neither the NTS forum proved
productive and useful for addressing the significant and important issue of maintenance
of the facilities created at the R&RS fields and observed that even though the
consortium would have been operating the field, still ONGC had to hold 40% of its
Participating Interest (Pl). The Committee noted that ONGC and MoP&NG allowed
plundering and looting’ of platform utilities and equipment in the absence of appropriate
security system that clearly showed lack of their seriousness to preserve and conserve
facilities that were created by ONGC at a cost of ® 472.55 crores and were of the view
that ONGC could have applied the reasoning for ‘strategic’ benefit and foresightedness
on maintenance of the created facilities and thus avoided the expenditure amounting to
® 1085.7 crore involved in estimated repair cost of the facilities. The Committee,
therefore, felt that ONGC could have pursued the matter more vigorously with the
Ministry and in-turn NTS to get the matter resolved. The Committee opined that non-
maintenance of oif producing fields by ONGC and subsequent plundering and looting
from the sites was nothing but sheer failure of a Public Sector Undertaking in looking
after the nation’s property. The Committee also felt that ONGC should have maintained
the fields as being a PSU it would have anyway recovered all its expenses sooner or
later and desired that the concerned officials of ONGC be held responsible for this gross
negligence and action be initiated against them.

17. In this regard, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in their Action Taken
Notes stated as under:-

"ONGC started production from Ratna field from February 1983 and continued
up to September 1994. Award of contract had been approved by the Government
in 1996 and same was informed to the Consortium of Successful Bidders
(CoSB). The issue of repair / maintenance of the facilities remained major
concern of ONGC till handing over of these Fields to awardees. ONGC brought it

1


18.

to notice of the Government through various communications and during the
meeting of Negotiating Team of Secretaries (NTS). ONGC also brought to notice
of the Government regarding decision on re-imbursement of repair / maintenance
cost of the facilities in these fields.

ONGC raised the issue of maintenance of facilities with the MoP&NG vide
letter from CMD-ONGC dated 13th March 2002 .ONGC also sought permission
for carrying out inspection / maintenance of SBM & structure and requested for
adjustment of cost undertaken in carrying out the same. The issue was also
raised during the meeting of Negotiating Team of Secretaries (NTS) for
confirmation regarding decision on re-imbursement of such cost.

Meanwhile, ONGC incurred an expenditure of Rs.6.92 crores plus USD
335,840 and conveyed the same to MoPNG vide letter dated 90 December 2004.
Note of such expenditure was made by NTS in its meeting dated 15! April 2005.

NTS in October 2004 decided that ONGC would need to be reimbursed
for the maintenance cost incurred between the date of award and effective date
of PSCs. However, the issue could not be concluded. as various articles of the
PSC were still being negotiated by the Government with CoSB. In light of non-
reimbursement of already incurred expenditure, ONGC did not find it prudent to
incur any further expenditure on Ratna R- series. It may be noted that ONGC is
a registered company under the Companies Act and any investment decision by
the Company needs approval of the Board. As the issue regarding
reimbursement costs could not be concluded, it would not have been possible by
ONGC Board to consider the expenditure on Ratna and R-Series Fields. "

While vetting the said ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:-

“Ministry's reply is silent on the issues:

Past cost to be compensated to ONGC, despite the directions of CCEA in 1999
and the audit observations twice in 1996 and 2005.

Non maintenance of facilities by ONGC.
Action initiated against the responsible official of ONGC.

Ministry's reply stated that it was not possible by the Board of ONGC to consider

the expenditure on Ratna & R-Series Field, since the issue of reimbursement cost
was not concluded. The reply may be seen in the light of the fact that in any case
ONGC would continue to hold 40 per cent share in the field and proper
maintenance of assets was in its own interest.”

12


19. In their further comments to the above said Audit observation, the Ministry stated as
under:-

NTS in October 2004 had decided that ONGC would need to be
reimbursed for the maintenance cost incurred between the date of award and
effective date of PSCs. However, the issue could not be concluded as various
articles of the PSC were still being negotiated by the Government with CoSB. In
light of non-reimbursement of already incurred expenditure, ONGC did not find it
prudent to incur any further expenditure on Ratna & R- series. As a Participating
Interest (Pl) holder of 40 % in to be concluded PSC, ONGC would have been
required to incur expenditure only to the extent of 40%, not entire expenditure on
maintenance of the assets.

After the Government decision’ to revert the field to ONGC, repair and
refurbishment of various production and evacuation facilities has been
undertaken by ONGC in several stages to receive the expected “First Oil” by
May, 2019.

Considering hydrocarbon potential of this medium sized field, Progress of
the project is regularly being monitored by the Government."

20. The Committee opined that non-maintenance of oil producing fields by
ONGC and subsequent plundering and looting from the sites was nothing but
sheer failure of a Public Sector Undertaking in looking after the nation’s property.
The Committee also felt that ONGC should have maintained the fields as being a
PSU it would have anyway recovered all its expenses sooner or later and desired
that the concerned officials of ONGC be held responsible for this gross
negligence and action be initiated against them. The Committee note from the
reply of Ministry that ONGC incurred an expenditure of हैं 6.92 crores plus USD
335,840 towards maintenance of field during the years 1993 to 2002, however, the
expenditure incurred could not be reimbursed and therefore ONGC did not incur
any further expenditure on R&RS fields. The Committee are shocked to note that
ONGC did not find it prudent to incur any further expenditure on maintenance
and, therefore, chose to remain a mute spectator to the plundering and looting
from the site in which it had 40 per cent Participating Interest. The Committee
while opining that officials of the Ministry also failed in their duties to ensure
protection of nation’s property desire that the responsibility of the officials of the

Ministry who neither thought of any arrangement for maintenance of the fields
13


nor directed the ONGC to maintain the site may also be fixed and action be taken
against them for allowing the site to be damaged during the course of
negotiations. The Committee reiterate that ONGC, a leading Public Sector
Undertaking, with 40 per cent PI should have continued to maintain the fields as
the restoration of the same will now require incurring huge additional
expenditure. The Committee also reiterate that the responsibility of the officials of
ONGC be fixed for their sheer negligence and desire that the actual cost incurred
on repair, reinstallation, refurbishment of various production and evacuation
facilities undertaken by ONGC after reversion of R&RS fields to them may be
furnished to the Committee to better understand the actual loss to Gol exchequer
due to non-maintenance of R&RS fields. Also, the Committee may be apprised of
the punitive action taken against the officials concerned.

21. Fixing of Responsibility towards delay in non — execution of mandate
(Recommendation Para 6)

The Committee in their Original Report observed that the silence of the Ministry
for not providing the details of the information sought by the Committee spoke volume
about the reasons behind the muddle created over the abnormal and unique delay of
over 25 years of the policy decision (1991), 20 years of award (1996) and 17 years of
CCEA approval (1999) in awarding the contract to the consortium and finally reverting
the R&RS fields to the original allottee i.e. the ONGC again. Also on Audit's
observation regarding financial implications due the indecision on R&RS fields,
indicated that the country had Jost oil and gas production worth more than 26,200
crores; Government's potential revenue to the tune of हैं 1105 crore on account of
royalty and cess and avoidable expenditure of = 1085.70 crore towards repair and re-
development of the R&RS fields and the Ministry terming it as ‘notional figures’, the
Committee desired to examine that the circumstances under which the Cabinet
Secretariat returned the note on piecemeal basis and why the Cabinet Secretariat could
not pursue the implementation of CCEA. The Committee were dismayed to note the
role of Cabinet Secretariat not taking the lead to resolve the issue when it became
evident that the MoPNG was unable to make up its mind and upgrading inter-
departmental consultation to Empowered Committee of Secretaries or Group of
Ministers or Empowered Group of Ministers. The Committee on unfolding and
scrutinising the sequence of events that took place since the issue of Letter of Award
(March, 1996) and decisions made either by the Ministry or the NTS or CCEA or the
Cabinet Secretariat in the R&RS field were of the opinion that the entire sequence
clearly portrayed itself as a classic case of system failure. The Committee, therefore,

14


desired that when decision to form high-powered body like NTS are taken in future by
the Government for execution of its decision, adequate monitoring mechanism be put in
place and ensure timely intervention and execution of decisions taken in tho national
interest.

22. In this regard, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in their Action Taken
Note have stated as under:-

. Administration of the upstream Exploration and Production (E & P) Sector
by the Government is a complex subject and has evolved over a period of time
with progress of the extant policy regime. Signing of the proposed PSC for Ratna
and R Series Fields was during the pre-NELP Discovered Fields policy regime,
while the Sector was still evolving from the prevalent nomination regime.

During the NELP regime, a mechanism of Empowered Committee of
Secretaries (ECS) was put up in place comprising Secretary (P &NG), Finance
Secretary and Law Secretary to consider Bid Evaluation Criteria (BEC), conduct
negotiations with bidders, wherever necessary and make recommendations to
CCEA on award of blocks.

The same mechanism of ECS has been approved in March, 2016 for the
new policy initiative, Hydrocarbon Exploration Licensing Policy (HELP) with the
following additional functions being vested in ECS:

(i) Approval of Model Revenue Sharing Contract and other bid documents;

(ii) Resolution of all contractual issues raised during the entire period of
implementation of future contracts based on the proposed model;

(iii) For Inter-ministerial consultation issues, ECS may co-opt Secretary of the
concerned Department / Ministry and NITI Aayog as member.

It has been stipulated that decision of the ECS on the additional functions
would be submitted to the Minister (P & NG) and Finance Minister for approval.
Thus, as desired by PAC, adequate monitoring mechanism has been put in place
to ensure timely intervention and execution of decisions, taken in the national
interest.

CCEA mandated NTS in March, 1999 to conclude the PSCs in respect of 11
small sized fields and one medium sized field i.e. Ratna and R-Series Fields.

NTS had several meetings (15) from 1999 to March, 2008 and various
issues were deliberated in the meetings like the negative net worth of EOL;
creation of charge by EOL with its bankers for its Refinery project before signing
the Contract; POLs negotiation with ONGC for assigning its Pl and Operatorship;

15


applicable rates of Cess and Royalty; transfer of pipeline asset by ONGC to the
consortium etc.

First NTS meeting was held on 22.11.1999 and to adopt a uniform
approach in negotiation, a Model Production Sharing Contract (MPSC) was
approved as a basis for negotiating the individual contracts. Second NTS
meeting was held on 02.03.2000 and it was agreed that the financial strength of
all the awardees would be evaluated based on latest available information.
Meeting held on 18.07.2000 finalized consequential changes in the PSCs for 10
small sized fields pursuant to finalization of COSA and the work programme
submitted by the companies. It was further decided that for Ratna & R Series
Fields and Amguti Fields, sixty (60) days time limit would be intimated to finalize
the PSCs, failing which the negotiation process would stand concluded.
Subsequent meeting was held on 07.09.2000 whereby draft PSC of Ratna & R
Series was deliberated on individual articles and put in the minutes. It was further
decided that the Ministry of Finance will revert on issue of financial capability of
Essar Oil limited (EOL). Another NTS meeting was held on 24.10.2000 for
Amguri and Ratna R Series Fields. The issue of financial capability of EOL was
deliberated and it was agreed that since Essar has recently been apprised by
ICICI in context of their refinery project, they should be consulted on net worth of
Essar. Response of ICICI was deliberated in meetings held on 20.02.2001 and
the remedies available under the PSC and Joint Operating Agreement (JOA) in
case of default by any contracting party. Implication of cancellation of award was
also discussed and following provision in the Notice Inviting Offer (NIO) was
brought out: है

‘While GOI has flexible approach to the terms, it reserves to itself the right
to accept or reject any bid in its sole discretion.’

Subsequent meetings held on 19.08.2002, 24.04.2003, 08.12.2003 and
31.08.2004 deliberated on the issue of creation of charge by EOL with its
bankers for its Refinery project before signing the Contract. It was during the
meeting held on 04.10.2004 that NTS agreed upon EOL financial capability
based on the considered opinion of Ministry of Finance provided in the meeting.
However, confirmation was sought from Premier Oil (POL) on signing the
contract and EOL and POL in respect of reimbursement to ONGC of the
maintenance costs. In another meeting held on 15.04.2005, it was decided that
reimbursement of maintenance costs to ONGC shall be non-recoverable contract
cost and to seek confirmation from EOL and POL on this. Moreover, EOL, POL
and ONGC should be asked to confirm acceptance of royalty on crude oil @ 10
% of well-head value and cess on crude oil @ Rupees 1800 per metric tonne,
which should be frozen for entire PSC period. Subsequent meeting held on
19.04.2006 decided that the contract stands concluded with issue of award letter
in March, 1996 and statutory levies should be maintained at the old level. In the

16



meeting held on 20.03.2008, NTS decided to recommend oid rates of royalty and
cess with old Cost Recovery Limit (CRL) bid by the contractors.

In June 2008, a CCEA note was circulated by this Ministry with NTS
recommendation of signing PSC with the EOL — POL consortium, maintaining old
rates of cess and royalty with old cost recovery limit (CRL). The Cabinet
Secretariat observed on the CCEA note that the process of negotiation in the
present case has not been taken to its logical conclusion and it would be
appropriate for the Negotiating Team of Secretaries to offer its unambiguous
recommendation in the matter. It was also suggested by Cabinet Secretariat that
NTS may identify alternate courses of action available in the light of conflicting
legal opinions and make its recommendation after taking into account all the pros
and cons including the feasibility of re-inviting the bids, settlement of the issues
by NTS, etc.

Number of options were explored by NTS, including cancellation of the
Letter of Award and consequently re-inviting of bids or revert the field back to
ONGC. There were four (4) more NTS meetings from 2009 to 2013 to deliberate
on these options and a draft CCEA Note on “Issues relating to Finalization of
Production Sharing Contract (PSC) for Ratna and R-Series” dated 28.10.2013
was circulated for Inter Ministerial Consultations (IMC) which was sent to the
Cabinet Secretariat on 21 May, 2014. This was returned by the Cabinet
Secretariat with comment that this may be put up for new Minister In Charge after
formation of new government.

After taking over in May, 2014, present Government considered this issue
for award of the Ratna & R-Series Fields earnestly. Various alternatives were
evaluated and a draft CCEA Note was circulated for Inter Ministerial
Consultations. Based on outcome of various inter-ministerial consultations,
CCEA on 10" March, 2016 approved the cancellation of the award letter dated
12.3.1996 issued in favour of the consortium of M/s. Essar Oil Limited and M/s.
Premier Oil Pacific UK Ltd. and revert the Ratna & R Series fields to ONGC,
subject to payment of cess and royalty at the current rates, as applicable under
the nomination regime.

It can be seen from details of the above NTS meetings that while PSC for
all other fields was successfully negotiated and concluded. But the Ratna
Contract could not be concluded due to actions and intentions of the Consortium,
which has been brought out in the Minutes for the NTS second meeting itself,
held on 2.3.2000. NTS was mandated by CCEA to conclude all the contracts and
efforts were continuously made by NTS, as is evident by number of NTS
meetings to resolve the issues and conclude the contracts. NTS made all the
efforts to bring agreement on various issues during negotiations with CoSB.
However, when it became evident that the issues with CoSB can no longer be

17


23.

24.

resolved to satisfaction of all the stakeholders, the Government took the decision
of cancelling the LOA and reverting the fields to ONGC on 10" March, 2016."

While vetting the said ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:-

“ Ministry has stated that adequate monitoring mechanism has been put in
place to ensure timely intervention and execution of decisions, taken in the
national interest under HELP approved in March, 2016.

However, the Ministry is silent on the following issues:

indecision of the Government till 10 March, 2016 for award of R&RS fields which
had seriously deprived the country of its own resources for more than two
decades,
expenditure on repairs due to non-maintenance of fields for more than two
decades which resulted in actual losses,

not asking ONGC to maintain the R&RS fields during the period of negotiations
by Ministry
indecision on all the related issues till 10 March, 2016 which had directly
compromised the national interest on energy security,

fixation of responsibility of all the officials of the Ministry for indecision and their
role in this regard.”

In their further comments to the above said audit observation, the Ministry stated

as under:-

25.

“ NTS made all the efforts to bring agreement on various issues during
negotiations with CoSB in accordance with the contractual norms. However,
when it became evident that the issues with CoSB can no longer be resolved to
satisfaction of all the stakeholders, the Government took the decision of
cancelling the LOA and reverting the fields to ONGC on 40" March, 2016.
Further, adequate monitoring mechanism has been put in place under recent
policy initiatives to ensure timely intervention and execution of government
decisions. ”

The Committee acknowledge that the Ministry has put in place a monitoring

mechanism under Hydrocarbon Exploration Licensing Policy (HELP) with

additional functions being vested in Empowered Committee of Secretaries (ECS).

However, the Committee find that Ministry has avoided providing replies on other

issues raised by the Committee viz., indecision of the Government till March,

2016 for award of R&RS fields seriously depriving the country of its own

18


resources for more than two decades; expenditure on repairs due to non-
maintenance of fields resulting in actual losses; failure of Ministry to provide

assurance to ONGC for reimburser t itu count of maintenance

of fields during the negotiation period; indecision on all related issues till March,
2016 directly compromising the national interest on energy security; and fixation
of responsibility of officers of the Ministry for indecision and their role as pointed
by the Committee during examination of the subject. The Committee express
their strong displeasure towards casual attitude adopted by the Ministry in not
responding to specific issues and desire to be apprised about the action taken by
the Ministry on all the unanswered issues including fixing of responsibility of
officials and action taken against them within two months of presentation of the
Report.

19


CHAPTER II

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
GOVERNMENT

Observation/ R

Delay in decision making leading to repeated assessing financial capability of in decision making leading to repeated assessing financial capability of
bidders:

The Committee note that Notice Inviting Offer (NIO) did not indicate any criteria for
evaluating financial capability. Financial capability of Consortium of Successful Bidders
(CoSBs) was evaluated in 1995 before award of contract to it. After assignment (March
1999) of work to NTS by CCEA for negotiation on the terms and conditions and signing
of PSC with CoSB, NTS carried out re-assessment of financial Capability on three
different occasions viz. in the year 2000, 2004 and in 2011. On first occasion, DGH
carried out (May 2000) assessment of financial capability and informed (September,
2000) NTS that net worth of CoSB was positive and it had sound financial health.
Accordingly, NTS decision was not taken due to techno-legal issues. On second
occasion in August, 2004, NTS again asked DGH to carry out assessment of financial
capability of CoSB. Based on the inputs provided (October 2004) by DGH and MoF,
NTS concluded that CoSB was financially capable to meet its obligations as envisaged
in PSC. However, before processing of PSC for finalisation, NTS raised (April 2005) the
issue of applicability of rates for cess and royalty and final decision could not be taken.
And finally on third occasion, in NTS meeting (October 2011), the issue of negative net
worth of the successful bidder partner was again raised and it was decided to freshly
ascertain the present net worth of CoSB. The issue was further raised on two
occasions by one of the members of the NTS through letters to MoPNG (November,
2011 and February, 2012). Meanwhile, in January, 2012, the CoSB partners submitted
the net worth certificates. issued by their statutory auditors, indicating a positive and
higher net worth than ascertained in earlier assessments. The Ministry submitted that it
was not that the financial capacity of CoSB was assessed in respect of only Ratna & २
Series Fields. This was done for bids in respect of other fields as well. During the NTS
meeting held on 02.03.2000, NTS decided that financial strength of all the awardee
companies should be evaluated based- on the latest available information. NTS
authorized DGH to obtain necessary information from the awarded companies and
evaluate their financial strength and submit the position. During the subsequent NTS
meeting held on 18.07.2000, NTS noted that according to the assessment carried out
by DGH, all the awrardee companies, except for Essar Oil, were financially capable.

20


According to the Ministry, the bidding of field is an irnportant economic decision and
should be taken with due caution after ascertaining all the related aspects and the
reassessment of financial capability was necessitated to adjudge the updated financial
position and strength of the CoSB to ensure that they are financially capable to meet the
obligations as envisaged in PSC in the current date. The Committee are of the view
that delays in taking final decision led to the need for fresh assessments of the financial
capability of CoSB, which contributed to further avoidable delays. The Committee are of
the opinion that PSC for R&RS fields could have been concluded on the basis of the
assessment of financial capability of CoSB carried out by the DGH in 2000, as was
done in case of 11 other fields. The Committee while observing that the NTS
unnecessarily dragged the issue for 17 years, expect a high powered body to be
dynamic in their actions. The Committee feel that the whole process of reassessing
financial health could have been avoided, had the NTS adhered to its target of 6
months. The Committee also desire to know the exact details of the extension of
mandate given to the NTS beyond their stipulated time period of six months.

(SI. no. 3 Part - ll of 6274 report of Public Accounts
Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by the Government:

CCEA meeting was held on 9 March, 1999 and it was decided to conclude the
PSGs in respect of 11 small sized fields and one medium sized field i.e. Ratna and R-
Series Fields. CCEA authorized Negotiating Team of Secretaries (NTS) to conclude
contracts after due negotiations. During the initial NTS meetings in the year 2000, it was
discussed that in view of the awards being more than 4 years old the financial capability
of all the awardee companies for the 12 discovered fields be assessed based on the
latest available information. NTS authorized DGH to carry out this exercise and submit
the position along with the recommendations.

The issue of Financial Capability of Essar Oil Limited was deliberated in subsequent
NTS meetings. While the financial capability of other awardee companies was approved
by NTS, certain actions on part of the consortium partners including issues related to
financial capability of EOL - POL, creation of charge on the fields against refinery loans
contrary to provisions of the draft PSC and differences on other issues with ONGC held
back signing of the Ratna and R-Series fields. The matter of financial capability, as
pointed by C&AG, was accepted by NTS after obtaining opinion from ICICI and it was
desired by NTS that EOL — POL may sort out issues of inventory and Crude Oil Sales
Agreement (COSA) with ONGC. On the issue of EOL creating charge on Ratna - रि

21


Series Fields against their refinery loan, Ministry of Law on 28.02.2003 and 05.03.2003
opined that since no agreement / contract had been signed by EOL with the
Government in respect of the fields, therefore, EOL had not acquired any right in the
said field and PSC did not provide power to the contractor to create charge on PI for
securing loan on any other project.

Further, Net Worth of Essar Oil Limited (EOL) was found negative when
evaluated based on bidding terms and conditions of Notice Inviting Offer (NIO) for NELP
IX round. The issue of re-assessing financial capability of bidder came up again only
during NTS meeting of October, 2011 after significant lapse of time, when the issue of
net worth of EOL during award of NELP-IX blocks was discussed. This is when Finance
Secretary desired to ascertain present net worth of EOL. However, the issue was
settled after obtaining net worth certificates issued by the statutory auditors.

Assessment of financial health of companies is necessitated to ensure that they
are capable to meet the obligations as envisaged in the PSC and this process could not
be avoided.

NTS could not conclude the 101 within period of six months as a process was
followed in all the cases where contracts were required to be concluded. While PSC for
other fields were signed, Ratna and R Series PSC could not be signed due to actions
attributable to the CoSB. It would be apt to quote from the Minutes of the NTS Meeting
held on 2.3.2000:

QUOTE

Despite the best efforts to expedite finalization of PSC, the Consortium appears to be
not interested in expediting the PSC. The Consortium has Proposed further discussions
on finalization of PSC after they had joint inspection of the facilities with ONGC, which is
likely to place some time this month. Hence, it will take time to finalize PSC with the
Consortium.

UNQUOTE

‘Thus, it can be stated that while NTS concluded all other contracts based on various
parameters, including assessment of the financial capability. But the Ratna Contract
could not be concluded due to actions and intentions of the Consortium, which has been
brought out in the Minutes for the NTS meeting held on 2.3.2000. NTS was mandated
by CCEA to conclude all the contracts and efforts were continuously made by NTS, as
is evident by number of NTS meetings to resolve the issues and conclude the coniracis.

22


Vetted remarks of Audit:

Ministry reply may be seen in the light of the fact that the delays in taking decision on
te-assessing financial capability of the CoSB contributed to further delays which were
avoidable.

Further, the details of the extension of mandate given to the NTS beyond their
stipulated time period of six months may be incorporated in the ATN for better
appreciation of the PAC.

Reply on Vetting remarks of Audit:

During the initial NTS meetings whereby it was decided to follow a uniform
procedure for execution of the contracts, assessing the financial capability of all
awardee companies was one of the key parameters, in view of the awards being more
than 4 years old. While the financial capability of other awardee companies was cleared
based on DGH examination, the issue of Financial Capability of Essar Oil Limited was
required to be deliberated in subsequent NTS meetings due to certain actions on part of
the consortium including creation of charge on the fields against refinery loans, contrary
to provisions of the draft PSC.

Subsequently, Net Worth of Essar Oil Limited (EOL) was found negative when
evaluated based on bidding terms and conditions of Notice Inviting Offer (NIO) for NELP
- IX round.

Assessment of financial health of companies is necessitated to ensure that they
are capable to meet the obligations as envisaged in the PSC and this process could not
be avoided, particularly if deviations to the established procedures like creation of
charge or negative net worth are observed. Negotiating on the basic agreed norms may
lead to non-performance of the executed PSC and subsequent litigation. The winning
consortium was given a long rope to adhere to various norms agreed and available
under the policy perspectives.

NTS could not conclude the LOI within period of six months as a process was
followed in all the cases where contracts were required to be concluded. While PSC for
other fields were signed, Ratna and R Series PSC could not be signed due to actions
attributable to the CoSB. No specific mandate for timeline extension to.NTS was
available, as it was mandated to conclude the contracts.

Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, O.M. No. O-
32011/2/2016-ONG-I, dated 13.09.2017)

23


Observation/ Recommendation No 4

Deliberations on ne nous-of the Issues ~ Techno - Legal and Rovalty and Cess: Issues ~ Techno -- Legal and Royalty and Cess:

The Committee note that frequent deliberations were held on certain techno-legal
issues from February, 2001 to April, 2005 among the Ministry of Petroleum of Petroleum
and Natural Gas (MoP&NG), the Ministry of Law and Justice (MoL&J) and the Ministry
of Finance (MoF). Various rounds of clarifications and confirmations were sought
through the Secretaries of all these three ministries who were the members of NTS.

Further, CCEA had approved (March 1999) freezing of the rates of levy of royalty and
cess prevailing at the time of bidding which had been applied in 11 other fields
(excluding _ R&RS fields) and accordingly PSCs signed between February, 2001 and
February, 2004 for the same. The Committee note that during deliberations NTS
observed that a long time had elapsed and there had been significant change in the oil
price market and advised (April, 2005) that the stakeholders of R&RD fields may be
asked to confirm payments of statutory levies at the current level rather than those
prevailing in 1995. Despite initial negation, ONGC (May, 2005) and CoSB (August,
2012) also accepted Payment of Royalty and cess at current rates with updated Cost
Recovery Limits (CRL) based on current costs, The Committee further observe that
despite clear opinion on the issue of Royalty and cess by the AGI and MoL&dJ, the issue
was repeatedly raised. and referred among various Ministries although the Secretaries
were part of NTS.

ONGC in their submission for their acceptance of current rates of royalty and cess has
stated that since ONGC intended to get back the R&RS field, it was strategic decision to
agree for the then current rates of cess and royalty as ONGC would have to pay the

the ‘field was reverted to ONGC. Further, ONGC obtained the opinion of Solicitor

General (SG) (20 May, 2005) who advised that applying earlier rates of cess and royalty
would cause huge Public loss. On the eventual acceptance of CoSB for payment of

24


and the C&AG report reveals that the delay itself was avoidable. If the technical issues
including the frequently deliberated issue of applicability royalty and cess were so
insurmountable, nothing prevented the issue being resolved through a panel of
technical and legal experts. The disputes between CoSB and the NTS/Government of
India could have been resolved through a process, similar to arbitration. The NTS could
have concluded the PSC for R&RS fields with the stakeholders along with 11 other
fields and complete its mandate rather than referring and complicating the matter further
thus providing scope for deliberations and disagreement amongst its own members.
The Committee desire to be apprised of the reasons as to why this particular issue was
not brought to notice of the Cabinet for appropriate and timely decision.

(SI. no. 4 Part - li of 6270 report of Public Accounts
Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by the Government:
This particular issue was brought to notice of the Cabinet in the process of approval.

A note to CCEA dated 16.06.2008 was sent for approving signing of the PSC with
consortium of EOL, POL and ONGC as per draft PSC. Later, on the advice of Cabinet
Secretariat, a revised note, with the approval of Minister (P&NG), was sent to CCEA on
26.06.2008 for approving signing of the PSC with consortium of EOL, POL and ONGC
as per draft PSC negotiated by NTS with old rates of cess and royalty with the condition
that the consortium accepts it with old cost recovery limit bid by them without any
provision for upward revision account of higher prices. Cabinet Secretariat vide OM
dated 07.07.2008 offered certain suggestions on the CCEA Note. The matter was re-
examined in this Ministry. NTS had re-iterated its earlier recommendations in its
meeting held on 20.03.2008 considering the relevance of the points. Under the
circumstances, in order to comply with the directions of the Cabinet Secretariat, it was
considered necessary to hold meeting of NTS with a view to analyzing in detail the
various alternatives available along with their financial implications and accordingly,
NTS meeting was held on 21.07.2009. This issue of Royalty and Cess was raised
because signing of Contract at old rates of Royalty and Cess would have resulted in
lower realization to the Government which was avoided.

Vetted remarks of Audit:
The fact of the matter was that Govt. took decision on 10" March 2016 after a delay of

17 years.

25


No further comments to offer.

(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas,
O.M. No. 0-32011/2/2016-ONG4, dated 13.09.2017)

26


CHAPTER Ill

OBSERVATIONS/RECOM

MENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 700 NOT DESIRE
TOP

3)
URSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE
GOVERNMENT

-NIL-

27


CHAPTER IV

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION

Observation/ Recommendation No 4

Introductory:

Accordingly, in 1993, Gol issued notice inviting offers for development of R&RS fields.
Subsequently, ONGC stopped production of Petroleum from these fields from
September, 1994.

Following invitation of bids from private parties by Government of India (Gol), the
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) approved (February 1996) award of
contract in respect of R&RS fields to a Consortium of Successful Bidders (CoSB). The
consortium comprised of M/s. Essar Oil Limited (India)(EOL) [50%] and Premier Oil

sized fields, the National Oil Company (NOC), i.e., ONGC in this case held 40 percent
Participating Interest (Pl) in R&RS fields. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
(MoPNG) issued (March 1996) a Letter of award of R&RS fields to 0058. Thereafter,
CCEA approved (March 1999) negotiation to be held by the Negotiating Team of
Secretaries (NTS) for finalising and concluding Production Sharing Contract (PSC)
within six months.

The Committee found serious delays in decision making for more than 20 years,
after the CCEA approval, depriving the country of the much needed fuel from these oil &
gas fields. The Committee on detailed examination of the decision making process
found that the non-execution of PSC was due to unfruitful deliberations held by NTS for
over 17 years with various stakeholders on the issues that had already been laid down
by the CCEA. Frequent deliberations made on the issues of techno-legal, royalty and
cess and references to various agencies and consequent delays also necessitated
repeated re-assessment of financial Capability of the successful bidders. Other issues
that held-up the signing of PSC related to reimbursement of past-cost and non-
maintenance of idle facilities by the ONGC. The Committee while dealing with the

28


issues highlighted in the Audit Report, observe that the exclusive high-powered body
i.e. NTS failed miserably in its mandate and could not conclude PSC for R&RS fields in
17 years which eventually resulted in CCEA (10 March 2016) approving cancellation of
the award letter (12 March 1996) issued in favour of the consortium and reverting the
R&RS fields to ONGC, subject to payment of cess and royalty at the current rates, as
applicable under the nomination regime.

(SI. no. 1 Part - Il of 62" report of Public Accounts
Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by the Government:

In the wake of the policy of economic liberalization introduced in 1991,
Government took certain initiatives to attract private investment capital in the upstream
oil sector to augment the production of oil and gas in the country. “Small and Medium
Sized Discovered Policy” was evolved in 1992 on this basis and to make
recommendations for award of fields, a Negotiating Committee of Secretaries (NCS)
was constituted by CCEA on 02.07.1992. In the first round of bidding for discovered
fields in 1992, 5 medium and 15 small sized fields were awarded and contracts were
signed.

Gol invited the Second Round of bids for the development of discovered oil and
gas fields in 1993. The consortium of Essar Oil Limited (EOL) and Premier Oil Pacific
(UK) Ltd. (POL) were recommended to be awarded the Ratna & R Series fields by NCS
in the meeting held on 26.12.1995, subject to certain conditions. On 20.2.1996, CCEA
approved the recommendation of NCS. In pursuance to the CCEA approval, letter of
award dated 12.3.1996 was issued to the successful bidder i.e. consortium of EOL-
POL, subject to certain stipulations. These stipulations were as below:

(i) The use of ONGC's storage facility at Nnava would need to be directly
negotiated by the consortium with ONGC.

(ii) The gas can be received by ONGC with certain modifications subject to
settlement of other commercial issues with ONGC. The oil has to be
evacuated through SBM as the ONGC cannot receive oil at Heera complex
upto 2001-02 due to capacity constraints.

(iii) The creation of appropriate storage facilities for crude at the offshore loading
point would be at the cost of the contractor and can be charged as a project
cost. :

29


(iv) The phrase “any abnormal situation” mentioned at point No.8 in your
Clarificatory letter dated g" February 1995 under the head “Capital
Expenditure (CAPEX)/Operating Expenditure (OPEX) will have to be
dropped.

(५) Bidders were requested to send their comments on the draft Production
Sharing Contract and Joint Operating Agreement (copies enclosed) to us by
12” April, 1996 so that the PSC and JOA can be finalized at the earliest.

Thus, the award of Ratna & R Series Fields was conditional subject to fulfilment of the
above conditions.

Contract negotiations with the successful bidders for the Purpose of signing
production sharing contracts did not commence till 1999, as there were concerns
expressed in many quarters about tenets of the Discovered Field Policy. An earlier C &
AG Report had raised several issues, some of which were specific to Panna & Mukta
Fields awarded under the above Policy, whereas others had wide bearing on this policy
of the Government, The CAG had submitted its final report in December, 1996. In
November, 1997, the Parliamentary Committee on Public Undertakings (0070)
examined ONGC on Participation of private parties with ONGC in the production of
crude oil and natural gas. Moreover, there were legal implications as a Public Interest
Litigation (PIL) was filed by Centre for Public Interest Litigation (CPIL) before the Delhi
High Court and, subsequently, a Review Petition in the Supreme Court. All these
developments contributed to an initial delay of three (3) years.

Subsequently, CCEA vide its meeting held on 97 March, 1999 approved
concluding the PSCs in respect of 11 small sized fields and one medium sized field i.e.
Ratna and R-Series Fields offered under second round of bidding. CCEA authorized
Negotiating Team of Secretaries (NTS) to conclude the contracts after due negotiations.
NTS comprising Secretary (P & NG), Finance Secretary and Law Secretary undertook
negotiations with the consortiums, based on a Model Production Sharing Contract
(MPSC) approved in November, 1999 as the basis for negotiation and finalization of the
PSC with the consortiums. ”

NTS undertook a series of meetings undertaking several complex issues related
to negotiations and bringing convergence on the technical, commercial, legal and
financial issues. 19 NTS meetings were held from November 1999 to June 2013.
Based on outcome of the NTS meetings, PSC for 11 small sized fields were signed (9 in
February, 2001 and 2 in February, 2004). However, PSC for Ratna & R-Series Fields
could not be finalised by NTS for many reasons, including the conditions as brought out
in the Letter of Award (LOA) above and others viz. financial capability of EOL, departure
from MPSC as observed by MoL&J, payment of Royalty and Cess at old tates, Cost

30


Recovery Limit (CRL) and creation of charge by EOL on its PI for construction of
refinery. NTS in Minutes of the Meeting held on 2.3.2000 even observed that, “Despite
the best efforts to expedite finalization of PSC, the Consortium appears to be not
interested in expediting the PSC.”

Vetted remarks of Audit:

The Ministry did not explain the reasons as to why the high-powered body (NTS) failed
in its mandate to negotiate/ resolve the issues which inter-alia included conditional
award dated 12.3.1996, financial capability of EOL, Royalty and Cess rates, Cost
Recovery Limit (CRL) and creation of charge by EOL on its PI for construction of
Refinery etc for concluding PSC- Ratan R-Series. It kept setting targets for completion
of negotiations and signing of PSC and did not adhere to its own targets. It took nearly
17 years. (from the date of mandate given (March, 1999 to date of cancelation of award
March, 2016).

Reply on Vetting remarks of Audit:

CCEA mandated NTS vide approval in the meeting held on gt” March, 1999 for
concluding the PSCs in respect of 11 small sized fields and one medium sized field i.e.
Ratna and R-Series Fields, offered under second round of bidding. NTS made
prolonged and concerted efforts in accordance with the mandate for 17 long years,
commencing from as early as 22.11.1999 when the first NTS meeting was held to adopt
a uniform procedure based approach in negotiations with all the successful bidders.
Model Production Sharing Contract (MPSC) was approved as a basis for negotiating
conditions stipulated under various articles of the individual contracts.

19 NTS meetings were held from November 1999 to June 2013. Based on outcome of
the NTS meetings, PSC for 11 small sized fields were signed (9 in February, 2001 and
2 in February, 2004). However, PSC for Ratna & R-Series Fields could not be finalised
by NTS for many reasons due to various deviations in the established procedure set by
NTS, including the conditions as brought out in the Letter of Award (LOA) and others
viz. financial capability of EOL, departure from MPSC as observed by MoL&J, payment
of Royalty and Cess at old rates, Cost Recovery Limit (CRL) and creation of charge by
EOL on its PI for construction of refinery. NTS in Minutes’ of the Meeting held on
2.3.2000 even observed that, “Despite the best efforts to expedite finalization of PSC,
the Consortium appears to be not interested in expediting the PSC.”

Thus, failure for non execution of Ratna PSC cannot be attributed to NTS.

(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, O.M. No. O-32011/2/2016-ONG-l, dated
13.09.2017)

31


Observation! Recommendation No 2

Failure of Negotiating Team of Secretaries (NTS) to execute Production Sharing of Negotiating Team of Secretaries (NTS) to execute Production Sharina
Contract (PSC) with respect to R & RS Fields: PSC) with respect to R & RS Fields:

The Committee note that Government of India (Gol) in 1993 issued notice inviting offers
for development of R&RS fields. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoPNG)
issued (March 1996) a Letter of Intent (Lol) for award of R&RS fields to CoSB and in
March 1999, CCEA approved negotiations and concluding PSC in respect of 12
discovered fields (11 small sized blocks and one medium sized R&RS block) to be held
by the Negotiating Team of Secretaries (NTS) for negotiating and finalizing Production
Sharing Contract (PSC) with the consortium within six months. PSC in respect of the 11
small sized fields were signed in February 2001 and February 2004. The Committee
further note that NTS, a high-powered body consisting of Secretary, Ministry of
Petroleum and Natural Gas; Finance Secretary; Secretary, Department of Expenditure;
Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs; Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs and
CMD, ONGC, did not adhere to its own targets of completion of negotiations within six
months and kept setting targets for completion of negotiations and signing of PSC and
held 20 meetings between November, 1999 to June, 2013. Further, during the period
from May, 2010 to July, 2015, only two meetings were held and, on both the occasions,
it was decided to hold another meeting to take a final decision, it was decided to hold
another meeting to take a final decision in the matter. The Committee observe that the
process of reaching a decision to finalize the PSC was not completed even after 25
years of policy decision, 20 years of award and 17 years of approval of CCEA. The
Ministry in their reply has stated that NTS undertook a series of meetings for
deliberating on several complex issues and for bringing convergence on the technical,
commercial, legal and financial matters and based on these efforts, PSC for 11 small
sized fields were signed and the main reasons for non-finalisation of PSC for R&RS
fields were financial incapability of EOL during negotiation stage; creation of charge by
EOL (Essar Oil Limited ) with its bankers for refinery project without the approval of
Government and non-finalisation of issue regarding transfer of pipeline asset by ONGC.
to the consortium. Further, even after holding active negotiations by the NTS, the terms
and conditions to execute the formal PSC between the Gol and the Joint Venture of
companies and ONGC, as required under Article 299 of the Constitution of India and
other statues, could not be concluded due to disagreements between the consortium
partners and Government of India. The Committee note that due to disagreements on
multiple issues and irregularities on the part of the consortium partner after the issuance
of letter of award and the inordinate delay in concluding the contract resulting into delay
in the development of the fields, it was decided with the approval of CCEA to cancel the
contract. The Committee are of the view that the purpose of formation of such high-

32


powered body like NTS with as many as six Secretary / CMD level officers of the
Ministries/NOC was defeated as these highest level officers could not adhere to their
own timelines and reach a decision after several rounds of meetings. The Committee
find that the Ministry has taken the whole episode casually as is evident from its
submission that the R&RS case may be viewed as one unfortunate case where despite
several issues the NTS tried the best to resolve them and ultimately the contract could
not be concluded. The Committee are of the view that timely intervention by the
Government/ CCEA into the issue could have helped in taking a decision on the issues
of royalty and cess. The Committee feel that it is high time that the country has a
mechanism to review the efficiency of high-level Government officials associated/
nominated in Inter-Ministerial Groups/High-Level Committees independently of the help
of regular bureaucracy. The Committee desire the Government to consider this issue as
an eye-opener and establish adequate mechanism to review the performance of all
such officers nominated on various Committees. The Committee observe that the delay
is mainly attributable to the anxiety of the officers to avoid ‘dispute in future’. However, it
seems that no concern was raised at the fact that no production was happening for
about two decades. The CoSB seems to have climbed down in August, 2012 to agree
to the current rates, yet the contracts were not signed. The NTS, which itself was a
Committee of Secretaries, having been unable to resolve the issue on its own should
have sought the help of experts or Cabinet Secretary. The Committee strongly
deprecate the rationale of NTS comprising senior Civil Servants keeping such a
calculated silence and inaction, if not indifference. The Committee while observing that
the delays by these officials that resulted in a huge loss of Rs. 26200 crore to the
exchequer and deprived the country of scarce resources for more than two decades
tantamount to criminal negligence, direct that the responsibility for causing inordinate
delays in decision making may be fixed and action be taken against the officials
concerned under intimation to the Committee.

(SI. no. 2 Part - Il of 62"? report of Public Accounts
Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by the Government:

Due to concerns expressed in many quarters about tenets of the Discovered
Field Policy, MOP&NG sought necessary policy directions from CCEA vide note dated
28.2.1999. Approval of CCEA was sought for concluding the contracts in respect of 12
discovered fields awarded under the Second Round in 1995 after due negotiations are
held with parties by the Negotiating Committee of Secretaries (NCS). (The final

33


Paragraph of the proposal mentioned NCS as Negotiating Team_of Secretaries (NTS)
comprising Petroleum Secretary, Finance Secretary and Law Secretary). The CCEA in
its meeting held on 9.3.1999 in Case No.44/CCEA/99 (item No.4) considered the note
dated 18.2.1999 of MOP&NG and approved the proposals contained in paragraph 26,
wherein one of the proposal was for “concluding contracts in respect of 12
discovered fields awarded under the second round in 1996 after due negotiations
are held with the parties by the Negotiating Team of Secretaries’. Ratna & R-Series
field was one of the 12 discovered fields for which contract was to be negotiated.

NTS undertook negotiations with the consortiums, based on a Model Production
Sharing Contract (MPSC) approved in November, 1999 as the basis for negotiation and
finalization of the PSC with the consortiums.

NTS had several meetings (15) from 1999 to March, 2008 and various issues
were deliberated in the meetings like the negative net worth of EOL; creation of charge
by EOL with its bankers for its Refinery project before signing the Contract; POLs
negotiation with ONGC for assigning its Pl and Operatorship; applicable rates of Cess
and Royalty; transfer of pipeline asset by ONGC to the consortium etc. In 2008, a CCEA
note was circulated by this Ministry with NTS recommendation of signing PSC with the
EOL — POL consortium, maintaining old rates of cess and royalty with old Cost
Recovery Limit (CRL): It was suggested by Cabinet Secretariat that NTS may identify
alternate courses of action available in the light of conflicting legal opinions and make its
recommendation after taking into account all the pros and cons including the feasibility
of re-inviting the bids, settlement of the issues by NTS, etc.

Number of options were explored by NTS, including cancellation of the Letter of
Award and consequently re-inviting of bids or revert the field back to ONGC. There
were four (4) more NTS meetings from 2009 to 2013 to deliberate on these options and
a draft CCEA Note on “Issues relating to Finalization of Production Sharing Contract
(PSC) for Ratna and R-Series” dated 28.10.2013 was circulated for Inter Ministerial
Consultations (IMC) which was sent to the Cabinet Secretariat on 2" May, 2014. This
was returned by the Cabinet Secretariat with comment that this may be put up for new
Minister In Charge after formation of new government.

After taking over in May, 2014, present Government considered this issue for
award of the Ratna & R-Series Fields earnestly. Various alternatives were evaluated
and a draft CCEA Note was circulated for Inter Ministerial Consultations. Based on
outcome of various inter-ministerial consultations, CCEA on 10" March, 2016 approved
the cancellation of the award letter dated 12.3.1996 issued in favour of the consortium
of M/s. Essar Oil Limited and M/s. Premier Oil Pacific UK Ltd. and revert the Ratna & R
Series fields to ONGC, subject to Payment of cess and royalty at the current rates, as
applicable under the nomination regime.

34


Rs. 26,200 crores was an estimation of value of reserves by CAG considering
crude oil prices ranging from US$ 55 to US$ 130. The reserves are still in place and
available for production. The present decision of the Government taken vide CCEA
meeting held on 107 March-2016 to revert the field to ONGC for further development
and production and to realize cess and royalty at current rates applicable under
nomination regime, interest of the Government is protected with the present decision.
Delay in decision making is not due to lack of exercising due diligence on the part of any
official but due to complexity of issues involved including financial incapability of EOL
during negotiation stage.

Vetted remarks of Audit:

The reply of the Ministry may be viewed in the light that in March, 1999, CCEA
approved negotiations and concluding PSC in respect of 12 discovered fields (11 small
sized blocks and one medium sized R&RS block) to be held by the NTS for negotiating
and finalizing PSC with the consortium within six months. PSC in respect of the 11 small
sized fields were signed in February, 2001 and February, 2004. Ratna & R-Series could
not be concluded. On 10" March, 2016 CCEA approved the cancellation of the award
letter dated 12.3.1996 issued in favour of the consortium of M/s. Essar Oil Limited and
M/s. Premier Oil Pacific UK Ltd. and reverted the field back to ONGC,

Further, the reply did not mention the action initiated for fixing responsibility of the
officials for delay in decision making which resulted in a huge loss of Rs. 26,200 crore to
the exchequer and deprived the country of scarce resources for more than two decades
tantamount to criminal negligence, Action taken in this regard may be incorporated in
the ATN for better appreciation of the PAC.

Reply on Vetting remarks of Audit:

NTS made all out efforts to execute the Ratna & R Series PSC. NTS may not be held
responsible for deviations to the adhered procedure followed in respect of 11 other
PSCs. Non adherence to the agreed and approved procedures set by NTS by one
particular private consortium may be viewed as only one off case. Fixing responsibility
of the individuals would only discourage those upright officers who protected
government commercial interests by eventually realizing royalty and cess at the current
rates rather than freezing at the old rates. Even the EOL-POL consortium also agreed to
pay royalty and cess at current rates subsequently. However, PSC could not be
concluded due to other deviations from the agreed norms and intentions of the
Consortium, which has clearly been brought out in the Minutes for the NTS meeting
held on 2.3.2000.

(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, O.M. No. O-32011/2/2016-ONG-I, dated
13.09.2017)

35


Observation/ Recommendation No 5

Reimbursement of Past - Cost and non - maintenance of idle facilities:

The Committee note that Audit in their report, has referred to the issue of
reimbursement of past-cost and non-maintenance of idle facilities. The Committee
understand that ONGC had created facilities in Ratna R-12 field at a cost of Rs. 472.55
crores. These facilities were used by the Company for production since 1983. It
obtained a mining lease for the field in 1986 with a validity upto February, 2001. When
the field was offered for private parties, ONGC stopped production with effect from
September, 1994. After adjusting the tax benefits and revenue enjoyed by ONGC from
the field, the net past cost that remained to be compensated to ONGC was Rs, 270.46
crores. It is seen that CCEA directed the Ministry in March, 1999 for the past cost
compensation in consultation with Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission. The
need for settlement of the above compensation amount was also highlighted in the
Report No. 5 of 1996 and follow-up Audit Report No. 6 of 2005 of Union Government
(Commercial). Despite the direction of CCEA in 1999 and the audit observations twice
in 1996 and 2005, the issue remained unresolved. ONGC in its submission stated that
it had been highlighting the issue of repair / maintenance of the facilities through its
various communications and during the meeting of Negotiating Team of Secretaries
(NTS) and requested for confirmation regarding decision on re-imbursement of such
cost. Though NTS has deliberated on the need to facility maintenance, but cost re-
imbursement issue was always kept pending and no firm decision in this regard was
ever conveyed to ONGC. Further, the Ministry (August, 2015) has acknowledged that
the issue of reimbursement of past cost to ONGC was another significant issue in
making the field operational and monetizing the field reserves. Also the cost incurred by
ONGC 0 maintenance and security of R&RS fields over the years would require
consideration based on number of possible alternatives. The Committee are dismayed
to find that despite CCEA directions (March, 1999) and clear clause (Article 15.1)
mentioned in draft PSC, MoPNG did not evolve modalities for past cost compensation
to ONGC and neither the NTS forum proved productive and useful for addressing the
significant and important issue of maintenance of the facilities created at the fields. The
Committee observed that even though the consortium would have been operating the
field, still ONGC had to hold 40% of its Pl. The Committee further note from the
observation of the Audit that the ONGC and MoP&NG allowed ‘plundering and looting’
of platform utilities and equipment in the absence of appropriate security system
showing lack of their seriousness to preserve and conserve facilities that were created
by ONGC (Rs. 472.55 crore). Further, the stand taken by ONGC (May, 2005) while
agreeing to current rates of royalty and cess on the grounds that since ONGC intended
to get back the field, the same ‘strategic’ benefit and foresightedness could have been
applied by ONGC on maintenance of the created facilities and thus avoided the

36


expenditure amounting to Rs. 1085.7 crore involved in estimated repair cost of the
facilities. Now, with the decision of the Government to cancel the award to the
consortium and reverting the fields to ONGC, the. Committee feel that the ONGC could
have pursued the matter more vigorously with the Ministry and in-turn NTS to get the
matter resolved. The Committee further opine that non-maintenance of oil producing
fields by ONGC and subsequent plundering and looting from the sites is a sheer failure
of a Public Sector Undertaking in looking after the nation’s property. The Committee feel
that ONGC should have maintained the fields as being a PSU it would have anyway
recovered all its expenses sooner or later. The Committee, therefore, desire that the
concerned officials of ONGC be held responsible for this gross negligence and action
be initiated against them.

(SI. no. 5 Part - Il of 6211 report of Public Accounts
Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by the Government:

ONGC started production from Ratna field from February 41983 and continued up to
September 1994. Award of contract had been approved by the Government in 1996 and
same was informed to the Consortium of Successful Bidders (CoSB). The issue of
repair / maintenance of the facilities remained major concern of ONGC till handing over
of these Fields to awardees. ONGC brought it to notice of the Government through
various communications and during the meeting of Negotiating team of Secretaries
(NTS). ONGC also brought to notice of the Government regarding decision on re-
imbursement of repair / maintenance cost of the facilities in these Fields.

ONGC raised the issue of maintenance of facilities with the MoP&NG vide letter from
CMD-ONGC dated 13th March 2002 .ONGC also sought permission for carrying out
inspection’ / maintenance of SBM & structure and requested for adjustment of cost
undertaken in carrying out the same. The issue was also raised during the meeting of
Negotiating Team of Secretaries (NTS) for confirmation regarding decision on re-
imbursement of such cost. है

Meanwhile, ONGC incurred an expenditure of Rs.6.92 crores plus USD 335,840 and
conveyed the same to MoPNG vide letter dated 97 December 2004 .Note of such
expenditure was made by NTS in its meeting dated 15" April 2005.

NTS in October 2004 decided that ONGC would need to be reimbursed for the
maintenance cost incurred between the date of award and effective date of PSCs.

37


However, the issue could not be concluded as various articles of the PSC were still
being negotiated by the Government with CoSB. In light of non-reimbursement of
already incurred expenditure, ONGC did not find it prudent to incur any further
expenditure on Ratna R- series. It may be noted that ONGC is a registered company
under the. Companies Act and any investment decision by the Company needs approval
of the Board. As the issue regarding roimbursement costs could not be conciuded, it
would not have been possible by ONGC Board to consider the expenditure on Ratna
and R-Series Fields.

Vetted remarks of Audit:
Ministry reply is silent on the issues:

° Past cost to be compensated to ONGC, despite the directions of CCEA in 1999
and the audit observations twice in 1996 and 2005.

e Non maintenance of facilities by ONGC.
e Action initiated against the responsible official of ONGC.

Ministry reply stated that it was not possible by the Board of ONGC to consider the
expenditure on Ratna & R-Series Field, since the issue of reimbursement cost was not
concluded. The reply may be seen in the light of the fact that in any case ONGC would
continue to hold 40 per cent share in the field and proper maintenance of assets was in
its own interest.

Reply on Vetting remarks of Audit:

NTS in October 2004 had decided that ONGC would need to be reimbursed for the
maintenance cost incurred between the date of award and effective date of PSCs,
However, the issue could not be concluded as various articles of the PSC were still
being negotiated by the Government with CoSB. In light of non-reimbursement of
already incurred expenditure, ONGC did not find it prudent to incur any further
expenditure on Ratna & R- series. As a Participating Interest (PI) holder of 40 % in to be
concluded PSC, ONGC would have been required to incur expenditure only to the
extent of 40%, not entire expenditure on maintenance of the assets.

After the Government decision to revert the field to ONGC, tepair and refurbishment of
various production and evacuation facilities has been undertaken by ONGC in several
stages to receive the expected “First Oil” by May, 2019.

38


Considering hydrocarbon potential of this medium sized field, progress of the project is
regularly being monitored by the Government.

(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, O.M. No.
0-32011/2/2016-ONG-I, dated 13.09.2017)

39


CHAPTER ५

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT
HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES/NO REPLES

Observation/ Recommendation No 6

The Committee note that the CCEA (March, 1999) approved conclusion of contract
keeping the cess and royalty at the level prevailing at the time of inviting bids and also
asked NTS to finalise the PSC within six months. Despite the above decision of CCEA
and the fact that PSCs for rest of 11 fields from the bundle of 12 fields offered
simultaneously under similar terms and conditions had been finalised and signed till the
end of 2004 and opinion of AGI to go for finalisation of PSC, the Ministry (January,
2008) sent a fresh note to CCEA for an appropriate decision. CCEA Note was returned
by the Cabinet Secretariat to obtain unambiguous recommendations of NTS on certain
issues. NTS forwarded its unambiguous recommendations in March, 2008, MoPNG
submitted (June, 2008) the Note to make certain modifications/corrections relating to
some deficiencies. A proposal for modification in the Note to CCEA was approved on
09 July, 2008. However, when the new Secretary, MoPNG joined on 01 August, 2008,
the matter was again re-examined in MoPNG and it was decided that NTS should
consider the matter once again, with a view to analysing in detail the various
alternatives available along with their financial implications. The Ministry's changed
stance led to series of deliberations and clarifications which had ultimately contributed
to the delay in decision.

Further, Audit while working on financial implications due the indecision on R&RS fields,
have indicated that the country had lost oil and gas production worth more than Rs.
26,200 crores; Government's potential revenue to the tune of Rs. 1105 crore on account
of royalty and cess and avoidable expenditure of Rs. 1085.70 crore towards repair and
re-development of the R&RS fields.

The Ministry in their submission has stated that the matter was re-examined (August,
2015) by it and it was observed that NTS had earlier not analysed in detail the
alternatives available and had just reiterated the earlier recommendations. Thus, in
order to fully comply with the directions of Cabinet Secretariat, NTS should consider the
matter once again with a view to analyse in detail the various alternatives available
along with the financial implications. MoPNG further informed that a CCEA Note dated
02 May, 2014 was sent to the Cabinet Secretariat regarding issues relating to the
finalisation of PSC for R&RS fields. However, due to change of Government in May,

40


2014 the circulated Note was not considered by CCEA at that time. Similarly the
Ministry in their written submission to the issues posed before them in the matter has
stated that time taken in the process of approval, being dependent on may relevant
factors to be considered while taking a call on the issue, may not necessarily be seen
as a delay because the decision makers in the process of final settlement and resolution
matters of disagreement have to be sure in all aspects and get satisfactory reply of
their all queries. Also while reasoning with the question posed to the Ministry for fixing
of responsibility and accountability on taking final decision on the PSC, the Ministry has
submitted that the R&RS fields have been reverted to ONGC and in view of the reasons
explained it may not be a fruitful exercise towards fixing of accountability. Further,
d

al

°

uring the oral evidence tendered before the Committee, on reference drawn to the
leged role of particular Joint Secretary (Exploration) during the negotiation stage of the
contract, the Committee sought explanation from the Ministry. However, the silence of
the Ministry and not providing the details of the information sought by the Committee
speaks volume about the reasons behind the muddle created over the abnormal and
unique delay of over 25 years of the policy decision (1991), 20 years of award (1996)
and 17 years of CCEA approval (1999) in awarding the contract to the consortium and
finally reverting the R&RS fields to the original allottee i.e. the ONGC again. Further,
while coming to the Audit’s calculation of financial implication, the Ministry has termed it
as ‘notional figures’ since no crude oil/natural gas has been produced from these fields
and hydrocarbon reserved from these fields would still be in place. The Committee are
of the opinion that the circumstances under which the Cabinet Secretariat returned the
note on piecemeal basis and why the Cabinet Secretariat could not pursue the
implementation of CCEA are required to be examined. Further, the coming of new
Secretary, MoPNG on 1 August, 2008 should have facilitated and expedited the process
of concluding and finalizing the terms of PSC rather than delaying and complicating the
matter further. The Cabinet Secretariat, being the nodal agency for all matters relating
to Cabinet, including implementation of the decisions by the Cabinet and its committees,
as expected should have taken the lead to resolve the issue when it became evident
that the MoPNG was unable to make up its mind. When there were differences of
opinion between the NTS and the Ministry and between the Ministry and the Cabinet
Secretariat, the inter-departmental consultation should have been upgraded to
Empowered Committee of Secretaries or Group of Ministers or Empowered Group of
Ministers. The Committee are further dismayed to note as to why Cabinet Secretariat
had not taken this initiative. The Committee on unfolding and carefully scrutinizing the
sequence of events that took place since the issue of letter of award (March, 1996) and
decisions made either by the Ministry or the NTS or CCEA or the Cabinet Secretariat in
the R&RS field clearly portrays itself as a classic case of system failure. The
Governments and officials may come and go but the responsibility for execution of the
policy decisions of the Government lies with the efficiency and zeal of executors to

41


implement and pass on the benefits of sustainable development to future generations of
the county. The Committee, therefore, desire that when decision to form high-powered
body like NTS are taken in future by the Government for execution of its decision,
adequate monitoring mechanism be put in place and ensure timely intervention and
execution of decisions taken in the national interest.

Further, coming to the financial implications calculated by the Audit and the
Ministry terming it as ‘notional loss’ needs to be seen in the perspective that country like
India, being a net importer of hydrocarbon resources for fulfilling its energy
requirements, the Committee are of the firm view that the indecision of the Government
till 10 March, 2016 for award of R&RS fields has seriously deprived the country of its
own resources for more than two decades (since ONGC stopped its production in
1994). Further, expenditure on repairs due to non-maintenance of fields for more than
two decades will result in actual losses. Further, the Committee are of the strong
opinion that Ministry should have atleast asked ONGC to maintain the R&RS fields
during the period of negotiations. The Committee seriously deprecate the Ministry's
indecision on all the related issues till 10 March, 2016 which has directly compromised
the national interest on energy security and desire that stringent action may be taken in
this matter. The Committee also desire that responsibility of all the officials of the
Ministry for indecision and their role in this regard be fixed and action taken against
them under intimation to the Committee,

(SI. no. 6 Part - Il of 6214 report of Public Accounts
Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by the Government:

Administration of the upstream Exploration and Production (E & P) Sector by the
Government is a complex subject and has evolved over a period of time with progress
of the extant policy regime. Signing of the proposed PSC for Ratna and R Series Fields
was during the pre-NELP Discovered Fields policy regime, while the Sector was still
evolving from the prevalent nomination regime.

During the NELP regime, a mechanism of Empowered Committee of Secretaries:
(ECS) was put up in place comprising Secretary (P &NG), Finance Secretary and Law
Secretary to consider Bid Evaluation Criteria (BEC), conduct negotiations with bidders,
wherever necessary and make recommendations to CCEA on award of blocks.

42


The same mechanism of ECS has been approved in March, 2016 for the new
policy initiative, Hydrocarbon Exploration Licensing Policy (HELP) with the following
additional functions being vested in ECS:

(i) Approval of Model Revenue Sharing Contract and other bid documents;

(ii) Resolution of all contractual issues raised during the entire period of
implementation of future contracts based on the proposed model

(iii) For Inter-ministerial consultation issues, ECS may co-opt Secretary of the
concerned Department / Ministry and NITI Aayog as member.

It has been stipulated that decision of the ECS on the additional functions would
be submitted to the Minister (P & NG) and Finance Minister for approval. Thus, as
desired by PAC, adequate monitoring mechanism has been put in place to ensure
timely intervention and execution of decisions, taken in the national interest.

CCEA mandated NTS in March, 1999 to conclude the PSCs in respect of 11
small sized fields and one medium sized field i.e. Ratna and R-Series Fields.

NTS had several meetings (15) from 1999 to March, 2008 and various issues
were deliberated in the meetings like the negative net worth of EOL; creation of charge
by EOL with its bankers for its Refinery project before signing the Contract; POLs
negotiation with ONGC for assigning its Pl and Operatorship; applicable rates of Cess
and Royalty; transfer of pipeline asset by ONGC to the consortium etc.-

First NTS meeting was held on 22.11.1999 and to adopt a uniform approach in
negotiation, a Model Production Sharing Contract (MPSC) was approved as a basis for
negotiating the individual contracts. Second NTS meeting was held on 02.03.2000 and
it was agreed that the financial strength of all the awardees would be evaluated based
on latest available information. Meeting held on 18.07.2000 finalized consequential
changes in the PSCs for 10 small sized fields pursuant to finalization of COSA and the
work programme submitted by the companies. It was further decided that for Ratna & R
Series Fields and Amguri Fields, sixty (60) days time limit would be intimated to finalize
the PSCs, failing which the negotiation process would stand concluded. Subsequent
meeting was held on 07.09.2000 whereby draft PSC of Ratna & R Series was
deliberated on individual articles and put in the minutes. It was further decided that the
Ministry of Finance will revert on issue of financial capability of Essar Oil limited (EOL).
Another NTS meeting was held on 24.10.2000 for Amguri and Ratna R Series Fields.
The issue of financial capability of EOL was deliberated and it was agreed that since
Essar has recently been apprised by ICICI in context of their refinery project, they
should be consulted on net worth of Essar. Response of ICICI was deliberated in
meetings held on 20.02.2001 and the remedies available under the PSC and Joint

43


Operating Agreement (JOA) in case of default by any contracting party. Implication of
cancellation of award was also discussed and following provision in the Notice Inviting
Offer (NIO) was brought out:

‘While GOI has flexible approach to the terms, it reserves to itself the tight to
accept or reject any bid in its sole discretion,’

Subsequent meetings held on 19.08.2002, 24.04.2003, 08.12.2003 and
31.08.2004 deliberated on the issue of creation of charge by EOL with its bankers for its
Refinery project before signing the Contract. It was during the meeting held on
04.10.2004 that NTS agreed upon EOL financial capability based on the considered
Opinion of Ministry of Finance provided in the meeting. However, confirmation was
sought from, Premier Oil (POL) on signing the contract and EOL and POL in respect of
reimbursement to ONGC of the maintenance costs. In another meeting held on
15.04.2005, it was decided that reimbursement of maintenance costs to ONGC shall be
non-recoverable contract cost and to seek confirmation from EOL and POL on this.
Moreover, EOL, POL and ONGC should be asked to confirm acceptance of royalty on
crude oil @ 10 % of well-head value and cess on crude oil @ Rupees 1800 per metric
tonne, which should be frozen for entire PSC period. Subsequent meeting held on
19.04.2006 decided that the contract stands concluded with issue of award letter in
March, 1996 and statutory levies should be maintained at the old level. In the meeting
held on 20.03.2008, NTS decided to recommend old rates of royalty and cess with old
Cost Recovery Limit (CRL) bid by the contractors.

In June 2008, a CCEA note was circulated by this Ministry with NTS
recommendation of signing PSC with the EOL — POL consortium, maintaining old rates
of cess and royalty with old cost recovery limit (CRL). The Cabinet Secretariat observed
on the CCEA note that the process of negotiation in the present case has not been
taken to its logical conclusion and it would be appropriate for the Negotiating Team of
Secretaries to offer its unambiguous recommendation in the matter. It was also
suggested by Cabinet Secretariat that NTS may identify alternate courses of action
available in the light of conflicting legal opinions and make its recommendation after
taking into account all the pros and cons including the feasibility of re-inviting the bids,
settlement of the issues by NTS, etc.

Number of options were explored by NTS, including cancellation of the Letter of
Award and consequently re-inviting of bids or revert the field back to ONGC. There
were four (4) more NTS meetings from 2009 to 2013 to deliberate on these options and
a draft CCEA Note on “Issues relating to Finalization of Production Sharing Contract
(PSC) for Ratna and R-Series” dated 28.10.2013 was circulated for Inter Ministerial
Consultations (IMC) which was sent to the Cabinet Secretariat on 2" May, 2014. This

44


was returned by the Cabinet Secretariat with comment that this may be put up for new
Minister In Charge after formation of new government.

After taking over in May, 2014, present Government considered this issue for
award of the Ratna & R-Series Fields earnestly. Various alternatives were evaluated
and a draft CCEA Note was circulated for Inter Ministerial Consultations. Based on
outcome of various inter-ministerial consultations, CCEA on 10" March, 2016 approved
the cancellation of the award letter dated 12.3.1996 issued in favour of the consortium
of M/s. Essar Oil Limited and M/s. Premier Oil Pacific UK Ltd. and revert the Ratna &R
Series fields to ONGC, subject to payment of cess and royalty at the current rates, as
applicable under the nomination regime.

It can be seen from details of the above NTS meetings that while PSC for all
other fields was successfully negotiated and concluded. But the Ratna Contract could
not be concluded due to actions and intentions of the Consortium, which has been
brought out in the Minutes for the NTS second meeting itself, held on 2.3.2000. NTS
was mandated by CCEA to conclude all the contracts and efforts were continuously
made by NTS, as is evident by number of NTS meetings to resolve the issues and
conclude the contracts. NTS made all the efforts to bring agreement on various issues
during negotiations with CoSB. However, when it became evident that the issues with
CoSB can no longer be resolved to satisfaction of all the stakeholders, the Government
took the decision of cancelling the LOA and reverting the fields to ONGC on 10" March,
2016.

Vetted remarks of Audit:

Ministry has stated that adequate monitoring mechanism has been put in place to
ensure timely intervention and execution of decisions, taken in.the national interest
under HELP approved in March, 2016.

However, the Ministry is silent on the following issues:

e indecision of the Government till 10 March, 2016 for award of R&RS fields which
had seriously deprived the country of its own resources for more than two
decades,

* expenditure on repairs due to non-maintenance of fields for more than two
decades which resulted in actual losses,

e not asking ONGC to maintain the R&RS fields during the period of negotiations
by Ministry

e indecision on all the related issues till 10 March, 2016 which had directly
compromised the national interest on energy security,

45


° fixation of responsibility of all the officials of the Ministry for indecision and their
role in this regard.

Reply on Vetting remarks of Audit:

NTS made all the efforts to bring agreement on various issues during
negotiations with CoSB in accordance with the contractual norms. However, when it
became evident that the issues with CoSB can no longer be resolved to satisfaction of
all the stakeholders, the Government took the decision of cancelling the LOA and
reverting the fields to ONGC on 100 March, 2016. Further, adequate monitoring
mechanism has been put in place under recent policy initiatives to ensure timely
intervention and execution of government decisions.

(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas,
O.M. No. 0-32011/2/2016-ONG-I, dated 13.09.2017)

NEW DELHI; Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
23 March, 2018 Chairperson
2 Chaitra, 1940 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

46


APPENDIX-I
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
CONTAINED IN THEIR SIXTY-SECOND REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations - 6
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee - Total : 02
which have been accepted by the Government: Percentage: 33%

Para Nos. 3 and 4

(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee - Total : 0
do not desire to pursue in view of Percentage:0%
the reply of the Government:

-Nil-
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in resnect of - Total : 03
which replies of the Government have not been Percentage:50%

accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

Para Nos. 1,2 and 5
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of - Total : 01
which the Government have furnished interim Percentage: 17%

replies/no replies:

Para Nos. 6