AG

‘

MPLEMENTATION OF PUBLIC PRIVATE
PARTNERSHIP PROJECT AT CHHATRPAT!I SHIVAJI

- INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT; MUMBAI

MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2015-16)

FORTY SIXTH REPORT

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

= ;
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


VAC Ne, 2049
a (2 हि

FORTY SIXTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2015-16)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

IMPLEMENTATION OF PUBLIC PRIVATE
PARTNERSHIP PROJECT AT CGHHATRPATI
SHIVAJI INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT, MUMBAI

MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION

Presented to Lok Sabha on: AS Obs Pole
Laid in Rajya Sabha on: g.94 S916

LOK SABRA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

April, 2016/ Vaisakha 1938 (Saka)


CONTENTS
Page Nos.

Compasition of Public Accounts Committee (2015-16) (iii)
Composition of Public Accounts Committee (2014-15) {v)
Introduction (vii)
| REPORT :
PART —1
1. Background

wo

Il. Audit Review
I. Descriptions of the Transaction Documents
1५... Project Management
(0)... Besign canstraint
(i) Right of first refusal ‘
(iii) | Concession Period
(iv) Change in scope of work and Master Plan
(v) — Mandatory Capital Projects
५. Project Financing
{i} Increase in Project casts and assessment of efficiency

- _, Of capital expenditure
(ii) Airport Development Fee

(iii) Assessment of funding Gap '

23

-VI. Revenue sharing
(0) Aeronautical tariff in ‘shared till’ arrangement

(if) Conflicts. between OMDA and AERA Act in defining
aeronautical and non-aeronautical services

|)... Qut sourcing domestic and international cargo activities

(ivy) Award of concession for operation of Hote!

(v) Delayed Retirement Compensation


Vil.

VIII

u

Leasing of land 24
{i} Maintenance of land records

(ii) Carved out Assets

{ii} | Commercial exploitation of Land

{iv)  Unwarranted benefit to MIAL on relocation of activities
and Change in land use

(४). Landin possession of other government agencies
(vi) Encroachment at 051 Airport, Mumbai
Passenger Service Fee 4

{i) Unauthorised expenditure
(fi) Unjustified Charge

हि PART -॥
Recommendations and Observations 43
APPENDICES
Minutes of the Thirteenth sitting of the Public Accounts 62

Committee (2015-18) held on 16.4 1.20167
Minutes of the Twenty-Sixth sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2015-18) held on $§.04.2018


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2015-16) -

Prof, K.V. Thomas - Chairperson

MEMBERS.

_ LOK SABHA _
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
4, Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura
5, Shri Nishikant Dubey
6. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank''
9, Shri Neiphiu Rio
10. Shri Dushyant Singh

11. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
14... Shri Shivkumar Udasi
15. 9, P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA
18. Shri Naresh Agrawal
17. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
16... Shri Anil Madhav Dave
19. © Shri Vijay Goel

20. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
21. Shri Shantaram Naik 1
22. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri A.K. Singh —_ Additional Secretary
2. Shri Tirthankar 085. - Additional Director
3. Shri A.K. Yadav - Deputy Secretary

t ai)


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2014-15)

Prof. K.¥. Thomas -  Chatrperson

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri $.S. Ahluwalia

Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
hri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura

a wo

un

hri Nishikant Dubey

97 Gajanan Kirtikar

hri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank”
shri Neipbiu Rio
hri Dushyant Singh

11, Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
12". Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi.

13. Dr, Kirit Somaiya

14. Shri Anurag Thakur

15*. 9-7, Venugopal

$
8
6 ड़
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8 8
9 5
iS

RAJYA SABHA
16. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
17. Shri Vijay Goel
18. Dr, Satyanarayan Jatiya

19. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
20. Shri Shantaram Naik
21. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy

22. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh

* Blected wef. 3 December, 2014 vice Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy who has deen appainted as Minister w.e.f. 9" November, 2014.
1 Elected w.ef. 3 December, 2014 vice Shri Jayant Sittha who bas been appointed as Minister w.e.f, 9"* November, 2014.

+ Blected w.e.f 3 December, 2014 vice Dr. M, Thambidurai who has been chosen as Hon'ble Deputy Speaker, Lok Sabha and
has since resigned from che membership of tae Committee, ‘ +

ivi


INTRODUCTION

॥ the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2015-16) having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Forty Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
on ‘Implementation of Public Private Partnership project at Chhatrapati Shivaji
International Airport, Mumbai’ based on C&AG Report No. 15 of 2014 (Performance
Audit), Union Government related to the Ministry of Civil Aviation.

2, The above-mentioned Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
was laid on the Table of the House on 18th July, 2014.

3. The Public Accounts Committee (2014-15} took up the subject for detailed
examination and report. The Committee hold informal discussion with the
representatives of fhe Ministry of Civil Aviation/AAYMIAL on the subject during their
study visit 9 Mumbai in 2015 and in 2016. As the examination of the subject could not
be completed due to paucity of time, the Public Accounts Committee (2015-16) re-
selected the subject to continue the examination and took evidence of the
representatives of the Ministry of Civil Aviation at their sitting held on 16" November
2015, Accordingly a Draft Report was prepared and placed before the Committee for
their consideration. The Committee considered and adopted this Draft Report at their
sitting held on-26" April, 2016. The Minutes of the Sittings are appended fo the Report.

4, For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type and form Part- II of
the Report.

5... The Committee thank their predecessor Committees for taking oral evidence and
obtaining information on the subject.

6. The Committee would like ta express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation, Airport Authority of India and MIAL for tendering evidence
before them and furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in connection with
the examination of the subject.

7. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered ta
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India and the
PAC Secretariat in preparation of the Report. :

NEW DELHI; ह . PROF. K.V, THOMAS
26 April, 2016 Chairperson,

06 Vaisakha, 1938 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

( vit)


REPORT
‘ PART -।
1. BACKGROUND

With a view fo set up world class international airports in the country, Cabinet
approved the restructuring of airports of Airport Authority of India (AAI) in January, 2000
through long term lease route in pursuance of the Policy on Airport Infrastructure (PAI)
1997. While approving the restructuring of airports the Cabinet had also directed that
each detailed plan prepared for development of any airport through lease route should
be separately brought up for consideration of the Cabinet Committee on Economic
Affaits (CCEA).

2. Accordingly, MOCA initiated action to restructure and upgrade Delhi, Mumbai,
Chennai and Kolkata airports through the long leasing route. Financial and Legal
consultants were appointed and work of due diligence and transaction structure started.
While doing so the Ministry felt that the Joint Venture route had certain advantages over ,
long term leasing route. Therefore, the matter was again put up for consideration of the
Cabinet in December 2002 seeking approval to the proposal of restructuring of Delhi,
Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata airports through Joint Venture route by formation of .
separate Joint Venture Company (JVC) for each of these airports with the respective
selected bidder, in which AAI would have five per cent equity.

3. Thereafter, the MOCA was directed by the Cabinet to discuss the proposal
further with the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Company Affairs and revert to the
Cabinet. In July 2003, the Ministry of Finance had opined that the proposal should be
restricted te Délhi and Mumbaf only. 4

4. Finally in September 2003, Cabinet approved the proposal of MOCA that
restructuring of Delhi’ and Mumbai airports may be undertaken through JV route by
formation of two separate companies between AAI and selected JV partner. It also
approved formation of an Empowered Group of Ministers (EGOM) comprising Minister
of Finance, Minister of Law and Justice, Minister of Disinvestment and Minister State
(Independent Charge) of Civil Aviation to decide on the detailed modalities including the
design parameters, bid evaluation criteria, etc. based on which the Joint Venture partner


was fo be selected. Subsequent to the formation of the new Government, the Minister
of Defence was made the Chairman of the EGOM when the EGOM was reconstituted in
June 2004. -

5. The EGOM in February 2005 approved all the key principles of the Request for
Proposal (RFP) document along with the draft transaction documents ie. Operation,
Management and Development Agreement (OMDA), State Support Agreement (SSA), -
Shareholders Agreement (SHA), Lease Deed Agreement, Communication, Navigation,
Surveillance and Air Traffic Management (CNS-ATM) Agreement and State
Government Support Agreement ह

6. The EGOM.after evaluation of the technical and financial bids had recommended
the Joint Venture Partners, which were submitted to the Cabinet for approval in a note
dated 31 January 2006 and the same was approved on 1 February 2006.

7. For Chhatrapati Shivaji International (051 Airport, Mumbai, the JV partner
approved was M/s GVK Consortium. The consortium comprised of three private entities
namely (i} GVK Industries Limited; (ii) Airports Company South Africa Limited; and (iii)
Bidvest Group Limited.

8. AAI incorporated a subsidiary Joint Venture Company (JVC) on 2 March 2006
and named Mumbai International Airport Private Limited (MIAL). After the OMDA was
signed on 4 April 2006 between AAI and the JV partners, AAI transferred 74 per cent of
the equity shares in MIAL to JV partner in accordance with the Shareholders’
Agreement (SHA). In terms of the agreement, the issued share capital
of MIAL was %200 crore which was jointly held by AAI (26 per cent), GVK Airport
Holdings Private Limited (37 per cent), Bid Services Division (Mauritius) Limited (27 per
cent} and ACSA Global Limited (10 per cent). Subsequently, on 18 October:2011,
1,08,00,000 shares (out of 5,40,00,000 shares) of Bid Services Division (Mauritius)
limited were acquired by GVK Airport Holdings Private Limited raising its stake in MIAL
_ to over 50 per cent. The paid up equity capital of MIAL as on 16 April 2012 was %1200
crore with the share of AAI at 26 per cent. GVK Airport Holdings Private Limited {50.5
per cent), Bid Services Division (Mauritius) Limited (13.5 per cent) and ACSA Global
Limited (10 per cent).


i, AUDIT REVIEW

9. This report is based on Audit Report No, 15 of 2014 for the year ended March
2013. The Audit Report No.15 of 2014 was prepared after taking into account the
findings of Audit as contained in their Report No.5 of 2012-13 and the recommendations
of PAC thereon as contained in their 94" Report (157 Lok Sabha) on the subject
Implementation of PPP project at IGI Airport, Delhi". The Audit observations pertain to
operationalization of the JV mode and implementation of the OMDA and SSA.. The
intention was to protect the revenue interest of the Government of India. ‘The decision
to enter into a Joint Venture to develop and manage CSI Airport at Mumbai was first of
its kind along with the GI Airport at Delhi. Some of their important observations made
by Audit in this case are identical to the observations made in case of IGI Airport Delhi
which includes conflict between OMDA and AERA Act (Airports Economic Regulatory
Authority of India) in defining aeronautical and non aeronautical services; unilateral right
to extend the concession period for another 30 years on the identical terms and
conditions at the sole option of JVC; Right of First Refusal to JVC in case'of second
airport; Commercial exploitation of land; Development Fee imposed and collected from
air passenger for development of airport instead of funds raised by the JVC; Highly
concessional lease rent; deficient land records at CSI Airport; change in Major
Development Plan; funds diverted from PSF (security component) escrow Account for
purchase of Security Equipment by MIAL; and irregular withdrawal from PSF (SC)

Escrow Account.

10. Performance Audit of.implementation of Public Private Partnership (PPP} project
at Chhatrapati Shivaji International (CSI) Airport, Mumbai was conducted by the audit to
assure that the revenue interest of the Government was protected. The adtual
operation of PPP arrangements in CSI Airport, Mumbai was also studied and its impact

on government and other stakeholders assessed.

11. Against this backdrop, the Public Accounts Committee (2014-15 and 2015-16)
selected the subject for detailed examination and report. In the process of examination
of the subject, the Committee obtained background material and detailed written replies
from the Ministry of Civil Aviation {MoCA). They also took oral evidence of the


representatives of the MOCA, AAI and MIAL and obtained post evidence replies.
Besides, the Committee also visited the CSI Airport, Mumbai in January 2016 to have
an on-the-spot assessment of the projéct. Based on written and oral depositions by the
Ministry, thé Committee examined the subject in detail and discussed some of the
issues as enumerated in the succeeding paragraphs. ,

fil. DESCRIPTIONS OF THE TRANSACTION DOCUMENTS

12. Consequent to the decision to hand over CSI Ajirpart to the Joint Venture
-Company ie. MIAL and before physically handing over the airport to the Satter, a
number of agreements were signed among the concerned parties. These documents
individually and collectively determine the terms and conditions of the handing over
including economic benefits accruing to the parties. When these agreements were
signed, the Regulator, namely Airport Economic Regulatory Authority (AERA) was not in
existence. Some of these documents contained provisions relating to areas like tariff
fixation for aeronautical services, which later, with the establishment of AERA came
under the Reguiator's domain of decision making.

{i) Operation, Maintenance and Development Agreement (0008): Together
with the State Support Agreement (SSA), OMDA is the most important docurnent and
formed the soul of the PPP in CSI Aiprot, Mumbai. The OMDA, signed on 4 April 2006
between AAI and MIAL, faid down the obligations and responsibilities of both the
parties, the terms of revenue sharing and duration of the concession, conditions of
assets transfers at present and in future, terms and conditions of land transfers, etc.

(ii) State Support Agreement (SSA): Complementary to the OMDA, the State
Support Agreement was signed between Government of India represented by MOCA
and MIAL on 26 Apri] 2006. It laid down the responsibilities and obligations of MOCA
and MIAL in their respective domain and to each other. In Schedule 1, it laid down the
principles of tariff fixation for aeronautical services.

{iil)- State Government Support Agreement: State Goverriment Support
Agreement (SGSA} was signed on 27 April 2006 between the Government of
Maharashtra and MIAL to provide support services to the project. The agreement
provided that the State Government will provide support te MIAL in matters relating to


removal of encroachment, procurement of additional land for development of airport,
rernoval of obstruction outside the airport boundary to ensure safe and efficient air traffic
movement, improve the surface area access to the airport and to provide all the utilities
on payment basis to MIAL. ,

. (iv) Lease Deed Agreement: The Lease Deed agreement was signed on 26
April 2006 between AAI and MIAL to 1४४६8 the demised premises on “as is where is
basis" on an annual lease rent of 2100/- (र One hundred only) initially for a period of 30
years extendable for another 30 years by virtue of extension of concession period. The
demised premises include all the buildings, construction or immovable assets, if any on
the premises as described in the agreement with the liberty to construct, erect,

renovate, alter or otherwise deal with the leased premises.

{v) Communication, Navigation and Surveillance (CNS)Air Traffic
Management (ATM) Agreement: The agreernent was signed on 26 April. 2006
between AAI and MIAL according to which the former was to provide air traffic services
support at the airport as AAI was authorized fo provide necessary air traffic services

within the country's air space and at all civil airports.

(vi) Shareholders Agreement: Signed on 4 April 2006 by AAI and MIAL and
other participants, Shareholders Agreement recorded the terms and conditions to
govern the relationships in their mutual capacity as the shareholders of the JVC.

“(yi Aikport ‘Operator Agreeitient: “As per Schedule~8 “of OMDA, MIAL छा ©

required to enter into an Airport Operator Agreement with the Airport Operator (AQ) who
(isa member of the consortium (nominated if more than one AO are in the consortium).
The agreement conttactually set out the role, responsibilities, accountabilities and
financial arrangements between the AO and MIAL. Accordingly, an agreement was
signed on 28 April 2006 between MIAL and ACSA Global Ltd. (Airport Operator) to

provide airport services,


iV. PROJECT MANAGEMENT

(i) Design constraint

13. CSI Airport Mumbai has a design constraint on account of cross alignment of the
fwo runways (runways 09/27 and 14/32). The initial plan submitted by GVK at the time
of bidding proposed a parallel runway to increase the runway capacity of the airport.
- However; this proposal was-shelved due to involvement of large scale relocation of
facilities and need for acquisition of privately owned land. With this constraint, Audit
observed that the maximum passenger traffic handling capacity of 591 Airport, Mumbai
even affer modernisation and up-gradation wit! be 40 million passengers per annum.
This saturation point is expected to be reached by 2015 as per traffic projections. Thus,
the airport will reach its design capacity by the time its modernisation and up-gradatian
is completed.

14. The MOCA informed the Committee that Development of second airport was
envisaged as CSIA, due to land constraint, would become saturated in future. They
also gave detailed plans of MOCA to control congestion at the CSIA, since Juhu and
Navi Mumbai airports were at planning stage. In their written submission, they stated as
follows:

"M/s MIAL has constructed and operationalized the new Terminal at CSIA,
Mumbai with a passenger handling capacity of 40 million passenger per annum
(mppa). Further, as part of the airside development program, MIAL has taken
many initiatives to increase airside capacity beyond 40 mppa. Improvements in
ATC processes, DGCA regulations and introduction of other best practices have
led to operational efficiencies such as reduction in runway occupancy time and
réduction in aircraft séparation. The airside capacity has already improved due to
High Intensity Runway Operations. Hourly movements have substantially
increased and MIAL is handling comfortably.48 hourly movements. Further
increase in airside capacity is also possible if larger aircraft are used by airlines
on at least ten most busy domestic routes such as Mumbai-Delhi, Mumbai-
Bangalore, Mumbai-Hyderabad, etc, and some international routes especially the
Middle East. In fact few airlines such as Emirates and Singapore Airlines have
already started operating larger aircraft such as A-380 frorm Mumbai an
‘international routes and various other airlines are also in the process of
commencing Operations shortly from Mumbai with larger aircraft.

15. During evidence before the Committee a representative of the AAI further added
that in 2002, when the restructuring of the airport was approved, the Mumbai Airport


handled about 12.26 million passengers ॥ was handed over in 2006, it was handling
from the Terminal 1A, 1B and 20 of CSIA. In 2006, the total capacity was 13 million and
it handled about 18.4 million. As on today, the capacity-is 40 million, which has been
created and the size reached is 36,63 million. Itis upgradable to 50 mppa by 2020.

16. In reply to a query of the Committee regarding plan of action for expediting NMIA
Project to relieve the congestion at CSI Airpart, Mumbai, the MOCA submitted as under:

"In order to meet the capacity constraints, second airport at Navi Mumbai has
been planned as envisaged in State Support Agreement. Government of India
has granted ‘In Principle’ approval to Govt. of Maharashtra (GoM) for setting up
of a Greenfield tnternational airport at Navi Mumbai in Maharashtra. The airport
is proposed to handle a passenger capacity of 25 MPPA (extendable to 60
MPPA)} and will be developed under the Public-Private Partnership (PPP) mode
by setting up a Special Purpose Company (SPC) with equity participation from
City and Industrial Development Corporation of Maharashtra Limited (CIDCO)
The NMIA project has already received approvals from Ministry of Civil Aviation,
Ministry of Environment & Forests, and Ministry of Defence. The project'requires
an area of 1864 Ha, out of which 1572 Ha has been acquired. State Government
-has already completed the Request for Qualification (RFQ) stage and has
projected to operationalize first phase of the airport by December, 2020".

(ii) Right of first refusal

17. _ State Support Agreement (SSA) allows MIAL a Right of First Refusal (ROFR) on
the second airport planned within 150 km radius of the CSI Airport, Mumbai. [f MIAL is
unsuccessful in the competitive bidding process for thé second airport, it would be
allowed to match the best bid, provided MIAL's bid lies within a 10 per cent range of the.
most competitive bid and MIAL has performed satisfactorily without any material default
at the time of exercising the ROFR. This condition will be applicable for. the first 30
years Allowing such ROFR thwarts competition and provides MIAL with a natural
advantage on the second airporf. MOCA had earlier assured Public Accounts
Committee on similar provision in case of Delhi International Airport Limited (DIAL) that
safeguards had been provided to ensure transparency and Competitiveness.

18. The Gommittee desired to know the safeguards envisaged by MOCA to ensure
competitiveness in the bid for second airport in the face of ROFR. The MOCA replied
as under:


19.

" Government of India has entered into State Support Agreement (SSA) with M/s
MIAL. Vide Clause 3.4 of the Agreement, MIAL has been given right to exercise
Right of First Refusal (ROFR} with regard to a second airport within a 150 km
{One Hundred and Fifty Kilometer) radius of the Airport. However, while granting
ROFR to M/s MIAL, certain safeguards have also been incorporated so that
MIAL does not fake unwarranted advantage of the provision. The salient features
and safeguards envisaged in the SSA are as follows:

i. The “Right of First Refusal (ROFR)" with regard to a second airport within
a 150 km (One Hundred and Fifty Kilometre) radius of the Airport has been given
to the JVC i.e. MIAL by following a competitive bidding process, in which the JVC
can also participate if it wishes to exercise its ROFR.

fi. In the event, the JVC is not the successful bidder but its bid is within the
range of 10% of the most competitive bid received, the JVC will have the ROFR

‘by matching the first ranked bid in terms of the selection criteria for the second

airport. : .

ii. For the purpose of exercising the ROFR, JVC has to perform satisfactorily
af the existing airport i.e. CSIA, Mumbai without any-material default under any
Project Agreement at the time of exercising the ROFR.

iv. - A sunset clause has been provided that RoFR will not be available to IVC
after initial 3Q years of first term. हि :

v. Existing JVC is not to be consulted in the planning process of the second
airport.

vi. RoFR applies within 150 KM of the existing airport. However, ROFR is not
available with the JVC in case of any proposal by.GO! to develop a second
airport at Chakan, Pune or at any other place in its vicinity." :

In reply to a query of the Committee regarding formation of a new subsidiary

company - Navi Mumbai Airport Developers and steps taken to ensure that it does not

derive any additional benefits on second airport, the MOCA submitted as under:

20,

“In terms of clause 3.4.1 the’ State Support Agreement, the Right of First Refusa!
with regard to a second airport within 150 km radius of the Airport will be given to
MIAL by following 8 competitive bidding process in a transparent manner and in
compliance fo the provisions of Article 2.2.1 of OMDA. This RoFR has to be
within 10% of the highest bid which will lead to aggressive bidding enhancing the
competition further." .

In response to another query of the Committee, the Ministry furnished a written

reply wherein it is informed that in the 47th Board Meeting of MIAL, a decision has

already been taken to wind up the subsidiary viz. ‘Navi Mumbai Airports Developers

Private Limited', The process of winding up is already initiated by MIAL.


(iii) | Concession Period

21.  MIAL enjoys unilateral right to extend the concession period of 30 years for
another 30 years ‘on the same terms and conditions’, provided no event of default had
taken place during the 20th to 24th year of the first concession period. Absence of
review clause, thus, virtually allows MIAL the right to operate the airport for a period of
60 years with the terms and conditions frozen in OMDA. On similar provision made in
case of Delhi International Airport Limited (DIAL), the Public Accounts Committee in
their 94th Report had desired to be apprised how the joint venture would pave the way
for future airport development and modernization in the country.

22. The Committee desired to know from the MOCA about their plans to devise an
appropriate strategy to effectively comply with the concern expressed in PAC
recommendation in view of benefit conferred upon MIAL which would translate into
almast an automatic extension of the initial concession period to another 30 years The
Ministry in their reply furnished as under: |

“There are no benefits conferred upon MIAL by the right to extend the
concession period for another 30 years in terms of Article 18.1 (b) of OMDA.
While entering into an Agreement with the JVC, it was ensured to check the
unwarranted benefits to it by laying down the stringent conditions on JVC such as
_adherence to laid down standards, performance indicators, mandatory
investment, satisfactory performance throughout the period, Objective Service
Quality Requirements etc, Non-compliance of which attracts penalties and
liquidated damages which can lead to termination and cancellation of the
agreernent by AAI and government. Hence, JVC does not have automatic right to
extend the period but is subject to conditions and review by AAI and further
subject to overall stringent yardsticks laid down in OMDA and monitored by AAI.

Further, Airports have tong gestation periods and the investor needs long term
period to plan and execute projects apart from making considerable upgradation
depending on the requirement. The longer lease tenure improved the
attractiveness of transaction and bidders were able to factor in the improved
cash-flow and investment recovery profile while bidding for this project. It would
enable the concessionaire to recover its investment with a reasonable rate of
return. Besides, the extension provision was part of the bidding process and
known to all the bidders The prospect of long lease term resulted into high
Revenue Share of 38.7% for the CSIA, Murnbal. Hence, no extra or new benefit
has been conferred on MIAL.

it is prominent to notice that the case of implementation of PPP of Mumbai airport
was one of the pioneer efforts in the Civil Aviation Sector as there was no such
precedencé available before the Government. Hence, there was apprehensions


23.
experience of PPP projects at the time of implementation of PPP project at Mumbai

10

among the prospective bidders regarding, availability of enough opportunity for
them to extract the profit out of their huge investment made by them. These
‘airports required huge investment and management skill to build and operate
them as world class airports, If AA! were to do it, there would have been a severe
Tesource crunch for AAI and it could not have taken up development of other
airports."

The Committee enquired to know whether MOCA had explored the global

airport. The MOCA replied as under:

Airport projects involve very Jong gestation periods that lead to high-level of
uncertainty and cost-overruns. These uncertainties are further accentuated by
the fact that continuous capital expenditure on account of capacity saturatian as
well as technological advancements may be required periodically. This
uncertainty may increase the risk perceptions, thereby having a negative impact
on the bankability of the project. Hence, a longer concession -period was

' suggested in the Cabinet Note dated 01.09.2003 in line with the practice followed

in various international airports concessions. The details of various PPP projects
undertaken across the globe are as under.

Table |; Major international infrastructure projects undertaken through PPP mode

ProjectName | Year | Country | PPP Mode | Type Total Financing | Government
: Project | Mix (Debt: | support
_j Cost Equit:
Kenya- | | Kenya, Concession | Brownfield | USD 70:30 Leasing of
Uganda Uganda 404 assets
Railways million
National 2008 | Lesotho | Concession | Brownfield | USD 85:15 (excl. | USD 80
Referral पर 100 govt. inillion equity
Hospital | inillion | equit
City Link, | Australia | Concession | Greenfield | USD 59:44 a
Melbourne हे /BOT 2.2
: billion
Second 1992 | UK DBFO Greenfield | USD 1 | 91:9 | |
sevencrossing
bridge | :
Rosario- 1997 | Argentin | DBOM Greenfield | USD 32:68 48% Grant
victoria bridge a 385
है million
Vasco-de- 1994 | Portugal | Concession | Brownfield | USD 59:41 36% Grant
gama Bridge 1.2
i | bilion
Karnataka 2005 | India OMT Brownfreld | USD 80:20 None
Urban Water 14
Supply Impra- million
yment Project |
Amritsar 2004 P| Concession | Brownfield |-USD a | |
Intercity 805 3.6
Terminal "| million
Project _ |


1

Table || - Major Brownfield airport projects undertaken through PPP mode Project

Project Name - Year | Country | PPP Mode | Total Financing | Government
Project Mix (Debt: | support
Cost Equit
Up-gradation, 2000 | Germany | Concession | USD 453 | 63:37 Leasing of
Operation and million assets
Maintenance of
Hamburg
loternational Airport 4
Rehabilitation, 2003 | Nigeria Concession | USD = 200 | 75:25 Land and assets
Operation and million lease

Maintenance of
Domestic Terminal

at | Murtala

Muhammed Airport है रद
Rehabilitation, 2007 | Jordan Concession | USD 675 ( 41:59 Land and assets
Expansion and million lease
Qperation of the

Queen Alia

International Airport

Expansion of the | 2009 | Russia Concession | USD 1,552 | 60:40 Land and assets
Pulkovo Airport in million lease

St Petersburg

Up-gradation & | 2006 | Saudi Concession | USD 320 | 80:20 Land and assets
Expansion of King Arabia *) million lease

Abdul Aziz

International Airport
Hajj Terminal
‘Source: “infrastructure PPP financing in india”, a report prepared by Ihe World Bank in 2007

24. On being enquired whether MOCA is maintaining a regular and well documented
review of financial as well as operational performance af MIAL, the Ministry replied as

under:

"There are several expressed provisions in the OMDA for Monitoring and
supervision of the operational and financial performances of the JVC. Chapter 16
of the OMDA mandates the JVC to submit reports on regular basis such as
Monthly activity report (passenger traffic, aircraft movements, cargo, ete.), Other
operating statistics as required by MCA, AAI, ICAO, IATA and Relevant
Authorities, Reports on various indicators of performance measurement,
Quarterly financial accounts, Annual budget, Latest update of Business Plan,
Annual mainteriance program, the daily traffic record, and other such reports/
information as required by AAI. :

‘For the above purpose, an Institutional Mechanism is in place in form of a Joint
Venture Cell (JVC) in the Airports Authority of India for monitoring of the
performance of all the Public Private Partnership (PPP) projects in Airport Sector
including CSIA, Mumbai. The JV Cell maintains the data relating to CSIA,
Mumbai and monitors its performance at AAI level and furnishes these data to
MoCA as and when required. Further, Independent Engineers for monitoring the


12

project construction works/procurements and Independent Auditor to certify the
revenue details for the purpose of Annual Fee payable by concessionaire to AAI
have been appointed.

At the Ministry level, a separate dedicated unit (the “OMDA Implementation
Oversight Committee” or “OlIOC”) under the chairmanship of Secretary,
MOCA has been set up as a ‘single point of contact’ for the JVC and fo ensure
that the Conditions Precedent as contemplated under OMDA are duly
metfulfilled. The Committee meets regularly and reviews the performance of
JVC.” ~ हु

Besides, a regulatory Authority namely, Airports Economic Regulatory Authority
of India (AERA) has been established for determination of tariff and promoting
competition in airport related services. AERA determines the aeronautical
charges for CSIA, Mumbai based on the Financial and Operational performance
of the airport."

(iv) Change in scope of work and Master Plan

25. As per OMDA, MIAL had to submit the Master Plan and Major Development Plan
for development of CSI Airport, Mumbai, before the expiry of six months from the date
of execution of OMDA to AAI for its information and MOCA for its review and comments.
Specific schedule for MOCA's suggestions and MIAL's action thereupon leading to
firming up of the plans is also laid out in the SSA. MIAL submitted the initial Master Plan
and Major Development Plan (MDP) on 03 October 2006, revised Master Plan in 2007
and revised MDP in 2007 after seven and thirteen months respectively as against the
time limit of 15 days specified in SSA. Subsequently in March 2011, MIAL submitted a
modified Master Plan. Master Plan for the project, thus, remained flexible for over five
years (October 2006 to March 2011). MOCA accepted changes in Master Plans and
did not comment about the delay in submission of the same Master plan 2007 which
had reflected major change in scope of work centralizing passenger handling facilities at
Sahar instead of a terminal building for all international passengers and 60 per cent
domestic passengers at Sahar. This change led to increase in costs and contributed to
delay in project execution. However, this change did not alter the capacity constraint of
the airport as capacity remained at 40 mppa.

26. The Committee enquired whether there was any change in FAR (Floor Area
Ratio) after change in Master Plan. The Ministry informed that there was change in


13

FAR (FSI} due fo construction of new integrated terminal of the airport. The change in

FAR (FSI) is in compliance with focal laws,

27, The Committee enquired about the action taken, if any, by MOCA against delay
in submission of Master Plan by MIAL. The Ministry submitted as under:

"As per requirement of OMDA, MIAL submitted a Master Plan in October 2006 to
MOCA/AAI. In this Master Plan, Major Development Plan was provided inter-alia
envisaging te modify and refurbish existing Terminal 2 (T2). Master Plan
submitted was teviewed by MOCA/AAI and it was commented that it may have
been appropriate for JVC to consider development of ultimate terminal under one
roof at Sahar. MIAL considered the suggestions to have the Terminal under One-
roof because of the various advantages between earlier and the new plan of “one
roof, MOCAVAA! were required to provide suggestions to Plan in the overall
interest, modernization and passenger facilitation. It may be noted that there is
no provision in OMDA 10 approve the Project Cost which fall under the purview of
AERA under SSA. -MOCA vide its letter No. AV.2401 1/015/2006-AAl (Pt) dated
27th October, 2006 provided interim comments to MIAL which were based on
inputs from AAI. MIAL acknowledged receipt of interim comments/ suggestions of
MoCA and further mentioned that it awaits final comments of ministry in order to
Tespond to the same as stipulated under SSA. The Initig] master plan provided
for construction of parallel runway, unified integrated building etc. However,
based on the ground realities like non availablity of land due to encroachment,
the runway work could not be taken up. Hence, the same was dropped to be
subsequent development plan. After considering all the comments of AAI /
MoCA, MIAL submitted a Master Plan in May 2007 and MDP in November 2007.
In view-of the changed circumstances and change of scope of work a revised
Master Plan in 2011 was submitted by MIAL taking into consideration all
requirements of the additional work and deletion of work which were not feasible
as stated above. The master plan was revised by MIAL depending upon the
progress of the work and there was na delay.” है

28. The Committee enquired whether the change in scope of work for integrating
passenger handling facilities at Sahar justified in view of the present plans to retain both
the terminals i.e. 118 and 110, The Ministry replied as under: ‘

"MIAL has taken many initiatives to Increase airside capacity beyond 40mppaa. In
the long run, with more advanced and larger aircraft coupled with best flying and
operating practices, airside capacity is bound to increase. Given the fact that
Terminal 2 cannot be expanded any further due to land constraints, and to strike
a balance between possible increase in airside capacity and optimization of
available resources, it was felt essential to utilize part of Terminal 1 facilities.
Further, in order to efficiently utilize night parking capacity at Santacruz and also
to avoid unnecessary movement of aircraft’ busing of passengers, use of part of
Terminal 1 is necessary.


14

Keeping this in mind, in the revised Master Plan 2011, MIAL had proposed to
retain Terminal 1A and Terminal 1C to meet the future demand / growth beyond
40 mppaa. It- may be noted that Terminal 10 has-been newly constructed in 2010,
whereas Terminal 1A was commissioned in 1992, which was recently refurbished
/ renovated by MIAL. Final decision about retaining Terminal 1A/ T1C/ 118 is to
be taken in due course considering relevant facts about estimated final airside
capacity, traffic growth and overnight parking requirernents at Terminal 1 due to
parking space constraints at Terminal 2.

Hence, integrating passenger handling facilities at Sahar was imperative ta
minimize/ eliminate inter terminal transfers, where there is no possibility to
provide rapid transportation. Besides, regulatory requirements are so
cumbersome yet unavoidable that it is essential to provide integrated terminal.”

(v} Mandatory Capital Projects

29. As per OMDA, MIAL had to complete 32 Mandatory Capital Projects (MCPs) by
March 2010, Out of these 32 MCPs, 28 were to be completed by May 2008. One of the
MCPs (8-068) was not completed on time and was delayed by two years SSA provided
for incentive to MIAL through a 10 per cent increase in airport base charges provided
MCPs were completed by May 2008. MOCA allowed the incentive to MIAL though MIAL
failed to complete the project in time. The scope of another mandatory capital project
(3-09) for the terminal building was revised and its implementation delayed by two years
(actual completion date being March 2012 as against scheduled completion date of
March 2010). The original scope of work included completion of the international
terminal building. Even with the mandatory capital project completed in March 2012,
the international terminal could be made ready only by January 2014. In addition to
MCPs, Master Plan 2007 had listed a set of 45 other capital works which included
airside works, terminal works and city side development which were’ necessary for
overall execution of the project. Actual progress of work was slow with only three works
having been completed in Phase 1 (ending 2010) as against the targeted eight.
Although AAI had the tight to levy liquidated damages on MIAL, no communication
urging MIAL to speed up the work was on record,

30. In view of inordinate delay in completion of terminal facilities, the Committee
desired the MOCA to justify achievement of. efficiency advantages expected from the
PPP arrangement. The Ministry in their reply furnished as under:


31.

15

“CSI airport is severely land constrained atrport. Development of airport heavily
depended on timely availability of various land pockets and also on removal of
impediments like relocation of certain facilities. Mumbai airport had 3 large
nurnber of inherent problems which were specific to this airport which caused
delay and MIAL could not be blamed for the same. ‘Shifting of Shivaji statue was
a complex issue and took a lot of time to resolve. Notwithstanding the severe
challenges illustrated above, the PPP arrangement successfully derived the
solutions by applying innovations, diligence and deploying best of talents and
practices to successfully complete the state of the art integrated passenger
terminal T2 and to upgrade the airside to world class standards. All this was
achieved essentially on the site of existing airport while the airport operations
were in full swing and highest standards of passenger services were maintained.
Airport Service Quality (ASQ) ratings of CSIA has consistently improved.

As per Economic Impact Study conducted by National Council of Applied
Economic Research, in 2009-10, around Rs 286.3 billion or 0.44 per cent was
contributed by CSIA's operational activities fo India’s GDP. Its contribution
relative to the regianal economy (Maharashtra) was 3.35 per cent of the state’s
GSDP. In terms of employment contribution, CSIA's operations sector has
contributed about 1,425 thousand jobs (0.31 per cent of the national
employment) in 2009-10 and as a ratio to Maharashtra’s employmen it
contribyted 2.90 per cent. The report has indicated that during the construction
period ie. FY 2008-09 to 2015-16, the ecanomic contribution of CSIA’s

_ eonstruction in terms of value added and employment to the national and

Tegional economy is estimated as: Direct contribution of % 75.5 billion in income
and 20,000 jobs to the national economy Indirect (multiplier impact) contribu ion
of Rs 122.3 billion in income and 1,078,000 jobs to the national economy.
Hence, economic and efficiency advantages expected from the PPP
arrangements are obviously achieved." :

The Committee then enquired about the reasons for not levying liquidated

damages in view of the article 8.3.8’of OMDA for delay in Other Capital Projects. The‘

Ministry in their written submission furnished as under:

“Clause 8.3.8 of OMDA provides for the penalty to be imposed by the AAI in case
of failure of the JVC to implement the Capital Projects within the Target dates
Highlights of the provision set out in the Clause 8.3.8 of the OMDA are as under:

i. The Mastér Plan has to incorporate target dates for construction of
individual facilities (the “Targets”) which should be linked fo traffic trigger points
or otherwise.


16

ii The JVC is to ensure that each of the Targets is met fully and on time.

til. Default in Commencement: In the event that a project set out in the
approved Master Plan is not commenced at the designated traffic trigger or such
other trigger and there is no explanation provided by the JVC to AA that is
satisfactory to AAI -{at its sole discretion), AAI shall have the right to levy
liquidated damages on JVC equivalent to 0.5% of the estimated capital cost of
the project for each week the project is delayed, on the JVC. ह

iv, In the event there is delay in cornmencement of a project, and liquidated
damages have been paid in respect of such delay, and in spite of delay in
commencement, the relevant project is completed within the time period set forth
in the Master Plan, then the liquidated damages already received in respect of
detay in commencement shall be returned by AAl to the JVC without any interest.

v Default in Completion: AAI shalt have the right to levy liquidated damages
on JVC at the same rate in the event the time period for the completion of the
project exceeds the time period of construction set out in the Master Plan
subject to the delay not being on account of delay in commencement, in respect
of which liquidated damages have been paid by JVC to the AAI

vi. The total liability of the JVC under this Article 8,3.8 for delay in respect of
a particular project shall not exceed 10% of the capital cost of the relevant
project.

From above, it is evident that the “Targets” have to be linked to traffic trigger
point or otherwise and any default in completion should be backed with
appropriate justification. Out of 8 projects to be completed in Phase |, MIAL
completed 3. Out of the remaining five projects indicated in Phase 4 of
development. Hence, any delay in completion of these projects does not ‘affect
traffic handling capacity of the airport. In view of absence of any linkage to traffic
trigger, imposition of Liquidated Damages under clause 8.3.8 is not applicable.

Besides, except for two works (S06 and $09), other Mandatory Capital Projects
(MCPs) were completed in time. The reasons for delay were examined through
an Independent Engineer and the reasons for delay were. found to be justified
and reschedulement was allowed by MOCA for completion of the projects. The
delay in completion of MCPs was attributable to circumstances and situations
beyond the control of MIAL as the works were being carried out with significant
operational constraints

As already mentioned CS! Airport is a severely land constrained airport and
development of airport is contingent on availability of land either to be retrieved
after slum rehabilitation or to be obtained from agencies including Air India, MET,
CPW, Ministry of Health efc.

It may be observed that retrieving such land is not in contro! of MIAL.
निज it may kindly be observed that in majority of the cases project could
not start because of non-availability of land. However, it has been ensured that


uy

47

projects which were to be commenced and completed due to traffic trigger are
nat delayed thereby fully compliant with OMDA. In all the cases AAI has been
kept informed about non-availability of land. Hence, MIAL has always provided
lawful explanation for any delay. There is no question of any LD to be imposed."

32. Giving details about the planning of MOCA for strengthening the monitoring
structure related to progress of work, the Cammitiee were informed as under:

"A robust monitoring structure is already in place as detailed below:

a) Independent Engineer: AAI has appointed an Independent Engineer (IE)
to monitor the project progress and to send periodical reports to AAI. Based an
these reports of IE AAI is following up with MIAL on various projects.

b) MIAL Board: MIAL Board monitors progress of the project where
nominees are senior officials of AA/MOoCA.

c) OMDA Implementation Oversight Committee (0100): As per provisions of
OMDA a committee, OMDA Implementation Oversight Committee chaired by
Secretary, MOCA periodically meets to, inter alia, review progress of the project
and resotution of, inter alia, issues relating to project implementation.”

Ov PROJECT FINANCING

(i) Increase in Project costs and assessment of efficiency of capital expenditure

33. OMDA and SSA do not specify any cost for the project. The initial estimate of
project cost was %5,826 crore (2006) which has been revised upward by MIAL
progressively in 2008, 2010 and finally in 2011 to 212,380 crore. The major reasons for
increase in project cost were change in scape of work to developing a new integrated
common user terminal at Sahar and delay of 17 months for relocation of Shivaji Maharaj
statue. AERA restricted project cost to =1 1,647.46 crore for the period upto March 2014.
As significant expenditures have been shifted to future control periods (beyond 2013-
14) by AERA, the project costs are set to increase further. AERA also noted deficienctes
Teported by Technical and Financial Auditor in implementation of projects like process
deficiencies, non preparation of detailed cost estimates, consideration of high risk
premium ete.

34. In response to a query of the Committee regarding grant of extension of time to
MIAL while considering the fact that the Shivaji statue was located in the demised
premises handed over to MIAL in 2006, and, hence, responsibility of MIAL, the Ministry

stated as under:


35.

18

"It is a matter of fact that jocation of Shivaji statute was in the demised premises
that was handed over to MIAL in 2006 and need of its relocation was known all
along, ance decision to construct new integrated terminal. complex was taken.
However, in view of sensitivity involved in such relocation, it was essential for
MIAL to have dialogue with all stakeholders Most importantly relocation of statue
required permission of Government of Maharashtra (GoM) under State
Government administrative mandate. MIAL initiated dialogue with all concerned
stakeholders, including GoM, for this purpose and conclusion of the issue took
time. Once permission of GoM was granted in August 2011, statute was
relocated immediately. Though it looks it took a long time to relocate the statute,
but fact remains that under political circumstances prevailing in the state,
especially in Mumbai, it was impossible to predict with certainty the definite
timeline to achieve the same. Hence granting extension of time in this respect
was fully justified and necessary."

As per State Support Agreement, the target revenue & hence airport tariff

inctease with increase of total project cost, The Committee asked whether MOCA have

plans to cap project costs in future projects. The Ministry responded as under:

36.

“Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India has come up with its Normative
Approach for Economic Regulation of the Major airports and has issued a
Consultation Paper in this regard. This consultation paper, intér alia, envisages to
put a ceiling on the capital cost for arriving at the Target Revenue while
determination of Aeronautical Tariff at major airports. The proposed approach of
AERA is at consultation stage”.

‘The Technical & Financial Auditor had pointed out a set of deficiencies in project

implementation on which no action had yet been initiated by AAVMOCA. The

Committee wanted to know if MOCA would consider putting in place a suitable

monitoring mechanisms such that concerns regarding inefficient project implementation

could be addressed. The Ministry in their reply furnished as under:

“A suitable monitoring mechanism is already in place. In line with Section 8.5.8 of
OMDA, ‘AAI appointed an Independent Engineer whose responsibilities as per
Schedule 21-are:

. To. review all designs, drawings, specifications and procurement
documents to assess compliance with Finalized Major Development Plan (if
applicable) and Development Standards and requirements as detailed in
Schedule 1 and with the finalized Major Development Plan

. To review benchmarking’ exercise carried out by JVC for the project
specifications and cost against national and international airport projects of
similar scope and nature,


19

. To review development reports submitted by JVC to assess compliance of
works undertaken. In this regard, Independent Engineer shalt ensure that
i) Owners requirements, Master Plan requirements, specifications and

design parameters in any. agreement or agreed through OMDA mechanism have
been fully addressed/ complied with

ti} Quantity are reasonable.

iii) Reasonable and fare time for completion of projects( excepting Mandatory
Capital Projects/ Stage-I projects) has been given

. To review the award of any contract in relation to any and all aspects of
design, construction, completion, comrnission and development of the Airport or
any other commercial contract to any Group Entities of the JVC

, To perform any other duties as would be deemed necessary and specified
in the appointment letter

Both Technical and Financial Auditors had pointed out certain process related
issues and made a general comment that it led fo increase in Project Cost.
However, they had not ascribed any additional cost, specifically to these items.
They had stated that it is difficult and subjective to assess the impact of the
process related issues in quantitative terms. Observation of Technical and
Financial Auditors were suitably responded during determination of Development
fee and tariff determination by AERA. Such submissions were duly considered by
AERA."

{ii} Airport Development Fee ~

37. As per OMDA, MIAL was to arrange for financing through suitable debt and
equity. OMDA also provided that MIAL can list its shares on Mumbai and/or National
Stack Exchange. As per the initia! financing plan, the projéct cost of %6,826 crore was to
be financed entirely through equity, internal accruals and debt. As the project cost
increased progressively, MIAL sought and was allowed to levy Development Fee (DF)
on passengers to cover the funding gap. No efforts were made to secure sources of
financing for the project as envisaged in OMDA. With AERA's approval to levy of DF of
€3,400 crore in December 2012, DF accounted for 29.19 per cent of project funding
while the equity stake of the private partners of MIAL at 888 crore contributed a mere
7,6 per cent. The debt of MIAL had also not altered even as. the project cost nearly
doubled thus indicating that the finance risk for the project had not been appropriately

transferred to the JV partner.

38. The Committee enquired if MOCA, before entering ito the agreements consider
the total capital expenditure required for the project and the quantum expected to be


20

borne by the JVC and the financing pattern of the project, if any, agreed upon. The

Ministry in their response furnished as under:

39.

"As per the provisions of OMDA, MIAL had to prepare a Master Plan and Major
Development Plan for development of airport in accordance with the standard
parameters set forth in the agreement. There was no provision for appraval of
Project Cost in the bid or subsequent to award by AAI/ MOCA. Accordingly, the
Independent Engineers scope of work also did not contain provision for
monitoring the project cost. The project cost was to be reviewed by AERA, while
determining DF/tariff for CSIA. It may be noted that AERA had disallowed
certain expenditure in the project cost. Financing pattetn was, in general, to be
debt and equity, however no specific financing pattern Is part of OMDA
Development Fee was sanctioned as per provisions of the statute, and OMDA
is governed by Indian Laws."

The Committee further desired to know whether MOCA did suggest/insist on

MIAL employing alternate financing modes like listing of shares in stock exchanges as

envisaged in OMDA rather.than allow tevy of Development Fee and in case of further

increases in project costs {as is likely on account of shifting expenditures to future

control periods}, whether MOCA intend to allow further levy of Development Fee on

passengers The Ministry has replied as under:

40.

“No, Sir. The determining factor for the grant of concession was the Revenue
share quoted by bidders and not the Project Cost. Chapter 8 of OMDA sets out
in detail the obligations of MIAL. Cost of the different phases of the project was
not the determining factor. However it is obligatory on MIAL to ensure that the
airport at all times meets the requirement of an‘international world class airport
Further MIAL is required to develop, manage and operate the airport in
accordance with good industry practice. As a result, it was not mandatory for the
Ministry to consider the Project Cost before entering info the agreements.
Further, though OMDA provides for listing options, it was found to be not feasible
considering the strategic interest of AAI through its- 26% shareholding which
would have been reduced to below 26% and that would not have been
acceptable to AAI

As regards, allowing DF in the future, AERA under section 13(1)b) is mandated
to determine the amount of Development Fee w.r.t CSIA, Mumbai taking into
consideration "timely investment in improvement of airport facility’ as well as
“economic and viable operation of major airports". [n discharge of its functions,
accordingly, AERA determines the amount of DF in accordance with the
provisions of Section 13(1)(b) of the AERA Act read with Section 22A of AAI Act."

Interest on loan amount has been included in the quantum of DF levied on the

passengers The Committee wanted to know the reasons for the same. They also


21

enquired about the plans of the Ministry to addrees the concern in future projects,

considering that the finance risk in the project has not been effectively ffansferred to the

private partner. The Ministry in their reply stated as under:
"The DF is determined by AERA under section 13(1)(b) of the. AERA Act, 2008
read with section 22A of AAI Act, 1994. However, as per Rules of the Airports
Authority of India (Major Airports) Development Fee Rules, 2011, framed by the
“Government, the money deposited in the Development Fee Receipt Account can
be used fo pay for the servicing of debt to the lenders raised against
Development Fees. Accordingly, in pursuance of these provisions of the
Develapnent Fee Rules, 2011, interest on loan raised against DF has been
allowed by AERA and included in the quantum of DF to be levied on the
passengers" fot

(iif) Assessment of funding Gap

41. During the process of finalization of levy of DF, AERA and MJAL both arrived at
different figures for actual funding gap. This was due to difference in assessment of
estimates of internal accrual, MIAL assumed internal accrual of 22,464 crore. The
financial auditor estimated it at 24,021 crore after adding depreciation and deferred tax
liability to profit after tax. AERA pointed out that accruals estimated by MIAL were based
on their tariff expectations which were uncertain. AERA arrived at an internal accrual of
₹1,151.26 crore considering the actua! cash balance (as on March 2012) and adding
projected depreciation for two years (2012-13 and 2013-14). Lower estimation of
internal accrual resulted in a higher funding gap which in-turn led to levy of a larger DF

on passengers

42. The low estimation of internal accruals resulted in higher quanturn of DF. The
Ministry while giving explanation for such low estimation of intemal accruals furnished

‘as under: '

"CSt Atrport, Mumbai has been restructured through joint venture route and
leased to MIAL for a petiad of 30 year (further extendable of another 30 years)
under Section 12A of the Airports Authority of India (AAI) Act 1994.

The Development Fee is levied under section 22-A of AAI act. This act was
amended in 2003, much before signing of OMDA. Applicability of the act was in
the knowledge of all the bidders ॥ may further be noted that while delivering the
judgement dated ‘26.04.2011, on the issue of whether levy of DF could be
explicitly mentioned the Concession Agreements entered into with the JVCs


22

(DIAL & MIAL), Hon’ble Supreme Court in its conclusion, inter-alia, observed the
following

Though Airports Authority can utilize the fees levied by it, for all or any of
these purposes mentioned in clauses (a), (0) and (०) of Section 22A, what can be
assigned by the Airparts Authority to a lessee under a lease entered into under
Section 12A of the 1994 Act is the power to levy fees for the purposes mentioned
in clause (a) of Section 22 A of the 1994 Act. जज जज जज जन :

Further Hon'ble Court has also observed that...."since we- have held that the
function of establishment and development of a new airport in fieu of an existing
airport and the function of establishing a private airport are exclusive functions of
the Airports Authority under the 2004 Act, and these statutory functions cannot
be assigned by the Airports Authority under lease to a lessee under Section 12A
of the Act, the lease agreements, namely, the OMDA and the State Support
agreement could not make a provision canferring the right on the lessee to levy
and collect development fees for the purpose of discharging these statutory
functions of the Airports Authority. We, therefore, do not think it-necessary to
refer to the clauses of the OMDA and the Stafe Support Agreements executed in
favour of the two lessees to find out whether the right of fevying and collecting
the development fees has been assigned to the lessees or not.

Therefore, when the Airports Authority makes a lease of thé premises of an
airport (including buildings and structures thereon and appertaining thereto) in
favour of a lessee to carry out some of its functions under Section 12, the lessee,
who has been assigned such functions, will have the powers of the Airports
Authority under Section 22 of the Act to collect charges, fees or rent from the
third parties for the different facilities and services provided to them in terms of
the leasé agreement”.

जलन तल हट In the absence of such contractual relationship, the liability
of the embarking passengers to pay development fees has fo be based on a
statutory provision and for this reason Section 22A has been enacted
empowering the Airports Authority-te levy and collect from the embarking
passengers the development fees for the purposes mentioned in clauses (a), (0)
and (c) of Section 22A of the Act. In other words, the object of Parliament in
inserting Section 22A in the 2004 Act by the Amendment Act of 2002 is to
authorize by Jaw the levy and collection of development fees from every
embarking passenger dehors the facilities that the embarking passengers get at
the existing airports” है

In view of the above conclusions of Hon'ble Coun, it is clear that Gal cannot give
power to levy DF through an agreement; it can only be done through statutory
provisions and as stated above. The statutory provisions were known to all the
bidders upfront before issue of RFP. Hence, observations of Audit that financing
of fhe project can be done only as per clause 13.1 of OMDA is not correct.

It may further be noted that the very concept of DF came into being through the
Act 43 of 2003 (section 6 and section 7) which was passed by Pajliament in 2003
for privatizing the Delhi and Mumbai airports. AAI Act, 1994 was amended


Vi
43.

23

suitably and Government came out with the bidding documents in 2005 for Delhi
and Mumbai airport privatization based on the armended AA! Act, 1994 facititating
the levy of DF; as is clear from the newly incorporated Section 22A. The AAI Act,
4994. was specifically fisted as one of the governing legislation for the aviation
sector in India in Paragraph 6.2 (Pg. 98) of the Information Memorandum dated *
4st April 2005, provided to all potential bidders at the time of privatization of

- Mumbai Airport. The AAI Act, 1994 (amended in 2003) was also provided to all

bidders in the CD #4 accompanying the RFP documents released on 1st April
2005. Thig amendment to AAI Act, (and specifically section 22A) was also
reiterated by the Hon'ble Minister of Civil Aviation in the Parliament on 2nd
December 2004 and publicised by National Media like Press Trust of India and
Business Standard. Hence, there was no need to expressly repeat all provisions
of the AAI Act in the bid documents

Though OMDA provides for listing options, it was found to be unfeasible
considering the strategic interest of various stake holders which would have been
reduced. Development Fee was considered as a last resort after refusal of
further equity by stake holders, unwillingness on the part of the lenders to finance
the project etc. :

Further, AERA has determined the DF in respect of Mumbai Airport after
considering all the factors and after due diligence of the relevant provisions of
AAI Act. AERA has given detailed reasonirig for approval of DF in their order.
The internal accruats calculation by MIAL and independent auditor was based
upon increased tariff sought by MIAL white filing its Multi Year Tariff Proposal
{MYTP) to AERA. Since AERA has allowed much lower tariff (164.29%)
compared to 881.29% asked by MIAL, projected internal accruals had to be
reduced correspondingly and AERA has considered the same while finalizing
means of finance after taking into account actual funds that would be available
for project funding after netting of funds utilised for operations capex, disallowed
project cost and other current assets."

REVENUE SHARING
The financial bidding ‘criterion for selection of JV partner was the revenue share

of JV with AAI. MIAL shares 38.7 per cent of the revenue,to AAI. As MIAL outsourced
its activities it may result in further reduction of revenue to AAI.

(i)

44.

Aeronautical tariff in ‘shared til? arrangement
The State Support Agreement has adopted a shared fill model for CSI Airport,

Mumbai where only 30 per cent of non-aeronautical revenue is considered while fixing

aeronautical tariffs. Other airports (barring IGIA, Delhi} follow a single till model where

the entire non-aeronautical revenue is considered. The shared fill model results in

‘higher aeronautical tariff. Thus, the burden on passengers would be higher in CSI


240

Airport, Mumbai. PAC in its report on DIAL urged the Government to consider the
aspect that shared till actually increased the burden on travelling passengers as
aeronautical tariffs were not subsidised by a significant part of non-aeronautical tariff
which are low capital and high revenue services while awarding airport contracts under.
PPP in future. |

45. The Commitiéé' enquired to know whether MOCA has carried out any exercise
towards calculating financial impact resulting from categorization of cargo & ground
handling services, The Ministry, in their reply, stated as under:

"The structure of tariff of the airports was deliberated by IMG and EGoM in its
several meeting before issuing of the RFP. Vide para 6.2.2.1 to 6.2.2.3 of the
EGoM Note dated 09.02.2005, EGOM was apprised about the tariff setting
principle and recommendations of the IMG. IMG had recommended that in
addition to setting out principles for tariff approach in SSA, the revision of
aeronautical tariff be kept constant in real terms in year 1, thereafter, the same
could increase @ 10% in real terms in the 2nd year and 15% in real terms in the
3rd year with a base as the preceding year. The EGoM approved the tariff.
principle as recommended by IMG with the following directions:

(i) That the current tariff base of AAI and its increase will be an interim
alrangement till AERA is set up.

(ii) AERA will be put in place in a definite timeframe.

(iii) AERA will set tariff on the basis of accepted international practices,
reasonable and efficient costs. This will be stated in the concerned document
upfront-for the information of the bidders

{iv} It must be made clear that the tariff base as contained in () above will not
be a subject matter of negotiation post bid, after selection of the successful
bidder,

4
EGOM in meeting on 15.02.2005 decided that a “hybrid shared till” “price cap
approach” be adopted for fixation of aeronautical tariff i.e. aeronautical tariff to be
fixed based on the price cap approach, with 30% of non-aeronautical revenue to -
be considered for subsidizing the aeronautical tariff. This approach was based on
the approach followed in UK and Australia,

Accordingly, the above provisions were set out in the SSA and also mentioned
about establishment of AERA. Further, in terms of the provisions of AERA Act
[Section 13 (1) (a)], while determining tariff for aeronautical services at major
airports, AERA is to take into consideration provisions of OMDA offered by the


25

Central Government in any agreement or memorandum of understanding or
othenvise. As per the opinion of the Ministry of Law and Justice, OMDA and SSA
is a concession granted by the Government. Tariff determination formula has
been prescribed in Schedule —| of the SSA. As per this, 30% of non-aeronautical
revenue should be taken into account by AERA while determining the
aeronautical charges. In other words, 38.70% of the remaining 70% of non-
aeronautical revenue is to be shared with AAI by MIAL. The latter is also shared
by AAl in terms of dividend on its share. MIAL does not gain any undue financial
advantage as it is managed by a Joint Venture Board having AAI Directors and
audited by independent auditors

Further, structure of tariff determination was part of bid process where 30% of
gross non-aero revenue (other than revenue from Nan-Transfer Assets} was to
be utilized for cross subsidization of aero charges. Based on these stipulations
only, bidders submitted bids and revenue share as high as 38.7% was quoted by
GVK led Consortium. This revenue share is not a pass through hence
passengers are not burdened with this substantial amount which goes to AAI
This amount is available to AAI for development of other airports.

It may be noted that bids submitted by bidders at the time of privatization ofthe
Airports were based upon explicit understanding that Shared Till Mechanism will
be adopted for tariff determination. Hence, no undue advantage has been given
to MIAL on this account."
46. In response to recommendation of PAC as contained in their 94th Report (45th
LS) on DIAL, the MOCA stated that Government of India is in the process of formulation
of a policy on Economic Regulation for airport sector keeping in view alt aspects.
(ii) Conflicts between OMDA and AERA Act in defining aeronautical and non-
aeronautical services
47. There are inconsistencies between provisions of OMDA and SSA signed for CSI
- Airport, Mumbaj and the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority (AERA) Act, 2008. The
definition of aeronautical and non-aeronautical services differs substantially between
OMDA and AERA Act. Ground handling and cargo. handling services have been
designated as non-aeronautical services in OMDA but are defined as aeronautical
services under the AERA Act. The ‘Target Revenue’ for fixing airport charges takes into
account only 30 per cent of the revenue generated from non-aeronautical services.
Tariff payable by the passengers will be crass subsidized only fo the extent of 30 per


26

cent by revenues generated fram cargo and ground handling services in case of CSI
Airport, Mumbai. As cargo and ground handling services constitute a major source of
revenue for the airport, this provided undue financial advantage to MIAL at the expense
of higher tariff imposed on the passengers PAC in its report on DIAL, on the same
issue, advised MOCA to apprise financial impact of the concessions granted by
Government under OMDA and_the revenue ensured by the Government. from the JV
after Ground handling services and Cargo Handling services were categorized as
aeronautical services

48. The Committee desired to know if MOCA has carried out the exercise of
calculating financial impact resulting from categorization of cargo & ground handling

_ services. The Ministry replies ‘as under:

"The Cargo and Ground Handling Services have always been shown as non-
aeronautical services as per the Annual Account Stafernent of AAI, which was
regularly laid in the Parliament. The aeronautical and non-aeronautical services

. were defined in OMDA based on the legacy followed by AAI for its own airports,
whereas provisions in AERA Act were made much later, as per the will of the
Partiament,

Schedule 6 of the OMDA categorizes Cargo Handling Services and Ground
Handling Services as Non-Aeronautical Services. Clause 12.2 of the OMDA
specifically provides for the Tariff and Regulation for charges for Non-
Aeronautical Services stating that Subject to Applicable Law, the JVC shall be
free to fix the charges for Non- Aeronautical Services, subject to the provisions of
the existing contracts and other agreeménts. These terms and conditions are a
part of Mumbai International Airport's bidding documents uniformly available to all
the parties. Further, AERA Act, 2008 empowers AERA to determine tariffs at
Major airports for aeronautical services provided at these airports including the
Ground handling and Cargo handling service. However, at the same time section
13¢1)(ay(vi) of the AERA Act also mandates the authority to take into
consideration the concession offered by Central Government in any agreement,
memorandum of understanding or otherwise. Since the AERA Act, 2008 has
been enacted after OMDA and there is a provision in the AERA Act to give due
consideration to the Concessions offered by GOl, it is evident that there is no
conflict between AERA Act and OMDA for determination of tariff for these two
services. In fact provisions of both-AERA Act and SSA have been harmoniously
applied by AERA by regulating ail the aeronautical. services, including cargo,
ground handling, on the one hand and follow shared till approach for tariff
determination as per SSA on the other hand.

As far as the financial impact of the concession granted by the Central
Government, the charges for these services are regulated by AERA under AERA


27

Act, 2008. It is further added that AAI gets its revenue share from the gross
revenue of MIAL which includes both aeronautical and non aeronautical
revenues. Therefore, AAI continues to receive its fevenue share thereon as per
the agreed rates under OMDA, irrespective of treatment of such services as
aeronautical or Non-Aeronautical. Hence, there is no impact of such treatment on
the revenue share of AAI." है

{iii} Outsourcing domestic बाप international cargo activities

49. MIAL had outsourced its cargo activities which is estimated to reduce cargo

revenue by 40 per cent in a span of two years As the cargo revenue subsidises tariff (30

per cent of cargo revenue being taken into account while working out airport tariff}, fall

in ¢argo revenues would lead to higher tariff and hence higher burden on the

passengers Besides, the revenue share of AAI will also reduce substantially with the

significant reduction in cargo revenues. The MOCA agreed that there would be drop in -
revenue in the initial period due. to outsourcing but pointed out that it would result in

better infrastructure and increase in handling capacity.

50, The Committee desired to know the status of Build Own Operate Transfer,
projects for cargo activities, details of agencies presently handling cargo activities and

involvement of any subsidiary of GVK in cargo activities. The MOCA informed as

under:

"MIAL has concessioned out intemational cargo facilities for a period of three
years to Container Corporation of India Ltd w.e.f. 18 February 2014 at revenue
share of 69%. During this period any capex to be: incurred by MIAL will be met
“out of deposit of Rs 125 crores provided by the concessionaire. Hence, MIAL
. shall not utilize its resource for capex upto हैं 125 crores.

In case of domestic cargo, MIAL has introduced a new revenue stream as AAl
was not handling domestic cargo at all Domestic cargo has also been
concessioned out to Container Corporation of India Ltd at revenue share of 42%
on BOOT basis w.e.f. 1 September 2012. Outsourcing of domestic cargo was
necessitated to pass on capital expenditure to concessionaire.

Cargo Service Centre India Private Limited (CSC} started Perishable cargo
handling w.e.f 16 May 2011 at the higher of Minimum Annual Guarantee and.
Tevenue share @ 15%. Concession for a period of five years on BOOT basis
after which entire facility will revert to MIAL at ६8.1. है

MIAL has introduced extra revenue stream which was not available in the past. It
does not involve any capital expenditure from MIAL. Further, no subsidiary of
GVK is involved in handiing of cargo activities." :


28

(iv) -Award of concession for operation of Hotel

51. As per OMDA, all developments at the airport shall be as per the existing Master
Plan and no development that is not envisaged in the Master Plan would be allowed to
be undertaken. MIAL took up construction of a hotel near Terminal 10 in June 2009
though it was not included in the Master Plans in violation of the terms in OMDA. MIAL
atso outsourced the hotel operations to a group company of GVK (a Consortium of M/s.
TAJ GVK Hotels & Resorts and Greenridge Hotels & Resorts}, with a very small
Tevenue share (4.65%) to MIAL. This was agreed to by AAI, though the arrangement
would have significant adverse impact on the revenue share of AAI with AAI receiving
only 1.79 percent of the gross earnings in the hotel project. As the hotel concession had
been awarded to a group entity of MIAL, the upside in revenue would benefit the GVK
group.

52. In reply to a query of the Committee the MOCA informed that MIAL has
concessioned out the construction and operation of Hotel near Terminal 10 to a
consortium of Taj GVK Hotels & Resorts Ltd and Green Woods Palaces & Resorts Pvt
Lid., which is a related party, through a process of competitive bidding and in full
compliance with the provisions of OMDA. However, it did not affect revenue share to
AAI in any way. They further informed about the process of award of sub-contract for
commercial use fo private parties with particular reference to maintaining transparency
in award of contract, as under:

"Selection of bidder was through tender in full compliance with provisions of
OMDA, Revenue Share Percentage and MAG was decided based upon bids
received and. subsequent upward ‘negotiations. To ensure arm's length
transaction, probity auditor was appointed. Scope of probity auditor is governed
“by provisions of schedule 12 of OMDA. Appointment of probity auditor was also
through a selection process. Terms of the contract were based on outcome of
bidding. No specific comments were offered by the Independent Engineer.

MIAL had informed AAI about key terms of contract and AA} did not find any key
term to be not-equitable or inconsistent with or contrary to the letter or spirit of
OMDA, Since the entire pracess was under supervision of probity auditor and
transaction being at arm's length, probity auditors certified and confirmed the
same."

53, in reply to yet another query of the Committee regarding plan of MOCA to
prevent grant of undue favour fo Group Companies of the airport operator as in the


29

present instance, the MOCA stated that there are adequate safequards under OMDA to
deal with related parties transactions. [n the present instance also no undue favour was
granted to related party. Entire process was audited by Probity Auditor.fo ensure

fransparent process and finalisation of terms on arms length basis

(v) Delayed Retirement Compensation

54. As per OMDA, MIAL was liable to pay ‘Retirement Compensation to AAl for
unabsorbed number of general employees. As per Article 1.1 of OMDA, Retirement
Compensation was to be based on AAT's latest available Voluntary Retirement Scheme.
AAI allowed MIAL to pay Retirernent Compensation as monthly instalments over ten
years in violation of specific directives from MOCA which stipulated that MIAL should
pay the balance amount immediately. This resulted in undue favour to MIAL and
consequent loss of interest (271.37 crore) to AAI. PAC in its report on DIAL concluded
that MOCA had erred in safeguarding the interests of employees of AAl and failed to
enforce its directives while also recoramending that MOCA enforce the contractual
obligations as per OMDA. हु

55, When the Committee prabed further to know whether any steps taken by MOCA
to ensure enforcement of contractual obligations as per OMDA, the Ministry informed
as under:

“As per the provisions of article 6.1.4 of OMDA, MIAL (JVC) is mandated to pay
Retirement compensation of such number of employees who had not opted for
the absorption in the JVC within the operation support period. The Retirement
Compensation claim has been raised by AAI in accordance with OMDA
provisions and.as per the VRS scheme of AAI and hence no lass of AAI. Thus,
there is no undue favour of MIAL. It is ensured that the provisions of OMDA are
strictly followed.”

Vil LEASING OF LAND

56. AAl leased out land in CSI Airport, Mumbai to MIAL for development of the
airport. Audit has observed that Land records maintained by AAI were not proper which
benefited MIAL.

(i) Maintenance of land records

57. _ The leased premises was not demarcated nor was its area defined before
handing over the land to MIAL. Neither OMDA nor the lease deed signed between AAI


30

and MIAL demarcated and defined the specific detaits of leased land. Both documents
were to have a map of the ‘demised premises’ which was left blank. AAI did not have
up-to-date land records. As such, the area of CS! Airport, Mumbai stated to be 1875
acres in the Request for Proposals increased fo 2006 acres on actual survey by MIAL.
The very significant difference in areas quoted by AAI and MIAL raised questions on the
quality of land records and documents maintained by AAI. हि

58. In reply to a query of the Committee regarding availability of land records and the
present status of the same, the MOCA stated as under:

“At the time of handing over of CS! Airport fo MIAL, the OMDA provided only ihe
map of the demised premises and carved out assets and the land was handed
over on as-is-where-in basis. No proper land records were available with AAl
since the same was not handed over to AAI on its formation. However, MIAL
subsequent to taking over the airport, surveyed the Total Area of Land as CSIA
through Government of Maharashtra and accordingly property cards were
prepared. As on date details of property cards vis-a-vis total area (in acres) are

_ as follows:
‘ :
Total land area as per OMDA and Supplementary 2006.24
Lease Deed dt.21,12.2011 | |
Increase in area due to correction in property cards 0.12
Total Area | .: | 2006,36
Property cards available (‘including 17.08 acres of 4975.10"

land permanently transferred to Indian Navy and
Indian Air Force but property cards continue fo be

in name of AAT है
Property cards not avaifable in name of AAI | |
| Property where title is under dispute 27.49
Property cards under process 3.77 31.26 | 2006.36

As already stated earlier, MIAL will be allowed to commercially exploit only 10%
of original Demised Prémises i.e. 10% of 1875 acres."

59. The Committee asked for the reasons for handing over the Government land to a
private party for development without clearly earmarking the boundaries of airport land,
demised premises and carved out area. The Ministry informed as under:

"The Mumbai Airport was set up before independence and the airport belonged
to the then Civil Aviation Department. This land. was subsequently transferred by
an Act of Parliament, namely the Intetnational Airports Authority of India Act,
1971, to the then constituted International Airports Authority of India on ‘as is
where is’ basis. Thereafter, the land was vested in the Airports Authority of India
by the Airports Authority of India Act, 1994. No details of land records have been
passed on by the erstwhile organizations to the new organizations. Though |


60,

31

Airports Authority of India has been making efforts to get the details of land
records, the same fas been difficult to acquire, being an old record.

AS regards survey, a large part of the 0918 boundaries are covered with slums,
and therefore it was not possible to earmark the boundaries of the airport land
Similarly, due fo on-going litigations and adverse possession of land in some
cases, it was not practically possible to earmark the boundaries of demised
premises. Even property cards were not updated and were not available for
major portion of airport land which MIAL took up an war footing and has got fand
records updated for substantial portion of land.

However, the total area of land handed over to MIAL was based on the demised
area Map indicated in the Scheduled 25 of OMDA and Schedule 1 of the Lease
Deed.

Meanwhile the Committee wanted ta know whether MOCA has issued any

instructions based on PAC recommendations on DIAL report to undertake joint survey

of land and erect physical markings to identify the demised land and carved out assets

for future. The Ministry in their reply furnished as under:

(ii)

61.

“As regards recommendations of the 1019७ Committee w.r.t. GIA, New Delhi,
the requited action to survey the land including physical markings in respect of all
fand — dernised premises, carved out assets and excluded assets is being taken
by the airport operator i.e. M/s Delhi International Airport Pvt. Ltd. (DIAL). This
being a huge exercise and also the existing records are not avaiable and. the
ownership details are also not readily available, it is anticipated that the work will
take some time. .

As regards land at CSIA, Mumbai, MIAL had, through Government of
Maharashtra, conducted survey of Mumbai airport land area in 2006/2007.
However, physical markings are still not possible in most areas due to reasons
enumerated above. MIAL has obtained property cards for the land except land
parcels where there are title disputes."

+

Carved out land transferred to MIAL on the basis of 'Upfront Fee’

‘Carved out assets' were primarily intended for the use of AAl as per OMDA and

could be transferred to MIAL, if required, for aeronautical purposes with the condition

that the parties (AAL and MIAL) should negotiate the terms and conditions of such

transfer. AAI agreed to transfer 48.15 actes out of carved out assets to MIAL against a

meagre consideration based on upfront fee paid by MIAL without negotiation of terms

and conditions as provided in OMDA. MOCA maintained that upfront fee paid had no


32

relation to the extent of land and assets at airport. However, this upfront fee was the
- basis for transfer of part of carved out assets 0 MIAL. _
62. As per OMDA, for transfer of additional Jand out of carved out assets,
“negotiations in good faith” were to be carried out. In this context, the Committee
desired to know whether such negotiations were carried out before transfer of carved
out land. The Ministry in their detailed reply stated as under: 7

"As per OMDA, the airport land is classified into three relevant categories:

Demised Premises: Section 2.6.1 of OMDA defines “Dermised Premises” as — all
the land {along with any buildings, constructions or immovable assets, if any,
thereon) which is described, delineated and shown in the Schedule 25 hereto,
other than (i) any lands (along with any buildings, constructions or immovable
assets, if any, thereon) granted to any third partly under any Existing Lease(s)
constituting the Airport on.the.date hereof; and (ii) any and all of the Carved Out
Assets and the underlying land together with any buildings, constructions or
immovable assets thereon, on an “as is where is basis" together with all
Encumbrances thereto,

- Schedule 25 consists of the Map Demarcating the Demised Premises.
Excluded Premises: In the event at any time during the Term, the JVC requires
the hundred (100) hectares of land (or any part thereof) as identified in the Initial
Development Plan and deducted for determining the Demised Premises (the
“Excluded Premises’), for the purposes of provision of Aeronautical Services,
then JVC may request AAI to lease such Excluded Premises, or part thereof, as
the case be, and upon such request the Parties shalt enter in to a lease deed for
grant of such lease

- Carved Out Assets are defined under Section 27 of OMDA

The additional 48.45 acres demised to MIAL in terms of OMDA for aeronautical
purpose is part of the “Excluded Premises” and not Carved out assets as noted
by CAG. Hence, this transfer from “Excluded Premises” is governed by Section
2.6.1 of OMDA according to which no compensation was envisaged. Section
2.6.3 is not applicable in this :situation since the transferred land is not part of
Carved Out Assets. Section 2.6.3 reads as follows: “With respect to land
underlying the Carved Out Assets, the Parties further agree ‘that if, at any time
during the Term, the JVC requires the said fand for providing any Aeronautical
Services or developing and/or constructing any Aeronautical Assets, the Parties
shall come together to negotiate in good faith the terms and conditions on which
the AAI shall lease to the JVC, and the JVC shall take on lease from the AAI, the
said land”

Hence, “Excluded Premises” can be transferred to MIAL without any
compensation to AAI as this land is to be used only for aeronautical purposes
Further, it also needs to be understood that the leasing of land by AAT to MIAL is


33

in return of its share of 38.70% of the total revenue. Annual Fee was quoted by
bidders based on Revenue potential not based on quantum of land, Assuming
that the terms and conditions mean to determine some compensation is outside
he purview of OMDA. Terms and canditions could be like relocation of AAl
facilities by MIAL at its cost, timing of handing over carved out assets, cost of
densification of colony, cost of ATC Tower, timeline, quantum of land, facilities to
be created by MIAL etc.

n fact upfront fee was nof payable on any subsequent leasing of land. However,
AAI could negotiate the upfront amount in proportion to = 150 crores paid by
MIAL. For this purpose AAI calculated arnaunt to be paid by MIAL on the basis of
% 150 crores upfront fee paid by MIAL for, then estimated, 1875 acres, while
ease rent under OMDA is = 100 per annum only and extension of the same
would have meant additional lease rent of Rs 2.57 per annum, instead AA| has
got 3.852 crores over and above revenue share @ 38.7%. It will not be out of
place to mention that upfront fee was to cover average profit which AAI would
“have earned in year 2003-04. Therefore, lease rental from MIAL is
inconsequential. On the other hand leasing to other entities like performing the
reserved activities is only in return of lease rental and hence this comparison
itself is not correct."

(iii) Commercial exploitation of Land

63. OMDA allows MIAL to utilize ten percent of ‘demised premises’ for commercial
exploitation. RFP issued by AAI in 2005 indicated the total area of Mumbai Airport as
1875 8७85. OMDA signed in Aprit 2006 did not indicate the fotal area of the airport but
fixed the area of carved out assets as 76,3 acres. Accordingly, initially the land
available for commercial exploitation was 179.8 acres, which increased to 790.1 acres
in December 2011 on account of re-survey of the land which indicated total land as
2006.73 acres. MIAL benefitted by 10.23 acres of additional exploitable land. Further,
with the transfer of carved out asset, the land eligibility of MIAL for commercial
exploitation Increased to 196.67 acres. The revenue fram these activities would not be
considered for determination of airport charges. However it has the potential for
reduction of burden of levies on passengers. .

64. On being enquired about the total area of land made available to MIAL for
Aeronautical purposes, Non Aeronautical purposes and commercial purposes the
Ministry in their reply, submitted as under: ह

"As per OMDA, the. activities taken up at airport have been classified only as
Aeronautical, Non-aeronautical and Essential activities. Aeronautical and Non-


34

aeronautical services are performed by the Airport operator whereas the
Essential services are performed by the Government agencies. OMDA provides
that MIAL can provide the Non-aeronautical services provided however that the
land area utilized for provision of Non- Transfer Assets shall not exceed 10% of
the total land area constituting the Demised Premises.

This issue was examined by the Public Accounts Committee in respect of Delhi
airport also and has acknowledged the reply of MOCA.

Aiter survey of [and MIAL had intimated the following:

Totai AAl Land { as per Supplementary Lease Deed dated Acres | Acres | Acres
24" Dec. 2011

Less 2006.73
Transferred to Indian navy and Indian Air Force on permanent 17.08

basis

Carved aut as per OMDA { less already demised to MIAL’ 32.32

Carved aut, now demised fo MIAI but nat to be calculated for the 43,98
purpose of Non-Transfer Asset

Carved out as per OMDA
‘ है 76.30
Carved out ( Hotel Leela} but shown less in OMDA | 0.49 | |
Carved oul, as per lease deed but not OMDA, demised to MIAL, 4.17 | 80.96
but the status of carved out disputed by MIAL,
Land to be demised to MIAL subject to order of Bombay High 7.66 108.70
Court,
Derniged [and éligible for calculation of 10% cap 1901.03 }
Land which can be used for commercial exploitation (10%: 190.16

65. It has been further informed that presently maximum area of land for Commercial
exploitation based on 10% cannot exceed 190,11 acres, Land was given to MIAL on as-

is-where-is basis. Any change in area is mainly.due to correction of records. No extra
piece of land has been given to MIAL other than demise or carved out assets as per
provisions of OMDA and subject to end use restriction, In fact extent of slums has now
been estimated to be 308.95 acres against 147 acres indicated in OMDA and 171 acres
indicated in State Government Support Agreement.

66. | MOCA also informed that as per Interim Development Plan by Special Planning
Authority (SPA) ie. MMRDA, 133 acres of and is earmarked for commercial
exploitation. Question of commercial exploitation will always be governed by
Development Plan approved by SPA. At any point of time if commercial utilization
exceeds 10% of the total land, it will be violation of OMDA provisions and consequent


35°
h

action against MIAL shall follow. MIAL is permitted fo undertake certain commercial
activities as per Schedule 6 of OMDA

{iv) Unwarranted benefit to MIAL on relocation of activities and Change in iand use
67. MIAL proposed to relocate non-aeronautical facilities (Air India Cabin catering
and Chef-Air Flight Kitchen-3 acres) to carved out land which amounts to usage of
‘additional carved out land for non-aeronautical purposes and was a violation of the
OMDA provisions, OMDA enjoins that ‘carved out land’ could be used by MIAL only for
aeronautical purposes. AAI MOCA agreed to this proposal. MOCA also agreed to the
subsequent proposal of MIAL for change in end use of this vacated land for non-
aeronautical purpose, on the condition that MIAL provide an alternate location of
identical size for aeronautical purpose. Alternate site proposed was-in an encroached
area accepted by AAUMOGA, 5 acres of land earmarked for AAl's Air Traffic
Management Centre by MIAL was also in the encroached region, MIAL had been
directed to provide suitable land to AAI. व ‘
68. The MOCA further informed that as per OMDA, the total non-aero /commercial
land available to MIAL in any case is limited to 190.11 acres which 10% of the tatal
demised premises. No land use change has been allowed resulting in increase in
overall limit on commercial exploitation of land.

69. The Ministry also submitted that AAI has not agreed ta alternate locations where
the land is in encroached area. MIAL, in November, 2014, has already earmarked 5
acres of land to be handed over to AAI for Air Traffic Flow Management Centre.

(v) शाप in possession of other government agencies

70. MIAL has listed nine pockets of land in and around CSI Airport in the possession
of other government agencies. Intended use of such land altered over time as per
successive Master Plans of MIAL. AAl/ MOCA allowed such changes to be made
without any significant comment on these plans, Audit has observed that transfer of
possession of identified land pockets (in possession of [MD, CPWD) to MIAL involves
significant expenditure which would be loaded to the project cost in subsequent control
periods and would, thus, lead to future increases in airport’ charges and possibly

additional burden on passengers.


36

71. The Committee were informed that no change in use of land has taken place. A
Yellow Fever Hospital to cater to the medical requirements of the passengers has been
provided at the airport premises. The cost incurred and capitalized for construction of
the hospital is हैं 9.82 crares and the same has been formed part of Regulatory Asset
Base (RAB). No other arnount so far has been included in RAB relating to the
Government. agencies as. work is still ongoing. Once projects are. completed, MIAL
needs to submit the details fo AERA for its scrutiny and consideration about eligibility for
inclusion under RAB. ;

(vi) Encroachment at CS} Airport, Mumbai

72, Two documents signed by AAI in 2006 i.e. Lease deed and State Government
Support Agreement (SGSA) indicated two different figures as area under
encroachment. This indicated lack of clear understanding of AAI regarding the area that.
was actually under encroachment. Area under encroachment increased from 147 acres
to 308.96 acres which only highlight 8४0५3 deficiencies in land records management.
MIAL executed a contract with M/s. Housing Development and Infrastructure Limited
(HDIL) to undertake activities relating to rehabilitation of encroachers and restoration of
the Airport land under encroachment in lieu of the right to develop part of the land
vacated by encroachers. The encroachment was to be removed within 48 months of
commencement date ie. by October 2011 or with further six months extension at
MIAL’s discretion. The contract was subsequently terminated by MIAL as the
encroachment was not removed. :

73. In reply to a query of the Committee regarding agreement between MIAL and M/s
Housing Development and Infrastructure Limited (HDIL) for Slum Rehabilitation and
related issues, the MOCA furnished as under:

"MIAL had also entered info a State Government Support Agreement (SGSA)
with the Government of Maharashtra in 2006. The SGSA empowers MIAL to
remove the encroachment from the airport land. For the purpose, Clause 3.1.2 of
SGSA stipulates that if MIAL requires the use of any of the land at the airport
site, which land is subject to encroachment and hindering the provision of
Aeronautical Services and/or to construct, develop and maintain any
aeronautical assets at the airport, it shall notify GoMh and AAI of the same and
pursuant to receiving the aforesaid notice from Company, GoMh shall undertake
its best efforts in providing support to the Company and AAI in clearing the land.


37

GoMh, vide Government order No. MRD 3305 Circular No. 858/UD-7 dated 30"
September, 2005, appointed Urban Development Department as a nodal agency
for airport slum Rehabilitation. Accordingly, Mumbat Metrapolitan Region
Development Authority (MMRDA) was asked by GoMh to take necessary action
for survey of slums for further action. MIAL entered into an agreement on 1200
December; 2006, with MMRDA to assist MIAL in various functions relating to
slum rehabilitation inctuding appointment of developers to carry out the
developments as per Slum Rehabilitation Authority (SRA) Scheme. In order to
rehabilitate the slum dwellers to free aizport land for airport development
purposes, MIAL engaged M/s Housing Development and Infrastructure Limited
(HDIL} as a developer through competitive bidding process. A Slum Rehabilitation
Agreement was executed by MIAL with HDIL on 19" October, 2007.

There are about 75000 - 80000 hutments on airport land about 3-4 lacs people
are involved. A large number of slur dwellers are ineligible under State Slum
Rehabilitation Scheme, Slums around the airport are the largest sium in Mumbai,
bigger than even Dharavi. It is not feasible that only eligible slum dwellers are
rehabilitated and ineligible slum dwellers are removed. Slums around airport are
also a grave security threat.

One of the conditions of the fender was that slum rehabilitation has to be ex-situ,
18, developer should have at least 50 Acres of their land ant construct
tenements for rehabilitation of slum dwellers on such land. HDIL had submitted
the bid asking for lump suit %640 crores and 35% cleared land ie. about 97
acres being 35% of the 276 acres encroached land but without any title dispute.
After negotiation, it was agreed that only about 23.5% of land being 85 acres and

_ without any [ump sum consideration will be available to HDIL on sub-lease basis,
subject to the provisions of OMDA. Sublease was to be co-terminus with OMDA
and all rights of AAI under OMDA were incorporated in the agreement entered
into with HDIL. It may be noted that the no commercial vatue can be ascribed to
any encroached land.

HDIL had to-bear all the costs and expenses relating to the entire slum
tehabilitation project as below:

i. Cost of procuring the Land; *

ii, Cost of construction of tenements for the rehabilitation of the Protected
Stum Dwellers and the cost of relocating the Protected Slum Dwellers from the
Encroached Airport Land fo transit tenements (if any) and from the transit
tenements fo the rehabilitation buildings;

ili. Cost of transit tenements;
iv, Casts of compliance;

v. All charges to be paid to MMRDA including = 20,000 per tenement
pursuant to the Agreement dated December 12th, 2006 executed between MIAL
and MMRDA.


38

vi. Payment of infrastructure charges and other payments to the SRA or any
other authority pursuant to the Applicable Law and Approvals;

vi. © Amount payable for the purpose of improvement of infrastructure in slum
or slum rehabilitation areas;

vit, Infrastructure development charges equaf to double the infrastructure
development charges as applicable;

‘ix All deposits payable to SRA or any other authority;
x. Land under construction charges;

xi. All fees and expenses for obfaining Approvals for the rehabilitation of the
Protected Slum Dwellers and evicting and: removing Unauthorised Slum Dwellers
frorn the Encroached Airport Land;

xii, Payments to be made concerning Slum Rehabilitation Project to
consultants including PMC, architects, designers, security personnel and —
contractors; है

xiii, Cost of provision of all required off site infrastructure including as per

requirements of Applicable Law, Government and other agencies;
।

xiv. All expenses incidental and ancillary to implementation of the Slum
Rehabilitation Project including the litigation costs to be incurred for the
tehabilitation of the Protected Slum Dwellers and removal and/or eviction of
Unauthorised Afrport Slum Dwellers from the Encroached Airport Land;

xv, Costs for removal of debris;

xvi. Any cost, charges, tax(including service tax and works contract tax),
stamp duty, registration charges, legal charges, levies, fees, cess as may be
imposed from time to time for the implementation of the Slum Rehabilitation
Project and any instrument in relation thereto, grant of any rights or benefits;

xvii. Cost of formation of co-operative housing societies of slum dwellers;

xvifi, Costs of settlement and/or removal of Unauthorised Slum Dwelters from
the Encroached Airport Land; and

xix. All costs to be incurred in relation to conducting and completing the Plane
Table Survey.

All above costs and charges are indicative and not éxhaustive.

Since slum rehabilitation had to be on the land outside airport, no benefit from
airport land by way of TDR could acerue to HDIL. Hence, whatever TDR HDIL
had to receive was in relation with land procured by it and tenernents to be
constructed thereon for eligible slum dwellers as per slum rehabilitation scheme
of Government of Maharashtra. Looking into enormity of ineligible slum dwellers,


74.

39

it was agreed that in consideration of HDIL taking responsibility of clearing airport
land by removing both eligible and ineligible slum dwellers, MIAL will sublease
85 acres of land to HDIL for commercial development as permitted under OMDA.

There was no commitment from MIAL whether HDIL gets any benefit or not other
than 65 acres of land to be made available on sub-lease basis as consideration
for the slum dwellers. it is pertinent to mention that 65 acres of land was subject
to HDIL clearing entire 276 acre of airport land and handing over unencumbered
possession to MIAL. Further TDR could accrue to developer; only on acquiring
the land and construction of tenements on such land.

HDIL had fo clear about 158 acres of land and handover to MIAL for operational
use. Any sub-lease of land to HDIL was to be in phases only based on balance
118 acres of land cleared by HDIL. For each acre of land cleared other than 158
acres, only 0.55 acre of land was to be sub-leased fo HDIL i.e. out of 118 actes,
65 acres of land was te be sub-leased fo HDIL.

In view of the facts mentioned above, the issue of providing double benefit fo
HDIL by MIAL may not be appropriate.

As per agreement with M/s HDIL slum. rehabilitation was to be implemented
within a period of four years in different phases (2007 to 2011). HDIL could not
perform in spite of repeated assurances to do so.-Finally MIAL issued a Cure
Notice to HDIL against which also HDIL could not perform and as a last resort,
MIAL terminated the agreement with HDIL on 6" February, 2013. Subsequently,
HDIL went for litigation and the matter is sub-judice with Arbitral Tribunal."

When the Committee further enquired whether SRA and MMRDA have gone

overboard and given such benefit to a private company, the MOCA stated that the

policies promulgated by Government of Maharashtra which was implemented by SRA,

has been put in place after prolonged and detailed stakeholders consultations. MMRDA

was taken on board by MIAL to ensure proper implementation of the approved SR

policy of the Government of Maharashtra.

75.

The Committee desired to know the details of any payment made by MIAL to

HDIL to undertake the aforesaid activity and whether any penalty been imposed on

HIDL for not fulfilling its contractual obligations. The Committee were informed by the
MOCA as under:

"Due to non-performance, MIAL terminated the agreement with HDIL. The party
aggrieved over the termination filed a petition in the Bombay High Court seeking
relief on (i) issuing injunction to stay the termination process; (ji) And to maintain
status quo in réspect of non-transfer assets,


40

The petition was summarily dismissed. HDIL challenged the Order before the
Division Bench of Bombay High Court and the samé was dismissed with direction
to HDIL to pay cost of 25 lakhs to MIAL, 22.5 lakhs each to MMRDA and SRA.
HDIL filed a SLP with Supreme Court of India which was also dismissed.

As ‘per the provisions of the agreement, an arbitral Tribunal was constituted on
02/09/13 with Justice SH Kapadia (Reid) being nominated by MIAL, Justice AM
Ahmadi was nominated by HDIL, and both the Co-arbitrators nominated Justice
JB Patnaik’as the presiding Arbitrator. All the appointees are former Chief Justice *
of Supreme Court. HDIL filed an application before the arbitral Tribunal seeking
interim directions to allow the contract to be performed, a direction not to create
any third party interest over the proprieties to the extent of 65 acres (land) which
would have otherwise been given to HDIL after successful completion of the
contract, a direction not to give the contract to any other person until the
conclusion of the arbitral proceedings and a direction injuncting MIAL from
putting the slum dwellers in tenements constructed by HDIL.

The application was rejected by the Tribunal. MIAL has filed a counter claim of
211,807 crores in which an amount of 2276.46 crores is towards Liquidated
Damages." हु

76. While giving details of procedure and justification of transferring 65 acres of
prime non-aeronautical area of developable land to HDIL, the MOCA stated that as per
agreement with HDIL, no fand was envisaged to be transferred. As a part of
consideration in getting the encroached land .of 276 acres vacated, having around 3
lakhs persons both eligible & ineligible slum dweller, the agreement provided for sub-
lease of 65 acres of land to HDIL for carrying out commercial activities as provided in
OMDA and AA! Act. No ownership rights or transfer of {and on permanent basis was
provided in the agreement.

77. The Committee then enquired as to how does MIAL/MOCAV/State Govt. of
Maharashtra propose to address the challenges of rehabilitation of encroachment and
restoration of airport land. The MOCA in a written submission stated as under:

"Govt. of Maharashtra, on the recommendation of MOCA is formulating Airport
Specific Stum Rehabilitation Scheme for CSIA. This Scheme along with its
Development Contral Regulations are being finalized by Govt of Maharashtra
under Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning Act, 1966 (MRTP, 1966) as part
of the statutory process of the State Govt.

As. regards involvement of AAI in the slum rehabilitation project, MIAL had
approached AAI for its approval for in-situ rehabilitation of slum dwellers as per
policy of State Government or as per any other schemes as may be applicable.


4)

AAI has given ‘in principle’ approval for in-situ slum rehabilitation. Besides,
granting necessary approvals, AAI has the right fo seek details of agreement to
ensure OMDA compliance." है

Vili. PASSENGER SERVICE FEE

78, Passenger Service Fee (PSF) is an amount collected from each embarking
passenger at the airports by the airlines. The PSF has two components viz., Security
Component (SC) which constitutes 65 per cent, and the Facilitation Component 35 per
cent of the total PSF charge. As per SSA, respective airlines shall collect the entire
PSF and distribute the Security Component (SC) to AAl and the Facilitation Component
(FC) to MIAL directly.

(i) Unauthorised expenditure

79. As per State Support Agreement, MIAL was responsible for procuring and
maintaining at its own cost, all security systems and equipment (except arms and
ammunitiqns) as tequired by the Government of India (GOI) or the Bureau of Civil.
Aviation Security or its designated nominee(s)/representative(s) from time to time.
MOCA pemitted entire cost incurred on security equipment deployed at the airports to
be met from PSF (SC). MIAL included cost of security equipment's in the PSF (SC)
account. Thus, the order of the MOCA permitting the same to be met from the PSF
(SC), overriding the provisions of SSA, resulted jn extending unwarranted favour of हैं
87.97 crore to MIAL. Using Ministry's directions, MIAL also charged 22.55 lakh towards
insurance charges of PSF (80) account which were otherwise to be borne by the MIAL
as per OMDA. PAC in its report on DIAL had observed that such lapses should not

occur.
4

80, The Committee desired to know status of the same issue in case of DIAL where
MOCA has assured PAC that in future the cost of security equipment would be met by
JVC as mandated in SSA. The Ministry in their reply stated as under:

"MoCA vide its Order dated 18.02.2014, has directed all the airport operators to
reverse/reimburse back to the respective PSF(SC) escrow account, with in a
period of one month, the total amount spent (on account of capital
costs/expenditure) so far towards procurement and maintenance of security
- systems/equipment and on creation of fixed assets out of the PSF(SC) escrow
account, together with the interest that would have accrued in normal course had


42

the said amount not been debited against the PSF(SC) escrow account, MAL
‘has filed a Writ Petition before Mumbai High court for quashing and setting aside
the order. The Hon. High court has ordered the parties to maintain status quo ‘
and directed MOCA not te take any coercive action till the matter is finalty
decided by Hon'ble High Court. Hence, the matter is sub-judice."

81. In response to query of the Committee regarding the control mechanism that
MOCA intends to put in place for ensuring that such lapses do not recur, the Ministry
” submitted that Rule 884 has been inserted in the Aircraft Rule 1937 to collect Airport
Security Fee (ASF) for meeting security expenditure Draft, Standard Operating
Procedure (SOP) has already been circulated for comments to all stakeholder. This
SOP, infer alia, list out expenditure which can be incurred through ASF, Collection and

utilization of ASF is being assigned to AAI to rule out any use which is not listed.

(ii)  Unjustified Charge :

82. In violation of MOCA order which specifies that the security related expenses
permitted under PSF(SC) should not include expenditure on any other security staff or
other administrative set-up created /engaged by the airport operator, MIAL charged
salary of 312.36 crore from PSF (SC) Escrow Account (2009-10 to 2011-12) in respect
of security emplayees and other miscellaneous services from private agencies deployed
at Mumbai Airport. PAC, in its report on DIAL had advised MOCA to look into matter
and fix responsibility for ‘avoidable loss to Government.

83. The Committee desired to know the present status in this regard in view of the
recommendation of PAC in DIAL report, where PAC urged the GOI to fix responsibility’
for avoidable loss to Government. The MOCA stated that any perception that if any
security expenses are incurred from PSF(SC) which has been objected by MOCA, is
loss of Government is not correct. As security is the sovereign function, all security
expenses have to be met by Government. In case any security related expenditure,
whether revenue or capital, is not allowed to be incurred through PSF(SC) the same
has 10 be collected through tariff from passengers. Any perception that MIAL has
gained ‘because of any expenditure incurred through PSF (80) is misconception.
Ultimately MIAL has to meet security related expenditure either through PSF(SC) or
through amount collected through tariff.


43

PART -॥

RECOMMENDATIONS AND OBSERVATIONS

introductory
The Committee note that in pursuance of the Policy on Airport
Infrastructure 1997, the Cabinet approved the restructuring of airports of Airport
Authority of India (AAI) in January 2000 through long term lease route and
directed that after detailed plans were prepared for development of any airport,
each such case for lease should be separately brought up for the consideration
of the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs {CCEA}. Accordingly, action was
initiated by the Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) to restructure and upgrade Delhi,
Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata airports through the long leasing route. Financial
and Legal consultants were appointed and work of due diligence and transaction
structure started. In this process the MOCA felt that the joint venture route had
certain advantages over long term lease route. The Cabinet in December 2002
considered the proposal for restructuring of four airports through JV route by
formation of separate Joint Venture Company (JVC) for each airport with selected
bidder in which AAI would have five per cent equity and directed the MOCA to
discuss the proposal with Ministry of Finance and the then Ministry of Company
Affairs. In July 2003 Ministry of Finance opined that the proposal should be
' restricted te Delhi and Mumbai only. The Cabinet in September 2003 approved
the proposal for restructuring of Delhi and Mumbai airports through JV route by
formation of two separate companies between AAI and the selected JV partners.
The Cabinet also approved formation of Empowered Group of Ministers (EGOM)
comprising of Minister of Finance, Minister of Disinvestment and Minister of Civil
Aviation to decide on the modalities Including design parameters, bid evaluation
criteria, etc. based on which JV partner was to be selected. Later on-in June
2004, the Minister of Defence became the Chairman of the EGOM. This EGOM in
February 2005 approved all the key principles of the Request for Proposal {RFP}
document alongwith the draft transaction documents ie. Operation, Management
and Development Agreement (OMDA), State Support Agreement (SSA),

Shareholders Agreement (SHA), Lease Deed Agreements, Communication,


44

Navigation, Surveillance and Air Traffic Management (CNSATM} Agreement and

State Government Support Agreement (SGSA). After evaluation of the technical

and financial bids, EGOM recommended the JV partner which was also approved

by the Cabinet on 1% February 2006, For CSIA, Mumbai, the approved JV partner

was Mis GVK Consortium which comprised of three private entities. AAI

incorporated on 1° March 2006. a_subsidiary company namely M/s Mumbai

International Airport Private Limited (MIAL). After the OMDA was signed on 4"

April 2006 with the JV partner, 74% of the equity shares were sold to them in

accordance with the Shareholders Agreement. In terms of the agreement, share

capital of 2200 crore was jointly held by AAI (26 per cent}, GVK Holdings Pvt. Ltd.

(37 per cent), Bid Services Division (Mauritius) Limited (27 per cent) and ACSA

Global Limited (10 percent). Subsequently, on 18 October 2011, 1,08,00,000 (out
of 5,40,00,000) shares of Bid Services Division (Mauritius) were acquired by GVK
Holdings Pvt. Ltd. raising its stakes above 50 per cent in MIAL. The paid-up
equity capital of MIAL as on 16 April, 2012 was #1200 crore with the share of AAI-
at 26 per cent. The Mumbai Airport was handed over fo M/s MIAL with effect from

3 May 2006. The Committee note that the Airports Council International had

adjudged the CSI Airport as the fifth best in the world among 235 airports in the
category of 25-40 million passengers per annum and appreciate the
improvements in services at CSIA. The Committee, however, found several
lacunae and shortcomings in the operationalisation of the JV mode and
implementation of OMDA and SSA which are similar to those found by fhe PAC in
case of Delhi International Airport Limited (DIAL) (94th Report/15th LS). The
Committee examined the subject in depth, took evidence of the representatives of
MOCA, AAI, MIAL, GVK etc. and also conducted an on-the-spot study visit to
obtain first hand knowledge and understand the ground realities at CSIA. The
findings of the Committee are contained in the subsequent paragraphs.

Design Constraint
2. The Committee note that on account of crass alignment of the two
runways, CSIA has a design constraint, The Committee also find that the initial

plan of GVK for a parallel runway to increase the runway capacity of the airport


45

was shelved due to involvement of large scale relocation of facilities and
consequent need for acquisifion of privately owned jand. Due to this constraint
the capacity of CSIA was not to exceed 40 million passengers per annum (mppa)
which was expected to be reached by 2015, even after the modernisation and up-
gradation. The Committee feel that even after modernization and upgradation of
CSI airport, Mumbai, the airport would be unable to. meet the demand of
passengers. Meanwhile, the MOCA has also commenced the process for
construction of another airport at Navi Mumbai 7.86. Navi Mumbai International
Airport (NMIA) to meet the future requirements of air passengers. It is expected
that NMIA will be operationalised by December 2020. The Committee feel that the
magnitude of problem, pertaining to passenger handling would be compounded
with delay in development of NMIA, They, therefore, recommend MOCA to take a
more pro-active role in expediting processes of inviting request for proposal,
financial bids, finalisation of bics and award of contract for construction of NMIA,
keeping in view the observations and recommendation of PAC contained in their
94th Report (15th Lok Sabha), without any delay as the CSIA is likely to reach its
capacity much before 2020 i.e. targeted date of operationalisation of NMI Airport.
Considering the delays expected in commissioning of NMIA and near saturation
at CSIA, the Committee desire that another AAl airport at Juhu, Mumbai, which is
also plagued with problems of encroachment, be secured and a plan be prepared
to develop-it as an alternative to handle small/charter traffic. The Committee
would also like to be informed of the action taken by MOCA to deal with
passenger congestion at CSIA till the NMIA become operational.

‘

Right Of First Refusal

3. The Committee note that SSA gave MIAL the Right of First Refusal (8०11२)
with regard to any second airport planned within 150 Km radius of the 0818, The
second airport, if planned through a competitive bidding process, then MIAL too
would participate and in the event of being unsuccessful, MIAL would be allowed
to match Its bid with the most competitive bid, if it was within 10 per cent of that
bid. The Committee note that this condition is applicable only in the first 30 years
and was also- stipulated in case of Delhi International Airport Limited (DIAL), The


46

MOCA had earlier submitted in response to recommendation of PAC as contained
in their 94th Report on DIAL that competition and transparency will be ensured in
the process whenever ROFR is exercised jn future. The Committee hope that the
assurance given hy MOCA would be fulfilled.
Concession Period
4, .... The Committee note that in terms of Article.18.1(b} of OMDA, MIAL enjoys
the unilateral right to extend the concession period for another 30 years on the
identical terms and conditions provided no event of default takes place during
20" and 25" year of first concession period of 30 years as in the case of DIAL
also. MOCA informed that this practice is in vogue in the aviation sector in all
over the world where airports were given for 80 years and 100 years also to
private operators. The Cabinet Note of September 2003 specifically envisaged
that concession period of next 30 years will be subject to ‘mutual agreement and
negotiation of terms’. However, MOCA stated that the extension of concession
period was not automatic/unlimited as conditions like satisfactory performance in
first 30 years was stipulated under OMDA. These provisions relating to extension
of lease petiod were finalized before Request for Proposal was issued to the
qualified bidders, While giving the reasons for extending the concession period
by another 30 years, the MOCA submitted that it was felt that the investment
would need a fonger fime-frame and also fo attract more bidders for Delhi and
Mumbai airports, the EGOM made a provision for further extension of 30 years.
The Ministry also informed that there are several expressed provisions in the
OMDA for monitoring and supervision of the operational and financial
performances of the JVC apart from 'OMDA ‘implementation Oversight Committee’
(OlOC).and Airport Economic and Regulatory Authority (AERA). The Committee
feel that in the absence of review clause and re-negotiation before extension of
concession period, it appears as if MIAL has been allowed the right to operate the
-airport for a period of 60 years with the terms and conditions frozen in OMDA.
They, therefore, recommend that review of performance by MOCA at regular
intervals is all the more essential to safeguard the revenue interests of the
Government as also to condition MIAL to deliver as per its committed outputs.


a7

Change in Scope of Work and Master Plan
5, The Committee note that as per OMDA, MIAL had to submit the Master Plan

and Major Development Plan for development of 5518 before expiry of six month
from the date of execution of OMDA to AAI for information and to MOCA for
review and comments. The schedule for comments of MOCA and MIAL's action
taken thereon are laid down in the SSA. MIAL submitted -the initia! Master Plan
and Major Development Plan (MDP) on 3 October 2006. The revised Master Plan
_ and MDP was submitted to AAI and MOCA in 2007 after seven and thirteen
months respectively as against the time limit of 15 days specified in SSA.
Subsequently, MIAL submitted modified Pian in March 2014 thus, it remained
flexible for over five years. MOCA, however, informed that Master Pian submitted
in 2006 was revised by MOCA/AA) and commented that JVC consider
development of Airport under one roof at Sahar. The MIAL considered the
suggestion and submitted revised Plan of ‘one roof. The initial Plan which
indicated parallel runway was also shelved on ground realities such as
encroachment of Airport land. MOCA did not find any fault in delay as the revised
Master Plan after incorporating all the changes was submitted in March 2011
considering additional work and deletion of works which were not feasible.
MOCA also justified integrating of passenger handling facilities at Sahar as it was
imperative to minimise inter-terminal transfer and ‘to avoid cumbersome yet
unavoidable regulatory requirements. The Committee strongly deprecate the
vacillating approach of the MOCA/AAI resulting in development plan of CSIA
remaining in doldrums for nearly 5 years.
Mandatory Capital Projects
5. The Committee note that as per OMDA, 32 Mandatory Capital Projects
(MCPs) were to be completed by April 2010. Out of these 32 MCPs 28 MCPs were
to be completed by May 2008, One MCP (8-06) was not completed In time and
delayed by 2 years. And in case of another MCP (S-09), the scope of the project
for terminal building was revised and Its implementation was delayed by 2 years.
Even MCPs completed in 2012 the international terminal coutd be made ready
only by January 2014, Master Plan 2007 had listed 45 capital works projects of


48

which only three works in Phase ! (2010) completed as against eight. As per SSA,
the MIAL was not entitled to any incentive in respect of base airport charges due
"to delay in completion of MCPs, However, the Committee are dismayed fo note
that MOCA allowed the incentive to MIAL though MIAL failed to complete the
project in time. The MOCA defended its action on ground that delay in completion
..of MCPs was. attributable to. circumstances and situations beyond the conttol of
MIAL as the works being carried out in an operational airport involved co-
ordination with various external agencies. Deprecating this attitude on the part of
the Ministry, the Committee exhort the Ministry to take appropriate measure to
ensute that incentive such as increase in base airport charges are not given when

inordinate detays take piace in completion of projects for unjustifiable reasons.

Status Of Other Capital Projects

7. Status of other capital projects is yet another matter of concern for the
; Committee, The Committee find that in addition to the MCPs, as mentioned in the
previous paragraph, Master Plan 2007 had listed a set of 45 other capital works
which included varieties of works such as airside works, terminal works and city
side development which were necessary for overall execution of the project, The
Committee are pained to nofe that MIAL could only execute/complete three
projects in phase 1 as against the targeted 8 projects. While deprecating the
delay caused In timety completion of the projects by MIAL, the Committee desire
the Ministry to be cautious in future while discharging their duties in over-seeing
or examining the execution of any projects to guard against any loss of revenue
-interest of the Government of India.

Increase In Project Cost

8. The Committee note that OMDA and SSA did not specify any cost estimate
for the project. The initial project cost was %5826 crore as on 2006 which was
revised by MIAL in 2008, 2010 and finally in 2011 to 212380 crore i.e. increase of
more than 100 percent of original cost estimate. However, it was considered by
AERA and finally restricted to €11647,46 crore for the period up to March 2014,
The Committee apprehend that since significant expenditure have been shifted to


49

future control period (2013-14) by AERA, the project cost is likely to increase
further. The Committee feel that this increased cost resulted in widening the gap
in funding of the project which was being met through the Development Fee
imposed on passengers departing from the CSI Airport. Originally, full project
cost was te be met by the concessionaire, Notably, however, the project cost
was reduced to 72.68 per cent of the actual cost as DF constituted 27.32 per cent
of the capital outlay though OMDA did not envisage the funding of project cost
through fevy of DF. However, MOCA justified increase in project cost and
extension of time to revision in various plans was also approved by them. To cap
the project cost in future in such projects which lead to increase in airport tariff,
the AERA has come up with its Normative Approach for Economic Regulation of
the Major airports and has issued a Consultation Paper in this regard. This
consultation paper, inter afia, envisages to put a ceiling on the capital cost for
arriving at the Target Revenue while determination of Aeronautical Tariff at major
airports, The proposed approach of AERA is at consultation stage. / The
Committee have also been informed that there are suitable monitoring
mechanism under Section 8.5.8 of OMDA. Both Technical and Financia! Auditors
had pointed out certain process related issues and made a general comment that
it led to increase in Project Cost. However, MOCA stated that they had not
ascribed any additional cost, specifically to these items and stated ‘that it Is
difficult and subjective to assess the impact of the process related issues tn
quantitative terms. Observation of Technical and Financial Auditors were
suitably responded during determination of Development fee and_ tariff
determination by AERA. Such submissions were duly considered by AERA. The<
Committee while examining DIAE én the same issue had recommended that the
PPP model be discussed threadbare so as to formulate transparent rules and
credible institutional mechanism after fullest consultation with ail fhe
stakeholders. In their action taken note on the recommendation of PAC, MoCA
submitted that AERA has a proposal which is at consultation stage. The
Committee would like the AERA to finalize their proposal at the earliest and they


50

may be informed of the latest status in this regard alongwith the comments of
MOCA on the plan to cap project cost in future projects.

_ Airport Development Fee

9, As per OMDA, MIAL was to arrange for financing through suitable debt and
equity including listing of its shares on MumbaifNational Stock Exchange. The

..Gommittee are surprised. to note that instead of finding ways of debt and equity

contribution, MOCA allowed MIAL to levy a Development Fee (DF} at CSIA for the
Purpose of funding or financing the cost of up-gradation, expansion or
development of the Airport in contravention of the provisions of OMDA. The
Committee appreciate that though OMPA provides for listing options, MOCA
opted for levying of development fee to ensure share holding of AAi does not fall
below 26%, considering its strategic interest and desire that there is no change in
shareholding pattern in violation of OMDA. The Committee aiso note that DF is
determined by AERA under section 13(1)(b) of AERA Act 2008 read with section
22A of AAI Act 1994, However, as per Rules of the Airports Authority of India
(Major Airports) Development Fee Rules, 2011, framed by the Government, the
money deposited in the Development Fee Receipt Account can be used to pay for
the servicing of debt to the lenders raised against Development Fees.
Accordingly, in pursuance of these provisions of the Development Fee Rules,
2011, interest on foan raised against DF has been allowed by AERA and included
In the quantum of DF to be levied on the passengers. The PAC in their 94th
Report (15th LS} had made certain observations on the same issue and
Committee would like the MOCA to respond to those observations. They also feel
that AERA.is competent to fix DF and expect it to determine DF in future keeping
in view the revenue interest of the Government of India in PPP projects and also
that of the interest of the passengers.- -— — —-

Assessment Of Funding Gap

10. The Committee are perplexed to note that during the process of finalization
of levy of DF, AERA and MIAL both arrived at different figures for actual funding
gap. This was stated to be due to difference in assessment of estimates of
internal accrual, MIAL assumed internal accrual of €2,464 crore. The financial


$1

auditor estimated it at 24,021 crore after adding depreciation and deferred tax
liability to profit after tax. AERA pointed out that accruals estimated by MIAL were
based on their tariff expectations which were uncertain. AERA arrived at an
internal accrual of 1,151.26 crore considering the actual cash balance (as on
March 2012) and adding projected depreciation for two years (2012-13 and 2013-
14). Audit, therefore, observed that lower estimation of internal accrual resulted
in a higher funding gap which in turn led to levy of a larger DE on passengers
MOCA while giving reasons for lower estimation of internal accrual stated that
AERA is the authority to determine the DE as per the observation of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court. Further, the AERA has determined the DF in respect of Mumbai
Airport after considering all the factors and after due diligence of the relevant

’ provisions of AAI Act, AERA has given detafled reasoning for approval of DF in
their order. The internal accruals calculation by MIAL and independent auditor
was based upon increased tariff sought by MIAL while filing its Multi Year Tariff
Proposal (MYTP) to AERA. Since AERA has allowed much lower tariff (164,29%)
compared to 881.29% asked by MIAL, projected infernal accruals had to be
reduced correspondingly and AERA has considered the same while finalizing
means of finance after taking into account actual funds that would he available
for project funding after netting of funds utilised for operations capex, disallowed
project cost and other current assets. The Committee feel that in the absence of
a fixed formula/process to assess the ‘internal accrual’, the difference in
assessment of ‘internal accrual’ between MIAL and MOCA surfaced. The
Committee, therefore, desire that Ministry‘AERA should evolve a_ fixed
formula/process for assessment of internal accrual so that such difference in
calculation is avoided in future

Revenue Sharing - Aeronautical Tariff in ‘Shared Till’ Arrangement Sharing - Aeronautical Tariff in ‘Shared Till Arrangement

11 The State Support Agreement has adopted a ‘shared fill’ model for CSI
Airport, Mumbai where only 30 per cent of non-aeronautical revenue is
considered while fixing aeronautical tariffs. Other airports (barring 1918, Delhi)
follow a single till model where the entire non-aeronautical revenue is considered,
The audit concluded that shared till modef has resulted in higher aeronautical


52

tariff, thereby increasing the burden on passengers in CSI Airport, Mumbai. PAC
in its report on DIAL had urged the Government to consider the aspect that
shared ti}! actuaSly increased the burden on travelling passengers as aeronautical
tarifis were not subsidised by a significant part of non-aeronautical tariff which
are low capita! and high revenue services, while awarding airport contracts under
_PPP model in future. The MOCA, however, contended that EGOM in 2005 decided
that a ‘hybrid/shared til! “price cap approach” be adopted for fixation of
aeronautical tariff ie, aeronautical tariff to be fixed based on the price cap
approach, with 30% of non-aeronautical revenue to be considered for subsidizing
the aeronautical tariff. This approach was based on the approach followed in UK
and Australia. Accordingly, the above provisions were set out in the SSA and
also mentioned about establishment of AERA. Further, structure of tariff
determination was part of bid process where 30% of gross non-aero revenue
(other than revenue from Non-Transfer Assets) was to be utilized for cross
subsidization of aero charges, Based on these stipulations only, bidders
submitted bids and revenue share as high as 38.7% was quoted by GVK led
Consortium. In response to recommendation of PAC as contained in their 94th
Report (15th LS}, MOCA has stated that GOI is in the process of formulation of a
policy on Economic Regulation for airport sector keeping in view all aspects. The
Committee expects that Government expedites finalization of the proposed policy
on Economic Regulation for airport sector before the bids for other airports for
privatisation fs finalised. They would like to be informed of the status in this

regard.

Conflicts between OMDA and AERA Act

12. The Committee note that there are inconsistencies between provisions of
OMDA and SSA signed for CSI Airport, Mumbai and the Airports Economic
Regulatory Authority (AERA) Act, 2008, The definition of aeronautical and non-
aeronautical services differs substantially between OMDA and AERA Act. Ground
handling and cargo handling services have been designated as non-aeronautical
services in OMDA but are defined as aeronautical services under the AERA Act.
As the ‘Target Revenue’ for fixing airport charges takes into account only 30 per


53

cent of fhe revenue generated from rion-aeronautical services, the tariff payable
by the passengers Is cross subsidized only to the extent of 30 per cent by
revenues generated from cargo and ground handling services in case of CSI
Airport, Mumbai. As cargo and ground handling services constitute a major
source of revenue for the airport, the Committee feel that this has provided undue
. financial advantage to MIAL. at the expense of higher tariff imposed on the
passengers. PAC in its earlier report on DIAL on the same issue, advised MOCA
to critically assess the financial impact of the concessions granted by
Government under OMDA and the revenue ensured by the Government from the
JV after Ground handling services and Cargo Handling services were categorized
as aeronautical services. The MOCA however, defended and stated that the
Cargo and Ground Handling Services have always been shown as non-
aeronautical services as per the Annual Account Statement of AAI, which was
regularly laid in the Parliament. The aeronautical and non-aeronautical services
were defined in OMDA based on the legacy followed by AAI for its own airports,
whereas provisions in AERA Act were mace much later, as per the will of the
Parliament. The Ministry further informed that as far as the financial impact of
the concession granted by the Cenfral Government, the charges for these
services are regulated by AERA under AERA Act, 2008. It is further added that AAI
gets its revenue share from the gross revenue of MIAL which includes both
aeronautical and non -aeronautical revenues. Therefore, ‘AAI continues to
receive its revenue share thereon as per the agreed rates under OMDA,
irrespective of treatment of such services as aeronautical or Non-Aeronautical.
The Committee, therefore, urge upon the Government to adopt and implement a
more practical method which will be suitable for Government as well as
passengers while they take decision before entering into future PPP projects in

aviation sector.

Outsourcing of Domestic and International Cargo Activities by MIAL
13, The Committee note that MIAL had outsourced its cargo activities which is

estimated to reduce cargo revenue by 40 per cent in a span of two years As the
cargo revenue subsidizes tariff (30 per cent of cargo revenue being taken inte


54

account while working out airport tariff), a fall in cargo revenue would lead to
higher tariff and hence higher burden on the passengers. Correspondingly, the
revenue share of AAI will also reduce substantially, which is a matter of concern
for the Committee. Though Ministry has agreed that there would be drop in
revenue in the initial period due to outsourcing but pointed out that it would
result in better infrastructure and increase in handling capacity. MIAL has
concessioned out international cargo facilities for a period of three years to
Container Corporation of India Ltd w.e.f. 18 February 2014 at revenue share of
69%. In case of domestic cargo it has also concessioned out to Container
Corporation of India Ltd at revenue share of 42% on BOOT basis wie.f. 1
September 2012. Outsourcing of domestic cargo was necessitated to pass on
capital expenditure to concessionaire. Cargo Service Centre India Private Limited
(CSC) started Perishable cargo handling w.e.f 16 May 2011 at the higher of
Minimum Annual Guarantee and revenue share @ 15%. Concession fora period
of five years on BOOT basis after which entire facility will revert to MIAL at Re.1.
MIAL has introduced extra revenue stream which was not available in the past. It
does not involve any capital expenditure from MIAL. They have also informed
that no subsidiary of GVK is involved in handling of cargo activities. The
Committee appreciate the efforts of outsourcing cargo activities which will create
better infrastructure and enhanced handling capacity. However, the Committee
desire the Ministry to ensure that such activities do not result in lower revenue
generation which ultimately result in higher tariff at the atrport fo be borne by the
Passengers. They also desire MOCA to consistently monitor and review the
extent and adequacy of promised improvements in infrastructure and handling
capacity compared to the projected reduction’ in revenue and take suitable

ameliorative measures as and when required.

Award of Concession for Operation of Hotel

14. The Committee note that as per OMDA, all developments at the airport shall
be as per the existing Master Plan and no development that is not envisaged in
the Master Plan would be allowed to be undertaken. However, MIAL took up


construction of a hotel near Terminal 16 in June 2009 though it was not included
in the Master Pians, thereby, Violating the terms of reference in OMDA. MIAL also
outsourced the hotel operations to a group company of GVK (a Consortium of
Mis. TAd GVK Hotels & Resorts and Greenridge Hotels & Resorts}, with a very
small revenue share (4.65%) to MIAL. This was agreed to by AAI, though the
arrangement would have significant adverse impact on the revenue share of AAl
with AAI receiving only 1.79 percent of the gross earnings in the hotel project. As
the hotel concession had been awarded to a group entity of MIAL, the upside tn
revenue would benefit the GVK group. The MOCA, however, denied the charges
on the ground that MIAL has concessioned out the construction and operation of
Hotel near Terminal 10 to a consortium of Taj GVK Hotels & Resorts Ltd and
Green Woods Palaces & Resorts Pvt. Ltd., which is a related party, through a
process of competitive bidding and in full compliance with the provisions of
OMDA and it did not affect revenue share to AAI in.any way, They further
informed that to ensure arm’s length transaction, probity auditor was appointed.
Since the entire process was under supervision of probity auditor and transaction
being at arm's length, probity auditors certified and confirmed the same. The
Committee are dismayed to note that though AAI is represented on the Board of
MIAL and ought to have been aware of the initiation of construction of the Hotel in
June 2009, they wonder how it could not be included in the Master Plan, 2007.
The Committee also find that even the Independent Engineer also fatled to report
Hotel construction which was in deviation fo the then operational Master Plan.
The Committee feel that had MOCA been more vigilant and exercise due diligence
in an efficient manner while dealing with such agreements the same would have
been avoided. The Gommittee, therefore, would like to caution the Ministry to be
more careful in future while dealing with things which involve revenue interest of

the Government of India.

Delayed Retirement Compensation Retirement Compensation _ हु

48. The Committee note that as per OMDA, MIAL was liable to pay Retirement
Compensation to AA! for unabsorbed number of general employees. The
Retirement Compensation was fo be based on AAl’s latest available Voluntary


56

Retirement Scheme. AAI allowed MIAL to pay Retirement Compensation as
monthly instalments over ten years which according to audit is in violation of
specific directives from MOCA which stipulated that MIAL should pay the balance
amount immediately. This resulted in undue favour to MIAL and consequent loss
of interest (%71.37 crore) to AAI. However, MOCA defended MIAL on the ground
that as per provisions of article_6.1.4 of OMDA, MIAL.(JVC) is mandated to pay
Retirement compensation of such number of employees who had not opted for
the absorption in the JVC within the operation support period. The Retirement
Compensation claim has been raised by AAI in accordance with OMDA
provisions and as per the VRS scheme of AAI and hence no loss of AAl, Thus,
there is no undue favour of MIAL. The Committee in its report on DIAL had
concluded that MOCA had erred in safequarding the interests of employees of
AAI and failed to enforce its directives while also recommending that MOCA
enforce the contractual obligations as per OMDA. MOCA has assured the
Committee that it has ensured that the provisions of OMDA are strictly adhered to
and continue to ensure in future also. The Committee hope that MOCA will not
only ensure compliance of provisions of OMDA in future PPP but also keep the
audit informed of the factual position so that such instances do not occur in
future.

Maintenance of Land Records

16, The Committee note that neither OMDA nor the lease deed signed between
AAI and MIAL demarcated and defined the specific details of.the jeased land.
Both documents were to have a map of the ‘demised premises’ which was left
blank. This indicates that AAI did not have up‘to-date land records. Moreover, the
Committee are surprised to note that the area of CSI Airport, Mumbai which was
stated to be 1875 acres In the Request for Proposais, increased to 2006 acres on
actual survey by MIAL. The difference in areas quoted by AAI and MIAL raises
‘questions on the quality of land records and documents maintained by AAI.
MOCA, however, said that no proper land records were available with AAl since
the same was not handed over to AAI on its formation. Though AAI has been
making efforts to get the land records it has been difficult to acquire being an old


st

record, The Committee have been informed that survey/markings were not
possible as large part of CSIA boundaries are covered with siums and due fo on-
going litigations and adverse possession of land in some cases, The Committee
are distressed to note that in the absence of proper records of the land of CSIA
and also given the fact that without conducting any physical survey, public land
was transferred to MIAL. The Committee, therefore, recommend that necessary
survey of the land be undertaken with the help of State Government and other
local agencies and obtain property cards of the remaining land after resolution of
the disputes and put all land related papers in safe custody of MOCA/AAI. They
also desire that physical markings may also be erected to identify the demised
land and carved out assets for future and the Committee may be apprised
accordingly.

Carved out land transferred to MIAL on the basis of ‘Upfront fee’

17. The Committee note that ‘Carved out assets’ were primarily intended for
the use of AAl as per OMDA and could be transferred to MIAL, if required, for
aeronautica! purposes with the condition that AAI and MIAL should negotiate the
terms and conditions of such transfer. The Committee have been informed that
AAI agreed to transfer 48.15 acres out of catved out assets to MIAL against a
meager consideration based on upfrant fee paid by MiAL without negotiation of
ferms and conditions as provided in OMDA. The Committee, however, feel that
with increase in the extent of demised premises, the quantum of land available to
MIAL for commercial exploitation also increases which would be available for 60
(30430) years. This needs clarification. The Committee, therefore, urge upon the
- Ministry to find out the total earnings of MIAL and the revenue earned by the
Government and MIAL year-wise, in terms of its approved share, to enable the
Committee to infer whether public interest was substantially subserved by such a

negotiated settlement as claimed by MOCA,

Commercial Exploitation of Land

18. OMDA allows MIAL to utilize ten percent of ‘demised premises’ for
commercial exploitation. The Committee note that initially toe land available for
commercial exploitation was 179.8 acres, which increased to 190.1 acres in


38

December 2011 on account of re-survey of the land and increase in 'demised
Premises’ 10 .1901,03 acres. Thus, MIAL benefitted by 10.23 acres of additional
exploitable land. Further, with the transfer of carved out asset, the land eligibility
of MIAL for commercial exploitation increased to 196.67 acres. The revenue from
these activities would not be considered for determination of airport charges, The
MOCA informed that, after survey of fand MIAL had intimated that as. on 21 Dec.
2041 the total AAI land is 2006.72 acres, carved out land as per OMDA is 76,30
acres, demised land 1901.03 acres and land which can be used by MIAL for
commercial exploitation will be 190.10 acres. According to MOCA presently
maximum area of Iand for Commercial exploitation based on 10% cannot exceed
190.11 acres, Land was given to MIAL on as-is-where-is basis and any change in
area is mainly due to correction of records. No extra piece of land has been given
to MIAL other than demise or carved out assets as per provisions of OMDA and
subject to end use restriction. In fact extent of slums has how been estimated to
be 308.95 acres against 147 acres indicated in lease deed and 171 acres indicated
in State Government Support Agreement. MOCA informed that as per Interim
Development Plan by Special Planning Authority (SPA) 1.6. MMRDA, the
governing authority, 133 acres of land is earmarked for commercial exploitation.
Question of commercial exploitation will always be governed by Development
Plan approved by SPA. The Committee, find that despite explanation given by
MOCA that commercially exploitable land cannot go beyond 190.1 acres, the
extent of commercially exploitable land available to MIAL after the removal of
encroachment on airport fand is not clear. Since the benefit from the 'non-
transfer’ asset would accrue to ‘MIAL and it will not be considered for
determination of airport charges, the same would be a revenue enhancing activity
having the potential for reduction of burden in the form of various fevies on
passengers. The Committee would like the MOCA/AAI to consider this aspect
and inform the Committee about the impact, if any, it would have on the earning
of AAI and levies on passengers. They would like to urge the MoCA/AAI to
carefully work out the economies of commercial exploitation of land from time to

time under intimation to the Committee,


39

Encroachment at CS} Airport, Mumbai and iis removal

19, The Committee have been given to understand that two documents signed
by AAI in 2006 i.e, Lease deed and State Government Support Agreement (5588)
indicated two different figures as area under encroachment, which indicated lack
of clear understanding of AAl regarding the area that was actually under
encroachment. I[t has been established that at that time, MOCA/AA! has no
records to show the exact area of airport land including area under
encroachment. Accordingly the area of encroached land increased from 147
acres (approx} as indicated in SGSA to 308.96 acres which only highlight serious
deficiencies in land records management. To undertake activities relating to
rehabilitation of encroachers and restoration of the Airport land under
encroachment in tieu of the right to develop part of the land vacated by
encroachers MAL entered into a State Government Support Agreement (SGSA}
with the Government of Maharashtra (GoMh) in 2006. The SGSA empowers MIAL.
to remove the encroachment from the airport and. For the purpose, Clause 3.1.2
of SGSA stipulates that if MIAL requires the use of any of the land at the airport
site, which fand is subject to encroachment and hindering the provision of
Aeronautical Services and/or to construct, develop and maintain any aeronautical
assets at the airport, it shall notify GoMh and AAI of the same and pursuant to
receiving the aforesaid notice from Company, GoMh shall undertake its best
efforts In providing support to the Company and AAI in clearing the land. GoMh,
on 30" September, 2005, appointed Urban Development Department as a nodal
agency for airport slum Rehabilitation. Accordingly, Mumbai Metropolitan Region
Development Authority (MMRDA) was asked by GoMh to take necessary action
for survey of slums for further action. MIAL entered into an agreement on 12"
December, 2006, with MMRDA to assist MIAL in various functions relating to slum
rehabilitation including appointment of developers to carry out the developments
as per Slum Rehabilitation Authority (SRA) Scheme. in order to rehabilitate the
slum dwellers to free airport land for airport development purposes, MIAL
engaged M/s Housing Development and Infrastructure Limited (HDIL} as a

developer through competitive bidding process. A Slum Rehabilitation


60

Agreement was executed by MIAL with HDIL on 157 October, 2007 and after
negotiation it was agreed that only about 23.5%-of land being 65 acres will be
available to HDIL for commercial development on sub-lease basis, subject to
the provisions of OMDA in lieu of ex-situ slum rehabilitation. HDIL had to bear all
the costs and expenses relating to the entire slum rehabilitation project. This 65
_ acres of land was subject to HDIL cleating entire 276 acre of afrport land and
handing over unencumbered possession to MIAL. HDIL had fo clear about 158
acres of land and handover to MIAL for operational use. Any sub-lease of land to
HDIL was fo be in phases only after balance 118 acres of land cleared by HDIL.
For each acre of land cleared other than 188 acres, only 0.55 acre of land was to
be sub-leased to HDIL i.e. out of 118 acres, 65 acres of land was to be sub-teased
to. HDIL. As per agreement with M/s HDIL slum rehabititation was to be
implemented within a period of four years in different phases (2007 to 2011). As
HDIL could not perform in spite of repeated assurances to do so, MIAL finally
issued a Cure Notice to HDIL against which also HDIL could not perform and asa
last resort, MIAL terminated the agreement with HDIL on 6" February, 2013.
Subsequently, HDIL went for litigation and the matter is sub-judice with Arbitral
Tribunal. The Committee feel that since MOCA was aware of said agreement, the
Papers relating thereto should have been made available to C&AG to ensure
transparency. The Committee are perturbed to note that despite award of contract
and signing of agreement for slum rehabilitation of slum dwellers on airport land
the work did not progress well and ultimately contract was cancelled. The
‘Committee remain apprehensive that any further delay in the implementation: of
" the rehabilitation plan would further put on hold any developmental work in 0918,
Mumbai, The Committee strongly deprecate that AAI though aware of above
agreement, since defunct, feigned ignorance during the evidence and desire
appropriate action to ensure that such lapse is not repeated.

20, The Committee, however, are happy to note that MIAL had approached AAI
for its approval for in-situ rehabilitation of slum dwellers as per policy of State
Government or as per any other schemes as may be applicable. AAl has given ‘in
४ principle’ approval for in-situ slum rehabilitation. The Govt. of Maharashtra, on


61

the recommendation of MOCA is formulating Airport Specific Slum Rehabilitation
Scheme for CSIA. This Scheme along with its Development Control Regulations
are being finalized by Govt of Maharashtra under Maharashtra Regional and
Town Planning Act, 1966 (MRTP, 1966) as part of the statutory process of the
State Govt. The Committee hope that slum rehabilitation plan taking utmost care
of safety and security of bassengers/aircraft and airport infrastructure also, will
be formulated and finalised at the earliest in consultation with all stakeholders so
that developmental plans: at the CSI airport is not further delayed and
rehabilitation of slum dwellers on encroached land of ‘airport is done. The
Committee, therefore, desire the MOCA/AAI to expedite the matter pertaining to
finalisation of slum ‘rehabilitation plan and pursue its implementation with the
Government of Maharashtra at the earliest.

NEW DELHI; PROF.'K.V. THOMAS
26 April, 2076 Chairman,

06 Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.


Annesctyze - 7

MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2015-16) HELD ON 16 NOVEMBER, 2015.

The Committee sat.on Monday, the 16" November, 2015 from 1130 hrs to 1445

hrs in Room No. G-074, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.

80 ० N OTR ६२ ३७

=
2

11.
12.
13.
14.

ही ४ Ns

PRESENT

Prof. K.V, Thomas . Chairperson

Niembers
LOK SABHA

Shri 5.5. Ahiuwalia

Shii Nishikant Dubey

Shri Gafanan Kirtikar

Shri Ramesh Pokhriyat "Nishank"
Shri Neiphiu Rio

Shit Janardan Singh Sigriwal

Dr. Kirit Somaiya

Shri Anurag Thakur

Dr, P. Venugopal

RAJ RAJYA SABHA
Shri Vijay Goel
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
_ Shri Shantaram Naik
Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

Shri A.K Singh i Additional Secretary
Shit Jayakumar 1. > Director
Shri AK, Yadav - Deputy Secretary

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE G&AG OF INDIA

Shri P. Mukherjee - Deputy C&AG (Commercial)
Shri A.M. Bajaj ~ © Director-General (Commercial)
Shri Manish Kumar - Principal Director (PAC )

Ms, Parama Sen : = Principal Director CA

: -62- : : :


“ae .
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION

1... Shri R.N. Choubey - Secretary

2. Ms. Gargi Kaul पु 7 Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor

3... Shri Anil Srivastava - - Joint Secretary

4... Shri Arun Kumar - Joint Secretary

5. Shri R.K. Shrivastava - Chairman, AAI

6. ShriS,Suresh .. + Member (Finance}, AAI

7, Shri Alok Shekhar - Representative af AERA

8. Shri Sanjay Reddy - Managing Director, MIAL

9... Shri Rajeev Kumar Jain ~ Chief Executive Officer, MIAL

2. At the outset.the Chairperson welcomed thé Members and the representatives

of the Office of the C&AG of India to the sitting of the Committee. The Chairperson
then apprised the Members that the meeting has been convened to take oral evidence
of the representatives of the Ministry of Givil Aviation on the subject “Implementation
of Public Private Partnership Project at Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport
Mumbai" based on C&AG Report No.15 of 2014

3. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Civil Aviation, Airport Authority
of India and Mumbai International Airport - Limited (MIAL) were called in. The
Chairperson welcomed them to the sitting of the Committee convened to take their oral
evidence on the above mentioned subject. - The Chairperson observed that the most
significant issue, the audit pointed out, was that the MIAL virtually has the right to
operate the airport for a period of 60 years with the terms and conditions frozen in
OMDA. ॥ enjoys unilateral right to extend the concession period of 30 years for
another 30 years on the same terms an conditions. The second lacuna pointed out
was that the State Government Support Agreement allows MIAL Right of First Refusal
(ROFR) on the second airport within 150 kr. from CSI Airport. It is found that the
implementation of the project was delayed leading to almost 100 per cent increase in
the project cost. Further, the Chairperson raised other issues such as transfer of
481.15 acres of land out of carved out assets to MIAL against a consideration based on
upfront fee paid by MIAL (Rs.3.52 crores); misutilisation of Passenger Service Fee for
purchase of security systems and equipments; en-availability of records of the actual
Jand under possession of thé Mumbai Airport: commercial utilisation of land; detay in
rehabilitation of families presently residing on the slum.on encroached land of Mumbai
Airport. . : : पु
—63-


4 The Chairperson also called the attention of representatives of the MOCA
regarding pendency of action taken note with regard to the 94th Report of PAC (15TH
Lok Sabha) relating to the “Implementation of PPP at IGI Airport, Dethi" relating to
Delhi Airport. A number of issues raised in the present report on MIAL are common

as raised in the repart on DIAL.

5. Thereafter, Secretary of the Ministry and Chairman, AA! gave a power point
presentation giving background of the subject and also attended to the queries of the
Members on various issues including decision of government to go for PPP model in
modernisation of Airports, right of first refusal, long tenure of lease, right of first refusal
to MIAL, delay in completion of various projects, increase in cost, imposition of
development fee on passengers and rehabilitation of slum dwellers settled on
encroached land of Airport. Thereafter, Members also raised various queries related
to the subject. The officials of the Ministry responded to some of the queries,
However, a number of queries remain unanswered as the replies were not readily
available with them. The Chairperson, PAC asked the officials of the Ministry to send
the written replies to all the queries raised by the Members during the discussion fo the
Lok Sabha Secretariat within 15-20 days. ,

6, The Chairperson also informed the Committee that some Members from
‘Mumbai have suggested that the Committee should visit the Mumbai airport and he
wilt obtain requisite permission from the Hon. Speaker so that a visit to CST Railway
Station and CSI Airport Mumbai can be organised after the winter session.

7. The Chairperson thanked the representatives of the Ministry for appearing

a

before the Committee and furnishing updated information on the subject.

A copy of the verbatim proceedings has been kept on record,

The Committee, then, adjourned,

— C4-