59

INDIGENOUS CONSTRUCTION OF
INDIAN NAVAL WARSHIPS

MINISTRY OF DEFENCE

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

FIFTY NINTH REPORT

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2092

FIFTY NINTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

INDIGENOUS CONSTRUCTION OF
INDIAN NAVAL WARSHIPS

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations! Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Thirty Second Report (16" Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF DEFENCE

Presented to Lok Sabha on: we
8)
Laid in Rajya Sabha on: ak

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHE

November, 2016/ Kartika, 1938 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE {2016-17)

INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER! Report ....................००००--------------------

CHAPTER tI Observations/Recommendations which have
been accepted by the Government
CHAPTER lll Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the replies received from the Government

CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of
है whieh replies of the Government have not

been accepted by the Committee and which

require reiteration

CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of
- which the Government have furnished interim
replies

APPENDICES

॥ *Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts
Commnittee (2016-17) held on
10.11.2016 .

॥ Analysis of the Action Taken by the
Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their
Eighteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) .....

* Not appended in the Report

PAGE
(iii)

(iv)
1-18


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2016-17)
Prof. K.V. Thomas - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

2 Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay

3 Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
4. Shri Nishikant Dubey

5. Prof. Richard Hay

6 Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

8. Smt. Riti Pathak

9. Shri Neiphiu Rio

10. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwai
11... Shri Abhishek Singh

42. — Dr. Kirit Somaiya

43. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur

14... Shri Shivkumar Udasi

15. Dr. P. Venugopat

RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Naresh Agrawat
‘47. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
48.” Shri Bhupender Yadav
19... Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
20. Shri Shantaram Naik

21... Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
22. Shri Ajay Sancheti

SECRETARIAT

Shri 65.1९, Singh - Additional Secretary
Shri S.C Chaudhary Joint Secretary

Shri Tirthankar Das Additional Director
Shri Deepankar Kamble Executive Officer

BUNS

* Bleeted w.e.f. 09.08.2016 vice Shri Vijay Goel, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f, 05.07.2016,

Cy


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2016-17), having been
authorized by the Committee, do present this Fifty Ninth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha}
on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Thirty .Second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha} ‘on
‘Indigenous Construction of Indian Naval Warships' based on the C&AG's Report
No.32 of 2010-11 relating to Ministry of Defence.

2. The Thirty Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha an 22 December, 2015
and laid in Rajya Sabha on 23 December, 2015. Replies of the Government to ail the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received. The Public
Accounts Committee considered and adopted the Fifty Ninth Report at their sitting held
on 10 November, 2016. Minutes of the sitting are given at Appendix |.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the

Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered. to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptrolier and Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Thirty Second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is

given at Appendix-H.

NEW 08118 PROF, K.V. THOMAS,
16 November, 2016 Chairperson,
25 Kartika, 1938(Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

CV}


CHAPTER ~ 1
REPORT

This Report of the Public Accounts Commiltee deats with Action Taken by the

Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in

their Thirly-second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on “Indigenous Construction of
Indian Naval Warships” based on the C&AG's Report No. 32 of 2010-11 relating to
the Ministry of Defence.

2. The Thirty-second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha}, which was presented to Lok
Sabha on 22™ December, 2015 and laid in Rajya Sabha on 23% December, 2015,

contained 12 Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken Notes in respect of ail

the Observations/Recommendations have been reccived from the Ministry of

Defence and these have been categorized as under:

0)

(ii)

{iii)

{iv)

Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by lhe
Government: है

Paragraph Nos. 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 10, ६1 and 12

Total: 08
Chapter- Il

Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:

Paragraph Nos. 4 and 9

Total:02
Chapter- Ili

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replios of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiieration:

Paragraph Nos. 3 and 8
Total:02
Chapter- IV

Observations/Recommendations -in respect of which the Government
have furnished interim replies:

Paragraph No. Nil

Total:Nil
Chapter-V


2
3. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Defence on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Thirty-second
Report (Sixtoenth Lok Sablra) have been Teproduced in the relevant Chapters of this
Report. ॥ the succeeding paragraphs, the Committee have dealt with the_Action

Taken by the Government on some of thelr Observations/Recommendations which

either need reiteralion_or merit comments.

1. Warship Building
(Recommendation Para No. 2)
4, The Commiltee found that Naval Ship-building, being a complex multi
disciplinary engineering activily, requires significantly higher shipyard effort and
dependence on a large number of agencics. A ship construction programme has a
number of agencies which interact with each other, including feasibility studies,
design issues, system interaction, construction, test and triats. The Committee also
found that besides being a multi disciplinary engineering activily, construction and
monitoting of ship-building involves various Directorates. What is more important to
note is that at Naval Headquarters itself, the activities of construction and monitoring
are separated in two wings. The Committee found that there are multiple
responsibility centres in the Integrated Headquarters, depending upon their role and
- responsibility towards ship building but without a single contro! point which would
enforee co-ordination and overat! control, The Committee felt that although India has
credibly demonstraicd the capability in indigenous construction of naval warships and
is one of the few Navies in the world capable of designing and building warships, yet,
performance in this area needs to he improved as the operational preparedness of
(Indian Navy depends on an efficient and effectively managed warships construction
projects. The Committee, therefore, recommended that single point accountability for
ship puildirig project should be fixed after taking due care of all the aspects related to
ship building. They felt that such an unity of command would ensure better span of
contro! and would result in effective management of ship building processes and
procedures. They recommended that enquiry be ordered against officiats responsible
for all the irregularities pointed gut by Audit in naval warship building.

5. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:

“(a) Single Point Accountability. Accountability. As brought out in the PAC
report, Naval warship-building is one of the most complex
engineering activity involving multiple agencies. Even within the



3

NHQ there are various directorates which are involved in this
complex multi disciplinary activity. Besides NHQ and the shipyards
there are various agencies like DRDO, OFR / other PSUs, private
vendors, foreign Governments / OEMs etc who are involved in
warship building in our context. Whilst various agencies as
mentioned abave perform their respective roles, the Controtler of
Warship Production and Acquisition (CWP8A), at NHQ is the single
point authority to monitor the design and production: activities
telated to warship building.

(b} Enquiry for irregularities. Comments / action taken has
been given at para 1(a) above. It is submitted that delays and cost
escalation in each of the aforesaid cases was examined by the
Ministry and re-casting of timelines and revision of cost has been
accorded by the CFA / CCS after ascertaining the reasons /
attributability in cach case. Accordingly, both MDL and GRSF have
been levied LD by the Ministry as per Defence Procurement
Procedure / contractual provisions for delays attributable to them in
P-17, P-15A, and P-28 respectively.”

6. The Committee note that the oxisting Controller of Warship Production
and Acquisition {CWP&A} at the Naval Headquarter is merely a monitoring
authority without any accountability, as result of which it was difficult perhaps
to fix responsibility for the lapses pointed out by the Audit. The Committee fecl
that for preventing delays in the execution of ship building projects,
accountability is a primary requirement apart from monitoring in order to
ensure timely completion of such projects. The Committce therefore desire that
CWP&A may be made more accountable and may also be given the mandate to
ensure strict compliance by the multiple agencies involved in the design and
production activities related to warship building. The Committee are disturbed
to note that on their recommendation for conducting enquiry against the
offictais responsible for the irregularities, Ministry is sifent on the issue. ft
scems that the Ministry is contended with the fact that both MDL and GRSE
have been levied LD as per Defence Procurement Procedurc/Contractual
provisions for delays attributable to fhem in P-17, P-15A and P-28 respectively.

The Committee feel that delays in warship building should not only be viewed


4
from the angle of Defence Procurement Procedure or contractual provisions,

the component of human error or irregularities committed by the then officials
should also be viewed seriously as building of naval warships caters fo the
vital economic and security interest of a major maritime nation like india. They,
therefore, reiterate their carlier recommendation for ordering enquiry against
officiats responsible for the irregularities pointed out by Audit in naval warship
building so that similar irregularities may not recur in future,

Il. Cost Estimates and Revision in Costs Costs
(Recommendation Para No. 3)

7. The Committee were dismayed to note that astimation of costs in the case of
P-15A, P-17 and P-28 ships had been done as a formality for obtaining approvals to
ship building projects from the Government rather than as a professional and
meaningful oxercise, The Committec noted that in case of P-15A ships, the cost was
calculated with 1999 as the base year leading to an increase of 226% in the initial
estimate. In the case of 7-17 ships, the Committee noted that cost estimate was
based on the year 4994. The steep rise in the rate was due lo erratic supplies from
Russia, modernization of Mazagaon Docks and cost of B&D spares. Due to this the
build period escalated from 60 months to 78 months. Fer P-28 ships, the cost
escalated from * 3051.27 crore to © 7852.39 crore. The production was to start in
March 2003 but it commenced only in March 2006. The Committee also noted that
non-availability of warship quality stecl and other supplies also affected the time
schedule, From the above, the Committee were af-the considered view that since
warship production directly affects the security preparedness of any country, the
Committee found that accurate initial estimate was affected dua to lack ef accurate
inputs necessary for forecasting cost and delivery of a warship. They, therefore,
desired the Ministry to take punitive action against officials responsible for preparing
inaccurate estimates. The Committee, also, exhorted the Ministry to make all out
efforts to ensure calculation of accurate cost of a warship which would also determine
the delivery time. To supplement this, there should be an institutionalized mechanism
in NHQ and the Ministry to verify the correctness of budgelary costs submitted by
DPSU shipyards. Besides, the Committee expected the NHQ and the Ministry to


5
conduct independent cost estimation by using internationally accepted best Practices
so that cost becomes competilive and the warships get compteted within the

approved budget and get delivered within the stipulated time.

8. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:

"(a} Action against officials for inaccurate estimates. The
Committee has acknowledged that accurate initial estimate
was affected due (0 lack of accurate inpuls necessary for
forecasting cost anc delivery period of the warship. Cast
estimates for tong gestation complex projects is a formidable
challenge due ta nan availability of accurate data for major
equipment during the initial estimates (especially concerning
weapons and sensors). The detailed explanation has been
given by the Ministry at para 26 of Part | of the said PAC

. report. Feedback at para 2(b) and 1(a) above also refers.

(b) Need to have accurate estimates. Warship projects are
now being progressed as fixed cost projects, Variable
component is only allowed wherein uncertaintios in costing
exist especially in developmental equipment (fe. certain
weapons . and sensors). Accordingly, based on past
experience, from P-15A onwards, the yard effort costs have
been fixed with variable component atlowed in certain
equipment as mentioncd above. Warship building projects
awarded in the recent past for example P-158 and P-17A
have been fixed cost projects having only few major
weapons and sensors which are variable cost in nature.
CCS sanction for major warship prajecls are obtained in two
stages. The 2४ stage CFACCS sanction caters for the
variable component in the project. The 207 stage sanction is

- obtained within the stipulated period after firming up the
details/cost of the variable component/equipment. First stage
CCS sanction for P-15B and P-17A projects have been
obtained on the same fines and firm costs will be arrived
before obtaining the 2४ stage sanction. The accuracy of cost
estimation for warships in our context is expected to improve
with the acquired experience and expertise in duc course.

(०)... Institutionalised Mechanism for Costing. The Contract
Negotiation Committee (CNC) for shipbuilding projects inter-
alia include members from NHQ, Acquisition Wing and MoD
(Finance). The CNC carries out considerable scrutiny of the
budgetary quote submitted by the shipyards vis-a-vis the
extant and international benchmarks. In the NHQ, the
Directorate of Contract and Cost Management looks in to
these aspects.”

9. The Committee note that the action taken by the Government are not in

consonance with the spirit of the recommendation made by them in their


6
original report. The Committee not only observed regarding preparation of

inaccurate initial cost estimates and absence of adequate mechanism at NHQ
to verify the correctness of the budgetary cost, but also exhorted the Ministry
to make all out efforts to ensure calculation of accurate cost of a warship
which would also determine fhe delivery schedule. But they are dismayed to
note that instcad of taking any concrete steps in this regard, the Ministry have
preferred to give a hypothetical reply by stating that the accuracy of the cost
estimation is expected to improve with the acquired experience and expertise.
Therefore, the Committee not only deprecate this lackadaisical attitude on the
part of Ministry but also desire them to be cautious while sending such
hypothetical reply in response to the recommendation of the Public Accounts है
Committee. The Committee also note that although Contract Negotiation
Committee (CNC) carries out considerable scrutiny relating to ship building
projects, yet, it has not been able to ensure preparation of accurate cost
estimate. The Committee further note that although the Directorate of Contract
and Cost Management (DCCM) is mandated to look into these aspects in the
NHQ, it has not been able to verify the correctness of budgetary cost as
recommended by the Committee. The Committee feel that the existing
institutional mechanism for costing such as CNC and DCCM arc not adequate
enough to ensure accurate cost estimation and cost management. They,
thorefore, desire that the existing institutional mechanism be strengthened to
be more effective in the preparation of accurate cost estimates as also to verify
the correctness of the budgetary cost. Action taken in this regard be brought fo

the notice of the Committee.


7
I. | Nomination and Readiness of Shipyards

(Recommendation Para No. 8)

10, The Committee have been informed about the India Navy's 15 year ship
building plan to augment force levels by 2017. The Committec were dismayed to note
that the different class of ships were in parallel production at Mazagaon Dock
Limited, Mumbai viz. P-17 and P-15. As a 1950९, construction of P-17 commenced
late by 17 months. Similarly, construction of P-28 warships commenced after a delay
of three years from the dafe of sanctioning. What was more disturbing for the
Committee to note was that while the project costs were now estimated at more than
double of the origina! estimate, progress of ship building itself was very slow. The
Committee, therefore, desired that the Ministry may revisit its policy of gotting its
warships built only through DPSUs and should think of including capable shipyards
either in public or private sector also, They also urged upon the Ministry to bo more
judicious in selecting shipyards that possessed adequate capacity and infrastructure,
keoping in view the features of the ships to be built and ensure adherence to
timelines and costs. The Committee felt that had the sclection of shipyard been donc
by taking into it's preparedness, the delay and the increase in cost would not have
boen that high. The Committe, therefore, urged upon tho Ministry to fix responsibility
for such lapses of the officials under intimation to the Commitlee.

11. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have submitted as under:

“Selection of ShipyardsiCapacity Assessment ShipyardsiCapacity Assessment, Shipbuilding
projects are awarded to shipyards (DPSU/PSUs as well as private
sector shipyards) based on capacity assessment/qualification
caltied out by IN/Acquisition Wing (as mandated by the BPP).
Private Shipyards are also now participating in warship building
projects.”

42. Although the Ministry have claimed that ship building projects are
awarded to shipyards based on the capacity assessment/qualification carried
out by IN/Acquisition Wing, the Committee are perplexed to note the time and
cost overrun that have taken place in the case of different class of ships such
as P-17 and P-28. The Committee once again reiterate their view that had the

selection of shipyard becn done by taking into account it's preparedness, the


8
delay and the increase in cost would not have becn that high. Moreover, the

replics of the Ministry is silent on the issue of fixing responsibility on officials
responsible for the lapses. Therefore, the Committee reiterate their earlicr
recommendation and desire that the selection of Shipyards be made in future
in a judicious manner which can ensure strict timeliness and cost as

recommended by the Competent Authority in this regard.

lV. Slippages in Delivery Deliver
(Recommendation Para No. 10)

43.  Slippages in delivery is yet another issue of concern for the Committee. The
Committee were given to understand that delivery period of the warships as’
onvisaged were extended viz. for P-15A target was of 78 months bul was extended to
429 months. The Committee noted that the extended time was almost double of the
originally envisaged timeline. The Committee found this unacceptable as the
shipyards’ efficioncy has not improved though the claims of the Ministry in this regard
state otherwise. The Commiltee also noted with displeasure the Ministry's repeated
claims regarding the causes for delays. The Commitiee were of tho view that
shipyards engaged in production of naval warships haven't been upgraded to the
desired level as they scem to be unfamiliar with new technologies and processes
being acquired and implemented across the word, Therefore, the Committee desired
that the Ministry try to expand their domestic vondor base 80 that dependency on
international suppliers would gradually reduce thereby automatically arresting delays
and protracted negotiations. The Committee felt Ihat in keeping with modern notion
that a warship is built around weapons and sensors, emphasis should be given to
timely selection and finalization of weapens and sensors. Moreover, a ship building
project should be seen with definite timetines and mifesiones with deadlines for all
stakeholders for fulfilling their respective obligations. The Committee, therefore, urged
upon the Ministry to fix responsibility in case of non-performance/delay under
intimation to this Committee.

44. | The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have submitted as under:

(a) Upgradation of Shipyards / New Technologies and
Processes. As brought out at para 9 above shipyards are
continuously being upgraded. As regards, incorporating



9

technologies and processes, a performance benchmark study of
DPSU shipyards vis-d-vis international shipyards / standards and
best practices have been carried out by a reputed consultant. The
recommendations emerging out of the benchmarking study are
being implemented by the respective shipyards. Further, MDL and
GRSE have entered into a contract with an internationat ‘know-how
provider’ for adopting ‘Integraled / Modular Construction’ in P-17A.
Industry best practices, procedures and state-of-the art
methodology is envisaged to be imbibed through the ongoing
construction of P-17A. In addition, GSL would be collaborating with
an international shipyard for acquiring Mine Counter Measure
Vessel (MCMV) technology.

(b) Expansion of vendor base, Explained at para 4(h} above.
AIL DPSU shipyards are expanding their vendor base and are also
resorting to outsourcing.

(c}) Timely selection and finalisation of weapons and
sensors, As per the extant shipbuilding procedure the weapons
and sensor package have lo be finalised prior to taking the on
stage CFA / CCS sanction. The limeline for taking 270 stage
sanction is also decided at the time of faking initial fi* stage
sanction.

(d} Moniforing of milestones _/ Responsibility. Definite
milestones are enumerated in shipbuilding projects as stipulated in
DPP and are duly captured in the contracts alongwith their
timelines. The payment to shipyard is released based on the
confirmation of each milestone by the ‘Overseer’ /IN. There is a
mechanism in place for monitoring shipbuilding projects w.r.t
definite milestones / timelines.”

415. The Committee find that although the observation made by them
regarding slippages in delivery of the ships has been addressed by fhe
Ministry, yet their reply is conspicuously silent on. the issue of fixing
responsibility for non-performance and delay. While vetting the reply of the
Ministry, when Audit pointed out the same, the Ministry furnished the counter
comments by stating that penalty has been levied on concerned shipyards for
slippages in delivery. The Committee feel that India being a major maritime
nation with vital economic and security interest linked to the sea, it is
imperative for the Indian Navy to be equipped with requisite number of ships in

a timely manner to meet multifarious challenges. The Committce are of the


10 न
opinion that merce imposition of penalty may not act as a deterres.

not to repeat the same mistake again. They, therefore, impress upon .
Ministry to fix responsibility on shipyards and also by taking into account the
component of human error involved in the matter and inform the Commitice

accordingly.

Vv. Monitoring Mechanism Mechanism

(Recommendation No. 41}

16. The Committee noted that construction of warship is a complex task involving
multiple agencies which require ciose coordination and constant monitoring. The
Committee had been informed that review meetings are held every six months to
review on-going projects. The Committee were also happy to note that Naval Warship
Overseeing Team of the Indian Navy is stationed at the shipyards for close scrutiny of
the projects. The Committee observed that faking cognizance of anticipated and
unanticipated factors affecting cost and time overruns in the warship building industry,
a more realistic assessment for the production of warships needs to be done. For
this, the Committee desired that special experts in the field be roped in so that the
delivery schedules may be more accurately assessed and used effectively for
monitoring parameters. The Committee noted with concern that Apex level
Committee Meetings were not held in the year 2010. The Ministry in this regard
submitted that henceforth, the meetings would be held periodically as stipulated in
DPP-2011. The Committee desired that since Apex level Committee Meetings were
crucial for reviewing and monitoring warship production, they be held regularly so that
any anomalies as noticed could be immediately brought to notice and be rectified as

early as possible. _

17, The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have submitted as under:

“{a} Assessment_of warship production_by _exper's. of warship production by experts. The
benchmarking study of DPSU shipyards. vis-a-vis internationat
standards has been carried out by a reputed consultant, as
explained af para 140(a) above. Further {N has also developed
requisite expertise and experience fo assess warship delivery
schedules more accurately now.



11
(b) Apex mecting are being held regularly. The details of Apex

Meeting held in the last four ycars are as follows:-
= DATE DATE
2013 16Apri3. OJ SNovd3 _
2014 21 Jan't4 8 May't4
2015 20 Jan't5 5 80815
i 2016 __ | 410 Feb16* __

18. The Committee 100 thai although Apex meetings arc being held

regularly, yet the Ministry have not informed as to how these mcctings have

helped ensuring a robust monitoring mechanism. it is not even clear whether

contentious issues such as delay in warship building, inaccurate cost
g estimation, defay in’ signing of contract, nomination and readiness of
shipyards, cost and time overrun cte. have ever surfaced for discussion before
the Apex Committee and if such discussions have taken place, the Committee
would like to be informed of the specific guidance given by the Apex
Committee on these issues. The Committee feel that if the Apex Committee
would have deliberated on the issucs pointed out by Audit, perhaps all these
deficiencies would have been avoided. The Committee, therefore, urge the
Ministry to onsure that not only the Apex Committee meetings aro held
regularly, but contentious issues are also discussed and proper guidance is

given so that the anomafies are removed before surfacing as big problems in

aa

the way of warship building exercise of the Indian Navy.

akKRAH

SEE A RO HEL

45

Peop, kev, THOMAS
Chacsperor
ह ०४५० Aecoutts ८0०»

Alen? aelhy
6 Movers 2616

— kashla , 8 (Seta)



i

po is faeces SE

2220८६८4६:४७४७:८८००४5

SSN EU eater ate

Cotsen

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv}

(v}

APPENDIX-II
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
CONTAINED IN THEIR THIRTY-SECOND REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA}

Total number of Observations/Recommendations

Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
which have been accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 4, 2, 5 to 7 & 10 fo 12

Observations/Recommendations which the
Committce do not desire to pursue in view of
the reply of the Government:

Para Nos. 4,9
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

Para Nos. 3, 8

Observations/Recommendations in respect of

which the Government have furnished interim replies:

Para Nos, - Nil

12

Total : 08
Percentage: 66.67%

Total : 02

Porcentage: 16.67%

Total ; 02
Percentage: 16.67%

Total: 0
Percontage: 0%