 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Ninety-sixth Report (16th Lok Sabha)] 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE) 
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
MANAGEMENT OF NARCOTICS 
SUBSTANCES 
120 

2 
 
PAC NO. 2159 
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTIETH REPORT 
     
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
  
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Ninety-sixth Report (16th Lok Sabha)] 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE) 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on: 18.12.2018 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 18.12.2018 
 
 
L O K    S A B H A    S E C R E T A R I A T 
N E W  D E L H I  
 
December, 2018/Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka) 
  
 
MANAGEMENT OF NARCOTICS 
SUBSTANCES 

3 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMITTEE (2018-19)  
INTRODUCTION    
CHAPTER I              
  
Introductory  
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
replies received from Government   
 
 
CHAPTER IV  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee and which require reiteration  
 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Government have furnished interim replies/no 
replies 
 
 
APPENDICES 
I* Minutes of the twentieth sitting of Public Accounts 
Committee (2018-19) held on   5.12.2018. 
 
II Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts 
Committee contai ned in their Ninety -sixth Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
 
*  To be appended at the time of Printing. 
 
 
 

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2018-19) 
  Shri Mallikarjun Kharge   - Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria  
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra 
5.    Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar   
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
7. Smt. Riti Pathak 
8. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank” 
9. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
10. Shri Abhishek Singh 
11. Shri Gopal Shetty 
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya  
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
15. Dr. Ponnusamy  Venugopal 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
16. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda 
17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
18. Shri Shwait Malik 
19. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
21. Shri C.M.Ramesh 
22. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A.K. Singh       - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri T. JayaKumar - Director 
3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja     -            Deputy Secretary 
  

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2018 -19), having been 
authorised by the Committee, do present this One Hundred and Twentieth Report  
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action  Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Ninety -sixth 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Management of Narcotics Substances ' relating to 
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue). 
 
2. The Ninety -sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on  
28 March, 2018 . Replies of the Government to the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Report were received on 6 th November, 2018. The Public Accounts 
Committee considered and adopted the One Hundred and Twentieth Report (Sixteenth 
Lok Sabha) at their sitting held on 5 December, 2018. Minutes of the Sitting are given at 
Appendix-I. 
 
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold of the Report. 
 
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to 
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government o n the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Ninety -sixth (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is 
given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                        Mallikarjun Kharge                                                      
13 December, 2018                                                                                     Chairperson                                                 
22 Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)                                                        Public Accounts Committee 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHInew LY  
  
8_ 
  
  
 
 
 
 

6 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
 This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
their Ninety-sixth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on "Management of Narcotic Substances". 
 
2. The Ninety-sixth Report which was presented to Lok Sabha on 28 th March, 2018 
contained fourteen Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken Notes on all the 
Observations/Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Revenue) and are categorized as under: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 Para Nos. 2,6,7,8,9 and 10        
    
          Total:     06       
          Chapter – II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
NIL 
          Total:    NIL      
          Chapter – III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of  which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
  Para Nos. 3, 4 and 11 
           
           Total:    03 
          Chapter – IV 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies/no replies: 
  Para No. 1,5,12,13,and 14       
   
          Total:    05         
          Chapter -V 

7 
 
3. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed certain 
shortcomings/deficiencies on the part of Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) in 
Management of Narcotic Substances like illicit cultivation of opium poppy, absence of 
clear policy framework for the management of opium production and sales and 
overlapping roles of Narcotics Control Bureau (NCB) an d Central Bureau of Narcotics 
(CBN). The Committee while dealing with the issues pointed out by the Audit made 
recommendations/observations on huge vacancies in major controlling agencies, need 
for  a robust policy and narcotic control framework, augmentin g opium production, 
technological advancement and foolproof  monitoring mechanism . 
4. The final Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Revenue) have been reproduced in the relevant chapters of this Report. The Committee 
will now deal with action taken by the Government on their 
Observations/Recommendations which either need reiteration or merit comments. 
5. The Committee desire the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) to 
furnish Action Taken Notes in respect of Observ ations/Recommendations 
contained in Chapter I and final action taken replies in respect of 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter V for which interim reply 
has been given by the Government within six months of the presentation of the 
Report to the House.  
(Recommendation Para No. 3) 
6. Audit examination had revealed that no soil testing was carried out before issue 
of licenses to cultivators and the District Opium Officer of Barabanki, Uttar Pradesh 
accepted the audit observation. The Committee w ere shocked to note from the reply of 
the Ministry that observations made by the audit regarding issuance of license on the 
basis of soil testing etc are neither supported by the provisions of the NDPS rules 
issued under NDPS Act, nor by NDPS Policy and no r even by the Guidelines issued by 
the Govt. for issuance of license. However, CBN issued licenses for soil research and 
development to five Research Institutes. The Committee desired that expenditure 
incurred on soil research and development in last 5 yea rs and the innovations / 
decisions etc. made on the basis of above research be furnished to the Committee. The 
Committee were of the considered opinion that logically, soil testing must be a pre -
requisite before issuing licenses and desired that an explici t provision in this regard be 
added to the Rules so that the licenses are issued on scientific basis. The Committee 

8 
 
also desired that soil testing in new areas should also be done for determining the 
production capability of the country. The figures so der ived be intimated to the 
Department of Commerce for inclusion in EXIM Policy for the narcotics substances and 
the International Narcotics Control Bureau (INCB) for being considered while fixing  of 
country quotas by them.   
 
7. The Ministry of Finance (Dep artment of Revenue) in their Action Taken Notes 
have stated as under:- 
 “As regard to the explicit provision of soil testing before issuing licenses, it is 
submitted that around 60000 licenses are issued every year.  This suggestion of 
the Committee does not seem to be practical as it is not possible to carry out soil 
testing of more than 60000 cultivators. However, Ministry of Agriculture has been 
requested to offer comments on procedure /mechanism for carrying out soil 
testing for opium cultivation through Ministry of Agriculture and agency there 
under.  Ministry of Agricultur e has informed that soil testing is required for 
fertilizer recommendations to obtain optimum crop yield. The State Agriculture 
Departments carry out soil testing for opium cultivation and give fertilizer 
recommendations if their soil testing labs are appr oached. However, it is not 
mandatory.”   
8. While vetting the above ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:- 
 i)  Ministry may apprise the PAC, whether proposal of soil testing in new 
areas is under consideration for determining/increasing the production capability 
of the country so as to reduce the import of poppy seed? 
 ii)  Expenditure incurred on soil research and development in last 5 years and 
innovations/decisions etc. made on the basis of above research may be 
furnished to PAC. 
 
9. In their further comments to the above said Audit observation, the Ministry stated 
as under:- 
i) With regard to the soil testing para 3 of the Action Taken Report  may 
please be perused. 
ii) With regard to the expenditure incurred on soil research and developme nt 
in last 5 years , it is submitted that CBN does not have any budget for incurring 
expenditure on Research and Development. No soil research and development 
work has been undertaken by University/Colleges engaged in the research work 
pertaining to opium during last five years. 

9 
 
10. The Committee while noting that no soil testing  was carried out before 
issue of licenses to cultivators had opined that soil testing must be a pre -
requisite before issuing licenses and desired that an explicit provision for tes ting 
of soil before issuing licenses should be added to the rules to ensure that 
licenses are issued on scientific basis. The Committee note from the submission 
of the Ministry that carrying out soil testing in respect of more than 60000 
cultivators is not possible and that State  Agricultural Departments carry out soil 
testing for opium cultivation when fertilizer recommendations are sought from 
their labs. The Committee are, therefore, of the view that it may be made 
mandatory for the cultivators to get t heir soil tested from the labs of the States' 
Agricultural Departments for getting licences to cultivate opium. Department of 
Revenue may take up with the Ministry of Agriculture for addition of a column in 
the existing soil card, being issued by it, regar ding fitness of soil for production 
of opium. Since the Committee are of the firm opinion that licenses for cultivation 
of poppy should only be issued after soil testing has been carried out, they, 
reiterate, their earlier recommendation that an explicit p rovision be added to the 
rules to make it mandatory for the cultivators to get their soil test report once in  
every three  years. 
 
   (Recommendation Para No. 4) 
11. The Committee observed that manufacture, sale and export of the narcotic 
alkaloid extracts higher up in the value chain have the potential to provide exponentially 
higher economic returns to the poppy plantation and save foreign exchange in procuring 
poppy seeds from the traditional hinter lands. However, Audit pointed out that there 
seemed to be no clear policy framework aiming at the twin objectives of revenue 
generation through sale of finished opium based pain relief chemicals and foreign 
exchange savings by indigenous production of opium seeds. The Committee noted that 
the CBN which is under the DoR is responsible for the supervision of opium cultivation 
and is regulatory authority for licensing import and export of the alkaloids and licit opium 
etc. Narcotics Control Bureau(NCB) which is under the Ministry of Home Affairs, is an 
apex enforcement agency for the narcotics drugs and destruction of illicit cultivation of 

10 
 
opium. The DRI, the Customs, the State police, are other agencies which are involved 
in management of narcotics substances. The Committee observed that the system in 
place to monitor and control production of opium poppy is deficient as is evident from 
illegal crop production, rampant uprooting of crops, not achieving even the Minimum 
Quality Yield (MQY), absence of soil testing, limiting the production to only three States 
etc. The Committee found that involvement of CBN, NCB and State authorities has only 
added to the confusion, mismanagement, overlapping of monitoring and control, not 
taking action by one organisation as they think that the other organisation might take 
action due to lack of coordination and absence of clearly  defined responsibilities in 
inter-related areas. The Committee therefore, referred to the Principle of Management 
i.e. 'Unity of Direction' which states that activities aimed at the same objective should be 
so organized that there is one plan and one head responsible  
for accomplishment of the same. The Committee were of the view that there should be 
an integrated pla n for management of narcotics substances under the supervision of 
Narcotics Control Division (NCD), Department of Revenue  to ensure unity of action and 
coordination. Accordingly, the Committee desired that all functions related to 
management of narcotics substances be transferred to the NCD to ensure efficient 
handling of related aspects.  
 
12. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) in their Action Taken Notes 
have stated as under:- 
 "In so far as proposal to bring all functions related to managem ent of narcotics 
 substances under a single Department is concerned, it is submitted that:- 
(a)   Prior to NDPS Act 1985, Department of Revenue was administrating  
 the opium Act -1852, the Opium Act -1878 and the Dangerous Act 1930 
 right from the year 1950 . Department of Revenue came out with a 
 comprehensive legislation of the NDPS Act - 1985 in order to strengthen 
 controls over drug abuse, enhanced penalties for drug related offense and 
 make provisions for implementation of obligation under the internati onal 
 Drug Conventions. Department of Revenue has been functioning as the 
 Nodal Department in the filed of Drug Administration even before 
 independence.  

11 
 
(b)  The NDPS Act has assigned different sphere of works related to Drug 
 Administration to differen t Ministries/ Departments/ Agencies/ State 
 Governments as follows : 
 (i)   Responsibility of Narcotics Control Division under DoR –      
             Framing of Rules for Regulation under NDPS Act.   
   CBN – Supervision of licit cultivation, licensing for   
    manufacturing and import-export of substances for   
    legitimate use. 
   CCF- Extracting of Alkaloids from Opium and supplying of  
    drugs for legitimate use. 
 (ii)       Supply Reduction –  
   Narcotic Control Division under DoR (MoF) – Regulatory  
    aspect 
   NCB (MHA)- Enforcement and reporting to INCB. 
           (iii)   Demand Reduction –Ministry of Social Justice and   
    Empowerment (MSJE)   &  
  Harm Reduction – Ministry of Health and Family Welfare  
   (MoH&W) 
Apart from the above Customs, State Police, State drug administration 
and state excise department also have different roles in the narcotics 
management. Therefore as per the national Policy there are various Ministries 
associated with narcotics management in the country.  
(c)  Drug Administration involves a large number of areas which are quite 
different from enforcement and intelligence. It involves a complex array of 
activities. These include regulation of licit opium cultivati on; manufacture, import 
and export of opium and its alkaloids; manufacture, import and export of narcotic 
drugs and psychotropic substances; control over precursor chemicals, 
investigation and forfeiture of drug related assets and drug money laundering. 
The majority of these functions are regulatory in nature and require to be 
addressed by different agencies under Department of Revenue, Ministry of 
Finance.  
(d)  Department of Revenue has administrative control over CBEC which 
is the legitimate authority to keep check on manufacture and trade in the country, 
making it suitable to effectively control the licensing, surveillance and 

12 
 
enforcement of NDPS Act and Rules. Further, economic crime is closely linked to 
with narcotics. Ministry of Finance is ideally po ised with agencies which gather 
intelligence, monitor and enforce economic offences under SAFEMA, FEMA 
Prevention of Money laundering Act. etc.  
(e) CCF with two Government Opium Alkaloids Works at Ghazipur, UP 
and Neemuch, MP is involved in revenue earnin g and taxation activity also which 
are sole mandate of Department of Revenue. 
(f) Various Central and State Government agencies like NCB, CBN, 
Central Excise, paramilitary Forces are entrusted with preventive activities under 
NDPS Act, 1985. Therefore, NCB  is not the sole agency for destruction of illicit 
poppy cultivation, prevention, combating abuse of and illicit traffic in narcotic 
drugs and psychotropic substances. 
(g) Training on Narcotics is a part of the training module of IRS ( C&CE) 
Officers for which Department of Revenue is the cadre controlling authority. 
(h) Establishment matters of CBN are in the domain of CBIC while 
operational issues are in the domain of Narcotics Control Division under 
Department of Revenue, further, the establishment matte rs are distributed 
among various desks in CBIC, in addition to the establishment matters of 
personnel of Central Excise, Customs and Service Tax Commissionerates. 
Similarly, staff matters of laboratory staff of GOAWs are in the domain of CRCL. 
Therefore, n umber of staff dealing the establishment matters of these 
organizations need to be worked out before transferring the NC Division. 
 In view of the foregoing paras it may be seen that policy making and 
enforcement related to narcotics are better administered in the present scenario." 
13. While vetting the above ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:- 
“Due to deficiencies found in present system of monitoring & controlling Poppy 
cultivation, PAC opined that there should be an integrated plan for managem ent 
of Narcotic substances. PAC may be apprised of steps initiated to ensure unity of 
action and coordination w.r.t narcotic substances. ” 
 
14. In their further comments to the above said audit observation, the Ministry stated 
as under:- 
“Reply already given in ATR.” 

13 
 
15. The Committee noted that involvement of CBN, NCB and State authorities 
had only added to the confusion, mismanagement, overlapping of monitoring and 
control, lack of coordination and absence of clearly defined duties and 
responsibilities in inter-related areas. The Committee were of the view that there 
should be an integrated plan for management of narcotics substances under the 
supervision of Narcotics Control Division (NCD), Department of Revenue  to 
ensure unity of action and coordinat ion and desired that all functions related to 
management of narcotics substances be transferred to the NCD to ensure 
efficient handling of related aspects. However, on perusal of the reply of the 
Ministry, the Committee are appalled to note that the Depart ment has only 
detailed the mandate of the various agencies concerned  and has not commented 
upon the Committee's observation regarding transferring all functions related to 
narcotics to NCD. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that policy 
making and enforcement related to narcotics are better administered in the 
present scenario. Ministry of Home Affairs had submitted that a Cabinet note for 
transfer of NCD, CBN and CCF from Department of Revenue to MHA. The 
Committee are shocked to note that the policy making and enforcement agencies 
have not been able to even align their views on who should be the controlling 
agency. The Committee while noting that Department of Revenue is handling 
most of the activities related to management of narcotics sub stances and has the 
required manpower for enforcement activities across the length and breadth of 
the country are of the opinion that NCD, be made responsible for handling all 
aspects related to the over all management of narcotic substances. 
 
(Recommendation Para 5) 
16.  The Committee had observed that there were no apparent rationale for allowing 
cultivation of poppy seeds in only three States when the demand for the same is much 
higher than its production which is consequently met through imp orts. The Committee 
noted that last demand survey was conducted by the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment seventeen years back in 2001. The Committee desired that a 
comprehensive demand survey be done urgently by the NCD and thereafter every five 
years to assess the actual demand of opium poppy in India. However, the Committee 
observe that the demand for opium have already been much higher than its cultivation 

14 
 
and will increase manifold in next 5 -10 years after National Health Policy is enforced. 
The Committee exhorted the Ministry to conduct soil testing in more States to ascertain 
its quality for poppy Cultivation to cope up with the ever increasing demand of opium. 
The Committee desired that the results of soil testing of new and existing areas an d 
drug demand survey be considered by NCD for adding new areas of cultivation to meet 
the domestic demand. 
 
17. In this regard, The Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) in their Action 
Taken Notes have stated as under:- 
"In so far as demand survey for opium is concerned, the Ministry of Social Justice 
and Empowerment is responsible for conducting demand survey. For soil testing, 
Ministry of Agriculture has informed that soil testing is required for fertilizer 
recommendations to obtain optimum crop y ield. The State Agriculture 
Departments carry out soil testing for opium cultivation and give fertilizer 
recommendations if their soil testing labs are approached. However, it is not 
mandatory." 
18.  While vetting the said ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:- 
 “Ministry may apprise the PAC whether it is in correspondence with Ministry of           
 Social justice & Empowerment for conducting the comprehensive demand survey 
 on regular basis as directed by PAC, to assess the actual demand of opium 
 poppy in India..” 
19. In their further comments to the above said Audit observation, the Ministry stated as 
under:- 
“It  has been  intimated by the Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment that 
they have assigned the National Survey on extent and pattern o f Substance 
(Drugs) abuse in India to national Drug Dependence Treatment Centre (NDDTC), 
AIIMS,  New Delhi, which is under progress. The substances which are being 
surveyed includes alcohol, tobacco, opioids, sedative –hypnotics, cannabis, 
stimulants, hall ucinogens, inlalants (volatile solvents). The survey will provide 
national and state -level estimates of proportion and absolute number of people 
who use various substances and people who are suffering from substance use 
disorders in India. It will also map  the presence of services and interventions for 
individuals suffering from substance use disorders and identify the gaps in 
service delivery.” 
20. The Committee had noted that the demand for poppy seeds is much higher 
than its production and desired that a  comprehensive demand survey be done 
urgently by the NCD to assess the actual demand in the country. The Committee 

15 
 
had also observed in their earlier recommendation that the demand for opium 
poppy will increase manifold after National Health Policy is enfo rced. As per the 
reply of Department of Revenue, the Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment 
have assigned the national survey on extent and pattern of Substance(Drugs) 
abuse in India to National Drug Dependence Treatment Centre (NDDTC), AIIMS, 
New Delhi which is under progress.  The Committee while noting that Ministry of 
Social Justice & Empowerment is conducting a survey on extent and pattern of 
Substances abuse, reiterate that a survey of the demand of opium/ poppy seeds 
for licit/ medicinal use may be  conducted and more areas of cultivation be added 
to enable augmenting the production of the same. 
   (Recommendation Para 11) 
21. The Committee noted that contrary to the provisions, the Department had paid 
more than Rs. 2 crore being 90 percent price of opium and its balance amount to the 
persons other than cultivators like son, brother, daughter and Mukhiya etc. On being 
asked about the matter, it was replied that as per Opium Manual Volume -II "If any 
cultivator is absent, payment for him may be made to the Lambardar or substitute 
appointed by the cultivator himself on the responsibility of the Lambardar", and that no 
complaint had been received from cultivators regarding non receiving of cost of opium 
and since 2012-13 opium cost had been paid to the cul tivator's individual bank account 
through e-Payment. The Committee were dismayed to note that though e -payment has 
been introduced, large amount such as Rs. 1.51 crore and Rs. 0.56 crore (approx.) in 
respective States was paid to persons other than cultiva tors without obtaining any 
authority letter from the cultivators and the original cultivator had not given authority to 
whom the payment was to be made; hence, the payment was irregular. The Committee 
desired that the responsibility of the officials for ma king irregular payments be fixed and 
action taken against them and the Committee be apprised thereof.  
 
22. In this regard, the Ministry of Finance ( Department of Revenue) in their Action 
Taken Note have stated as under:- 

16 
 
“With regard to the payment, it is submitted that the cash payment noted by the 
committee pertains to the period when e -payment was not introduced. After 
introduction of e -payment there are no cash payments made either to the 
cultivators or to the person na med by him.  There is no reported case of misuse 
of facility of payment to named individual if cultivator himself is absent. Action of 
officers is  in line with the Department manual. The problem is of past era when 
many cultivators did not have bank accou nts and e -payment was not 
implemented. However, as of now, there are only stray cases of such payments 
being made to other than cultivator which are made through cheque/demand 
draft in the name of person named by the cultivator. In all other cases, e-payment 
is made."  
 
23.  While vetting the said ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:- 
“Ministry is required to apprise the PAC about the action taken against the 
officials responsible for mismanagement of records, for making irregular 
payments before the introduction of e-payments." 
 
24. In their further comments to the above said audit observation, the Ministry stated 
as under:- 
“In this regard, it is submitted that there is no reported case of misuse of facility of 
payment to named individual if cultivator himself is absent. Action of officers is in 
line with the departmental manual. The problem is of past era when many 
cultivators did not have bank accounts and e -payment was not implemented. 
However, as of now there are only stray cases of such p ayment being made to 
other than cultivator which are made through cheque/demand draft in the name 
of person named by the cultivator. In all other cases, e-payment is made. 
In view of above position, no officer appear to be responsible. However, caution 
is being issued to all officers intimating that e -payment should be made to the 
bank account of cultivator, if for some reason e -payment is not possible account 
payee cheque/demand draft in the name of cultivator should be issued. ” 
25. The Committee had note d that despite introduction of e -payment 
mechanism large amounts such as Rs 1.51 crore and Rs 0.56 crore were paid to 
persons other than cultivators without obtaining any authority letter from the 
cultivators. The Committee had desired that the responsibil ity of the officials for 
making irregular payments be fixed and action taken against them. The 
Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that the problem was of past era 

17 
 
when many cultivators did not have bank accounts and e -payment was not 
implemented. However, presently there are only stray cases of such payments 
being made to other than cultivators and that no officer appears to be 
responsible. The Committee are appalled to note the non -chalant attitude of the 
Ministry in matters relating to financia l procedures. The Committee are of the 
opinion that due diligence cannot be compromised in any circumstance and 
action should be taken against violations, even if negligible. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that responsibil ity of officials for 
mis-management of records and making irregular payments be fixed and 
exemplary action taken against them. The Committee also desire that 100% 
internal audit of the payments made through cheques/ drafts may be furnished to 
ensure genuineness in those transactions. 
 
(Recommendation Para 12) 
26. The Committee noted that the Department claims to conduct 100 per cent 
internal audit of cultivation of opium records after the completion of settlement operation 
each year and as per the internal audit report, no discrepancies irregularities/ambiguity 
was found during the period 2010 -11 to 2012 -13. However, C&AG audit found, inter -
alia, non -adherence to the provisions of licensing policy, smart card identification, 
satellite based cultivation manag ement and lack of serious efforts for recovery of 
outstanding dues from the cultivators indicating lack of internal controls in the 
Department.  
The Committee further noted that there was no reconciliation done with the State Excise 
Departments of the States to control the sale/diversion of the by -products of the poppy 
(poppy straw, poppy husk and poppy seeds). The Department replied that there is a 
system of monthly reporting on all aspects of the functioning of State units of  
CBN and CCF, which is regularly scrutinized and monitored at the level of 
Headquarters. Besides, reports of all seizures and those on other developments are 
sent as and when they occur and a number of steps have been taken for automation of 
its functional activities including interaction with public by introducing web -application 
and sharing of information. The Committee were shocked to note that instead of taking 

18 
 
measures to  rectify the flaws pointed out by the Audit, the Ministry is reiterating the 
prevailing mechanism .The Committee were of the view that since cases of non -
adherence to the provisions of Licensing Policy, non -maintenance of records at District 
Opium Office i .e. Preliminary Weighment Register, Payment Weighment Register etc. 
have been pointed out by the Audit the reporting, recording and monitoring system be 
strengthened and a time frame be prescribed for CBN to get an ISO certification. The 
Committee were of the view that non -adherence to the provisions of licensing policy, 
non-maintenance of records and non-reconciliation with the State Excise Department to 
control diversion are serious issues which should be enquired into and action taken 
against those found  responsible. The Committee exhorted the Ministry to take urgent 
steps to improve the system and apprise the Committee accordingly. 
 
27. The Ministry of Finance ( Department of Revenue) did not reply to the above 
para in their Action Taken Notes.  
 
28.  While vetting the said ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:- 
“Ministry is required to apprise the PAC about the steps taken towards 
strengthening the reporting, recording and monitoring system. Further time frame 
to be prescribed for CBN to get an ISO certification may be informed." 
 
29. In their comments to the above said audit observation, the Ministry stated as 
under:- 
“The present reporting, recording and monitoring mechanism is manual and is 
based primarily upon the monthly reports sent by the officers to controlling 
unit/headquarters. Apart from this, special reports are sought for from field 
formations time to time during the cultivation season. Regular maintence of 
records is being done in the form of registers in the prescribed format (as 
prescribed by Narcotics Commissioner time to time.) 
For better record keeping, reporting and monitoring, it is desirable that the entire 
documentation and recording work is computerized and made online. This 
proposal will require appointment of specialized a gency for studying the 
departmental records and suggesting ways and means to computerize them and 
provide online linkages. Processes and record keeping needs to be first aligned 

19 
 
with the ISO certification requirements and then completely made online for 
better recording, reporting and monitoring. As regards time period required for 
implementation of it, this office has no previous experience of it, however, the 
process may take between 2-3 years. ” 
30. The Committee were of the view that since cases of non -adherence to the 
provisions of Licensing Policy, non -maintenance of records at District Opium 
Office have been pointed out by the Audit the reporting, recording and monitoring 
system be strengthened and a time frame be prescribed for CBN to get an ISO 
certification. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that the present 
reporting, recording and monitoring mechanism is manual and is based primarily 
upon the monthly reports sent by the officers to control unit/headquarters. 
Further, it has been st ated that for better record keeping, reporting and 
monitoring, it is desirable that the entire documentation and recording work is 
computerized and made online. The Ministry has submitted that the 
computerization will require appointment of specialized age ncy for studying the 
departmental records and suggesting ways and means to computerize them and 
provide online linkages. Processes and record keeping needs to be first aligned 
with the ISO certification requirements and then completely made online for 
better recording, reporting and monitoring. Notably, Ministry has also stated "As 
regards time period required for implementation of it, this office has no previous 
experience of it, however, the process may take between 2 -3 years". The 
Committee are amazed to  note that though the Department has understood that 
computerization and going online can improve the system of reporting, recording 
and monitoring, it has not made any efforts to bring about the required changes. 
Further, the Committee are shocked to note the submission of the NCD that it has 
no experience of computerization though CBIC under whose domain the 
establishment matters of CBN fall is almost fully computerized. The Committee 
are aghast to note the lackadaisical approach of the NCD and desire tha t the 
steps necessary to computerize the system be taken urgently and they may be 
apprised thereof. 
  
 

20 
 
(Recommendation Para 13) 
31. The Committee were distressed to note that audit has pointed out serious 
problems like licenses issued  to ineligible farmer s, exorbitant ploughing back of opium, 
no mechanism to verify opium testing report, irregularities in Preliminary Weighment 
Register etc indicating deficiencies and irregularities in the internal  
control mechanism. The above cases highlighted the lackadaisical attitude of the District 
Opium Officers (DOO), Lambardar in recording and maintaining the records at regional 
level. Hence, the Committee exhorted the Ministry to develop a robust monitoring 
mechanism to ensure that rules, regulations and procedures are followed by all levels in 
the hierarchy. The Committee desired the Ministry to  
prescribe yearly schedule of regular inspections of Regional Offices by the senior 
officers of the Department and all inspection reports be made available online to ensure 
transparency and easy access by the higher authorities. The D00 should also be made 
accountable by prescribing submission of fortnightly reports online. 
  
32. The Ministry of Finance ( Department of Revenue) did not reply to the above 
para in their Action Taken Notes. 
33.  While vetting the said ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:- 
“Steps taken towards prescribing yearly schedule of regular inspections of 
Regional offices and making such inspection reports online may be informed." 
 
34. In their comments to the above said audit observation, the Ministry stated as 
under:- 
“At present there is no practice of regular inspection of regional offices.  The 
frequency of conducting regular inspection is suggested as under  
 Inspecting Officer Formations to be inspected 
1
. 
Narcotics Commissioner (a) Office of any two units 
(b) One DOO Office of each Unit 
2
. 
Deputy Narcotics Commissioner 
(Hqrs.) 
(a) Unit Office not scheduled to be 
inspected by Narcotics Commissioner. 
 
(b) One DOO and one P&I Cell Office 
in each unit not scheduled for 

21 
 
inspection by Narcotics Commissioner. 
3
. 
Unit Deputy Narcotics 
Commissioner   
Four division and 2 P & I Cell offices for 
inspection of other unit not scheduled 
for inspection by Narcotics 
Commissioner (Hqs) 
4
. 
Assistant Narcotics Commissioner 
(Hqrs.) (Tech./Narcotics). 
Each ANC to inspect one DOO and one 
p&I Cell Office of each unit not 
scheduled for inspection by any of 
above officers. 
 
5
. 
Unit Assistant Narcotics 
Commissioner  
To inspect remaining DOO/P &I Cell 
Offices of unit other than their own. 
 In addition to above, Additional/Special Secretary (Revenue) may conduct 
inspection of Headquarters' office or any one unit office as deemed fit.” 
35. The Committee had desired the Ministry to prescribe yearly schedule of 
regular inspections of Regional Offices by the senior officers of the Department 
to ensure transparency and accountability. The Committee are unhappy to note 
that the Ministry has replied to the recommendation of the Committee only after 
being pointed out b y the Audit to do so. The Ministry has in its reply given a 
detailed suggestion for routine inspections, the Committee desire that the same  
be implemented urgently and regularly followed scrupulously. 
 
(Recommendation Para 14) 
36. The Committee further no ted that the satellite based monitoring of illicit 
cultivation of opium is not enough as cases of illegal cultivation not detected by the 
Satellite have been noticed. Also, the areas reflected in satellite data was at times short 
captured than actual area found and destroyed by agencies. Such inefficiency defeats 
the very purpose of the systems of identification of illegal opium cultivation and 
monitoring. The Committee were of the view that mapping of areas be done in a manner 
where satellite based monitor ing functions as an adjunct to the ground level survey to 
give effective  results. The Committee opined that Centralized Monitoring System would 
work better with the Departments and Ministries concerned coming together, 
coordinating and working effectively for the cause. The Committee desired that in order 
to reduce illicit cultivation a facility be developed whereas an image of the illegally 

22 
 
cultivated area can be uploaded on the website by anyone as is being done by the 
DDA.   
37. In this regard, the Mini stry of Finance ( Department of Revenue) in their Action 
Taken Note have stated as under:- 
“To implement satellite based monitoring of illicit cultivation of opium it is 
submitted that imaginary report on suspected location of illicit Poppy cultivation 
are being generated by Aviation Research Centre, Director General of Security in 
Collaboration with ADRIN, Department of Space, Government of India. As far as 
uploading of images of illicit cultivation of Opium by disgruntled elements, 
informers or responsibl e citizens is concerned a Whatsapp number is being 
circulated for this purpose."  
 
38. The Committee had desired that in order to present illicit cultivation a 
facility be developed whereas an image of the illegally cultivated area can be 
uploaded on the website by anyone as is being done by the DDA. The Committee 
note from the reply of the Ministry that a whatsapp number is being circulated for 
the purpose. The Committee are of the opinion that in order to keep the identity of 
those informers who do not w ish to reveal the same, a provision be made to 
upload the images on the website as well as whatsapp messages without 
revealing the contact details of the sender. 
 
------- 
 
  

23 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
The Committee note that opium poppy is cultivated strictly in accordance 
with the general conditions finalized by the Government of India and one of the 
condition stipulates for  a certain Minimum Qualifying Yield (MQY) of opium 
produce per hectare, which is required to be tendered by the licensed 
cultivators, to be eligible for license during the following crop year. Audit 
revealed that the State of Uttar Pradesh was not achieving the average MQY 
and is produ cing less opium ranging from 6.67 % to 31.38% of average MQY 
during the period 2008 -09 to 2012 -13. The Committee further note that a huge  
number of cultivators in Uttar Pradesh fully/Partially uprooted the crop during the 
years 2008-09 to 2012-13 and though 23591 hectares areas was licensed there 
was a shortfall of 49 percent in utilization. The Ministry replied that to reduce 
cases of uprooting, a provision has been made in the general conditions that 
cultivators who have uprooted their crops for three ye ars continuously will be 
delicensed in the next crop year. The Committee desire that the details 
regarding delicensing of the number of farmers who have been delincesed for 
uprooting their crops be furnished to the committee and an enquiry be made into 
issuing of licenses to the farmers who  could not achieve MQY repeatedly and 
stern action taken against those found abetting illegal trade so as to curb the 
menace of drug -trafficking. The committee further desire that clear guideline for 
destruction of uproo ted crops be issued and enforced strictly as these uprooted 
crops can be used for extracting narcotic substances and the issue of large 
number of such cases be investigated.  
(Observation/Recommendation No. 2 of the 96 th Report of PAC (16 th LS) 
  

24 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
It has been asked for reasons for issuing of licenses to the cultivators of UP despite 
non-fulfillment of condition of Minimum Qualifying Yield (MQY) during the period 2008 -
09 to 2012 -13. In this regard, it is submitted that no cultivato r of UP Unit, whose 
average yield was found to be lower than the MQY fixed, was issued license in the next 
crop year. The CBN issues licenses for opium poppy cultivation to eligible cultivators 
only on the basis of opium policy notified by the Government of India. 
Crop Year Number of 
cultivators 
who have 
tendered 
opium in UP 
unit 
Number of 
cultivators 
de-licensed 
due to not 
achieving 
the MQY 
Number of 
cultivators 
who have 
achieved 
MQY 
Opium 
tendered by 
the 
cultivators 
who have 
achieved 
MQY 
Net 
productive 
area of 
cultivators 
who have 
achieved 
MQY 
Average 
yield 
Kg/Hect. 
achieved by 
the 
cultivators 
who have 
achieved 
MQY 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
2008-09 9 1 8 79.724 1.4100 56.542 
2009-10 162 102 60 605.278 10.7300 56.410 
2010-11 427 250 177 1837.157 31.7100 57.936 
2011-12 125 47 78 759.148 12.6400 60.059 
2012-13 113 21 92 234.232 3.9595 59.157 
 
From the data above it could be seen that many cultivators were de -licensed on the 
basis of MQY.  
2.     The provisions for plough back before lancing exist primarily to safeguard the 
cultivator from damage caused to the opium crop prior to lancing due to reasons such 
as rain, hailstorm, etc. when the cultivator is unlikely to fulfill the MQY and stands the 
chance of getting de-licensed in the next crop year. The system of allowing plough back 
has been revisited. The licensing conditions for issue of license is being issued to the 
cultivators for production of opium. In order to check the cultivators who are habitually 
applying for uprooting, a provision has been made in th e general conditions that 
cultivators who uprooted their crop continuous for three years will be de -licensed in the 
next crop year. To make this provision more effective, in the Opium Policy for the year 
2018-19 a clause has been inserted as forewarning th at the cultivators who get their 
opium poppy crop ploughed back in excess of 50% of total areas cultivated during the 

25 
 
crop years 2018 -19, 2019-20 and 2020-21 may not be eligible for a license to cultivate 
opium poppy in the following year i.e 2021-22. 
Vetting comments of the Audit 
Ministry may apprise the PAC about conducting of enquiry for issuing of licenses 
to the farmers who could not achieve MQY repeatedly and report on action taken 
against those found abetting illegal trade. 
Final Reply of the Ministry 
With regard to the conducting enquiry for issuing of licenses to the farmers who 
could not achieve MQY repeatedly, Para 1 of the Action Taken Report may please be 
perused.  
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 Audit revealed a shortfall in production of opium 100 MTs, 600 MTs and 
169 MTs in respect of requirement of opium for the year 2010 -11, 2011-12 and 
2012-13 clearly indicating the failure of Department to achieve the estimated 
requirement/production of opiu m. The Committee note from the reply of the 
Department that shortfall in production of opium was due to less harvesting of 
crop due to damage in crop (plant disease/natural calamity) in year 2010 -11, 
large uprooting/plough back of opium in year 2011 -12 and  licenses given to 
cultivators for 10 ares and 15 ares in place of 35 ares and 50 ares resulting in 
less harvested area in year 2012 -13.The Committee are shocked to note that 
Annual Narcotics Conference (ANC) on poppy cultivation was held every year 
to dis cuss various aspects before finalizing the policy for next crop year 
cultivation. Even after factoring the stated reasons every year during Annual 
Conference there was a shortfall in achievement of required opium production 
year after year. The Committee desire that a Sub -Group may be constituted to 
review poppy cultivation in India and suggest measures to  increase cultivation, 
production, technology up -gradation and changes in licensing policy and fee 
and amendments to NDPS Act to arrest continuous decline in production.  
(Observation/Recommendation No. 6 of the 96th Report of PAC (16 th LS) 
 

26 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
It is informed that the shortfall in production as compared to targeted production arises 
mainly on account of bad weather  condition, hail storm, drought diseases etc. which 
cannot be predicted and hence, no steps can be incorporated in the  licensing policy of 
year. In compliance of the PAC recommendation a sub group has been formed 
comprising of (1) Narcotics Commissioner, CBN (2) Chief Controller of Factories, 
GOAW (3) Director, CRCL (4) Representative of DoR (5) Representative of NCB (6) 
Representative of Drug Controller General of India, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
(7) Representative of Department of Pharmaceuticals to review and suggest measures  
to increase cultivation, production, technology up -gradation and changes in licensin g 
policy and fee and amendments to NDPS Act to arrest continuous decline in production. 
The committee has recommended as follows -  
(i)   There is no additional requirement of opium in the country to meet its present level 
of domestic and export requirements. 
(ii) There is a need to augment the production capacity of Codeine Phosphate as at 
present production capacity is lower than the domestic requirement of codeine 
Phosphate. However, the cost of codeine Phosphate manufactured in India is much 
higher than  the landed cost of imported Codeine Phosphate. In other words, though 
there is unmet demand of Codeine Phosphate, but meeting this demand by way of 
increase of production  may not be economical unless we change the manner of 
cultivation of opium poppy and its use. 
(iii) There is need to establish/upgrade GOAWs to make them compliant with US 
FDA norms if India wishes to achieve import substitution of imported Codeine 
Phosphate. 
(iv)  There is unmet demand of poppy seeds from domestic production to a very la rge 
extent and as such there is need to augment production of poppy seeds while not 
increasing production of opium (India has already got surplus opium stock and 
production capacity)  
(v) The committee  has noted that in the month of July 2018 Government h as 
sanctioned Rs. 68.80 Lakh to CIMAP towards the first instalment of total project cost of 
Rs. 238 Lakh. The Committee has recommended to complete the project  undertaken 
by Council of Scientific & Industrial Research - Central Institute of Medicinal and 
Aromatic Plant ( CSIR-CIMAP) for  development of latex-less and     alkaloid free variety 
of Opium poppy in time bound manner. The committee has noted that the research 
work of CIMAP goes at slow speed. In case CIMAP expresses its inability to do so or 
delays the agreed milestone, the project should be offloaded to a private entity for 
expeditious development.  

27 
 
(vi) The committee has recommended that production of alkaloids from opium is not 
going to be an economical proposition and the way forward is only t o switch to 
organized cultivation of opium crop and production of alkaloids through CPS route. The 
committee has recommended that investment in introducing new technology for 
extraction of alkaloids through gum opium process should be avoided.   
 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
The Committee observe that India is one of the few producers of opium in 
the world, yet opium seeds have to be imported. As per the Department of 
Commerce, the imports of poppy seeds during 2016 -17 was USD 44.07 million 
as agains t exports to the tune of USD 0.73 million. The Committee further 
observe that West Bengal, Bihar, Jharkhand, Manipur, Arunachal Pradesh and 
Uttrakhand are the areas where illicit crop has been cultivated and destroyed. 
The Committee are of the view that in  order to increase production within the 
country such areas of land can be brought under licit cultivation and new 
cultivators included through advertisement and by involving village Panchayat 
offices. The Committee note that two factories, one in Neemuch and another in 
Ghazipur are employing ,methods based on old and outdated technology 
leading to delay as well as shortage in production in addition to its misuse. The 
Committee while noting the submission of the Secretary that technological up -
gradation is needed to make production in the country viable, desire that the 
above said Sub -Group may also suggest the road map for introducing new 
technology to increase production in a time -bound manner.   
(Observation/Recommendation No. 7 of the 96th Report of PAC (16 th LS) 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 The policy for opium poppy cultivation is decided on the basis of demand of the 
opium for export and domestic consumption. At present, the stock of opium is enough to 
cater to requirement of 2 ½ years. It is therefore submitted that increase in production of 
opium will not fruitful.  

28 
 
 As regards of imports of poppy seeds is concerned, it is submitted that poppy 
seeds is by-product of cultivation. In our country, demand for poppy seeds is more than 
25000 MT in compare to production of 5000 -6000 MT. To cater the demand, poppy 
seeds is imported from Turkey, Czech Republic and China. To increase the domestic 
production , a project entitled “ Improvement of Latex -less and low alkaloid variety of 
Papaver Somn iferum L”  towards development of phenotypically distinct variety for 
commercial exploitation as nutritive seed crop has been approved by this Department. 
This project will be completed in five years. After successful completion of the project, 
commercial production will be explored.  
 
Vetting comments of the Audit 
 No further comments subject to final decision of PAC and monitoring the progress the 
project for improvement of Latex -less and low alkaloid variety of Papaver 
Somnifererum. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
The Committee observe that in Uttar Pradesh, area uprooted vis -a-vis 
measured area showed an upward trend and was carried out in disregard of 
the provisions laid down in opium manual issued by the Department. In 
Barabanki district, the uprooted area increa sed from 59.57 per cent in 2011 to 
75.32 per cent in 2013, and no reasons like natural calamities such as rains, 
plant diseases etc. were available on record. Further, In Bareilly district, a 
cultivator had an excess cultivation beyond the 5% 'Condonable L imit' during 
the crop year 2011 -12 and the appellate authority vide appeal order No.9/2012 
dated 29 March 2012 had ordered the ploughing back of excess portion of 
crop only. District Opium Officer (D00), however, ploughed back the entire 
crop of the cultivator in disregard of the aforesaid provisions and the order of 
the appellate authority. Besides, this fact was willfully not mentioned by the 
District Opium Officer in his annual report of 2012. On being pointed out by the 

29 
 
Audit, the Ministry replied  that entire crop of said cultivator had dried up by the 
time of passing of Appeal Order and ploughing -back was on application of the 
farmer. The Committee are of the view that the reply is not acceptable as no 
such record was available in the State of Utt ar Pradesh and that such cases 
point to the callous attitude of the higher authorities and complicity of the 
officials at field level. The Committee desire that strict action be taken against 
the erring D 00 and delinquent officials and the Department may a lso look into 
other such cases to ensure that uprooting has only been allowed in genuine 
cases.  
(Observation/Recommendation No. 8 of the 96th Report of PAC (16 th LS) 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
It is submitted that there does not seem to be any mala fide in the matter as the 
plough back of the partial/entire crop is routine matter. The records of plough 
back are available in the office of District Opium Officer. It may be appreciated 
that the information about plough back of entire crop could be detec ted by audit 
only because it was available in the records of District Opium Officer. It should 
also be appreciated that the plough back order issued by the Appellate Authority 
was dated 29.03.2012 and by that time the crop dries up leaving no opportunity 
for lancing of crop to obtain opium. Therefore there was no alternative available 
to the farmer but to get the entire crop ploughed back as lancing was not 
possible at all. 
Vetting comments of the Audit 
Ministry is required to apprise the PAC about the action taken against the officials 
responsible for mismanagement of records, for making irregular payments before the 
introduction of e-payments. 
Final Reply of the Ministry 
 
 In this regard, it is submitted that there is no reported case of misuse of facility of 
payment to named individual if cultivator himself is absent. Action of officers is in line 

30 
 
with the departmental manual. The problem is of past era when many cultivators did not 
have bank accounts and e -payment was not implemented. However, as of now t here 
are only stray cases of such payment being made to other than cultivator which are 
made through cheque/demand draft in the name of person named by the cultivator. In 
all other cases, e-payment is made. 
In view of above position, no officer appear to b e responsible. However, caution 
is being issued to all officers intimating that e -payment shold be made to the bank 
account of cultivator. if for some reason e -payment is not possible account payee 
cheque/demand draft in the name of cultivator should be issued.  
 
Observation/Recommendation  
The Committee observe that a new mode of drug trafficking is happening 
through darknet using crypto currency. The Committee are distressed to note 
that growing e -commerce in the country is facilitating significant increase in 
online pharmacies that are bei ng used for trafficking drugs with the help of 
shady courier services under the veil of darknet. The Committee feel that as 
India is also facing challenges associated with narco -terrorism, illegal 
cultivation of opium poppy and rising drug abuse there is a  need to improve 
coordination and reducing number of agencies, giving impetus to increasing 
opium production in India and restricting imports, eliminating illegal internet 
pharmacies, while safeguarding trade interests. The Committee desire the 
need for a dedicated technical Cyber Wing under NCD, DoR to monitor drug 
trafficking through virtual currency and internet pharmacy.  
(Observation/Recommendation No. 8 of the 96th Report of PAC (16 th LS) 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
In compliance of the suggestion of the committee to develop cyber wing, it 
is submitted that proposal for creating of dedicated Technical cyber Wing has 
been initiated by NCB in consultation with Ministry of Home Affairs.  

31 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
The Co mmittee observe that during the scrutiny of quarterly  
information/report in respect of pending cases in the District/Subordinate 
Courts for the quarter ending on December 2013 sent by U.P Unit of CBN to 
their Headquarters, out of 104 cases pending as on d ate, about 37 cases 
involve seizures prior to the year 2000; but neither respective date(s) of filing 
these 104 cases had been mentioned nor the Department was aware of the 
present status of any of these cases. Shockingly, the Ministry submitted that it 
is not correct to say that 104 no. of cases are pending as the Officers of CBN 
have filed these cases and Special Public Prosecutor (SPP) concerned is 
regularly directed to request Courts for early disposal of cases. The Committee 
do not agree with the conte ntion of the Department as the observation had 
been concluded from the records provided by U.P. unit to CBN Headquarters. 
Though speedy decisions by Courts is beyond the control of the Department, 
poor record keeping and lack of monitoring by the Departmen t is a serious 
matter. The Committee desire that strict action be taken against the officials 
responsible for mismanagement of records. The Committee are of the opinion 
that there must be special NDPS courts in all States where tracts have been 
notified. a nd desire that Ministry to vigorously pursue disposal of NDPS cases 
besides regular monitoring of all the Court cases which should be preferably 
made online and easily accessible to higher authorities.  
(Observation/Recommendation No. 10 of the 96th Report of PAC (16 th LS) 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
In compliance of the suggestion of the committee to establish Special Court for 
NDPS, it is submitted that Section 36 of the NDPS Act, 1985 empowers State 
Government to constitute as many special Courts as may be necessary for the 
purpose of speedy trial of offence under NDPS Act, 1985. The State 
Government of UP, MP and Rajasthan have been requested to take necessary 
action for setting up special NDPS Courts.  
------ 

32 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
 
- NIL - 
  

33 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REIT ERATION 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
Audit examination revealed that no soil testing was carried out before issue of 
licenses to cultivators and the District Opium Officer of Barabanki, Uttar Pradesh 
accepted the audit observation. The Committee are shocked to note from the 
reply of the Minis try that observations made by the audit regarding issuance of 
license on the basis of soil testing etc are neither supported by the provisions of 
the NDPS rules issued under NDPS Act, nor by NDPS Policy and nor even by 
the Guidelines issued by the Govt. fo r issuance of license. However, CBN issues 
licenses for soil research and development to five Research Institutes. The 
Committee desire that expenditure incurred on soil research and development in 
last 5 years and the innovations / decisions etc. made on the basis of above 
research be furnished to the Committee. The Committee are of the considered 
opinion that logically, soil testing must be a pre -requisite before issuing licenses 
and desire that an explicit provision in this regard be added to the Rules s o that 
the licenses are issued on scientific basis. The Committee also desire that soil 
testing in new areas should also be done for determining the production 
capability of the country. The figures so derived be intimated to the Department 
of Commerce for  inclusion in EXIM Policy for the narcotics substances and the 
International Narcotics Control Bureau (INCB) for being considered while fixing  
of country quotas by them.   
(Observation/Recommendation No. 3 of the 96th Report of PAC (16 th LS) 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
As regard to the explicit provision of soil testing before issuing licenses, it is submitted 
that around 60000 licenses are issued every year.  This suggestion of the committee 

34 
 
does not seem to be practical as it is not possible to carry o ut soil testing of more than 
60000 cultivators. However, Ministry of Agriculture has been requested to offer 
comments on procedure /mechanism for carrying out soil testing for opium cultivation 
through Ministry of Agriculture and agency there under.  Minis try of Agriculture has 
informed that soil testing is required for fertilizer recommendations to obtain optimum 
crop yield. The State Agriculture Departments carry out soil testing for opium cultivation 
and give fertilizer recommendations if their soil test ing labs are approached. However, it 
is not mandatory.  
Vetting comments of the Audit 
 i)Ministry may apprise the PAC, whether proposal of soil testing in new areas is under 
consideration for determining/increasing the production capability of the country so as to 
reduce the import of poppy seed? 
ii)Expenditure incurred on soil research and development in last 5 years and 
innovations/decisions etc. made on the basis of above research may be furnished to 
PAC. 
Final Reply of the Ministry 
 i)With regard to the soil testing para 3 of the Action Taken Report  may please be 
perused.  
ii) With regard to the expenditure incurred on soil research and development in last 5 
years , it is submitted that CBN does not have any budget for incurring expend iture on 
Research and Development. No soil research and development work has been 
undertaken by University/Colleges engaged in the research work pertaining to opium 
during last five years.  
 
Observation/Recommendation  
The Committee observe that manufacture, sale and export of the narcotic 
alkaloid extracts higher up in the value chain have the potential to provide 
exponentially higher economic returns to the poppy plantation and save 
foreign exchange in procuring poppy seeds from the traditional hinter lands. 

35 
 
However, Audit pointed out that there seemed to be no clear policy framework 
aiming at the twin objectives of revenue generation through sale of finished 
opium based pain relief chemicals and foreign exchange saving s by 
indigenous production of opium seeds. The Committee note that the CBN 
which is under the DoR is responsible for the supervision of opium cultivation 
and is regulatory authority for licensing import and export of the alkaloids and 
licit opium etc. Narc otics Control Bureau(NCB) which is under the Ministry of 
Home Affairs, is an apex enforcement agency for the narcotics drugs and 
destruction of illicit cultivation of opium. The DRI, the Customs, the State 
police, are other agencies which are involved in m anagement of narcotics 
substances. The Committee observe that the system in place to monitor and 
control production of opium poppy is deficient as is evident from illegal crop 
production, rampant uprooting of crops, not achieving even the Minimum 
Quality Y ield (MQY), absence of soil testing, limiting the production to only 
three States etc. The Committee find that involvement of CBN, NCB and 
State authorities has only added to the confusion, mismanagement, 
overlapping of monitoring and control, not taking a ction by one organisation 
as they think that the other organisation might take action due to lack of 
coordination and absence of clearly  defined responsibilities in inter -related 
areas. The Committee would, therefore, like to refer to the Principle of 
Management i.e. 'Unity of Direction' which states that activities aimed at the 
same objective should be so organized that there is one plan and one head 
responsible  
for accomplishment of the same. The Committee are of the view that there 
should be an integra ted plan for management of narcotics substances under 
the supervision of Narcotics Control Division (NCD), Department of Revenue  
to ensure unity of action and coordination. Accordingly, the Committee desire 
that all functions related to management of narc otics substances be transferred 
to the NCD to ensure efficient handling of related aspects.  
(Observation/Recommendation No. 4 of the 96th Report of PAC (16 th LS) 
 

36 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
In so far as proposal to bring all functions related to management of 
narcotics substances under a single Department is concerned, it is submitted 
that :- 
(a)   Prior to NDPS Act 1985, Department of Revenue was administrating the 
opium Act -1852, the Opium Act -1878 and the Dangerous Act 1930 right from 
the year 1950. Department of Revenue came out with a comprehensive 
legislation of the NDPS Act - 1985 in order to strengthen controls over drug 
abuse, enhanced penalties for drug related offense and make provisions for 
implementation of obligation under the internat ional Drug Conventions. 
Department of Revenue has been functioning as the Nodal Department in the 
filed of Drug Administration even before independence.  
  
(b)  The NDPS Act has assigned different sphere of works related to Drug 
Administration to different  Ministries/ Departments/ Agencies/ State 
Governments as follows :  
(i)  Responsibility of Narcotics Control Division under DoR –     Framing of 
Rules for Regulation under NDPS Act.   
 CBN – Supervision of licit cultivation, licensing for manufacturing and import-
export of substances for legitimate use  
CCF- Extracting of Alkaloids from Opium and supplying of drugs for legitimate 
use. 
(ii)     Supply Reduction –  
Narcotic Control Division under DoR (MoF) – Regulatory aspect  
NCB (MHA)- Enforcement and reporting to INCB  
(iii) Demand Reduction –Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (MSJE)   
& Harm Reduction – Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoH&W)  
 
Apart from the above Customs, State Police, State drug administration and 
state excise departmen t also have different roles in the narcotics management. 
Therefore as per the national Policy there are various Ministries associated with 
narcotics management in the country.  

37 
 
 
(c)  Drug Administration involves a large number of areas which are quite 
different from enforcement and intelligence. It involves a complex array of 
activities. These include regulation of licit opium cultivation; manufacture, 
import and export of opium and its alkaloids; manufacture, import and export of 
narcotic drugs and psychot ropic substances; control over precursor chemicals, 
investigation and forfeiture of drug related assets and drug money laundering. 
The majority of these functions are regulatory in nature and require to be 
addressed by different agencies under Department o f Revenue, Ministry of 
Finance.  
 
(d)    Department of Revenue has administrative control over CBEC which is 
the legitimate authority to keep check on manufacture and trade in the country, 
making it suitable to effectively control the licensing, surveillance and 
enforcement of NDPS Act and  Rules. Further, economic crime is closely linked 
to with narcotics. Ministry of Finance is ideally poised with agencies which 
gather intelligence, monitor and enforce economic offences under SAFEMA, 
FEMA Prevention of Money laundering Act. etc.  
 
(e) CCF with two Government Opium Alkaloids Works at Ghazipur, UP and 
Neemuch, MP is involved in revenue earning and taxation activity also which 
are sole mandate of Department of Revenue.  
 
(f)       Various Central and State Government agencies like NCB, CBN, Cen tral 
Excise, paramilitary Forces are entrusted with preventive activities under NDPS 
Act, 1985. Therefore, NCB is not the sole agency for destruction of illicit poppy 
cultivation, prevention, combating abuse of and illicit traffic in narcotic drugs 
and psychotropic substances.  
 
(g) Training on Narcotics is a part of the training module of IRS ( C&CE) 
Officers for which Department of Revenue is the cadre controlling authority.  

38 
 
(h) Establishment matters of CBN are in the domain of CBIC while operational 
issues are in the domain of Narcotics Control Division under Department of 
Revenue, further, the establishment matters are distributed among various 
desks in CBIC, in addition to the establishment matters of personnel of Central 
Excise, Customs and Service Tax Commissionerates. Similarly, staff matters of 
laboratory staff of GOAWs are in the domain of CRCL. Therefore, number of 
staff dealing the establishment matters of these organizations need to be 
worked out before transferring the NC Division.  
 
 In view of t he foregoing paras it may be seen that policy making and 
enforcement related to narcotics are better administered in the present 
scenario. 
Vetting Comments of the Audit 
 Due to deficiencies found in present system of monitoring & controlling Poppy cultivation, 
PAC opined that there should be an integrated plan for management of Narcotic 
substances. PAC may be apprised of steps initiated to ensure unity of action and 
coordination w.r.t narcotic substances. 
Final Reply of the Ministry 
 
Reply already given in ATR 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
The Committee note that contrary to the provisions, the Department had 
paid more than Rs. 2 crore being 90 percent price of opium and its balance 
amount to the persons other than cultivators like son, brother, daughter and 
Mukhiya etc. On being asked about  the matter, it was replied that as per 
Opium Manual Volume -II "If any cultivator is absent, payment for him may be 
made to the Lambardar or substitute appointed by the cultivator himself on the 
responsibility of the Lambardar", and that no complaint had b een received from 
cultivators regarding non receiving of cost of opium and since 2012 -13 opium 

39 
 
cost had been paid to the cultivator's individual bank account through e -
Payment. The Committee are dismayed to note that though e -payment has 
been introduced, l arge amount such as Rs. 1.51 crore and Rs. 0.56 crore 
(approx.) in respective States was paid to persons other than cultivators 
without obtaining any authority letter from the cultivators and the original 
cultivator had not given authority to whom the paym ent was to be made; 
hence, the payment was irregular. The Committee desire that the responsibility 
of the officials for making irregular payments be fixed and action taken against 
them and the Committee be apprised thereof.  
(Observation/Recommendation No.  11 of the 96th Report of PAC (16 th LS) 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
With regard to the payment, it is submitted that the cash payment noted by the 
committee pertains to the period when e-payment was not introduced. After 
introduction of e-payment there are no cash payments is made either to the 
cultivators or to the person named by him.  There is no reported case of misuse 
of facility of payment to named individual if cultivator himself is absent. Action of 
officers is  in line with the Department manual . The problem is of past era when 
many cultivators did not have bank accounts and e -payment was not 
implemented. However, as of now, there are only stray cases of such payments 
being made to other than cultivator which are made through cheque/demand 
draft in the name of person named by the cultivator. In all other cases, e -
payment is made. 
--------- 
 
  

40 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES  
 
Observation/Recommendation  
The Committee observe an acute shortage of staff in Group 'A' and Group 
'D' cadres in CBN and CCF telling upon the quality of inspections and 
implementation of work. The vacancies stood at 56.83% in CBN and 60.85% in 
CCF. The difference between the sanctio ned and actual strength for different 
cadres ranged from 14% to 63% in CBN whereas for Chief Controller of 
Factories (CCF) it was 30 % to 60% in 2013 -14. The Committee further note 
that even after being pointed out by the Audit in the Report and the Commit tee 
during evidence, the vacancies are still at 54 % and 65 % in CCF and CBN. 
Also, a large number of vacancies are yet to be filled in NCB. The Committee 
note from the reply of the Ministry that the vacancies are being filled and 
meetings with Staff Selec tion Commission and Central Board of Excise and 
Customs have been organized and that Staff Selection Commission informed 
that, their calendar was full and they would not be in position to organize the 
special examination for recruitment of Hawaldars in CBN , CBEC and NCB, 
before May, 2018. Further, the Committee note from the reply of the Ministry 
that a request was made to Staff Selection Commission in May 2016, followed 
by request to DOPT in August 2016, to devise a system of maintaining wait list 
in the s election list. The Committee desire that the Ministry may follow up with 
the SSC and DoPT on the request for maintaining a wait list and apprise the 
Committee of the action taken by SSC and DoPT thereon. The Committee are 
of the view that in the instant ca se, for NDPS Act to be properly implemented, it 
is necessary to fill these key positions urgently. The Committee observe that 
such large scale vacancies in all of the major agencies involved in controlling 
and management of narcotic substances has seriousl y hampered the 
functioning of these Agencies which is clearly visible from the findings of the 

41 
 
Audit Report and exhort the Ministry to take up the matter urgently with the 
recruitment agencies so that the vacancies are filled up at the earliest.  
The Committee are of the view that delay in filling up vacancies across all 
the Ministries/Departments is taking its toll on the output of these organizations. 
The working of organizations mandated to enforce laws, rules regulations etc is 
severely affected by shor tage of manpower. The Committee opine that the 
Ministry may allow organizations with large number of vacancies to absorb 
deputationists who served that organization satisfactorily for a specified number 
of years. The Committee desires that Ministries/Depar tments should have a 
well laid down rotational transfer policy to be implemented in letter and spirit to 
discourage vested and personal interests hampering judicious decisions. The 
Committee also recommend that the recruitment procedure be 
comprehensively reviewed by the Government to ensure that vacancies are 
filled up at the earliest.  
(Observation/Recommendation No. 1 of the 96th Report of PAC (16 th LS) 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
In connection with above observation the updated vacancy position as on 01.01.2018 in 
CBN and CCF  is as under  
Sr. No.  Grade CBN/CCF 
  Sanction Strength Working Strength Vacancy Position 
 Main Stream Posts 
1. Commissioner  2 2 0 
2. ADC/JC 6 5 1 
3. DC/AC 8 4 4 
4. AD(OL) 1 0 1 
     
 Technical Posts 
  CBN 
1 Group A  1 0 1 
2 Group B 69 61 8 
3 Gropu C  1335 404 931 

42 
 
 
2.  The Staff position of CCF indicating the staff strength (Sanctioned 
Strength & Vacancy Position) of CBN Cadre/CCF Cadre/CRCL Cadre as on 
31.08.2018 is as under : 
 Cadre Sanctioned 
Strength 
Working Strength  Vacancy Position  
GOAW, Ghazipur  Factory Cadre  676 340 336 
CBN 98 34 64 
CRCL 53 15 38 
GOAW, 
Neemuch 
Factory Cadre  397 179 218 
CBN 80+6* 28 58 
CRCL 27+2** 8+1** 19+1** 
CCF Office Common Cadre 
(CBN) 
50 20 30 
*    06 Post of Upper Division clerk are diverted by CCF from CCF office to the GOAW, Neemach  
**  02 post of chemical Examiner are temporarily diverted by CRCL, New Delhi  
 
3. In AGT-2018 order in respect of DC/AC of IRS Cadre, suitable replacement in the 
grade of AC/DC has been provided. The combined vacancy position of  CBN/CCF vis -à-
vis All India Vacancy Position of IRS cadre as on 01.01.2018  is as under :- 
 
 Grade Sanctioned 
Strength 
Working 
strength 
Vacancy 
Position 
%age 
Vacancy 
Position 
All India 
Vacancy 
Position 
CBN/CCF Commissioner 2 2 0 0% 19% 
ADC/JC 6 6 0 0% 47% 
DC/AC 8 7 1 12% 25% 
 
From the above table, it may be seen that Out of 16 posts, 15 posts have already been 
filled and only one post is vacant at present.  
 
4. Regarding filling up of the vacancies in various Group ‘B’ and ‘C’ posts of CBN 
cadre, the Staff Selection Commission has time and again been approached by CBIC 
with the request to conduct examination for recruitment in the grades of Hawaldars. The 
CBIC pursued the matter with SSC vigorously. The team of CBIC including Joint 
Secretary and Officer from DGHRD have held several meetings with top officials of SSC 
for securing a special recruitment drive for this purpose. It is mentioned that a meeting 
on 14.06.2018 was conveyed to discuss the possibility of combining the examination of 

43 
 
Hawaldars in CBIC/CBN and GD constables i n CAPFs, which was attended by CBIC 
DoPT, CAPFs and MHA officials. The suggestion was discussed at a length in a 
meeting however, the suggestion was not agreed due to differences in recruitment rule 
for both the post and divergent opinions expressed with r egard to implementing the 
clubbed proposals. A meeting was again convened on 28.06.2018 with the officials of 
SSC to discuss any possible way. The commission rejected the possibility of conducting 
stand alone examination for this purpose citing the heavy w ork load and shortage of 
vendors to conduct separate exam with additional responsibility to conduct common 
eligibility test next year.  But the commission finally agreed to club this MTS examination 
to be held in June 2019 . In the meanwhile , Option of op ening  window for lateral entry 
is also being explored by deputing of officers holding equivalent posts in the Armed 
Forces and other Central Organizations by amending the present Recruitment Rules. 
5.  As regards to the filling of vacancy through absorpti on of deputation 
post, it is submitted that none of the Officer/Staff is working on deputation in the 
office of CCF and GOAWs. There is no policy for absorption of the deputation 
posts as well as for their transfer. The CCF and GOAWs are being run with the  
officials/staff of Factory Cadre, CBN Cadre and CRCL Cadre. There is separate 
Recruitment Rules for different post and Factory cadre, CBN Cadre and CRCL 
Cadre. As there is separate cadre, inter cadre transfer is not feasible. Transfer 
and posting of CBN a nd CRCL Cadre are being done by the respective 
Competent Authorities. Regarding Cadre restructuring and amendment in 
Recruitment Rules, it is submitted that Cadre -structuring has not been done in 
the GOAWs in the past fifty years. With decreasing export re quirement, the 
activity of drying of opium has been completely stopped w.e.f 01.04.2016. All 
the staff of the opium factory has been diverted to the alkaloid plant. There are 
unit wise (alkaloid Plant and Opium Factory) sanctioned strengths of various 
posts in the each GOAW. A Committee under the Chairmanship of Additional 
Commissioner, CCF office has been constituted for re -determining the cadre 
strength in the various posts.  The Committee has submitted its report which is 
expected to be implemented by 31.03.2019.  

44 
 
6. Nomination of 13 Laboratory Assistant has been received from 
recruitment agency and is likely to join in GOAW shortly.  
 
Vetting Comments of the Audit 
 i) It has been noticed that though percentage of vacancy in Group A and B have been 
decreased but the percentage of vacancy in Group C have been substantially increased 
from 59.6% to 69.7%. 
ii). Ministry may state whether they have followed up with the SSC & DoPT of their 
request maintaining a waitlist and if so apprise the PAC about the action taken by SSC 
and DoPT on Ministry’s request to devise a system of maintaining wait list in the 
selection process. 
iii) The Ministry has stated that the Staff Selection Commission has time and again 
been approached for filling up of vacancies in Grou p B and Group C and provided 
vacancy position in Group A,B and C.  
iv) Ministry may explain briefly how the recommendations of Committee constituted for 
re-determining the cadre strength would address the concerns raised in the PAC 
Report. 
v) :-Ministry may state whether they have initiated any action on laying down rotational 
transfer policy to discourage vested & personal interest hampering judicious decisions. 
 
 
 
Final Reply of the Ministry 
 
In this regard to above comments, para 4 & 5 may please be perused.   
 
ii): -The business activities of GOAWs have been changed in such a long period of 
time. With decreasing export requirements, the major activity of opium factory i.e drying 
of opium has been completely stopped w.e.f 01.04.2016. All the staff of the opium 
factory has been diverted to  the alkaloid plants. There are unit wise (Alkaloid Plant and 
Opium Factory) sanctioned strengths of various (posts in the each GOAWs. Therefore, 
there is requirement of cadre restructuring by way of redetermination. A Committee 
under the Chairmanship of Additional Commissioner, CCF office has been 
constituted for re -determining the cadre strength in the various posts. The 
redetermination of the cadre strength for various posts would facilitate the assessment 
of existing requirement of  manpower for running the both Alkaloid plants in increased 
number of shifts, if so required. The amendment in the Recruitment Rules as per the re -

45 
 
determined cadre strength may further enable recruitment of manpower which will 
certainly address the concern expressed in the report of the PAC for augmentation of 
production of alkaloids by increasing use of opium. 
 
iii) : - The CCF organization is being run with the officials of three different cadres i.ed 
Central Bureau of narcotics (CBN), Central Revenue Cont rol Laboratory (CRCL) and 
Factory Cadre. The transfer policy is laid out by the concerned cadre controlling 
authorities with regard to CRCL and CBN officials. The GOAWs have their different set 
of posts and sanctioned strength with different pay scales. Th us, the rotational transfer 
policy cannot be undertaken for factory cadre officials in the current dispensation 
governed by separate Recruitment Rules for both GOAWs.  
 
Observation/Recommendation 
The Committee note that there seems to be no apparent ration ale for allowing 
cultivation of poppy seeds in only three States when the demand for the same 
is much higher than its production which is consequently met through imports. 
The Committee note that last demand survey was conducted by the Ministry of 
Social J ustice and Empowerment seventeen years back in 2001. The 
Committee desire that a comprehensive demand survey be done urgently by 
the NCD and thereafter every five years to assess the actual demand of opium 
poppy in India. However, the Committee observe tha t the demand for opium 
have already been much higher than its cultivation and will increase manifold in 
next 5-10 years after National Health Policy is enforced. The Committee exhort 
the Ministry to conduct soil testing in more States to ascertain its qual ity for 
poppy Cultivation to cope up with the ever increasing demand of opium. The 
Committee desire that the results of soil testing of new and existing areas and 
drug demand survey be considered by NCD for adding new areas of cultivation 
to meet the domestic demand. 
(Observation/Recommendation No. 5 of the 96th Report of PAC (16 th LS) 
 
 

46 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
In so far demand survey for opium is concerned, the Ministry of Social Justice 
and Empowerment is responsible for conducting demand survey. for soil 
testing, ministry of Agriculture has informed that soil testing is required for 
fertilizer recommendations to obtain optimum crop yield. The State Agriculture 
Departments carry out soil testing for opium cultivation and give fertilizer 
recommendations if their soil testing labs are approached. However, it is not 
mandatory.  
 
Vetting Comments by the Audit 
 i):Ministry may apprise the PAC whether it is in correspondence with Ministry of Social 
justice & Empowerment for conducting the comprehensive demand survey on regular 
basis as directed by PAC,to assess the actual demand of opium poppy in India. 
ii):- Ministry may furnish the details of steps taken towards increasing the indigenous 
production of opium seeds. 
 
 
 
Final Reply of the Ministry 
 
i):- It  has been  intimated by the Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment that they 
have assigned the national Survey on extent and pattern of Substance (Drugs) abuse in 
India to national Drug Dependence Treatment Centre (NDDTC), AIIMS,  New Delhi, 
which is under progress. The substances which are being surveyed includes alcohol, 
tobacco, opioids, sedative –hypnotics, cann abis, stimulants, hallucinogens, inlalants 
(volatile solvents). The survey will provide national and state -level estimates of 
proportion and absolute number of people who use various substances and people who 
are suffering from substance use disorders in I ndia. It will also map the presence of 
services and interventions for individuals suffering from substance use disorders and 
identify the gaps in service delivery.   
ii) :-In this regard, reply of Ministry in para IV (V) of Action Taken Report  may be 
perused.  
 

47 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
The Committee note that the Department claims to conduct 100 per cent 
internal audit of cultivation of opium records after the completion of settlement 
operation each year and as per the internal audit report, no discrepancies 
irregularities/ambiguity was found during the period 2010 -11 to 2012 -13. 
However, C&AG audit found, inter -alia, non -adherence to the provisions of 
licensing policy, smart card identification, satellite based cultivation 
management and lack of serious efforts for recovery of outstandin g dues from  
the cultivators indicating lack of internal controls in the Department.  
The Committee further note that there was no reconciliation done with the 
State Excise Departments to control the sale/diversion of the by -products of the 
poppy (poppy st raw, poppy husk and poppy seeds). The Department replied 
that there is a system of monthly reporting on all aspects of the  functioning of 
State units of CBN and CCF, which is regularly scrutinized and monitored at the 
level of Headquarters. Besides, report s of all seizures and those on other 
developments are sent as and when they occur and a number of steps have 
been taken for automation of its functional activities including interaction with 
public by introducing web -application and sharing of information.  The 
Committee are shocked to note that instead of taking measures to  rectify the 
flaws pointed out by the Audit, the Ministry is reiterating the prevailing 
mechanism .The Committee are of the view that since cases of non -adherence 
to the provisions of Lic ensing Policy, non -maintenance of records at District 
Opium Office i.e. Preliminary Weighment Register, Payment Weighment 
Register etc. have been pointed out by the Audit the reporting, recording and 
monitoring system be strengthened and a time frame be pr escribed for CBN to 
get an ISO certification. The Committee are of the view that non -adherence to 
the provisions of licensing policy, non -maintenance of records and non -
reconciliation with the State Excise Department to control diversion are serious 
issues which should be enquired into and action taken against those found 
responsible. The Committee exhort the Ministry to take urgent steps to improve 

48 
 
the system and apprise the Committee accordingly.  
(Observation/Recommendation No. 12 of the 96th Report of PAC (16th LS) 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
NIL 
Vetting Comments by the Audit 
 Ministry is required to apprise the PAC about the steps taken towards strengthening the 
reporting, recording and monitoring system. Further time frame to be prescribed for 
CBN to get an ISO certification may be informed. 
 
Final Reply of the Ministry 
The p resent reporting, recording and monitoring mechanism is manual and is based 
primarily upon the monthly reports sent by the officers to controlling unit/headquarters. 
Apart from this, special reports are sought for from field formations time to time during 
the cultivation season. Regular mainten ance of records is being done in the form of 
registers in the prescribed format (as prescribed by Narcotics Commissioner time to 
time.) 
For better record keeping, reporting and monitoring, it is desirable that the ent ire 
documentation and recording work is computerized and made online. This proposal will 
require appointment of specialized agency for studying the departmental records and 
suggesting ways and means to computerize them and provide online linkages. 
Processes and record keeping needs to be first aligned with the ISO certification 
requirements and then completely made online for better recording, reporting and 
monitoring. As regards time period required for implementation of it, this office has no 
previous experience of it, however, the process may take between 2-3 years. 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
The Committee are distressed to note that audit has pointed out serious 

49 
 
problems like licenses issued  to ineligible farmers, exorbitant ploughing back of 
opium, no mechanism to verify opium testing report, irregularities in Preliminary 
Weighment Register etc indicating deficiencies and irregularities in the internal  
control mechanism. The above cases highlight the lackadaisical attitude of the 
District Opium Officers (DOO), Lambardar in recording and maintaining the 
records at regional level. Hence, the C ommittee exhort the Ministry to develop a 
robust monitoring mechanism to ensure that rules, regulations and procedures 
are followed by all levels in the hierarchy. The Committee desire the Ministry to  
prescribe yearly schedule of regular inspections of Re gional Offices by the 
senior officers of the Department and all inspection reports be made available 
online to ensure transparency and easy access by the higher authorities. The 
D00 should also be made accountable by prescribing submission of fortnightly 
reports online. 
(Observation/Recommendation No. 13 of the 96th Report of PAC (16 th LS) 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
NIL 
 
Vetting Comments of the Audit 
 Steps taken towards prescribing yearly schedule of regular inspections of Regional 
offices and making such inspection reports online may be informed. 
 
Final Reply of the Ministry 
 At present there is no practice of regular inspection of regional offices.  The frequency 
of conducting regular inspection is suggested as under  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Inspecting Officer Formations to be inspected 
1. Narcotics Commissioner (a) Office of any two units 
(b) One DOO Office of each Unit 
2. Deputy Narcotics Commissioner 
(Hqrs.) 
(a) Unit Office not scheduled to be 
inspected by Narcotics Commissioner. 
 
(b) One DOO and one P&I Cell Office 

50 
 
in each unit not scheduled for 
inspection by Narcotics Commissioner. 
3. Unit Deputy Narcotics 
Commissioner’s   
Four division and 2 P & I Cell offices for 
inspection of other unit not scheduled 
for inspection by Narcotics 
Commissioner (Hqs) 
4. Assistant Narcotics Commissioner 
(Hqrs.) (Tech./Narcotics). 
Each ANC to inspect one DOO and one 
p&I Cell Office of each unit not 
scheduled for inspection by any of 
above officers. 
 
5. Unit Assistant Narcotics 
Commissioner’s  
To inspect remaining DOO/P &I Cell  
Offices of unit other than their own. 
 In addition to above, Additional/Special Secretary (Revenue) may conduct inspection of 
Headquarters office or any on unit office as deemed fit. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
The Committee further note that the satelli te based monitoring of illicit cultivation 
of opium is not enough as cases of illegal cultivation not detected by the satellite have 
been noticed. Also, the areas reflected in satellite data is at times short captured than 
actual area found and destroyed b y agencies. Such inefficiency defeats the very 
purpose of the systems of identification of illegal opium cultivation and monitoring. The 
Committee are of the view that mapping of areas be done in a manner where satellite 
based monitoring functions as an ad junct to the ground level survey to give effective 
results. The Committee opine that Centralised Monitoring System will work better with 
the Departments and Ministries concerned coming together, coordinating and working 
effectively for the cause. The Committee desire that in order to reduce illicit cultivation a 
facility be developed whereas an image of the illegally cultivated area can be uploaded 
on the website by anyone as is being done by the DDA.  
 (Observation/Recommendation No. 14 of the 96th Report of PAC (16 th LS) 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
  To implement satellite based monitoring of illicit cultivation of opium it is 
submitted that imaginary report on suspected location of illicit Poppy cultivation are 

51 
 
being generated by Aviation Research Centre, Director General of Security in 
Collaboration with ADRIN, Department of Space, Government of India. As far as 
uploading of images of illicit cultivation of Opium by disgruntled elements, informers or 
responsible c itizens is concerned a  Whatsapp number is bei ng circulated for this 
purpose.  
 
 
NEW DELHI;                 MALLIKARJUN KHARGE 
13 December, 2018             CHAIRPERSON 
22 Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)     PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
 
 
------- 
  

52 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
CONTAINED IN THEIR NINETY-SIXTH REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations 
 
 
- 14 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
which have been accepted by the Government:  
 
- Total : 06 
Percentage: 43% 
 Para Nos. 2, 6, 7, 8, 9 & 10 
  
  
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of  
the reply of the Government:  
 
- Total : 0  
Percentage:0% 
 
 -Nil- 
 
  
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of  
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration:  
 
Para Nos. 3, 4 & 11 
- Total : 03 
Percentage:21% 
 
     
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of  
which the Government have furnished interim 
replies/no replies:  
 
- Total : 05 
Percentage: 36% 
 Para Nos. 1, 5, 12, 13 & 14 
 
  
-------- 