66

NON-COMPLIANCE BY MINISTRIES/
DEPARTMENTS IN TIMELY
SUBMISSION OF ACTION TAKEN
NOTES ON THE NON-SELECTED
AUDIT PARAGRAPHS (CIVIL AND
OTHER MINISTRIES)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

SIXTY-SIXTH REPORT

a

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC No.2099

SIXTY-SIXTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

oars BY MINISTRIES/
DEPARTMENTS IN TIMELY SUBMISSION
OF ACTION TAKEN NOTES ON THE NON-

SELECTED AUDIT PARAGRAPHS (CIVIL
AND OTHER MINISTRIES)

Presented to Lok Sabha on: 17.03.2017

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 17.03.2017. —

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March 2017/ Phalguna 1938 (Saka)


CONTENTS
REPORT

PAGE
Part-I

I. INTRODUCTORY 2 1

Il. Vigil by the Monitoring Cell (Ministry of Finance) on timely submission of 2
Action Taken- Notes on the Non-selected Audit Paragraphs by various
Ministries

Ill. Non-compliance in timely submission of ATNs on non-selected Audit 4
paragraphs relating to Ministry of Finance

IV, Non-compliance in timely submission of ATNs on non-selected Audit 9
paragraphs relating to Ministry of Defence

V. Non-compliance in timely submission of ATNs on non-selected Audit 11
paragraphs relating to Ministry of Railways :

Part—Il
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 14

APPENDICES

1. Minutes of the Fourth Sitting of Sub-Committee IV of PAC (2016-17) held on
26-09-2016.

I. Minutes of the Fifth Sitting of Sub-Committee IV of PAC (2016-17) held on 07-
10-2016. <

Ill. | Minutes of the Twenty Sixth Sitting of PAC (2016-17) held on 10-02-2017.


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2016-17)

Prof. K.V, Thomas - Chairperson
MEMBERS

LOK SABHA
2. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
3 Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
4, _- Shri Nishikant Dubey
5. Prof. Richard Hay
6 Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
7 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Smt. Riti Pathak
9, Shri Neiphiu Rioh
40, Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
41. Shri Abhishek-Singh
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
44. Shri Shivkumar C, Udasi
45. Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA

46. | Shri Naresh Agrawal

47. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
48, * Shri Bhupender Yadav
49. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
20. Shri Shantaram Naik

214. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
22. Shri Ajay Sancheti

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh - Additional Secretary
25 Shri S.C Chaudhary - Joint Secretary
कं Shri T. Jayakumar - Director
4, Shri Paolienlal Haokip - Deputy Secretary

५ Elected w.c.f. 09.08.2016 vice Shri Vijay Goel, MP appointed as Minister of State ४४.९.
05.07.2016.

Gif) 7 —~


Sub-Committee — IV [Non-compliance by Ministries/Departments in
timely submission of Action Taken Notes on the Non-selected Audit
Paragraphs (Civil and other Ministries)] 4 PAC (2216-287)

.. . Convenor 1. -911 क्षा।णाक्षां Mahtab
~ Alternate Convenor : 2. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
~ Members : “3.7 ~Shri Nishikant Dubey

4. Dr. P. Venugopal

5. Shri Ajay Sancheti :

6.

Shri Shivkumar 0, Udasi

Gv)


(9

INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2016-17) having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Sixty-Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
on “Non-compliance by Ministries/Departments in timely submission of Action
Taken Notes on the Non-selected Audit Paragraphs (Civil and other Ministries)” -
related to the Ministries of Defence, Railways (Railway Board) and Finance

(Department of Revenue) and (Department of Expenditure).

2. Due to inordinate delay on the part of various Ministries/Department in timely
submission of Action Taken Notes on the non-selected Audit Paragraphs of the Reports.
of the C&AG of India, the Public Accounts Committee (2016-17) took up the subject for
detailed examination and report. A Sub-Committee was specifically constituted under
the convenorship of Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab, MP and a Member of the PAC. The Sub-
Committee procured written replies and took evidences of the representatives of these
Ministries on the subject at their sittings held on 26.09.2016 and 07.10.2016.
Accordingly, a draft Report on the subject was prepared and approved by the Convenor
and subsequently approved by the Chairperson, PAC. The Committee considered and
adopted this Draft Report at their sitting held on 40" February, 2017, The Minutes of the
Sittings are appended to the Report.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type and form Part- Il of
the Report.

4. The Committee thank the: Sub-Committee - IV for taking oral evidences of the
various Ministries and obtaining information on the subject. :

5, The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministries for tendering evidence before the Sub-Committee and furnishing the requisite
information to the Sub-Committee in connection with the examination of the subject.

6. -The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller.and Auditor General of India.

NEW DELHI; i PROF. K.V. THOMAS -

(4 “March,2017 Chairperson,
27> Phalguna,1938 (Saka): Public Accounts Committee.


1

REPORT
PART- |

1. INTRODUCTORY

* Remedial-action on the shortcomings, lapses and loopholes found by auditors is one
key:thrust area behind audit of public funds, apart from basic objective of accountability.and
efficiency of public expenditures. To overcome such lapses or deficiencies the executing
authority must give sufficient attention to the task of examining/analysing audit observations
and taking remedial/corrective actions to redress the same. The PAC, taking cognizance of
this fact, had over the years evolved a system for close scrutiny of the timely submission of
action taken notes by Ministries/Departments of the Government of India. Compliance by the
government in timely submission of remedial/corrective Action Taken Notes to the PAC, duly
vetted by C&AG, has subsequently improved over the last two decades on account of the
continuous oversight of the Public Accounts Committee. Nevertheless, some
Ministries/Departments are still found wanting in compliance. This report deals with the
examination of the Non-compliance by Ministries/ Departments in timely submission of Action
Taken Notes on the non-selected Audit paragraphs of C&AG (Civil and other Ministries) during
the year 2016-17. हु

2 The Background Note furnished by the C&AG on the subject contained status of the
pending Corrective/Remedial Action Taken Notes pertaining to various Ministries/Departments
as on 30.09.2016. As per the information furnished by Audit the total number of paras pending
with the various Ministries stood at 805 as on 31,07.2016. The remedial action taken by the
Ministries/Depariments concerned on the C&AG's Reports still continues to be below the
desired level as submission of a large number of Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes are
still pending with the Ministries/Departments concerned, some for several years.

3. The Committee, therefore, once again constituted a Sub-Committee (Sub-Committee-
IV) to look into and examine the non-compliance on the part of the Ministries/Departments on

- timely submission of ATNs on Audit paras not selected by the PAC. After examining the

pendency status of ATNs with various Ministries/Departments by the C&AG, the Sub-
Committee decided to take up the non-compliance in timely submission of ATNs on non-
selected Audit paragraphs pertaining to the Ministries of Defence, Ministry of Railways

2

ECTS nnn nn nnn न नल नन++3+।


2

(Railway Board) and Finance (Department of Revenue and Department of Expenditure) as the
performance of the said three Ministries remain below par. Oral evidences of both the
Ministries of Defence and Railways were taken by the Sub-Committee on 26-09-2016 and then
of the Ministry of Finance on 07.10.2016 to gauge of the pendency of Audit Paras and effective
measures taken by the Monitoring Cell to synchronize ‘and take stock of the progress by the

Ministries.

Il, Vigil by the Monitoring Cell (Ministry of Finance) on timely submission of Action Monitoring Cell (Ministry: of Finance) on timely submission of Action
Taken Notes on the Non-selected Audit Paragraphs by various Ministries. Ministries.

4. The Monitoring Gell, under the Department of Expenditure (Ministry of Finance) has
been given the task to maintain, coordinate and collect the Remedial/Corrective Action Taken
Notes on all the Audit Paragraphs contained in different Audit Reports of the C&AG, from the
Ministries/Departments concerned, duly vetted by Audit and furnish the same to the Public
Accounts Committee within the stipulated period of four months from the date of presentation
of Audit Reports to the Parliament. The Sub-Committee noted that since 21.05.2010 when the
PAC had for the first time selected “Non-Compliance by the Ministries/Departments in timely
submission of replies to the Audit paragraphs of the C&AG" as a subject for detailed
examination, there has been a sizable decrease in the number of pending paras. According to
the Ministry, from an astounding figure of 4216 paras pending as on 30.06.2010, the number
had decreased to 1151 as on 07.10.2016 which include paras/Reports laid in the current year
also, The Ministry further submitted that due to the continued effort of the Department, 1276
paras have been settled as on 07.10.2016 and the pendency status of the ATNs on the C&AG
paras have come down to 844 from 2120 as on 08.04.2016. The number of ATNs which have
not been submitted even once have also declined to184 from 930.

5. The office of the C&AG in their Background note submitted that the total pendendcy of
ATNs on the Audit paras as on 31.07.2016 is 805 out of which ATNs on 134 paras have not
been submitted even for the first time, revised ATNs on 300 paras were awaited from the
Ministries, ATNs on 101 paras were pending with the Ministries and ATNs on 270 paras were
still under examination in Audit. Later, a statement of pendency as on 30.09.2016 of the
various Ministries was obtained from Audit. The same is given in the following table.


3

Total Number of Reports / paras on which ATNs are pending as on 30.09.2016

No of Reports/|No. of Ee ATNs finally | No. of ATNs | Total
Paras onwhich| paras on which vetted by Audit | with _ Audit
ATNs have not| revised ATNs are|but pending for Vetting

been. received | awaited from | with Ministry /

even for the | Ministry/Department | Monitoring Cell

first time from for submission

the - Ministry/ to PAC

Department

151 338 86 206 | 781

Thus, from the above data, it may be seen that the total pendency of ATNs as on
30.09.2016 has marginally decreased from 805 to 781. The figures furnished by Monitoring
Cell, Ministry of Finance again differed from that furnished by the C&AG to 1151 as on
07.10.2016, though some Reports have been added in due course. This showed that the
reconciliation of pendency figures between the two have not been fully redressed. However,
some new paras, which have in the meantime become due, have been added to the total
pendency. Ministry-wise pendency as on 30.09.2016 as furnished by Audit is at Appendix-ll.

6. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) submitted that they have taken
various measures/steps to reduce the pendency of paras, viz. Secretary Expenditure had
written to all Secretaries requesting them to take necessary action expeditiously for liquidation
of pending audit paras, especially those which were more than three years old, by convening
meeting of the Standing Audit Committee, chaired by Secretary of the Department more
frequently. Observations of the PAC in Para 15 of the first Report (16" Lok Sabha) had also
been brought to the notice of the Financial Advisors in all Ministries/Departments for taking
immediate action; the outcome of. the Oral Evidence before the Sub Committee held on
08.04.2016 was circulafed to all the Ministries/Departments by the Monitoring Cell vide their
OM dated 25.04.2018. This was followed by issuance of yet another OM by the Monitoring Cell ©
dated 03.05.2016 regarding settlement of C&AG paras by Ministries/Departments which have
been cleared manually but pending on the APMS portal under the head "Backlog". All the
Ministries/Departments were advised to upload all their pending C&AG paras in the APMS
portal; jn the meeting taken by Finance Secretary with Financial Advisors on 03.06.2016, the
position of pending CAG and PAC paras were discussed. Finance Secretary advised FAs to
be proactive in the settlement of these Paras; a time schedule and instructions vide OM dated
30.06.2016 was issued to all Ministries/Departments to expedite the process of clearance of
pendency of ATNs within the stipulated time period of 4 months. Ministries/Departments were



4

also requested to submit ATNs after completing the cycle on APMS portal; a meeting of the
Committee of Secretaries (CoS) under chairmanship of the Cabinet Secretary was held on
44.07.2016 with Ministries which have a large number of pending paragraphs. It was noticed

that 1325 C&AG and 569 PAC paragraphs were pending as on 30.06.2016 for submission of ~

ATNs by various Ministries/Departments who were advised to take necessary steps to ensure
that 50% of pending paras (C&AG and PAC) are settled by 30.09.2016 and rest by
31.12.2016. The decisions of COS meeting were communicated to all Secretaries of the
Department vide OM dated 08.08.2046; in a further meeting with Financial Advisors held by
Finance Secretary on 14" or 15" July 2016, he had reiterated the need for timely submission of

_ Action Taken Notes in respect of pending paras. Finance Secretary had also stated that while
there had been a lot of progress in liquidating pending paras in many of the Departments,
there was a need for constant monitoring. He suggested that the Standing Audit Committees
(SACs) should be in place in all Ministries and they should meet regularly as lack of regular
monitoring results in accumulation of pendency. It had been seen that SACs were not meeting
regularly. There were large number of paras to which no reply had been sent even for the first
time. Reply to these paras should be the first priority. Also there should be a concerted effort
to liquidate some of the very old penditig paras. With continued effort by the Department as
mentioned above, monitoring of the submission of ATNs by the Monitoring Cell and directions
given by the Cabinet Secretary, it was expected that the pendency figures of C&AG and PAG
paras were likely to come down considerably in the coming months.

te The Sub-Committee were also apprised of the efforts of the Deparment of Expenditure
in upgrading the web-based Audit Para Monitoring System (APMS) and impressing upon the
Ministries on the usage of the APMS portal for quick and easy referral of the pendency position
of ATNs of the various Ministries. However, the Committee expressed concern over the non-
compliance to the directions for adopting APMS and uploading of ATNs on APMS portal by

certain Ministries citing frivolous reasons.

Ill. | Non-compliance in timely submission of ATNs on non-selected Audit paragraphs hon-selected Audit paragraphs
relating to Ministry of Finance

8. As per the information furnished by the C&AG, as on 31.07.2016, the total number of

Corrective/Remedial Action Taken notes on non-selected Audit paragraphs due to be
submitted by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) to the Committee stood at 336.



5
Out of these, 41 ATNs have not been received from the Ministry even for the first time. As

revisions on 78 ATNs were awaited and 217 ATNs were under examination in Audit.

9. A statement of pendency as on 30.09.2016 of the Ministry of Finance and the
~ Department of Revenue (both CBEC and CBDT) as obtained from the C&AG is given under.

Comparative Number of Audit Paras for which ATNs are pending
ms on sores ___—}35- 07.2016 1 336
As on 30,09.2016 | 265

From the above comparative figures, it could be seen that the pendency of the ATNs on Audit
paras in respect of Ministry of Finance and the Department of Revenue have decreased
slightly in a gap of two monhts.

40. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) in their written information
submitted that the total pendency of ATNs due to be submitted by the Department of Revenue
to the PAC as on 07.10.2016 for CBEC was 201 paras (100 paras of Central Excise and 101
paras of Customs). The Ministry further stated that the total number of paras pending with
CBDT as on 07.10.2016 was 167.

41. However, CBEC in their written submission stated that the total pendency of paras on
which ATNs were to be submitted to PAC as on 04.10.2016 was 224 out of which ATNs on
only 2 paras pertaining to Customs have not been submitted even for the first time, revised
ATNs were to be submitted for 7 paras, ATNs on 31 paras have been approved by Audit and
~ the same were pending with the Ministry and the remaining ATNs on 184 paras were pending
with Audit, CBEC further submitted that out of the total 422 paras with Central Excise &
Service Tax pending on APMS portal, on 112 paras action was to be taken by C&AG and on
10 paras action was pending on part of the Ministry. In all the 10 paras, copies of ATNs in
English and Hindi would be forwarded to the Monitoring Cell within a fortnight. CBEC also
appraised that out of the total 102 paras pending with Customs on APMS portal, on 72 paras,
action was to be taken by C&AG and on 30 paras action was pending on part of the Ministry.
Out of the 30 paras where action was to be taken by the Ministry on 2 paras, it was shown that
ATNs were not submitted even for the 43 time. However for the said 2 paras ATNs had already
been. submitted to CAG but they could not be uploaded. Since these pertained to the year -
2005/2007, neither the Ministry nor the CAG office was able to trace files. Efforts were on to
reconstruct | reconcile the records with the records in CAG office. On 7 paras, where revised



6

ATNs have to be submitted by the Ministry, comments would be provided by CBEC on the
observations made by CAG on ATNs within a fortnight. ATNs approved by Audit on 6 paras
would be uploaded within a week. On 15 paras finalised ATNs were submitted by CBEC but 30
copies in English and 15 copies in Hindi were required to be forwarded to the Monitoring Cell.
The CBEC assured that action, in this regard would be completed within a week:

42, Further, CBDT in their written deposition submitted that as on 04.10.2016 the total
pendency was 248 paras and there was no ATN pending for submission. for the first time. In
other words, in all the cases draft ATNs in prescribed format had already been submitted to the
office of C&AG for their comments and as on date 140 ATNs were under consideration of the
office of the C&AG for giving vetting comments. The C & AG in 32 cases had given additional
comments out of which in 11 cases revised ATNs had been submitted for vetting comments of
the ७ & AG and other 21 cases were under examination of CBDT. In 55 cases, vetting
comments had been given online and the CBDT was under process of sending physical copies
of the final ATNs and uploading final ATN. In 21 cases, the monitoring cell had stated that
physical copies of the final ATNs had not been received by them. These are under checking
by the CBDT.

43, When the Sub-Committee desired to know the latest status of pendency of the ATNs
with the Ministry of Finance especially’ CBEC and CBDT, the Revenue Secretary, during
evidence deposed as under:

"We have been trying our best to reduce the pendency of paras from our side. We have
also met with some success as you can see from the data which is before you. As far
as CBDT is concerned, one good thing is that there is no para pending for the first time
replies. We have already replied to all the paras. Out of the pendency which is shown
‘as on 29" of September, there are 248 out of which 148 ATNs are under consideration
of C&AG. In 32 cases, C&AG has given additional comments, out of which 11 cases
have been submitted for vetting and remaining 21 are under examination in CBDT. In
55 cases, vetting comments have been given online and we are in the process of
sending physical copies of final ATNs and uploading it in the final ATN. \n 21 cases, the
monitoring cell has stated that the physical copies have -not been received. We will
check it out because | think there is some confusion, but we will re-send the papers to
them. My colleague can also give some more information on CBDT para and maybe
the Committee can ask a few questions on that. In CBEC, in Customs there are 402
paras which are shown as pending. There are 30 cases in which action is pending at
our end and 72 are already sent to C8&AG. There are two paras which are shown as the
first-time replies also not having been uploaded. But these two paras are in dispute
since 2005-07, The paras are shown as having been sent from our office. There is
some confusion because there was a fire in the office. There are seven paras which
are pending-for revised ATNs which our office will send within a fortnight. There are six
paras in which the ATNs have been approved by Audit and they have to be uploaded.


7

In 15 paras, physical copies in Hindi and English have to be sent. That will be done
within a week. In case of Central Excise, there are 122 paras relating to Excise and
Service Tax. Of this, there is no first-time reply pending fortunately. Only in ten paras,
action is to be taken by the Ministry for submission of requisite number of copies in
English and Hindi which will be done in a fortnight. Regarding 112, it is pending in CAG.
This is the overview in regard to the number of paras. With respect to the Department of
Expenditure, there is no pendency. The observations of the Sub-Committee during the
last meeting - as you had also commented in your inaugural address — have been
circulated to the Ministry and the Finance Secretary has taken two meetings of the
_ Financial Advisors of the various Ministries in which he has actually directed them to
emphasise disposal of these paras.
44. During oral evidence, the representative of the Department of Expenditure further
supplemented as under :

"We have subsequently also from the Monitoring. Gell issued the time schedule for
disposal of these paras which has to be done by 120 days. That has also been
circulated in June. A lot of emphasis has been given to the disposal of these paras as a
result of which you have also commented that the disposal situation has improved.
As the Revenue Secretary has also just said, in Economic Affairs, there are only two
paras as per my information. There is a representative from Economic Affairs here.
There are only two-paras for which the replies are not yet due. So, they should be
disposed within the time prescribed for that."

45. When the Sub-Committee asked as to whether the Department should reconcile the
figures with the C&AG as there was a mismatch in the pendency of figures in submission of
ATNs provided by the C&AG and Department of Expenditure, the Ministry submitted that the
C&AG reckoned a para as pending if it remained unsettled after the expiry of the 4 months
whereas Monitoring Cell took it pending from the date of laying of the relevant C&AG report in
the Parliament. The Ministry further stated that the C&AG adopted a different yardstick for
dropping a para from the pendency list by treating the para as settled immediately after final
vetting of ATN whereas Monitoring Cell took it as settled only when the process cycle had
been completed on APMS portal and hard copies of the ATNs had been submitted to the Lok
“Sabha Secretariat. The mismatch also occurred due to different treatments given to a
Performance Audit Report which was to be taken separately or the entire report was to be
treated as single para.

46. When the Sub-Committee stressed that the Department of Expenditure needed to
enhance monitoring as there were a large number of paras pending in respect of social sector
Ministries, the Finance Ministry submitted that ithe issue of Social Sector Ministries had been
raised in Para 15 of the 427 Report of the PAC and the Department of Expenditure had



( मा 8

already taken up the matier with Social Sector Ministries and sought reports from them.
However, no response had been received till date.

17. The Sub-Committee desired to know the efficiency of the mechanism provided in the
APMS portal for submission of ATNs for review/rectification of defects, if any, in the portal. In
response, the Department of Expenditure submitted that the APMS portal was started to
strengthen, streamline and speed-up the submission of ATNs and the Ministries/Departments
uploaded scanned copies of the draft/revised/final ATNs in the prescribed format at every
stage. The Audit could also upload their vetting comments as an attachment. Edit facility has
also been provided to review/rectify all defects by the Ministries. The Monitoring Cell had
written to NIC for conducting a system study for upgrading of APMS portal.

48. When the Sub- Committee desired to. know the time frame for submission of revised
ATNs, the Department of Expenditure stated as under:

"As regards the submission of revised ATNs, there exists a time frame of 20 days for

submission of ATNs within 120 days. The schedule was issued in consultation with

C&AG."
49. . The Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue (CBDT) in their written information
submitted that a Meeting of Committee of Secretaries (COS) was held under Chairmanship of
the Cabinet Secretary on 11/07/2016. The recommendation of COS were viz Ministry /
Departments may take necessary Steps to ensure that 50% of pending C & AG and PAC paras
are settled by 30/09/2016 and remaining by 31/1 2/2016; Ministries/Departments may expedite
draft ATNs where first reply has not been uploaded within the stipulated time; Ministries /
Departments may ensure regular meetings of SAC are held to review the progress of
settlement of pending paras, The details telating to the meetings may be uploaded on the
APMS portal; as regards performance audit, paras relating to various areas may be counted
separately and not as a single para for the purpose of compliance; replies to draft paras may
be sent promptly and appropriately so that they do not necessarily become audit paras; and
Ministry / Departments must complete the process flow on APMS portal before submission of
hard copies of ATNs to Monitoring Cell. The present status against each of the
recommendations of the COS were viz. as on the date of meeting of COS, 509 ATNs were
pending. The figure now is 248. Therefore the recommendation stands complied with; as on
the date of meeting of COS, 102 draft ATN were pending for uploading. Now, all the draft
ATNs stands uploaded; last SAG meeting was convened on 19/08/2016 and uploaded on
APMS portal; noted for compliance; and uploading was done before the hard copies were

See



t ४

submitted to MC. Prescribed time schedule had been noted for adherence; the Minisiry is
committed to adhere to the time schedule from the date of tabling a new Audit Report
Tespectively.

20. When the Committee enquired about the steps taken by the Ministry to adhere to the
prescribed timeline of four months for submitting the ATNs, the representative of the Ministry
deposed during evidence as under:

"With respect to the various efforts that have been taken by the Department of
Expenditure, | would like to tell you that after the last sitting of this Sub Committee in
April, 2016, we have circulated two letters to all the Ministries and Departments
reiterating and emphasizing quick disposal of all these paragraphs in the manner that
has been prescribed and the Finance Secretary, on two occasions, in the meeting with
the Financial Advisors of various Departments and Ministries, has again emphasized on
the disposal and the methods of these audit paragraphs. As has been mentioned in the
Opening Remarks of the Chairman, the Committee of Secretaries have also deliberated
upon this issue and they have issued directions to all the Departments to monitor the
disposal of these audit paragraphs. | would like to also inform this august Sub
Committee that as of 30" of September, as was asked by the hon. Member, the
Departments, apart from the Department of Revenue or the Ministry of Finance for
which the figures are already on record, the Defence Ministry has a pendency of around
268 paragraphs, the Railway Ministry has 143 paragraphs pending with them and the
Ministry of Telecommunications has 40 with them and Home and Commerce Ministries
have both 31 and other departments have a little less pending paragraphs.”

NV. Non-compliance in timely submission of ATNs on non-selected Audit paragraphs in timely submission of ATNs on non-selected Audit aragraphs
relating to Ministry of Defence '
21. The Sub-Committee took evidence of representatives of Ministry. of Defence on
26.09.2016. The pendency of ATNs with the Defence Ministry was on the decline but not
satisfactory as it dropped only marginally, From an outstanding of 163 ATNs in July, 2016 the
figure has dropped to 157 as on 30.06.2016. “Qut of the total 163 paras pending as on
31.07.2016 ATNs on 44 paras have not been received from the Ministry even for the first time,
revised ATNs were awaited for 80 paras including paras as old as 1989 and 1990, ATNs on 33
paras were finally vetted by Audit but pending with the Ministry and ATNs on 6 paras were
under examination in Audit. The reconciliation of ATNs were not satisfactory as of 30.09.2016
as still ATNs on 38 paras were not received even for the first time, revised ATNs on 84 paras
were still awaited and ATNs on 30 paras have been finally vetted by Audit but pending with the
Ministry. ; है 1

22... 8 comparative statement of pendency of ATNs as on 31.07.2016 and 30.09.2016 of the
Ministry of Defence as obtained from the Audit is given in the following table.



10

Peer सुकजकमल As on 31.07.2016 far on 30.09.2016

No. of Audit Paras for which | 163 157
ATNs are pending

From the above comparative data, it is seen that the Ministry had been able to clear

only 6 additional Paras between July, 2016 and September, 2016.

23. Apprising the Sub-Committee of the pendency of ATNs and the efforts made to reduce

the same, the representative of the Defence Ministry deposed as under:

"We have always been getting guidance from this Sub Committee’ because | had
appeared a number of times before this hon. Committee in the past. We have taken
note of the directions given by the Committee earlier. As far as the number of ATNs are
concerned, we are also concerned that the number of outstanding paras relating to our
Ministry is very large and we should try to reduce the numbers. As far as the ATNs
which have not been sent once to the Committee, as per our record, they are 34 in
number. We ate aware of the directions of the CAG that the replies should be sent
within four months of the submission of the report to the Parliament. Sir, we have been
making efforts at the level of the Ministry. At my level also, we have been regularly
reviewing with all the Joint Secretaries in the Ministry. We have brought three Joint

. Secretaries in the meeting of the Committee because some of these JSs have a larger

number of audit paras. If the Committee wants, the Committee can get a feedback from
the Joint Secretaries also. The total number of outstanding paras as on 21* September
which you have prepared, there may be some discrepancies in a few numbers here and
there but the total number of outstanding paras as on 217 September, 2016 is 164, out
of which 34 are where the ATNs have not been sent once. There is some slow progress
in terms of hosting the ATNs at different stages on the APMS portal. As | had brought
out in the Committee before in the last meeting because of the sensitivity involved in
some of the documents relating to the Ministry of Defence and the restriction on the use
of pen drives across the Ministry from one office to other, we had issues relating to
hosting the ATNs:on the APMS portal. That is why, the progress is slow, But we have
started hosting some of these ATNs now and some wings of the Ministry have started
doing it but as the Chairman has pointed.out, there are 66 paras from our records where
the old ATNs have already been sent but they have not yet been hosted on the APMS
portal. We are making arrangements in centralised way in the budget section of our
Ministry which looks after the ATNs that all the concerned officers who have issues
relating to scanners and other logistic problems in hosting the ATNs which are already
sent or now in whatever stage they are sent to audit or to the Committee, they could

-come at a centralised place, scan it and post it so that whatever we have done is

reflected in the APMS portal and we are not seen as lagging in doing that aspect also.
Sir, we are concerned as the number of paras are large. We are trying to make efforts
that to expedite compliance in these cases also but because of the huge field formation
and a number of tiers of organisation, especially in case of Armed Forced, especially
the Amy, we are not able to adhere to the timeline in many of the case. We are sorry
for that but still we are making efforts that we can expedite." :



ll

24. When the Sub-Commitiee asked about the number of pending paras still to be uploaded
on the APMS portal because of sensitivity of cases, the representative of the Ministry
submitted during evidence as under:

“It ig not we will not be able to host it on the APMS portal because of it sensitivity,
- because of the sensitivity there is some problem in use of pen drives and all in the

Ministry. So, what we will have to do is to bring it all at one place for scanning and then
host it on the portal for which we have made arrangements. We will be able to host all
and-there-is no problem. There are about 66 audit paras where our compliance has
already been sent to the Committee which were earlier done on the manual basis. Now
those have also to be put on the APMS portal. Those are cases where compliance ATN
has been sent to the Committee after being vetted by the audit. That has now to be
physically put on the web portal. Those 66 cases, as | was mentioning, the ATN have
been sent but not put on the portal. That is also counted because those are not put on
the APMS portal as pendency."

25. When asked to give a timeline for completing the hosting of ATN pendency on APMS:

portal, the representative of the Ministry deposed as under:

"| will ask my Additional FA to review and then | can give a commitment. We will review
in one week's time and send the status of the timeline when we can give. Within one
week we will communicate that. | will not be aware of all the specific paras so by Friday
we will send you the timeline by which we can send the ATNs." x

५. Non-compliance in timely submission of ATNs on non-selected Audit paragraphs in timely submission of ATNs on non-selected Audit paragraphs
relating to Ministry of Railways

26. The Sub-Committee took evidence of’ representatives of Ministry of Railways on
26.09.2016. The pendency of ATNs with the Ministry of Railways was on the rise. From an
outstanding of 100 paras in July, 2016 the number has increased to 133 as of 30.09.2016. Out
of the total 100 paras pending as on 31.07.2016 ATNs on 05 paras have not been received
from the Ministry even for the first time, revised ATNs were awaited for 53 paras, ATNs on 06
paras were finally vetted by Audit but pending with the Ministry and ATNs on 36 paras were
under examination in Audit. The reconciliation of ATNs were not satisfactory as of 30.09.2016,
as still ATNs on 30 paras were not received ‘even for the first time, revised ATNs on 57 paras
were still awaited. ATNs on 04 paras have been finally vetted by Audit but pending with the
Ministry and ATNs on 42 paras were under examination of the Audit.

27. A comparative statement of pendency as on 31 .07.2016 and 30,09.2016 of the Ministry
as obtained from the Audit is as under:

As on 31.07.2016 | Ason ———

No. of Audit Paras for which | 100 | 133.
ATNs are pending



12

From the above comparative figures above, it is seen that there is a 33.33 percent
increase in the pendency of ATNs in the Ministry between July, 2016 and September, 2016.

28.  Apprising the Sub-Committee of the pendency of ATNs, the efforts made to reduce the
pendency and the difficulties encountered to do the same, the representative of the Railway
Board deposed as under:

"Sir, | would like to mention that in the last five years certain measures have been taken
by the Ministry of Railways in clearing the pending audit paras. In the year 2012, we had
309 outstanding paras. Since then we had added another 184 paras. But, | am happy to
inform the Committee that we have already cleared 355 paras since then and as on
date the outstanding paras are only 138. So, from 309 outstanding,'we have come
down to some hundreds. Sir, we have taken a lot of measures to expedite the
finalisation of audit paras. We have recently issued instructions to all our field officers
for finalising audit paras on time. Then, Standing Audit Committees have been
constituted and meetings of SACs are regularly held. For example, in the current
Financial Year, we have already conducted 17 meetings in the last six months to
expedite the replies to the audit paras. Secondly, tegular meetings are held at the level
of Additional Member. Sometimes even the Financial Commissioner is also involved in
the meetings. All our Board Members also participate in these meetings. We have taken
all steps that are required to expedite the replies. Sir, | would like to seek the indulgence
of the hon, Committee, like you have just mentioned, our spread in the country is such
that for some of the thematic issues that are taken up by the C&AG's office, we have to
call for information from the field units. Here, ‘field units’ means not just zones or
division, bur right up to the sub-divisional levels where the information takes a little
longer time than perhaps what it takes for other Ministries where replies are probably
faster and they are able to get it quicker. Then, Sir, the other reason for delay is when
there is a cross reference. If an Action Taken Note (ATN) is submitted to the Audit and it
taises some further queries. Then, that again has to be sent to the field units for getting
the feedback. "

29. When asked to state the specific reasons for repeated default on the part of the Ministry
in not furnishing the ATNs within the prescribed timeline of four months, the representatives of
the Ministry submitted during evidence as under: ;

"Sir, | would like to submit before the Committee that ever since the audit para
monitoring system of the Ministry of Finance has been set up we have been uploading
the position of the Railway audit paras on to this system. We have. already uploaded 89
finalised paras in the year 2016 on the APMS. As on date, only 39 initial ATNs have not
been uploaded. Of these, five pertain to the period of reports laid in the year 2015 and
28 are of the current year, that is 2016. Two paras are of old reports files of which we
are trying to get. Though it is not a reason, | would just like to mention that some of the
replies got delayed because of the division of the Railways from nine to 16 Zones.
Between 2002 and 2003 when the existing nine zones became 16, the records which
were earlier maintained in one office were not transmitted to the new office because
they were functioning from very temporary accommodation and so on and so forth, So,
some of the older reports got delayed because of the bifurcation of the Railways. It was



30.

13

an administrative issue which caused some delay. Nevertheless, there is no denying
that we have to submit the reports-on time. We have sensitized our field offices to
submit reports, Yes, we have also given instructions that without waiting for directions
from the Zone they should act based on the reports which we directly communicate to
the field units. Only when the return information is given it comes under the signature of
the head of the office as is required by the CAG. So, we are making all efforts and we
will continue to make further efforts to ensure that the pendency is reduced even
further."

When the Sub-Committee asked about the concrete measures taken by the Ministry to

ensure compliance of the timeframe of four months for submission of the ATNs, the Ministry

submitted that following steps have been taken since the evidence meeting on 26.9.2016 for

expeditious disposal of the audit paras:-

"“(@) A meeting of the SAC was held under the Chairamanship of Additional
Member(Budget) on 29.9.2016 with all Additional Members/Advisors concerned to
review the pendency.

(i) A reminder was issued from Financial Commissioner, Railways to all Members
concemed for early disposal of pending audit paras.

(iii) As a result, replies to 29 audit paras have since been sent to audit(as on
24.10.2016).

(iv) At the time of meeting, a total of 97 paras were pending for ATNs/ comments on
audit's observations. Since then,- 4 paras have been finalized and sent to Monitoring
Cell and PAC. Further 3 more paras have been finalized and will be sent shortly to
Monitoring Cell after Hindi translation - bringing the pendency down to 90 paras for
Reports laid down in various years up to the year 2015.

(vy) Meeting with audit will be held to further expedite finalization.

Disposal of audit paras is a continuous process. All efforts are being made to clear the
audit paras pending with this Ministry. The finalisation of audit paras also depend on
audit. The ATNs on pending paras will be submitted to PAC and also uploaded on
APMS as and when vetted by Audit.”


PART Il

Observations and Recommendations

1. Under Article 151 of the Constitution of India, the Reports of C&AG of India
relating to the audit of Union accounts must be submitted to the President of India who
directs them to be laid on the table of the Houses. Thereafter, the Reports of the C&AG
(Civil) stand entrusted to the Public Accounts Committee for comprehensive
examination. However, due to dearth of time, the Committee find it difficult to examine

. each and every Report and so they have adopted a judicious and selective approach by
examining and reporting on the more important Reports/Paras. The Audit Reports which
are not selected for in-depth examination by. the Committee are being dealt with by a
well devised and accepted mechanism. The Committee, in.their 405" Report (Tenth Lok
Sabha, 1995-96), had recommended that the Action Taken Notes on all the paragraphs
of the Reports of the C&AG of India should be furnished to the Committee through the
Monitoring Cell, Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) within a period of 4
months from the date of laying of the Audit Reports on the table of the House w.e.f. 317
March, 1996. From the year 2009-10 onwards, the Public Accounts Committee have
been vigorously examining the subject ‘Non-compliance by the Ministries/Departments
in timely submission of Action Taken Notes on Non-selected Audit Paragraph’ reports
on which are also presented to the Parliament, i

2. ‘As a result of the Committee's persistent oversight of the timely submission of
ATNs, the position of pendency has been liquidated to a great extent. The pendency
however, still remains high and it is a matter of concern to the Committee. The
Committee (2008-09), (2010-11), (2013-14), (2014-15) and (2015-16) reviewed the position
with respect to timely submission of ATNs on the non-selected Audit paragraphs by the
Ministries/Departments and gave some considered opinion/suggestions to improve the
situation. Though the Committee appreciate the efforts made by -the
Ministries/Departments in taking appropriate measures for timely submission of ATNs,
pursuant to the Committee’s recommendations, a lot of improvement is still imperative
on the part of some Ministries/Departments viz., Finance, Defence and Railways as

enumerated in the succeeding paragraphs.



15

Monitoring Gell, Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) Gell, Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure

3, The Committee take a note of the efforts of the Monitoring Cell, Ministry of
Finance (Department of Expenditure) in persistently monitoring timely submission of
the ATNs within the stipulated period of 4 months by the Ministries/Departments,
pursuant to the recommendation of PAC which has resulted in considerable reduction
in the pendency of ATNs from 4216 paras as on 30.06.2010 to 805 paras as on
31.07.2016. The Committee, while appreciating the efforts of the Monitoring Cell, feel
that there are some areas for improvement, especially with regard to the reconciliation
of pendency figures maintained separately by the C&AG, the Ministries and the
Monitoring Cell. One of the anomalies behind the mismatch in figures of pendency
maintained by the three entities relates to the earlier manual settlement process
wherein the C&AG treats a para as settled after it has given its final vetting comments
whereas for the Ministries the matter is settled on receipt of C&AG's final vetting
comments. The Monitoring Cell considers a part as settled on physical receipt of finally
vetted copies for onward transmission to the PAC. The Committee in their 4277 report
(Rec. Para 5) clearly suggested that the entire process of ATN settlement be completed
in the APMS portal and the extant practice of manual submission of hard copies to the
PAC be done away with. The Committee reiterate that henceforth, all the three entities
mentioned above should treat a para as settled once the C&AG uploads its final vetting
comments on the portal. The Monitoring Cell may once again reconcile the pendency
figures on the basis of this criterion and apprise the Committee of the reconciled figure

at an early date.

4, Another area where figures differ between the data furnished by the C&AG and
the Monitoring Cell is the lack of clarity regarding the audit paras on which remedial
ATNs are to be furnished by various Ministries/Departments. The Committee would like
to make it clear once and for all that remedial ATNs were earlier required to be
submitted to them on those Audit Paras/Chapters/Reports which are not selected by
PAG for detailed examination and report because once PAC presents a Report to the
House on the selected para/subject, the Ministries/Departments concerned are bound to
furnish Action Taken Notes within six months of the presentation of the Report whereas
on non-selected paras, remedial ATNs are required to be furnished within four months
of the laying of the Audit Reports. However, the Committee in their 207 Report (16" LS)



16

had clearly made a recommendation that ATNs on all Audit Paras, whether selected or
not by PAC, have to be furnished for further scrutiny. The Committee, thus, believe that
there should absolutely be no confusion in the submission of ATNs. Of course, there is
a need to prioritize the non-selected Audit Paras upon which remedials are to be
furnished within the stipulated time frame, The Committee would therefore like the ~
C&AG to decide, identify and prioritize the paras of its Reports which require remedial
action by the Ministries and upload them on the portal immediately after its Reports are
laid in the Parliament, Further, each para should be uploaded with the date of the

” Report being laid, the date on which ATNs are due etc. Thereafter, the Monitoring Cell
should maintain separate data for paras which are pending beyond the stipulated 4
months, and those which have not crossed the 4 months period.

5, The treatment of the so-called backlog paras, ie. paras which have been
manually settled by the Ministries with the C&AG but yet to be uploaded on the portal is
another cause for the mismatch in the pendency data. The Commiitee, therefore, desire
that since no further manual settlement was to be entertained by the C&AG pursuant to
the Committee's recommendations in their 42" Report (160 LS), the Monitoring Cell may
create a separate link for such backlog paras until such paras are settled. Thus, only

“such paras which are being processed for settlement on the APMS in tallying the
pendency figures on the main page of the portal be taken into account, The Committee
will henceforth refer-to only this APMS figure for assessment of non-compliance by
Ministries/Departments in timely submission of ATNs. The Ministries with backlog
paras may accordingly be given a time-frame of three months to upload all the manually -
settled paras alongwith C&AG's final vetting comments on the APMS portal.

6. The Committee feel that the facility of APMS should also be exterided to the PAC
Reports and desire that the Monitoring Gell take on the added responsibility of
monitoring the timely submission of ATNs on the reports of the PAC. Towards this, the
Committee desire that separate pages for each Ministry/Department may be added on
the portal where the Lok Sabha Secretariat can upload the Committee's
recommendations requiring ATNs from Ministries concerned, with columns showing the
dates of presentation of Reports, the dates on which ATNs are due, the replies/ATNs by
Ministries concerned and vetting remarks of the C&AG. Considering the benefits of
efficiency, economy of paper and time, and the potential for replication of the practice



17

by all other Parliamentary Committees, the Committee desire that the Monitoring Cell in
consultation with all stakeholders like the NIC, C&AG, Ministries and the PAC
Secretariat should develop this added feature on the APMS within a period of three
months from the presentation of this report to Parliament. The Committee, in their 20"
Report, had also recommended that ATNs on Audit Paras, whether they have been
selected by the PAC for examination or not, should be furnished by the
Ministries/Departments within the stipulated period of 4 months. In cases where the
PAC have given their report on an Audit report/para, ATN on the report would be
considered to treat the para as settled. The Committee, therefore, desire that the C&AG
may upload paras requiring ATNs onto the portal irrespective of whether they are
selected or not by the PAC for further scrutiny/examination.

Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue

vi The Committee note that as on 31.07.2016, the total pendency of Action taken
Notes with the Ministry of Finance and Department of Revenue was 336 out of which
ATNs on 41 paras have not been furnished. even for the first time. The Department of
Revenue have however, submitted that the total paras pending with the Department was
472 only, i.e. 122 in Central Excise and Service Tax, 102 in Customs and 248 in Central
Board of Direct Taxes. The Committee further observe from the information furnished
by Audit that the number of pending ATNs as on 30.09.2016 was 263, 08६6 have stated
that the total pendency of paras on which ATNs are to be submitted to PAG as on
04.10.2046 was 224 out of which ATNs on only 2 paras pertaining to Customs have not
been submitted even for the first time, revised ATNs are to be submitted for 7 paras,
ATNs on 31 paras have been approved by Audit and the same are pending with the
Ministry and the remaining ATNs on 184 paras are pending with Audit, CBEC have
further submitted that out of the total 122 paras with Central Excise & Service Tax
pending on APMS portal, on 112 paras action was to be taken by C&AG and on 10 paras
action was pending on part of the Ministry. CBDT further stated that as on date, 140
ATNs were under consideration of the office of the C&AG for giving vetting comments.
The G&AG in 32 cases had given additional comments out of which in 11 cases revised
ATNs had been submitted for vetting comments of the C & AG and other 21 cases were
under examination of GBDT. In 55 cases, vetting comments had been given online and
the CBDT was in the process of sending physical copies of the final ATNs and


18

uploading of the same. The Committee are concerned with the indifferent approach of
the Ministry in reconciliating the pending paras with that of the Audit, despite clear cut
guidelines to furnish the ATNs within 4 months after the Audit Reports are laid in
Parliament and upload the same on the APMS portal. The Committee are particularly
dissatisfied with the delay in submission of remedials on non-selected. Audit Paras for
which the pendency of the ATNs have increased over a period of time. The Committee,
therefore, recommend the Ministry to take urgent requisite measures in consultation
with Audit to reconcile the status of the ATNs and adhere to the prescribed period for
bringing down the pendency status at the earliest , The Committee may be apprised of
the action taken in this regard within two months of the presentation of the Report.

Ministry of Defence

8. The Committee are equally concerned over the pendency of ATNs on the part of
the Ministry of Defence, though the figure has dropped marginally from 163 in July,
2016 to 157 as on 30.09.2016 out of which ATNs on 38 paras have not been received
from the Ministry even for the first time, 84 paras on which revised ATNs are still
awaited, 30 paras on which ATNs are pending with Ministry and 5 paras are pending
with Audit. The Defence Secretary during evidence had stated that the total outstanding
paras were 164 out of which ATNs for 34 paras have not been sent to Audit even for
once, The Committee do not approve of the discrepancies in the number of pending
paras furnished by Audit vis-a-vis the Ministry and the delay on the part of the Ministry
in submission land uploading the ATNs on the APMS portal. The Committee urge the
Ministry to take stock of the pendency of ATNs in consultation with Audit and work out :
an effective mechanism so that the anomalies are removed and ATNs are timely
submitted and uploaded on the portal.

Ministry of Railways

9. The Committee note that the total outstanding paras of the Ministry of Railways
were 100, out of which ATNs on 5 paras have not been received from the Ministry even
for the first time, revised ATNs on 53 paras were awaited and ATNs on 6 vetted paras
were pending with the Ministry. Though the Ministry have reportedly making efforts in
finalizing the ATNs by issuing instructions to the field officers to take necessary action
on the Reports for expediting the submission of ATNs without waiting directions from
the Zonal offices and also constituting and holding: meetings of Standing Audit



19

Coramittees, the Committee are, however, perturbed to note the increase in the
pendency of ATNs by 33.33 percent as on 30.09 2016. 1६19, therefore, imperative that the
monitoring mechanism be strengthened by the Ministry to ensure that various
measures initiated towards timely submission of ATNs actually fructify,

~NEW DELHI; PROF. K.V. THOMAS
/4 March, 2017 Chairperson,
23 Phalguna, 1938 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee