83

LAND MANAGEMENT IN BHARAT SANCHAR NIGAM
INITED :

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recormnmendations of
the Committee contained in their 53° Report (16 Lok Sabha)] ह

“MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS (DEPARTMENT OF
TELECOMMUNICATIONS) .

‘PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

"  {2017-18)

_ EIGHTY-THIRD REPORT

i

SIXTEETNH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SEGRETARIAT
NEW DELHI



EIGHTY-THIRD REPORT

PUBLIG ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE |
(2017-18)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

LAND MANAGE
NIGAM LIMITED

MENT IN BHARAT ‘SANCHAR

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
- the Cornmittee contained In their Fifty-third Report (16" Lok Sabha)]

“MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS (DEPARTMENT OF -
_ TELECOMMUNIGATIONS)-

slept

ig] y2]oer -

’ Presented to Lok Sabha on: al

Laid in Rajya Sabha on:

“LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
' NEW DELHI

December, 2017 /Agrahayana, 1939 (Saka)



CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS

CHAPTER V*

“dt

COMMITTEE (2017-18)
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER] REpOM.ccsssccicccrssssseseeleccesscespeseespeerectrees
CHAPTER IF Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ....... जन जज जन ते दि
CHAPTER I[I* ७.5३४४५्वांंजा5॥२8०णाशाशातव्लीणा8... which the
7 Committee do not desire to- pursue in view of the
teplies received from the Government ,,,.,........ ... हु
CHAPTER ५७. Observations/Recommendations in’ respect of-
which replies. of the Government have not been
- accepted by the Committee and which require
- reiteration $0008 e044 ranean ०००९००००००००० ००००० ०००
Observations/Recommendations in respect of -

which the Government have furnished interim
replies :

- APPENDICES"

Minutes of the 9" sitting of the Public Accounts

Committee {2017-18} held on .
_8" September, 2017

Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their Fifty-third
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

. aft

*Not appended to the cyclosiyled copy of the Report

PAGE
(iii)

{iv)


COMPOSITION OF THY PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMEVERE i
(2017-18)
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge लि ह Chairperson
MEMBERS
“LOK SABHA

2 छत Sudip Bandyopadhyay

3 Shti Subhash Chandra Baheria
4... Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey
6
7
8.

Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

8. Smt. Riti-Pathak.

9.7. Shri Neiphiu Rioh’

- 40. Shri Abhishek Singh
- 11. Prof. Ram Shanker

12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya

13... Shij Anurag Singh Thakur

14, Shri Shivkumar 0. Udasi है है
- 15. Dr, P. Venugopal -

RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Naresh Agrawal

17. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
48. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
19. Shri Shantaram Naik’

20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar-Roy?
21. Shri Ajay Sancheti

22. Shri Bhupender Yadav

SECRETARIAT हे हि
४ 1... छत AK. Singh -- Additional Secretary .
. ° ShiT.Jayakumar - Director | हि ा vy
3... Smt.Anju Kukreja “-| Under Secretary

irement from Rajya Sabha on 28 Juty, 2017.
ement from Rajya Sabha on 18 August, 2017.

* Ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon ht
1 Ceased to be a Member of Conunittee consequent. upon his 1:


INTRODUCTION

॥ the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2017-18), having been
authorised by the Committee, do preseni this Eighty-third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

- on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the *
Commitiee contained in their Fifty-third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on “Land
Management in Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited" relating to Ministry of
Communications (Department of Telecommunications). oe

2. The Fifty-third Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on
22" November, 2016. Replies of the Government to all the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received. The Public
Accounts Committee considered and adepted the Eighty-third Report at their sitting held
on 8" September, 2017. Minutes of the sitting are given at Appendix |

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report,

4... The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance Tendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of india.

- 5, An analysis of the action taken’ by the Government on the Observations/
Recornmendations contained in the Fifty-third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given at :
Appendix-Hf. .

NEW DELHI; - SHR! MALLIKARJUN KHARGE

‘4 December, 2017° en Chairperson,

है 13 Agrahayana, 1939 (Saka) हु Public Accounts Committee


REPORT
PART =|
This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations and Recommendations contained in their 53 Report (16" Lok Sabha)
on the subject “Land Management in Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited”. based on
Para No. 5.1 of C&AG Report No. 17 2014 teilated to Ministry of Communications |
(Department of Telecommunications). : ‘

2. In their 53 Report which was presented to Lok Sabha on 2200 November, 2016,
the Committee had dealt with the various issues such as absence of Land Management
Policy, delay in getting the inherited plots transferred/mutated/alienated in the name of
the Company, inability of the company to commercially exploit its vacant land, abnormal
variation in the book value of inherited land ‘and leasehold land, undervatuation: of the
assets of the Company, encroachment of land, non-acquisition of saleflease deed and
surrender of fand without receipt of adequate compensation/allocation of alternative site
etc.

3. The Action Taken Notes ine respect of all the Nine
observations/Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of
Communications (Department of Telecommunications) and these have been
categorized as follows

(i) | Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government .

Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 & 9

Total: 9
Chapter - i
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to.

pursue in view of the replies received from the Governnient:

‘Para Nos. -NIL-

Total: NIL
Chapter - fil


a)

कण

Observations‘/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have riot been accepted by ihe Committen kid whieh re quire

reiteration:

Para Nos, NIL

Total; NIL
Chapter.- ४

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have-

furnished interim replies

Para Nos. NIL

Total: NIL
Chapter -V

Gist of Observations/Recommendations contained in 53"4 Report (16 Lok Sabha)
4. The Committee in their 53" Report (167 Lok Sabha) on the subject had made the
following important Observations/Recommendations:

@

(i)

(i)

(iv)

The Committee recommended the Ministry to take urgent steps to
formulate a sound Land Management Policy to protect and preserve its:
. invaluable large tracks of land at the earliest.

The Committee desired that in future, the Ministry should streamline the

_- process of execution of mutation/transfer of land as soon as the same is

acquired.
The Committee desired that the BSNL need to be proactive to earn more
revenue from their vacant land by fast tracking submission of proposals for

_ commercial exploitation of its vacant land. Inspection of vacant plots and ,
their commercial exploitation on monthly basis must be made by BSNL

and the Report be submitted to the Ministry.

The Committee urged upon the Ministry/BSNL. io formulate ao

comprehensive action plan both for early removal of encroachments and
Prevention of fresh encroachments. A coordinated approach should also

required to be taken with a view to ensuring fast vacation of encroached.

land


5. The: Action Taken’ Notes furnished by the Ministry of Communications ,
(Department of Telecommunications) have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of
this Report. In the succeeding Paragraphs, the Committee will deal with the action taken
by the Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations made in the

original Report, which need reiteration or merit comments.

A. SalefLease deed not executed -
(Recommendation Para No. 7)

6. | The Committee observed that in four Secondary Switching Areas (SSAs), the
Company had taken on lease 17 plots measuring 0.12 lakh square meters of land for
periods ranging from 30 years to 98 years. The Company paid a premium of = 0.64
crore for taking the plots on lease for the purpose of establishing Telephone
Exchange/Remote Line Unit. However, the Company did not enter. into a ९४88
agreement for the said plots which had resulted in avoidable payment of premium
amounting to ₹ 0.64 crore and consequential loss of interest thereon, It was also
observed that in five SSAs under two Circles the Company acquired 65 plots of land
measuring 0.85 lakh square meters with a book value’ of
₹ 2.74 crore but no sale deed was executed for the same. While observing that due to
delay in execution of sale/lease deed, the BSNL has lost huge sums of revenue, the
Committee, recommended that Ministry/BSNL must fix a time frame so that execution of
seli/lease dead can be expedited

- 7. In their Action ‘Taken Note to the aforesaid recommendation Ministry of
Communications (Department of Telecommunications) have stated as under;

"The matter of executing lease deed of 17 plots measuring 0.12 lakh sqm has
already been taken up. with the. concerned revenue authorities for execution of
lease deed and is being actively pursued. Out of these 17 plots, BSNL has taken
up possession of 16 plots. Circie-wise: pdsition of pending lease deed is given as
under: .


eed not executed

i Sie, Hos. of plots [Lease deed | Balance Nos. |
{ fox which | executed for which
16458 deed not | (Current lease deed to
. exeouted Status be executed
4 Gulerat Abmedabad | 8 iit
{DL
| Sarat है. कि 1
Rajasthan Jaipur 5 Nil 5 et
_ | Udaipur 3 2 1.
i I 1 2 [5 =

Details of Free hold plots for which Sale deed not executed deed not executed

Circle Name of SSA | Nos.. of plots | Lease deed | Balance Nos.
7 for’ which | executed for which |
leases ~ deed | (Current lease deed fo
_ गत 101 ७९९०४६९४ | Status bo executed
Gujarat Surat — [Ni sd
Himmatnagar | 55 [40 sdf 8
Junagarh 13 3
Punjab Chandigarh 1 1
Rajasthan Bharatpur 1 1 पा
Total |. [665 [45 sf

“With a view to expedite the process, BSNL has issued directives to the Circle
Heads to constitute Task Force to deal with such matters, apply for issue of
duplicate revenue record wherever required and execute requisite lease/sale
deed at the earliest..Corporate Office shall also monitor the progress of the task

on monthly basis

8. The Committee are astonished to find from the circle-wise position of lease
deed that out of 17 leasehold plots in Gujarat and Rajasthan circles lease deed

was executed in two cases only, The Committee observe that in case of

Ahmedabad Telecom District, Surat and Jaipur circles no lease deed was
executed till the finalization of Action Taken Notes. Further, in case of free hold
plots, the Committee notice that out of 65 plots in Gujarat, Punjab and Rajasthan
Circles, lease deed was executed in 45 cases. The Committee would like to be

apprised of the- time [28000 since when’ all these cases are pending for

‘finalizztion, steps Initiated so far for execution of lease deed in these cases,
outcome thereof and present position of execution of the 12958 deed. The


Ministry have now informed that BSNL have issued directives to the Circle Heads
to constitute Task Force to deal with such matters, apply for duplicate revenue
. records wherever required and execute requisite iease/sale deed at the earliest.
The Corporate office, BSNL shal! monitor the progress of the task on monthly
basis. The Committee are aghast to note that no concrete action appears fo have
been initiated to take the matter fo ifs logical conclusion despite issuing ;
directives to the Circle Heads fo constitute Task Force for this purpose. Further
-no steps have been taken to fix a timo frame so as to expedite the execution of
saleilease deed. Since the Ministry/BSNL are incurring huge loss of revenue due
to delay in execution of lease deeds, the Committee recommend that the
Ministry/SNL should finalize these lease deeds by fixing a time frame so that
execution of saleflease deed can be expedited, They would like to he apprised of
the conclusive action taken in the matter within two nionths of the presentation of
this Report. हु ,

B. Non-Submission of Alienation Proposals of Alienation Proposals

{Recommendation Para No. 8)

9. The Committee observed that the Government of Andhra Pradesh had allotted
vacant lands measuring 32307.1 square meters to Telecom Department for construction
of Telephone Exchanges and support services during 1981-2001 for a total
consideration of ₹ 7.38 crore. For completing the transfer process, DoT/BSNL was
required to procure and submit alienation proposals to the Government of Andhra ©
Pradesh. The Commitiee observed that this had not been done in any of these cases
either by the DoT or by the Company even after 11 years of formation of the Company. *
Rt was also observed that one of the lands/plots measuring’ 2543 square meters for
which an amount of % 1.58 crore was paid as consideration’ was resumed by the
- Government of Andhra Pradesh in 2005 as the same remained vacantunutilized since it
was allotted in 1998 and was not legally transferred to the DoTiCompany The
Committee were informed that in order to expedite the mutation, Circle level Task Force
has been constituted by Corporate Office and monthly monitoring is being done. The
Cammittee did not fee! the constitution of Task Force even after 17 years of allotment of



land 55 appropriate and were of the opinion that strict deteirent penal action shouk! be

taken against defaulting officers for remaining inacive for’ such a long :

E. Re

Expressing serious displeasure over this state of affairs, ihe Committee félt thet ¢

Ministry/BSNL should owe an explanation to them as to why no action was inifiated in
this case for such a long time.

40. In their Action Taken Note to aforesaid recommendation the Ministry of
Communications (Department of Telecommunications) have stated as under:

“Most of these land parcels allotted in AP Circle were acquired immediately prior to

- the formation of the Company. Before mutation of these plots in the namie of BSNL,
alienation of these plots is to be completed in the name of DoT. As on date, all
these land parcels are in possession of BSNL with the exception of Mahendra Hills,
where a part of the land (1188.2.Sqm out of 2643 Sqm) was allotied to Sikh ©
Community Welfare Association in 2005, for which matter has already been taken up -
with the concerned revenue authority for grant of compensation, The balance area of
1591.27 Sqm is in possession of Hyderabad Telecom District, where compound wall
has already been constructed and a Base Trans-receiver Station (BTS). is
operational. . The strategy in this regard has been chalked out and special emphasis
has been given in the modified land management system to expedite the mutation of
land parcels by constituting Circle Level Task Force and real time monitoring at
various levels. This would result in periodical monitoring besides achieving desired
results." .

11. The Committes note that as on date all the land parcels are in possession
of BSNL with tha exception of Mahendra Hills, where a part of the land (1188.2
sqm out of 2643 sym) was allotted to Sikk Community Welfare Association in
2005, The Committee have now been informed that the matter has already been
taken up with the concerned revenue authority for grant of compensation. The |
1 Committee are constrained to observe that the matter has not been resolved even
after 12 years and no compensation has been received so far. Obviously, the
Ministry have slept over it and not acted with all the seriousness that.is required,
The Committee would, therefore like to reiterate their earlier recommendation to
take strict deterrent penal action against the defaulting officers for remaining
inactive for such a long period and would like to be apprised of the éoncrete
action taken in this regard within two. months of the presentation of the report.


7

alternative site
{Recommendation Paya No. 9)

12. The Committee noted that in Karnataka and Tamil Nadu Circles, BSNi. had to
surrender 1690.40 square meters of land with book value of हैं 0.79 crore without
adequate compensation/consideration. In Bengaluru (Karnataka Circle), Bangalore
Mass Rapid Transport Ltd. (BMRCL)-Metro Rail Project acquired (August 2005), $57.40 -
square meters of land which was procured by BSNL during January 2004 at a cost of
₹ 0.79 crore. The.organization offered alternate site measuring 525.20 square meters
and paid cash compensation of © 7.97 lakh for unused quantum of land measuring
32.21 square meters. - But the alternative plot was allotied to BSNL after a lapse of
seven years ie, on 10.10.2042. Further, in Tamil Nadu Circe (Trichy SSA) during 2003,
1133 square meters of land with a market value ‘of ₹ 3.46 lakh was acquired by the
National Highways Authority of India for road widening work, No compensation for 10
"was given by the NHAI. The Committee deplored the casual approach adopted by the -
8SNL authorities for taking action in this regard only after 13 years when the case was
pointed out by the Audit. Upon-noticing that action taken in these cases was not only
belated but also totally inadequate, the Committee desired that the matter be
investigated with a view to taking deterrent action against the delinquent offi cials. An
effective mechanism should also be put in place for monitoring such cases and taking
timely action fo receive compensation रा

13... In their Action Taken Note on the aforesaid recommendation, the Ministry of
Communications and information Technology (Department of Telecommunications) ..
have stated as under: : :

"BSNL had purchased a plot measuring: 557,40 Sqm of area at Magadi road for
construction of Telephone Exchange Building. The cost of the plot at the time of
purchase (January 2004) was % 79,20,000. Subsequently, in the year 2008, the
land was acquired by Ministry of Commerce and Industry, Government of Karnataka -

for development of BMRCL. In lieu of this plot, BMRCL offered alternate plot a

measuring 625.20 sqm behind the acquiréd BSNL land and paid cash compensation
of हैं 7.97 lakh; for balance 32.20 Sqm BSNL has also got registered the: offered
jarid on 10.10.2012. As such, this case.may be treated as settled.


In the case of NHAI, out of 1133 Sqm BSNL tand, an area of 273 Sqm wes acquired
by NHAL But, NHAI did not offer due compensation to BSL becuse the land in
question on ihe date of acquisition was in the name of Govl, of ladia. As pe:
procedure for payment of compensation, NHA! is net bound fo pay any
compensation for the land registered in the name of Government. However, BSNL is

- seeking legal opinion/action in the matter so that the due campensation, if any,
could be obtained from NHAI. Meanwhile, NHAI has been requested not to make
payment of compensation to any other party in respect of the said land."

14, Incase of land acquired by the National Highways Authority for India for.
road widening work in Tamil Nadu Circle {Trichy SSA} during 2003, the Comfitittee
have been apprised by the Ministry that as per procedure for payment of
compensation, NHAt is not bound to pay any compensation for the land
registered in the name of Government. However, BSNL is seeking legal
opinion/action in the matfer so that the due compensation, if any, could be
obtained from NHAI. The Committee strongly deplore the confused and casual
approach of the Ministry in dealing with this matter.- The Committee are
distressed fo note that though the matter had come to the notice of the Ministry
after 13 years when this was pointed out by Audit, the Ministry are still oscillating
and have not been able to resolve the issue fill date. The Committee while
deprecating the laxity shown by the Ministry in this regard recommend that this
case should be resolved at the earliest and appropriate action taken against the
detinquent officials. The Committee would also like to be apprised'of the legal
opinion, if obtained, in this case.

—_
NEW DELHI; SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE
December, 2017 है - Chairperson,

_-44 Agrahayana, 1939 (Saka) ee Public Accounts Committee -