97

PERFORMANCE OF IMPORT AND EXPORT
TRADE FACILITATION THROUGH CUSTOMS
PORTS

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Seventy-fifth Report (167 Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF FINANCE

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2017-18)

NINETY-SEVENTH REPORT

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO.2131

NINETY-SEVENT REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2017-18)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

PERFORMANCE OF IMPORT AND
EXPORT TRADE FACILITATION
THROUGH CUSTOMS PORTS

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Seventy-fifth Report (167 Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF FINANCE

Presented to Lok Sabha on: 28.02.2018

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 28.02.2018

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

March, 2018/Chaitra, 1940 (Saka)


CONTENTS

14-18

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2046-47)

INTRODUCTION

CHAPTER |
CHAPTER II

CHAPTER III

CHAPTER IV

CHAPTER V

REPORT

Introductory

Observations/Recommendations of the Committee which
have been accepted by the Government

Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from
the Government

Observations/Pecommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration

Observations/? *commendations in r ct of which the
Government hove furnished interim replies

APPENDICES

Minutes of the “itting of the Public Ac.ounts Committee
(2017-13) held w123 March, 2018

Analysis of thy Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Pecommendations of the Public Accounts
Committee contained in their Soventy-fifth Report
(Sixteenth Lo! abh .}

# Not appended am the cyclostylad VLRSION


wep ०० ०७ ०9 ४ + YN

Sere

20.
21.
22.

12.

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2017-18)

Shri Mallikarjun Kharge - Chairperson

MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
Shri Nishikant Dubey

Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Smt. Riti Pathak

Shri Neiphiu Rioh”

Shri Abhishek Singh

Prof. Ram Shanker

Dr. Kirit Somaiya

Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi

Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Naresh Agrawal
bri Satyavrat Chaturvedi

an

Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Shri Mohd. Ali Khant

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy*
ri Ajay Sancheti

bri Bhupender Yadav

hri A.K. Singh - Additional Secretary
hri T. Jaya Kumar - Director
Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary

5
Ss
SECRETARIAT
5:
5

+ Ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon acceptance of his resignation from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 22
February, 2018.

1 Elected w.e.f. 29 December, 2017 in lieu of vacancy caused due to retirement of Shri Shantaram Naik.

+ ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 18 August, 2017 and
re-elected w.e.f. 29 December, 2017.


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2017-18), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Ninety-seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Seventy-fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Performance of Import and Export Trade Facilitation through Customs Ports’

relating to Ministry of Finance.

2. The Seventy-fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on
187" July, 2017. Replies of the Government to the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 87 December, 2017. The Sub-Committee-lll
(Direct & Indirect Taxes) and thereafter Public Accounts Committee (2017-18)
considered and adopted the Ninety-seventh Report at their sitting held on

23" March, 2018. Minutes of the sitting are given at Appendix-l.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the

Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance tendered to

them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on. the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Seventy-fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given

at Appendix-ll.

NEW DELHI; MALLIKARJUN KHARGE,
23 March, 2018 Chairperson,

02 Chaitra, 1940 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


CHAPTER -।
REPORT
This Report of the Public Accounts Committee (2017-18) deals with Action
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Seventy-fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on “Import and Export
Trade Facilitation through Customs Ports” based on the C&AG's Report No. 13 of
2015 relating to the Ministry of Finance-Department of Revenue-Central Board of
Excise and Customs.

2. The Seventy-fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha), which was presented to Lok
Sabha/iaid in Rajya Sabha on 18" July, 2017, contained 08
Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the
Observations/Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Finance
and these have been categorized as under:

(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the

Government:
Paragraph Nos. 1, 4,5, 7 and 8

Total: 05
Chapter- Il

(it) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:

-NIL-

Total: 00
Chapter- Ill

(iii) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration:

-NIL-
Total: 00
Chapter- IV

(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government
have furnished interim replies:

Paragraph Nos. 2, 3 and 6

Total: 03
Chapter- V


2

3. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Finance on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Seventy-fifth
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this
Report. In the succeeding paragraphs, the Committee have dealt with the Action
Taken by the Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations which

either need reiteration or merit comments.

4. The Committee desire the Ministry of Finance to furnish Action Taken Note in
respect of Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter i and final action
taken replies in respect of Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter V
for which interim reply has been given by the Government may be furnished within

six months of the presentation of the report to the House.

1. Impact of Trade Facilitation measures
(Recommendation Para No. 2)

5. The Committee highlighted the fact that world trade is around 40 trillion
dollars, out of which India contributes around one trillion dollar but the Strategic Plan
of Department of Commerce (DoC) estimates a huge impact on the transaction cost
due to poor facilitation. In this connection, it was observed that the impact as a result
of the measures taken as specified in documents furnished by the Department is not
reflected in the “Doing Business Report 2016" under the category 'Cost to
Documentary Compliance in both Imports and Exports’. The Committee desired to
know if DoC/DGFT have carried out any analysis of impact of these measures for
improvement in trade facilitation and reduction in transaction cost. The Committee
wished to be apprised of the mechanism adopted by the Department to monitor the
time limits specified in the Strategic Plan. Further, the Committee noted that despite
constitution of committees and task forces by DoC in 2005, 2009 and 2013
concomitant with the Foreign Trade Policies (FTP) to address the issue of high
transaction cost in India and to suggest measures to reduce transaction cost and
time impacting the Country’s Foreign Trade transactions, the outcomes have not
yielded desired returns. A task force on ‘Transaction Costs in Exports’ was
constituted in 2009 by Ministry of Commerce (MoC) to look into various issues
affecting the competitiveness of Indian exports and to initiate a set of executable

remedial measures towards reducing the costs associated with trading across.


3
borders. The committee had made 44 recommendations pertaining to seven
ministries, out of which 33 recommendations were agreed upon. The Second Task
force on ‘Reduction in Transaction Costs in Exports’ was constituted in 2013 to
examine and identify difficulties that the exporters face and make actionable
recommendation to reduce or eliminate them. The committee made 46
recommendations pertaining to nine ministries and 7 separate recommendations
relating to Land Border crossing and other miscellaneous issues. The Committee
noted that the recommendations were yet to be implemented by the related
departments fully and wish that the DoC/DGFT may take up with other Ministries/
Departments for urgently implementing the recommendations. The Committee were
of the considered view that there was a good scope to improve efficiency by
streamlining procedures and felt that the Country's performance needed
improvement in the indicators of trade infrastructure efficiency. Further, they noted
that in overall logistic performance index, although India’s score had improved over
time, it was a continuous exercise. The Committee desired that DoC/DGFT may carry
out an analysis of the impact of the measures taken by it for trade facilitation, take
stringent steps against those who have not adhered to the timelines and prepare a
plan for trade facilitation for next five years for reducing transaction costs further. The
Committee desired that the compliance costs of the measures initiated by the

Government may also be calculated to assess the costs vis-a-vis the benefits.

6. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:

"Departments associated with international trade have taken a number of
measures in the past few years for facilitating exports and imports. The
overall effectiveness of these measures has been captured through the World
Bank's Doing Business Reports released annually. The reports capture the
efficiency of ease of exports and imports through its Trading Across Borders
parameter. The reports show that India’s performance has improved on many
parameters. For example, report shows that the Time of export has come
down. The border compliance time for exports has come down from 109.3
hours (2016 report) to 106.1 hours (2018 report). The documentary
compliance time for exports has come down from 41.5 hours (2016 report) to
38.4 hours (2018 report). The report also shows that the Cost of export has
come down. The border compliance cost for exports has come down from
101.7 hours (2016 report) to 91.9 hours (2018 report). The documentary
compliance cost for exports has come down from 413.1 hours (2016 report) to
382:4 hours (in 2018 report). The border compliance cost for exports has
come down from 109.3 hours (2016 report) to 106.1 hours (2018 report). The
following table summarises the data reported by the World Banks in its



4

Trading Across Borders reports for the years 2016,2017 and 2018 (released

on Oct 31, 2017).
Trade Cost and Time Parameters Doing Business Reports
2018 2017 2016
Exports | Time to exports
Documentary compliance 38.4 38.4 41.5
hours
Border compliance (hours) 106.1 106.1 109.3
Cost to exports
Documentary compliance 91.9 91.9 101.7
US$
Border compliance (US$) 382.4 413.1 413.1
Imports | Time to Imports
Documentary compliance 61.3 61.3 63.3
hours.
Border compliance (hours) 264.5 283.3 287.4
Cost to Imports
Documentary compliance 134.8 134.8 144.7
US$
Border compliance (US$) 543.2 574 574

. Reducing

required for exports and import

DGFT/DOC has implemented ||
past few years.

number of Documents:

he following Trade Facilitation Measures in the

Number of mandatory documents

8 have been reduced to 3 each for export and

import. Earlier 7 documents were required for exports and 10 for imports.
DGFT in January 2016 has also specified that any violations in this
regard should be brought to its notice.

. Reducing number of Schemes: The New Foreign Trade Policy (2015-20)

was launched on ‘st April, 2015 with a focus on supporting both merc
and services exports and improving the ‘Ease of Doing Business’.

handise
DGFT

consolidated 5 different incentive schemes under the earlier policy for
rewarding merchandise exports into a single scheme, namely the Merchandise

Exports from India Scheme. The replaced schemes are: Focus
Scheme (FPS), Focus Market Scheme (FMS), Market Linked Focus

Product
Product

Scrip (MLFPS), Vishesh Krishi and Gram Udyog Yojna (VKGUY), Agri.
Infrastructure Incentive Scrip

. PAN of firm is being issued as IEC by the DGFT wef July 1,2017. The

process

of making application and issuance of IEC is online and secure. IEC has also

been integrated with the eBIZ portal of DIPP. IEC and EPCG app

ications

have been integrated with the eNivesh portal implemented by PMG set up by
the Cabinet Secretariat.



5

d. Use of electronic bank realization certificate (eBRC) system has been
extended. DGFT shares data generated by the electronic bank realization
certificate (eBRC) system with 17 agencies. The eBRC system captures
details of the foreign exchange received by exporters through the banking
channel. So far DGFT has signed MOUs with 14 state governments 2 central
government agencies and GSTN for sharing of the data. At the state level,
Commercial Tax Departments of 14 states have signed MoU with DGFT for
receiving e-BRC data for VAT refund purposes. These are: (i) Maharashtra, (ii)
Delhi, (iii) Andhra Pradesh,(iv) Odisha, (v) Chhattisgarh, (vi) Haryana, (vii)
Tamil Nadu, (viii) Karnataka, (ix) Gujarat, (x) Uttar Pradesh, (xi) Madhya
Pradesh, (xii) Kerala, (xiii) Goa, (xiv) Bihar. In addition, Ministry of Finance,
Enforcement Directorate, Agricultural & Processed Food Products Export
Development Authority and GSTN have signed MoU.

e. The ‘Aayat Niryat’ Forms used for making online application to DGFT, have
been simplified bringing in clarity in different provisions, and enhancing
electronic governance.

f. Web Portals

DGFT has launched a new look website making it more user-friendly
and easy to navigate. DGFT website has a large dynamic component
whereby the trade community can file applications online for IEC and
various other schemes of DGFT. The exporters can also see the status
of their electronic Bank realization certificates in almost real-time. The
website is rich in content with all documents related to Foreign Trade
Policy along with a responsive online grievance redressa! system.

Indian Trade Portal launched by Department of Commerce and
managed by FIEO displays information useful for export import. It
contains the Trade enquiries uploaded by Indian trade missions, Tariff
and Trade data of India’s major trade partners, Export Market Reports,
and Trade Agreements etc.

EXIM Dashboard launched at the commerce.gov.in website. Allows
users a graphical understand of India’s export and imports at the
product, country and port level. Popular with exporters on account of
useful data depicted in uncomplicated manner.

g. DGFT: Facilities for Complaint Resolution

Contact@DGFT system has been activated at the DGFT website
(www.dgft.gov.in) as a single point contact for resolving all foreign trade
telated issues. Exporters/Importers use this facility for resolution of foreign
trade related issues either directly concerning DGFT (headquarters or
regional offices) or concerning other agencies of the Central or State


6 .
Governments. A reference number is issued for each request so that the
status of action taken can be tracked. Effective monitoring arrangements
have been made.

e DGFT maintains an active Twitter handle (#DGFTINDIA) with more than
26400 followers. Responses to tweets sent to CIM’s account and DGFT
handle are managed through the Twitterseva service and more than 7200
tweets have been replied to w.e.f Apr 2016 with an average reply time of

_ less than 12 hours.

e Grievances on policy, procedure and implementation issues registered at
the Public grievances portal of Department of Administrative Reforms &
Public Grievances are handled promptly.

h. Outreach & Niryat Bandhu Scheme-in the last two years, 50,000 new and
prospective exporters have attended the Niryat Bandhu outreach programs
through the regional offices of DGFT. DGFT conducted outreach activities at
34 clusters, as part of Niryat Bandhu. In addition, an online training

programme has been started with the IIFT for first time entrepreneurs.”

7. The Committee were of the view that there was substantial scope to
improve efficiency by streamlining procedures to improve country's
performance in the indicators of trade infrastructure efficiency. The Committee
had desired that Department of Commerce (DoC)/Director General of Foreign
Trade (DGFT) may carry out an analysis of the impact of the measures taken by
‘it for trade facilitation, take stringent steps against those who have not adhered
to the timelines and prepare a plan for trade facilitation for next five years for
reducing transaction costs and the compliance costs of the measures initiated
by the Government may also be calculated to assess the costs vis-a-vis the
benefits. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that the DoC has
taken a number of measures in the past few years for facilitating trade and the
effectiveness of these measures has been captured through the World Bank’s
Doing Business Reports released annually which shows that documentary and
border compliance costs for both imports and exports have come down. The
Committee desire that a comparative statement of the border and compliance
costs of trading in India vis-a-vis other countries like China, USA, Brazil and
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) countries may be
furnished to evaluate the effectiveness of efforts made by the DoC. The

Committee while noting that DoC has not taken any action towards either


7
impact or cost-benefit analysis and has only referred to the World Bank Data

exhort them to carry out the same to derive assurance that importers and
exporters have actually benefitted by the measures implemented by the DoC.
The Committee are unhappy to note that the status of implementation of the
recommendations of both the task forces constituted by the DoC has not been
furnished as desired by the Committee in their original Report and desire the
same may be furnished within one month of the Presentation of the Report to

the House.

1. Key Performance Indicators
(Recommendation Para No. 4)

8. The Committee noted with appreciation that there was downtrend in dwell
time, decreasing from 13.94 days during 2010-11 to 10.95 days during 2013-14 and
feel that this could be further improved by implementing the trade facilitation
measures initiated by CBEC more effectively. They also noted that almost 65 per
cent of the total time taken in imports is attributed to the filing of the BEs and
payment of duty while in exports filing of the EGM constituted nearly 90 per cent of
the total time taken. The Committee also noted 22 per cent of the |GMs were found to
contain errors which required corrections. Also, a major anomaly is non-declaration of
the destination port which is almost 50 per cent of the IGMs filed at major sea/air

ports. The Committee observed that there were delays in allotment of berths by Port

Authorities, in clearing the goods by the importers at Ports, in rectification of errors in
Import General Manifests (IGM), in filing of BEs by the Importers, non-mandatory
filing of BEs through ICEGATE, manual registration of licenses with the Custom
houses and in furnishing reply to the queries raised by the department, examination

by other Agencies, payment of duty/refund and or drawback, in filing of Export

General Manifests (EGM) and rectification of errors etc. The Committee were of the
considered view that efficiency at the ports need to be improved by updating
ICEGATE to minimize breakdowns, making e-filing of BEs and EGMs mandatory, full
use of 24x7 facility, pre-clearance of consignments by Custom authorities, opening
running accounts of registered traders, making ACP/AEO schemes user friendly and
rectification of errors easier. The Committee felt that permitting minor amendments in
IGM by the shipping line/shipping agents online instead of going to the service centre

may reduce the dwell time and if the need be provide for amendments to the


8
Customs Act, 1962 for their suitability in smooth handling of cargo at ports for faster
facilitation. The Committee also felt that the Department may consider easing the
procedures to help importers by launching a Mobile App for filing error free
IGM/BE/EGM/SB, uploading scanned documents, allowing rectification of minor

errors, adjustment of excess duty paid due to short landing etc. by opening a wallet.

9. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:

"With regard to the above observations, Committee is of considered view that
efficiency will be enhanced by following measures. Ministry reply against each
measure is given:

(i) Updating ICEGATE to minimize breakdowns- Under 58:08 Project
SAKSHAM, new IT hardware has been commissioned and migration of
C.B.E.C.'s e-services to the new hardware is underway. Once all services
are migrated, disruptions would be minimal. The working of ICEGATE is
being monitored to achieve optimization and minimize the inconvenience
on account of technical glitches and network disruptions.

(ii) | Making e-filing of BEs and EGMs mandatory- Majority of Bills of Entry
are being filed through e-filing. Filing of Bill of Entry through a Service
Centre is an additional facilitation measure.

(iii) Full use of 24x7 facility- CBEC has been making efforts to encourage
importers/exporters to make full use of 24x7 facility. Field formations are
reaching out to the stakeholders to encourage them to optimally make use
of the facility.

(iv) Pre-clearance of consignments by Custom authorities- CBEC intends
to introduce this measure as a trade facilitation measure and an instrument
to reduce dwell time. However, it is felt that prior to introduction of this
measure, thorough discussions are required as introduction of this
measure would entail statutory as well as procedural changes.

(v) Opening running accounts of registered traders- Same reply as (iv)
above.

(vi) Making ACP/AEO schemes user friendly and rectification of errors
easier-

Vide Circular No. 33/2016-Customs dated 22thJuly, 2016, CBEC has
decided to merge the two facilitation schemes namely ACP (Accredited
Client Programme) and AEO (Authorized Economic operator) into a
combined three-tier AEO programme, to enhance the scope of these
programmes so as to provide further benefits to the entities who have
demonstrated strong internal control system and willingness to comply with


(vii)

(viii)

(ix)

(x)

9
the laws administered by the Central Board of Excise and Customs. Now, a
comprehensive unified trade facilitation AEO programme has been
developed by incorporating the existing ACP scheme and ongoing AEO
programme, in the light of international developments, as well as in view of
the focus of the Government of India on “Ease of Doing Business”.

Further regarding rectification of errors, CBEC has taken a number of steps
like issuing notification no. 35/2017-Customs (N.T.) dated 11.04.2017,
decentralizing the minor amendment process by making Superintendent or
Appraiser of Customs as the proper officer, notification no. 36/2017-
Customs (N.T.) dated 11.04.2017 to amend the Levy of Fees (Customs
Documents) Regulations, 1970, levying fees for amendments so that minor
amendments are decided without recourse to adjudication or levy of
penalty and at the same time levy of fee discourage the tendency to file
amendments. However, no amendment fee shall be levied in respect of
advance Bill of Entry, where amendment is necessitated due to
amendment in import manifest. Further, suitable instructions have been
issued for timely approval of amendments.

Permitting minor amendments in IGM by the shipping line/shipping
agents online instead of going to the service centre may reduce the
dwell time- In this regard, steps have already been initiated to cut down
errors in IGM. The board vide circular 14/2017 has notified procedures for
carrying out minor amendments in IGM. The circular mandates that all
minor amendment application are disposed of on the same day of filing the
amendment application and also not resorting to recourse of adjudication
and levy of penalty. In case of major amendments also, it has been
necessitated that the amendment applications are disposed of by 24 hours
else they are escalated to officers at the rank of Joint/Additional
Commissioners.

launching a Mobile App for filing error free IGM/BE/EGM/SB-
Recommendation has been forwarded to Directorate of System for
examination and check the feasibility of recommendation.

uploading scanned documents

Utility for the uploading scanned documents has been developed and it is
currently under testing

allowing rectification of minor errors-

In this regard, CBEC has taken a number of steps like issuing notification
no. 35/2017-Customs (N.T.) dated 11.04.2017, decentralizing the minor
amendment process by making Superintendent or Appraiser of Customs
as the proper officer, notification no. 36/2017-Customs (N.T.) dated
11.04.2017 to amend the Levy of Fees (Customs Documents) Regulations,
1970, levying fees for amendments so that minor amendments are decided


10

without recourse to adjudication or levy of penalty and at the same time fee
is levied to discourage the tendency to file amendments. However, no
amendment fee shall be levied in respect of advance Bill of Entry, where
amendment is necessitated due to amendment in import manifest. Further,
suitable instructions have been issued for timely approval of amendments.

(xi) adjustment of excess duty paid due to short landing etc. by opening a
wallet- As no such provision exist in the Customs Act, 1962, for creation of
running account /wallet, the recommendation would be considered for
amendment in the Customs Act, 1962.

Committee further observed that manual registration of licenses with

the Custom houses, furnishing reply to the queries raised by the

department, examination by other Agencies and payment of

duty/refund and or drawback also result in delays. In this regard,

instructions have been issued to all field formations to ensure that

unwarranted delays are avoided."
10. The Committee opined that efficiency at the ports needs to be improved
by updating ICEGATE to minimize breakdowns, making e-filing of Bill of Entry
(BEs) and Export General Manifests (EGMs) mandatory, full use of 24x7 facility,
pre-clearance of consignments by Custom authorities, opening running
accounts of registered traders, making Accredited Client Programme (ACP)/
Authorized Economic Operator (AEO) schemes user friendly and rectification
of errors easier and felt that permitting minor amendments in
Import General Manifests (IGM) by the ‘shipping line/shipping agents online
instead of going to the service centre may reduce the dwell time. The Ministry
further stated that the Department may consider easing the procedures to help
importers by launching a Mobile App for filing error free
IGM/BE/EGM/Shipping Bill (SB), uploading scanned documents, allowing
rectification of minor errors, adjustment of excess duty paid due to short
landing etc. by opening a wallet. The Committee note that the CBEC has
initiated measures to enhance the efficiency at the ports and that the manual
filing of BE through a Service Centre is an additional facilitation measure. The
Committee desire that internal controls be strengthened for all manual
transactions and 100% internal audit be provided for to ensure that such
transactions have been done on genuine grounds. Further, the Committee note

that migration of CBEC's e-services to the new hardware is underway and


11
desire that the same may be done in a prescribed time frame to minimize

inconveniences to the users.

Mh. Delay in Clearing the Goods by the Importers at Ports
(Recommendation Para No. 5)

41. The Committee noted with apprehension that in JNPT, Mumbai and ACC,
Chennai, nearly 40 per cent of the goods were cleared by the importers beyond the
free period of three days during 2010-11 to 2013-14 adding to the cost of goods as
demurrage charges on the imports. The Committee while opining that any delay on
the part of the importers in clearing the goods should be dealt with by imposing
penalties are of the view that time frames be prescribed for clearing the goods by the
various authorities (Customs, FSSAI, Textiles Committee, plant/animal quarantine,
Drug Controller, Wildlife Control Bureau etc.) and any procedural delays be only

condoned by senior most officers.

12. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have submitted as under:

"In order to address the issue of delayed clearance of goods, beyond free
period of three days, suitable regulations have been framed, making it
mandatory to file the bill of entry before the end of the next day following the
day (excluding holidays) on which the aircraft or vessel or vehicle carrying the
goods arrives at a customs station at which such goods are to be cleared for
home consumption or warehousing. Where the bill of entry is not filed within
the time. and the proper officer of Customs is satisfied that there was no
sufficient cause for such delay, the importer has been made liable to pay
charges for late presentation of the bill of entry. Further, the concerned wing
of CBEC has obtained Service Level Standard (SLS) of Partner Government
Agencies (PGAs). The SLS of the PGAs are being published on the
ICEGATE website for information of the trade." ह

13. The Committee while opining that any delay on the part of the importers
in clearing the goods should be dealt with by imposing penalties had desired
that time frames be prescribed for clearing the goods by the various authorities
(Customs, Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), Textiles
Committee, plant/animal quarantine, Drug Controller, Wildlife Control Bureau
etc.) and any procedural! delays be only condoned by higher authorities. The
Committee note from the reply of the Department that where the BE is not filed
within the time and the proper officer of Customs is satisfied that there was no

sufficient cause for such delay, the importer has been made liable to pay


12 *
charges for late presentation of the Bill of Entry. Further, the concerned wing
of CBEC has obtained Service Level Standard (SLS) of Partner Government
Agencies (PGAs) which are being published on the ICEGATE website for
information of the trade. The Committee are of the view that since all agencies
are functioning under the National Committee on Trade Facilitation (NCTF) for
trade facilitation, the time frames for clearance of goods be fixed for each of
the agency concerned by the NCTF and in addition to publishing of the SLS of
PGAs, a consolidated chart of timelines of all departments/agencies may also
be uploaded on the website. The Committee also desire that provision may be
made for punitive action against the officials of the agencies concerned for not
adhering to the timelines and a statement of such irregularities and the action

taken thereon be placed before the NCTF for their perusal.

IV. Other Factors affecting facilitation
(Recommendation No.8)

14. The Committee were dismayed to note that lack of infrastructure facilities like
port to road connectivity, rail infrastructure to move containers to ICDs and non-
coordination between all the relevant stake holders for improving the infrastructure
were adversely affecting the trade facilitation measures initiated by the Government.
The Committee while acknowledging that the National Committee on Trade
Facilitation (NCTF) has been constituted with representatives from various Ministries/
Departments desired that duplication of efforts should be looked into by the NCTF
and the procedures should be streamlined with no repetitions. The Committee were
of the strong opinion that integration of all procedures and coordination between all
involved should be ensured by the NCTF. The Committee further noted that the 24X7
facility requires that the staff of all the agencies involved are also available round the
clock. The Committee desired that the issue of providing officers of all agencies
involved be also taken up by the NCTF. The Committee also desired that the NCTF
take up the issues relating to the courier industry which provides solution to quick
movement needs of the e-commerce and bring out comprehensive guidelines for
immediate release of consignments by the customs. The Committee were dismayed
to note the lackadaisical approach of Department of Commerce and Ministry of

Textiles in initiating/implementing trade facilitation measures. The Committee desired


13
the Cabinet Secretary to convene meetings of the various Ministries/Departments
regularly besides the meetings of the NCTF to monitor their progress and
contribution. The Committee also desired that the Ministries/Departments/Agencies
involved be pro-active in their approach and put forward all their problems,
suggestions in the meetings of the NCTF and ensure their follow-up. The Committee
desired that the minutes of the meetings of the NCTF be furnished to the Committee

for perusal.

The Committee while noting that the Single Window Interface for Facilitating
Trade has been implemented by the CBEC hoped that all the stakeholders would
work in tandem so that all approvals and clearances are given online without any
manual interventions. The Committee also desired that timeframes may be
prescribed for all the agencies whose approvals are needed mandatorily. The
Committee were of the view that an integrated RMS is essential for all the agencies
also to accord approval within a given timeframe. The Committee while noting that
printouts of the online submissions still need to be presented at the ports were of the
view that all ports be instructed to accept submissions on-line. The Committee also
desired to be apprised whether the CBEC has installed a feedback mechanism on
the operations through SWIFT and the action taken on the feedback received. The
Committee also desired that to minimize inconvenience to the traders and to reduce
transaction costs the software should be adaptable to modifications needed due to
any amendments in the provisions or any feedback received. The Committee while
noting that the intimation of any amendments/changes to the Act/Rules/Procedures/
Duties reaches the ports after a substantial delay desire that the notifications may be
intimated to all the ports on real time basis. The Committee also felt that Customs
and Excise portals be also integrated for factory stuffing permissions, adjusting

duties etc.

The Committee while noting that the Directorate of Revenue Intelligence
(DRI) mandated to deal with the work relating to the collection and study of
information on smuggling activities and the deployment of all anti-smuggling
resources at the all India level under the Central Board of Excise and Customs were
of the view that DRI is also a trade facilitator as initiating measures to prevent illegal
trade eventually facilitates trade. The Committee were, therefore, of the view that

fool-proof procedures be evolved to enhance efficiency of intelligence gathering and


14
application along with a uniform investigation protocol. The Committee were of the

view that the DRI should make use of the latest technology and scientific methods

for detentions/seizures.

Further, with manifold increase in trading across borders, the Committee
observed that the number of disputes and litigations were also set to rise. The
Committee were of the view that the Ministry should have a robust mechanism for
settlement of disputes to minimize litigations. The Committee opined that the Ministry
may think of a separate trade dispute resolution mechanism for expediting the

settlement of trade disputes in a time bound manner.

The Committee noted that the lack of last mile connectivity had adversely
affected India's trade facilitation efforts and the projects facing delay include the
Chennai-Ennore port connectivity project, and the elevated four-lane link road from
Chennai to Maduravoyal. Other issues hampering logistics include lack of rail
infrastructure to move containers to inland container depots (for reasons such as line
congestion, limitations in loading of containers), and lack of feeder network at the
international container transshipment terminal. The Committee were also dismayed
to note the lack of transparency and reasonableness in the various charges levied by

the shipping lines and their agents in export-import (EXIM) trade.

The Committee while noting that Sagar Mala project was a initiative to
modernize the existing Ports into modern world class Ports and integrate the
development of the Ports, the Industrial clusters and hinterland and efficient
evacuation systems through road, rail, inland and coastal waterways resulting in
Ports becoming the drivers of economic activity in coastal areas are of the opinion
that all related projects should be time bound and since most of the projects under
the project are to be based on PPP mode, the interests of the Government should be
secured. The Committee hoped that timely execution of the Sagar Mala project

would improve logistical efficiency, thereby reducing transaction costs.

The Committee were of the considered opinion that freight and other charges
across all the modes of transport should be rationalized to reduce transaction costs.
The Committee observed that shipping lines collect terminal handling charges of the
port authority which is much higher than the actual charges of the port authorities.
Also, the Committee understood that these shipping lines impose arbitrary freight


15
charges making exports unviable in some cases. The Committee were of the view

.that a regulator may be appointed for controlling operations of shipping lines.
Similarly, the Committee opined that Railway freight charges should also not be
increased to subsidize other segments as these hikes make Indian products non-
competitive in the world market. Further, the Committee desired effective measures
may be taken urgently for easing of congestion, improvements in loading capacity

and availability of feeder networks.

The Committee while noting from the submission of Ministry of Textiles that
only in 12 locations, single sign up facility had been given to them, VPN in nine
locations and issuing receipts of samples through the system has started in four
locations desired that the whole process be made on-line at all the locations at the
earliest.

In view of the delays in executing Chennai-Ennore Port Connectivity Project
and Four Lane Elevated Link Road from Chennai to Maduravoyal due to differences
with the State Government, the Committee were of the considered opinion that an
agreement/MoU with State Governments be invariably made before taking up such

projects to avoid disputes at later stages.

15... The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have submitted as under:

"The observations/recommendations also pertain to DoC/DGFT/MoShipping.
However, with regard to observations related to Department of Revenue, it is
stated that at the first meeting of the NCTF held on 28/10/2016, it was
suggested by the Revenue Secretary to do away with the multiplicity of
committees overseeing trade facilitation at various levels and for subsuming all
other such committees in Commerce, Shipping and Civil Aviation Ministries.
The suggestion was endorsed by the Chair and it was decided that henceforth,
NCTF will be the single high level national body for trade facilitation. The
committee will aim for simplification, standardization, harmonization and
integration of all trade related processes and procedures and will attempt to
avoid any duplication in such efforts. In the first meeting of the NCTF held on
28/10/2016, the Cabinet Secretary directed all ministries and governmental
organizations to expedite the actions to simplify the procedures, to reduce time
and costs involved in the procedures, to introduce technology to eliminate
human interaction in routine tasks and to augment infrastructure required for
the processes to run smoothly. He also highlighted it to all agencies that
dissemination of policy changes and procedural reforms is very important in
order to obtain quick results. He had also added that NCTF and Steering
Committee shall be the only fora for reviewing and resolving trade facilitation
issues. NCTF forum should be used for all policy decisions regarding Trade



16

Facilitation whereas Steering Committee may work on operational issues and
implementation of the decisions. All concerned ministries, departments &
agencies are very pro-active in their participation in such meetings, where
issues pertaining to them are put forth and a regular discussion around such
issues takes place amongst the stakeholders. These highlighted issues are
then carefully chronicled in the minutes of the meetings that are then
circulated amongst all stakeholders. As per the directions of the chair, a
regular follow up is mandatory and this is also being routinely followed. In the
second meeting of the NCTF held on 08/06/2017, the Cabinet Secretary
directed that it shall be ensured by all concerned agencies that sufficient staff
strength is available at all designated airports/ports at all times to avoid delay.
In the same meeting. Commerce Secretary who is also the co-chair of the
Steering Committee, the operational arm of NCTF, highlighted the need for
action on issues pertaining to de-minimis rule for courier
imports/exports. These have to be addressed on top-priority as they are
linked to e- commerce deliberations at WTO. The chair also directed that the
Steering committee should monitor all issues raised by stakeholders on
regular basis and the action taken report should be presented in the next
NCTF meeting. The minutes of meeting of the first and the second NCTF
meetings held on 28/10/2016 and 08/06/2017 are attached alongwith. The
Cabinet Secretary has also directed that a single interactive portal may be
developed hosting updated regulatory information related to all government
agencies involved in trade facilitation and necessary IT systems may be put in
place for submission of electronic documents in place of manual documents
and a central repository of original documents may be created in all field
formations of the agencies. For the issue of arbitrary high charges imposed by
the Shipping lines, the Cabinet Secretary has directed that the nexus between
shipping lines and CFS and the issue of excessive charges being levied by
shipping lines may be examined by Ministry of Shipping, Department of
Revenue, Ministry of Commerce and Ministry of Railways for appropriate
action. Further with regard to observations related to efficiency of intelligence
gathering, uniform investigation protocol, dispute resolution etc., it may be
informed that a Task Force has been created by the Central Board of Excise &
Customs with an aim to review old Acts. Separate working group on Dispute
Resolution & Enforcement has also been created under the Task Force. It has
been envisaged that the Task Force would suggest revision in the Acts, Rule
& Regulations which may inter-alia provide enhanced automation of
processes, take care of various initiative of World Customs Organization
including areas like e-commerce, simplify inward and outward processing for
promoting ease of doing business etc. Minutes of first and second meeting of
NCTF are annexed at Annexure-l.

With regard to the recommendation, Directorate General of Foreign
Trade has also furnished following further submissions:

The ease of doing business related issues are always taken up on priority by
the Department of Commerce which coordinates with different departments to
facilitate the implementation of such measures. One example is notifying the
reduction in the number of mandatory documents to three each for exports
and imports. Before implementation of this measure the numbers of


17

documents required were 7 for exports and 10 for imports. Department of

commerce coordinated with Department of Revenue and Ministry of Shipping

to drop additional documents and limit the number to 3 only. All suggestions

made by the Hon'ble Committee for taking up with the NCTF would be

informed to the NCTF Secretariat for inclusion in next NCTF meeting’s

agenda."
16. The Committee, while noting lack of infrastructure facilities like port to
road connectivity, rail infrastructure to move _ containers to
Inland Container Depot (ICDs) and non-coordination between all the relevant
stake holders for improving the infrastructure were adversely affecting the
trade facilitation measures initiated by the Government, made a number of.
suggestions to enhance the effectiveness of trade facilitation measures. The
Committee note from the reply of the Department that NCTF has taken various
measures to ensure ‘ease of doing business’. The Committee are unhappy to
note that the Department has not replied on prescribing a time frame for
clearance of goods by all departments/ agencies involved; development of an
integrated Risk Management System (RMS) which is essential for clearance of
goods within a prescribed time frame; intimation of notifications to all the ports
on real time basis; integration of Customs and Excise portals for factory
stuffing permissions, adjusting duties; delays in executing Chennai-Ennore
Port Connectivity Project and Four Lane Elevated Link Road from Chennai to
Maduravoyal due to differences with the State Government; lack of rail
infrastructure to move containers to inland container depots; and lack of
feeder network at the international container trans shipment terminal. The
Committee desire to be apprised of the action taken by the
Ministries/Departments concerned on the above said issues within one month
of the presentation of the Report to the House.

The Committee acknowledge that the Ministry of Shipping is working on
a new Multimodal Transportation of Goods (MMTG) Bill, 2017, in consultation
with stakeholders in shipping sector, to overcome the constraints of the
existing MMTG Act. The Committee while noting that Department of Commerce
has been allocated the subject matter of ‘integrated development of logistics
sector’, desire that the comments sought by the Ministry of Shipping on the
above Bill may be given at the earliest and the Committee be apprised thereof.

The Committee further desire that a Sub-Group to look into the effectiveness of


18
the measures taken for increasing efficiency at the ports be constituted by the

NCTF which should meet every three months to review and give suggestions
for further improvements. The Sub-Group may also be made responsible for
coordination amongst various agencies whenever any new technology/

infrastructure facilities/other updations are introduced.

डक अंक के कफ फेक जे फेज,