         131 
 
AVOIDABLE PROCUREMENT OF A MOBILE 
NITROGEN GAS GENERATOR PLANT; INFRUCTUOUS 
PROCUREMENT OF MATERIAL; DEVELOPMENT OF 
INTEGRATED AEROSTAT SURVEILLANCE SYSTEM; 
AND IRREGULAR EXPENDITURE ON CONSTRUCTION 
OF VEHICLE TESTING GROUND 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
               
                   
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 


2 
 
 
 
PAC NO. 2170                  
 
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY FIRST REPORT 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(2018 -19)  
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                              
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE  
 
                                         
                                                                                          
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on:  19.12.2018 
 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   19.12.2018 
 
 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
DECEMBER, 2018 /AGRAHAYANA, 1940 (Saka)  
 
 
AVOIDABLE PROCUREMENT OF A MOBILE 
NITROGEN GAS GENERATOR PLANT; INFRUCTUOUS 
PROCUREMENT OF MATERIAL; DEVELOPMENT OF 
INTEGRATED AEROSTAT SURVEILLANCE SYSTEM; 
AND IRREGULAR EXPENDITURE ON 
CONSTRUCTION OF VEHICLE TESTING GROUND 
 

3 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
PAGES 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2018-19)  ……      (iii) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2017-18)  ……           (v) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-I (DEFENCE) OF THE PUBLIC 
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2018-19)                                                        ……           (vii) 
     
INTRODUCTION                                                                                          ……          (ix) 
 
                 
 
PART- I 
1 Introductory 3 
2 Avoidable Procurement of a Mobile Nitrogen Gas Generator Plant 4 
3 Infructuous Procurement of Material 11 
4 Development of an Integrated Aerostat Surveillance System 24 
5 Irregular Sanction and Expenditure of ` 5.20 Crore On Construction of 
Vehicle Testing Ground After Completion of the Project 
34 
 
PART - II 
 
6 Observations/Recommendations 19 
7 Observations/Recommendations 40 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I Minutes of the First Sitting of the Sub -Committee-I (Defence) of Public 
Accounts Committee (2017-18) held on  25th May, 2017. 
 
 
II Minutes of the Nineteenth Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee  
(2018-19) held on 15th November, 2018. 
 
 
III Minutes of the Fourteenth Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee 
(2018-19) held on 7th September, 2018. 
 
 
IV Minutes of the Twenty first Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee  
(2018-19) held on 14th December, 2018. 
 
 

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
 (2018-19) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge   - Chairperson 
  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria  
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra 
5.    Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar   
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
7. Smt. Riti Pathak 
8. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank” 
9. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
10. Shri Abhishek Singh 
11. Shri Gopal Shetty 
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya  
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
15. Dr. Ponnusamy Venugopal 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda 
17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
18. Shri Shwait Malik 
19. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
21. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
22. Shri C.M. Ramesh 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh -  Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Sanjeev Sharma -  Director 
3. Shri Deepankar Kamble -  Committee Officer 

5 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee, having been authorized by the 
Committee, do present this One Hundred and Thirty First Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 
"Avoidable Procurement of a Mobile Nitrogen Gas Generator Plant; Infructuous 
Procurement of Material; Development of Integrated Aerostat Surveillance System; and 
Irregular Expenditure on Construction of Vehicle Testing Ground " based on Para Nos. 6.1 
and 6.2 of the C& AG's Report Nos. 19 of 2016 and 15 of 2017, respectively, relating to the 
Ministry of Defence.  
 
2. The above-mentioned Reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India were laid 
on the Table of the House on 26th July, 2016 and 21st July, 2017, respectively. 
 
3. The Sub -Committee-I (Defence) of the Public Accounts Committee (2017 -18) took up 
the subjects relating to Para Nos. 6.1 and 6.2 of the C&AG's Report No. 19 of 2016 for detailed 
examination and report. The Sub -Committee took evidence of the re presentatives of the 
Ministry of Defence (MoD)  and Defence Research and Development Organization (DRDO) on 
the subjects at their sitting held on 25th May, 2017. However, due to paucity of time, the subjects 
were carried forward to the successor Committee i .e. PAC (2018 -19). The Committee took 
further evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Defence (MoD) and Defence Research 
and Development Organization (DRDO) on the subjects at their sitting held on 15 th November, 
2018. The Committee (2018 -19) took up the subjects relating to Para Nos. 6.1 and 6.2 of the 
C&AG's Report No. 15 of 2017 for detailed examination and report. The Committee took 
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Defence (MoD)  and Defence Research and 
Development Organization (DRDO) on the subjects at their sitting held on 7th September, 2018. 
Accordingly, a draft Report was prepared and placed before the Committee for their 
consideration. The Committee considered and adopted this draft Report at their sitting held on 
14th December, 2018. The minutes of the Sittings are appended to the Report. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in thick type and form Part- II of the Report.   
 
5. The Committe e would also like to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministry of Defence (MoD) and Defence Research and Development Organization (DRDO) for 
tendering evidence before them and furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in 
connection with the examination of the subject.    
 
7. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to them in 
the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India and the Committee 
Secretariat in preparation of the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                 MALLIKARJUN KHARGE                                          
December, 2018                                                                                          Chairperson, 
Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)                                                             Public Accounts Committee. 
        
 

6 
 
 
Part - A  
 
"AVOIDABLE PROCUREMENT OF A MOBILE 
NITROGEN GAS GENERATOR PLAN T" AND 
"INFRUCTUOUS PROCUREMENT OF MATERIAL " 
based on Para Nos. 6.1 and 6.2 of Chapter VI of the 
C&AG's Report No. 19 of 2016 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

7 
 
 
REPORT 
PART I 
 
I. INTRODUCTORY 
1. The Committee selected Chapter VI of the C&AG's Report No.19 of 2016 relating 
to Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) for detailed examination 
and report. This Chapter contains two paragraphs out of which Para 6.1 relates to 
Avoidable Procurement of a Mobile Nitrogen Gas Generator Plant while para 6.2 relates 
to Infructuous Procurement of Material. 
2. The Committee learn that Para 6.1 of Chapter VI of C&AG's Report No. 19 of 
2016 revealed that despite no demand from Army for Nitrogen gas generator plant, 
Combat Vehicles Research & Development Establishment (CVRDE)  Avadi, placed an 
order for development of a mobile Gas Plant, at a cost of Rs. 97.33 lakh. Development 
of Gas Plant by CVRDE was unwarranted as the plant had already been developed by 
the same firm for DRDO in July 2010 and supplied to Defence Research and 
Development Laboratory in January 2011.  
3. Further, the Committee have found that audit Para No. 6.2, which  pertains to 
infructuous procurement of material, reveals that C-103 material did not resist the high 
temperature generated in the scramjet engine .  Scramjet or supersonic combustion 
ramjet is an air breathing jet engine in which high vehicle speed is used to compress the 
incoming air forcefully before combustion in supersonic airflow allowing it to operate 
efficiently at extremely high speeds thus generating very high temperatures in the  range 
of 2227 0C to 2527 0C.  Despite knowing this fact, Defence Research and Development 
Laboratory procured 1329 Kg of C -103 material valuing Rs. 4.83 crore, which was 
unwarranted and eventually proved wasteful. 
4. Against this backdrop, the Sub-Committee-I (Defence) of the Public Accounts 
Committee (2017 -18) obtained background note and requisite replies and some other 
clarifications from the Ministry of Defence (MoD) and Defence Research and 
Development Organisation (DRDO). The Sub -Committee took oral evidence of the 
representatives of the MoD and DRDO on 25.05.2017 and consequently obtained 

8 
 
information on the subject s. However, due to paucity of time, the subject was carried 
forward to the successor Committee i.e. PAC (2018 -19). The PAC (2018 -19), took 
further oral evidence of the representatives of the MoD and DRDO on 15.11.2018 and 
obtained updated information on the subjects. Based on the information gathered, the 
Committee proceeded with examination of the relevant issues in detail as outlined in the 
succeeding chapters. 
Para 6.1 Avoidable Procurement of a Mobile Nitrogen Gas Generator Plant 
5. The Committee found that Combat Vehicles Resear ch & Development 
Establishment (CVRDE), Avadi, in May 2010, projected requirement for pr ocurement of 
mobile Nitrogen gas generator plant to produce Nitrogen gas for use in the Army’s Arjun 
Main Battle Tank (MBT) during operations/trials in the field areas. The procurement was 
to be done so  that during strategic operation s/war scenario, the ga s cylinders would be 
required to be positioned deep in the forward areas/war zone and the requirement could 
not be met by procuring gas cylinders from the open market. 
6. In this sequel, CVRDE placed an order for development of a mobile gas 
generator plant at a cost of Rs. 97.33 lakh, despite there being no demand for nitrogen 
gas generator plant.  Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) in their 
Background Note, furnished to the Committee, stated as under: 
 "Arjun MBT is a flagship product of CVRDE/DRDO  and Nitrogen gas is very 
 important and critical to keep the Arjun MBT in war -fit condition, necessary for 
 achieving cushioning effect, for the functioning of the braking system under 
 dynamic condition and to keep  the Gunners Main Sight moisture free. 
 Unavailability of Nitrogen gas will affect both the mobility and firing capabilities, 
 which are all mission critical features of the tank. Nitrogen gas requirement can 
 be met from open market of the near -by area on ly during peace time. However, 
 during war scenario, there won’t be any open market at war zone, so,  if the tank 
 moves inside the enemy territory, it would be impossible to locate the source for 
 the gas at hand." 
7. The Committee wanted to know whether DGMF had placed any order on CVRDE 
for procuring bulk quantity of the gas plant to meet it's requirement during strategic 
operations/war scenario and whether the Government had accorded approval to DGMF 

9 
 
for its units to h old a vehicle mounted gas plant.  The Chairman, DRDO, while deposing 
before the Committee stated: 
"Hon. Chairman, the DGMF is known to using the existing T -90 and T -72 tanks 
which do not have hydro pneumatic type of suspension which is the latest.  Even 
today and in the future, this type of s uspension is expected to be used.  Spring 
based suspension used in T -90 and T -72 cannot give the crew comfort.  
Therefore, the Arjun suspension is nitrogen filled.  Having got the newer 
suspension, they were not totally aware at that point of time when we launched 
that it requires nitrogen gas which is needed to be replenished as and when it is 
required.  It is true that we can have it in a bottle but  in a war scenario, it may not 
be possible to mobilize wherever the tank goes.  It has to be close to a gro up of 
tanks.  That is the intent  with which we did it.  In all these designs, user will not 
come and tell us what exactly is needed, are to be decided by us, designed by us  
and provided by us.  We did only one gas plant which was enough for the entire 
regiments.  So always whenever the DRDO funding is given, the first piece is 
made and for that neither we get any order from the DGMF nor any money from 
them because they are not having any advance knowledge of our system.  If they 
have not asked, because th ey may not even be aware of it.  But subsequently, 
when they came for the training, after the decision given by the Steering 
Committee through DGMF they have agreed.  All the aspects were looked into 
and all the user has agreed.  I believe the minutes of t he Committee also stated 
that it is a requirement.  It is being used now by Army.  As regards placing an 
order, for DRDO funding, they do not place any order for the first piece but when 
it is needed in a large quantity, they go to the production agency an d place an 
indent.  As regards ground based or a permanently fixed installation to a mobile 
installation, our thinking is that mobile installation is needed because we do not 
know where two regiments are going to exploit the tank.  During war tanks may 
go to various places.  At that time, we will be told that it is not moving sometimes, 
Army is going to a far away place from town and they can fill up the bottle like 
any other gas but during war time, coming and going may not be a viable 
solution.  That is t he reason, we provided  one unit of this mobile generation 
station.  As we said, 40 bottles are there and each bottle can completely fill up 
the two suspensions.  So, one is more than enough for many of the tanks.  
Initially, we were not totally clear abou t the deployment pattern, so we talked to 
Army and they gave id and also it is needed in the emergency gas should be 
produceable in the war zone.  It was an oral statement.  Always this type of 
statement finally getting into a specifications sometime we ne ed to make a 
prototype to get the approval.  Today, an approval is there.  The steering 
Committee has given the approval and the unit is being used by Army." 
8. The Committee further found that in November 2011, CVRDE placed an order on 
M/s GEM Pressure Systems for supply of vehicle mounted mobile Gas Plant at a cost of 
Rs. 97.33 lakh and was taken on charge in August 2012.  However, in September 2015, 

10 
 
it was noticed that even after a lapse of three years, the Gas Plant was held in CVRDE 
and thus, not being used for the intended purpose in the field areas/operations. 
9. Replying to Audit's contention on the above, DRDO, in their Action Taken Note, 
submitted as under: 
  "…only one plant was proposed to be developed as an experimental vehicle to 
 ascertain the  feasibility of its use.  Further to the Order, CVRDE received the 
 Mobile nitrogen plant during August 2012.  After subjecting, the unit for 
 performance evaluation and consistency in generation of nitrogen, the final 10% 
 payment was cleared on 17.03.201 4 on satisfactory functioning of the plant.  
 Since the receipt of the plant, the Nitrogen gas was being regularly generated 
 using the plant, as a part of its performance evaluation, in CVRDE and the gas 
 being used for support of various activities of CV RDE for development of Arjun 
 MBT Mk -II, maintenance & support of MK -I tanks held at CVRDE, testing of 
 suspension units and other sub -systems.  Although this was an exploration & 
 development exercise as stated in above mentioned EPC paper, CVRDE 
 proposed to hand over the plant to  Army, as the performance of the plant was 
 found to be good and consistent in compliance to the decision of XIIth Steering 
 Committee.  Accordingly, CVRDE requested Army to designate the agency for 
 the same, vide Letter No. CV RDE/ARJUN/PMA/47 dated 28th August, 2014.  For 
 which, DG MF agreed and confirmed that the  Nitrogen generator vehicle was to 
 be taken over by 140 Armd Bde [246 Armd Workshop], vide Letter No. 
 A/36026/MBTGen/GS/IP(AC) dt. 3 rd September, 2014. Further, it may be noted 
 that the plant is a combination of different sub -systems namely -Nitrogen 
 generation unit, diesel operated generator, air compressor, high pressure 
 booster, high pressure gas cylinders, storage fitment, etc., wh ich requires proper 
 training and understanding of the functioning of the system to the operating 
 members. For which, to the CVRDE initiation vide Letter No 
 CVRDE/ARJUN/PMA/47 dt. 8 th December, 2014, Army nominated their 
 personnel from 246 Armd Workshop  vide Letter No. 70301/MBT/Wksp dt. 23 
 Dec., 2014 and got trained.  In this process, the training has also been imparted 
 to EME and Armoured workshop besides CVRDE members and also its regular 
 usage at CVRDE.  In the mean time, CVRDE has already taken u p the initiative 
 and got the BA No. for the vehicle on 14.9.2015 [vide Army DGIS No. 
 B/28262/GS/MISO/TMS/BA No. dated 2 nd Sept. 2015 and DRDO HQrs Letter 
 No. DHRD/92481/CVRDE/BA/C/M/02 dated 14 th Sept 2015], as the BA No. was 
 necessary for forwarding t he vehicle to field area. After completing all the 
 subsequent formalities, the Army crew from 246 Armoured Workshop visited 
 CVRDE and collected the vehicle vide Issue Voucher No. IV/EXT/MM/B -up 
 RG/Loan/03 dated 29 th April 2016.  As of now, the vehicle h as already reached 
 246 Armd Workshop [140 Armd Brigade], Jaisalmer, Rajasthan, and being 
 utilized for further experimentation and exploitation in the field area. The 246 
 Armd Wksp confirmed that the Army received the plant and it is in serviceable 

11 
 
 condition as on date. Further, it is stated hereby that the plant was under 
 continuous usage for the above purposes as long as it was in CVRDE." 
10. The Committee found that DRDO stated that being a research and develo pment 
organization, CVRDE was required to visualize and develop state of the art system that 
would be advantageous in use of Armoured Fighting Vehicles. However, the 
procurement of the Gas Plant was  not a developmental activity and t he plant had 
already been developed by the same firm for DRDO in  July 2010 and two such plants 
were supplied to Defence Research and Development Laboratory  (DRDL) in January 
2011. The Gas Plant was also demonstrated to the CVRDE scientist s who visited the 
Firm’s premises in July 2011 before placing of the supply order by CVRDE in November 
2011. The integration, installation and assembly of components were well positioned as 
the Gas Plant was already developed for DRDO to meet the strategic requirement of the 
users and it was to be mounted on a vehicle. 
11. DRDO, while c larifying their stand on the issue above submitted through written 
note as under: 
 "It was felt that there would be a need for strategic support vehicle, which shall 
 be incorporated with all the self sufficient sub -systems for the generation of 
 nitrogen gas from the atmosphere, and also on a military class chassis, so 
 as to have comparable mobility to move along with the Army during the war. 
 With this objective in mind, an experimental vehicle was developed and 
 demonstrated after due lab scale evaluation. While there were issues with the 
 initial acceptance by the Army after experimentation, exploitation and utilisation 
 at CVRDE, the  vehicle was handed over to Army 246 Armoured Workshop, 140 
 Armoured Brigade, d uring the year 2016, after giving adequate training to the 
 Army  personnel and completing all the purchase formalities & acceptance of the 
 vehicle. Vide Letter No. 70301/MBT/Inst/Wksp dated 23rd Aug 2016, the 246 
 Armoured Workshop confirmed that the Arm y received the plant and it is in 
 serviceable condition as on date. In addition to the above, the Armoured 
 Workshop recently confirmed that the plant was in working condition and useful 
 for the workshop vide Letter No. 70301/MBT Arjun/Wksp dt.  20 Feb 20 17. 
 Further, they have stated that the plant was being continually utilized for the 
 generation of Nitrogen gas for the maintenance & upkeeping of Arjun MBT fleet." 
12. In this regard, DRDO further informed the Committee as under: 
 "the same firm had already developed the plant for DRDO in July 2010, it is 
 clarified that the Nitrogen plant ordered by DRDL & CVRDE were different. The 
 nitrogen plant developed for DRDL was for the Lab [in -house] usage on a Static 

12 
 
 Platform, with bare m inimum support system air dryer, nitrogen generator, 
 receiver and booster system, with maximum pressure of 150 bar to charge the 
 commercial/industrial gas cylinders with working pressure of 150 bar. Whereas, 
 the mobile nitrogen plant conceptualized and developed for CVRDE is different 
 from the above plant. The latter plant was developed on military class - Ashok 
 Leyland Stallion Chassis for the first time to meet matching mobility requirements 
 of the Armoured Regiments of the Army. In addition, the en tire plant was 
 visualized for self sustaining angle and provided with Diesel operated power 
 generator and air compressor, so as to perform its function of nitrogen gas 
 generation independently. The high pressure operating conditions necessitates 
 fully integrated high pressure piping and handling of 300 bars, including their 
 inherent safety aspects." 
13. The Committee were concerted to learn that w hen enquired about the possible 
induction of the Gas Plant into service as a strategic maintenance vehicle for Armoured 
regiments, the Director General Mechanised Forces (DGMF), in December 2013 stated 
that their directorate was not pursuing any plan for acquisition of Gas Plant. It was 
further stated that the procurement of Gas Plant was an internal decision of CVRDE and 
Army had not given its concurrence or requisition for procurement of the Gas Plant. 
DGMF also stated that Nitrogen gas cylinders we re authorised to Armoured Regiments 
for maintenance of MBT Arjun and the requirement  for refilling of the  cylinders wa 
carried out through the Ordnance factories channel. 
14. It was also informed to the Committee that t he DG MF (Army) was the u ltimate 
user of the Gas Plant a s the procurement of the Gas Plant was to meet Army’s use 
during strategic operation/war scenario. the Committee sought to know why the Army’s 
requirement of the Gas Plant was not ascertained before procuring the same. In their 
written submissions to the Committee, DRDO submitted as under: 
 "The mobile nitrogen gas plant was developed/procu red as support vehicle for 
 MBT Arjun Main Battle Tank [Arjun MBT] as Technology Demonstrator by DRDO 
 for maintenance & sustenance of MBT. It is the responsibility of DRDO to 
 visualise & develop the defence system(s)/equipment(s)/support vehicles, which 
 would provide advantageous features of maintenance of Arjun MBT during field 
 operation and considering certain real time war scenario. The Mobile Nitrogen 
 Generation Plant was housed on a military class vehicle [In -service Ashok 
 Leyland Stallion Chassis] to have matching mobility with MBT. The entire gas 
 plant was visualized for self sustaining angle and provided with Diesel operated 
 power generator, so as to perform its function of nitrogen gas generation 
 independently in remo te areas of the operations. Further, 40 Nos. of high 

13 
 
 pressure gas bottles/cylinders with working pressure of 300 bar were provided, 
 exclusively to meet the charging pressure requirement of 14 Nos of Hydro -gas 
 Suspension Unit [HSU] of each Arjun MBT in order to keep up the mission critical 
 mobility conditions. Nitrogen gas is required for mobility of tank i.e. for the 
 functioning of braking system under dynamic condition and to keep Gunner’s 
 main sight moisture free. These are the state of the art feat ures which are latest 
 in the World are not being used in the other Tanks currently held in the inventory 
 of the Army.  An attempt was made to develop altogether new support vehicle 
 with tailor -made specifications considering the maintainability requirem ents of 
 Arjun MBT. As this was an exploratory exercise, the experimental vehicle was 
 done by DRDO independently as a Technology Demonstrator. However, on 
 successful completion, the case was reviewed in XIth Steering Committee under 
 the Chairmanship of Secretary [DP] and decided that DRDO was to transfer the 
 N2 generation vehicle to Army for maintenance of the tanks. CVRDE proposed to 
 hand over the plant to Army for further evaluation, as the performance of the 
 plant was found to be good and consisten t in compliance to the decision of XIth 
 Steering Committee. Accordingly, DG MF agreed and confirmed that the 
 Nitrogen generator vehicle was to be taken over by 140 Armd Bde [246 Armd 
 Workshop], vide Letter No. A/36026/MBT Gen/GS/IP(AC) dt. 3rd Sept., 20 14. 
 After completing initial experimentation, exploitation and training of Army 
 personal at CVRDE, the vehicle was dispatched to Army 246 Armoured 
 Workshop, 140 Armd Brigade, during the year 2016." 
15. The Committee sought to know the reasons for procur ement as Army had 
categorically stated that they d id not require any Nitrogen Gas Generator Pla nt as their 
requirement of gas was met through the Ordnance channel through procurement. In this 
connection, DRDO clarified as under: 
 "Although the Army stated earlier that the gas requirement was met through the 
 Ordnance channel through procurement from open market before the issue of 
 the plant, the importance of requirements of the Nitrogen gas in order to keep the 
 Arjun MBT in war -fit condition, the need fo r the plant and the issues related to 
 sourcing through the open market under ordnance channel. It may kindly be 
 noted that the Hydro-gas Suspension Unit [HSU] is provided in Arjun MBT, as leg 
 & foot for the tank to support its static load and as well as  provide cushioning 
 effect under dynamic conditions.  Total 14 HSU stations are provided in each 
 Arjun MBT.  This HSU system works on with the two important working medium 
 viz. SAE 10W30 Oil and Nitrogen Gas.  Under the working conditions, any load 
 or undulation due to road/terrain/off -road interactions of the vehicle is getting 
 transferred through Track, Roadwheel, Axle arm & other mechanical linkages to 
 the oil inside the HSU actuator cylinder, which in -turn through damper & 
 accumulator cylinder/piston arrangement to the nitrogen gas, which acts as gas 
 spring under pressurised condition for the reactive force.  As such, the Load 
 bearing capability of the Hydro -gas suspension Unit [HSU] of Arjun MBT Mk -I  
 directly depends on the nitrogen gas press ure in the accumulator cylinder of the 

14 
 
 HSU, which is generally maintained at around 180 bar in static condition of the 
 tank.  Under the circumstances, leakages of the gas, if any, would lead to the 
 immobile condition for the tank.  Further, the charging  of the gas is an important 
 procedure to be followed for the replacement of HSU during repair/maintenance.  
 In addition to the above, the nitrogen gas purging is also done in Brake 
 accumulator of hydraulic - brake control of automatic  transmission syst em.  Any 
 loss or unavailability of the nitrogen gas in the system would lead to complete 
 failure of brake system of the vehicle.  Further, the nitrogen gas is also required 
 to be charged in the Gunner Main Sight [GMS]  chamber, in order to keep it free 
 from moisture/water particles, so as to have good visibility and accuracy during 
 the firing." 
16. DRDO through their written replies further informed the Committee as under: 
 "Nitrogen gas is very important for up-keeping of the tank, as its unavailability will 
 affect both the mobility and firing capabilities, which are all mission critical 
 features of the tank.  At the same time, CVRDE would like to re-iterate  again that 
 the nitrogen gas requirement can be met from open market of the near -by area 
 during the peace time, as being done now through ordinance channel.  Further, 
 in the DGMF Letter No. A -36026/MBTGen/GS/IP (AC) dated 17.12.2013 
 addressed to the Dy. Director of Audit, it was mentioned that the Ordnance Depot 
 receives its supplies of Nitrogen gas from Jodhpur Gas Agency, Indus trial Area 
 Boranada, Jodhpur. However, during war scenario, there won't be  any open 
 market at war zone. If the tank moves inside the enem y territory, it  would be 
 impossible to locate the source for the gas at those places.  Under the 
 circumstances, it was felt that there would be a need for strategic support 
 vehicle, which shall be incorporated with all the self sufficient sub -systems for the 
 generation of nitrogen gas from the atmosphere, and also on a military class 
 chassis, so as to have comparable/matching mobility to move along with the 
 Army during the war.  With this objective, in mind, an experimental vehicle was 
 developed and demonstrated after due lab scale evaluation.  As this 
 development exercise has been done for the strategic application and found to 
 be acceptable, the vehicle has already been to the Army after completing all the 
 formalities. 
17. With the Army showing n o interest in the Nitrogen Gas Generation Plant 
developed by CVRDE, the Committee sought to know whether the developmental 
activity, undertaken on exper imental basis, proved wasteful.  Clarifying its position,  
DRDO informed as under: 
 "CVRDE proposed to h and over the plant to Army, as the performance of the 
 plant was found to be good and consistent in compliance to the decision of XIIth 
 Steering Committee, after a due deliberation with the user.  Subsequently, Army 
 has already designated its agency [140 Armd Bde - 246 Armd Workshop], got 
 trained their personnel and collected the vehicle.  As of now, the vehicle is being 
 utilised by the 246 Armd Workshop [140 Armd Brigade] in the field area.  It is 

15 
 
 understood from the recently visited CVRDE team to the field area that the plant 
 is under continuous usage and utilisation by the Army Unit - 246 Armd 
 Workshop, which provides comprehensive engineering & maintenance support to 
 the two Arjun MBT Regiments [43 & 75 Armoured Regiments] of the Army.  
 Further, it is reiterated hereby  that the plant was under continuous usage earlier 
 for the above purposes as long as it was in CVRDE. Therefore, the 
 development/procurement done through open tender basis was not wasteful." 
Para 6.2 Infructuous Procurement of Material 
18. A Technology Demonstration Project was sanctioned by Defence Research and 
Development Organisation (DRDO) in March 2001  for ‘Design and Development of 
Hypersonic Technology Demonstrator Vehicle’ (HSTDV) by Defence Research an d 
Development Laborat ory (DRDL). DRDL undertook a feasibility study in September 
2003, which included a study on design and development of scramjet  engine. The study 
found that the temperature encountered in the scramjet engine combustor was of the 
range equivalent to 2227 -2527oC. DRDL therefore identified two high temperature 
resistant materials viz Nimonic C -263 and Niobium C -103, for possible use in the 
development of the engine. DRDL found that C -263 was the suitable material which 
could sustain for 20 seconds flight durati on. The maximum temperature resistance 
capability for C-103 material was found to be 1200 oC, which could be enhanced only up 
to 1370oC through coating technique.   
19. Taking note of the background of the subject, the Committee also found that i n 
September 2005, Ministry of Defence sanctioned a project for ‘Development of Scramjet 
Engine and Engine Integrated Airframe’ at an estimated cost of Rs. 48.65 crore as part 
of the HSTDV project, to be taken up by DRDL , Hyderabad. The aim of the project was 
to desig n, fabricate and carry out testing of scramjet engine. Scramjet engine is 
subjected to very high temperature . DRDL identified C-103 material as High 
Temperature Resistant Material (HTRM) for inner layer of the engine and C -263 for the 
outer layer. Requireme nt of C -103 material, which has a shelf life of 10 years, was 
accordingly projected for development of five scramjet engines. However, keeping in 
view the anticipated design changes and high cost involved, the Special Purchase 
Committee (SPC) held in May 2 006 recommended procurement of C -103 material for 
development of only three scramjet engines. In July 2007, DRDL accordingly procured a 

16 
 
quantity of 1329 Kg of HTRM worth Rs. 4.83 crore which was received between 
October 2007 and October 2008. A quantity of  3660 Kg of C -263 material was also 
procured between December 2007 and February 2008 at a cost of Rs. 1.76 crore, for 
use in the project. 
20. Throwing light on the above observation, in their Background Note, furnished to 
the Committee, DRDO stated as under: 
  "C-103 material procured was intended to be used for fabrication of single 
 module-double wall Scramjet engine. The material was procured after the 
 recommendations of two experts committee under the Chairmanship of Dr. AR 
 Acharya, Group Director , VSSC and Dr.  Baldev Raj, Director, IGCAR, 
 Kalpakkam during scramjet engine design and fabrication reviews. The 
 committees had cleared the design and fabrication methodology using C -103 
 materials. C-103 is a strategic material being widely used in the international 
 scenario for high temperature and high speed engine development programmes 
 for which the lead time in procurement is high. Hence, conscious decision was 
 taken to procure C-103 material." 
21. It was observed in March 2012 that the feasibility study carried out in 2003 had 
specifically brought out that C -103 material can resist temperature only up to 1370 0C 
whereas the temperature generated in the scramjet engine combustor would range up 
to 2527 0C. Despite this known limitations, DRDL procured 1329 Kg of C -103 material. 
During the process of development, DRDL used only 107 Kg of the C -103 material and 
found that it could not withstand the high temp erature beyond five seconds and 
therefore, the balance material was not further used. W hen enquired about the 
justification f or procurement of the material, DRDO HQ stated that due to severe 
oxidation problem/change in engine combustor design, C -103 material could not be 
used and C -263 material alone has been used for the scramjet engine development. 
although usage of C-103 material has limitation as the temperature experienced is more 
than 2300 oC, yet considering the ground test data it was expected that the same ha d 
potential for longer duration tests of the order of 100 seconds and 200 seconds with 
suitable anti-oxidation coating techniques. 
22. The Committee wanted to know whether procurement of material was 
unwarranted and which eventually proved wasteful  expenditure.  In this regard,  the 
Director-DRDL during evidence stated as under: 

17 
 
"The temperature in the engine is of the order of 2,500 degrees because the hot 
flame is actually coming out of the engine.  But even though the gas temperature 
is 2,500 degrees, the metal temperature will be around 1,000 degr ees for the 20 
second duration.  It takes time for  the metal to heat up.  So, it is still not a wrong 
decision to select this material.  Even now the temperature predicted will be 
1,000 degrees and this material will withstand.  But after procuring the ma terial, 
when we attempted to use this material for fabrication, we got into a number of 
fabrication issues.  The original design was to have an external structural layer of 
C-263 with C-103 inside which is exposed to the heat.  The combination of these 
two materials have faced some welding problem.  This has never been done 
earlier.  This material has to be given silicide coating without which the properties 
were going to drop.  This coating application process was not readily available for 
this configuration" 
23. He also stated: 
"Sir, I still say that 2,500 degrees is the gas temperature.  Maybe our people 
were unable to clarify the technical point to the Audit.  The gas temperature is 
2,500 degrees, but the material which is holding that gas is not crossin g 1,000 or 
1,100 degree centigrade.  So this material is still valid and even in the world 
nowhere there is a material which can withstand this kind of 2,500 degree 
centigrade temperature." 
24. The Committee did note that DRDL was aware that C -103 material  had 
limitations to resist high temperature encountered in the scramjet engine combustor. 
Yet, it procured the C -103 material, which eventually proved wasteful. Besides, the 
Project proposal envisaged flight tests of short duration of 20 seconds, for which  the 
material has failed, hence the possible usage of C -103 material for a longer duration 
flight tests of 100 seconds and 200 seconds was unlikely.   
25. On the point that C-103 material had failed flight tests of 20 seconds  short 
duration and the subsequent decision to use the material  for longer duration flight tests 
of 100 seconds and 200 seconds , Director-DRDL, during oral evidence, submitted as 
under: 
"In May, 2006 only design was completed at that stage. The first time this 
material came to ou r country under this procurement was in 2008. There was no 
material existing with us. This was the first procurement. It was never procured 
earlier to this. For longer duration, you have to go for new technology." 
 

18 
 
26. Supplementing the above, Scientific A dvisor to the Prime Minister, during 
evidence stated: 
"We procured the material for three engines only. We procured the material 
required for only three engines, not more than that. What we are trying to do is, 
we make one proto type, one qualification unit and one flight unit." 
27. Taking note of the fact that the design was not finalized and tested and the 
feasibility study revealed that C -263 was the suitable material, the necessity of 
procuring huge quantity of C -103 material worth Rs. 4.83 crore was questioned by the 
Committee.  In this connection, DRDO through written reply, intimated as under: 
 "Initially, the preliminary design of Scramjet engine was carried out considering 
 two approaches – Single Wall & Double Wall type construction. For achieving the 
 required design with single wall type construction resulted into heavy weight 
 penalty. Hence, double wall type construction was considered and it was found 
 that double wall construction for weight optimum design with stri ngent constraints 
 of deflec tion and allowabl e stress is a feasible solution (Report 
 no.DRDL/DOFS/ASD/HSTDV-01/18 dated 13 th July 2004). Subsequently, a 
 single module double wall configuration of size 550 mm width X 250 mm height X 
 2885 mm length with C -103 Niobium based alloy and  C-263 Nimonic alloy as 
 outer wall was analysed and design finalised. Among all refractory materials, 
 Niobium alloys (C -103 is one of the Niobium alloys) were found to be ductile, 
 lighter weight, possessing good fabricability . C -103 material for the combustor 
 chamber of the scramjet engine is a reliable material for high temperature 
 application."  
28. DRDO, also through written reply  further furnished as under:  
 "Small quantities of C-103 material of thickness 1.7mm (15kg) available ex -stock 
 at M/s MIDHANI and 3mm thickness (2.34kg) available with M/s GCL chemicals, 
 Coimbatore was procured in Oct, 2004 . This small quantity of material was used 
 for evaluation tria ls at coupon level and data generation for design. Detailed 
 Design and thermo -structural analysis of double wall Scramjet engine was 
 carried out by Structures Group  (DOFS), DRDL and independently verified by 
 Design Experts at IGCAR, Kalpakkam in October 2007. A committee was formed 
 in 2007 to review Thermo -structural design of Scram jet Engine with leading 
 experts from various organisations under the Chairmanship of Dr. AR Acharya, 
 well known structural expert from ISRO. This committee reviewed and cle ared 
 the design of double walled construction of Scramjet Engine using C -103 & C -
 263 materials for further fabrication." 
 

19 
 
29. DRDO further submitted in a post-evidence reply that:  
 "manufacturing process was also studied in parallel at DRDL and finalise d 
 process has been presented and discussed with the scientists of various expert 
 organizations across the country in the field like IGCAR -Kalpakkam, VSSC -
 Thiruvananthapuram, LPSC -Bangalore, LPSC -Thiruvananthapuram, NFTDC, 
 Hyderabad, IUAC -Delhi, GTRE -Bangalore, MIDHANI -Hyderabad etc. and input 
 from them has been used in this Engine development. A committee was formed 
 in 2007 to review and recommend the manufacturing methodology and 
 suggested to start fabrication of engine immediately after receiving the qualified 
 material. The experts committee  advised to look into critical technological areas 
 such as explosive bonding of Niobium base C -103 and Nimonic C -263 alloys, 
 Electron Beam Welding, Laser Welding, large size vacuum heat treatment, anti -
 oxidation silicide coating, etc as these are being developed for the first time in the 
 country for C-103 alloy." 
30. DRDO, while explaining the merit behind the procurement of the material, 
through written reply stated as under: 
 "C-103 is a strategic material being widely used in the international scenario for 
 high temperature Scramjet engine development programmes for which the lead 
 time in procurement is high. Hence, concise decision was taken to procure C-103 
 material. C-103 material was procured by Oct 2008 for 3 sets of Scramjet Engine 
 development. Welding trials such as TIG welding, Electron Beam Welding were 
 carried out. As these two materials are dissimilar it resulted in the for mation of 
 brittle intermetallic compounds in the weld joints. Hence, this scheme did not 
 meet the requirement.  As an alternate approach, the diffusion and explosive 
 bonding were carried out to bond C -103 & C-263. Out of this, explosive bonding 
 was found to be suitable at coupon level. Several complexities were encountered 
 to manufacture full scale Scramjet engine because of large shape and size 
 (rectangular cross section, length 2.8m, width 550mm), joining complexities, 
 requirement of large size vacu um heat treatment facility, inadequate 
 manufacturing facilities. Hence, fabrication of full scale engine using C -103 and 
 C-263 was foun d to be complex and difficult. At this juncture, complexities in 
 fabrication & coating issues for development of Scram jet engine using C -103 & 
 C-263 were being addressed. In the meantime, an alternate approach was 
 considered by introducing middle wall thereby modifying the existing double 
 walled single module design to two module -single wall construction using C -263 
 alone."  
31. DRDO also through post-evidence reply submitted that: 
  "Mid-course technical design changes are very much a part of design and 
 development process.  This modified design has reduced the stresses and 
 deflections as the width of engine is redu ced from 550mm to less than 225mm.  
 The two module engine configuration using C -263 also meets the design 

20 
 
 requirements, in spite of C -263 being inferior to C -103 in terms of thermal 
 properties. It may be noted that C -263 has been considered for limited short 
 duration of 20 seconds for present HSTDV mission, however for long duration 
 flight (about 600 sec), C -103 along with regenerative cooling will be a better 
 option. For present HSTDV mission, based on this modified design, the Scramjet 
 engine has b een fabricated using C -263 alone and more than 60 ground tests 
 have been conducted successfully. The flight worthy Scramjet engine has been 
 realized (weight=330kg) and thermo -structurally qualified. Hence, C-103 material 
 could not be utilised for the fabrication of Scramjet engine for the present HSTDV 
 programme. However, it has been gainfully utilised for establishing technologies 
 such as explosive bonding, Electron Beam welding, Laser Beam Welding and 
 Oxidation resistant coating trials as a part of HSTDV demonstration project to 
 develop advance technologies for future programmes. The technologies using C -
 103 material for the development of Scramjet engine have been successfully 
 established and can be used for long duration Scramjet engine development." 
32. During oral evidence, the Committee sought to know if the material was found 
suitable then why it was not used for its intended purposes . The Director-DRDL in this 
regard submitted as under: 
"It was because when we saw there were manufacturing li mitations such as in 
the form of welding or dissimilar material, that was taking time.  Then, we had to 
develop the laser welding technique.  Then, silicide coating development was 
taking time.  Then, an alternate design was developed with two modules. 
Originally it was designed with a single module and later on it was made into two 
module engine.  Once you design with a two module engine, the stresses had 
come down.  Even C-263 was meeting the requirement.  So we went ahead with 
that. The objective was to make the engine.  A simpler material C -263 was 
meeting the requirement for short duration with the configuration design change." 
33. The Committee took note of the fact that as per feasibility study of  Hypersonic 
Technology Demonstrator Vehicle ( HSTDV), the long duration flight tests would require 
materials with superior high temperature capability, good thermal stability and high 
oxidation resistance. It was seen that 146 Kg of C -103 material was transferred to 
DMRL, Hyderabad for development of oxidat ion resistant coating. They wanted to know 
whether oxidation resistant coating was developed and tested with C-103 material for its 
sustainability to high temperatur e in long duration flight tests.  DRDO repl ying to the 
Committee's queries through written reply intimated as under: 
"…the oxidation resistance coating technology has  been developed and tested 
with C-103 material for its sustainability to high temperature in long duration flight 
tests at DMRL. DMRL has carried out extensive testing using C -103 ma terial 

21 
 
supplied by DRDL and developed oxidation resistance coating using slurry 
deposition method and Pack carburising methods. The oxidation resistant silicide 
coating using slurry deposition method has been developed with C -103 material 
and the same can be adopted to high temperature in long duration flight tests (of 
about 600 sec)." 
34. The Committee desired to know w hether long duration project ha d been 
sanctioned and whether C-103 material had been found suitable at high temperature for 
long duration flight tests . In response, DRDO through post -evidence reply, DRDO 
submitted:  
"…presently HST DV mission for 20 sec duration wa s being pursued and flight 
test scheduled before the end of this year. However, feasibility studies for L ong 
duration hypersonic flight we re being carried out at DRDL in parallel. The 
proposals had been discussed during the apex board meetings and the project 
proposal would be submitted after finalisation of mission and confi guration. From 
the design and experimental studies, it is found that C -103 material is suitable for 
long duration mission with regenerative cooling for scramjet engine application." 
35. The Committee learnt that out of 1329 Kg of HTRM received, 616 Kg valu ing Rs. 
2.25 crore was held as of August 2015. The Committee sought to know w hether this 
quantity had been gainfully utilised and for what purpose . DRDO in response, through 
written reply, informed as under: 
 "DOAMP, DRDL had established welding methodology for dissimilar materials by 
 conducting various experimental trials and establishing the welding 
 characteristics of C -103 alloy for EB Welding, Laser Welding etc. including the 
 post weld heat treatment procedures in vacuu m atmosphere and surface 
 engineering treatments. Propulsion group  (DOLP) of DRDL wa s involved in the 
 development of different types of long duration thrusters (burn time 100 seconds) 
 for programmes of Missile Complex. DOLP, DRDL ha d established the 
 fabrication process and methodology for fabrication of thrusters components 
 using C-103. Out of 616 kg, 247.25 kg ha d been gainfully utilised and out of the 
 balance ma terial of 368.75 kg, 208.75 kg wa s already under consumption at 
 various stages of manufac turing/testing of thrusters components. The balance 
 material of 160 kg wa s available at DRDL which was planned to be utilised for 
 development of Scramjet engine for long duration Hypersonic mission." 
36. During oral evidence, Director-DRDL, supplementing the above, stated: 
"Sir, over the last four years, we used this material to establish the various 
manufacturing technologies. Now, we have established the Welding 
Technologies; we have established the Coating Technologies.  We feel, now, 
that this materia l is suitable for long duration engines in future work.  In the 

22 
 
meantime, we also had a requirement to use this material for another project -
Ballistic Missile Programme, where we have successfully, with this material, 
tested it for 125 seconds.  So, whatev er material has been procured, as of now, 
around 88 per cent of it has been used in various R&D activities to develop the 
technologies required for the future and also for some products for the Ballistic 
Missile Programme. In our various Groups, it is done." 
37. Supplementing the above, Chairman-DRDO, during oral evidence, also stated: 
"The remaining per cent is also being utilized.  It is already in the pipeline in 
various activities. We will submit the report showing the utilization of the 
material." 
38. The Committee were of the view that procurement of C-103 material valuing Rs. 
4.83 crore for development of scramjet project was unwarranted and proved wasteful 
and wanted to know  whether any responsibility ha d been fixed in this regard.  DRDO 
replying to the Committee's concern, through written reply furnished as under:  
"…the Scramjet technology programme wa s one of the most ambitious 
programme of advanced countries like USA, Russia, China, France, Australia 
and Japan. Worldwide it is a c losely guarded technology and the detailed 
information including fabrication technology with C -103 material is not available 
in the open literature. C-103 is one of the most suitable and reliable materials for 
the combustor chamber of the scramjet engine f or high temperature application. 
Two experts committees under the Chairmanship of leading experts from ISRO 
and DAE ha d cleared the scramjet engine design and fabrication methodology 
using C -103 materials.  C-103 is a strategic material and the lead time in  
procurement is high and decision was taken to procure the material considering 
tight project schedule.  The procured material ha d been gainfully utilised to 
develop related technologies like Explosive bonding, Electron beam/Laser 
welding, various methods o f Anti-oxidation coating applications and established 
for future development of re -generatively cooled scramjet engine. This material 
was partially being utilised by DMRL for development of materials and related 
technologies for future long duration hypers onic flights under Hypermat Project 
and by Propulsion group of DRDL for development of long duration (> 100 sec) 
thrusters. It wa s planned to utilise the remaining material for radiation cooled 
rocket thrusters and long duration hypersonic vehicle. The pro curement o f 
material in DRDO as a policy wa s examined and approved both from the 
necessity and expenditure angle with financial concurrence at appropriate levels 
by the various committees. After ap proval, the procurement action wa s initiated 
by the project  comprising of a team of technical experts, but not by the decision 
of any individual. Hence, the procurement ha d not been wasteful and 
responsibility had not been fixed." 
***************** 

23 
 
PART-II 
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
Para 6.1 Avoidable Procurement of a Mobile Nitrogen Gas Generator Plant 
1. In their examination of Para 6.1 on "Avoidable Procurement of a Mobile Nitrogen 
Gas Generator Plant" based on the C&AG's Report No. 19 of 2016, the Committee fi nd 
that Combat Vehicles Research & Devel opment Establishment (CVRDE), placed an order 
for development of a mobile Gas Plant, at a cost of ` 97.33 lakh despite no demand from 
the Army for Nitrogen gas generator plant. In Committee’s view, the development of Gas 
Plant by CVRDE was unwarranted as t he plant had already been developed by the firm, 
M/s GEM Pressure Systems for DRDO in July 2010 and supplied to Defence Research 
and Development Laboratory (DRDL) in January 2011. However, the gas plant was not 
used for intended purposes in the field areas/operations for three years. 
2. The Committee note that nitrogen gas is very important and critical to keep the 
Arjun MBT in war -fit condition as it is necessary for achieving cushioning effect of the 
hydro-gas suspension unit, for the functioning of the b raking system under dynamic 
condition and to keep the Gunners Main Sight moisture free. They further note that 
during war, a strategic support vehicle would be needed which shall be incorporated with 
all the self sufficient sub-systems for the generation of nitrogen gas from the atmosphere 
on a military class chassis, so as to have comparable mobility to move along with the 
Army. However, the Committee are dismayed to note that the acquired gas plant from M/s 
GEM Pressure Systems remained unused for three years as it was steadily being used by 
DRDL for performance evaluation and consistency in nitrogen generation plant despite 
being procured for the end user i.e. the Army. Also, Army had initially stated that they did 
not require the gas plant as their nitro gen gas cylinders were being refilled through the 
Ordnance factories and were reluctant to receive the procured gas plant as they were self 
sufficient with the available resources.  
 In this regard, t he Committee observe that DRDL is the nodal agency to pr ovide 
for the specific needs of the armoured brigades of the Army and were mandated to 
develop the nitrogen gas system for Arjun MBT but due to developmental exigencies, the 
gas plant was procured from a private vendor terming it as a R&D project. They also note 
with concern that acceptance of the gas plant by the Army for trials appeared to be under 

24 
 
duress as the Director General Mechanised Forces (DGMF) had stated that CVRDE had 
offered them the gas plant on 'no cost and no liability to the Army'.  
 Also, the Army has not placed any bulk orders for the gas plant indicating that the 
development of gas plant by CVRDE has overshot the time frame of developmental 
window and the end user is dependent on private manufactures for the gas plant. The 
Committee are of the view that since CVRDE is mandated for developing and providing 
critical hardware for the armoured wing of the Army, nevertheless they are lagging 
behind in this area. They find that the establishment did not take the end user on board 
and to su pply them for their tailor made requirements. The Committee, therefore, desire 
that all the stakeholders should have a consensus for the creation of such important 
hardware as it has a direct bearing on the work horse of the armoured regiments i.e. 
Arjun MBT which is essential in war time scenario. They therefore recommend that the 
Army should lay down their explicit requirements in future to establish a proper chain 
right from the conception stage to manufacturing of the end product and subsequently 
handing it over to the Army for trials and eventual use. 
3. In this particular case, the  Committee would like to bring to light the fact that the 
Army, specifically the DGMF does not effectively require the gas plant for its regular 
maintenance or operational r equirements as they have established their supply chain 
through the Ordnance factories. They wonder as to why DRDO/DRDL did not develop or 
augment the existing facilities at Ordnance factories for development of the gas plant 
due to its mission criticality  in times of war. The Committee are not oblivious of the fact 
that development of military technologies and their incorporation in hardware is a time 
consuming process but wonder if a private firm could develop the gas plant, why it took 
DRDO/DRDL five years in developing the same and reaching finality . They accordingly 
recommend that DRDO should furnish details about the development and subsequent 
production of the gas plant to the Committee.  
4. Consequent to enquiring this subject, t he Committee in general infer the need to 
re-look in to the functioning of DRDO and its associate laboratories as they are of the 
view that under confidentiality or secrecy, development of sensitive technologies has 
been a very time consuming affair. They are of the view that DRDO needs is operational 
freedom to function more effectively and deliver world class products on time. Also, the 
Committee are of the specific view that synchronization is not effective  between the 
DRDO and the armed forces as they feel coordination amon g the agencies has affected 

25 
 
the systematic development of military hardware. The Committee desire the 
administrative Ministry i.e. the Ministry of Defence to play a proactive role in better 
synchronisation and coordination among the agencies as both are mu tually 
interdependent on each other and their association has direct bearing on the overall 
security and preparedness of the Country. The Ministry m ay provide the Committee 
steps/measures proposed to be taken in this regard. 
Para 6.2 Infructuous Procurement of Material 
5. In regard to Para No 6.2 on "Infructuous Procurement of Material", the Committee 
observe that DRDL was aware of the fact that C-103 material had limitations to resist high 
temperature generated in the scramjet engine combustor and the material had also failed 
in the flight tests of short duratio n of 20 seconds, yet, 1329 kgs of C -103 material was 
procured valuing ` 4.83 crore, which eventually proved wasteful.  
6. Scramjet or supersonic combustion ramjet is an air breathing jet engine in which 
high vehicle speed is used to compress the incoming a ir forcefully before combustion in 
supersonic airflow allowing it to operate efficiently at extremely high speeds thus 
generating very high temperatures in the range of 2227 0C to 2527 0C.  Committee’s 
scrutiny of the subject reveal that f or the development of scramjet engines, DRDO 
procured Nimonic C -263 and Niobium C -103 materials for their high temperature 
resistance properties. However, the Committee note with concern that both the materials 
eventually failed in the testing phase and some quantities of th e materials were used in 
other on going research projects, thus defeating the very purpose for which these were 
originally procured for. They  would like to  highlight the fact that DRDO contested 
C&AG's claim of unwarranted procurement and eventual wastage by stating during their 
audit, the DRDO scientists could not properly explain the logic behind the move. 
However, the Committee are of the opinion that in the field of research and development, 
conclusions are reached by the way of experiments applying tri al and error method but 
are of the considered opinion that materials procured should be used for their intended 
purpose and not to be used for other ongoing projects. Since development of new 
hardware is a technological intensive activity, the Committee recommend that DRDO and 
its associated laboratories may draw a comprehensive roadmap by  undertaking 
thorough due dilligence for the development right from the conception stage till the 
manufacturing stage so that delays are minimised.   The action initiatied/ taken in this 
regard should be intimated to the Committee. 

26 
 
7. Coming to inquiry of this subject, t he Committee observe that C -103 material 
could resist only 13700C whereas the heat generated in the scramjet engine reached upto 
25270C. However, DRDO stated that the high temperature generated was the gas 
temperature. The Committee  take serious note of this discrepancy and recommend that 
DRDO may furnish the specific reasons for procuring the material out of which only 107 
kg of C -103 was used and remaining 88 per cent of the materials was used in ballistic 
missile programme and other R&D programmes.   Having been apprised of the alternate 
usage to which C-103 can be put to use, the Committee recommend that procurement for 
such alternate projects should be made project specific and that possible alternate utility 
could not be used  to justify procurement of unsuitable material.  They further desire to 
be apprised about the present status of the project with complete details to be forwarded 
to them for taking the issue to a logical conclusion. 
*************************************** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

27 
 
Part - B  
 
"DEVELOPMENT OF AN INTEGRATED AEROSTAT 
SURVEILLANCE SYSTEM " AND " IRREGULAR 
SANCTION AND EXPENDITURE OF ` 5.20 CRORE ON 
CONSTRUCTION OF VEHICLE TESTING GROUND 
AFTER COMPLETION OF THE PROJEC T" based on 
Para Nos. 6.1 and 6.2 of Chapter VI of the C&AG's 
Report No. 15 of 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

28 
 
REPORT 
PART - I 
 
I. INTRODUCTORY 
1. The Committee selected Chapter VI of the C&AG's Report No.15 of 2017 relating 
to Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) for detailed examination 
and report. This Chapter contains two paragraphs out of which Para 6.1 relates to 
‘Development of an Integrated Aerostat Surveillance System’ while Para 6.2 relates to 
‘Irregular Sanction and Expenditure of ` 5.20 Crore On Construction of Vehicle Testing 
Ground After Completion of the Project'. 
2. Against this backdrop, the Public Accounts Committee ( 2018-19) obtained 
background note and requisite replies and some other clarifications from the Ministry of 
Defence (MoD) and Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO). The 
Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the MoD and DRDO o n both the 
paras on 07.09.2018 and consequently obtained information on the subject. Based on 
the information gathered, the Committee proceeded with examination of the relevant 
issues in detail as outlined in the succeeding chapters. 
Para No. 6.1: Development of an Integrated Aerostat Surveillance System 
3. The Committee found that aerostat is a balloon based platform which is based on 
lighter than air principle  and carries payloads for surveillance and communication 
purposes. The Aerial Delivery Re search and Development Establishmen t (ADRDE), 
Agra, had completed in 2013 the development of medium size aerostat of capacity 2000 
cum under a research and development (R&D) project named ‘Akashdeep’ by using 
polyurethane (PU) coated nylon fabric with payl oad capacity of 300 kg, endurance of 
five days and balloon life of 18 months. 
4. The Committee also found that Indian Army  expressed interest in the 
development of an  aerostat platform with net payload capacity of 300 kg and an 
endurance of 7 to 14 days with balloon life of four to five years at a total cost of ` 48.80 
crore by December 2014 us ing laminated fabric . It was provided for in the project 
proposal that in case of unavailability of laminated fabric, attempt would be made to 

29 
 
import the fabric.  The project also included a sub -system for aerostat platform namely 
Communication Intelligence ( COMINT) payload to be developed by Defence Electronic 
Research Laboratory (DLRL) at a cost of ` 22.50 crore. DRDO sanctioned a technology 
demonstration (TD) project , 'Nakshatra', to ADRDE in July 2011.  The project cost was 
revised to ` 58.80 crore in October 2013 to cater for t he import of laminated fabric and 
the probable date of completion (PDC) of the project was extended up to June 2016. 
5. Giving background of the Project, the Chairman - DRDO, during oral evidence, 
stated as under: 
"....DRDO has a laboratory in Agra called ADRDE basically to develop the 
aerostat surveillance systems for the defence requirements. ADRDE had taken 
up a project for development of ae rostat integrated system for surveillance and 
monitoring. The project is called Nakshatra. At that time in the country we had 
some technology available for polyurethane -based balloons and the laminated 
technology was not available. In the project Peer Revi ew Committee and in the 
sanctioning process, it was said that we should make a polyurethane -based 
balloon and also try to make a laminated balloon which has a longer life. So, both 
polyurethane and laminated balloons started developing with the resources a nd 
people available in the country. When we started attempting on a small piece of 
laminated model, it was not successful. So, it was suggested again that we 
should go for one laminated -based balloon as a standby option for this. So, 
procurement action for  the laminated one also started while the development of 
polyurethane-based balloon went on in the country." 
6. The Committee wanted to know the s pecific reason s for escalating the project 
cost to ` 58.80 crore in October, 2013 from Rs. 48.80 crore as orig inally envisaged in 
July, 2011.  They also wanted to know the specific reasons why the enhanced cost was 
not anticipated at the tim e of sanctioning of the project.  In this connection, DRDO 
though a written reply, intimated as under: 
"At the time of sanctioning of project the total project cost was estimated to be ` 
48.8 crore. One of the project objectives was to develop balloon with laminated 
fabric. In spite of all the scientific efforts put in by the Scientists at ADRDE, the 
required technologies for the realization of balloon with laminated fabric was not 
fully matured. Therefore, to meet the project objectives, it was proposed to 
procure a laminated fabric balloon with an additional estimated cost of ` 10.0 
crore and after sanction, the revised cost of project escalated from ` 48.8 crore to 
` 58.8 crore. However, the project is completed with total expenditure of ` 49.5 
crore." 

30 
 
7. The Committee desired to know as to w hy the date of pro ject completion was 
extended from December, 2014 to June, 2016.  The Ministry in their written reply stated 
as under:  
"Following are the main reasons for completion date of project (PDC) extension 
from December, 2014 to June, 2016 -  
(a) As per initial project realization plan, COMINT payload was to be  procured 
under “BUY” option and integrated with aerostat system for demonstration. But it 
was found that the available payload was not meeting the project requirements 
and therefore, need was felt to develop indigenous COMINT payload. Number of 
meetings and brain storming sessions were held between DRDO Scientists and 
all stake holders to arrive on technical particulars/specifications for realization of 
COMINT payload and related subsystems. These technical particulars was 
finalized and also endorsed by Us ers vide letter no 55340/ABC/NAKSHATRA/SI-
11 dated 21 Jan’2014.  
(b) Scope of the project activities was extended to carry out Users associated 
technical trials of prototype system developed for technology demonstration and 
imparting training to Users repr esentatives on system installation, integration, 
operation and maintenance.  
In view of above, to realize COMINT payload and related subsystems after 
finalization of endorsed QR and to complete extended scope of project activities, 
the completion date o f project was extended from Dec, 2014 to Jun, 2016 and 
the project objective are successfully met." 
8. Adding further on this point, the Chairman - DRDO, during oral evidence, stated 
as under: 
"The ADRDE has successfully developed the polyurethane -based ballo on and 
started utilising it. It has successfully performed, and the tests continued with the 
same polyurethane -based system. It has been tested a number of times. The 
testing went on for six months. Meanwhile, the balloon procured in an open 
tender was rec eived by the laboratory and was kept as a standby option to 
replace the first one in case it gives a problem on aspects like durability and life." 
9. He further stated that: 
"However, the indigenously developed balloon has functioned well. It went 
through all the tests. During the process of testing, it called for an extension to 
test in detail and to improve the system. So, extension of the project was taken 
up in 2016 and it had gone through successful testing as per the parameters 
given in 2016. There wa s no opportunity to test the standby balloon that was 
procured and so it had been kept aside. Army was a part of this. Army has gone 
through the testing and they have seen the results. As the project went on for so 

31 
 
many years, army is now looking for a sim ilar balloon but with improved 
specifications. They are making the specifications for a balloon with improved 
specifications. Sir, what I want to submit is that as parallel options of 
polyurethane and laminated fabric -based balloons were to be pursued, as the 
laminated-based balloon technology was not available in the country, to realise 
aerostat a balloon was procured and kept there. But good success has been 
achieved by the indigenous system and the indigenous system has performed 
well, and so the standby  system could not be utilised. We are trying to make 
another airframe and trying to make the laminated -based balloon also to be 
utilised right now. This is the status. It was right in the beginning taken as option 
No.2 and the balloon was purchased to make the project successful. The primary 
system that we made has worked and so we could not utilise the standby option. 
Sir, I again submit to you that the laminated -based balloon was procured as that 
technology is not available in the country." 
10. The Commit tee noticed through the reply of DRDO (in January 2017) that 
ADRDE spent ` 6.20 crore on import of balloon made of laminated fabric from a foreign 
firm. However, this balloon was not utilised in the project as the project was carried out 
using PU coated fabric balloon. This project had been closed by ADRDE on 30.06. 2016 
after incurring an expenditure of ` 49.50 crore without acceptance of the Army and had 
not been utilised for the intended purpose.  
11. DRDO, in their Background Note, while explaining their position informed the 
Committee as under: 
"In Nakshatra project proposal, 03 nos. of the balloons (01 for Test & evaluation , 
01 for Demonstration and 03 rd as a spare) were catered for, to meet the desired 
project objective. Helium filled Balloon is made up of flexible textile material and 
there is a risk of damage due to gust & storm. Therefore, standby balloon is 
always kept for such contingency due to lon g lead time for balloon procurement.  
To meet the requirement for standby balloon during trial as per project proposal, 
imported laminated fabric balloon was supplied by Indian Industry i.e. M/s 
Pipavav Shipyard Ltd, Rajula (Guj arat) and kept as standby for  usage in case of 
any failure of indigenous Balloons during trials. However, during extensive flight 
trials/testing, no damage has occurred with PU coated indigenous balloon and 
project objectives were achieved. Hence, need to use standby balloon did not 
arise in the project. Since, the indigenous PU coated balloon could fulfill the 
project objectives, the laminated standby balloon was not required to be used. 
However, the same would be used for future trials.  Also against two indigenous 
Balloons sanctioned  in project, only 01 no. indigenous advanced Polyurethane 
(PU) coated fabric balloon was used during flight trials/testings and project 
objectives were met. Hence, the second Balloon was not procured.  The project 
was undertaken on a Technology demonstratio n (TD) mode. All required 

32 
 
technologies have been established to meet project objectives during successful 
User Assisted Technical Trials (UATT) with COMINT payload.  In the next stage, 
this equipment has to be proven as per requirement of the Army. Accordin gly, 
requirements have been deliberated with Army & draft QR has been forwarded to 
them (as decided in meeting with Army) for approval in order to take up a new 
project which would include field trials by Army. Army is in process of finalizing 
the QR and case will be taken further after approval of QR by Army." 
12. The Committee sought to know the reason behind the construction of aerostat 
with PU coated fabric in the first instance. The Ministry through a written note informed 
the Committee:  
"The availability of laminated fabric was under “High Development Risk Area”. In 
case of its non-availability, the balloon was developed using PU coated fabric for 
integration and testing of COMINT payload as per project strategy. The same 
was also mentioned in the pro ject proposal at the time of sanction of the project. 
Hence, first PU coated fabric balloon was developed to complete integration and 
initial testing of other subsystems till such time the laminated fabric balloon is 
realised."  
13. The Committee sought to  know as to w hy during the initial project stage, a 
provision was made for three balloons but the objective was met with only two and how 
was the third stand -by balloon put to use.  In this regard, the Ministry submitted as 
under: 
"Balloon is a flexible st ructure made of light weight fabric and susceptible to 
damages due to gust, storm and other unforeseen aspects. Hence, quantity 03 
nos. (01 for test & evaluation, 01 for payload demonstration and 01 as a standby) 
were catered in the project to meet the sta ted project objectiv es. However, the 
stated project objective of realization of technology for Integrated Aerostat 
Surveillance System – Medium Size was successfully demonstrated with the 
usage of two nos. of balloons only (one balloon used for testing, tr ial & payload 
demonstration and second balloon kept as standby). Since, no significant 
damage occurred to the first balloon during trials, it usage was continued for the 
payload demonstration also and second balloon was kept as standby. Hence, 
third Balloo n was not procured.  the standby balloon, kept for contingencies 
arising from damages due to gust, storm & other unforeseen reasons, was not 
required to be used in the project as such contingencies never arose." 
14. On the alternate use of the balloon, the Chairman-DRDO, during oral evidence, 
stated as under: 
"We have about 1.5 to 2 years’ life available still for that balloon. It is available in 
the lab. We are trying to make another aerostat to utilise this balloon. Otherwise,  

33 
 
it was kept aside as a standby option to be utilised if and when there is a problem 
with the first balloon." 
15. The Committee also learnt that ADRDE had stated that the integrated aerostat, 
made up of PU coated fabric balloon, surveillance system was successfully 
demonstrated during user associated technical trials (UATT) and the project was 
closed. ADRDE also  stated that the other balloon i.e. balloon made of laminated fabric 
was kept as spare and would have been utilised in case of any damage that might have 
occurred in unforeseen circumstances. 
16. In regard to the procurement of the material, the Chairman -DRDO, during 
evidence stated: 
"Sir, the statement given there that it is procured through an Indian industry is 
correct. It has been taken as a stand -by. That statement is also correct. The 
balloon that we have developed indigenously has worked, so the stand -by 
system could not be utilized. So, both these statements which are written there 
and what we are saying is also correct. The only thing is that the Army is making 
the requi rements now based on this testing and with that requirement -based 
system, with some improvements we will be developing and giving it to the 
Armed Forces." 
17. Supplement the above, a representative of DRDO, submitted as under: 
 
" Sir, when we were going for a trial with the Army at their user site, we insisted 
that trials would be extended to three months, but our PDC is approaching. So, 
we told them, “You note down all the improvements; we will sit together and we 
will formulate new QR and based on that new QR we will give you the venue for 
two years. You can go for trial of all these things and come back.” Sir, that was 
the solution at that time." 
 
18. Clarifying the position, a representative of Ministry of Defence also supplemented 
as under: 
 
"Sir, the i mport of that material was only as a stand -by. Since the indigenous 
material has succeeded, they have not used it. So, in that sense, it is our 
submission that the expenditure should not be treated as infructuous because it 
was part of the project design." 
 

34 
 
19. The Committee noted that s ince integrated aerostat was based on a PU coated 
fabric and they sought to know  the precise reasons for importing the balloon with 
laminated fabric.   The Ministry through a written reply informed as under: 
 
"At the time of  project sanction, one of the project objectives was to develop 
aerostat balloon with laminated fabric. The availability of laminated fabric was 
already mentioned in project proposal under high development risk area. In spite 
of all the scientific efforts put in by the Scientists at ADRDE, the required 
technology for the realization of balloon with laminated fabric was not fully 
matured. Therefore, the aerostat balloon with  laminated fabric was procured. In 
order to maintain  the continuity of system develop ment, as an alternate to 
laminated fabric, PU coated fabric balloon as per project proposal, was resorted 
to. At that instant, it was envisaged that testing of various subsystems and initial 
integration/trials should be continued with PU coated fabric ball oon till the 
laminated fabric balloon is realised. The performance of PU coated fabric balloon 
was not known a priori. But, during trials, PU coated balloon performed much 
better than expectations for a longer period and no damage was faced.  Since, 
no sig nificant damage occurred to the PU coated balloon, its usage was 
continued for the payload demonstration also to explore its performance at fullest 
and met the Project objectives. Use of indigenous PU coated fabric balloon 
resulted in a step forward toward s self reliance in critical technology. Had the 
laminated fabric balloon been used in initial development stages of the project, 
the success of PU coated would not have been known and might have got 
deprived of self reliance in this technology. The interfaces of all the subsystem of 
Integrated Aerostat Surveillance System ‘Nakshatra’ are compatible to both PU 
coated as well laminated fabric balloons.  Therefore, this integrated aerostat 
system may be deployed with either of the balloons."  
 
20. The Chairman-DRDO, on this aspect, during evidence, submitted as under: 
  
"They are both two different technologies, Sir. We thought we should pursue both 
the technologies – polyurethane and lam inated fabric based technology. The 
laminated fabric based technology, right in the beginning of the project, could not 
be done. So, we thought that the first one shoul d be imported, where we had the 
confidence to go ahead with the development of polyurethane based product. So, 
both have been pursued simultaneously and we pro cured this one. But by the 
time we procured this, the first fabric was developed indigenously and we started 
utilizing it and it is good that it has worked. So, the imported one could not be 
utilized."  
 
21. When the Committee sought  details regarding the non utilization of imported 
balloon and also wanted to know whether the imported balloon was not according to the 
Army’s specifications, the Ministry furnished as under:  

35 
 
"To meet one of the project objectives, Aerostat balloon with laminated fabric was 
developed for the integration of payload and demonstration. But, by the time 
laminated fabric balloon was delivered, the results of indigenous PU coated 
balloon (fabricated as time gap arrangement and meant for initial test purposes) 
had already started exhi biting its performance far better than the expectations. 
Hence, to explore its performance at fullest, it was continued to be used during 
system demonstration trials also. Thus, need did not arise to deploy laminated 
fabric balloon and it remained as stand by during the project completion. Aerostat 
balloon with laminated fabric was specifically developed based on the design 
inputs and specifications provided by DRDO not by Army. Further, this laminated 
fabric balloon was integrated with required simulated su bsystems and deployed 
under controlled conditions at firm premises in India. Subsequently, DRDO 
Scientists carried out  study and analysis on this balloon in respect of its 
configuration, fabrication & sealing technology involved in laminated fabric, panel  
and joint analysis, pressure drop study, inflation and deflation techniques, 
integration of interfaces, static balancing of different loads in inflated conditions 
etc."  
 
22. During oral evidence, a representative of DRDO, also submitted as under: 
  
"Sir, as our Secretary said, this was a stand -by balloon we kept because balloon 
is susceptible with winds, gust and different kinds of loads during a dverse 
environment conditions. So, this was as a project strategy that we have kept this 
balloon as a spare. Now, this balloon will definitely be used, when new QR which 
we are working with the Army, has been finalised. Then we will definitely utilize 
this balloon." 
 
23. Since imported balloon was lying idle as a spare, the Committee wanted to know 
what was the pro bable alternative for using the same for  the benefits of the end users 
and sought to know the present status of the same and also what was the basket time 
in which it should have been used or discarded.  In this conection, the Ministry furnished 
as under: 
 
"Certain mandatory data related to fabric structure w.r.t. the joint strength needs 
to be evaluated under pres sure by inflating balloon. Analysis of such data would 
be useful for futurist ic laminated fabric structures. The usage of this balloon is 
already underway for the aeration test, which has bee n recently conducted in 
October, 2018 and has re-ascertained its performance at the required pressure in 
inflated conditions. During the remaining shelf life of balloon, available payloads 
would also be integra ted for its perfor mance evaluation from December, 2018 
onwards. DRDO is having interactions with Users/ Army, who is in the process to 
finalize the QRs for project NAKSHATRA vide letter no. 55340/ABC 
(Nakshatra)/SI-11 dated 15th Dec 2017. Currently, the la minated fabric balloon is 

36 
 
being used for comparative study and analysis of panel and joints. As of now, the 
basket time for this balloon is approximately 2 years."  
 
24. The Committee learnt that the Army stated that the User Associated Technical 
Trials (UATT) for the system could only be carried out for three days an d as such the 
effectiveness of the COMINT system could not be ascertained. It further mentioned that 
ADRDE had been requested to deploy the aerostat with the COMINT payload for three 
months fo r UATT as it is a pre -requisite to ascertain efficacy before taking over the 
system for extended trials. 
 
25. When the Committee sought to know the specific reasons for conduction of trials 
with the indigenous product when the imported balloon was already procured and 
remained idle, the Ministry furnished as under:  
"As per project strategy, the initial integration, testing and subsystem trials with 
indigenous PU coated balloon were started before delivery of imported balloon 
itself. The performance of PU c oated was not known a priori. However, during 
trials, PU coated balloon performed as per requirements and met the Project 
objectives and no significant damage was reported during deployment trials. 
Hence, use of laminated fabric balloon was not necessitate d and it remained as 
standby. This was a step forward towards self reliance in critical technology." 
 
26. During oral evidence, a representative of DRDO informed the Committee that 
during trials, Army requested DRDO to extend the trials a little further bu t they were told 
that the trial was upto June only and expenditure was not available for trials beyond 
June. Army was requested to provide their queries and the aerostat would be given to 
the Army for two years for user trials across the country. Army agre ed to the proposal 
and were apprised that DRDO would give them a new Qualitative Requirement (QR) 
and would ask the Army for new requirements. 
 
27. Intimating about the stand of DRDO, the Chairman -DRDO, during oral evidence, 
stated: 
"The polyurethane technology was a reasonably matured technology at that time 
in the country. It has not been made an aerostat of this class by that time at all. 
What was the period and durability of polyurethane? Also, the laminated 
technology should be tried which gives a long er life. The laminated technology 
was not available at that time. We should not try this technology. When we tried 
small pieces of it, that could not bring good results. So, we placed a contract with 

37 
 
this company. This company has imported parts of it. They have assembled them 
in their premises and given it to us. If it got failed, then only we could have gone 
for the imported one. That could have been a question.  The leap time for it is 
more than about an year.  So you cannot be waiting as a lull period.  So, it has 
been taken as a mitigation that you should go for the parallel option also 
simultaneously.  As regards details, I will look into the file and get back to you. 
So, that i s how, that has been procured. But it is good that the i ndigenous 
material has worked. So, it could not be utilised." 
 
28. When t he Committee w anted to know as to what were the constraints felt b y 
DRDO/ADRDE in conducting a tr ial for three months and consequently for extended 
trials to the full satisfaction of the Army, the Minist ry through a written reply, submitted 
as under:  
"The scope of the project was to develop an integrated aerostat surveillance 
system in technology demonstration (TD) mode. In TD mode project, the 
technological capabilities are demonstrated to undertake futuristic requirements 
in mission mode. In TD mode p rojects User involvement is not mandatory. Since 
the developed technology is to be utilized by Army. Therefore, it was a 
considered opinion to involve the Army i.e. end Users during development phase. 
Therefore, in this project, all functional aspects of s ystem were demonstrated at 
Agra and at User designated sites, during User associated technical trials 
(UATT). Also the interception capabilities of COMINT payload were 
demonstrated with available frequencies at these trial sites. The know -how about 
system was imparted to end Users during these trials.  Since, all the functional as 
well as interception capabilities of aerostat mounted COMINT payload were 
successfully demonstrated which was also endorsed by Users vide their minutes 
of meeting dated 31st Aug’2 016. The project was closed within its date of 
completion (PDC). However, upon successful completion of the project, the User 
suggested to incorporate certain additional modification/ improvement in the 
system along with the extended trials. Based on the d eliberations with Army 
(Refer point 7 & 8 in their minute of meeting), a draft QR has been forwarded to 
them for approval in order to take up a new project for further improvement in the 
system (Letter No. ADRDE/QMD/MSG/NAKSHATRA/PS/01 date 19 th Oct 2016 
and ADRDE/QMD/MSG/NAKSHATRA/PS/01 dated 27 th July 2017. The Army 
vide letter no. 55340/ABC(Nakshatra)/SI -11 dated 15 th Dec 2017 intimated that 
Army is in the process of finalizing the revised QRs for  project NAKSHATRA and 
the same shall be forwarded shortly to ADRDE." 
 
29. The Committee sought reasons from the Ministry for keeping a higher quality 
product as spare and instead use a lower quali ty product in the main trials.  The 
Ministry, in this regard, clarified as under:  
"At the inception stage of the Project, it was envisaged to use first PU coated 
balloon during initial integration and testing of subsystems till such time the 

38 
 
laminated fabric balloon is realised. The performance of PU coated was not 
known a priori. Howeve r, during trials, PU coated balloon performed as per 
requirements and met the Project objectives. Indigenous PU coated balloon met 
project objectives for a longer period and no damage was faced during flights. 
This was a step forward towards self reliance in critical technology. Had the 
laminated fabric balloon been used in initial development stages of the project, 
the success of PU coated would not have been known and might have got 
deprived of self reliance in this technology. Furthermore, the country co uld have 
remained dependent on import. Through this approach adopted in the Project, 
the efficacy of PU coated balloon has been proved. At the same time laminated 
fabric balloon when procured, was deployed with integrated simulated 
subsystems under controlled conditions and fully tested in India." 
 
30. In summation, the Committee learnt that Para 6.1 of Chapter VI of C&AG's 
Report No. 15 of 2017 revealed that t he Aerial Delivery Research and Development 
Establishment (ADRDE), Agra spent ` 6.20 crore on impo rt of a balloon made of 
laminated fabric which was not utilized in the project as the project was carried out 
using polyurethane (PU) coated fabric balloon  and the project itself did not achieve its 
objective despite an expenditure of ` 49.50 crore as it w as closed wi thout acceptance 
by the user i.e. Army.  
Para No. 6.2: Irregular Sanction and Expenditure of ` 5.20 Crore on   
   Construction of Vehicle Testing Ground after Completion of  
   the Project 
31. The Committee found that t he Defence Works Procedure-2007 envisage that all 
defence works and services are to be completed with the minimum delay in a cost -
effective manner and that no new works are sanctioned without careful attention to the 
assets and facilities already available. It was noticed that a Vehicle Testing Ground was 
constructed in April 2014 at Vehicle Research & Development Establishment  (VRDE), 
Ahmednagar at a sanctioned cost of ` 5.20 crore to meet the test requirements of 
Unmanned Ground Vehicle (UGV)  project.  However, the  Committee found that the 
Project had already been closed in  February 2008, nevertheless t he Administrative 
Approval for the work was accorded by DG (R&D), in April 2009 .  It is learnt that  the 
requirement for the said vehicle was projected by VRDE in Marc h 2005 to meet the 
needs of test facilities for the UGV with Gross Vehicle Weight of 10 Ton at a maximum 
speed of 82 kilometre per hour (kmph). 

39 
 
32. When enquired about the necessity of sanctioning the work after the UGV project 
had already closed in Februa ry 2008, DRDO stated that the UGV testing ground was 
planned for then ongoing as well as pipeline/futuristic unmanned systems testing and 
not for any ‘specific’ project and it was to facilitate an isolated test ground with safety 
provision for arresting moving UGV, in case of emergency/uncontrollable operation. 
33. The Committee also found that the requirement of testing ground was projected 
specifically to meet the needs of testing the UGV being developed on a 2.5 Ton ‘B’ 
vehicle with Gross Vehicle Weight of 10 Ton at a speed of 82  kmph. The trials of this 
UGV had already been completed utilizing the existing VRDE test tracks, as the Testing 
Ground was not available then. The project of 2.5 Ton ‘B’ vehicle UGV was itself closed 
in February 2008. Thus, the d elayed sanctioning of the Testing Ground did n ot serve 
the intended purpose . Besides, as the Army is currently in need of UGV of 50 kg 
capacity only, it is evident that the testing facility is not likely to be optimally utilized. 
Army in a Project Review m eeting (August 2012) had intimated DRDO that the ongoing 
development of larger UGV would be stopped and henceforth all developments shall be 
directed to develop the smaller 50 Kg UGV. Also, since construction of the track, the 
VRDE has had only one project  of development of CBRN mini-UGV for reconnaissance 
and that too a 50Kg UGV for which presently existing ground testing facilities would 
have sufficed. 
34. The Committee wanted to know the reasons for delay in sanctioning  of the 
Project especially when the  project PDC was 4 years as the requirement of Vehicle 
Testing Ground projected by VRDE was in March 2005 and Administrative Approval for 
the UGV Testing Ground was accorded in April 2009 .  The Ministry , in this regard, 
clarified as under: 
"The subject wor k of provisions of UGV (Un -manned Ground Vehicle) Testing 
Ground was an independent infrastructure development work and was not a part 
of any sanctioned project/program, as referred to.  This was a multi -disciplinary 
development work.  The case was pursued with due diligence and in accordance 
with the existing procedure which involved meetings, correspondence & co -
ordination with multiple agencies viz. Garrison Engineer, Pune, Chief Engineer, 
Secunderabad, DCV&E, DCW&E, New Delhi, etc. for reviews, appraisal s and 

40 
 
assessment, while VRDE was the user lab.  There were many observations, 
clarifications, deliberations and iterations that took place amongst various 
agencies to fine -tune the UGV Test Ground requirements to a realizable stage.  
As such, there were no undue delays, rather, the case was prolonged as it went 
through critical reviews, mid -course corrections and background job -work to 
generate data as explained above.  The project for Dev of UGV was executed 
within the stipulated PDC and clo sed as the object ive were met. The referred 
infrastructure development work  was not part of this project. Therefore, 
development of this infrastructure facility may not be linked with the PDC of any 
specific project." 
35. When the Committee desired to know about  the reasons for closing the UGV in 
February 2008, the Ministry through a written reply furnished as under:   
"The project realized the set objectives within the PDC (Feb 2008) and hence 
was closed.  The subject Project titled "Development of Unmanned  Ground 
Vehicle (UGV) [Project no. RDE-P1-04/VRD-46] was sanctioned on 5 Feb 2004 
with PDC of 48 months from the date of issue of sanction [R ef Project sanction 
letter no. DCV/04/5673101/P/01/326/D(R&D) dtd 5 Feb 2008].  The subject 
project was taken up as Technology De monstrator project wherein Two 
prototypes of UGV and one prototype of Pilot System Un it were to be developed 
within PDC of the project." 
36. The Committee noted that the Army had not identified a 2.5 Ton 'B' UGV for their 
future requirements and wanted to know why was the project then sanctioned for 
development as the end user had already denied the same .  In this regard, the Ministry 
informed as under: 
 "The identification of 2.5 Ton 'B' of UGV for this future requirements was based 
 on interaction held with the user's as follows: 
 Brainstorming meetings were conducted with Users/Service Officers in Oct. 2003 
and Dec. 2003 respectively, during pre -sanction phase of the project.  The 
purpose of these meetings was to generate inputs for the proposed T D UGV 
project. It was recommended by Army that "for development purpose, veh icle 
already inducted in army should be considered (viz 1/2 ton, 2.5 ton) for avoiding 
inventory problem during induction in the Army. 
 Based on the recommendations of Use r's in these meetings, 2.5 Ton 'B' vehicle 
platform i.e. TATA 713 was selected for development of UGV Technology as, it 
was already inducted in army and its payload capacity of 2.5 ton matches with 
the need for complying to the operational requirements.   

41 
 
 Undertaking TD project was relevant as a proactive approach by DRDO and 
 technology base has been established in the field of Unmanned Ground Vehicle 
 systems/Technologies." 
37. When the Committee asked the Ministry to justify the conduct of trials of oth er 
vehicles from January 2014 when the testing ground was specifica lly constructed for 
UGV testing, the Ministry furnished as under: 
The UGV testing round was utilized only for testing of UGVs an d systems thereof 
for various activities such as endurance tr ials, proving trials, design validation, 
performance evaluation etc.  The vehicles with BA no. as shown in the table 
below refer to UGVs, which are Tele -operated/Autonomous.  These were tested 
at the UGV Testing ground from 2011 to 2018. 
The following tabl e depicts specific details with quantification of running km for 
tele operated TD UGVs (UGV -I & UGV -II, s no. 1 to 4) and Autonomous UGV 
(AUGV, s.n. 5 to 9). 
SI. 
No. 
UGV BA No. Year Test/trials Km 
1. UGV-I BA V- 1057 2011 Endurance Trials 303 
2. UGV-II BA V - 1093 2011 Endurance Trials 1584 
3. UGV-I BA V - 1057        2012 Endurance Trials 243 
4. UGV-II BA V - 1093 2012 Endurance Trials 820 
   Total 2950 km 
5. AUGV BA V - 1147 2014 Testing/Trials 127 
6. AUGV BA V - 1147 2015 Testing/Trials 208 
7. AUGV BA V - 1147 2016 Testing/Trials 103 
8. AUGV  BA V - 1147 2017 Testing/Trials 1117 
9. AUGV  BA V - 1147 2018 
(Jan 18 to June 18) 
Testing/Trials 504 
   Total 2059 km 
   Grand Total 5009 km 

42 
 
38. On being sought  details of vehicles tested including Gross Vehicle weight etc. , 
the Ministry furnished as under: 
S. 
No. 
UGV BA no. Year Test/trials Km GVW, Payload 
1. UGV-I BA V- 1057 2011 Endurance Trials 303 7.5 Ton, 2.5 Ton 
2. UGV-II BA V - 1093 2011 Endurance Trials 1584 7.5 Ton, 2.5 Ton 
3. UGV-I BA V - 1057 2012 Endurance Trials 243 7.5 Ton, 2.5 Ton 
4. UGV-II BA V - 1093 2012 Endurance Trials 820 7.5 Ton, 2.5 Ton 
   Total 2950 km  
5. AUGV BA V - 1147 2014 Testing/Trials 127 1.6 Ton, 0.35 Ton 
6. AUGV BA V - 1147 2015 Testing/Trials 208 1.6 Ton, 0.35 Ton 
7. AUGV BA V - 1147 2016 Testing/Trials 103 1.6 Ton, 0.35 Ton 
8. AUGV  BA V - 1147 2017 Testing/Trials 1117 1.6 Ton, 0.35 Ton 
9. AUGV  BA V - 1147 2018 
(Jan 18 to 
June 18) 
Testing/Trials 504 1.6 Ton, 0.35 Ton 
   Total 2059 km  
   Grand Total 5009 km  
 
39. The Committee were also supplied the details of the project relating to the 
development of technology for autonomous UGV sanctioned in May 2015 by the 
Ministry which as under: 
"Project Title:  Development of Technologies for Autonomous UGV & Testing on 
Automotive platform 
Sanction date : 01 May 2015, PDC: 30 April 2018 
The main objective is to develop technologies for Autonomous Unmanned 
Ground VEHICLE (AUGV), integrate & to carry out testing/tr ials of the sa me on 
a test platform vehicle. The following sub -systems/modules constitute AUGV 
technologies: 
 1. Vehicle Control Module (VCM) 

43 
 
 2. Vehicle Supervisory Module (VSM) 
 3. Power Supply Module (PSM) 
 4. Operator Control Unit (OCU) 
 5. Vehicle Localization Module (VLM) 
 6. Vehicle Perception Module (VPM) 
 7. Vehicle Navigation Module (VNM) 
 8. Vehicle Actuation Module (VAM) 
 9. Fails-Safe Module (FSM) 
 10. Advanced Communication Software Protocol (ACSP) 
 All these modules/sub -systems have been inte grated & tested on an 
 automotive test pl atform. Testing and Demonstration of these carried out 
 at UGV Testing Ground of VRDE." 
40. Conclusively, the Committee found that the Director General, Research & 
Development had accorded sanction for construction of Vehicle Testing Ground at 
Vehicle Research & Development Establishment  (VRDE), Ahmednagar at a cost of ` 
5.20 crore in April 2009 based on VRDE’s proposal of March 2005 to meet the specific 
requirement of testing the Unmanned Ground Vehicle (UGV) being developed on 2.5 
Ton ‘B’ vehicle. However, by then UGV Proje ct was closed. The expenditure wa s 
rendered infructuous because the Testing Ground c ould not  be gainfully utilized as 
Army’s requirement was for a 50 k g UGV for which the existing VRDE Test Tracks  
would have sufficed. 
 
 
******* 
 
 
 
 
 

44 
 
PART-II 
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
Para 6.1 Development of an Integrated Aerostat Surveillance System 
1. In their examination of Para 6.1 on " Development of an Integrat ed Aerostat 
Surveillance System" based on the C&AG's Report No. 15 of 2017, the Committee 
observed that the very purpose of import of a balloon made from laminated fabric 
was to attain the objective of a medium size d aerostat without the constraints of 
endurance and shelf life as experienced using a polyurethane (PU) coated fabric 
aerostat. However, the balloon imported by the Aerial Delivery Research and 
Development Establishment (ADRDE), Agra  for research purposes militates 
against the project’s objective as consequently neither the aerostat was deployed 
nor Communication Intelligence ( COMINT) payload was tested for the duration 
desired by the Army. Also, t he claim about usage of the imported balloon with 
laminated fabric as a spare to cater for the unfore seen circumstances is 
incomprehensible to the Committee as the intended objective has not been 
achieved even after incurring to a total expenditure of ` 49.50 crore, out of which 
an amount of ` 6.20 crore pertained to importing of laminated fabric balloon,  
which remained idle eventually.  
2. The Committee note that the technical specification of project 'Nakshatra' 
specified the use of laminated fabric for aerostat to sustain a working life of 5 
years and for continuous operability for 14 days. However, they are dismayed to 
note that PU fabric coated balloon was used for trials which was of a lower 
quality than imported ball oon made up laminated fabric. What can be more 
disconcerting for the Committee than the fact that imported balloon; though of 
superior quality, was never put to any field trial and  was kept as risk mitigation 
strategy.    
3. The Committee do not concur with the assertion of either the Ministry or 
the DRDO that the Project met its set objectives and hence the use of laminated 
fabric balloon was not necessitated.  The Committee are confounded at the fact 
that as to why, in the first instance, the balloon was imported if the purpose could 

45 
 
have been achieved with indigenous product.  It clearly depicts the lack of 
foresight and planning on the part of DRDO as at no stage of the examination, the 
Committee could find DRDO coming up with the alternative use of the imported 
balloon in case the domestic product proves to be successful.   
4. Here, the Committee would also like to highlight the fact that the Army also 
expressed reservations about the effectiveness of the balloon during the User 
Assisted Technical Trials (UATT).   The Committee has every reason to believe 
that DRDO was more inte rested in developing/importing a foreign made balloon 
rather than ensuring that the end -user is fully satisfied with the product delivery.  
Non-extending the trials further on the ground that expenditure was not available 
for the same, is evidently an amis s on the part of the DRDO.   Instead they came 
out with alternative suggestions of seeking queries from the Army after giving 
them for 2 years user trials across the country.   The Committee also note with 
concern that since the completion of project, the Army has still not finalized the 
qualitative requirements (QR) for the aerostat project.  The Committee, in this 
regard, recommend that an internal inquiry be set by DRDO to find out the 
reasons for these lapses and the avoidable expenditure which proved t o be 
infructuous.  
5. Another glaring issue which has come up not only during the examination 
of this para but in other subjects relating to DRDO is the delays and cost 
escalation in their projects.  This particular project viz. Nakshatra was initially 
sanctioned in July 2011 at the cost of 48.80 crore.  However, the project cost was 
consequently revised to Rs. 58.80 crore in October 2013 with the revised probable 
date of completion (PDC) June, 2016 instead of the original one, i.e., December, 
2014.  Althou gh the project was completed at a cost of 49.50 crore finally, the 
Committee are in a dithering state as to why the project cost was hiked to the 
tune of almost 10 crores and then the same was also not utilized.  This is 
undoubtedly a case of wrong financi al projections and goes against the 
principles of prudent financial management.  If seen in the backdrop of extending 
the field trials for the Army by DRDO on the ground of lack of funding, this issue 
assumes special significance.  The Committee in no unce rtain words recommend 

46 
 
that the internal inquiry as recommended in the preceding paragraph should also 
cover these aspects and responsibility be fixed, if required, under intimation to 
the Committee.  They also recommend that all -out efforts be made to obvi ate 
instances of such nature which include wasteful expenditure as well as cost and 
time escalations.  At least now, they be apprised of the outcome of the Qualitative 
Requirements as finalized by the Army. 
Para 6.2    Irregular sanction and expenditure of ` 5.20 crore on   
   construction of vehicle testing ground after completion of the  
   project  
6. In regard to Para No 6.2 on "Irregular S anction and Expenditure of ` 5.20 
Crore on Construction of Vehicle Testing G round after Completion of the 
Project",  the Committee observe that sanction was accorded for construction of 
a Vehicle Testing Ground at Vehicle Research & Development Establishment  
(VRDE), Ahmednagar at a cost of ` 5.20 crore in April 2014.  The Project was 
based on VRDE’s proposal of March  2005 to meet the specific requirement of 
testing the Unmanned Ground Vehicle (UGV)  being developed on 2.5 Ton ‘B’ 
vehicle. However, the UGV Project was already closed in February, 2008.    
7. The Committee find that  UGV Testing Ground was proposed as a long term 
vision for testing UGVs in lighter to heavier weight categories for 
current/planned/futuristic projects. However, they note with dismay that the 
project for testing and developing a 2.5 ton 'B' vehicle UGV was already closed in 
February, 2008 but the track was constructed in April, 2014.   The Committee are 
baffled to learn as to why the DRDO in the first instance brought out a proposal 
for developing the testing ground for 2.5T ‘B’ vehicle whereas the Army’s 
proposal was for development of  a smal ler 50 kg UGV.  During their examination, 
the Committee have been given to understand by the Ministry as well as DRDO 
that the ground is being tested for UGVs, which includes endurance trials also.  
The Committee from this assertion understand that the tes ting ground once 
created is currently being utilized for related vehicles but not explicitly for 2.5 T 
‘B’ UGV.  In their firm opinion, it is again a glaring instance of lack of proper 

47 
 
planning and foresight on behalf of DRDO.  It is disquieting to note th at DRDO 
proceeded with the development of the track even when the Project was closed 
as early as 2008.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that DRDO should look 
into the entire issue afresh and come out with the reasons as to why this track 
was developed without taking into consideration the specific requirements of the 
end-users.  They also recommend that DRDO should revisit and constitute firm 
guidelines for initiating any research for the users in future and not commencing 
any project suo motto.  They a lso recommend fixing the responsibility in the 
matter for any deviation from the Defence Works Procedure -2007 which 
envisages that all defence works and services are to be completed with the 
minimum delay in a cost -effective manner and that no new works are sanctioned 
without careful attention to the assets and facilities already available. 
 
************************ 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                        MALLIKARJUN KHARGE                                          
December, 2018                                                                              Chairperson, 
Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)                                                 Public Accounts Committee. 
  