1 
 
30 
 
GLOBAL ESTATE MANAGEMENT BY THE 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS  
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS  
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2015-16) 
 
 
THIRTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
               
                      
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 


2 
 
 
PAC NO. 2062 
 
 
 
T H I R T I E T H  R E P O R T 
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(2015 -16)  
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                              
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS  
 
                                         
                                                                                       
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on: 21.12.2015  
 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 21.12.2015   
 
 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
December, 2015 /  Agrahayana 1937 (Saka)  
 
 
GLOBAL ESTATE MANAGEMENT BY THE 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS  
 
 

3 
 
CONTENTS 
 
PAGES 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2015-16)……     (ii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2014-15)……     (iv) 
 
 
INTRODUCTION………………..            (vi) 
            
       
REPORT 
PART- I 
 
I Introductory  1-5 
II Organisational Set-up 6 
III Absence of domain information 6-10 
IV Absence of action plan 11-12 
V Failure/delay in purchase of land/acquisition of property 12-22 
VI Inability to acquire land on reciprocal basis 23-25 
VII Purchase of building unsuitable for public assembly/representational 
functions for Indian Cultural Centre (ICC) at Eol, France. 
 
25-28 
VIII Delay in commencement of construction 28-37 
IX Inefficiencies in renovation/ redevelopment 37-42 
X Expenditure beyond delegated financial powers 42-44 
XI Retention of vacant accommodation 44-45 
XII Property lying unutilised (EoI Berlin, Germany) 45-46 
XIII Jawaharlal Nehru Bhawan 46-47 
XIV Regional Passport Offices (RPO)/ FSI 47-53 
 PART - II  
 Observations/Recommendations 54-69 
  
APPENDICES 
 
 
I Minutes of the Thirteenth sitting of the PAC (2014-15) held on 05.01.2015  
II Minutes of the Sixth sitting of the PAC (2015-16) held on 19.08.2015  
III Minutes of the Sixteenth sitting of the PAC (2015-16) held on 17.12.2015  
 ANNEXURE 
 
 
 Statement indicating the changes/modifications made in Draft Repot 
‘Global Estate Management by the Ministry of External Affairs’ 
 

ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2015-16) 
 
 
Prof. K.V. Thomas  - Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura 
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey 
6. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar  
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
9. Shri Neiphiu Rio 
10. Shri Dushyant Singh 
11. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
15. Dr. P. Venugopal 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
16. Shri Naresh Agrawal 
17. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
18. Shri Anil Madhav Dave 
19. Shri Vijay Goel 
20. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
21. Shri Shantaram Naik 
22. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh           -   Additional Secretary 
2. Shri T.Jayakumar       -   Director 
3. 
 
Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja   -   Deputy Secretary 
 

iii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2014-15) 
 
 
 
 
                                            
1 Vacant  vice Dr. M. Thambidurai who has been chosen as Hon'ble Deputy Speaker, Lok Sabha and has since resigned from the 
membership of the Committee.  
 
Prof. K.V. Thomas  - Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura 
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey 
6. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar  
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
9. Shri Neiphiu Rio 
10. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
11. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
12. Shri Jayant Sinha 
13. Dr. Kirit Somaiya 
14. Shri Anurag Thakur 
151. Vacant 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
17. Shri Vijay Goel 
18. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya 
19. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
20. Shri Shantaram Naik 
21. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
22. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh 

iv 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2015 -16), having been authorised 
by the Committee, do present this Thirtieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Global 
Estate Management by the Ministry of External Affairs’  based on C&AG Report No. 
16 of 2014, Union Government (Civil) (Performance Audit) relating to Ministry of 
External Affairs.  
 
2. The Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid on t he Table 
of the House on 1st August, 2014. 
 
3. The Public Accounts Committee (2014 -15) selected the subject for detailed 
examination and report. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of External Affairs on the subject at their sitting held on 5 th January, 2015.  As 
the examination of the subject could not be completed, the Public Accounts Committee 
(2015-16) re -selected the subject for examination and took further evidence on 19 th 
August, 2015. The Committee considered and adopt ed this Report at their sitting held 
on 17th December, 2015. Minutes of the Sittings form Appendices to the Report. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type and for m  
Part II of the Report. 
 
5. The Committee thank their predecessor Committees for the valuable work done 
by them. 
 
6. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministry of External Affairs  for tendering evidence before  them and furnishing the 
requisite information to the Committee in connection with the examination of the subject. 
 
7. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to 
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.  
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                   PROF. K.V.THOMAS 
21st December, 2015                                                                          Chairperson, 
30 Agrahayana  1937 (Saka)                                   Public Accounts Committee. 
         
 

-2- 
 
 
 
REPORT 
PART- I 
 
Introductory 
 
An Embassy/Chancery/Mission/Post abroad is the main link and the immediate 
interface between the country it represents and the country in which it is situated. It is 
the key institution through which a country interacts and nurtures its cordial and 
harmonious relations with the host country. It acts as the saviour of its citizens in a 
foreign soil. A country's diplomatic presence abroad embodies its culture, its economic 
status and its strengths to the world. Accordingly, the role of Mission/ Posts abroad is  to 
work towards strengthening the image of the country and to provide efficient services to 
the citizens of both their country and of the country where they are stationed. In order to 
reflect the unique identity of a nation, the Properties where these Mis sions/ Posts are 
housed should be functional while making  national statement. The Ministry of External 
Affairs (Ministry), through its 180 Missions/Posts in various countries, occupies a large 
number of properties both in the country and abroad which incl ude owned and leased 
properties.The Ministry’s Estate Management Porfolio inter alia  includes acquisitions, 
construction of properties for our diplomatic Missions/Posts, Cultural Centres and 
Residences abroad, renting and leasing properties abroad for the functioning of 
diplomatic Missions and their employees, exchange and acquisition of properties on 
reciprocal basis for diplomatic representation, managing Regional Passport Offices and 
other properties in India such as the Jawaharlal Nehru Bhawan and the F oreign Service 
Institute, and renovation of existing Government of India owned properties in India and 
abroad. The work related to acquisition and management of owned properties is carried 
out by the Project Division, while management of leased buildings i s with the Property 

-3- 
 
 
 
Section of the MEA. The Projects Division in the Ministry vet projects falling under its 
mandate. The  process of acquisition  of properties is also facilitated by engagement of 
legal experts and consultants from the host country to ens ure the convergence with the 
local laws and regulatory framework while keeping Indian rules and regulations in 
perspective. Once the design of the building is approved, professional architects and 
consultants are engaged for execution and monitoring. Acqui sition of  properties can be 
made on reciprocal basis as per Vienna Convention or as are offered by the host 
Government. But in most of the cases properties have been acquired thr ough 
commercial market purchase.    The Public Accounts Committee (108 th Report of 
1987-88) had emphasized the need for a gradual reduction of rental expenditure of 
MEA with sound investment in suitable properties. 
2. A performance audit of ‘Property Management by Ministry of External Affairs’ 
was carried out by Audit for the period 1999 -2000 to 2003-04 (C&AG’s Report No. 17 of 
2005).   The issues raised in performance audit were examined by the PAC and its 
recommendations are contained in the 51 st  Report of the PAC (14 th Lok Sabha) laid on 
the table of the  Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha on 24.08.2007.  The Ministry’s Action 
Taken Note on PAC recommendations were further scrutinised  by the PAC.  The 
assurances of Ministry and further recommendations (August 2008) of PAC as 
contained in fifty -first report of PAC (14 th Lok Sabha) and seventy -fifth report of PAC 
(14th Lok Sabha) are given below: 
(i) Streamline the project planning mechanism  in the Ministry with regard to 
property management and budgetary provisions. 
(ii) Expedite all the pre -construction activities in regard to their projects 
(reported to in the audit report), such as finalisation of design brief, 

-4- 
 
 
 
appointment of consultants etc and ensure execution of these project at all 
the stations within the targeted time frame through a specific monitoring 
plan for each project. 
(iii) Ministry should put in place appropriate systems under their project 
division so that avoidable delays for re -development/re-construction of 
properties do not recur and the Missions should also be galvanised to 
make every possible efforts to minimize the rental outgo on leased 
accommodation. 
(iv) Listing out all the properties lying vacant for long periods and prioritize th e 
same for prompt disposal in order to avoid further deterioration in their 
condition. 
(v) MEA should exercise more effective supervision over the Missions/Posts 
abroad to ensure that irregular expenditure on leased accommodations in 
excess of prescribed rental ceilings did not become a regular feature. 
(vi) MEA to revamp their inspection machinery so that the working of Indian 
Mission/Posts abroad in regard to property management is supervised in a 
more effective manner. 
3. The action taken by Ministry of External Aff airs and assurances made during the 
examination were as follows: 
(i) MEA informed PAC that it constantly endeavoured to improve property 
management through timely finalisation of proposals for purchase, 
construction as well as renovation of Government properti es both in India 
and abroad.   
(ii) MEA further informed that corrective action had been taken as necessary, 
the work on construction projects and purchases had been streamlined to 
a great extent and continued efforts were being made to improve the 
monitoring, response time and effective control over spending by 
Missions. 
(iii) MEA assured that every effort was made to carefully ascertain the local 
procedures so that problems could be anticipated to the extent possible 
and advance action taken as necessary to avoid or minimize time and cost 
overruns. 

-5- 
 
 
 
(iv) MEA informed PAC that it had taken several concrete steps to acquire 
properties abroad in order to reduce rental liabilities. 
(v) MEA further informed that since setting up the Projects Division in 
February 2005, it had exclus ively focussed on construction/ 
renovation/purchase and property management.   
(vi) MEA assured that it was taking expeditious action for disposal/use of 
vacant properties.   
4. The present audit sought to assess efficiency of the utilisation and management 
of its global estate by MEA and review compliance of the assurances given to the PAC.  
The major findings of the audit include 
 
(i) Lack of domain information and non-preparation of action plan 
It was seen  that even essential domain information i.e. owned, rental and leased 
number of Chancery buildings/Embassy residences/Staff residences etc were not 
readily available with MEA. The absence of the information indicates a lack of a 
systematic approach towards reduction of rental liability as assured to the PAC. The 
MEA was also yet to develop an action plan for estate management despite an 
assurance given to the PAC. 
(ii) Delay in acquisition of property 
The Ministry had rendered assurance to the PAC that significant steps had been 
taken to streamline and speed -up the internal processes related to acquisition and 
construction of property. However, audit noted in seven cases (Geneva, Berne, 
Hamburg, Munich,  Bishkek, Stockholm and Milan) deficiencies and delays in 
decision making. Failure in purchase of land/acquisition of property resulted in rental 
outgo amounting to ` 7.83 crore during 2011-12.  
(iii) Delays in construction activities  
Audit noted delays in comm encement of construction of properties in ten cases 
(Shanghai, Port of Spain, Port Louis, Dar -Es-Salaam, Kathmandu, Tashkent, Kyiv, 
Brasilia, Doha and Nicosia). The delays were attributable to delays in submission of 
drawings, failure to firm-up the type of properties required, non finalisation of project 
designs, delays in obtaining approval from local authorities, frequent changes in 
project requirements and other procedural delays. Most of these delays were 
internal to the Ministry.  The PAC during the e xamination of the previous audit report 

-6- 
 
 
 
of property management had also urged the MEA to put in place specific time 
frames and monitoring mechanism to avoid delay in pre construction activities. The 
annual rental outgo in these cases, in 2011-12 was ` 16.36 crore.  
(iv) Deficiencies in renovation/redevelopment activities 
Renovation/Redevelopment work of Government of India owned buildings has been 
taken up by the Ministry at various stations. Audit of records maintained at 
Ministry/respective Missions revealed t hat at four stations viz., Sydney, Hong Kong, 
Kuala Lumpur, and Jakarta there were irregularities and considerable delays in 
renovation/redevelopment work. This resulted in avoidable rental expenditure of 
` 7.44 crore during 2011-12.  
(v) Delays in construction activities in India 
Lack of a systemic approach was also noted in domestic construction projects.  
Audit of records of five projects (RPO Jaipur, RPO Amritsar, RPO Mumbai, RPO 
Srinagar and FSI, Delhi) revealed that there were considerable delays in start  of 
projects upto 22 years (RPO Jaipur). Construction at RPO Srinagar had not 
commenced though the land was purchased in December 2006. Avoidable rental 
outgo in respect of three RPOs (RPO Amritsar, RPO Mumbai and RPO Srinagar) 
during 2011-12 alone was ` 3.98 crore. 
 
5. The Ministry operate d 180 Mission/Posts in various countries. As per the 
information provided by MEA (October 2013) in respect of 157 Missions, the position of 
leased/ owned properties in the Missions/Posts abroad was as per the table given 
below:  
Year 
Chancery Embassy Residence ICCR2 Staff Residence 
Owned Leased Owned Leased P.O.C Owned Leased P.O.C3 Owned Leased 
2007-08 57 89 64 61 8 1 12 5 451 1491 
2008-09 57 88 67 58 8 1 12 5 440 1517 
2009-10 59 88 68 59 8 2 16 5 475 1515 
2010-11 59 91 68 62 8 3 22 4 475 1532 
                                            
2 ICCR: Indian Council for Cultural Relations 
3 P.O.C.: Part of Chancery 

-7- 
 
 
 
2011-12 62 95 70 62 8 3 20 4 481 1566 
 
 
 
6. The above graph show ed that there was no change in the proportion of owned 
properties during the period 2007 -08 to 2011 -12, thus indicating that there was 
consistent reliance on leased properties abroad entailing large rental liability. 
II. Organisational Set-up 
7. The major funct ions of MEA relating to its estate management were acquisition, 
construction, maintenance and disposal of its properties in India and abroad. The work 
related to acquisition and management of owned properties is carried out by the Project 
Division, while management of leased buildings is with the Property Section of the MEA.  
The Projects Division was setup in February 2005 with a view to improve the Ministry’s 
property management through timely finalization of proposals for purchase, construction 
and renovation of Government-owned properties both in India and abroad to be used as 
its offices and residences for employees.  
 
77 78 76 76 77 
23 22 24 24 23 
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Year 
Proportion of leased and owned properties(Staff 
Residences) of MEA abroad   (In percentage) 
Leased Owned 

-8- 
 
 
 
8. The Project Division was headed by J oint Secretary (Project), who was  assisted 
by a Director and an Under Secretary. Four officers on de putation from CPWD, two 
each of the rank of Superintending Engineer and Senior Architect, provide assistance in 
technical matters. The Property Section of MEA, headed by Joint Secretary 
(Establishment), looks after the renting of accommodation for Missions /Posts as well as 
residences of staff/officers posted abroad. The issues regarding security measures to 
be followed in Mission/Post abroad were dealt by Bureau of Security Division, which 
was headed by Joint Secretary (Personnel). 
III. Absence of domain information 
9. The Ministry assured (January 2007) the PAC that two separate five year plans 
were prepared for gradual reduction in rental liabilities. Accordingly, Audit asked the 
Ministry to provide information on the owned, rental and leased number of Chance ry 
buildings/Embassy residences/Staff residences etc to assess the situation. The request 
for information was made in August 2012. Reminders were issued in November 2012, 
December 2012, April 2013 and May 2013. The Ministry provided information in respect 
of 157 Missions/Posts only by October 2013.  
 
10. When the Committee asked as to why the Ministry took more than a year in 
furnishing the information required by the audit, it was submitted that the  Ministry 
received annual rent statements from Missions/Posts abroad, which functions as a 
database of rented properties abroad.  In August 2012, information relating to rented 
properties abroad was sought from all Missions/Posts as per format received fro m 
Audit.  After studying the information received from Missions/Posts, in consultation with 
Audit, it was found that the information was not easy to compile in that format.  

-9- 
 
 
 
Therefore, in April 2013, a new format to seek information from Missions/Posts abr oad 
was developed in consultation with Audit. Relevant information, after compilation, was 
provided to Audit, both in soft copy as well as hard copy. 
 
11. When the Committee further enquired as to what are the reasons for not 
furnishing details of remaining 23  Missions, the Ministry submitted that  the Ministry’s 
database in the form of annual rent statements and Audit’s initial format was not found 
amenable to compilation.  So, the information was sought as per the revised format in 
April 2013 and Audit author ities were provided with information in respect of 160 
Missions/Posts by 5/8/2013, based on which Audit had finalized its report.  
 
12. When the Committee asked as to why the Ministry ha d not maintained any 
database about the properties abroad, the Ministry of  External Affairs stated that the 
Ministry maintains a database of rented properties abroad in the form of Annual Rent 
Statements sent by Missions/Posts abroad.   
 
13. When the Committee enquired as to how the Ministry was taking steps for 
reduction in rental liability as assured to PAC in absence of even the basic data about 
ownership, the Ministry submitted that savings on rentals was only possible when there 
was a purchase or construction of staff residences or chancery. In almost all other 
situations, the s cenario was of increasing rentals, much the same as exists in India.  
The Ministry already operates a system of rental ceilings in individual Missions to 
control rental expenses and with a view to ensuring efficient management of rental 
expenditure.  Howev er, rental liability had witnessed an increase due to general 
increase in rentals worldwide, opening of new Missions/Posts and recent depreciation of 

-10- 
 
 
 
Indian Rupee vis -à-vis US $, Euro and other major currencies which had substantially 
pushed up rental expenditure in Rupee terms. 
 
14. Supplementing the above view, t he Secretary, Ministry of External Affairs during 
the oral evidence deposed as under: 
"It has been our consistent endeavour to improve the efficiency of 
management and utilisation of Government -owned properties abroad and 
those being used by MEA in India. This is not always easy for a variety of  
reasons that include complexities of function ing in different environments, 
reconciling local requirements with our own rules and practices, operating 
with budgetary uncertainties at times, coping with dependencies outside 
the Ministry’s control and factoring in changing norms, demands and 
costs. The Ministry’s own capabilities have   also been challenged in that 
process. I would be the first to admit that there is much room for us to 
improve. In my 39 th year of service after having served as Ambassador in 
four Stations and No.2 in two, all of whom had major property issues. I can 
testify to both the difficulties and possibilities of better property 
management abroad. I would, however, like to assure the august 
Committee that this is a matter to which I now devote personal attention. I 
have inspected o ur properties in Kathmandu and  only recently and I 
would also ensure that long -pending decisions in regard to Washington 
DC are hastened. I intend to go to Russia next month to look for reasons 
for delay there, a matter which the hon. Chairperson had ment ioned. The  
action plan of the Ministry is also under re -evaluation. I would like the 
august Committee to know that the   process has been initiated. I hope the 
august Committee will see a more responsive and active managerial 
approach in the months to com e. It has been our consistent stand that 
Government of India -owned properties are preferable to those rented 
abroad as well as in India on account of both better projection of India’s 
diplomatic presence and better functionality. That is also in keeping wi th 
our emerging and growing security concerns. Reduction in the rental 
liabilities is obviously a major consideration although  I would emphasise 
there are stations where the viability of owning is an open question. 
Accordingly, the Ministry gives priority  to acquisition of built -up properties, 
constructions and renovation of our diplomatic Missions and Posts, 
cultural centres and residences abroad. We also focus on renting and 
leasing our properties abroad for functioning of diplomatic Missions and 
residences of India -based officials in the interim. At home, managing the 
Regional Passport Offices and other  properties in India such as the 
Jawaharlal Nehru Bhavan and the Foreign Service Institute are the main 
activities. A complete updated data -base of all t he properties owned or 
rented by MEA has been created and the same has been submitted to the 

-11- 
 
 
 
august Committee while responding to its questionnaire. I would like to 
acknowledge the role of the august Committee in completing this exercise. 
It has been our c onsistent endeavour to reduce the rental outgo and 
increase the number of Government -owned properties. We do so while 
ensuring that the properties so selected represent India as a global player, 
a major economy and a significant culture. As the hon. Commit tee would 
have noted from our data base, there is still work to be done to improve 
our rental situation. About 55 per cent of our Chanceries still operate from 
rental premises. The situation is better for Embassy residences, about 40 
per cent. If only 25 p er cent of our staff residences are owned, it is 
because they do not have the same representational priority.  The rent 
outflow abroad last year was, Rs.364 crore. After the first burst of property 
acquisition in 1950s, economic reasons slowed us down; in the 1970s  
and 1980s we also did not have the global footprint or the capacity to 
acquire too many properties. In the 1990s resources were a constraint. 
But the MEA started focusing thereafter on acquisition and construction of 
properties for our Missions and its officials looking at high rental cities first 
in a planned manner. In the last decade or more, there has been a 
steadier progress while addressing the backlog of the past. This is being 
helped by setting up a separate Projects Division in the Minis try, having its 
own technical team of engineers and architects to evaluate and vet 
projects falling under its mandate. The  process of acquisition  of 
properties is also facilitated by engagement of legal experts and 
consultants from the host country. This  is to ensure the convergence with 
the local laws and regulatory framework while keeping our own rules and 
regulations in perspective. Once the design of the building is approved, 
professional architects and consultants are invariably associated with the 
project for execution and monitoring. The scale of work that awaits us is 
known to the hon.Committee.  Twenty Missions properties abroad are yet 
to be constructed for various reasons, while six are currently under 
construction. We also have some major India n Cultural Centres to 
complete. The very nature of the estate portfolio of the MEA is diverse and 
multifaceted reflecting the diversity. While managing government 
properties abroad, we face challenges which are peculiar to this Ministry. 
We have to modify our requirements in harmony with rules and regulations 
of foreign countries. In many cases, government norms on acquiring and 
construction properties are at variance with local laws of the country on 
land use, structure, access control or assembling. Our p rojects in Paris, 
Warsaw and Budapest are examples of delay due to such harmonisation. 
Some of our construction projects in such countries have had to adjust to 
changing international reality among them the disintegration of the Soviet 
Union. our project in Ukraine for example is still on hold due to the current 
political situation there. The threat of terrorism and security has to be 
factored in while locating designing and building properties  abroad. 
Working with different regulatory frameworks, construction practices poses 
its own challenges. Reconciling local rules and regulations with general 

-12- 
 
 
 
financial rules can often take both time and effort. Acquisition of heritage 
properties comes with its own limitations on future expansion and 
renovation. We are facing such difficulties in execution of our projects 
such as in Paris. During the last 30 years, we have also seen fluctuations 
in fund availability, including freeze for construction activities in 1990s. 
Projects during this period such as Warsaw encount ered delay at various 
stages. Hon. Committee may also bear in mind that to address the 
emerging realities in various countries and changing importance of our 
relationship, the size of our Missions are fluctuating. Missions in Asia have 
largely expanded while those in Europe have not. This resulted in a review 
of our projects necessitating changes in design and layout causing delay 
in implementation and execution of our construction and redevelopment". 
 
15. The Ministry assured (January 2007) the PAC that two se parate five year plans 
were prepared for gradual reduction in rental liabilities. Accordingly, Audit asked the 
Ministry to provide information on the owned, rental and leased number of Chancery 
buildings/Embassy residences/Staff residences etc to assess th e situation. The request 
for information was made in August 2012. Reminders were issued in November 2012, 
December 2012, April 2013 and May 2013. Ministry provided information in respect of 
157 Missions/Posts only by October 2013. 
 
16. When the Committee asked  as to how does the Ministry prepare budgetary 
estimates as well as the plans regarding its estate management function and monitor  
the properties managed by it, i n the absence of a systematic approach, the Ministry 
stated that the Ministry prepares budgetary estimates keeping in view the projects which 
are under construction, projects under renovation and the acquisition proposals likely to 
be materialized in the current and ensuing financial year. The Ministry had a list of 
projects under construction and anticipated expenditure for the current and ensuing 
financial year. Now the Ministry have five years Action Plan (2014 -19) for acquisition 
and construction of properties. 

-13- 
 
 
 
IV. Absence of action plan 
17. The  Ministry  had informed PAC in January, 2007 that two separate five -year 
action plans had been prepared starting from the financial year 2006 -07 for acquisition 
of built -up properties and for construction. Audit noted that the five -year action plans 
have not been pr epared. As per the reply of the Ministry (March 2014), the process of 
developing a long term action has been initiated. 
 
18. When the Committee asked as to w hy the Ministry gave a statement to PAC that 
two five -year action plans had been prepared starting from  2006-07 when no action 
plans were actually ready even by March 2014 and also to furnish  the current status on 
the action plans, the Ministry submitted that the Ministry had in place a five year action 
plan (2014-19) for acquisition and construction of properties in Missions/Posts abroad. 
 
19. When further sought as to why the Ministry had taken so long time for the 
preparation of the action plans, the Ministry submitted that the Estate Management 
portfolio of the Ministry underwent rapid fluctuation in view of  involving international 
situation like impact of terrorism on various societies, popular uprising, regime changes, 
internal strife and external aggression. This made it difficult for a fully justified and 
implementable action plan for acquisition and cons truction of Government of India 
owned properties. 
 
20. When the Committee desired to know whether any timeline had been fixed by 
which the long -term action plan would be prepared and also the current status on the 
action plan, the Ministry stated that they had  a five year action plan (2014 -19) for 
implementation. 

-14- 
 
 
 
 
21. Audit pointed out that, the Ministry had issued guidelines in August 1986 
regarding purchase of property. When the Committee enquired whether it is  a fact that 
the same did not contain clearly define d timelines for critical activities and whether the 
Ministry prescribed any timelines consequent to the observation s of the Audit, the 
Ministry submitted that in November 2011, that they had issued revised guidelines to 
the Indian Missions/Posts abroad for  sending complete and viable proposals for 
purchase of built up properties. No standard timelines have been defined for critical 
activities as local conditions vary from country to country. Taking note of the 
recommendation made by Audit, a five year Action  Plan for acquisition of built -up 
properties and construction projects abroad for the period 2014 -15 to 2018 -19 was 
drawn up.  The Action Plan was prepared with due diligence and following extensive 
consultations with our Missions/posts abroad.  The Action  Plan prioritizes projects for 
acquisition or construction on the basis of rental liability, security considerations and 
bilateral reciprocal arrangements. 
 
22. The Secretary during the oral evidence further deposed as under: 
"When it comes to construction, ME A has taken a number of initiatives to 
address pending issues and I mentioned the creation of a separate 
Projects Division. We have been focusing on targeting utilisation of 
budgetary resources available to us. We have also standardised 
templates like Expr ession of Interest, request for proposal, etc.  These 
templates are harmonised in consonance with local rules of the country 
concerned but challenges are not infrequent in Africa and Europe and 
Latin American countries. During the last decade, we have been  able to 
execute several construction projects successfully. These are in Berlin in 
2002, Toky in 2009; Jawaharlal Bhavan in 2011; Beijing 2011; Kabil  2012; 
Abuja 2014; and Brazilia 2014. Out Chancery Construction projects in 
Darussalam and Bahrain are no w on stream. A number of renovation 
projects have also been completed during this period. Later on, you had 
raised the issue of Action Plan. Now, essentially what had happened and 

-15- 
 
 
 
if I can explain it in simpler English rather than bureaucratic English is t hat 
when the time came to submit to the hon. Committee our Action Plans, I 
think at that time they could not find it". 
 
V. Failure/delay in purchase of land/acquisition of property 
23. Audit noted deficiencies and delays in decision -making, absence of time bound 
action plan for property acquisition inspite of assurance by the Ministry to PAC about 
streamlining and speeding up of the internal processes related to acquisition of 
property. 
 
24. When the Committee desired the Ministry to give the status of the acquisition of 
properties in the Missions cited in the Audit Para, the Ministry submitted as under: 
"Germany: Zonal Changing approval is expected soon. However, it is still 
subjudice. 
Berne:  In view of local city restrictions on new construction in city of Berne, it is 
not possible so far to locate suitable property.  
Hamburg: Despite our extensive efforts, no suitable property has yet been 
identified.  
Munich: We have not yet identified suitable property for acquisition.  
Kyrgyzstan: The Government of the Republic of Kyrgyzstan has offered a small 
 plot in size for 49 years of lease. Size is not suitable and lease period is at 
variance for standard 99 years’ lease.  
Sweden: No suitable property has been identified yet. 
Italy: We have not been able to identify a secure and suitable property yet". 
 
25. When the Committee further asked whether the Ministry had ever assessed in 
detail the reasons of the long delays in acquisition of properties abroad, it was stated 
that the delays in acquisition of properties could be attributed to local factors like 
political and security situation in the country, state of the property market, etc., as well 
as availability of adequate budgetary resources. 

-16- 
 
 
 
 
26. When the Committee asked as to what steps the Ministry had taken to address 
the issue of delays in acquisition, it was stated that Ministry had a firm and 
implementable five year action plan. Its fulfillment however, depends on the resources 
allocated. 
 
27. In reg ard to the specific reasons for having a very large number of leased 
properties meant for staff residences abroad as compared to Chanceries, Embassy 
residences and ICCR offices, the Ministry submitted that w ith opening of new 
Missions/Posts abroad and growing deployment of India-based personnel there hiring of 
more properties abroad was unavoidable.  
 
28. When the Committee desired to know the various steps and authorities involved 
in the process of acquisition of the properties abroad, the Ministry stated that steps 
taken by the Mission was to find suitable property for Chancery/Residences etc. as per 
norms such as space requirement, locality, security, structural soundness and price etc.  
The proposal for acquiring was then sent to the Ministry for consideration. The proposal 
was examined in Projects Division taking into consideration the points mentioned 
above. In principle approval was obtained from competent administrative authorities. 
After that it was examined from legal angle, security point of view and financial approval 
was obtained as per relevant provisions of Delegation of Financial Power Rules a nd 
General Financial Rules 2005. 
 
29. The Committee noted that not much headway had been made in acquiring 
properties in the Missions pointed out by the Audit. When asked as to why the Ministry 

-17- 
 
 
 
was taking such a long time in even identifying a suitable p roperty, the Ministry 
submitted as under: 
"Both the Ministry and the concerned Missions/Consulates have been 
making efforts to identify suitable properties for acquisition in the Seven 
stations mentioned by the Audit viz Geneva, Berne, Hamburg, Munich, 
Kyrgyzstan, (Bishkek), Sweden (Stockholm) and Italy (Milan). The efforts 
of the Missions in identifying and pursuing purchase of properties are 
outlined below: 
Permanent Mission of India, Geneva: Currently Government of India 
owned: Embassy Residence; Rented – Chancery and 5 Residences. 
1. The Permanent Mission of India (PMI Geneva) has been 
pursuing purchase of a plot of land which meets with our 
requirements for construction of Chancery building since 
October 2009. At this point in time, the Landowner (M/s 
DNK) is st ill awaiting a formal approval from the Canton of 
Geneva for conversion of zoning law from “residential” to 
“office space” in respect of this plot of land. As a result of 
efforts of the Mission, the Canton of Geneva initiated a 
Revised PLQ ( Zone Changing A pproval) Process ON 17 
July 2013. The State Council of Geneva also adopted the 
revised PLQ (No. 29408 -530) on 16 April 2014 allowing a 
maximum of 30 days to file a legal appeal. One Appeal was 
filed by the owner of a neighbouring plot which  has led to 
start of legal process and therefore delayed the adoption of 
the PLQ. The decision of the Court of Justice may be 
expected in the first quarter of 2015.  
 
2. Ministry would also like to point out that the amount of CHF 
4.5 millions (Approx. Rs, 21  crore) mentioned by Audit  was 
kept  only as a provision in budget  and the money was not 
required due to legal implications in the deal. As regards the 
annual  rental expenditure of Rs. 2.84 crore being incurred 
by the Mission, t his expenditure is necessa ry  as no other 
GOI owned property exists which has been kept vacant nor 
is there any other suitable plot of land for construction of 
chancery premises.   
 
Embassy of India, Berne:  
Government of India owned: Embassy Residence and 7 residences - 
Rented Chancery and 5 other staff residences. 

-18- 
 
 
 
Mission is constantly trying to identify property for Chancery with 
the requisite parameters of Security, connectivity, location and other 
relevant aspects mandated for Chancery.In 2007, Mission approached the 
owner of th e current leased property housing the Chancery if he could 
consider selling the property and also requested the owner to give 
priority/preference to the Embassy in case he decides to sell. 
Embassy has made regular efforts to identify property through local 
staff, local property agents with regular follow up of the efforts, but no 
suitable property could be located.  
The basic problem encountered by the Mission is that Berne being 
a small cit y with restrictions on new constructions inside the town; there 
are very limited options available for purchase of property to house the 
Chancery. Mission however continues its efforts to locate a suitable 
property for the Chancery. 
Consulate General of India, Hamburg:  
 
Government of India owned – Embassy Residence; - Rented-Chancery 
and 3 residences 
1. CGI Hamburg has been on the lookout for suitable 
properties including through advertisement in the local 
Dailies, but have not been able to locate/finalise an y of the 
properties. Mission had identified 4 properties for CG’s 
Residence in Dec 2006/Jan 2007. None of the properties 
were found economically viable with the Economic Cost 
being much lower than the asking price. 
  
2. In Aug/Sept 2007, the Consulate forward ed details of 4 
properties for CG’s residence out of which three of them 
were found suitable in the initial analysis. A Property Team 
visited Hamburg in December 2007 to view the properties on 
offer and also additional properties shortlisted by the 
Consulate for Chancery and Embassy Residence and 
approved purchase of one property for CG’s Residence. One 
of the shortlisted properties was purchased for CG’s 
Residence after approval of competent authorities in 2008. 
 
3.  The Mission, however, continued to look for suitable 
properties including through advertisement but have till date 
been unable to locate suitable property for Chancery as 
properties in line with our requirements have not been 
available. The Mission is, ho wever, continuing its efforts to 
locate suitable properties for acquisition. 
 
4. As per the criteria for purchase of properties abroad, the 
economic cost of purchase of a Chancery building based on 

-19- 
 
 
 
current space norms and the rental escalation during the last 
10 years works out to be Rs 19,57,76,674/ -. The 
Ministry/Mission are seriously pursuing any proposal that 
falls within the range of economic viability. 
 
Consulate General of India, Munich 
1. Germany was identified  as one of the high rental stations 
and CGI Munich was requested to prioritize acquisition of 
property and locate suitable properties for acquisition. 
Munich is a real estate market where property prices have 
shown an upward trend. It is difficult to find a good, well 
located and reasonably priced property in Munich that meets 
our economic criteria.  The Consulate, in past, had tried to 
locate suitable properties, both for Chancery and CG’s 
residence, through advertisement in prominent local 
newspapers and had inspected many properties; 
unfortunately none was found fit for various reasons viz. too 
expensive, requiring massive renovation, unsuitable lay -out 
and design, poor location, inadequate size, lack of privacy & 
security etc. 
 
2. One Property that largely met Consulate’s requirements in 
terms of space, location and other norms - was identified   in 
2011 for housing the Chancery. However, the deal could not 
be concluded as the price offered by the Ministry was not 
acceptable to the owner of the property. Afte r inspections of 
over dozen odd properties, the Mission also shortlisted 4 
properties for the residence of Consul General which were 
also not found suitable enough by the Property Team. Later 
in October 2012, more properties for CG’s Residence were 
identified by the Mission. While most of the properties 
identified had to be rejected in view of the high price and not 
meeting the area norms in case of one property at Garteweg 
which met with the requirements of the Consulate but the 
purchase fell through as the landlord accepted another offer.  
 
3. Consulate has, however, continued to make efforts to 
locate/identify suitable properties for purchase. Despite 
extensive efforts, not too many suitable properties could be 
identified and those identified were not found suitable for 
consideration as one of them was exorbitantly priced and 
other would have needed extensive renovation work.   
    
4. As per the criteria for purchase of properties abroad, the 
economic cost of purchase of a Chancery building   based 

-20- 
 
 
 
on current sp ace norms and the rental escalation during the 
last 10 years works out to be Rs. 30,88,05,286 the 
Ministry/Mission  are seriously pursuing any proposal that 
falls within the range of economic viability. 
 
Kyrgyzstan (Embassy of India, Bishkek): 
The Government of the Republic of Kyrgyzstan has offered a plot 
measuring 3000 Sq. mts for 49 years of lease. The size of the plot is not 
suitable and lease period is at variance from standard 99 years lease. 
Further the offer is subject to reciprocity wit h GOI offering a similar size 
property in Delhi at Rs.1 for the lease period of 49 years. The Mission is 
not in favour of acquiring  land on reciprocity as the cost of land in Delhi 
cannot be compared with the cost in Bishkek and has suggested purchase 
of built up property for Chancery. The Mission is making efforts to locate a 
suitable one. 
Sweden (Embassy of India, Stockholm):  
Government Owned - Embassy Residence and one Residence; Rented - 
Chancery and 3 residences 
1. No suitable property has been identified  yet despite 
Mission’s efforts.  Properties identified by the Consulate in 
2003 could not be purchased in view of the condition of the 
properties which needed extensive renovations and had 
single exit/entry. The proposals were also not economically 
viable as the prices of properties were at an all-time high. 
 
2. A suitable property was located for Chancery in 2005 but the 
purchase could not materialize as the asking price was too 
high. Between 2005 and 2010  Consulate continued to make 
efforts to locate suitable properties. Another proposal   to 
purchase an alternate ER and shift the Chancery to the 
Govt. Owned ER could not materialize due to the objections 
raised by the Management board of Corporative where 
Embassy Residence is located to the proposal. 
 
3. In 2013, three properties were identified and discussions 
held with the owners. While in the case of one of the 
properties which was an historical building, the proposal was 
dropped in view of the restrictions  that Heritage properties   
bring with them on Repairs/renovation works. The owners of 
the other two building pulled back from the proposal. In fact 
in the case of one of the buildings, Ministry’s approval was 
also conveyed to acquire the property but the deal could not 
go through as the owners decided to defer the sale. 

-21- 
 
 
 
 
4. In September 2013, another property was identified but 
could not be pursued in view of its location in the outskirts of 
the City and high cost. A proposal for purchase of a 
“Heritage Prope rty’ could not be pursued in view of the 
restrictions that come with such properties in November 
2014. Further in this case a bid amount had to be committed 
before start of the negotiations and it was felt that this could 
add complications at a later stage  if the purchase does not 
come through. 
 
5. As per the criteria for purchase of properties abroad, the 
economic cost of purchase of a Chancery building based on 
current space norms and the rental escalation during the last 
10 years works out to be Rs. 49,10,2 0,727/-.  The 
Ministry/Mission is seriously pursuing any proposal that falls 
within the range of economic viability. 
 
Italy (Consulate General of India, Milan):  
Government of India owned Embassy Residence and 5 Residences; 
Rented-Chancery and 3 Residences 
1. Mission has not been able to identify a secure and suitable 
property yet. Milan is hosting EXPO 2015 hence the real 
estate prices are significantly higher at present. Mission is 
continuously making efforts to locate suitable property. The 
Consulate Genera l of India in Milan has been looking at 
purchase proposals for Chancery as well as residences of 
Consul General and other officials for the past many years. 
 
2. In the beginning of 2008, the property team from the Ministry 
visited Milan to evaluate the propos als sent by the 
Consulate.  3 residence apartments for Consul, Vice Consul 
and Vice Consul/PS were purchased in September 2008. 
The remaining 2 for Assistant and Upper Division Clerk were 
purchased in September 2009. 
 
3. Regular search and visits to evaluate suitable properties for 
Chancery office and residence of Consul General are carried 
out. In April 2010, the property team visited Milan to assess 
the properties identified and found suitable by CGI Milan for 
Chancery o ffice and residence of Consul General. After 
evaluation by the property team, properties for Chancery and 
residence of CG were shortlisted and market evaluation was 
carried out. As the evaluation of residence of CG was much 

-22- 
 
 
 
less than the asking price, the owner refused to sell the 
property. As for the Chancery office, the owners informed 
the Consulate that the property was un-available.   
 
4. Location/identification of suitable/adequate Chancery 
premises is not very easy as not many stand -alone 
properties are available and properties in a building are 
usually denied keeping in mind the huge number of people 
visiting the Consulate for services. Whenever suitable stand -
alone properties are available, we are informed by various 
real estate agencies and the property is visited. 
 
5. As per the criteria for purchase of properties abroad, the 
economic cost of purchase of a Chancery building based on 
current space norms and the rental escalation during the last 
10 years works out to be Rs. 124,16,60,861/ -. The 
Ministry/Mission is seriously pursuing any proposal that falls 
within the range of economic viability". 
 
30. Audit further pointed out that most of the observations raised by the audit pertain 
to well-developed cities/countries. In all the cases there has been significant  passage of 
time without identification of suitable properties. This indicates lack of a systematic and 
concerted approach by the Ministry/Mission. There does not appear to be any 
structured mechanism in place at the Missions/Ministry for interaction with the local 
government/professional agencies for identification of properties.  To this the Ministry 
further submitted that identification/acquisition of properties was a continuous process 
undertaken by the Missions/Posts within the frame -work of the rules/r egulations 
applicable for such acquisitions. Missions were constantly/continuously on the look out 
for suitable properties. Ministry on its part sends guidelines on such acquisitions 
regularly. The status of acquisitions in the Missions/Posts highlighted b y the Audit were 
that for PMI Geneva, Switzerland  the last legal impediment to the grant of PLQ was 
removed with the withdrawal of objection by Mr. Parratte  on May 11, 2015. This paved 
the way for change of zoning regulations applicable on the plot of land from residential 

-23- 
 
 
 
to office space.  The Mission had been advised to engage with the land owner and the 
construction company to finalise the Promise to purch ase and sell Agreement (PVA) 
with the owner so as to ensure that the PVA was in accordance with the GFR/CVC 
guidelines. With respect to Eol Berne,CGI Hamburg, CGI Munich, Eol Bishkek, Eol 
Stockholm and CGI Milan Missions were continuing their efforts to ac quire economically 
viable/suitable property. 
31. The Secretary during the oral evidence further deposed as: 
"Geneva is a city where it is very difficult to find a plot at the right place of 
the right size. So, for many years, we ha d been pursuing a particular plot. 
Now, what had happened was that we got into zoning problem because 
when we were trying to ensure change of zoning, the people living around 
the plot raised legal challenges to that. We have just settled the last of 
those legal challenges, and in fact , we have sent the proposal to the 
Ministry of Finance only about a few weeks ago saying that we should 
send an Empowered Committee to Geneva to tie this problem up before 
we have fresh issues". 
 
32. When the Committee desired to know as to w hat were the dispu ted issues in 
respect of property acquisition in Geneva and  for how long the case had been sub -
judice and also to provide the latest status , the Ministry submitted that  the Permanent 
Mission of India (PMI Geneva) had been pursuing purchase of a plot of la nd, which 
meets with the Ministry's requirements for construction of Chancery building, since 
October 2009.  The basic issue was that the Canton of Geneva’s approval was required 
for using this property as a Chancery i.e. approval for conversion of zoning law from 
“residential” to “office space” in respect of this property.  As a result of efforts of the 
Mission, the Canton of Geneva initiated a Revised PLQ (Zone Changing Approval) 
Process on 17 July 2013 by redrawing the contours of the plot by including C hemin de 
Gaeis, a private road adjacent to the plot.  Subsequently, the Municipalities of Grand 

-24- 
 
 
 
Saconnex and Pregny -Chambesy withdrew their earlier objections.  However, five new 
objections were raised by the neighbouring landowners against the revised PLQ .  The 
State Council of Geneva set aside the five objections and adopted the revised PLQ (No. 
29408-530) on 16 April 2014, allowing a maximum of 30 days to file a legal appeal.  
One Appeal was filed by the owner of a neighbouring plot which has led to star t of legal 
process and, therefore, delayed the adoption of the PLQ. In August 2014, the 
Permanent Mission of India to the UN in Geneva arranged a working session with Mr. 
Paratte, the complainant petitioner, to discuss his objections filed against the adop tion 
of PLQ.  Separately, Mission was also briefed by a representative of the construction 
company, M/s Implenia, in September 2014 that they have discussed with Mr. Paratte a 
possibility of purchasing his plot of land with a condition that he will withdra w his 
objection against adoption of the PLQ.  The case had been sub -judice since July 2013. 
The PMI Geneva had been informed that the decision of the Court of Justice may be 
expected by the first quarter of 2015. The last legal impediment to the grant of P LQ was 
removed with the withdrawal of objection by Mr. Parratte on May 11, 2015. This paved 
the way for change of zoning regulations applicable on the plot of land from residential 
to office space.  The Mission had been advised to engage with the land owne r and the 
construction company to finalise the Promise to purchase and sell Agreement (PVA) 
with the owner so as to ensure that the PVA is in accordance with the GFR/CVC 
guidelines. Ministry also maintained a database of rented properties abroad in the form 
of Annual Rent Statements sent by Missions/Posts abroad. 
33. When the Committee wished to know as to w hat prevented the Ministry from 
having it s own database and suitably revising it on the basis of information received 

-25- 
 
 
 
from Missions, instead of wholly depending on the rent statements sent by Missions, the 
Ministry of External Affairs submitted that t he Ministry was so far maintaining database 
in the form of Annual Rent Statements. Pursuant to the observations made by the Audit 
and the PAC, the Ministry had now compiled a comprehensive database of MEA 
properties abroad and MEA offices in India. The format used allows easy compilation 
and updating o f data. The database covers all MEA properties abroad, both those 
owned by the Government of India as well as rented properties along with information 
on annual rental outgo. It covered not only Chancery buildings but all residences, 
Cultural Centres and p lots of land. Further, it included MEA offices in India including 
Regional Passport Offices, Passport Sewa Kendras, ICCR Regional offices, and Branch 
Secretariats. While the Ministry maintains detailed information on GOI -owned 
properties, information in re spect of rented properties abroad could be compiled and 
updated only on the basis of inputs received from Missions/Posts. This was because the 
Missions/Posts had delegated powers to surrender, rehire or change their rented 
properties within the prescribed rental ceilings.  These changes were intimated to the 
Ministry at the end of Financial Year. 
 
34. In response to the Committee's query to provide status and details thereof of their 
own database by February, 2015 as was promised to the PAC during the oral evid ence 
held on 5.1.2015, the Ministry of External Affairs submitted that since the last meeting 
held on 5 January 2015, the Ministry of External Affairs had completed compilation of a 
comprehensive database of MEA properties abroad and MEA offices in India. The 
database covered all MEA properties abroad, both those owned by the Government of 
India as well as rented properties along with information on annual rental outgo. It 

-26- 
 
 
 
covered not only Chancery buildings but all residences and Cultural Centres. Further,  it 
included MEA offices in India including Regional Passport Offices, Passport Sewa 
Kendras, ICCR Regional offices and Branch Secretariats. The database would be 
updated electronically. It  would be updated annually in April.  
VI. Inability to acquire land on reciprocal basis 
35. Audit pointed out that, examination of the records maintained by the Ministry and 
various Missions/Posts revealed that Ministry failed to acquire plots of land on reciprocal 
basis at China and Bangladesh. 
 
36. The Committee asked as to wh y the Ministry ha d not been able to take a 
decision to allot land to the Consulate General of China in Kolkata as this would 
facilitate the acquisition of land offered by China at Guangzhou and  why and at what 
level the earlier decision was taken  in case the Ministry was trying to delink the two 
issues. The Committee further asked as to why the delinking efforts was being taken 
now, particularly, in view of the reciprocity clause in the Vienna Convention. In response 
to this, the Ministry submitted that land allotment to the Chinese Consulate in Kolkata 
was in the jurisdiction of the Government of West Bengal. The Government of West 
Bengal had already alloted land to the Consulate in the Diplomatic Enclave in Kolkata 
(Action Area 11 E, Diplomatic Enclave New Town Kolkata -700156). The Ministry had 
concurred in the decision of the State Government. The Chinese Government was yet 
to agree to the offer in question. The Ministry was in dialogue with the Chinese 
Government/ Embassy of China in this regard. No decision ha d been taken by th e 
Ministry to deny reciprocity with respect to the allotment of land for Chinese Consulate 
in Kolkata. 

-27- 
 
 
 
 
37. When the Committee desired to know how much of the construction at Dhaka, 
Bangladesh was complete as of now and whether the Ministry was contemplating action 
against the contractor for the delay, it was submitted that as of end of October 2014, 
around 75% of the work had been completed at Dhaka. Staff Housing Block of the 
project had been ha nded over by the contractor and occupied by the Mission’s staff. 
Levy for compensation for liquidated damages against contractor shall be decided as 
per terms and conditions of the contract on completion of the project. 
 
38. When the Committee enquired that  how many countries’ Missions ha d been 
allotted land on reciprocal basis and whether all these countries ha d allotted land to 
India in reciprocation, the Ministry stated that the initial information would be available 
with Ministry of Urban Development. The M inistry was in communication with the Land 
& Development Office of the Ministry of Urban Development to obtain the information on 
land given to the Foreign Diplomatic Missions in India on reciprocal basis. The 
information on this aspect as well as details of such countries which in turn have given 
land to Indian Missions abroad on reciprocal basis would be compiled on priority basis 
after receipt of the details from the Ministry of Urban Development. 
 
39. When the Committee further asked as to what were the ste ps initiated by the 
Ministry to ascertain from the Ministry of Urban Development the details of land allotted 
to various countries on reciprocal basis and how many of these countries have 
reciprocated so far, the Ministry of External Affairs stated that th ey, were in 
communication with the Land and Development office of the Ministry of Urban 
Development to obtain the information on the land allotted to the Foreign Diplomatic 

-28- 
 
 
 
Missions in India on reciprocal basis and of such countries which ha d in turn given land 
to Indian Missions abroad on the same basis. 
 
40. The Ministry further submitted that i n response to the request made to the 
Ministry of Urban Development, i t was submitted that land had been allotted / 
earmarked to Vietnam, Maldives, Fiji (only earmarke d as of now, with proposal to finally 
allot the same), Bhutan, Bangladesh, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar and Uzbekistan. 
Reciprocally land had been allotted by countries Vietnam, Maldives, Bhutan, 
Bangladesh, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar and Uzbekistan to the Indian Missions  in their 
countries. In case of Fiji, reciprocally the land had been earmarked as of now with an 
intention to finally allot the same. The Foreign Secretary during evidence deposed as 
under: 
"In the particular case, we had identified land, but there had bee n a delay 
in completing the transaction because it was linked to the purchase of 
Chinese property in Kolkata. The Chinese asked for a larger amount of 
land while we asked for a smaller amount of land. The per square metre 
cost was very different and  how w e arrived at reciprocity became an 
issue. These were the kinds of problems we face when we acquire 
properties abroad. They were not simple transactions where you estimate 
the value, do the calculations and say ‘yes’ or ‘no’. But I do want to say 
that it is not that rental expenditure, when properties are not purchased or 
finalised, is unauthorised. That is not the case. Looking back, perhaps 
from the very beginning, we should have insisted on reciprocity, but we did 
not. I think, those were early post-independence days. Maybe we were too 
enthusiastic, but today the situation is that we try to keep as many 
transactions reciprocal. We are trying to compensate with countries, 
where we have already given away land, to find ways of getting it back. 
Sometimes, it works and sometimes it is very difficult. You had referred to 
Dacca. Again we had encountered some delays. But I was there a few 
months ago. A part of the problem in the last stage was some liquidity 
problem which the company executing the project had. We have 
addressed those. I think, perhaps when I appear next time before the 
Committee, I can report to you that Dacca has been completed. It is partly 
already occupied. People have moved into the residential part. But there 
are parts which need to be done. T hen comes the case of Port of Spain. 

-29- 
 
 
 
This is particularly a difficult case. I think, here a part of the reason was 
our own indecisiveness. People were very indecisive on the space norms, 
and the requirements of the cultural centre.  I cannot blame anybody else 
other than ourselves for the situation. Again, I hope to give this my 
attention and come back to the hon. Committee. On Dacca, as I said, 74 
of the residential accommodations are occupied and we are now literally in 
the last stages of completing that project. I hope by early next year that 
would be done. 
 
 
VII. Purchase of building unsuitable for public assembly/representational 
 functions for Indian Cultural Centre (ICC) at Eol, Paris. 
 
41.  Audit pointed out that MEA decided to purchase a property belonging to French 
Government for establishing India n Culture Centre at Paris which was found to be 
unsuitable under French regulations by the two architects engaged by the Mission. The 
reports of both the architects were ignored and the property was purchased.  
 
42. When the Committee asked as to why did the Ministry purchase the building 
when both the consultant architects had opined that the property was unsuitable and not 
in accordance with the Fre nch regulations, it was submitted that the Mission and ICCR 
had assessed that the property was the most appropriate and suitable property for 
Cultural Centre. It was assessment of the Ministry that with appropriate approvals from 
local Paris authorities, the property could become the functional Cultural Centre. 
 
43. When the Committee queried as to why the building was purchased when it 
remained unutilized for 3 years after purchase and thus obviously was unsuitable for the 
purpose, the Ministry of External Aff airs stated that certain renovations and 
refurbishments were needed in the property which were being undertaken. 
 
44. The Committee further enquired whether the architect -consultant appointed for 

-30- 
 
 
 
renovation work submitted his plans and drawings and  also to specify the current status 
whether the Cultural Centre had become functional. In this regard, the Ministry 
submitted that the Ministry had approved plans and drawings submitted by the architect-
consultant.  Renovation/ refurbishments were to be undertaken and  completed by mid 
2016.  
 
45. When the Committee desired to know as to why the Ministry appointed  
architects/consultants twice to ascertain the suitability of the property when it had to go 
by its own assessment, it was submitted that the Ministry appointed 
architects/consultants twice in case of purchase of built-up properties only. At stage one 
the architects/consultants were appointed with a limited scope to assess the feasibility 
of the property in terms of its desired usage before the purchase and at the s econd 
stage the architect/consultant were appointed for the design purposes involving local 
body approvals, design and execution of the projects. In the instant case, the 
architect/consultant was appointed with a limited scope to assess the suitability of the 
building based on various aspects i.e. structural soundness, feasibility of utilisation of 
structure for the desired purpose, compliance with local regulations etc. Thereafter, 
decision on the proposal was taken by the Ministry/ICCR based on inputs fro m the 
architects/consultants along with broader aspects of importance of the project, legal 
issues etc. As such the Ministry/ICCR could not do away with the requirements of 
appointment of architects/consultants.  
 
46. The Ministry further submitted that i n the instant case, after surveying a number 
of properties, the Mission identified the French government owned 3 -storied built -up 

-31- 
 
 
 
property located at 3, Avenue du Lowendal as suitable in terms of space availability and 
its prominent location.  Director General (DG) ICCR in April 2009, visited this property at 
3, Avenue du Lowendal, and along with the Ambassador of India, Paris confirmed 
India's interest to the French Government to acquire the identified property given its 
suitability from the point of view of space and the location. Also in September 2009, the 
new President ICCR, Dr. Karan Singh during his visit to Paris in connection with the 
installation of the Sri Aurobindo's Statue at UNESCO headquarters also confirmed the 
suitability of this property. T he Property was finally recommended by a Property team 
after evaluating all the available options in August 2010. Subsequent to the confirmation 
by the ICCR/Ministry for this property, Ministry advised the Mission to commission 
market evaluation to assess the market value of the Property and simultaneously look at 
the feasibility and structural soundness of the same. At that stage, when the 
Government of India had already confirmed its interest in this French Government -
owned property, architect who looked at the feasibility of opening Indian Cultural Centre, 
pointed out the unsuitability of the property based on its existing conditions. It was true 
that there were objections raised by both the consultant and architect on account of 
single entry / exit door.  However, considering the usefulness of the property, 
ICCR/Ministry took up the matter with French Government which authorized the Mission 
to make additions/alterations in the existing building as well as, if required, to rebuild the 
property as per the re quirements of the Indian Government by following building bye 
laws prevailing in the city.  Ministry had already appointed the Architect -Consultant for 
renovation of the property and concept design of the renovation had been approved. 
The approved architect  is to obtain the approval of local authorities for concept design 

-32- 
 
 
 
for renovation approved by the Ministry in terms of local bye laws. In terms of time line, 
the tender inquiry was expected to be floated in July 2015 and to award the contract by 
September 2015. It was estimated that the project could be completed by September 
2016 and put to use for ICC at Paris. 
 
47. The Secretary during evidence further deposed as under: 
 
"The way I take it is that even whatever happened before my time, there 
are lessons to b e learnt. In Paris, the issue is that we should have been 
careful about the heritage implications of a property. There is a big lesson 
to be learnt in every embassy, which is that you should be very, very 
careful when it comes to any heritage property and you should not get into 
a situation where you buy a property and then discover that there are 
some local Government rules that you were not fully alert to. That caution 
today is being displayed in some of our other transactions, for example, 
when we are ap proaching Stockholm. On the issue of Paris -  you had 
referred to it and a number of Members had also referred to it – I think we 
got ourselves into a bad situation because the complexity of heritage 
property was not fully factored in. The French rules and  regulations about 
renovating it were also not fully factored in". 
 
VIII. Delay in commencement of construction 
48. Audit examination of the records maintained by Ministry/respective Missions 
revealed inordinate delays in construction of Chancery/residential buildings in at least 
10 cases. 
 
49. When the Committee asked whether the Ministry had assessed the inordinate 
delays noted by the audit and ascertained the reasons for such delays, the Ministry of 
External Affairs stated that the Ministry had already provided reasons for delays in each 
of the construction projects mentioned in the audit’s observations to the audit. 
 
50. When the Committee further asked as to what steps ha d been taken by the 
Ministry to get the construction completed at the earliest consequent to the observation 

-33- 
 
 
 
of the audit, the Ministry submitted that given the financial constraints on the basis of 
budget allotment during last few years and its full utilization by the Ministry, it would not 
be possible for the Ministry to initiate the execution of construction for all the projects. 
The Ministry had prepared a priority list/ five years action plan (2014-19) for execution of 
these construction projects on the basis of anticipated budget allotment under Capital 
Outlay. On the basis of the five years action plan, the Ministry has been chalking out the 
time line for each of the activity/process. Ministry is regula rly reviewing these activities 
vis-à-vis the time line. 
 
51. To a pointed query of the Ministry as to w hen the Action Plan (2014 -19) was  
approved and as to why the Ministry gave a statement to PAC that two five year action 
plans have been prepared starting from 2006 -07 when no action plans were actually 
ready and whether the Ministry agree with the audit’s view that the Action Plan was 
prepared only after completion of the Audit, the Ministry submitted that t he current 
action plan 2014-19 was prepared / appr oved in August 2014. As regards Action plans 
for the period 2006 -07, the two five year action plans for Acquisition  of properties and 
Construction/Renovation of projects for the period 2006 -07 to 2010 -11 ha d also 
prepared. It was regretted that the same co uld not be traced on time to submit to the 
Audit authorities. The plans were misplaced perhaps during the shifting of the Project 
Division from Akbar Bhawan to Jawaharlal Nehru Bhawan. The error was however 
deeply regretted. The Ministry did not agree with  the Audit that the Action Plans were 
prepared only after completion of the Audit. The Audit’s view was erroneous and not 
based on the fact that the two Action Plans for 2006 -2007 to 2010 -11 were in place.  
The committee would notice that while the rate of  success of sticking to the plan in 

-34- 
 
 
 
terms of finalization of purchases was markedly higher in the initial years of the plan, the 
success rate did fall after two years of the plan indicating the change in the international 
environment being more challenging due to rapid rise of terrorism and internal strife and 
war like situation at many places. However, during the same period the Ministry was 
able to acquire some other properties which had not been initially planned reflecting in 
the judicious use of Government funds. 
 
52. Audit further pointed out that the Ministry had accepted the fact that the plans 
were not provided to audit and the same were misplaced during the shifting of the 
Projects Division. This was indicative of the fact that the Ministry did not giv e due 
importance to planned and a systematic approach to global estate management. This 
was also reflected by the fact that no action plan was prepared after 2010 -11 and an 
action plan was prepared by the Ministry only in August 2014, after being pointed o ut by 
the audit. The action plan was only provided to the audit with the current ATN, hence a 
detailed analysis was not possible. However, preliminary scrutiny showed that the 
Ministry planned to acquire 37 properties between 2006 -07 and 2010 -11 it could n ot 
acquire 19 or 51% of the properties. Similarly , in case of construction projects 54 out of 
108 projects or 50 % were yet to be completed. In fact 5 projects planned for 2006 -07 
and 21 projects for 2007-08 were yet to be completed. 
 
53. The Ministry in respo nse to the Audit observation further stated that a s regards 
success rate of acquisition of properties as mentioned in their reply the rate of success 
in terms of finalisation of planned purchases was markedly higher @ 86% in the year 
2006-07 and tapers down to 16.6% in the last year of the plan reflecting the changes in 

-35- 
 
 
 
the international environment. As regards audit’s contention that only around 50% of 
planned properties were acquired, during the same period the Ministry was able to 
acquire some other prop erties which had not been initially planned reflecting in the 
judicious use of Government funds. Further changing international environment, impact 
of terrorism, regime change, internal strife, external war, lawlessness in view of poor 
social economic cond itions, also contributes towards non -fulfilment of the Five Year 
Action Plan.  In any given span of five years international environment definitely shifts 
its orientation and is not static or ideal as was assessed at the time of making Five Year 
Action Pla n. Details of properties acquired during the period which were not initially 
envisaged under the action plan had already been furnished to Audit. 
 
54. When the Committee desired the Ministry to provide the latest status regarding 
the stage of completion of the  projects pointed out by the audit, the Ministry submitted 
as under: 
"Latest update in respect of the project pointed out by the audit is as under: 
CGI Shanghai Selection of the Architect and finalization of Design Brief under 
process. Given the present status of the project, Ministry has 
prioritized this construction project to be commenced around 
April 2016 and completed by October 2017 as per its five year 
action plan (2014-19). 
High Commission of 
India, Port of Spain 
(Mahatma Gandh i 
International Culture 
Centre) 
Tender Documents for the project are under finalization. Given 
the present status of the project, Ministry has prioritized this 
construction project to be commenced around June 2015 and 
completed by December 2016 in its five  year action plan 
(2014-19). 
High Commission of 
India, Port Louis 
(Mauritius) 
Local Body’s approvals for construction of the buildings have 
been obtained. Detailed Estimates and Tender Documents for 
the project are under finalization. Given the present st atus of 
the project, Ministry has prioritized this construction project to 
be commenced around June 2015 and completed by 

-36- 
 
 
 
December 2016 in its five year action plan (2014-19). 
High Commission of 
India, Dar -Es-
Salaam, Tanzania 
Letter of Acceptance to the l owest bidder, for the construction 
of the building, has been issued. After signing the agreement 
with the Contractor, the construction is expected to commence 
in early December 2014. 
Embassy of India, 
Kathmandu 
Around 64.71% of the construction work completed. 
Embassy of India, 
Tashkent 
(Uzbekistan) 
It has been decided in the Ministry to float tender for the 
project in two bid system. Notice inviting Prequalification bids 
from the interested construction companies in Uzbekistan and 
India has been floated. Ministry has prioritized this construction 
project to be commenced around April 2015 and completed by 
October 2016 in its five year action plan (2014-19). 
Embassy of India,  
Kyiv (Ukraine) 
Recently, the Preliminary Design for the project has been 
finalized. Given the present status of the project, Ministry has 
prioritized this construction project to be commenced around 
September 2016 and completed by September 2018 in its five 
year action plan (2014-19). 
Embassy of India, 
Brasilia. 
The buildings ha ve been completed in November 2013 and 
are being utilized by the Mission since December 2013. 
Embassy of India, 
Doha Qatar 
Ministry has kept this project pending since Mission is pursuing 
the larger plot of land with the Government of Qatar. 
High Commission of 
India, Nicosia 
Detailed Estimates and Tender Documents for the project are 
under finalization. Given the present status of the project, 
Ministry has prioritized this construction project to be 
commenced around June 2015 and completed by Decem ber 
2016 in the five year action plan (2014-19). 
 
 
55. When the Committee asked as to what steps had been taken by the Ministry to 
curb the delays in construction/purchase of properties in India and abroad and whether 
the Ministry had fixed any responsibility  for the delays pointed out by the Audit, the 
Ministry submitted that  the Ministry had taken steps to streamline the process of 
Acquisition of Properties and Construction projects to cut down on avoidable delays 

-37- 
 
 
 
which includes formulation of a firm and im plementable action plan and prioritizing the 
Stations/ Construction projects identified/pointed out by the Audit authorities and other 
projects; Standardisation of documentations like Expression of Interests for appointment 
of Consultants/Architects, Terms  of References for selection of Architects/consultants, 
Tender Documents for construction works and major renovations/repairs; regular 
monitoring of the Projects by the Project Monitoring Team formed at Mission level as 
well as by the Ministry through regu lar visits and monthly performance reports , and 
check lists have been put in place  for points of consideration for construction projects to 
avoid exclusion of any important aspect which could delay the project at the time of 
execution. 
 
56.  As regards, delays in acquisition/construction projects, the Ministry submitted as 
under: 
" (i) Current status of the acquisition of properties pointed out by the 
Audit in 7 stations has been given in reply to question No. 12  
 
(ii) As regard, status of t he construction projects pointed out by the 
Audit is as under: 
Name of the Mission Status as on January 2015 
CGI Shanghai Selection of the Architects and finalization of Design Brief 
has been finalized. The Post has been advised to circulate 
the Design Br ief to the selected Architects for Design 
Competition. Given the present status of the project, Ministry 
has prioritized this construction project to be commenced 
around April 2016 and completed by October 2017 as per its 
five year action plan (2014-19). 
High Commission of 
India, Port of Spain 
(Mahatma Gandhi 
International Culture 
Draft for the Tender Documents in respect of the project 
have been finalized. After approval of revised documents 
received from the Consultant, tenders are expected to be  
floated in first quarter of year 2015. Ministry has prioritized 

-38- 
 
 
 
Centre) this construction project to be commenced around June 
2015 and completed by December 2016 in its five year 
action plan (2014-19). 
High Commission of 
India, Port Louis 
(Mauritius) 
Local Body’s approvals for construction of the buildings have 
been obtained. Detailed Estimates and Tender Documents 
for the project are under finalization. Given the present 
status of the project, Ministry has prioritized this construction 
project to be commenced ar ound June 2015 and completed 
by December 2016 in its five year action plan (2014-19). 
High Commission of 
India, Dar -Es-Salaam, 
Tanzania 
Work has commenced w.e.f. 01 December 2014 with 
stipulated completion period of 18 months. 
Embassy of India, 
Kathmandu 
Around 65.00% of the construction work completed. 
Embassy of India, 
Tashkent (Uzbekistan) 
It has been decided in the Ministry to float tender for the 
project in two bid system. Prequalification bids from the 
interested construction companies have been received and 
are under examination. Ministry has prioritized this 
construction project to be commenced around April 2015 
and completed by October 2016 in its five year action plan 
(2014-19). 
Embassy of India, Kyiv 
(Ukraine) 
Government of India, purchased a built-up property at Zabily 
Street, Kyiv, Ukraine at a cost of US$ 800,000 in September 
1995. Ministry also approved some essential renovations of 
US$ 400,000 based on visual findings in the built -up 
structure in 1995. However , Land registration could no t be 
done until August 1999 because of complex local regulations 
in Kyiv, Ukraine.  Mission appointed a consultant for 
renovations works in February 1996 and initiated the 
proposal for renovations. However, after land registrations in 
March 1999 when the Mi ssion approached for construction 
permit for renovations works, local authorities desired that 
Mission may get the structural investigations of the property 
and renovations shall be based on such investigations only. 
Subsequently the consultant proposed st ructural 
reinforcement of about US$150,000 apart from renovations 
cost of US$ 400,000. In view of this additional cost, the 

-39- 
 
 
 
Consultant also demanded revision in the consultancy 
agreement with increase in consultation fee. The Committee 
on Non -plan Expendit ure (CNE) in its meeting held on 
November 3, 1999, during deliberations on the proposed 
renovations,  suggested to the Ministry to explore option of 
disposing of the property. However , as the re -sale value of 
the property was found to be less than 1/4 (US$  200,000 
against US$ 800,000) of the purchase value, the options 
was not pursued further. In March 2000, A Technical team of 
Senior Architect and Structural Engineer from the Ministry 
visited Kyiv to assess the Structural Report viz -a-viz 
structural reinfo rcement proposal by the consultant. The 
team however, advised demolition of the existing structure in 
place of proposed renovations and recommended to 
construct a new building in the plot which the Ministry  
approved on January, 2001.    Ministry in Decembe r, 2003 
appointed M/s Arcom,  Architect -Consultant for Construction 
of Chancery Residences in Kyiv, Ukraine following EOI and 
design competition of short -listed firms. Ministry also 
approved engaging of M/s GDIP, a local Govt. Agency to 
facilitate the Miss ion in obtaining the approval of design 
proposal from the local authorities. However, as the Ministry 
had purchased a built -up property, new construction on this 
plot necessitated signing of the Revised Lease agreement 
with the Kyiv authorities. This whole  process took almost 4 
years and finally in March 2007, with Ministry's approval the 
Land Lease Agreement was signed for 49 years permitting 
the Ministry for construction of Chancery Residences on the 
plot. In the meantime, looking at the potential of the plot, 
Ministry decided to construct  the Chancery, a Multi -purpose 
hall for cultural activities along with Chancery Residences on 
this plot. However, as per prevailing local regulations, 
Mission had to obtain permission for change of land use 
from Resident ial to Mix -use (Chancery & residences). This 
change in Landuse required City Planning Argumentation 
(CPA), i.e. an Urban Feasibility Study based on the design 
concept of the project before the same is accepted for 
approval by the local authorities.  Missio n in September, 
2010 engaged a specialize consultant for the Urban studies 
which completed this by end of 2011 and therefore change 

-40- 
 
 
 
in Landuse was received only in September 2012. Action 
was simultaneously initiated by the Ministry / Mission for 
preparation of a concept design for construction of the 
proposed Chancery -cum-residential complex. Ministry in 
February 2011, revised the Space area norms for the 
Missions abroad hence, the Concept design was also 
required to be revised and Ministry approved the Con cept 
design of Chancery -cum-residential complex in April 2011. 
This also necessitated signing of supplementary agreement 
with the Architect-consultant in May 2011. The consultant in 
September 2012, submitted the preliminary design with a 
building design ba sed on sustainable design parameters in 
anticipation of proposed changes in the local regulation in 
this regard. However these local laws have still not been 
enacted and therefore Ministry advised the architect -
consultant to stick to conventional design on ly. Reasons for 
delay relate to the Kyiv city authorities and the Ukrainian 
Ministry of Regional Construction and Development which 
made changes in legislation and brought a new requirement 
regarding construction norms. After the change in 
construction norms which came into effect in October, 2009, 
the Ukrainian Parliament on September 22, 2011 adopted 
the 'Law of Ukraine on Amendments to Article 28 on Land'. 
Some of the major changes in Ukraine construction legislation 
for the period from 2010 to 2013 which according to the 
Architect-consultant have resulted in delay in obtaining local 
body approvals are as under; 
i. General terms and features of planning 
legislation - Three basic laws of planning 
legislation 
 
ii. The land issue in passing the licensing procedures 
in the construction 
 
iii. Territory planning 
 
iv. Design and construction of the object category of 
complexity. 
 
v. Licensing procedures in the construction 
 

-41- 
 
 
 
vi. Ecology 
 
Such frequent changes in the local land laws necessitated 
fresh/additional approvals. The Mission is working in close 
cooperation with state agency GDIP and the local Consultant 
has been making efforts to get the necessary approval from the 
Government of Ukraine.  Senior Architect from the Ministry 
visited Kyiv in May, 2013 and had detailed consultations with 
the local Architect and with GDIP. After making the necessary 
changes in the design and layout plan, etc. the local Architect 
submitted updated functional layouts and space optimization 
configuration. Ministry has finalized the Preliminary Design for 
the project. However no progress has been made in the last 
one year because of political instability in the country. The 
Mission has also been engaged in evacuation & welfare of 
Indian nationals in the disturbed areas.  Given the present 
status o f the project, Ministry has prioritized this 
construction project to be commenced around September 
2016 and completed by September 2018 in the five year 
action plan (2014 -19). However, we need to be conscious 
of the ongoing hostile situation in Ukraine an d economy on 
the verge of default. 
Embassy of India, 
Brasilia. 
The buildings have been completed in November 2013 and 
are being utilized by the Mission since December 2013. 
Embassy of India, Doha 
Qatar 
Ministry has kept this project pending since Mission  is 
pursuing the larger plot of land with the Government of 
Qatar. 
High Commission of 
India, Nicosia 
Detailed Estimates and Tender Documents for the project 
are under finalization. Given the present status of the 
project, Ministry has prioritized this construction project to be 
commenced around June 2015 and completed by December 
2016 in the five year action plan (2014-19). 
 
 
IX. Inefficiencies in renovation/ redevelopment 
 
57. Audit pointed out that records maintained at Ministry/respective Missions 
revealed that at four stations viz., Sydney, Hong Kong, Kuala Lumpur and Jakarta, there 

-42- 
 
 
 
were considerable delay in renovation/redevelopment work. 
 
58. When the Committee asked as to what corrective measures ha d been taken by 
the Ministry to complete the renovation/redevelopment works at the earliest at the 
properties cited in the audit para , the Ministry stated that in respect of Jakarta the 
Mission has taken resolute and clear cut action to implement the directive to rebuild the 
Chancery building. Ambassador had constituted a 3 -member project team which 
regularly met and followed up on the issue. As directed by the Ministry, re -tendering 
was undertaken and every deadline prescribed by the Ministry had been met by the 
Mission. Mission and Ministry were working in harmony to exercise due diligence while 
anticipating projections for future requ irements such as ASEAN Wing and Audit Wing. 
Audit was constantly reminded to communicate their decision for setting up Audit Wing 
in Jakarta. Space norms for the building are being concurred in the Ministry. With regard 
to Hong Kong it is clarified that the office space was purchased in August, 2010 and not 
in January, 2010. It may be noted that for a project of this scale, the necessary 
procedures and extant guidelines as laid down by CVC in tendering procedures were 
scrupulously followed. Simultaneously, Post had ensured that local laws and 
procedures were also complied with.  Therefore, pending completion of renovation of 
chancery premises, rented premises had to be retained. The project was completed in 
April/May, 2012. The Mission moved into the new prem ises by 1st May, 2012. For Kuala 
Lumpur earlier, Mission had invited the tenders which could not be awarded due to poor 
response. Ministry was processing modified documents for re -tendering by lowering 
some of the parameters. With regard to Sydney Chancery the delay occurred in carrying 
out the fit-out works at Chancery due to ever -changing local laws and regulations which 

-43- 
 
 
 
Mission had to abide by. The tenders were floated on the basis of incorporating certain 
changes made by the Consultant. The bids were examined by the Ministry and approval 
for selection of the contractor for the project has been conveyed in October 2014. In 
respect of Grassmere Road Property (Sydney)  the payment of rent could be avoided 
but the delay in taking the decision whether the prop erty was to be disposed off or to be 
reconstructed/re-built resulted in avoidable payment of rent. Now it had been decided by 
the Ministry that the Property was to be renovated and Consultant had been appointed 
who had completed the designs and preparing tender documents for bidders. 
59. When the Committee desired to know whether the Ministry ha d analysed the 
overall reasons for delays in the renovation/redevelopment works on the above 
properties and if so, whether the Ministry had  issued any fresh guidelines that would 
obviate cascading delays in future, the Ministry submitted that they had done a thorough 
analysis. To overcome any delays in future which relates to internal approvals, the 
Ministry had standardized various templates of Expression of Interest (E OI), Reference 
for Proposal (RFP), Tender Document/GCC/SCC for new construction 
works/renovation/repair work at out Embassies/Missions/Posts, with the approval of the 
Integrated Finance. 
 
60. When the Committee asked whether the Ministry make comparative analy sis 
between properties that need renovation and those that were ready to move, the 
Ministry submitted in the affirmative and stated as under: 
"The Ministry compares the properties available in the market before 
taking final decision to acquire the property. 
  
As regards the reasons for delay pointed out by the Audit, given the varied 
factors that go into successful implementation of the Projects; some of 

-44- 
 
 
 
which are beyond the control of the Ministry/Government of India, it is 
submitted that no individual/gro up of individuals can be blamed for the 
delays in the Projects. The construction projects by the Ministry are 
awarded on lump sum basis. In case of delay in the executions of the 
project, financial outgo is not affected. This remains same as contract 
award cost. However, we are not able to reduce rental liability during the 
delay in execution of the project. Further as mentioned above, the process 
of acquisition of properties/construction projects have been streamlined. 
The Ministry is hopeful that delays i n the ongoing and future projects will 
be reduced to minimum. 
 As regards to Regional Passport Offices and Passport Seva 
Kendras, CPWD has the mandate to execute construction work of all the 
Central  Ministries and MEA is one of them. MEA has got most of i ts 
properties in India constructed through CPWD. Being the construction  
Agency, CPWD has to get the drawings approved for construction from 
local bodies. Local bodies take their own time for according approval. 
Besides, CPWD has its own defined system of selection of vendor and 
award of work which also takes a lot of time before actual commencement 
of work takes place. 
 Thus, completion of projects get delayed not only due to more time 
taken by CPWD to complete the actual construction but also due to time 
taken by local bodies in according approval, obtaining approvals from  
various State Government Departments and issue of completion certificate 
by local body, besides budgetary constraints. Since the delay in 
completion of a project is not attributable to any single person/Department, 
the Ministry is not in a position to fix responsibility for delays as pointed 
out by Audit. 
  Current Status/Updates: 
a. Status of construction projects pointed out by the Audit is as under: 
Name of the 
Mission 
Status as on July2015 
CGI Shanghai Given the present status of the project, Ministry 
has prioritized this construction project to be 
commenced around April 2016 and completed by 
October 2017 as per its five year action plan 
(2014-19). 
       Concept Designs from the s elected 

-45- 
 
 
 
Architects have been received. A team from 
Ministry is expected to visit Shanghai soon to 
finalize the selection of Architect, in consultation 
with Post, based on the best design entry and fee 
proposal. 
High Commission 
of India, Port of 
Spain (Mahatma 
Gandhi 
International 
Culture Centre) 
Detailed estimates for the project have been 
approved by the IFD. However, inputs from the 
Indian Council of Cultural Relation (ICCR) have 
been called for to ascertain if there is any change 
in the size of ICC in P ort of Spain. After obtaining 
the input, Ministry would process for approval of 
Committee of non -plan Expenditure (CNE) to 
obtain approval to the revised project cost. 
High Commission 
of India, Port Louis 
(Mauritius) 
Local Body’s approvals for constructio n of the 
buildings have been obtained. Detailed Estimates 
and Tender Documents for the project have been 
finalized. Tender drawings have been received 
from the Mission. Ministry is in the process of 
finalizing note seeking approval of Committee of 
Non-Plan expenditure (CNE).  
High Commission 
of India, Dar-Es-
Salaam, Tanzania 
Work has commenced w. e. f. 01 December 2014 
with stipulated completion period of 24 months. 
Construction of basement and ground floor slabs 
has been completed. Construction of first floor 
slab is underway. 
Embassy of India, 
Kathmandu 
The project has been impacted by the 
earthquakes which hit Nepal in recent past. 
Damage assessment to the structure is under 
process. It is likely that project would be delayed 
further. Shifting of the o fficers in bungalows has 
also been delayed. At present financial progress 
of the work is 71.03%. 
Embassy of India, 
Tashkent 
(Uzbekistan) 
It has been decided in the Ministry to float tender 
for the project in two bid system. Response to the 
Pre-qualification process was not satisfactory. 
Only two companies could be qualified. Tenders 
has been refloated in the single stage two bid 

-46- 
 
 
 
system in which the two earlier qualified firms will 
also allowed to submit their bids. Last date for 
submission of bids is 04 August 2015.  
 
 
Embassy of India, 
Kyiv (Ukraine) 
The recent violent conflicts in Ukraine with over 
4,000 deaths and displacement of over 1 million 
people has taken a heavy toll on the economy of 
Ukraine with local currency depreciating nearly 3 
times as compared to US$. In view of this and 
Mission’s reco mmendations, in March 2015, 
Secy (West) has approved placing the project 
“on hold”. The situation is to be reviewed in the 
third quarter of the year 2015. 
Embassy of India, 
Brasilia. 
The buildings have been completed in November 
2013 and are being utilize d by the Mission since 
December 2013. 
Embassy of India, 
Doha Qatar 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Government of Qatar 
has made a verbal offer for allotment of an 
alternative plot of land measuring nearly 8,000 sq. 
M to our Mission. Mission is pursuing the matter 
with Government of Qatar. A definite timeline for 
further activities could be committed only after the 
above offer is materialized. 
High Commission 
of India, Nicosia 
Consultant has yet not finalized the Tender 
Documents and Estimates. Ministry is pursuing 
Mission to impress upon the Consultant to 
expedite submission . Consultant has been 
requested to revise the drawings (internal plan) 
carrying out the modifications as a parallel activity 
to avoid delay. Ministry has approved tender 
template based on FIDIC Conditions of contract 
for all new major construction projects . The same 
has been forwarded to Mission for advising 
Consultants to prepare tender documents based 
on FIDIC Conditions of Contract. However 
Consultant seems to have some  reservations as 
contracts in Cyprus as a norm follow   the  British 
Conditions Joint Contracts Tribunal (JCT). 

-47- 
 
 
 
 
b. Current Status of the renovation projects pointed out by the Audit is 
as under: 
Embassy of India, 
Jakarta 
Ministry has approved concept designs to be 
submitted to the local authorities for their 
approval. The process takes some months. 
Ministry’s observations on the Concept Design 
submitted by the Consultant in February 2015 
have been conveyed to the Mission on 12 March 
2015. Mission’s response is awaited. Remin der 
issued on 01 June 2015. 
CGI-Sydney 
(Chancery Project) 
Renovation works had been completed on June 
14, 2015. CGI, Sydney is working from the new 
premises from June 15, 2015. 
CGI-Sydney 
(Residence at 5 
Grassmere Road) 
Ministry approved the supplementary proposal on 
March 13, 2015.Consultant has almost completed 
the designs, including for driveway and tender 
documents and is working on the estimates. As 
per the time line submitted by CGI Sydney, the 
work is slated to be completed by 31/12/2015. 
CGI-Hong Kong 
(Chancery 
Renovation 
Projects) 
Work completed in May 2012. 
HCI- Kuala Lumpur 
(Chancery 
Renovation 
Projects) 
In view of the multifold increase in the cost 
estimates of almost 80% the Mission/consultant 
has been reque sted vide letter dated April 10, 
2015 for providing detailed justification for the 
increase. 
 
X. Expenditure beyond delegated financial powers 
61. Audit noted that CGI Vancouver, CGI Houston, EoI Panama City and EoI  Chile, 
expenditure was incurred over and above the delegated financial powers on repair and 

-48- 
 
 
 
maintenance of GoI properties. 
 
62. When the Committee asked as to w hat were the reasons for incurring 
expenditure in excess of delegated powers on repairs and mainten ance of GoI 
properties in respect of the 4 Missions and whether the internal audit in the Ministry 
pointed out these shortcomings, the Ministry stated that all the Missions were advised to 
get the excess expenditure regularised by the Division. Only CGI Va ncouver had taken 
action on the advice. The other three Missions had been reminded for taking necessary 
action. The works were of urgent nature and R&M could not be avoided or delayed. The 
Ministry had not received any inputs from the internal audit of the Ministry. 
 
63. The Secretary during evidence deposed as under: 
"A poin t was made about internal audit  I think, it is a valid point. Hon. 
Members would perhaps know that we have a system of audit both from 
headquarters as well as from regional centres abro ad from Kuala Lumpur, 
Washington, London and, in addition, from Delhi. If there is a case for 
strengthening audit systems – and it need not be physical audit – and 
accounting systems, we have something called IMAS. When transactions 
are made and money is e xpended, it is reported into the Controller of 
Accounts. So, if there are steps to be taken for strengthening that and 
improving the system and having more audits – regional audits and Delhi-
based audits – it is something which we are completely prepared to look at 
because like we view the hon. Committee as a mechanism to make sure 
our practices improve, we also view audit in the same way. Audit is what 
makes for good administration".  
 
64. When the Committee further enquired as to w ho was the competent authori ty to 
give sanction for expenditures in excess of delegated powers, the Ministry submitted 
that s anction for expenditures in excess of delegated powers was taken as per 
Delegation of Financial Power Rules and General Financial Rules 2005. 
 
65. To a point ed query of the Committee to specify in how many cases had the 

-49- 
 
 
 
Missions sought ex -post-facto sanction for incurring such expenditure, the Ministry 
stated that CGI, Vancouver was the only Post which had sought ex-post-facto approval. 
66. When the Committee desired to  know whether the Ministry was contemplating 
any action against the officials of CGI Houston, EoI Panama City and EoI Chile for not 
heeding to the advice of the Ministry  for regularizing the excess expenditure by the 
Division, it was submitted that the Min istry sought clarification from the concerned 
Missions/Posts. Replies/clarifications/documents had already been received from 
Embassy of India Chile for regularization.  Mission’s inputs were being examined for 
submitting to Finance Division for regulariza tion of excess expenditure.  Consulate 
General of India, Houston had taken up the matter with the Office of the Principal 
Director of Audit, Washington to drop the para and were yet to receive a reply from the 
Audit authorities in Washington. In the absence of any response from the Audit Office in 
dropping the para, they had requested the Ministry to regularize the expenditure. The 
Consulate had been asked to forward the requisite documents indicating the 
expenditure incurred, enabling the Ministry to consider regularization. Embassy of India, 
Panama had also forwarded documents requesting the regularization of expenditure. 
These were being processed in the Ministry.  It had been reiterated  to the Missions and 
Posts that they should not exceed the delegated financial powers without prior approval 
of the competent authorities in the Ministry. The Ministry further submitted that excess 
expenditure incurred by EoI, Panama had been regularized. Regularization was under 
process in case of other Missions/Posts. 
67. Supplementing the above view, t he Secretary during evidence deposed as 
under: 

-50- 
 
 
 
"There was a reference to regularisation of expenditure by four 
embassies/posts. Vancouver had replied. I am given to understand 
Panama has also sent a reply. Essentially this pertains to repairs which 
were undertaken without due authorisation. I believe, the case of Panama 
has been examined and regularised. I would look into the other two 
missions".  
 
XI. Retention of vacant accommodation 
68. Audit scrutiny revealed that in seven cases, the Missions had retained vacant 
accomodation in violation of the Rules.  When the Committee asked as to w hy had the 
Missions retained the vacant accommodation for more than 90 days wi thout approval of 
the Ministry, the Ministry stated that  Missions/Posts abroad had delegated powers to 
retain a vacant residential accommodation up to 3 months after considering various 
factors viz. arrival schedule of the new officer, possibility of findi ng an alternative 
accommodation, rent payable during notice period required to terminate the existing 
lease, expenditure involved in storage of Govt.-owned furniture items etc.  
 
69. When the Committee further asked whether the Ministry fix responsibility on 
these Missions regarding illegal retention, the Ministry submitted that  in cases where 
surrendering of vacant accommodation was not in the Government’s interest, the 
Ministry considers regularization of the period of vacant retention if it exceeds 3 months . 
Otherwise, the Ministry discourages retention of vacant accommodations by 
Missions/Posts. A few such cases occur due to unforeseen delay in arrival schedule of 
an officer’s successor, limited possibility of finding alternative accommodation within 
existing rentals in an equally secure area, rent payable during notice period required to 
terminate the existing lease, cost of storage of Government -owned furniture items and 
agency charges involved in hiring alternate accommodation.  Vacant accommodation 

-51- 
 
 
 
was o ften utilized as a transit accommodation to save on hotel stay of India -based 
officials on first arrival.  Detailed clarifications in each of the 7 such cases mentioned in 
the Audit report had already been provided by Ministry. 
 
XII. Property lying unutilised (EoI Berlin, Germany) 
 
70. Audit scrutiny revealed that a ready built building in Stormstrasse, Berlin was 
purchased (1985) and was used as the residence of the Consul General of India until 
1994.The building was subsequently converted into a Cultural Cent re. The Cultural 
Centre was shifted (January 2001) to the new Chancery building and since then the 
property is lying unutilized. 
 
71. When the Committee desired to know as to w hat were the reasons for not 
fulfilling the assurance given to PAC regarding the dem olition of the building and the 
use of the land for building apartments for RG officers, the Ministry stated that reasons 
for delay in initiating the proposal for red evelopment of the GoI property were that 
initially Mission proposed to utilize the vacant property as residence for Dy. Chief of 
Mission based on the recommendation of the Property Team from the Ministry who 
visited Berlin (Year 2000). Mission initiated action (2004) to appoint architect to access 
reconversion and conduct feasibility study for redevelopment of property. However, the 
proposal could not be materialized because of huge variation (ranging from Euro 2,000 
to Euro 8,620) in the fee quoted by three consultants. In 2005, Ministry decided to make 
apartment building for India based offici als of the Mission and decided to approach the 
Local Body for building permit. While processing the Local Body approvals (2006), the 
neighbours raised objections to the Mission’s proposal of constructing apartment. 

-52- 
 
 
 
Mission hired lawyer (2007) to counter th e objections of the neighbo urs. Application for 
building permit admitted by the Local Authorities in 2008 and approval was granted in 
2009. Mission proposed to appoint a project manager for selection of architect as per 
the prevailing practices and procedure followed in construction project for Chancery in 
2001. Ministry did not agree to the proposal of the Mission to appoint separate Project 
Manager as the small. In 2012, it was decided to appoint a singl e agency as architect 
consultant and construction manager. It was stated that the Committee may kindly 
consider the fact that it was only prudent to use the preparatory phase to ensure 
maximum, long -term utilization of the plot as also, the process of asce rtaining the 
consultancy requirements and fine-tuning the details with the concerned authorities. 
 
72. To a pointed query of the Committee as to w hat was the present status of the 
project and when it was likely to be completed, the Ministry submitted that presently, the 
concept design and the consultant architect cum construction manager for the project 
had been finalized. Ministry had prioritized this construction project to be commenced 
around June 2015 and completed by December 2016 in its five year actio n plan (2014-
19). 
 
XIII. Jawaharlal Nehru Bhawan 
73. Audit pointed out that the Ministry of Urban Development, alloted (1992and1994) 
two adjoining plots of land at New Delhi to MEA for construction of office building. The 
concept design prepared by CPWD was approved by MEA in July 2004 and the building 
was named Jawahar Lal Nehru Bhawan. In September 2004, MEA accepted that there 
would be a shortfall in office space in JNB and assured Ministry of Finance that their 

-53- 
 
 
 
first priority would be to surrender the rented premises occupied by MEA. 
 
74. When the Committee wished to know as to w hy did the Ministry first ed shift the 
non-rental units in Shastri Bhawan to Jawaharlal Nehru Bhawan contrary to its own 
assurance to the Ministry of Finance that its first priority wou ld be to surrender the 
rented premises, the Ministry submitted that  the factual position was that Ministry had 
begun to vacate its offices from the rented building Akbar Bhawan even before the 
construction project for Jawaharlal Nehru Bhawan had been fully  completed. Within a 
very short time frame the shifting of all offices from rented Akbar Bhawan (8 floors plus 
two basements) was completed. The shifting of offices to JNB thereafter was based on 
functional considerations as well as space availability. 
 
75. When the Committee desired to know as to whether the Jawahar Lal Nehru 
Bhawan ha d now been fully occupied with MEA offices and  if so have all the offices 
functioning from the rented premises been shifted to the new HQs, the Ministry 
submitted that Jawaharlal  Nehru Bhawan had been fully occupied. In fact, there was 
currently a shortage of office space faced by the Ministry. Nevertheless, efforts were 
made to shift remaining Divisions in rented Buildings. Accordingly, the International Law 
Division had also bee n shifted to JNB a few months ago leaving only a two small units 
(Hajj Cell and Special Kuwait Cell) in ISIL Building. Efforts were being made to shift 
these to JNB as well.  
XIV. Regional Passport Offices (RPO)/ FSI 
76. Audit scrutiny revealed inordinate delays in construction of properties on the plots 
of land acquired by the MEA for its various passport offices coun trywide and for Foreign 

-54- 
 
 
 
Service Institute (FSI) building. 
 
77. When the Committee asked the Ministry to furnish a statement providing details 
of rent ed/ owned buildings for all RPOs in the country, the Ministry submitted a 
statement providing detail of rented/owned building for all RPOs in the country as under: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


-55- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


-56- 
 
 
 
 
78. Supplementing the submission of the Ministry the Secretary during  evidence 
deposed as under: 
"The ICCR building and Branch Secretariat in Chennai and Guwahati are 
the exceptions. Insofar as properties relating to CPV Division is 
concerned, the data centre in Delhi, the disaster recovery centre in 
Chennai, 15 out of 37 R POs and 5 out of 82 Passport Seva Kendras are 
rented by the Ministry. So are two other regional  offices of ICCR. Details 
have been submitted to the hon. Committee. Out of these 15 rented RPOs 
I am happy to inform the hon. Committee that land have now been  
allocated by State Governments in seven cases. We hope to follow up 
quickly on the rest. Over the last seven years, RPOs at Vizag, Surat, 
Bhubaneshwar, Lucknow and Jaipur have moved to  newly constructed 
MEA own buildings. This is a positive trend. Constr uction of a building for 
housing RPO Mumbai has been completed and now formalities for full 
occupation certificate are underway. I can also report progress in 
construction of Amritsar and Jallandhar RPOs".  
79. When the Committee desired to know as to what mea sures the Ministry had 
taken to complete the construction and other works at the earliest at the properties cited 
in the audit para, that the plot was acquired in 1983 but the construction commenced 
only in 2005 the Ministry submitted that the plot of land which was allotted 1983 was got 
cancelled due to various reasons. The plot over which building was constructed was 
given possession on 30.03.2001 and the project was approved by the Ministry in 
September 2004. Hence construction of the building took 3 yea rs only. With respect to 
Amritsar  Audit scrutiny revealed that the p lot was allotted in Feb. 2008 but the 
construction could not commence even after lapse of 5 years as on Jan uary 2013. In 
this regard the Ministry stated that it approved the project in Au gust 2013. The work had 
commenced in April 2014 which was likely to complete by 2015 With respect to the 
Regional Passport Office, Mumbai, Audit highlighted that the l and was purchased in 
December 2005, the construction was suppose d to be completed by November, 2009 

-57- 
 
 
 
but had not been completed as of Jan uary 2013. The Ministry stated that CNE gave 
approval in Sep tember 2008. Foundation work was completed in Oct ober 2009 but 
actual building work started in Jan uary 2011 by CPWD. CPWD took long ti me to award 
the work. Now the building was almost complete and MMRDA was being requested to 
issue occupancy certificate. Audit pointed out that the property at  Srinagar was 
purchased in Dec ember 2006 but the construction had not been commenced as of 
January  2013. The M inistry stated that boundary wall and approach road had been 
constructed. CPWD  were requested to revise the drawings as per observations made 
by Project Division  of the Ministry of External Affairs . Revised estimates were awaited 
from CPWD. Audit highligh ted that the property at  Jalandhar  was purchased in May 
2007 but construction could not be started as of Jan uary 2013. The Ministry submitted 
that a lot of time was taken in finalization of drawing and obtaining approval from local 
bodies. The constructi on started in May 2013 and was supposed to be completed in 
June 2014. The date of completion is likely to extend as sufficient funds could not be 
released due to budgetary constraints during 2013-2014.  
 
80. The Secretary, Ministry of External Affairs deposed as under: 
"There are some cases. In the case of Mumbai, I looked at as to why the 
property took so long. At every stage, there was delay – in taking over the 
land, there was delay; and CPWD giving out the tender, there was delay. 
It is not a justification.  It is a lesson to us that we need to have tighter 
control, tighter timelines, maybe more review meetings. Again, it is 
something where probably we have to work better with Departments 
outside the Ministry".  
 
81. As per the audit, subsequent changes in the pl anning of FSI led to extra 
expenditure of ` 47.86 lakhs, even then all the 22 hostel rooms on the second floor 
were never put to use and  41 residential units also remain ed unutilised. When the 

-58- 
 
 
 
Committee desired the Ministry to explain the reasons for such underutilization, it was 
submitted that the 22 hostel rooms on the 2 nd floor were too small to use and lying 
vacant since FSI occupied this building in 2006. The expenditure of ` 47.86 lakhs was 
for conversion of these single rooms into 11 double rooms to be identical as on ground 
and 1 st floors. CPWD had completed the work and these 11 rooms were ready for 
allocation to new 2014 -Batch IFS Officer Trainees when they join FSI in mid -December 
2014. The induction into India Foreign Service was constantly increasing every year and 
two batches overlap for about 8 months in a year. There were 34 Officer Trainees in 
2011-Batch and 36 in 2012 -Batch. There were 25 Officer Trainees in 2013 -Batch and 
31 Officer Trainees of 2014 -Batch would be joining in mid -December 2014. There were 
only 29 hostel rooms and the number of hostel rooms will be increased to 40 from 
December 2014. As two batches overlap, Officer Trainees were accommodated in 
residential units. Residential units were not underutilised except for short interv ening 
periods between the departure and arrival of batches of Officer Trainees which was 
unavoidable. Details of utilisation of residential units as on 14.11.2014 was as follow:  
Block Type     No. of 
Flats        
Remarks 
A 7 1 Occupied 
B 5B 2 Both occupied 
C 5A, 4 2 + 6 = 8 5 occupied. Vacant units are 
allocated to Officer Trainees during 
the period of overlap 
D 3, 2 20+ 10 = 
30 
7 occupied. Vacant units are 
allocated to Office Trainees during 
the period of overlap 
E 1 11 All occupied as residential units 
and for essential services as 
CPWD, house-keeping etc. 
 
 

-59- 
 
 
 
82. Supplementing the above submission of the Ministry, the Secretary Ministry of 
External Affairs deposed during oral evidence as under:  
"India’s diplomatic presence abroad needs to keep pace with its growing 
international role and prominence while being representative of  our 
unique identity. Properties where our Missions are housed or where our 
diplomats live, particularly those having re presentational duties, do reflect 
these aspects. Our work space abroad needs to be functional while 
making a national statement. Likewise, the Ministry’s assets in India 
should facilitate efficient service delivery to Indian citizens. 
As regards the other two points, which you had made, one was that 
properties must make an impact. I think that it is a very valid point. I would 
submit that it is changing for the better. On the whole, I have visited in the 
last six months as Foreign Secretary, may be about 30 -40 Embassies. 
Yes, there are some Embassies where I was very unhappy and I made it 
very clear that the appearance of the Embassy had to be changed. 
A point, which has to be borne in mind, is that perhaps we need to have a 
stricter property inspection, mai ntenance, renovation mechanism. We 
have an inspection mechanism, but they inspect the working of the 
Embassy. They also do property on the site, but one thought after today’s 
examination is that perhaps we need to setup a mechanism to look at the 
maintenance and appearance of property in a very focused and dedicated 
way. 
I am completely in agreement with him. I think that in a variety of areas 
today Europe is setting rules, which can either benefit us or hurt us. We 
have just learnt, for example, in the pharmaceutical sector as to how much 
Europe can hurt us by one decision, which calls into question generics 
from India. So, I am in full agreement with the point. It is an Embassy that I 
would like to strengthen very much within the available manpower. I woul d 
certainly like to see it report more effectively as a watchdog. It has an 
extremely capable Ambassador, but Ambassadors also require backup as 
I discovered. So, it is something that I would bear in mind. 
Now, when we say better asset management, it means  a 
continuous review of all these aspects also as to what is happening in 
India in the RPOs, in the Passport Seva Kendras, and in the offices that 
we manage. It also includes maintenance, repairs and make sure that if 
repairs are done, then we do not have the kind of problem we had in 
Panama and Vancouver where people exceeded their limits. In a sense, 
what it means is that tighter control, more oversight and better 
management".  
 

-60- 
 
 
 
  

-61- 
 
 
 
PART-II 
Observations/Recommendations 
 
1. The Committee note that the Ministry manages properties in 180 Missions/ 
Posts abroad in addition to its offices in India which include owned/ leased/ 
rented properties. The Estate Management portfolio of the Ministry includes, inter 
alia, acquisitions, construction of prop erties abroad for diplomatic Missions/ 
Posts, Cultural Centres and residences abroad for the functioning of diplomatic 
Missions and their employees, exchange and acquisition of properties on 
reciprocal basis for diplomatic representation, managing Regional  Passport 
Offices and other properties in India such as Jawahar Lal Nehru Bhawan and the 
Foreign Service Institute and renovation of existing  Government of India 
properties in India and abroad. The Committee note from the submission of the 
Secretary that the consistent stand of Government of India has been to prefer 
owned properties to those rented abroad as well as in India and accordingly, the 
Ministry gives priority to acquisition of built -up properties, constructions and 
renovation of  diplomatic Missi ons and Posts, cultural centres and residences 
abroad. The Committee, however, find that about 55 per cent of  Chanceries, 40% 
of Embassy residences and 75 %  of staff residences still operate from rental 
premises and the  total rental outgo on properties a broad has been steadily 
increasing over the years and stood at `363.8 crore in 2013 -14. The Committee 
also note that as many as 20 properties abroad are yet to be constructed while 6 
are currently under construction apart from some major Indian Cultural Ce ntres 
awaiting completion. In India, the ICCR building and Branch Secretariat in 

-62- 
 
 
 
Chennai and Guwahati, 15 out of 37 regional Passport Offices,  5 Passport Seva 
Kendras, the data centre of CPV Division in Delhi, and 2 other regional offices of 
ICCR in Chenna i are still operating from rented premises. The Committee are 
unhappy to note that the Ministry did not maintain even basic records of its 
properties, there were delays in construction on acquired properties ranging from 
14 to 51 years, there have been sig nificant delays in identifying properties and 
finalizing deals, the renovation process has taken decades to complete, planning 
and assessment of the requirements of the buildings has been unsatisfactory ; 
there has been tardiness in acquisition of propertie s on reciprocal basis  and 
monitoring of various works by the Ministry has been deficient. The Committee's 
examination of the audit findings have brought forth the need for radical 
measures for  improving Ministry's handling of the activities relating to Es tates 
Management. Accordingly, the considered opinion of the Committee has been 
given in the succeeding paragraphs. 
2. The Public Accounts Committee in their 51st Report (14th Lok Sabha) 
(based on C&AG Report No. 17 of 2005) presented to the Parliament on 24.8.2007 
had recommended that the Ministry should put in place a suitable mechanism for 
streamlining the management of estates operated by it. The Committee are 
unhappy to note that the Ministry had  provided truncated information that too in 
respect of only 157 Missions/ Posts out of 180 Missions/ Posts to Audit after 
several reminders. When the Committee took oral evidence in January 2015, the 
Ministry could not furnish even basic  information about the properties 
owned/leased/ rented by its Missions/ Posts. Taking note of the aforesaid 

-63- 
 
 
 
situation, the Committee during evidence observed that the significance of 
database on property cannot be over -emphasized for a Ministry that endeav ored 
to improve the efficiency of management and utilization of properties abroad and 
gradually reduce its rental liabilities. The Committee felt that creation of a 
database was the first step towards streamlining the project planning mechanism 
with regard to property management and budgetary provisions. The Committee, 
however, appreciate the efforts made by the Ministry in creating a detailed 
database regarding properties owned/leased/rented by it for 2011 -12, 2012-13 and 
2013-14  and placing it before the m during evidence h eld in August, 2015. The 
Committee are of the view that this database would be instrumental in better 
management of properties by providing a comprehensive overview for effective 
planning and by filling in the gaps in monitoring process .The Committee desire 
that the database should also include details about the ownership (including 
previous ownerships) of all the properties (leased/ rented/ owned), the details of 
the inventories and the details of the periodical verification of the inventories. The 
Committee further desire that all the documents relating to the properties be 
microfilmed for effective monitoring of those properties and be readily available 
for scrutiny. The Committee direct the Ministry to upload the database on its 
website within two months. 
 
3. The Committee note that the Ministry could not submit two five year action 
plans to Audit for 'Acquisition of properties' and 'Construction/ Renovation of 
projects' for the period 2006-07 to 2010-11. Audit, therefore, observed that the five 
year action plans were prepared by the Ministry only in August, 2014 and not in 

-64- 
 
 
 
2007 as informed by it to the PAC. On being asked by the Committee, in their 
post-evidence questionnaire in January, 2015, the Ministry while furnishing the 
plans regretted that the plans could not be traced on time for submitting to the 
Audit.  The Ministry explained that the plans were misplaced perhaps during the 
shifting of the Project Division from Akbar Bhawan to Jawaharlal Nehru Bhawan 
and therefore Audit's view i s erroneous and not based on the fact since the two 
Action Plans for 2006-07 to 2010-11 were in place. The Committee take note of the 
reply given by the Ministry earlier to the Audit i.e. in March, 2014 that the process 
of developing a long term action pla n had been initiated and the fact was that it 
was a long overdue action which needed to be acted upon. The Committee are 
not able to comprehend how the plans that were implemented during the period 
2006-07 to 2010 -11 were misplaced by all the concerned off ices who had been 
involved in executing those plans. The Committee are of the considered opinion 
that more than just documents, action plans, once in place, become ingrained in 
the working culture as they channel all efforts towards attainment of targets b y 
fixing the responsibilities, tracking the achievements and reviewing/ revising 
according to the changing needs and scenarios. The Committee are of the view 
that non-submission of action plans for the years 2011 -12 to 2013 -14 to Audit as 
wells as the Comm ittee connotes non-existence of action plans for these years 
since the action plan for next five years  commenced in 2014-15.   The Committee 
opine that Audit made its observation after taking note of facts before it and, 
therefore, its view cannot be terme d as erroneous. The Committee would like the 
Secretary to revisit all the files relating to the action plans for the years 2006-07 to 

-65- 
 
 
 
2010-11 and 2011 -12 to 2013 -14 and apprise the Committee of the accurate 
position urgently. The Committee also expect that  the action plan for 2014 -15 to 
2018-19 would be implemented rigorously and targets set therein would be 
achieved within the time frames. 
 
4. The Committee are of the opinion that to ensure efficient utilization of 
public money , the Ministry may, besides set ting timeframes in the action plan, 
introduce performance indicators such as rent per square metre, other operating 
costs per square metre, total property costs per square metre and total property 
costs as a percentage of total operating expenses. These in dicators would 
eventually help the Ministry in ascertaining comparative costs of the properties, 
whether fair rental is being paid for a property and taking appropriate decisions 
accordingly to reduce costs.  
 
5. The Committee note that the deficiencies and d elays in decision making 
persisted despite the assurance by the Ministry to the Public Accounts 
Committee in 2008 that significant steps had been taken to streamline and speed -
up the internal processes related to acquisition of the properties. The Committe e 
further note that Audit had pointed out Permanent Mission of India ( PMI) Geneva, 
Switzerland which had been functioning from leased premises since June 1976 
and the property shortlisted in 2009 for purchase resulted in expenditure of `1.22  
crore on legal proceedings till March 2012 as it involved zone changing approval 
from the local authorities. Audit has also pointed out the cases of Embassy of 
India ( EoI) Berne, Consulate General of India ( CGI) Hamburg, CGI Munich, EoI 

-66- 
 
 
 
Bishkek, EoI Stockholm and CGI Milan where there have been significant delays 
in either acquiring a property after the decision to do so or efforts have not been 
fructified which resulted in rental outgo of `7.83 crores in 2011-12. The Committee 
would like to know abo ut rental outgo in these Missions for the year 2012 -13, 
2013-14, 2014-15. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that the last 
legal impediment to the grant of PLQ was removed in May, 2015 and that the PMI, 
Geneva has been advised to engage with  the land owner for completion of 
formalities. The Ministry have further stated that all other Missions are continuing 
their efforts to acquire economically viable/suitable property. The Committee find 
that there have been significant delays in identifying  properties and even after 
identification, in many cases, the deals have fallen through for one reason or 
other, pointing to a serious lack of time bound, committed and professional 
approach in identification and negotiation of properties. The Committee are of the 
view that a detailed Search Report may be prepared for all the properties that 
have been identified for acquisition and made available to the Ministry and the 
members of the purchase committee. The Committee, therefore, desire that 
interaction with  professional agencies abroad for timely identification, 
acquisition, development and maintenance of properties may be done in a more 
scientific, professional and structured manner by forming small teams 
comprising analysts and in cases where identificatio n and finalization of the 
deals have taken longer time the team may be led by an official from the Ministry 
to effectively negotiate and finalize the transaction. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry in this regard. 

-67- 
 
 
 
 
6. The Committee note that the Vienna convention made reciprocity the 
cornerstone of diplomatic relations between countries but are unhappy to find 
from the information provided by the Ministry of Urban Development that land 
has been reciprocally allotted/ agr eed for allotment to only 9 countries out of 180 
Missions/ Posts of India in various countries. Reciprocal allotment for Indian 
Missions abroad has been done in Adis Ababa, Dar -es-salam, Dhaka and 
Tashkent. According to the Audit, the Ministry failed to ac quire plots of land on 
reciprocal basis at CGI, Guangzhou, China even after 8 years of establishment of 
the Post there. The Committee note with serious concern that the construction at 
a reciprocally acquired building for HCI, Dhaka, Bangladesh is not comp lete even 
after 22 years of allotment. The Committee are of the view that the inability of the 
Ministry to finalize deals on reciprocal basis is a reflection on the poor 
negotiation initiatives and lack of will in the Ministry. The Committee while 
acknowledging the constraints within which such deals are to be made feel that 
the efforts to strike deals on reciprocal basis may be intensified in a rational and 
professional manner and negotiations be pursued rigorously to curb any further 
delays. 
 
7. The Committe e are shocked to find that when asked about the status of 
reciprocally allotted lands, the Ministry could not furnish any records of the lands 
allotted on reciprocal basis as it did not sincerely follow up the allotments after 
referring the decision to all ot land to the Ministry of Urban Development. The 
Committee are dismayed to note that the Ministry does not keep any record of the 

-68- 
 
 
 
lands allotted on reciprocal basis and are depending on Ministry of Urban 
Development to provide details as and when required . The Committee earnestly 
desire that the Ministry of External Affairs should maintain a proper record of 
both decisions taken by it in respect of reciprocal allotments of lands and the 
lands allotted accordingly by the Nodal Ministry/ Authority. The Commi ttee would 
like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard within six months. 
8. The Committee note that the Ministry decided to purchase a property 
belonging to French Government for establishing India Cultural Centre at Paris 
and both the architects/  consultants engaged by the Mission to assess the 
suitability of the building based on structural soundness, feasibility of utilization 
of structure for the desired purpose , design, execution and compliance with local 
regulations etc. reported that the bu ilding was not suitable to be used as a 
cultural centre since the building neither had two exits nor enough provision for 
assembly of at least 100 people as required under French regulations. The 
Committee further note that the Ministry ignored the reports  of the architects and 
purchased the property for `30.03 crore in March 2011 which has been lying 
unutilized since then. As per the reply of the Ministry, the issues raised by the 
Architects/ Consultants were taken up with French Government which authorize d 
the Mission to make addition/ alterations in the existing building as well as, if 
required, to rebuild the property by following bye laws prevailing in the city. 
However, information relating to taking up the matter with French Government 
was not provided to the Audit. The Ministry has now appointed another Architect -
Consultant for renovation of the property to make it suitable for cultural centre 

-69- 
 
 
 
and as reported by the Ministry the project is likely to be completed by 
September, 2016. The Committee are a stonished to find that the Ministry did not 
heed to the advice of the Architects/ Consultants and went on with the acquisition 
of the property which eventually resulted in idling of assets and wasteful 
expenditure on maintaining the property. The Committee  are of the view that  
making such a deal  without proper planning and consultation tantamount to 
criminal negligence . The Committee also take serious note of non -furnishing of 
important information to Audit by the Mission and desire that all the relevant 
records be  produced to the Audit urgently  within two months . The Committee 
after going through the reply of the Mini stry feel that the objections raised by the 
Architects/ Consultants after the confirmation by the Ministry/ ICCR for purchase 
of the property were not brought before the Ministry by the Mission. The 
Committee are of the considered opinion that a comprehens ive system of 
reporting be evolved where all such deviations from routine procedures get 
automatically identified and reported to the Projects Division  so that a judicious 
and prudent decision could be arrived at and the project implemented without 
loss of time and escalation of cost . The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the action taken in this regard within two months. 
 
9. The Committee note that there were inordinate delays in construction of 
Chancery/ residential buildings at various stations viz. CG I Shanghai, China, HCI  
of Port of Spain, Trinidad & Tobago, Port Louis, Mauritius, Dar -Es-Salaam, 
Tanzania, EoI, Kathmandu, Nepal, and EoI, Nicosia, Cyprus , Tashkent, 
Uzbekistan, EoI Kyiv Ukraine, Brasilia, Brazil, and Doha, Qatar . The Committee 

-70- 
 
 
 
find from the reply of the Ministry that apart from EoI, Brasilia and Tanzania 
where construction has been completed and commenced respectively, none of 
the other Missions have been able to make much headway yet. The Committee 
are unhappy to note that there have bee n tremendous delays in commencing the 
construction process as is evident from the case of EoI Tanzania where the plot 
was allotted in June 1987 on lease for 33 years and construction work 
commenced only in December 2014 i.e. after 27 years. Similarly, in U zbekistan 
and Cyprus, even after 26 years, construction has not yet commenced. The 
Committee are shocked to note that, as per the database submitted by the 
Ministry, the construction at EoI Tokyo commenced after 53 years of purchase of 
land in 2007. The Co mmittee while taking note of the reply of the Ministry that it 
has prioritized construction work of the unduly delayed projects for completion in 
its current five-year action plan opine that besides prioritizing  construction work 
of the unduly long project s the Ministry need to fix responsibility and take 
exemplary action against the officers  for such unpardonable delays. The 
Committee deprecate that the Ministry and the concerned Missions/ Posts were 
oblivious of such apparent delays which resulted in wasteful expenditure in terms 
of rental outgo in all these years  at the same time incurring , expenditure on 
maintaining the acquired properties for decades and cost escalation over the 
years which would ultimately be borne by the Government of India. The 
Committee are unhappy to observe that loss of opportunity, consequent delays 
and cost escalation in respect of all such properties would increase the actual 
cost incurred in acquisition of these properties tremendously. The Committee, 

-71- 
 
 
 
therefore, are of the considered view that Ministry take urgent steps by 
incentivizing the Missions/Post for good performance and by fixing the 
responsibility and taking stern action against the erring officials for not meeting 
the targets to get the long pending construction works  completed at the earliest  
and apprise the Committee of the action taken thereon within two months. 
 
10. The Committee note that there were considerable delays in renovation/ 
redevelopment works at Government of India buildings at CGI, Sydney, Australia, 
CGI, Hong Kong, HCI, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia and EoI Jakarta, Indonesia. The 
Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that in three out of six cases works 
have been completed as of now but in remaining cases works have not yet been 
started. The Committee co ncur with the observation s of the audit that delays 
have led to avoidable expenditure of more than ` 7 crore. The Committee feel that 
Ministry issue comprehensive guidelines to all its Mission/ Posts abroad to 
prepare an yearly action plan for achieving ta rgets in the five -year action plan of 
the Ministry.  This yearly action plan may enumerate the anticipated requirements 
in the year for better property management including the renovation and repair 
requirements during the year with timelines for completin g the same. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the Ministry in this 
regard within two months. 
 
11. The Committee note that a building purchased in Stormtrasse, Berlin in 
1985 for the residence of Consul General of India was converte d into Cultural 
Centre in 1994. In January 2001, the Cultural Centre was shifted to the new 

-72- 
 
 
 
Chancery building and since then the property has been lying unutilized. The 
Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that initially the Mission wanted to 
convert it into the residence of Deputy Chief of the Mission but later decided to 
make apartment building for India based officials and local body gave its 
approval in 2009.  The Committee find that the Mission proposed to appoint a 
Project Manager for selecti on of Architect as per the prevailing practices and 
procedure followed in construction project for Chancery in 2001 but the Ministry 
did not agree to the proposal of the Mission to appoint separate Project Manager 
due to small scale nature of the project and a single agency as Architect 
Consultant and Construction Manager was appointed in 2012. The Committee 
observe that after the approval given by the local body, the appointment of 
Architect Consultant and Construction Manager took unduly long time due to  the 
absence of any updated uniform guidelines for the Missions/ Posts in this regard. 
The Committee are of the view that the Ministry should issue comprehensive 
updated guidelines to all its Missions/ Posts abroad detailing the procedures to 
be adopted fo r identification, acquisition, approval from the Ministry as well as 
local authorities renovation, refurbishment, conversion and disposal of the 
properties. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the 
Ministry in this regard within two months. 
 
12. The Committee note with serious awe that CGI Vancouver, CGI Houston, 
Eol Panama City and EoI Chile incurred expenditure over and above the 
delegated financial powers on repair and maintenance of Government of India 
properties. The Committee als o note with dismay that the Missions in Oman, 

-73- 
 
 
 
Libya, Tehran, Moscow, Bucharest, Guangzhou and Pyongyang had retained 
vacant leased residential accommodation for more than 90 days without the prior 
approval of the Ministry as required under the relevant Rul es. The Committee find 
from the reply of the Ministry that the expenditure incurred by CGI Houston, Eol 
Panama City and EoI Chile are yet to be regularized by the Ministry. The 
Committee also observe that the Ministry has now examined all the cases of 
unauthorized retention and regularized all of them. The Committee are, however, 
perturbed to note the reply of the Ministry that due to large number of 
Missions/Posts to be audited coupled with limiting factors of manpower, limited 
budgetary resources, there i s no periodicity for conducting internal audit .  The 
Committee while noting the observation of the audit that in case of Oman, Libya 
and Moscow, the Mission could have applied for prior approval of the Ministry for 
retention. It clearly establishes  that the internal audit system of the Ministry has 
not been functioning properly as otherwise these irregularities would have been 
easily brought out . The Committee feel that the need for the internal audit as a 
preventive and remedial mechanism cannot be over em phasized and, therefore, 
strongly desire that the officials of the Ministry be adequately sensitized and an 
effective internal e -audit system may be developed in the Ministry to minimize 
such recurrences. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken b y the 
Ministry in this regard within two months. 
 
13. The Committee note that two adjoining plots of land were allotted in New 
Delhi by the Ministry of Urban Development for construction of office building of 
Ministry of External Affairs in 1992 and 1994 respe ctively. The concept design of 

-74- 
 
 
 
Jawahar Lal Nehru Bhawan, prepared by CPWD, was approved by the Ministry in 
July, 2004. It is astonishing to note that while the Ministry blames the local 
conditions, rules of a foreign country for the delay in construction/r enovation of 
properties it is difficult to understand the reason for a delay of more than a 
decade even to get a concept design prepared and approved in New Delhi by the 
Ministry. The Committee note that the Ministry accepted in September, 2004 that 
there would be shortfall of space in this office building and assured the Ministry 
of Finance that rented premises would be surrendered first. The Committee are 
shocked to note that in 2011, the units located in non -rental building was shifted 
first which result ed in continuing rental outgo of `62.79 lakh p.a. The Committee 
note from the reply of the Ministry that it could only vacate its offices from ISIL 
Building (rented) partially. The Committee are surprised to note the reply of the 
Ministry that due to severe constraints imposed on the Ministry in construction of 
Jawahar Lal Nehru Bhawan on the grounds of FAR norms and number of storeys, 
a shortfall of about 2500 sq.m., all the offices could not be shifted. The Committee 
are amazed to find that a Ministry is feigning ignorance of the law of the land. The 
Committee are of the view that the Ministry faltered in its assessments and did 
not evaluate correctly its needs either at the time of allotment or at the time of 
approving the designs. The Committee expect a Ministry dealing with so many 
countries and their laws to be well -versed with the laws of its own country first. 
The Committee desire that the Ministry take up the issue with the Ministry of 
Urban Development only after a prudent assessment of its current and future 

-75- 
 
 
 
needs of land and apprise the Committee of the action taken thereon within two 
months.  
 
14. The Committee note  that there were inordinate delays in construction of 
properties on the plots of land acquired by the Ministry for its various passport 
offices country-wide viz. Jaipur, Amritsar, Mumbai and Srinagar  resulting in huge 
outgo of avoidable rent . The Committee  note from the reply of the Ministry that 
except for Srinagar all other buildings are ready or will be ready by the end of 
2015. The Committee, however, feel that there have been significant delays in the 
construction of buildings even in India and are ast onished to find that Passport 
office, Jaipur, took over the building 25 long years after acquiring the plot. The 
Committee are shocked to find that CPWD has taken two and a half years for 
submitting revised drawings and estimates for Srinagar Regional Pass port 
Kendra. The Committee are of the view that lackadaisical attitude of the officers 
and lack of follow up and persuasion on part of the Ministry has contributed to 
these inordinate delays. The Committee desire that alongwith fixing the 
timeframes for co mpletion of construction the responsibility of the officers may 
be fixed and they may be asked to give periodic updates on each of the property 
under their supervision. The Committee further feel that a comprehensive 
mechanism may be developed so that allo tment of land, its construction is done 
in a time bound manner for future needs . The Committee may be apprised of the 
action taken by the Ministry in this regard within two months. 
 

-76- 
 
 
 
15. The Committee note that the Ministry purchased a plot of land in New Delhi 
for construction of Foreign Service Institute (FSI) building in 1990 and the work 
was to be completed by 1995 at a project cost of `11.50 crore. The Project was 
finally completed in 2007 at a cost of `25.85 crore. The Committee also note that 
due to deficiencies in planning  20 rooms at the ground floor and 38 rooms at the 
first floor were merged into 10 and 19 rooms in 1999  and in 2014 , the rooms at 
second floor were also merged at additional cost of `47.86 lakh. The Committee 
find from the reply of the  Ministry that the rooms at the second floor were not 
touched to avoid delays in completion of project. The Committee are of the view 
that if the rooms at ground and first floor s were merged at the stage of 
construction itself then merging of rooms at the second floor would not have 
delayed the project any longer than it already did. The Committee feel that delay 
of 12 years in construction led to cost escalation and then merging 22 rooms into 
11 which also increased the total cost of construction of the bu ilding point 
towards the utter lack of judicious and futuristic planning and poor professional 
property management in the Ministry. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the 
Ministry should give due emphasis to the objectives of the project, suitability  of 
the property for that objective, futuristic needs, reasonableness of costs and 
completion of work in a time bound manner while planning for construction, 
refurbishment or renovation of the properties owned by it. 
 
16. The Committee note that the Ministry had set up a Projects Division in 2005 
that exclusively focus es on construction/ renovation/ purchase and  deals with  
property management. The Committee feel that Projects Division has to work 

-77- 
 
 
 
earnestly as the results over these years do not project any mar ked improvement 
in either the ratio of rented/leased to owned properties or curbing the delays in 
identification/ acquisition/ construction/ renovation of the properties. The 
Committee note that the Project Division headed by Joint Secretary(Project) looks 
after transactions related to purchase, construction and renovation of 
Government owned properties both in India and abroad whereas Property Section 
of the Ministry headed by Joint Secretary (Establishment) is responsible for the 
renting of accommodation for Missions/Posts as well as residences of staff/ 
officers posted abroad. Ideally, there should only be one leader and one plan for a 
series of activities seeking accomplishment of the same objective as envisaged 
in Principle of Unity of Direction. The Co mmittee are, therefore, of the view that 
Projects Division and Property Section be brought together under Joint Secretary 
(Project) who may be made responsible for preparation of action plan, its 
implementation and review etc. in respect of all the transac tions relating to 
identification, acquisition, construction, renovation and refurbishment of all the 
properties whether owned/ leased or rented properties.  
 
17. The Committee desire that the Projects Division should be pro-active in its 
approach and work towards identifying stations where the Indian Missions needs 
to be strengthened.  The Committee are of the considered view that earnest 
efforts may be made to augment India's diplomatic presence  by depicting its rich 
and composite cultural heritage , particularly, in countries which are emerging as 
strong economies. The Committee, accordingly, feel that after emergence of 
European Union, the Embassy of India at Brussels require utmost attention of the 

-78- 
 
 
 
Ministry and recommend that the Indian Embassy at Brussels i. e. the hub of 
European Union be expanded and strengthened at the earliest.  
 
18. The Committee further feel that besides being functioning efficiently the 
workspace abroad needs to represent unique identity of the country. The 
Committee, therefore, are of the view that the presentation of all embassy 
buildings may be given specific importance as they show -case Indian culture to 
the country where they are stationed. The Committee, therefore, desire that all the 
buildings may be refurbished/ renovated to improve their aesthetic appearance to 
give visitors a feel of the rich and precious cultural heritage of India. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                 PROF. 
K.V.THOMAS 
21st December, 2015                                                                                         
Chairperson, 
30 Agrahayana  1937 (Saka)                                                  Public Accounts 
Committee. 
 
 
 
 
  

-79- 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(2014-15) HELD ON 5TH JANUARY, 2015. 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 5 th January, 2015 from 1130 hrs to 1330 hrs 
in Committee Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
 PRESENT 
 
 
 Prof. K.V. Thomas - Chairperson 
  
 
Members  
 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia  
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
4. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal  
5. Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi  
6. Dr. Kirit Somaiya  
7. Dr. P. Venugopal  
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
8. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi  
9. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya  
10. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K Singh - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita B. Panda - Director 
3. Shri Jayakumar T. - Additional Director 
4. Shri Ajit Kumar Yadav - Under Secretary 
5. Shri Amrish Kumar - Under Secretary 
    
 
 
Apppendix - I 

-80- 
 
 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA   
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh  - Deputy C&AG (RC) 
2. Shri Satish Loomba - Director-General (Central Expenditure) 
3. Shri L.S. Singh - Principal Director (RC) 
4. Shri Purshottam Tiwary - Principal Director (PAC) 
5. Shri Saurabh Shukla  - Director (O/o DGCE) 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
1. Smt. Sujatha Singh - Foreign Secretary 
2. Shri R.Swaminathan - Special Secretary (AMS &CPV) 
3. Smt. Mukta Tomar - Additional Secretary (AD) 
4. Shri Binoy Kumar - AS & Financial Advisor  
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
 
1. Shri Dharmendra - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri M.K. Joshi - Deputy L&DO 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives of 
the office of C&AG to the sitting of the Committee.  The Chairperson, then, apprised the 
Members that the meeting was convened to consider Memoranda No. 2 regarding 
selection of additional subjects for examination by the Committee during their current 
term.  He also apprised the Members that eighteen Reports of the C&AG were laid in 
Parliament since their last selection of subjects and observed that as per r ules these 
stand referred to the PAC. 
 
3. The Chairman, then, sought the views of the Members and the Audit Officers on 
some of the relatively more important paras/subjects from these Reports for detailed 
examination by the Committee.  During the course of discussions, the representatives of 
C&AG briefed the Committee on certain paras/subjects and highlighted the Audit 

-81- 
 
 
 
findings for facilitating their consideration by the Committee in finalizing selection of 
additional subjects.  After due deliberations the Committee selected Forty–six additional 
subjects as shown in Annexure-I.   
 
4. The Chairman then thanked the Members and the Audit Officers for their 
valuable suggestions for selection of additional subjects. 
5. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs were called in. 
Then the Officers of the C&AG of India briefed the Committee on the subject 'Global 
Estate Management by the Ministry of External Affairs' based on the C&AG Report no. 
16 of 2014. The Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of External 
Affairs to the sitting of the Committee and delineated several issues concerning the 
subject for instance delay in decision-making for property acquisition resulting in a huge  
rental outgo, absence of basic information with regard to Ministry of External Affairs' 
properties abroad, failure to acquire plots on reciprocal basis in China and Bangladesh, 
delay in construction of building for Regional Passport Offices and FSI, etc. He 
underlined the need to create an efficient information system in the Ministry of External 
Affairs as well as a well -documented Action Plan for better estate management. The 
Foreign Secretary, in her opening remarks, assured the Committee of the Ministry 's 
endeavour to improve the efficiency of management and utilization of MEA's property 
abroad and in India. She also enumerated reasons for long delays in acquisition of 
property i.e. political and security situation, inadequate budgetary resources etc. an d 
recognized the need to have a better and updated database of the estates under MEA's 
control. 
6. The Members then raised various issues which inter-alia included criteria to 
acquire properly abroad on reciprocal basis, delay in construction of acquired p roperties 
within India and abroad by MEA, increase in annual rental outgo for Jalandhar RPO, 
absence of centralized database of properties managed by MEA despite the matter 
taken up by the PAC 10 years ago, space shortage in the Jawaharlal Nehru Bhavan, 
constitution and mandate of the Purchase Committee of MEA, reasons to acquire an 
unsuitable property in Paris, etc. 

-82- 
 
 
 
7. The Committee then decided to convene their next Sitting on the subject in mid -
February, 2015 and desired the Ministry to provide concrete replies to the points raised 
by the Committee.   
  A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record.  
  
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
COMMITTEE (2014-15) HELD ON 19TH AUGUST, 2015. 
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 19 th August, 2015 from 1500 hrs to 1715 
hrs in Committee Room No. '53', Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 PRESENT 
 
 
 Prof. K.V. Thomas - Chairperson 
  
 
Members  
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia  
3. Shri Nishikant Dubey  
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
5. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal  
6. Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi  
7. Dr. Kirit Somaiya  
8. Shri Anurag Thakur  
9. Dr. P. Venugopal  
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
10. Shri Vijay Goel  
11. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita  
12. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
Apppendix - II 
 

-83- 
 
 
 
1. 
2. 
Shri A.K. Singh 
Smt  Anita B. Panda 
- 
- 
Additional Secretary 
Director 
3. Shri Jayakumar T. - Additional Director  
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA   
 
1. Shri P. Mukherjee - Dy. C&AG  (C) 
2. Shri Shubha Kumar - DG (RC) 
3. Shri Satish Loomba - DGACE 
4. 
5. 
Shri Menish Kumar 
Shri Saurabh Narain 
- 
- 
PD (PAC) 
Director (DGACE) 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
1. Dr. S. Jaishankar  - Foreign Secretary 
2. Ms. Mukta D. Tomar - Additional Secretary (AD) 
3. Shri Binoy Kumar - Additional Secretary & FA 
4. Shri U.S. Pant - Pr. CCA 
5. Shri Sanjay Kumar Verma - Joint Secretary (Projects) 
6. Shri Jaideep Mazumdar  - Joint Secretary (COP) 
7. Ms. Sangeeta Bahudur - Joint Secretary (FSI) 
8. Shri Muktesh K. Pardeshi - Joint Secretary (PSP) & CPO - Joint Secretary (AD &Estt.) 
9. 
10. 
11. 
Shri Sibi George  
Ms. Nutan Kapoor Mahawar 
Smt. Namrata Kumar 
- 
- 
- 
Joint Secretary (AD &Estt.) 
Joint Secretary(Parl. & Coord) 
DDG (ICCR) 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee 
followed by a briefing by the C& AG officials to the Members of the Committee on the 
subject ' Performance Audit of Global Estate Management by the Ministry of 
External Affairs' based on the C&AG Report No. 16 of 2014 and the issues involved 
therein. 
3. After the briefing, the witnesses were called in.  The Hon'ble Chairperson 
welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs and made the following 

-84- 
 
 
 
observations: (i) Fulfillment of assurances given to Public Accounts Committee was 
extremely   important for it is the nerve of Parliamentary form of governance. 
 (ii) Expressed happiness to place on record that the Ministry had come up 
with a   comprehensive data base of the properties owned by the Ministry of 
External   Affairs and praised the Foreign Secretary and his team of o fficers 
for the    achievement.   
 (iii) The Ministry should have a very good manual in place on the functioning 
of   different lease arrangements across the world to understand various  
  bottlenecks and challenges. 
 (iv) Four Missions viz. Panama City, H ouston, Vancouver and Chile had 
incurred an irregular expenditure of ` 20.29 crore beyond the power 
delegated to subordinate authorities and only CGI Vancouver was stated 
to have initiated action for regularisation though it was pointed out as early 
as 201 4.  Failure of the Financial Adviser to ensure such expenditure 
within the powers delegated to the subordinate authorities deserved to be 
brought to the notice of the Secretary, Department of Expenditure, Ministry 
of Finance. 
 (v) The Cabinet Secretary should be brought to notice of the importance of 
Result Framework Document (RFD) of the Department and also Annual 
Performance Appraisal Report (APAR) of the officers in achieving targets 
for examining its effectiveness at the field l evel to avoid delay and cost 
overrun construction of the Foreign Service Institute in Delhi. 
 (vi) Fix responsibility for the contributory negligence which facilitated loss to 
the public exchequer by way of loss for not using the single rooms and 
additional expenses for conversion of the single rooms into double rooms 
of the Foreign Service Institute, Delhi.  
 (vii) Bring to the notice of the Government in the Ministry of External Affairs for  
  considering to establish an effective internal audit system in the Ministry. 

-85- 
 
 
 
 (viii) The sad state -of-affairs, viz, purchase of building not suitable for cultural 
centre and contrary to French Government regulations, non -availability of 
documents relating to correspondence with the French Government for 
scrutiny etc. be brought to the notice of the Government in the Ministry of 
External Affairs. 
 (ix) The Foreign Secretary should look into the issue of the notice for 
 unauthorised retention of vacant leased accommodation in the seven 
 Missions of  Oman, Libya, Tehran,  Moscow, Bucharest, Guangzhou and  
 Pyongyang. 
 (x) The Ministry should draw a list of countries where reciprocal acquisition of 
properties could be attempted in the current action plan and also indicate 
where such attempts had been made but failed .  The Ministry should also 
draw a list of properties where construction had been delayed and list out 
the reasons for the same.  Moreover, the Ministry should fix responsibility 
to avoid the recurring situation where it becomes difficult owing to different 
persons having been in position during different periods. 
4. Thereafter, the Foreign Secretary, Ministry of External Affairs introduced himself 
and his colleagues and briefed the Committee about the efforts made by them on the 
issues involved therein.  The Memb ers then sought  clarification from the 
representatives of the Ministry which inter-alia included the reason for two and half 
years delay on the part of the CPWD in submitting revised drawings and estimates of 
Regional Passport office, Srinagar and the sil ence of MEA in this regard; need for a 
structured mechanism at the level of the Ministry for interaction with professional 
agencies for identification, acquisition, development and maintenance of its properties; 
time bound completion of projects in India a nd abroad; need for facelift of our 
embassies depicting our rich cultural heritage; details on outsourcing of passport and 
visa services; shortage of staff/infrastructure in Indian embassies specially in Brussels 
Embassy which is the headquarter of Europea n Union; non-constitution of a Committee 
to review the progress in acquisition and construction of property, non -defining of a 
clear cut policy of 'Better Asset Management', non -utilisation of property, inordinate 

-86- 
 
 
 
delay in the commencement of construction of property from 14 to 51 years, non -
exercise of due diligence in taking approval from local authorities for the construction of 
Embassy in Paris; misplacement of two Five Year Action Plans as assured to the PAC 
in 2007; reciprocal acquisition of property in other countries; road map  for 
acquisition/completion of property; fixing of responsibility for the delay in the acquisition 
of property of Indian Embassy in Paris; non -identification of Missions undergoing heavy 
rent burden; engaging firms other than CPWD for construction of property in India etc.  
5. Thereafter, the representative of the Ministry replied to the queries raised by the 
Members on related aspects particularly the various lapses/irregularities/shortcomings 
in the management of estates  by t he Ministry of External Affairs. As some queries 
required detailed and statistical information, the Chairperson asked the representatives 
of the Ministry to furnish written replies to the Secretariat at the earliest. The 
representatives agreed to do the same. 
6. The Chairperson thanked the representatives of the Ministry for appearing before 
the Committee and the representatives of the Office of the C&AG of India for providing 
assistance to the Committee in the examination of the subject.  
 The witnesses, then withdrew.  
 
  A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record.  
  
 
The Committee, then, adjourned.  
  
 
 
 
  

-87- 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
COMMITTEE  (2015-16) HELD ON  17th DECEMBER, 2015. 
 
 
 The Committee sat from 1000 hrs. to 1100 hrs. on 17 th December, 2015 in Room 
No. “51”, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
 PRESENT 
 
 
 Prof. K. V. Thomas    - Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
 
2. Shri Nishikant Dubey  
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
4. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal  
5. Dr. Kirit Somaiya  
6. Dr. P. Venugopal  
7. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank”  
8. Shri Dushyant Singh  
9. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia  
10. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar  
11.  Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
12. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita  
 
 
LOK  SABHA SECRETARIAT  
1. Shri A. K. Singh -   Additional Secretary 
2. Shri  T. Jayakumar  -   Director 
3. Shri Tirthankar Das -   Additional Director 
4. Smt. Bharti Tuteja -   Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 

-88- 
 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
 
1. Shri Rakesh Jain - Deputy C&AG (RC) 
2.  Ms. Shubha Kumar - Director General of Audit (RC) 
3. Shri Parag Prakash - Director General of Audit (ADS) 
4. Shri Mukesh P. Singh - Director General of Audit (ACE) 
5. Shri Manish Kumar - Principal Director of Audit (PAC) 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft Reports for 
consideration:   
(i) Draft Report on the subject “Global Estate Management by the Ministry of External 
Affairs” based on C&AG Report No. 16 of 2014. 
 
(ii)   XXXXXX  XXXXXX  XXXXXX 
 
(iii) XXXXXX  XXXXXX  XXXXXX 
 
3. The Chairperson invited suggestions of the Members on the above mentioned 
draft Reports. After discussing the contents of these draft Reports, the Committee 
adopted the draft Reports at Sl. No (i) with some changes/modifications which are 
indicated in the enclosed Annexure. The Committee then adopted the draft Report at Sl. 
No. (iii)  without any changes/modifications.  The Committee, however, decided to 
postpone the adoption of draft Report at SI. No (ii) for further examination of the subject. 
4. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalise these Reports in the light 
of verbal discussion and consequential changes arising out of factual verification by the 
Audit and present the same to Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
X Doesn't pertain to this Report. 

-89- 
 
 
 
Annexure 
Statement indicating the changes/modifications made in Draft Repot 
‘Global Estate Management by the Ministry of External Affairs’ 
Sl. 
No. 
Para 
No. 
Read 
1. 2 Add at the end of Para No. 10 of draft report 
 
The Committee desire that the database should also include details about the 
ownership (including previous ownerships) of all the properties (leased/ rented/ 
owned), the details of the inventories and the details of the periodical verification 
of the inventories. The Committee further desire that all the documents relating to 
the properties be microfilmed for effective monitoring of those properties and be 
readily available for scrutiny. The Committee direct the Ministry to upload the 
database on its website within two months. 
2. 5 Line No. 24 add after 'identidication and negotiation of properties' 
 
The Committee are of the view that a detailed Search Report may be prepared 
for all the properties that have been identified for acquisition and made available 
to the Ministry and the members of the purchase committee 
3. 8 Line No. 23 add after 'maintaining the property'. 
 
The Committee are of the view that making such a deal without proper planning 
and consultation tantamount to criminal negligence. 
4. 8 Add at the end of Para No. 8 of draft report 
 
within two months 
5. 9 Add at the end of Para No.9 of draft report 
 
within two months 
6. 10 Add at the end of Para No.10 of draft report 
 
within two months 
7. 11 Add at the end of Para No.11 of draft report 
 
within two months 
8. 12 Add at the end of Para No.12 of draft report 
 
within two months 
9. 13 Add at the end of Para No.13 of draft report 
 
within two months 
10 14 Add at the end of Para No.14 of draft report 
 
within two months 
 
 