1 
 
       134 
 
 
PRADHAN MANTRI SWASTHYA SURAKSHA YOJANA  
 
 
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
(DEPARTMENT OF MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND 
FAMILY WELFARE) 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
 
ONE HUNDERED AND THIRTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
               
                      
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


2 
 
PAC NO. 2173 
 
 
O N E  H U N D E R E D  A N D  T H I R T Y  
F O U R T H  R E P O R T 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(2018 -19)  
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
(DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE) 
 
 
                                         
                                                                                          
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on:  21-12-2018 
 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   21-12-2018 
 
 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
December, 2018 /Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)  
 
 
  
PRADHAN MANTRI SWASTHYA 
SURAKSHA YOJANA 
 

3 
 
CONTENTS 
 
PAGES 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS  
COMMITTEE (2018-19) 
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………... 
 
REPORT 
PART- I 
 
I INTRODUCTION  1 
II Planning 2 
 a) Non-existence of guidelines 2 
 b) Establishment of new AIIMS 3 
 c) Availability of Land for Setting up New AIIMS 5 
 d) Upgradation of GMCIs 7 
 e) Arbitrary selection and distribution of work amongst 
Consultancy Agencies 
13 
III Outstanding Utilization Certificates amounting to ` 234.98 crore 16 
IV Execution of works  17 
 a) Delay in implementation of Hospital, Medical College, 
Estate and Electrical Packages 
17 
 b) Excess payment to contractors 21 
 c) Non-installation of equipment 23 
 d) Delay in installation of equipment 25 
 e) Availability of Human Resources in new AIIMS 25 
 f) Non-achievement against envisaged deliverables 27 
V Delays in completion of works of Government Medical Institutions 28 
VI Monitoring 30 
 a) State level Project Monitoring Committee of the 
AIIMS/GMCIs 
30 
 b) Non-inclusion of interest clause in the contract agreement 33 
                                         PART – II  
 Observations/Recommendations 
 
34-42 
 
 

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
2018-19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge   - Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria  
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra 
5.    Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar   
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
7. Smt. Riti Pathak 
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank” 
9. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
10. Shri Abhishek Singh 
11. Shri Gopal Shetty 
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya  
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
15. Dr. Ponnusamy  Venugopal 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda 
17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
18. Shri Shwait Malik 
19. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
21. Shri C.M. Ramesh 
 
22. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh                         - Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja                         - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Shankarnath Sharma Laimayum - Committee Assistant 

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2018 -19) having been authorised 
by the Committee, do present this One Hundred and Thirty Fourth Report (Sixteenth 
Lok Sabha) on 'Performance Audit of Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana'  
based on C&AG Report No.10 of 2018 related to the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare (Department of Health and Family Welfare). 
 
2. The above -mentioned Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
was laid on the Table of the House on 07th August, 2018. 
 
3. The Public Accounts Committee (2018 -19) took up the subject for detailed 
examination and report.  The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of Health and Family Welfare) on 
the subject a t their sitting held on 26 th September, 2018. Accordingly, a Draft Report 
was prepared and placed before the Public Accounts Committee (2018 -19) for their 
consideration. The Committee considered and adopted this Draft Report at their sitting 
held on 14th December, 2018.  The Minutes of the Sittings are appended to the Report. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type and form Part - II of 
the Report.   
 
6. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of Health and Family Welfare) for 
tendering evidence before them and furnishing the requisite information to the 
Committee in connection with the examination of the subject. 
 
7. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to 
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                           MALLIKARJUN KHARGE 
20 December, 2018                                                                                     Chairperson, 
29 Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)                                             Public Accounts Committee 
        
 
  

6 
 
REPORT 
PART- I 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
  
1. The Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana  (PMSSY/Scheme), a Central 
Sector Scheme, was announced in August 2003 with the objective of correcting 
imbalances in the availability of tertiary healthcare services and improving the quality of 
medical education in India. In March 2006, the Government ap proved Phase -I of the 
PMSSY which comprised of (i) setting up of six AIIMS like institutions (later re-named as 
new AIIMS) and (ii) upgradation of 13 existing State Government Medical 
Colleges/Institutions (GMCIs). Upgradation of GMCIs envisaged improvemen t in health 
infrastructure through construction of Super Speciality Blocks/Trauma Centres and 
procurement of medical equipment for selected existing GMCIs. After a review of the 
coverage area of existing government institutions and planned institutions and  on the 
recommendations of the Working Group for Tertiary Care Institutions for 12th Five Year 
Plan, the Government decided to increase the number of new AIIMS to be setup and 
the GMCIs to be upgraded in subsequent phases of the scheme. As of March 2017, 
twenty new AIIMS are to be set up and 71 GMCIs upgraded in six -phases. The scheme 
envisaged 100 per cent funding by the Centre for setting up of new AIIMS while funding 
for upgradation of GMCIs was to be on sharing basis between the Central and State 
Governments. A total amount of ` 14,970.70 crore was allocated for the scheme during 
2004-17 of which ` 9,207.18 crore had been released by the Ministry. The Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare, Government of India (Ministry), is responsible for the overall 
administration of the scheme with the PMSSY Division of the Ministry headed by a Joint 
Secretary being entrusted with its implementation and monitoring. At the State level, the 
scheme is being implemented by the Department of Health and Family Welfare headed  
by the Principal Secretary with the Directorate of Medical Education and Research 
acting as the nodal office. At level of the institutions, the Dean/Medical Superintendent/ 
Principal of the concerned GMCI was responsible for implementation of the scheme.  
 
2. The performance audit of PMSSY was taken up with the objective of assessing 
whether: (i ) the scheme was properly planned and covered all the requirements of 
tertiary healthcare services; (ii) financial management was adequate and effective; (iii) 
the implementation of the scheme was effective; (iv) availability of equipment was 

7 
 
adequate; (v)  availability of human resources was adequate; (vi) whether scheme 
deliverables were achieved; and (vii) effective mechanisms were in place both in the 
Ministry and State Governments for monitoring and evaluating scheme implementation.  
 
3. The audit criteria/performance impact indicators were derived from the following: 
(a) AIIMS Act, 1956; (b) AIIMS (Amendment) Act, 2012; (c) Expenditure Finance 
Committee and Cabinet documents for establishment of new AIIMS and upgradation of 
existing GMCIs (Phase-I to Phase-III); (d) Financial rules and regulations; CPWD/PWD 
Manual; guidelines/ circular/orders issued by Government; and (e) Contracts/MOUs 
signed with various agencies and State Governments. The Audit Report of the CAG 
(Report No.19 of 2013 - Union Government -Civil) contained observations relating to 
irregularities in selection of project consultants, irregular expenditure on escalation 
charges amounting to ` 1.56 crore, incorrect release of mobilization advance amounting 
to ` 8.32 crore to contractors, excess p ayment of ` 25.20 lakh to in -house consultant 
and release of payment to PSU consultants based on estimated fund requirements 
instead of on actual progress of work. In reply to the audit comments, the Ministry had 
stated that the audit findings were noted f or avoidance of such occurrence in future. 
However, irregularities of similar nature have been noticed during the current audit and 
the same alongwith the new findings by the Committee are discussed in the succeeding 
paragraphs. 
 
II. Planning 
a) Non-existence of guidelines 
4. The Committee found that the Ministry had not formulated any operational 
guidelines for PMSSY. Instead, implementation was being guided by instructions issued 
from time to time and decisions taken by the Project Management Committee (PMC) 
mostly on a case to case basis. This resulted in several ad hoc decisions being taken 
with respect to fund management, selection of consultants, assignments of project 
tasks, award of contracts and in the management of contracts. Ministry, while accepting 
that no scheme guidelines had been formulated, stated (February 2018) that the 
contours of the scheme had emerged in the initial stages itself in the process of 
approving the projects. 
 
 

8 
 
5. When the Committee asked as to how the Ministry would justify the arbitrary 
decision making in absence of any operational guidelines for the implementation of 
PMSSY, a flagship scheme of the Government of India, the Ministry submitted as under: 
  
 "PMSSY was launched in 2003 to set up new AIIMS and to upgrade GMCs. The 
 scheme was innovative and path -breaking and sufficient experience to draft set 
 guidelines was not available. The contours of the scheme and approach for 
 execution of the projects were thus evolved in the initial stages, even though 
 “Scheme Guidelines” i n particular have not been issued. While absence of 
 detailed guidelines is not denied, yet there was no arbitrary decision making as 
 decisions on various aspect of administration of scheme including system and 
 processes were taken after due deliberation  in PMC Meetings. A two member 
 committee has recently been constituted to draw up “Scheme Guidelines” for 
 PMSSY in view of the fact that adequate experience and learning from prior 
 cases is available now. The committee will submit its report in two months’ time." 
 
6. When the Committee further desired to know as to whether implementing the 
Scheme by issuing instructions from time to time and taking decisions on case to case 
basis resulted in adhoc decisions which are apparent from the delays in carrying out  the 
up gradations and construction of new AIIMS  and if so, the  efforts being contemplated 
to obviate such scenario, the Ministry submitted as under:  
 
 "There was no blueprint of any such previous scheme available with the Ministry 
 at the time of launch of this ambitious Scheme. In view of this, at the time of 
 embarking upon execution of Phase -I projects under the Scheme; the Ministry 
 considered and evolved systems and approach for execution of projects. It may 
 be brought out here that firming up of th e scope of the new AIIMS works was a 
 somewhat complex decision. While the pattern was to be like AIIMS, Delhi, the 
 role model, it was also the position that the Ministry could not have straight away 
 replicated AIIMS, Delhi, which had evolved and grown o ver more than five 
 decades. AIIMS, Delhi was initially established as a less than 500 bedded 
 hospital and medical college. For cost considerations also, a middle path had to 
 be evolved. As comes out, the initial decision needed to be revisited and the 
 scope with respect to the facilities, area, equipment revised. The ambition was to 
 create world class institutions, therefore International consultants were initially 
 thought of but did not work out due to the excessive rates quoted by them." 
 
b) Establishment of new AIIMS 
 Deficiencies in planning for six new AIIMS 
 
7. The Committee found that the proposal for the six new AIIMS (Bhopal, 
Bhubaneswar, Jodhpur, Patna, Raipur and Rishikesh) was approved by the CFA in 
March 2006 with a total capital cost of ` 1,992 crore i.e.at the rate of ` 332 crore for 

9 
 
each new AIIMS. It issued Requests for Proposals (RFPs) to firms already shortlisted 
during its earlier exercise even though more than two years had since elapsed  for 
selection of project and design consultan t. As a result, the RFPs remained non -
responsive even after extension was given for submission. In November 2006, the 
Ministry decided to have separate consultancy arrangements for each new AIIMS and 
also delink construction of residential complex from the  medical college and hospital 
complex at each new AIIMS. The DPRs showed a large variation in estimated cost for 
each new AIIMS from the approved cost due to increase in cost indices, enhancement 
in area requirements, inclusion of additional items in the e stimates and increase in the 
quantum of equipment required at each AIIMS. The area required in the initial proposal 
had been under-estimated by approximately 37 per cent and green building norms and 
requirements in terms of Energy Conservation Building Cod e (ECBC) had not been 
catered for. Further, the requirement for equipment had also been under -assessed. The 
revised capital cost for each new AIIMS was estimated at ` 820 crore as against the 
approved cost of ` 332 crore. During this period, the commenceme nt of all works 
remained held up except for the residential complexes even though these were to be 
completed within three years of CFA approval granted in March 2006. The delay and 
the increase in costs was attributable to delay in appointment of project c onsultant and 
architectural design consultant which led to shortcomings in the planning of the scheme 
and obtaining approval based on a preliminary feasibility study, failure to firm up project 
parameters and scope of activities before seeking CFA approval and adoption of ad-hoc 
approach in terms of project planning. 
 
8. When asked as to why the Ministry failed to take into account the increase cost 
indices, enhancement in area requirements, inclusion of additional items in the 
estimates and increase in the qu antum of equipment required for each AIIMS and also 
as to whether the Ministry engaged experts while preparing cost estimates and if so, the 
recommendations of the experts, the Ministry submitted as under:  
 
 "In case of approval in 2006, the approval for setting up of six AIIMS was 
 accorded by the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) as a special 
 case based on Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) recommendation on 24th 
 November, 2004 that did not hav e a detailed project report. However in case of 
 approval in 2010, the complete Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) for six AIIMS 
 were prepared and the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) in September, 

10 
 
 2009 considered the available DPRs and approved the esti mates therein. Inputs 
 from experts were obtained at the time of preparing DPRs." 
 
9. When the Committee asked to explain as to explain as to how the area 
requirement in the initial proposal for the Institutes had been under estimated by 
approximately 37 per cent and green building norms and requirements in terms of 
Energy conservation Building Code not complied with, the Ministry submitted as under: 
   "In case of approval in 2006, the approval for setting up of six AIIMS was 
 accorded by the Cabinet Committe e on Economic Affairs (CCEA) as a special 
 case based on EFC recommendation on 24th November, 2004 that did not have 
 a detailed project report. However in case of approval in 2010, the complete 
 Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) for six AIIMS were available  and the 
 Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) in September, 2009 considered the  
 available DPRs and approved the estimates therein. Moreover, there was no 
 standardization for AIIMS to compare with at inception of the project." 
  
c) Availability of Land for Setting up New AIIMS 
 
10. States selected for establishing new AIIMS were required to provide a minimum 
of 100 acres of developed land for the project. Delay in providing suitable and 
encumbrance free land led to delay in establishment of the AIIMS. The Co mmittee 
found that in AIIMS Bhubaneswar, Odisha though there was a requirement of providing 
100 acres or more of land, the Ministry had conveyed a requirement of 200 acres of 
land. Against this, land provided by the State was only 92.11 acres. The Institut e had 
been demanding an additional 50 acres of land required for establishment of Cardiac 
Centre, Mental Health Centre and Neurosciences Centre but the State was able to 
commit an additional area of only 21 acres (2013) which was also yet to be provided. 
Consequently, expansion of the Institute in critical areas was held up. 
 
11. When the Committee desired to know the criteria for selecting locations for 
setting up AIIMS and whether these criteria have been followed in respect of all 20 
locations, the Ministry submitted as under:  
"As per Cabinet Note for Phase I and II, the primary criteria for selection of States 
for establishment of AIIMS are economic backwardness, adverse health 
indicators, inadequate deployment of resources for health by State Government, 
inability to generate resources both public and private etc.  However, a more 
structured method, viz. Challenge Method criterion has been evolved by the 
Cabinet Secretariat for evolution of the suitability of the sites for setting up of 
AIIMS. Sites for AIIM S in the states of Assam, Himachal Pradesh, Tamil Nadu 
and Jharkhand under phase IV and phase V of PMSSY have been finalized on 
the basis of the challenge method criterion." 

11 
 
12. Supplementing the above, the representative of the Ministry deposed during 
evidence as under: 
 
 "Sir,  we initially started with 100 acres of each AIIMS. There were problems in 
some cases.  All the facilities could not really fit it.  There would be waterbodies 
also. There would be landscaping issues also.  Later on, we switched over to 200 
acres of land. Now, when we go to a place, let us say, Bilaspur, Himachal 
Pradesh, the land which is given there is so far away from the town. Now, the 
Town and Country Planning Exercise has been taken up to ensure that the area 
between the town and t he AIIMS does not become congested. So, if you have a 
place like this, we can go for 200 acres. It is always good to have a space for 
future. "  
 
13. When asked as to whether the additional area of 21 acres has been provided by 
the Government of Odisha for the establishment of cardiac centre, Mental Health Centre 
and Neuro science Centre at AIIMS Bhubaneswar  and if so, to spell out the progress in 
this regard, the Ministry submitted as under:  
 "AIIMS, Bhubaneswar has taken up this issue with State Government. There was 
 some delay in acquiring and handover, as the identified la nd was categorized as 
 forest land. However, the proposal is under process." 
 
14. In AIIMS, Raebareli (Uttar Pradesh), though the CFA had approved setting up of 
new AIIMS in February 2009, th e State Government provided land for the Institute only 
in July 2013. As a result, work with regard to the Institute has been considerably 
delayed and work on the Hospital and Medical College is yet to commence. 
 
15. When asked about the reasons for the delay in allocating land by the Sta te 
Government for AIIMS Raebareli after four years of approval for its establishment during 
phase II of the PMSSY scheme and whether any efforts were done for acquisition of 
land before preparing any cost estimates, etc. and also whether the setting up an AIIMS 
in Raebareli was proposed by the State Government, the Ministry submitted as under: 
 
  "As  per Cabinet Note approved for Phase II of PMSSY; the Government of India 
 proposed setting up of AIIMS at Raebareli in Uttar Pradesh considering that 
 State of Uttar Pradesh was considered as Empowered Action Group (EAG) State 
 with adverse health population in terms of high prevalence rate of serious 
 communicable diseases, availability of affordable health services etc. the State 
 has not been able to invest substantially nor able to attract  private investment. 
 The AIIMS was earlier planned to be set up at Lalganja, Rae Bareli. However, 
 considering the convenience of patients and with a view to obviating the 
 difficulties of larger population of Rae Bareli town in reaching the institution, it 
 was decided to change location of the AIIMS to Rae Bareli town. The state 
 government had agreed to provide 148 acres of land. The project was originally 

12 
 
 envisaged for completion within 36 months .i.e. by the end of 2012. However due 
 to delay in hand ing over of land by the state government the project was not 
 implemented as per proposed plan. As per information available with the 
 Ministry, there was some problem regarding acquisition of land by State 
 Government on account of some pre -existing struc tures of Sugar Mills at 
 allocated site. Land was finally made available only after change of government 
 in Uttar Pradesh. With respect to transfer of land by the State Government there 
 were several cases where delay in transfer did impact the overall pr ogress of the 
 project. Gaining from the experience of the first six AIIMS, the norm for the 
 required land size has been increased from 100 acres to 200 acres 
 approximately so that long term future growth needs of the AIIMS can also be 
 catered to. Further, the Ministry also insists on prior transfer of encumbrance-free 
 land by the State Government so as to avoid project delays on account of delays 
 in transfer of land. However, land has to be provided by State Governments only 
 and therefore delays do t ake place sometimes in -spite of continuous 
 engagement by the Ministry." 
 
16. Supplementing the above, the representative of the Ministry deposed during 
evidence as under: 
 "We have the flexibility.  Sir, in Rae Bareli, we are doing it on 97 acres only. So, 
 we have flexibility." 
 
17. In AIIMS Raignaj (West Bengal) approval of CFA was granted in February 2009 
for setting up of a new AIIMS at Raiganj in North Dinajpur . As the State Government 
could not provide required land, the project has been deferred to the 4th Phase of the 
Scheme and the location has been changed to Kalyani in the Southern part of West 
Bengal even though the project had been approved in view of de ficient health services 
in the Northern region of West Bengal. 
 
18. When the Committee asked to explain as why the Government of West Bengal 
did not provide land for the establishment of AIIMS Raiganj, the Ministry submitted that 
no records was available. 
 
d) Upgradation of GMCIs 
19. The Committee found that the Ministry had not formulated any criteria or 
procedure for selection of GMCIs for upgradation as brought out below: (i) In Bihar, two 
GMCIs were selected for upgradation under PMSSY Phase -III by the Ministry wi thout 
consulting the Government of Bihar; (ii) Three GMCIs in Madhya Pradesh were 
approved for upgradation in Phase -III without obtaining any preliminary project report 
from the State Government. GRMC -Gwalior stated that the Ministry had approved 
upgradation of GMC as per their norms; (iii) In Maharashtra, selection of six GMCIs was 

13 
 
done based on proposals submitted by their respective Deans and not on the basis of 
any state level study; (iv) In Rajasthan, no record was available with the State 
Authorities of any request /proposal for upgradation of GMCIs under PMSSY; and (v) 
Ministry selected BJMC -Ahmedabad and PDUMC -Rajkot for upgradation under the 
scheme in first and third phase respectively without any proposal from the Government 
of Gujarat. 
 
20. When the C ommittee asked as to why did the Ministry failed to formulate any 
criteria for selecting Government Medical College Institution for up -gradation under the 
PMSSY Scheme, the Ministry submitted as under:  
 "PMSSY aims at correcting the regional imbalances in  the availability of the 
tertiary healthcare and medical education in different parts of the country. The 
Ministry has its own database under National Health Mission on penetration and 
reach of healthcare throughout the  country. Each State in the country a lso vies 
for central assistance in setting up of more medical facilities in their respective 
States. The Ministry has, while finalizing the up -gradation projects given higher 
priority to the States generally considered “backward” with respect to the broad 
socio-economic indicators. However, the State has to also bear the state share 
and also operate and maintain the facilities created; therefore, the willingness of 
the State to contribute its share and participate in the scheme is also important 
apart from backwardness. As per the EFC notes available with the Ministry, all 
projects have been selected on the basis of demands raised by the States. The 
selection of the upgradation projects have been made on the above 
considerations." 
 
21. Medical Council of India (MCI) had suggested that super speciality services may 
be set up in a manner that the maximum number of super speciality services is provided 
in a particular State. A Department of Neurology already existed in the Maharav Bheem 
Singh Hospital attached to GMC -Kota which fulfilled the norms of MCI for education in 
the super speciality course in neurology. However, a Department of Neurology was 
included in the newly created Super Speciality Block (SSB). Hence, the creation of a 
facility that was already available in the newly proposed SSB lacked justification and the 
resources could have been deployed for setting up some other Department. Moreover, 
equipment costing ` 12.86 crore4 which were procured/being procured from State funds 
had also been included in the list of equipment for procurement under PMSSY. Thus, 
there was duplication in the plan for procurement of equipment. At the same time, 
requirement for various equipment of five departments of GMC -Kota were not included 
in the gap analysis report. The Institute stated (August 2017) that revised requirement 
for equipment will be submitted and the equipment already procured/under process for 

14 
 
procurement will be removed from the list of equipment to be procured from the funds 
under PMS SY. The Ministry further approved (February 2009) procurement of 294 
equipment at an estimated cost of ` 37.69 crore for BJMC-Ahmedabad. Subsequently in 
August 2013, BJMC-Ahmedabad was asked to review its equipment list as it contained 
items not directly c onnected with tertiary healthcare viz. CCTV, lift, ramps, laundry 
machine, etc. The Institute submitted a revised list of equipment to the Ministry (October 
2013) including three new equipment costing ` 9.58 crore. The three new equipment 
were not accepted  by the Ministry (January 2014) on the ground that these items had 
not been included in the gap analysis. Thus, the Institute could not obtain funds for 
equipment required by it due to improper gap analysis. 
 
22. When the Committee enquired as to how the short comings were analyzed with 
respect to gap analysis undertaken for two GMCI namely GMC Kota and BJMC 
Ahmedabad leading to duplication of facilities and equipment and whether any 
responsibility been fixed for such errant analysis, the Ministry submitted as under: 
"GMC Kota : Kota authorities have informed that initially the Institute had 
included certain equipments in the upgradation projects. However, later on the 
State considered and approved their separate proposal for the same which were 
under considerati on of the State Govt. funds before, but had not been getting 
sanctioned.  In view of this, the GMC proposed for removal of these items from 
the list of equipments under PMSSY. Since GMC Kota has already proposed to 
remove the said equipments items from the  list of equipments to be procured 
from the funds of PMSSY and the equipment list also revised, the issue may be 
treated as settled. The above circumstances also explain as to the circumstances 
under which the items of equipment had been initially included  under PMSSY. 
BJMC-Ahmedabad: Gap analysis was undertaken with full involvement of the 
Institute. The three equipments referred to by CAG were not asked for by the 
Institute at the time of gap analysis, but only much later. Up -gradation of 
equipment is a c ontinuous process which takes place at the level of the State 
Government even after the one -time intervention made under PMSSY, so these 
equipments can also be procured by the college at a subsequent stage. It may 
also be added here that, the overall requi rement are much more than what can 
be accommodated in the limited Rs. 150 crore budget.  Since civil construction 
on the given piece of land should be taken in one go, the construction 
requirement gets priority over medical equipments.  With the approach, some of 
the lesser priority medical equipments are sacrificed with an understanding that 
these may be procured later separately. The above would explain the position. 
However, the Ministry takes up the gap analysis with due seriousness involving 
experts to  ensure that to include requirement optimally for best use of the 
available funds." 
 

15 
 
23. In GMC-Kota the State Government handed over a site for construction of SSB in 
May 2016 but an existing parking shed and adjacent medical shops was not 
removed/dismantled from the site. As a result, external development works valued ` 
1.87 crore could not be taken up. GMC-Kota stated (May 2017) that the matter had 
been taken up with PWD authorities but action was yet to be taken (August 2017). For 
DMCH-Darbhanga due to delay in providing a clear site by the State Government, work 
of demolition of existing structures was  undertaken using Ministry funds. This also 
resulted in the project being delayed by more than a year. In GRMC -Gwalior as the site 
provided was encroached the upgradation project was delayed by more than a year. 
GRMC stated that removal of encroachments ha d been delayed due to the 
administrative processes involved. In case of PDUMC  Rajkot the project was delayed 
due to change in site, revision in DPR and delay in obtaining permission for dismantling 
the old wards constructed through donations. For PMCH -Dhanbad, unencumbered land 
was to be made available by Government of Jharkhand within 30 days from the date of 
approval of DPR i.e. by December 2015. However, construction of Super specialty 
building could be started only from November 2016 due to encroachment  of land. 
Therefore, the construction work was delayed more than 10 months.  The Committee 
found that four GMCIs (BJMC -Ahmedabad, BMCRI -Bangalore, NIMS -Hyderabad and 
RIMS-Ranchi) diverted funds amounting to ` 26.71 crore for other purposes. For 
example, funds for procurement were diverted to meet cost escalation of civil works and 
installation of gas manifold system, comprehensive maintenance contract and purchase 
of consumables items. Similarly, funds for computerisation were diverted for centralized 
air conditioning and minor civil works. 
 
24. When the Committee asked as to why the State Governments failed to provide a 
clear site on time leading to delay in the up -gradation of the above mentioned GMCI's, 
the Ministry submitted as under:  
 "As  per information a vailable in the Ministry, it can be inferred that the States 
faced challenge on account of acquisition of land, changing of land criteria etc 
and therefore handing over of unencumbered land to Central Government 
became difficult. In many cases, encroachmen t on existing land/site, forest land, 
existence of structures within the site etc. were encountered which needed to be 
cleared by the State Government and then handed over." 
 
25. When the Committee desired the Ministry to explain in detail the reasons for 
holding the unutilized balance funds of ` 1267.41 crore in the six new AIIMS, it was 
submitted that the  funds were released to the six AIIMS as per their projected demand. 

16 
 
However, this actual expenditure fel l short of the projection, leading to unutilized 
balance. The main reasons for underutilization of funds by six AIIMS are as under:  
 Less than targeted progress of the remaining DPR works due to failure on the 
part of some of the construction agencies to perform at the desired level. Due to 
this the capital grants could not be fully utilized. 
 Difficulties in filling up of the Faculty positions due to non -availability of suitable 
candidates. Due to this reason all the healthcare services could not be started on 
time as envisaged.  
 Substantial fund under the GIA (Salary) head remained unutilized in all the six 
AIIMS as the implementation of the VII CPC scales could not be made in 2016 -
17 as envisaged, as certain clarifications were required from DoPT.     
However substantial progress  in the above area of functioning were made in the year 
2017-18 with the result Rs.607cr. were utilized during the year 2017 -18. The unutilized 
balance has been brought down to Rs. 660 Crore as on March, 2018. 
 
26. When the Committee further asked as to what i s the present status of the 
utilization of the unspent fund of ` 1267.41 crore in the six new AIIMS, the Ministry 
submitted that substantial progress has been achieved in the various area of functioning 
regarding overall utilization of funds. With this, opening balance was reduced from Rs. 
1267 crores in March 2017 to Rs 660 crores in March 2018. Further opening balance 
this year has been fully  utilized and current year funds are being used now despite 
some slowdown in construction activity due to rains and all AIIMS are now utilizing 
funds released during the current financial year only. Even after release of Rs. 591.00 cr 
in this current finan cial year to six AIIMS, the balance GIA at six AIIMS is around Rs. 
565.86 cr. 
 
 
 
27. When the Committee desired the Ministry to explain the reasons for non-
utilization of funds  to the tune of ` 393.53 crore for civil works and ` 437.28 crore for 
procurement of equipment by the nominated/executing agencies of GMCIs and the new 
AIIMS, it was submitted as under: 
"From the CAG Observation, it would appear that there has been lack of 
appreciation on the 10% reserve fund with Executing Agency. It may be clarified 
here that the Ministry takes up release of funds to the PSUs three to four times in 
a year. Therefore, sufficient funds need to be released on any occasion  taking 
into consideration the fund requirement over next four months in such a manner 
so that the Age ncy still would have some fund balance when the next release is 

17 
 
processed. The provisioned buffer is needed to ensure that the project is not 
starved of the funds while the next release is in process. In view of the above, 
although not explicitly mentioned  in any policy document, as a guiding principle 
the quantum of fund release is assessed by taking into consideration the fund 
requirement over next four months as estimated by the Executing Agency in such 
a manner so that the Executing Agency may still hav e a balance of 10% when 
the next release is processed. With this appreciation, it may be seen that the 
agencies would most likely have fund balance in the range of 10 -25 percent of 
the project cost at any point of time. Based on the above, the specific com ments 
with respect to the fund balances with the Executive agencies are furnished 
below: 
 
 Fund balance with M/s HSCC: The total tendered cost for works awarded to M/s. 
 HSCC under execution under Phase III i.e. upgradation of Government Medical 
 Colleges under PMSSY alone is Rs. 1,037.97 cr. Hence, the unspent balance of 
 Rs 212.35 crores as on March, 2017 available with HSCC as Executing Agency 
 is within reasonable limits, which was needed to be given to them so that the 
 projects did not suffer due to fund crunch at Agency’s end.  
  
 Fund balance with M/s HITES: The total tendered cost for works awarded to M/s. 
 HITES under execution under Phase III i.e. upgradation of Government Medical 
 Colleges under PMSSY alone is around Rs. 906.36 cr. Hence, the uns pent 
 balance of Rs. 152 Crore available with M/s HITES as Executing Agency was 
 within reasonable limits, which was needed to be given them so that the projects 
 did not suffer due to fund crunch at Agency’s end.  It is also mentioned that the 
 fund relea se h ave been always considered after receiving the utilization of 
 previously released funds.  However, the releases to the Executing Agencies will 
 be further fine-tuned in the light of the observation of the CAG.  
  
 Fund balance with the Procurement Sup port Agency (M/s HLL) There is 
 substantial difference between the two sets of data regarding the “Unspent 
 balance available with the nominated agencies”, viz., the data shared with the 
 Ministry by CAG during audit and the data depicted by the CAG in the ir final 
 report laid before the Parliament. The difference is brought out in the table below. 
 
 As per the agreement with the Procurement Support Agency (PSA), the Ministry 
 releases any funds to the PSA only after placement of Order for the concerned 
 Medical Equipment’s. Therefore, the appreciation that the unspent balance is 

18 
 
 there due to delays in finalizing the tenders and placement of orders is not 
 correct.   
 
 Here it is also mentioned that the reason for release of funds immediately after 
 placement of the purchase orders is that the funds become committed 
 contractual liability and further the PSA requires the funds in their Bank account 
 to enable them to open the LCs which is an essential step before the dispatch of 
 the medical equipment ’s by the manufacturers. As per the trade protocol, the 
 intermediary Bank insists on availability of funds equal to 100% of the cost of the 
 medical equipment’s in the bank account of the PSA at the time of opening of LC. 
 The funds are also blocked by th e Bank for any other use while the LCs are in 
 operation.   
 The observation of CAG that an unspent balance of Rs. 437 crore was lying with 
 the PSA as in 2016-17 is not a correct appreciation of the fund position in view of 
 the above. 
 As has been inform ed by the PSA, the factual funds position of Rs.437 crore, 
 was as under:  
a.   Committed Liabilities against execution but payment not released:   Rs 56.48 Cr.  
b.   Funds kept under lien with Bankers for LCs:         Rs. 93.74 Cr.   
c.   NOA Placed and LC under process:           Rs 212 Cr.  
d. Funds against committed liabilities to the extent of pending:   Rs 75.06 Cr        
execution/ achievement of milestone   
e.    Idling Funds:                 Nil 
Thus Rs. 437 crore balance in the accounts was actual ly in use against the LCs and 
commuted liabilities against execution. 
e) Arbitrary selection and distribution of work amongst Consultancy Agencies 
 
28. The PMC decided (May 2006) that for upgradation of GMCIs there was no need 
to appoint separate Project Consultant for each Institute for upgradation of GMCIs. It 
was instead decided to engage CPWD, M/s HSCC or any other PSU already engaged 
in the Health sector as consultant to assist the Ministry in effective implementation of 
the upgradation projects. Acco rdingly, upgradation projects were allotted to the CPWD, 
M/s HSCC and M/s HLL/M/s HITES Ltd. 

19 
 
29. The Committee learnt that four GMCIs four GMCIs (BJMC -Ahmedabad, BMCRI 
Bangalore, NIMS-Hyderabad and RIMS-Ranchi) diverted funds amounting to Rs. 26.71 
crore for o ther purposes . For example, funds for procurement were diverted to meet 
cost escalation of civil works and installation of gas manifold system, comprehensive 
maintenance contract and purchase of consumables items. Similarly, funds for 
computerization were diverted for centralized air conditioning and minor civil works. 
 
30. When the Committee asked to explain the reason for the major differences 
between the amounts lying unspent with the agencies as calculated by the Audit and as 
stated by the Ministry , the Min istry submitted that  CAG team has collected data from 
several sites i.e. Ministry, AIIMS, Executing Agencies, PSA, Govt. Medical Colleges etc. 
hence it is difficult to identify data from which source have been collated at which point 
of time. However, as a n initial step, the Ministry has requested all concerned to furnish 
data and then reconcile. The Ministry will approach CAG to clarify the discrepancies. 
 
31. When the Committee asked the reason for e ngagement of PSUs on nomina tion 
basis in violation of GFRs and payment of `27.76 crore to the “In-house Consultant”, the 
Ministry submitted as under  :    
 "The engagement of Consultant made in the light of the provisions under GFR 
 176. This provision does not specify any limit for agency selection on nomination 
 basis. PMSSY is a flagship scheme of this Ministry and it was felt that timely 
 completion was of utmost importance, thereby creating special circumstances as 
 provided for in Rule 176 , these PSUS were  hired with due approval of the 
 Hon’ble Minister and the credentials of consultants are known to MoHFW through 
 MoU mechanism of DPE.  Manual of Policies and Procedure for Selection of 
 Consultants is in the nature of generic guidelines only and it only stipulates that 
 selection on nomination basis may no rmally be restricted to a financial ceiling of 
 ` Ten lakh. Thus, the GFR provisions were correctly applied."   
 
32. When the Committee asked as to why MoHFW has not justified professional and 
tech credentials of the Consultants, the Ministry submitted as under:    
 "HLL / HITES / HSCC as 100% owned PSUs of the Ministry; have been assigned 
 roles of Project Consultant / Procurement Support Agent / In -House Consultant / 
 Executing Agency in the PMSSY project after careful consideration in the given 
 circumstances with a view to achieve the objective. Both the PSUs have required 
 experience in Hospital projects.  When HLL and HSCC were engaged on 
 nomination basis, they were having “Excellent/ Very good ratings” as per 
 evaluation of DPR." 
 

20 
 
33.  Supplementing the abov e, the representative of the Ministry during evidence 
deposed as under: 
"The consultants initially selected were private parties and selected through a 
process of tendering. As you rightly pointed out, all of them have left. Later we 
felt that the construction was in a complex situation and the tendering was also a 
slow process. So, it was not possible to go for a tendering process again; so 
instead we appointed out PSUs, HITES and HSCC and signed a contract with 
these PSUs on nomination basis. For later works, we have totally done away with 
the tender system. We are now assigning works to PSUs as executing agencies. 
The executing agency is fully empowered. We have also gone forward for EPC 
or engineering, procurement, and construction, contracts so that eve n the design 
part is with the construction agency which ensures that issues of co -ordination 
between the design consultants and executing agencies do not come up again." 
 
34. When the Committee desired to know the reason for diversion of funds to the 
tune of 26.71 cr. like BJMC, Ahmedabad received ` 18.68 for procurement of Medical 
Equipment, though ` 3.59 cr. was spent on purchase of consumables/Maintenance 
items, the Ministry submitted as under: 
"As per Performance Audit of PMSSY conducted by CAG; report no. 10 of 2018 
four GMCIs (BJMC -Ahmedabad, BMCRI Bangalore, NIMS -Hyderabad and 
RIMS-Ranchi)  funds amounting to Rs. 26.71 crore  have been reported to be 
diverted for other purposes like funds for procurement were diverted to meet cost 
escalation of civil works and installation of gas manifold system, comprehensive 
maintenance contract and purchase of consumables items. Similarly, funds for 
computerization were diverted for centralized air conditioning and minor civil 
works.   
  
 However, the position was that the Ministry did not have control on the conduct 
of the Institutes who were spending the State share. All these four project s have 
not yet attained closure and the diversions will be analysed carefully before 
closure. Permissible diversion will be accounted for by modifying the DPR 
accordingly and States will be asked to refund the amount spent on 
impermissible diversions.    
  
Learning from the experience of the Phase -I and II works, the Ministry now gets 
all procurement, except small value items below Rs. 30 lakhs, made through a 
PSA appointed by the Ministry. The provision to this effect has been incorporated 
in the MoU signe d with the State Governments. This has given better control in 
the hands of the Ministry to ensure that the money is spent only for the purpose 
for which it is sanctioned." 
 
35. When asked to explain how the four GMCIs namely BJMC – Ahmedabad, 
BMCRI – Bangalore, NIMS Hyderabad an RIMS -  Ranchi diverted funds amounting to 
Rs. 26.71 crore for purp osed other than those earmarked and  whether such diversion 

21 
 
complied with the rules and  If not, the responsibility fixed in this regard , the Ministry 
submitted as under: 
 "The Ministry doesn’t exercise any administrative and financial control on the 
Institutes who were spending the State share. All these four projects have not 
yet attained closure and the diversions will be analyzed carefully before closure. 
There is no laid down rules regarding permissibility and applicability of diversion. 
Permissible diversion will be accounted for by modifying the DPR accordingly 
and States will be asked to refund the amount spent on impermissible 
diversions.    
 Any impermissible diversion of funds by BJMC Ahmedabad or any other GMC 
will be recovered at the time of closure.  
 It is further brought out that now as a policy, projects are being dealt through 
PSA only to obviate the possibility of diversion of fund by the GMCs. 
 
 Thus, the Ministry has taken needed systemic measures to ensure that the 
 issues highlighted by the CAG are adequately addressed." 
 
36. When the Committee asked as to whether the Ministry is planning to put in place 
any mechanism for monitoring such diversion of funds, the Ministry submitted as under: 
"Learning from the experience of the Phase -I and II works, the Ministry now gets 
all procurement, except small value items below Rs. 30 lakhs, made through a 
PSA appointed by the Ministry. The provision to this effect has been incorporated 
in the MoU signed with the State Governments. This has given better control in 
the hands of the Ministry to ensure that the money is spent only for the purpose 
for which it is sanctioned and any possibility of diversion of fund in obviated." 
 
III. Outstanding Utilization Certificates amounting to ` 234.98 crore  
37. According to clauses 12 and 13 of the MoU  between the Ministry and GMCIs, 
advances/subsequent release shall be made by the Ministry on the satisfaction that the 
beneficiary institution had furnished necessary statement of expenditure and utilisation 
certificate. Audit noticed that utilization cer tificates in seven GMCIs amounting to ` 
234.98 crore were not furnished to the Ministry. In the absence of proper utilisation 
certificates, there was no assurance that funds were used for the purpose for which 
these had been provided and not diverted or pa rked. In PGIMS, Rhotak out of the total 
release of 42.75 crore an expenditure of 21.01 crore was made without submission of 
UC. 
 
38. When the Committee asked as to why the seven GMCIs  i.e. JNMC -Aligarh, 
BMCRI-Bangalore, NIMS -Hyderabad, Pt. BDS, PGIMS -Rohtak, GCKMC-Salem, 
RPGMC-Tanda and IMS -Varanasi could not furnish utilization certificates amounting to 
Rs.234.98 crore to the Ministry, and whether the Ministry released further funds even in 

22 
 
the absence of utilization certificate in respect of earlier releases , it was submitted as 
under: 
"The  Ministry invariably insists on submission of UCs before release of the next 
tranche of funds. No release in the Ministry is processed without furnishing of 
Utilization certificate / Statement of expenditure. Many of the U Cs in the cases 
cited pertains to the fund released by the State Government or other 
Departments. However, the matter has been taken up with the concerned GMCs, 
State Governments and PSUs for furnishing the UCs and settlement of the 
accounts." 
 
39. When the Co mmittee further asked as to what steps have been taken by the 
Ministry to ensure furnishing of utilization certificates by the GMCIs for minimizing the 
risk of further diversion and misuse of funds, the Ministry submitted as under: 
"The Executing Agencies (EA) and Procurement Support Agency (PSA) engaged 
by the Ministry have been requested to provide Utilisation certificate to the funds 
released out of Central Share by the Ministry. Most of the Utilisation certificates 
from the Executing Agencies and Procur ement Support Agency have been 
received. These are under scrutiny in the Ministry.   
  
The GMCIs have also been advised to provide utilization certificate w.r.t. 
expenditure committed under State share. After receipt of these utilization 
certificates, the figures will be tallied and reconciled based on data available with 
the Ministry, PSA and EAs." 
 
40. When the Committee asked the reason for the release of advance without 
ensuring UCs- Rs 42 crore was released to PGIMS, Rohtak, though, UC was given for 
Rs 21 crore only, the Ministry submitted as under: 
"Ministry has released Rs.17.75 Cr only to PGIMS, Rohtak, directly (for 
procurement of medical equipment). Rest of the amount for the upgradation 
project has been released to HLL (Rs.56.82 Cr for construction an d Rs.30.36 Cr 
for procurement, so far) So far as funds for construction is concerned, a 
Statement of Expenditure is invariably obtained from the Project 
Consultant/Executing Agency concerned for the funds already released, before 
release of further install ments of project fund is considered. Regarding funds for 
procurement of medical equipment, the Ministry is to release 100% of the 
procurement cost to the PSA, as per the agreement entered into with them." 
 
IV. Execution of works 
a) Delay in implementation of Hospital, Medical College, Estate and Electrical 
Packages 
 
41. Initial approval for the six new AIIMS at Bhopal, Bhubaneswar, Jodhpur, Patna, 
Raipur and Rishikesh was granted by the Government in March 2006 for completion 
within three years i.e. by March 2009. However, none of the works except those relating 

23 
 
to residential complexes had even commenced within this period. While approving 
revised estimates for the six new AIIMS in March 2010, it had been stipulated that the 
new AIIMS be set up within three years from the date of approval i.e. by March 2013 . 
The scheduled dates for start of work under various packages were between May 2010 
and July 2012 and the scheduled dates of completion were between August 2011 and 
July 2013. However, the target dates were not achieved in any of the new AIIMS and 
there were delays of about four to five years Only two out of 242 packages i.e. 
construction of medical college complex and electrical works for AIIMS -Bhubaneswar 
had been completed. The physical progress of other packa ges ranged from 45.8 per 
cent to 99.97 per cent. 
 
42. When the Committee desired to know the specific reasons for failure to comply 
with completion target by the six new AIIMS  and the efforts done by Ministry to check 
deficient project and contract management, administrative laxity and weak monitoring , 
the Ministry submitted as under: 
"There were huge delays in the initial projects. These Delays/ low expenditure 
were due to systemic issues, not individual failures.    
The contracts for the package -I (Medical College) and package -II (Hospital 
Complex) were awarded in 2010 and the work also progressed well, however, 
the progress of work was hampered due to site specific issues like poor 
performance on the part of the design consultants, the Project Consultants (PCs) 
and the contractors. The Project Consultants, the Design Consultants and the 
Construction Contractors failed to perform to the desired levels. Due to these 
extrinsic factors, t he progress of works suffered and the projects could not be 
completed in time.   
  
The AIIMS Raebareli project could not take off due to delay of 04 years in making 
available of the land by the State Government.   
  
However, to overcome the problems, Minis try’s PSUs (M/s HSCC and M/s 
HITES) were appointed as PCs, the AIIMS were empowered to get the design 
inputs from IITs/NITs in the event of failure of the Design Consultants to perform. 
The Ministry also closely engaged with the construction agencies to he lp them 
tide over their liquidity constraints. With these efforts, it has been possible to put 
the derailed system back on rails and substantial progress has been achieved 
over past one and a half year. Most of the construction agencies have been 
giving good progress now.   
  
A few of the construction agencies which failed to perform even after above 
intervention, their contracts have been terminated and the balance works 
assigned to CPWD which has in turn also appointed new contractors to complete 
the bala nce works.  The procurement of medical equipment has also been 
synchronized with the construction pace.  

24 
 
  
For proper monitoring at the level of the Executing Agencies these agencies 
have been mandated to deploy and use Project Management Software to bring  
about improved project management at their end. The Ministry has also 
developed an online dashboard to facilitate a closer and more effective 
monitoring at the Ministry level. " 
 
43. When the Committee wished to know steps taken by the Ministry to effectively 
mitigate the delays, remove bottlenecks and expedite the progress of the execution of 
works of the six AIIMS, the Ministry submitted as under: 
"Supplementing the above, the representative of the Ministry deposed during 
evidence as under: 
 
In Raebareli , because the land came to us four years late, there were delays 
because the cost had increased by then.  We have awarded the work.  We will 
complete it by March, 2020.  Meanwhile, we have already started the OPD and 
the residences are complete in Raebarel i.  In Mangalagiri, our OPD and housing 
is in advance stage and 38 per cent completion had been done.  We have plans 
to make OPD functional in December this year. We have already started classes 
in temporary campus in Mangalagiri. For hospital and academic  block, also 8 per 
cent progress is there.  The completion time is February, 2020.  For Nagpur, the 
position is exactly similar. The M.B.B.S. classes have already been started in 
temporary campus.  In Kalyani, we could not start the classes because the Sta te 
Government did not come with their offer of space to start temporary classes.  
But there again the progress is similar and our completion timeline is April, 2020 
and OPD by April next year.  In case of Gorakhpur, the construction work has 
been awarded.  There were some initial delays in getting the encumbrance free 
land from the State. There were about 80 structures which had to be demolished.  
The State Government had demolished that. The construction had started in 
June this year.  We are at 6 per cent now. The target is again April, 2020.  This is 
being done by L&T. It is being done on EPC mode in which the construction 
agency takes care of designing as well. AIIMS Bhatinda, similarly, it is in EPC 
mode.  The construction is in progress. Timeline is ag ain April, 2020.  In case of 
AIIMS, Guwahati, the position has already been apprised.  AIIMS Bilaspur, the 
master plan has been finalised. The construction tender has been floated.  The 
work is expected to be awarded sometime in first week of November. AII MS 
Tamil Nadu, as of now, we have appointed pre-investment agency." 
 
44. Deficiencies in execution of works Improper estimation of quantities of items 
Section 2.5 of the CPWD Works Manual states that a technical sanction amounts to a 
guarantee that the works p roposals are technically sound and that the estimates are 
accurately prepared and are based on adequate data. In the case of three new AIIMS 
projects (Patna, Rishikesh and Raebareli), it was noted that there were deviations upto 
150 times in the original q uantities in actual quantities with respect to 127 items of work 
as compared to quantities given in the Bill of Quantities (BOQ) of the contract. The total 

25 
 
monetary value of these deviations was ` 74.84 crore. The extent of variation indicated 
inadequate technical scrutiny at the time of grant of technical sanctions as the quantities 
of items of work mentioned in the detailed estimates had not apparently been 
realistically estimated nor were based on field survey and site conditions. This led to 
payment of higher market rates to contractors than what was otherwise admissible 
under the contracts. 
45. When the Committee asked to explain as to why there was deviation in actual 
quantities with respect to 127 items of works as compared to quantities given in the Bill  
of Quantities (BOQ) of the contract in the AIIMS at Patna, Rishikesh and Raebareli , the 
Ministry submitted as under: 
"The main reasons for deviation are given as under:  
  
(a) Work has been executed at site as per specific requirement of site conditions. 
While execution of works actual quantities many a times deviates from estimate 
as it is not possible for estimator to assess all the future circumstances. In fact it 
is for this very reason conditions of deviations have been provisioned for in the 
contract document.   
  
(b) During execution of works, some of the requirement of users changed and 
suitable modification were required to fulfill technical need of Doctors. 
Accordingly, some variations occurred.   
  
BOQ quantities were earlier decided based on the  drawings prepared by the 
DDPR consultant. Subsequent to this, design and drawings had got altered as 
per user requirement and the BOQ also got changed. However, the revised BOQ 
did not necessitate any change in the technical specification already approved . 
During execution of work such deviations occurred and deviations were approved 
by Competent Authority as per provisions laid down in Contract Agreement and 
CPWD Manual. However the observation made by the PAC have been noted for 
future guidance and attem pt is on minimizing cases of deviation by more 
meticulous planning involving the users from the design stage.  
  
In the specific cases were the BOQs came out to be at variance with the 
originally estimated quantities. Respective AIIMS have already replied as below:-  
RISHIKESH: It was pointed out by CAG Audit that Rs. 30.98 crores have been 
incurred on deviations in construction of AIIMS Rishikesh and financial 
irregularities existed during execution of Projects which could have been 
avoided.   
  
Water leve l below ground in AIIMS campus is varying because of Ganga river 
barrage located within vicinity of 100 meter and it is difficult to assess true site 
conditions during estimating which encountered during execution of work. Above 
reasons contributed to devi ation and it is admitted that deviation of Rs. 30.98 
crores (AIIMS Rishikesh) occurred against Pkg -I & Pkg -II contract amount of 
which is Rs. 251.02 crores + 64.80 crores = 315.82 crores. However it may be 

26 
 
seen that overall deviation is within 10% of tende red amount and well within 
deviation limit of 30%. CPWD Manual 2014, page no.8, para 2.3.5 also has 
following provisions.   
  
 “2.3.5 Excess over administrative approval  
  
Excess up to 10% of the amount of the administrative approval may be 
authorised by Officers of the CPWD, up to their respective powers of technical 
sanction. In case it exceeds this limit, a revised administrative approval must be 
obtained from the authority competent to approve the cost so enhanced.   
  
No revised administrative app roval is, however, necessary if the excess is 
covered by the requisite expenditure sanction.”  
  
PATNA : The GFC drawing was issued after preparation of BOQ & NIT, so there 
are variation in quantities proposed in BOQ & actual consumption/measurement 
at site. The payment of TMT bars have been made after detailed measurement 
carried out during the progress of work based on GFC drawing issued by the 
competent authority. The consumption of steel per cum is totally based on the 
structural drawing issued for diff erent buildings and no extra payment has been 
made. The quantity beyond permissible limit was paid on market rate as per 
Agreement Clause.   
  
In view of above justifications given by respective AIIMS it is mentioned that any 
excess up to 10% of the amount  of the administrative approval is authorized by 
Officers of the CPWD, up to their respective powers of technical sanction. In 
case it exceeds this limit, a revised administrative approval was to be obtained 
from the authority competent to approve the cost  so enhanced. No revised 
administrative approval is, however, necessary if the excess is covered by the 
requisite expenditure sanction.   
  
From above it is seen that the work has been executed as per site requirement 
and payment of deviations has been mad e as per actual measurement and 
strictly as per contract provision and CPWD Manual." 
 
b) Excess payment to contractors  
 
 Adoption of higher rates 
46. As per Notice Inviting Tender (NIT), bids for construction of Medical College, 
Hospital Complex and Estate Services (Package I, II and IV) in four new AIIMS (Bhopal, 
Jodhpur, Patna and Raipur) were invited on percentage basis. The BOQ was prepared 
on the basis of Delhi Schedule of Rates (DSR) 2007 considering cost index at the rate 
of 13 per cent over DSR rates . The bids were processed between December 2009 and 
March 2012. CPWD had reduced the rate of some DSR items by issuing correction slips 
during the period March 2007 to November 2009. However, the corrected rates of some 

27 
 
of the DSR items were not incorporat ed while preparing the BOQ resulting in excess 
payment of ` 9.28 crore to the contractors. 
 
47. When the Committee asked as to wh y the Ministry paid in excess of Rs.19.62 
crore to contractors due to adoption of higher rates in Bill of Quantities (BOQ), price 
escalation in violation of contract and change in mode of contracting in the four new 
AIIMS at Bhopal, Jodhpur, Patna and Raipur, the Ministry submitted as under: 
"Bhopal: The rates adopted in BoQ has been duly annexed by tender percentage 
and accordingly the lowest bidder was decided. As the bidder has quoted its 
percentage based on the rates that was taken in BoQ, the incorporation of older 
rates does not affect the tendere d rate. Hence the contention of audit is not 
agreed that corrected rates would have cost savings in the expenditure. This is 
even contested that many times tenders are item rate tenders where no BoQ 
rates were given to agency and agency quotes their own ra tes. As the quoted 
BoQ rates are same to all agencies which does not affect the total value of 
tender. Further, an estimate is only an approximate value and lowest cost 
derived from an open market competition can only indicate a fair value.   
  
Raipur: As per the contract agreement of the respective packages duly finalized 
by Ministry as per the rates based on the competitive bidding. As per the record 
vide Letter No-HLL/PAPMSSY/6AIIMS/2010-11/1972, Dated: 30/06/2017 the last 
date of receipt of tender has been extended from 30/06/2010 to 15/07/2010 up to 
2.00 PM. This fact clarifies the adoption of cost indices of the month of July for 
calculation of escalation amount.   
  
Jodhpur: Audit has mentioned about non incorporation of correction slips in  BOQ 
prior to receipt of bids. It has already been informed that the DPR, tender 
document, BOQ etc. were prepared in ministry by DDPR agency & Project 
Consultant agency hired through HLL.. The contents of S.E., AIIMS, Jodhpur 
earlier letters dated 25.01.20 17, 03.07.2017 and 04.08.2017submitted to the 
audit be read and treated as part and parcel of the reply to this also. The same is 
not repeated herein for the sake of brevity.     
Patna: The NIT was called on percentage rate system. The rates incorporated i n 
the NIT based on DSR 2007 are merely a broad guide to enable the bidder to 
quote their rates on the basis of prevailing market. It does not mean that 
contractors shall be paid on the rate mentioned in the NIT. The bidder analyzes 
their rates based on prevailing market rate and put the percentage accordingly. It 
is an open tender system and every bidder is free to quote their percentage and 
the bidder of lowest amount as a whole is awarded the work. Hence adoption of 
higher rate of one or two items can not  imply that the contractor has been paid 
excess amount. The bidder quoted the price in terms of percentage increase / 
decrease and not in terms of absolute amount. Hence it does not carry any 
meaning to include the correction slip and it is open to all bid ders. Therefore 
there is no question of giving any undue or unlawful advantage to successful 
bidders.   
  

28 
 
The Ministry is in agreement with the above contentions of the individual AIIMS. 
Since the above were competitive bids and the bidders analyze and ass ess their 
own rates and costs and put their percentage (higher or lower) accordingly and 
then the overall lowest bidder is selected, this competitive process ensures that 
the final rates that come out to be accepted are the most competitive rates, 
irrespective of even somewhat erroneous estimation in the specific items (As 
cited in the Audit observations) by the AIIMS in their tenders. Therefore, the 
argument that adoption of higher rate of some of the items has caused excess 
payment to the contractor does not hold good. Question of excess payment 
would have arisen only if the AIIMS had changed their estim ated rates after 
award of work." 
 
48. Against procurement orders for 5,834 items of equipment (March 2017) costing ` 
791 crore, 4,516 items equipment costing ` 337 crore had been received by the 
Institutions. Thus, 1,318 items of equipment (22.59 per cent) with estimated cost of ` 
454 crore (57.39 per cent) remained undelivered as on 31 March 2017 for periods upto 
25 months from the due date of delivery. It was evident that major items of equipment 
were yet to be delivered. The main reasons for delays were non -readiness of site, non -
acceptance of equipment by the Institutes, reluctance on the part of vendors to make 
supplies due to delay in issue of delivery rece ipts/installation certificate for earlier 
supplies and delays in submission of invoices. Audit observed that such delays could be 
mitigated by prompt and timely administrative action and effective monitoring. 
 
49. When asked to explain in detail the reasons as  to why 1,318 equipment worth 
Rs.454.00 crore remained undelivered as on 31st March, 2017 for period over two 
years from the due date of delivery in the six new AIIMS , the Ministry submitted as 
under: 
"The delivery and installation of equipment’s are depen dent on several factors 
like site readiness, availability of trained manpower etc. Individual AIIMS due to 
different status of progress of their civil works and recruitment have different 
status regarding their site-readiness. However, Ministry and PSA go for collective 
tendering for all six AIIMS as this has immense economic benefits due to scale. It 
has also been noticed that pre -mature procurement of equipment only leads to 
damage of equipment as they remain uninstalled within full or part period of thei r 
guarantee period. Hence in some cases, the vendors were requested to deliver 
the equipment’s at later date so as to synchronize with site readiness and 
manpower availability in the six AIIMS. It may also be brought out here that each 
tender also has provision of delivery period inbuilt into the tender." 
 
c) Non-installation of equipment  
 
50. A total of 195 equipment such as Heart -Lung machines, digital mammography, 
cardiac monitors, Bi -Plane DSA, CT 128 Slice etc. costing ` 72.04 crore that were 

29 
 
delivered were not installed due to pending civil work, non -availability of site, non -
availability of adequate space in the concerned department and non -availability of 
skilled manpower. These equipment were  consequently lying un -installed in the 
hospitals for periods ra nging between three months and four years as on March 2017 . 
Non-installation of equipment had resulted in delays in operationalization of the critical 
healthcare facilities and deprived patients of diagnostic/therapeutic benefits. Ministry 
stated (February 2018) that the issues were being sorted out with the suppliers. 
 
51. When the Committee asked as to what steps were taken by Ministry to check 
delays in the delivery of the equipment which could have been mitigated by prompt and 
timely administrative action and effective monitoring, the Ministry submitted as under: 
"Following steps were taken: - (i) The Procurement Support Agency (PSA) was 
directed to evaluate site readiness and synchronize placement of order with site 
readiness. Further following steps have been taken to expedite construction of 
physical infrastructure:- (ii) Following measures have been taken to ensure timely 
completion/ progress of civil works so that procurement of equipment can be 
made as per the orders placed and delays are avoided.  
  
The system of assigning the construction work to executing agencies on turnkey 
basis with emp owerment to handle all contractual matters at their end has been 
introduced.  The executing agencies have been mandated to deploy and use 
Project Management Software to bring about improved project management at 
their end. The Ministry has also developed a n online dashboard to facilitate a 
closer and more effective monitoring. The functional AIIMS have been 
empowered with greater delegation of powers through Empowered Review 
Committee (ERCs) in construction, procurement and administrative matters. In 
case o f six AIIMS, the PSUs of the Ministry i.e. HITES and HSCC have been 
engaged as Project Consultant to expedite completion of remaining works. The 
procedure for procurement of medical equipment has been simplified and made 
more efficient with greater delegat ion and empowerment of the Procurement 
Support Agency (PSA) which is entrusted with the work of pr ocurement of 
medical equipment." 
 
52. When asked as to whether the Ministry have taken steps to overcome the 
bottlenecks like pending civil work, non -availability of site, non -availability of skilled 
manpower etc. for installing the equipment costing Rs.72.04 crore received in the six 
new AIIMS, the Ministry submitted as under: 
"Steps taken to overcome the bottlenecks in civil construction and consequent 
non-availability of site for installation of equipments, have been detailed in the 
Ministry’s, response to question no 20.  
Further, following measurers have been taken to address the problem of non -
availability of stabled manpower/faculty.  
Recruitment of Human Res ource in the new AIIMS has been given high priority.  
To tide over the problem of non -availability of suitable candidates for faculty 

30 
 
positions in various speciality and super -speciality disciplines, suitable provisions 
have been made to allow for taking r etired faculty from Government Medical 
Colleges/Institutes on contact basis upto the age of 70 years.  Provisions have 
also been made for recruiting faculty from other Government medical 
colleges/Institutes on deputation basis. Walk in interview have also been held to 
catch the bright young passing out students from AIIMS, Delhi and other 
premises of medical institutes of the country.  Presently, good progress of 
construction has been achieved.  Also substantial improvement in faculty 
position has also been brought. Almost all the medical equipments, referred to in 
the CAG observations, have been installed." 
 
d) Delay in installation of equipment 
 
53. There were delays ranging from three months to over three years in installation 
of 850 equipment costing ` 76.40 crore in four new AIIMS (Bhopal, Bhubaneswar, 
Patna and Rishikesh). Thus, the Institutes procured equipment without ascertaining the 
availability of space, manpower and infrastructure required for installation. Due to 
noninstallation/delayed installation o f medical equipment, patients were deprived of the 
benefits from medical equipment procured at a high cost. Further operationalization of 
key diagnostic and in-patient facilities would also have been adversely affected. Ministry 
stated (February 2018) that  procurement orders have been synchronized with 
construction and manpower recruitment and orders are now being placed centrally 
since 2016 to avoid such situations. 
 
54. When asked as to whether the Institutes procured equipment without 
ascertaining the availability of space, manpower and infrastructure required for such 
installation and also the action taken by the Ministry for such blatant errors, the Ministry 
submitted as under: 
"Since some equipment have long lead time of supply, Orders need to be pla ced 
in advance as the construction was targeted to be completed by 2015. Therefore, 
for some equipment the orders were placed in advance keeping the construction 
timeframe in view. However, construction could not progress as planned and 
could not be comple ted by 2015. Due to this reason, the equipment which were 
already ordered, could not be installed for long periods. However, in 2016, the 
PSA was advised to synchronize placement of order with the progress of 
construction so that medical equipment do not remain uninstalled." 
 
e) Availability of Human Resources in new AIIMS 
 
 Shortage of Manpower  
55. The Ministry sanctioned 305 faculty posts and 3,776 non-faculty posts for each of 
the six AIIMS.  The shortage against various faculty and non -faculty posts in different 

31 
 
AIIMS ranged from 55 per cent to 83 per cent and 77 per cent to 97 per cent 
respectively. The shortages restricted the functioning of several departments and led to 
reliance on outsou rced employees, additional load on doctors during OPD and for 
carrying out tests and ultimately failure to provide treatment of required quality to 
patients. The delay in filling up of posts were attributed to delay in finalizing recruitment 
rules, court c ases, non-availability of eligible candidates and lack of synchronization of 
recruitment with development of infrastructure. 
 
56. When the Committee asked as to how the AIIMS are dealing with the  
shortages/delay in recruitment of non -faculty posts in several departments leading to 
failure to provide treatment of required quality to patients  and whether the Ministry has 
taken steps to overcome the bottlenecks in filling up of the faculty and non -faculty posts 
in the six new AIIMS for proper delivery of tertiary healthcare to the masses, the Ministry 
submitted as under: 
 
"Non-availability of quality faculty for the new AIIMS has been a major constraint 
in full operationalise of the healthcare services. As the new AIIMS have been 
envisaged to take leadership posit ion in tertiary healthcare, medical education 
and research in the respective regions where the AIIMS are established, the 
quality standards in faculty recruitment cannot be diluted. Several rounds of 
recruitment have been completed wherein the posts have b een advertised 
several times. There has been considerable improvement in the faculty position 
as brought out below:  
  
However, this issue still remains a key area of concern. With a view to improve 
the faculty position in the new AIIMS, following measures  have been taken: (i)     
Provision has been made for engaging of retired faculty from premier Institutes 
such as AIIMS-Delhi, PGI-Chandigarh, JIPMER-Puducherry  and other, upto the 
age of 70 (seventy) years. (ii)   Provision has been made for taking worki ng 
faculty from premier Institutes and GMCs on deputation. (iii)   The new AIIMS 
have been empowered to invite visiting faculty from premier Institutes in India 
and abroad upto the age of 02(two) years. (iv)    System of campus recruitment 
has been introdu ced to tap the bright young passing out students from AIIMS -
Delhi and other premier Institutes. (v)     Approval of M/o Home Affairs has been 
obtained for allowing PIO card holders to be appointed as regular faculty in new 
AIIMS. (vi) HR Sub-committees of the Governing Body/ Institute Body have been 
constituted to cut down on the delays in the process of approval on the 
recommendations of the Standing selection Committees.   
  
Non-faculty posts:  
  
The Recruitment Rules for the faculty posts for six AIIMS w ere framed by the 
Ministry in 2015 and were, thereafter adopted by the respective AIIMS duly 
approved by their Institute Bodies (IBs).  The Institutes have been undertaking 

32 
 
recruitment exercise for filling up non -faculty positions on need basis, keeping in  
view the facilities/services as became feasible to be operationalized as the 
construction progressed and more Faculty/Doctors joined the Institutes. In view 
of this, all the non faculty positions were not advertised in one go.   However, 
presently, as all  the AIIMS are in the process of attaining full functionality, with 
full bed strength of 960 beds, which is expected by this year end, the Institutes 
have advertised large numbers of the remaining non -faculty vacancies and have 
been conducting  the selecti on for the same.  The position of the advertised 
vacancies is brought out below:  
  
 It is also  apprised here that, with a view to streamline the recruitment process 
and attain speedier and better outcomes, the Ministry is considering common 
recruitment process for all the AIIMS together by clubbing together  vacancies of 
all the AIIMS.  It is envisaged that one AIIMS will hold recruitment of particular 
categories for all other AIIMS as well. In this way, the various non -faculty 
categories are proposed to be assigned amongst the different AIIMS, distributing 
the workload for taking up recruitment exercise.  Recently, AIIMS, Delhi carried 
out the recruitment for nursing cadre in which vacancies of AIIMS, Jodhpur were 
also clubbed. This approach as a policy m atter will be taken up in the next 
Central Institute Body (CIB) meeting." 
 
57. Supplementing the above, the representative of the Ministry during evidence 
deposed as under: 
 "Our main focus in AIIMS is also in the PG seats, as rightly pointed out by you. Becau se 
 of not  having the faculty in speciality and super -speciality discipline, we are not able to 
 run all the PG  courses, but we are able to run UG courses." 
 
f) Non-achievement against envisaged deliverables  
 
 Shortfall with respect to availability of beds 
58. A basic requirement for proper service delivery and quality patient care/treatment 
was the provision of adequate number of beds for patients. The scheme envisaged that 
each new AIIMS would have a 960 bedded hospital and the scheduled dates of 
completion were between August 2011 and July 2013. However, only 152 to 546 beds 
were available as on March 2017 in these Institutes Thus, the shortage of beds in the 
new AIIMS ranged from 43 per cent to 84 per cent. Ministry stated (February 2018) that 
the shortage o f beds was due to the delay in construction of hospital complexes and 
due to shortage of faculty. 
 
59. When the Committee asked to explain as to why only 152 to 546 beds were 
available against the requirement of 960 beds in each of the six new AIIMS , the Ministry 
submitted as under: 

33 
 
"The full bed strength of 960 beds could not be achieved as the hospital building 
could not be completed as per the original construction plan due to various  
systemic issues.  However, the Ministry has addressed the issues and problems 
and has achieved substantial progress in construction since then as also brought 
out in the aforesaid response.   With the result, the bed situation has substantially 
improved. With completion of hospital building in all the AIIMS in Dec 2018, ful l 
bed strength of 960  beds will be achieved by Dec 2018." 
 
V. Delays in completion of works of Government Medical Institutions 
60. The Committee noted inordinate delays in completion of construction work of 
GMCIs after award of work in the first three phases of PMSSY. In five GMCIs, Kolkata 
Medical College, GMC Madurai, GMC Nagpur, GMC Amritsar and PGIMS Rohtak work 
had not been completed even after delays which ranged from three months to over five 
years with respect to the scheduled completion dates. Further, none of the six GMCIs of 
Phase-III which were scheduled to be completed by March 2017 had been completed 
and the works for these GMCIs had commenced only during the period from May 2016 
to December 2016. The delay in completion of works were mainly due to non-availability 
of encumbrance free land, delays in getting clearances for excavation and tree cutting 
and other site related conditions, changes made in the scope and quantum of work, 
post contract changes in drawings and quantities, delays in providin g drawings, delay in 
release of mobilisation advance and payments to contractor and delay in provision of 
services. The slow progress both at the stage of planning and contracting stage 
indicates that both planning of works and contract management were ina dequate which 
finally adversely impacted delivery of services 
 
61. When the Committee asked as to what is the present status of the work in the 
five GMCIs which have not been completed with delays ranging from three months to 
five years with respect to the sch eduled completion dates in Phase I and II of PMSSY , 
the Ministry submitted as under: 
"The status of completion of five GMCs in phase –I and Phase-II  is appended 
below: 
 
SL. MEDICAL 
COLLEGE 
Executing 
Agency  
Schedule 
Date of 
Completion 
as per 
CCEA Note 
Likely date 
of 
Completion  
Status/Remarks 
1  Kolkata Medical 
College 
HSCC March, 
2013 
October 
2018 
Status of 
Completion 98 
% 

34 
 
2 GMC Madurai   HLL July 2011 31.10.18 Status of 
Completion 98 
% 
3 GMC, Nagpur    July 2011 Completed Completed 
4 GMC, Amritsar  HSCC July 2011 31.12.18 Status of 
Completion 93 
% 
5 PGIMS, Rohtak HLL  July 2011 31.12.18 Status of 
Completion 93 
% 
"  
 
 
62. When the Committee asked as to what is the present status of work in the six 
GMCI’s of Phase III which were scheduled to be completed by March 2017, the Ministry 
submitted as under: 
"There have been cases of hindrances due to non -availability of clear sites. All 
such matters are taken up with the respective States at highest levels as well as 
in the PMC meeting. Issues ha ve also been taken up in the State level review 
meetings under Chief Secretary/ Principal Secretary(ME).   
  
Presently, the hindrances have been removed and the construction is 
progressing in all the projects as brought out below. 
 
Name of the project Present progress Expected date of 
completion 
SMC, Muzaffarpur Bihar  
 
Civil Works : 49 % Jan 2019 
GMC, Darbhanga Bihar  
 
Civil Works : 53 % Jan 2019 
GMC, Rajkot Gujarat  
 
Civil Works : 80 % Dec 2018 
PMC, Dhanbad 
Jharkhand  
 
Civil Works : 75 % March 2019 
GRMC, Gwalior Madhya 
Pradesh  
 
Civil Works : 75 % Jan 2019 
GMC, Kota Rajasthan  
 
Civil Works : Completed Completed 
 
63. When the Committee further asked as to whether the Ministry has taken steps to 
expedite the work in the six GMCIs under PMSSY, Phase III the Ministry submitted as 
under: 
"(i) The Ministry has directed the agencies to expedite completion of remaining 
works. 

35 
 
(ii) The Ministry has developed an online dashboard to facilitate a closer  and 
more effective monitoring. 
(iii) Procurement has been synchronized with site readiness to evade  any delay 
in equipment front. 
(iv) The State Governments have been requested to release their part of State 
share, resolve issue of approach road, Electricity and Water connection, filling up 
of Post for operationalisation etc. 
(v) The Ministry has also taken up the various issues, as arose from time to time, 
with the State Governments in meetings, through D.O. letters to senior officials 
and also in the PMC meeting. The issues and hindrances were also flag ged in 
the Ministerial level interactions with the States at the level of Hon’ble Health & 
Family Welfare Minister and Hon’ble MoS.  
At present, all issues pertaining to all the 39 Phase III upgradation projects have 
been sorted out and the construction is  progressing well. The State share is also 
expected to be received from all the States soon." 
 
64. In ten GMCIs, 408 equipment costing Rs. 71.25 crore were either not installed or 
installed with delay ranging from three months to over seven years as on 31 Marc h 
2017, The reasons for no installation or delayed installation were again improper 
procurement planning, pending civil and electrical works, non -availability of skilled 
manpower, etc. 
 
65. When the Committee asked as to whether the Ministry have taken steps to rectify 
the improper procurement planning and also expedited the pending civil and electrical 
works and recruitment of skilled manpower for installation of the 408 equipments 
costing Rs. 71.25 crore in the ten GMCIs, the Ministry submitted as under: 
"The procurement process has been simplified with greater emphasis on 
synchronization, decision making at PSA level and faster delivery of services. 
Guideline has also been issued to all concerned Executing Agencies, 
Procurement Support Agencies and State Gove rnment to increase mutua l 
cooperation and understanding." 
 
VI. Monitoring    
a) State level Project Monitoring Committee of the AIIMS/GMCIs 
66. The PMSSY Division of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Ministry) was 
entrusted with the overall task of implementation and monitoring of PMSSY. 
Committees at Central, State and Institute levels had also been formed for monitoring 
the implementation of the scheme. 
 
67. In May 2008, the Committee of Secretaries suggested constitution of State 
Project Monitoring Committee (State PMC) under the chairmanship of State Chief 

36 
 
Secretary to monitor progress of new AIIMS being established in the State. The 
Committee was required t o meet at least once in a quarter to review progress and 
communicate its views on issues requiring direct intervention of the Government of 
India. Each State PMC was therefore required to hold 35 meetings upto March 2017. It 
was observed in audit that Stat e PMCs were not constituted for the two new AIIMS at 
Raipur and Rishikesh. For the remaining four new AIIMS, though the State PMCs were 
constituted, the stipulated number of meetings was not held. It is evident that the 
mechanism for monitoring at the State level was inadequate. The fact that several of the 
new AIIMS faced problems with regard to provision of encumbrance free land could 
have been effectively resolved had this mechanism worked as intended. Ministry stated 
(February 2018) that it is not possible at this point of time to underline the exact reasons 
for not constituting State Level Project Monitoring Committee due to non -availability of 
information. 
 
68. When the Committee asked as to why the States of Chhattisgarh and 
Uttarakhand have not constitut ed State Project Monitoring Committees for the two new 
AIIMS at Raipur and Rishikesh, the Ministry submitted as under: 
"These projects were conceived quite a long time back. At this point of time it is 
not possible to underline the exact reasons for not co nstituting State Level 
Project Monitoring Committee under chairmanship of Chief Secretary due to non -
availability of information. However, it may be mentioned here that the issues 
with State Govt. were resolved in various PMC meetings held frequently betwe en 
2004 – 2009 in the early stage of the six AIIMS projects and construction of 
Package I and II were taken up in 2010 in all 6 AIIMS. However, presently with 
respect to Phase III and later Phases works, meeting under the chairmanship of 
Chief Secretary of respective State are being held to review progress and resolve 
local issues." 
 
69. When asked to explain as to why the stipulated number of meeting at least once 
in a quarter was not held for the four new AIIMS where the State Project Monitoring 
committees have been constituted, the Ministry submitted as under: 
"It is not possible to underline exact reason for which the meetings were not held 
quarterly. However, it may be mentioned here that the issues with State Govt. 
were resolved in various PMC meetings hel d frequently between 2004 – 2009 in 
the early stage of the six AIIMS projects and construction of Package I and II 
were taken up in 2010 in all 6 AIIMS." 
 
70. In November 2007, the Ministry asked the State Governments to set up State 
Project Monitoring Committees (State PMCs) headed by the Principal Secretary 
(Health)/Medical Education of the respective State Government  for monitoring the 

37 
 
upgradation of GMCIs. The Monitoring committee was required to meet at least once in 
a month to review the progress of work. Audit noted that State PMCs were n ot 
constituted in eight GMCIs . Though a State PMC was constituted in BMCRI -Bangalore 
in March 2008, there were no records of its meetings. 
 
71. When asked to explain as to why the State Project Monitoring Committees for 
reviewing the progress of up -gradation of GMCIs not constituted in eight GMCIs , the 
Ministry submitted as under: 
"As mentioned above, it is not possible to indicate exact reason for which the 
State Project Monitoring Committees were not constituted.  However, it may be 
mentioned here that the issues with GMCs/ State Govt. were resolved in various 
PMC meetings held frequently between 2004 – 2009 in the early s tage of these 
projects. However, presently with respect to Phase III and later Phases works, 
meetings under the chairmanship of Chief Secretary of respective State are 
being held to review progress and resolve local issues as an alternative and 
effective mechanism to resolve the issues." 
 
72. The Committee found that  the Ministry could not provide figures of actual 
expenditure on the scheme stating that amount of funds released are treated as actual 
expenditure. However, it was noted in audit that unspent funds  amounting to ` 2,098.22 
crore was available with the new AIIMS and the nominated agencies as of March 20172 
. The existence of unspent balances indicated that financial progress was being over -
stated by treating funds released as actual expenditure on the scheme. It was also 
noted that Ministry was not compiling or monitoring expenditure being incurred by new 
AIIMS/agencies against releases made by it. Thus, no mechanism was in place for 
monitoring and tracking actual expenditure leading to accumulation of unspent funds 
with the new AIIMS and the agencies. 
 
73. When the Committee asked as to why the funds released by MoHFW has been 
proportionately very less as compared to BE, the Ministry submitted as under: 
"The budgetary grant also increased substantially from Rs. 1956 crore in 2014-15 
to Rs. 3975 crore in 2018 and expenditure is up, almost 4 times, from Rs 822 
crore in 2014-2015 to Rs 3160 crore in 2017-18.  The fund utilization percent has 
considerably and steadily improved from 42.03% in 2014 -15 to 79.47 % in 2017 -
18 in spite of much hi gher budgetary provisioning. The Key Systemic 
improvements have already been elaborated in the Part (A) of the replies." 
 
74. When the Committee further asked the reason for Non -providing of Actual 
Expenditure Figure to CAG for  2016-17, the Ministry submitted as under: 

38 
 
"Figures were made available to the CAG teams for the actual releases by 
Ministry for all the Years including  for the year 2016-17." 
 
b) Non-inclusion of interest clause in the contract agreement 
75. The Ministry generally included a provision in the contract with M/S HLL for 
adding the interest earned on funds received/advances drawn to the balances of 
deposits/advances for civil work and procurement of equipment for upgradation of 
GMCIs under Phase -I and in the contracts for provision of pre -clinical equipment. 
However, a clause to this effect was not included by the Ministry in the agreement 
entered into in August 2013 with the agency for procurement of clinical equipment for 
the six new AIIMS. As a result, an amount of ` 30.45 crore earned as interest as on 31 
March 2017 by M/s HLL on amounts advanced to the company for procurement of 
equipment had not been added to the deposit received/advance drawn by the company. 
 
76. When the Committee asked the reasons for Inadequate provisions in the contract 
to add Interest in plans of deposits, the Ministry submitted as under: 
"Ministry generally includes “Interest clause” in agreements with the PSUs.  
However, this clause was inadvertently omitted in case of the agreement with 
HLL for procurement of Medical equipment for the six AIIMS. It was an omission 
on the part of the Minis try in this particular case. However, HLL has agreed to 
return the interest amount of Rs. 30.45 crore at the time of finalization of the 
account. The MoA with HLL is also being modified ( Addendum) to add the 
“Interest clause” to remove the above deficiency in the Agreement." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

39 
 
PART – II 
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
1.  This Report is based on scrutiny of C&AG's Report No. 10 of 2018 on "  
Performance Audit of Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY) ". The 
Committee note that the Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY) was 
announced in August 2003 with the objective of correcting the imbalances in the 
availability of  tertiary healthcare services and improving the quality of medical 
education in  India. The scheme comprised setting up of AIIMS like institutions 
and upgradation of existing State Government Medical Colleges/Institutions 
(GMCIs). In its first phase, the scheme envisaged setting up six institutions like 
the All India  Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) and upgradation of 13 existing 
medical Colleges/Institutions. Over a period of time, the scheme has been 
expanded to cover 20 new AIIMS and 71 GMCIs in six phases. A total amount of ` 
14,970.70 crore was allocated for the scheme during 2004 -17 of which an amount 
of ` 9,207.18 crore had been released by the Ministry.  The performance audit of 
the implementation of the scheme covering the period  from 2003-04 to 2016 -17 
brought out that inadequacies in planning and financial  management coupled 
with poor contract management and  execution of works as  well as lack of 
synchronisation and coordination of activities resulting in undue  delays as well 
as additional costs that frustrated achievement of the intended  benefits and full 
achievement of the objectives of the scheme  and the sa me are discussed in the 
succeeding paragraphs.  
2. The Committee note with concern that the Ministry has not f ormulated any 
guidelines for  the implementation of the PMSSY scheme and was guided by 
instructions issued from time to time and decisions taken by  the Central Project 
Monitoring Committee (PMC) on case to case basis.  This resulted in various 
adhoc decisions being taken being taken with respect to fund management, 
selection of consultants, assignments of project task, award of management of 
contracts.  The Ministry submitted that a two member Committee has been 
constituted to draw up 'Scheme Guidelines for PMSSY with the experience and 
learning from prior cases and the same will submit its Report within two months 
time.  The Committee, therefore, rec ommend the Ministry to expedite the process 
of formulating the 'Scheme Guidelines' after the submission of the two member 

40 
 
committee report so as to negate the ad-hoc decisions and  implement the 
flagship  scheme in the right perspective.     
3. The Committee note the approval of six new AIIMS was obtained in March 
2006 based on preliminary feasibility study instead of a comprehensive 
assessment of scope of work.  The Committee note that the area required in the 
initial proposal had been under estimated by approximately 37 percent and the 
green building norms and requirements in terms of Energy Conservation Building 
Code had not been catered for.  Clarifying the above deficiencies the Ministry 
submitted that the Expenditure Finance Committee con sidered the Complete 
DPRs being prepared with inputs from experts and approved the estimates of the 
six new AIIMS in September, 2009.  Moreover, there was no standardization for 
AIIMS to compare with at the time of inception of the project . Further, the 
requirement for equipment had also been under assessed thus cumulatively 
resulting in delay in final approval of the scheme till March 2010 holding up 
commencement of work on many packages. The Committee  are aghast to note 
the shortcomings/deficiencies in pl anning of the scheme and  therefore, 
recommend the Ministry/AIIMS to streamline the bottlenecks in planning and 
approval for the timely execution of the future Projects under the scheme. 
4. The Committee note that in AIIMS at   Bhubaneswar, Odisha though the re 
was a requirement of 100 acres or more of land the State Government provided 
only 92.11 acres.  Moreover, for the additional requirement of 50 acres of land for 
establishment of Cardiac Centre, Mental Health Centre and Neurosciences Centre 
the State Gov ernment could provide only 21 acres (2013).  The Ministry in 
response thereto submitted that in case of AIIMS, Bhubaneswar there was delay 
in acquiring  and hand ing over  of the requisite land as the identified land was 
categorized as forest land.  The Comm ittee are dismayed to note the callus 
attitude of the Ministry/State Government in selecting identifying a forest land 
which hampered the early acquisition of the same.  The Committee, therefore, 
desire the Ministry/State Government to expedite the process of acquisition of the 
said land so as to avoid further delay s in the establishment of the these may or 
tertiary healthcare centre in AIIMS, Bhubaneswar.  

41 
 
5. The Committee note that the Competent Financial Authority had approved 
setting up of AIIMS Ra ebareli in February 2009 under Phase II of PMSSY Sch eme 
but the State Government provided land for the Institute only in July, 2013 and as 
a result work on the Hospital and Medical College is yet to Hospital and Medical 
College is yet to commence though the  project was originally envisaged for 
completion within 36 months i.e. by the end of 2012.  The Ministry submitted that 
in the instant case land acquisition was delayed on account of some pre -existing 
structures of sugar Mills at the allocated site.  It wa s also submitted that the 
Ministry insist on prior transfer of encumbrance free land by the State 
Government to avoid project delays.  Further, for AIIMS, Raiganj the project has 
been deferred to the IV Phase of the scheme and the location shifted from Nor th 
Dinajpur to Kalyani in the southern part of West Bengal even though health 
services were deficient in the northern region of West Bengal as the State 
Government could not provide the required land.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the Ministry to in corporate a clause whereby by encumbrance free 
requisite land is allocated before approval of the setting  up/establishment of new 
AIIMS.  The Committee also desire the same to be incorporated in the guidelines  
for the implementation of the scheme.          
6. The Committee observe that the Ministry ha s not formulated any criteria or 
procedure for selection of GMCIs for upgradation and have selected them without 
without obtaining preliminary project report from the State Government  and 
merely on the basis  proposals submitted by respective Deans.  The Ministry 
submitted that PMSSY proposes to correct the imbalances in the availability of 
tertiary healthcare and medical education in different parts of the country and by 
according higher priority to the States g enerally considered backward with 
respect to the broad socio -economic indicators.  The Committee opine that in the 
absence of requisite criteria, the primary objective of PMSSY would not be 
achieved.  The Committee are unhappy to note the avoidable delays in the matter 
and desire that  the criteria for selection of GMCI upgradation may be formulated 
in a timebound manner and the Committee be apprised thereof.  
7. The Committee note that in GMC -Kota an existing parking shed and 
adjacent medical shops stalled  the construction Super speciality Block .  In 
DMCH-Darbhanga, failure to provide and clear site by the State Government and 

42 
 
demolition of existing structures using Ministry funds resulted in the projects 
being delayed by more than a year.  Similarly, in GR MC-Gwalior the upgradation 
project was delayed by more than a year as the site provided was encroached 
upon.  In PDUMC Rajkot the project was delayed due to change in site, revision in 
DPR and delay in obtaining permission for dismantling the old wards.  S imilarly, 
the PMCH Dhanbad the construction of Super Speciality building was delayed by 
a year due to encroachment of land.  The Ministry submitted that there were 
challenges on the part of the State Governments on account of acquisition of 
land, changing of land criteria, encroachments, forestland, pre-existing structures 
etc.  and handover the same for upgradation of the GMCIs.  The Committee feel 
that the Ministry failed to give clear instructions to the State Governments before 
initiating the upgradatio n project in the GMCIs.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend Ministry to approve upgradation of GMCIs  only in those States who 
provide unencumbered land for the same and also make the same a pre -requisite 
for approval of DPRs.  The Committee would also des ire to be apprised of the 
progress made in upgradation of the GMCIs.     
8. The Committee were of the view that Government run medical colleges are 
the only institutions in the country which are able to provide medical education to 
the aspirants at most reasonable costs and these colleges are being run pretty 
well by other Ministries also.  The Committee find that under Pradhan Mantri 
Swasthya Suraksha Yojana, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has been 
mandated to set up new AIIMS in various parts of the  country alongwith 
upgradation of the existing Government Medical Colleges and accordingly, it is in 
the process of acquiring land, building new hospitals and upgrading Government 
medical colleges, all over the country.   The Committee note from the replies  of 
the Ministry that the main reason for the delay in the establishment of new AIIMS 
and upgradation of GMCIs were delay in  land acquisition, shortage of 
infrastructure/medical equipment, shortage of faculty and non -faculty posts etc. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend Ministry  to do a survey of all the existing 
ESIC medical colleges and hospitals and desire that those having infrastructure 
of the level of AIIMS may be taken over by the Ministry in consultation with the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment for upgradation to new AIIMS.  

43 
 
9. The Committee note that out of the total fund of `3,285.03 crore made 
available to the six new AIIMS i.e. Bhopal, Bhubaneswar, Jodhpur, Patna, Raipur 
and Rishikesh during  2011 -17, `2017.62 crore  was utilized leaving an unspent 
balance of `1,267.41 crore as of March, 2017.  The Ministry submitted that the 
funds were released as per their targeted demands . However, the expenditure fell 
short of the projection due to the failure on the part of const ruction agencies to 
perform at the desired level, non -availability of suitable candidates for filling up 
the faculty positions, non -implementation of the VII CPC scales in 2016 -17.  The 
Committee are perturbed to note that the unutilized balance in the six  new AIIMS 
still stands at ` 660 crore till March 2018 even though substantial progress in the 
above area of functioning were made in the year 2017 -18.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the unutilized balance be used in their respective head 
without further delay so that the tertiary healthcare sector in the country is not 
compromised due to lack of infrastructure and faculty.  The Committee also 
desire the Ministry to identify the construction agencies and fix responsibility  for 
appropriate action  for their failure to perform at the desired/targeted  level and 
apprise them of the status within three months of the presentation of this Report.     
10. The Committee note that four GMCIs i.e. BJMC - Ahmedabad, BMCRI - 
Bangalore, NIMS -Hyderabad and RIMS - Ranchi diverted funds  for procurement  
amounting to ` 26.71 crore to meet cost escalation of Civil works , installation of 
gas manifold system, comprehensive maintenance contract and purchase of 
consumable items.  Moreover , funds for computerization were div erted for 
centralized air conditioning and minor civil works .  The Ministry submitted that it 
did not have control on the conduct of the Institutes who were spending the state 
share and permissible diversion will be  analysed before closure of the projects 
and the States will be asked to refund the diverted amount.  The Ministry further 
submitted that all procurements except small value items below `30 lakh are 
made through a Procurement Support Agency PSA appointed by them for better 
control in their procur ement process.  The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Ministry to take steps to ensure that the  allocated funds are u tilized as per  the 
General Financial Rules, and analyze periodically the fund diversion in the above 
mentioned GMCIs and fix responsibility for appropriate action for the lapses.    

44 
 
11. The Committee note that seve n GMCIs i.e. JNMC -Aligarh, BMCRI - 
Bangalore, NIMS - Hyderabad, Pt. BDS PGIMS -Rohtak, GCKMC - Salem, RPGMC -
Tanda and IMS - Varanasi failed to furnish utiliz ation certificates amounting to ` 
234.98 crore.  Moreover, in PGIMS, R ohtak an expenditure amounting to the tune 
of ` 21.01crore was made without submission of utilization certificate.  The 
Ministry submitted that fund disbursement is not processed without obtaining  
utilization certificate/statement of expenditure.  Moreover, utilization certificates 
in the above cases pertain to funds released by the State Government  or other 
Departments.  The Ministry further submitted that the executing a gencies and the 
procurement support agency have been requested to provide utilization 
certificates to the funds released out of Central Share and State Share.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to advise the executing agencies 
both under the Central Share a nd State share to urgently furnish the Utilisation 
certificates so as to obviate diversion or parking of funds.  The Committee also 
desire the Ministry to take steps to streamline the guidelines for furnishing the 
utilization Certificates in coordination w ith the respective State Governments for 
early furnishing of the same and apprise them of the status within three months 
of the presentation of this Report.  
12. The Committee note that the approval for establishment of the six new 
AIIMS at Bhopal, Bhubane swar, Jodhpur, Patna, Raipur and Rishikesh was 
granted by the Government in March 2006 for completion by March, 2009.  None 
of the works except those relating to residential complexes had commenced 
within this period.  Moreover, while approving the revised  estimates in March, 
2010 the scheduled dates of completion of the six new AIIMS were to be between 
August, 2011 and July, 2013.  The Committee are surprised to note that the target 
dates were not achieved in any of the new AIIMS with delays ranging from f our to 
five years even after the second completion deadlines.  The Ministry submitted 
that the delays were due to systemic issues, not individual failures as the 
contracts for Medical college and Hospital Complex were awarded in 2010 and 
also hampering of progress of work due to cite specific issues such as on the 
part of design consultant, project consultant and the contractors, non -availability 
of land  for the project.  Moreover, to overcome the delays the Ministry's PSUs 
(M/s HSCC and M/s HITES) were app ointed as project consultants.  Project 

45 
 
Management software have been used to bring about improved project 
management with an online dashboard to facilitate a closer and more effective 
monitoring at their level.  The Committee, therefore, recommend the Min istry to 
complete the projects in the six new AIIMs urgently without further delay so that 
the objective of the scheme of providing tertiary healthcare service in their 
respective areas in met at the earliest and apprise the status of the projects 
within six months of the presentation of this Report.   
13. The Committee note hat 1381 items of equipment (22.59 percent) with 
estimated cost of `454 crore (57.39) out of the total procurement orders for 5834 
equipment amounting to ` 791 crore  remain undelivered as on 31 March, 2017 
with delays upto 25 months.  The Committee also note that the delays were due to 
non-readiness of site, non acceptance of equipment by the Institutes, reluctance 
on the part of vendors to make supplies due to delay in issue of delivery 
receipts/installation certificate and submission of invoices and individual AIIMS 
have different status of progress of those civil works and recruitment  and the 
vendors were requested to deliver the equipment at a later date so as to 
synchronize with site readiness and manpower availability in the six new AIIMS.  
The Committee are dismayed to note the non-installation of equipment resulted in 
delays in operationalisation of the critical healthcare facilities and deprived 
patients of dia gnostic/therapeutic benefits.  The Committee therefore, desire the 
Ministry to urgently take steps for prompt and timely administrative action and 
effective monitoring in the procurement process of the state of the art 
equipments for early delivery and app rise them of the action initiated in this 
regard within three months of the presentation of this Report.  
14. The Committee note that the Ministry sanctioned 305 faculty and 3776 non -
faculty post for each of the six AIIMS.  However, the shortage against va rious 
faculty and non -faculty post in different AIIMS ranged from 55 percent to 83 
percent and 77 percent to 97 percent respectively restricting the functioning of 
various Departments and ultimately resulting in failure to provide treatment of 
required quality to the patients.  The Ministry in reply thereto submitted that non -
availability of quality faculty and need based recruitment of non -faculty posts as 
the reasons for the figures indicating shortage of faculty  and non-faculty posts in 
the six new AIIMS  and measures have been taken to improve the position of the 

46 
 
same by considering streamlining the recruitment process through standard 
recruitment by clubbing all the AIIMS.  The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Ministry to steadfastly formulate and implement the common recruitment process 
urgently for all the AIIMS so that the required quality of treatment is dispensed to 
the patients.   
15. The Committee note that the scheme envisaged a 960 bedded hospital in 
each of the six new AIIMS scheduled to be c ompleted between August 2011 and 
July 2013.  However, only 152 to 546 beds are available in these Institutes as on 
March 2017.  The Ministry submitted that full bed strength of 960 beds will be 
achieved with the completion of hospital buildings in all the AIIMS by December, 
2018.  The Committee are astounded to note that the Ministry failed to provide 
adequate number of beds for patients which is a basic requirement for proper 
service delivery and quality patient care/treatment.  The Committee, therefore, 
desire the Ministry to apprise them of the status of completion of the six new 
AIIMS and provision of number of beds in the six new AIIMS. 
16. The Committee note that the upgradation work in six GMCIs under Phase III 
of PMSSY scheduled for completion in Mar ch 2017 had commenced during the 
period from May 2016 to December 2016 mainly due to non -availability of 
encumbrance free land, delays in getting clearances for excavation and free 
cutting, changes made in the scope and quantum of work, delay in providing 
drawings, delay in release of mobilization advance and payments to contractors 
etc.  The Ministry submitted that Ministry have taken steps to expedite the 
completion of work in the GMCIs under Phase III such as issuing instructions to 
the work agencies, sy nchronization with site readiness, coordination with the 
State Governments for their share online dashboard for real time monitoring etc.  
The Committee are aghast to note that the Ministry miserably failed in ensuring 
completion of the projects within 18 months from the commencement of work.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to fix responsibility against 
the erring officials for the delay in completion of the six GMCIs and apprise them 
of the status of completion of work within three months of the presentation of this 
Report.  

47 
 
17. The Committee note that the Committee of Secretaries suggested 
constitution of State Project Monitoring Committee (PMC) under the 
Chairmanship of State Chief Secretary to monitor the progress of new AIIMS 
being est ablished in the State and meet atleast once in a quarter to review the 
progress.  The Committee are, however, perturbed to note that State PMC have 
not been constituted for the two new AIIMS at Raipur and Rishikesh.  Moreover, 
the stipulated meetings were not held in the remaining four new AIIMS.  The 
Ministry failed to explain the reason for not constituting the PMC in the two new 
AIIMS and also not holding the requisite number of meeting in the remaining four 
AIIMS.  The Committee, therefore, recommend th e Ministry to give instruction  to 
the States of Uttarakhand and Chhattisgarh for constitution of PMCs and also the 
holding of the requisite number of meetings in the remaining States for reviewing 
the scheme.       
     
 
NEW DELHI;                                      MALLIKARJUN KHARGE 
20 December, 2018                                                                  Chairperson, 
29 Agrahayana 1940 (Saka)                                         Public Accounts Committee 
 
 
********** 