ADMINISTRATION OF PROSECUTION: ANE»
PENALTIES IN CENTRAL EXCISE & SERVICE
TAX

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Sixty-third Report (16 Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
(CENTRAL BOARD OF EXCISE AND CUSTOMS)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

SEVENTY-SEVENTH REPORT
jen EE SST SE SEES .

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

Tere si

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI .


PAG NG, 24

SEVENTY-SEVENTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

का OF PROSECUTION, ra |
PENALTIES IN CENTRAL EXCISE & SERVICE TAX

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations! Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Sixty-third Report (16 Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
{CENTRAL BOARD OF EXCISE AND CUSTOMS)

खत्यफ्रेव फ़यते
Presented to Speaker, Lok Sabha on 29.04.2047
Presented to Lok Sabha on: AS02017

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 162.702 2017

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

April, 2017/  Vaisakha, 1939 (Saka)


CORTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2016-17)

COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-III Of PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2016-17)

INTRODUCTION
‘

CHAPTER | Report

CHAPTER Il Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by Government

CHAPTER Ili Observations/Recommendations which the
Cornmittee do not desire to pursue in view of the
repties received from Government

CHAPTER IV¥~ Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of Government have not been accepted by
the Committee and which require reiteration

CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which

Government have furnished interim replies

APPENDICES

t Minutes of the Thirtieth sitting of Public Accounts
Commiltee (2016-17) held on 24.4.2017

H Minutes of the Tenth sitting of Sub-Committee-It of Public
Accounts Committee (2016-17) held on 24.4.2017

tll Annexure A (Circular No. 1009/16/2015-CX}

WV Annexure 1 (Note for PAC en Presecution Management
7 Module)
vo. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the

_Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts
Committee contained in their Sixly-third Report (Sixteenth
Lok Sabtra}

PAGE
{ili}
{v}

(शा)

22

1S

27

37


HE PUBLIC AGCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

COMPOSITION OF

Prof. K.¥. Thomas : Chairperson
MEMBERS
_ LOK SABHA

2. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay

3 Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
4 Shri Nishikant Dubey

5. Prof. Richard Hay ;
6. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
7 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

8. Smt. Riti Pathak

9. Shri Neiphiu Rio

10. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
tt. Shri Abhishek Singh

12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya

13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur

14. Shri Shivkumar C, Udasi

15. Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABRA

46. Shri Naresh Agrawal

17. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvecti
48. ° Shri Bhupender Yadav
19. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
20. Shri Shantaram Naik

24, Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
22. — Shri Ajay Sancheti

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri AK. Singh - Additional Secretary
2. Shi Sukhi Chand - Joint Secretary
3. Shri T.Jayakumar - Dkector है
4, Smt.-Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja - Oeputy Secretary

* Blected ४०.१. 09.08.2016 vice Shri Vijay Goel, MP appointed as Minister of Stale wef. 05.07.2046.

tnd


COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE - Nt (DIRECT AND INDIRECT TAXES) © OF THE
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITEE (2046-17)

Convenor पर Shri Nishikant Dubey
Alternate Convenor : Shri Gatyavrat Chaturvedi
Members Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi

Prof, Richard Hay
Shri Sukhendy Sekhar Roy
Shri Ajay Sancheti


INTRODUGTION

1, the Chairpersen, Public Accounis Committee (2016-17), having becn
authorised by the Cornmitice, do present this Seventy-seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Sixty-third Report. (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Administration of Prosecution and Penalties in Central Excise & Service Tay’ relating
to the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) (Central Board of Excise and
Customs)

2. The Sixty-third Report was presonted 0 Lok Sabha/aid in Rajya Sabha on
46.12.2016. Replies of the Government to the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 604.2017. The Sub-Committee III (Direct
and Indirect Taxes) of PAC and thereafter the Public Accounts Committee (2016 17)
considered and adopted the draft Report at their respective sitting held on 24.04.2017
Minutes of the Sittings are given at Appendix-| and I!

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recornmendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered fo
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

“5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventy-seventh Report (Sixteenth
Lok Sabha) is given at Appendix-V.

NEW DELHI; PROF. K.V, THOMAS
24 April, 2017 Chairperson

4 Vaisakha, 1939 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


1
CHAPTER - |

REPORT

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee, deais with Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their
Sixty-third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on “Administration of Prosecution and Penaities in
Central Excise & Service Tax” based on C&AG Audit Report No.29 of 2014 relating to
Ministry of Finance (Departrnent of Revenue) (Central Board of Excise and Customs)

2, The 63 Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabhajlaid in Rajya
Sabha on 16.12.2016. If contained 8 Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken Notes
in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations have been received from the Ministry

of Finance (Department of Revenues) and categorized as under:

@ Observations/Recommendations of the’ Committee which have been accepted by the
Government:

Paragraph Nos. 1,5 and 8
Total: 3

Chapter- fl

(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in
view of the replies received from the Government:

-NIL-
Total: NIL
Chapter: lil

(ii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government have rot
been accepted by the Committee and which requires reiteration

Paragraph Nos.- 4,6 and 7
Total: 3
* Chapter- iV

(५) Observations/Recommendations in tespect of which. Government have furnished
interim replies:

Paragraph Nos. 2 and 3.

Totak 2
Chapter- ४

3. The detailed examination of the subjeci by the Committee had_revealed_ certain

” shortcomings/defictencies on the part_of the Ministry ० Finance (PD Deparment of Revenuc}



2

which inter-alia included serious lacunae in administration of Prosecution and Penalties by

0850, prosecution cases involving meagre amounts were pending for years, delays on pari

of the Department and nen-following of the > timelines prescribed in various circulars issued

by the Ministry, The Committee had accordingly given their Observations/Recommendations

in their Sixty-third Report.
4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Finance (Department of

Revenue) have been repraduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. The Committee _
will now deal with action taken:by the Government on their Observations Observations/Recommendations

which either need _relieration or mer comments. The Committee desire that Action Taken
Note in respect of Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter | and final action
taken replies in respect of the Recommendations contained in Chapter V for which interim

replies have been given by the Government may be furnished to them within six months of

the Presentation of the Report to the House.

Recommendation Para No. 2
5. The Committee noted from the Audit observation that there were 593 prosecution
cases pending as on 34 March, 2013 involving a money value of 2011.56 crore and out of
which 155 cases were pending in Surat | and Ahmedabad | Commissionerates and from the
reply of the Ministry that as on 31 March 2045 the total pendency of Central Excise
prosecution cases is 1292 and Service Tax is 34. The Committee strongly felt that the lack
of adequate monitoring on the part of the Department has resulted in increasing pendency.
The-Committee while noting that pursuant to the Audit observations, a comprehensive
circular had been brought out superseding all the circulars issued earlier were of the view
that the Department should ensure that circular is implemented in letter and spirit and make
all out efforts to expedite/ withdraw the prosecution proceedings by evolving a robust in-built
monitoring mechanism whereby review of all pending cases is done periodically to ensure
adequacy of action taken by the officers in disposal of the cases alongwith tracking of the
- expenditure details in carrying out these prosecution proceedings. The Committee were of
the view that prosecution registers maintained at various commissionerates be also
checked periodically, the cases pending in the courts are pursued actively with the Chief
Judicial Magistrate for expediting the hearings and the cases where on identical allegation a है
noticee has been exonerated in the quast judicial. proceedings are withdrawn fhe
Commitice further observed that ail these measures would eventually help the Ministry in 2

better administration of the prosecution and penaltias.


3

6 The Minisiry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:

"The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and the department has
statted. working on Prosecution Management Module (PMM) which is designed as
part of the: implementation of the MIS electronically as per details enclosed as
Adinexure-1, The suitable Circularfinstruction would 06 considered with
implementation of Prosecution Management Module (PMM), a robust in-built
monitoring mechanism to review all pending cases of prosectition along with tracking
of the expenditure details." हि

7. While vetting the said ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:

“Finally vetted on the responsibility of the Ministry to ensure timely implementation of
PMM. Effectiveness of the same will be examined in future audit."

8. jn their further comments to the above audit observation, the Ministry stated as

under:

"It is in the advance stage of development PMM software and wilt be implemented by

on or before 317 July, 2017."
9. The Committee had noted that lack of adequate monitoring on part of the
Department has resulted in increasing pending cases and had recommended that a
robust in-built monitoring mechanism be evolved whereby review of all pending
cases is done periodically to ensure adequacy of action taken by the officers in
disposal of the cases alongwith tracking of the expenditure details in carrying out
these prosecution proceedings. The Committee while noting the reply of the Ministry
that in deference to the recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry (Department
of. Revenue) has taken an initiative to develop Prosecution Management Module
(PMM) for electronically capturing the important data on a real-time basis at critical
stages of the prosecution process from initiation of prosecution proposals till issue
of the final order and judgement by the court and storing them in an online
‘prosecution database acknowledge the efforts made by the Ministry to facilitate easy
monitoring of the compliance of the prosecution processes, 85 stipulated in the
various instructions/circulars issued by the Department from time to time, by the
senior most officers. The Commitee, further, desire that the Ministry may prescribe a
time frame for filing of an application for requesting the courts for withdrawal. of
cases where an identical allegation a noticee has been exonerated in the quasi-
judicial proceedings and the order has attained finality. हु

The Committee while noting that PMM ‘would not facilitate monitoring (a)
whether all the Order in Original (O-1-0} have been subsequently reviewed or not from

ihe angie of prosecution; {b} ali the O4-Os which are pending for review from


4

prosecution angle; {c) whether ail the cases of arrests have been subsequently
reviewed or not; (d) the delay which had taken place in sending the prosecution
proposal aficr the receipt of the decision of the adjudicating authority, in DGCEI
“eases; {e) cases which on review were found fit for prosecution but where
prosecution proposals are yet fo be sent, are of the view that suitable monitoring
mechanism may be evolved for such cases ‘under intimation to the Committee.
The Committee further desire that the PMM should be developed in a way that it
is also ready for the GST regime and subsequent changes in the provisions.
‘
OBSERVATIONIRECOMMENDATION NO.3
40. The Committee noted from the Audit observation that 11 cases involving an amount
of £4.82 lakh has been pending for more than 30 years and in 43 cases pendency periods
are not even available. The Committee were shocked to note that two prosecution cases
with petty amounts of 79000 and ₹750 are pending since 1973 and 1978 respectively. The
Committee noted from the reply of the Ministry that the prosecution in both these cases
were launched in the years 1973 ‘and 1978 before the monetary limit of 710000 for
launching prosecution was prescribed. The Committee while noting that 288 pending cases
were older than 15 years and involve duty of २5 lakhs or less with an average of 80000/-
per case conveyed their unanimous view during evidence cases involving meagre amounts
pending for decades is more of 8 harassment of the officials as well as the defendants. Also,
charges of lawyers and TA/ DA claims of the officials often result in expending more than
the amounts involved in the prosecution. The Cammitiee appreciated that the Ministry has
now decided to recommend filing of application before the court to withdraw from
prosecution of the cases where evasion of Central Excise duty is less than <5 lakh and is
pending for mare than 15 years and desire that the limits prescribed vide this circular be
reviewed periodically te factor in the inflationary trends. The Committee while
acknowledging that the bigger and habitual offenders should not be allowed te get away feet
that the Ministry should row ensure that the cases are disposed off timely and such huge
pendencies do not recur. The Committee also desired that fast track mechanism for disposal
of the pending cases may be evolved preferably by holding lok adalats. :
11. The Ministry in theie Action Taken Notes have stated as under:
“The Ministry has noted the recommendation for compliance."

42, — Whilo vetting the said ATNs, ihe Audit made the following comments:

"Tinally vetted on Ministry's sesponsibility."


wl

43. The Ministry offered no further comments on the matter.

14... The Commitice were of the view that cases fnvolving meagre amounis 85 little
as ¥ 750 pending for decades is more of a harassinent of the officials as well as the
defendants. Also, charges of lawyers and TA/DA claims of the officials often result in
expending more than the amounts involved in the prosecution. The Committee had,
therefore, desired that fast track mechanism for disposal of the pending cases may
be evolved preferably by holding !ok adalats. The Committee while noting from the
reply of the Ministry that the prosecution Hatabase and various useful reports derived
from them would be readily accessible in user-friendly manner to the fop
management of CBEC on a real-time basis to facilitate effective monitoring of the
prosecution processes are of the view that once clear picture of the pendencies in
prosecution cases is available after impiementation of PMM, the Ministry may hold
lok adalats for fast tracking disposal of the long pending cases, The Ministry may
also ensure that all cases where evasion of Central Excise Duty is less than हैं 5 lakh
and is pending for more than 15 years are also withdrawn. The Committee further
desire that the Ministry may review monetary limits and their corresponding period of

pendencies for withdrawal as below :

“Amount in हैं +: limit for = of
_ है _ _-pending cases
Upto 1,00,000 5 years
4,00,004 - 2,00,000 10 years
2,00,004 - 5,00,000 jf 15 years

OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION NOS. 4 AND 7

15. The Committee in their Original Report noled that in all cases where the
Commissioner: of Gentral Excise in charge of judicial work is satisfied that prosecution
should be launched, a proposal/investigation report for the purpose of launching prosecution
should be forwarded to the Chief Commissioner for decision within one month of the
adjudication of the case. However, according to Audit, in 138 prosecution: cases ihe
forwarding of investigation reports suffered delays. ranging from a month to AGyears to
obtain mandatory sanction of the Chief Commissioner to faunch prosécution and in 65 cases

there was delay upio 4 years from DGCE! units in forwarding the investigation reports. The


6 न

Committee were shocked to note that a Ministry which is levying penalties on other parties
on technical grounds is itself so casual in its working and is excusing itself wiih the
reasoning that the standard of evidence required for prosecution has to be totally different
and requires in-depth study and time consuming deliberation and therefore are only ‘of
administrative nature. Further, the Committee observed that though the guidelines prescribe .
that all the applications’ for compounding of offences must be disposed of within 6 monihs,
.there were delays upto 25 months in the disposal of application of compounding. Again, the
Ministry stated that the guidelines have only been issued for necessary guidance and advice
to the field formations and the sald time limit is toly advisory in nature. The Committee
strongly deprecated the attitude of the Ministry as the audit has only gone by the gttidelines
made by the Ministry itself which have also been reiterated in the tatest circular. The
Committee earnestly desired that the Ministry may sensitize its officials about the timelines
which are to be followed invariably. :

46. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:

"A letter would be written to all Chief Commissioners sensitizing them regarding the
observations of the PAC. However, with implementation of Prosecution Management
Module (PMM), all officers would have fo follow the fimelines as prescribed under
Cireutar No. 1009/46/2015-CX dated 23" October, 2015 as any delay on their part
will be observed by the senior officers of the department including Members of the

Board.”
47. While vetting the said ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:
"Capy of the letter addressed to all Chief Commissioners may be provided."

48. In their further comments to the above audit observation, the Ministry stated as

under: हि
Need of the fetter addressed to all Chief Commissioners is enclosed as Annexure-

19. _ The Committee in their Original Report further noted that in 61 cases under 42
Commisssionerates and in four cases under DGCE! Mumbai, Audit could not verify whether
the investigation reports were submitted within the stipulated time or not due to non-
availability of records. The Committee further noted that Audit could not identify the
pendency period in 43 prosecution cases as Department was not able to provide detaits of

- date of fiing of complaint. The Committee also found that in five cases, the copies of
approval by Chief Commissioner were not available in the relevant records. The Committee
were shocked to note that the papers might have been misplaced/ last from the records

when a clea’ guideline oxisis that it shallbe the responsinility of the officer who has been


7

authorized fo file complaint, 10 take charge of ‘all documents, statements and other exhibits

atc. The Commitiee directed that the responsibility for lost/ misplaced documents be fixed

and appropriate action taken against the officers found responsible in this regard. The

Commitiee also desired that all the all recordsfiles be stored in digitized format, henceforth,
- 59 that they arc always readily available for verification.

20. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:

"The Ministry has noted the recommendation for compliance. With implementation of
Prosecution Management Module (PMM), all the important documents of the
Pfosécution cases will be uploaded in this module. Kindly refer Annexure-t for

details.” t
24, While vetting the said ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:

“The reply is silent on the PAC instructions for fixing the responsibility for loss of
documents and taking necessary action.”

29, In their further comments to the above audit observation, the Ministry stated as

under:
“The PMM module will take care of uploading of all the important documents and the
information. Therefore, the documents will always be available for inspection.
However, for the past cases, wherever, the lost documentsifiles could not be re-
constructed, and in this regard Deparment has issued letter to all Chief
Commissioners of Central Excise & Service Tax sensitizing them regarding the
observation of the PAC and reiterating instructions issued: vide F.No.238/15/2015-
CX-7 dated 16.12.2015 initiating action for fixing responsibility in cases of serious
lapses noticed by the C&AG Audit."
23. The Committee had noted from the reply of the Ministry that the guidelines
have only been issued for necessary guidance and advice to the field formations and
the said time limit is only advisory in nature and had accordingly desired that the
Ministry may sensitize its officials about the timelines which are to be followed
invariably. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that it would be
issuing a lIctter to all Chief Commissioners sensitizing them regarding the
observations of the PAC. The Committee further note that the Audit had-asked the
Ministry to furnish a copy of the same which as per the reply of the Ministry was
onclosed at Annexure A. Similarly, the Committee had directed that the responsibility
for lostf misplaced documents be fixed and appropriate action taken against the
officers found responsible in this regard, As per the reply of the Ministry, wherever,
the lost documentséfiles could not be re-constructed, the Depariment has issued
letter to all Chief Commissioners of Central Excise & Service Tax sensitizing them

regarding the observation of fhe PAC and reiterating instructions . issued vide


8

६.४०,238/15/2015-0%-7 dated 16.12.2015 initiating action for fixing responsibility in
cases of serious lapses noticed by ihe C&AG Audit. However, on perusal of the
replies, the Committee note that Annexure A contains a copy of the circular issued in
2015 and nowhere in the replies furnished by the Ministry, the reiteration of the
Circular by ‘the Ministry could be found. The Committee while taking serious note of

the callous reply of the Ministry desire that the letter may be issued at the earliest.

. OBSERVATION/RECONMMENDATION NO.6 |
24, The Committee noted that Director General (inspection) and Principal Collector, who
would be inspecting the offices ‘of Collectors should specially check the points contained in
the Circular at the time of conducting inspection, however, in many cases DG (inspestian)
failed to make any observations pertaining to the prosecution cases as specified in the
circutar. The Committee were of the considered aginion that inspections by higher officers
“are deterrent against the complacent behaviour of the officials. The DG should ensure that
reasons for pendency and non-compliance of the guidelines of the Ministry are checked
during field inspections and remarks made in writing and timelines be prescribed for action

to be taken in this regard.

25. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:

"It is submitted that the Prosecution cases are inspected and examined as per
Board's Circular issued from tire to time and irregularities noticed are recorded in the
Inspections Reports of the DGPM. An inspection report is attached as. Annexure-2
for reference. DG (Perforrnance Management) has conducted the study regarding
prosecution cases of all the zones, the report received from one of the zone is
enclosed as example for reference as Annexure-3.

The Ministry has noted the recommendation for compliance."

26. While vetting the said ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:

"Since the issue pointed out by PAC is noticed in many cases where DG (inspection)
did not mention any observation pertaining to the prosecution cases, it is suggested
that the Ministry may reiterate the instruction fer scrupulously following the existing

circular.”
27. In their further comments to the above audit observation, the Ministry stated as

under:
; "The PMM module will take care of timely uploading of all the relevant documents ;
and information in the system. The same can be monitored at the highest level in the
Ministry. As stated earlier, PMM nodule will be implemented on or bafore 31° July,
2017."


9

28, The Committee had noted that in many cases DG (inspection) failed to make
any observations pertaining to the prosecution cases as specified in the circular and
opined that the DG shoutd ensure that reasons for pendency and non-compliance of
the guidelines of the Ministry are Ghecked during field inspections -and remarks made
in writing and timelincs be prescribed for action’ to be taken in this regard. The
' Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that the Prosecution cases are
inspected and examined as per Board's Circular issued from time to time and
irregularities noticed are recorded in the Inspections Reports of the DGPM. The
Committee further note, as per Audit that DG {inspection), in many cases did not
mention any observation pertaining to the prosecution cases and reiterate that the
DG should ensure that reasons for pendency and non-compliance of the guidelines of
the Ministry are checked during field inspections and remarks made in writing and
timelines be prescribed for action to be taken in this regard. The Committee express
their unhappiness and desire that suitable action be taken against the then
DG{Inspection) who failed to record, in many cases, the observations pertaining to
prosecution cases The Committee are of the view that successful monitoring of
prosecution cases after the implementation of PMM would depend more on the
promptitude of the senior most officers. The Committee, therefore, desire senior

most officers be more vigilant and scruputous in their approach.

रा


10

CHAPTER Il

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE WHICH HAVE
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT

OBSERVATIONRECOMMENDATION

The Committee note that prosecution is the commencement of a criminal
proceeding, where the Government exhibits before a Court of Law the formal charges
against a person accused of an offense and seeks to impose on such person 4 suitable
punishment and penalty, Thus, in Central Excise, prosecution sets in motion a legal
process by which Government seeks fo ensure punishment of companies and persons
concerned with evasion of Central Excise duty. A performance audit was conducted to
seek an assurance that the systems and procedures relating to prosecution and penalty
were adequate and adhered to by the Central Board of Excise and Customs. The
Committee further note that the major findings of this performance audit were Eleven
cases from 5 Commissionerates involving meager amount of % 1.82 lakh which were
under prosecution in various Courts for periods exceeding 30 years. Audit could not
identify the pendency period in 43 prosecution cases having a revenue implication of
2 31.50 crore as the Department was not able to provide details of date of filing of
complaint. In 138 prosecution cases in 27 Commissionerates, the sending of
investigation reports suffered delays ranging from a month to over 10 years to abiain
the mandatory sanction of the Chief Commissioner to launch prosecution. In 61 cases
under 12 Commissionerates and in four cases under 0508 Mumbai Audit could not
verify whether the investigation reports were submitted within the stipulated time or not
due to non-availability of records in the concerned files. In 475 cases relating to 37
Commissionerates and DGCEI, Delhi there was delay of a month to 15 years in filing
complaints with the Courts of Law. Out of 46 selected Commissionerates, 30
Commissionerates reported that they are not doing any review on pending prosecution
cases. Instances of delay in Court proceeding due lack of proper attention by the
Departmental officers were noticed. In 19 cases where prosecution was initiated, none
of the accused persons had been informed separately in writing about the offer of

compounding. la 24 Commissionerates NO remarks were found in the Director General


51

(Inspection) reporls pertaining to prosecution cases. The Department was not reviewing
the prosecution cases for withdrawal as per Board's Circular dated 4 Aprit 1994, The
Committee on their examination of the Report No..29 of 2014 found serious lacunae in
administration of Prosecution and Penalties by the CBEC, Department of Revenue,
Ministry of finance. The Committee found that prosecution cases involving meagre
amounts have been pending for years, delays on parl of the Department and non-
following of the timelines prescribed in various circulars issued by the Ministry. The
Committee in the succeeding paragraphs have made their observations and

recommendations on the subject.

{Para 1 of the 63" Report of PAC, 16"LokSabha]
Action Taken Reply

The observations of the Hon'ble Committee have been carefully noted. The action
taken on the Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs are furnished in the
relevant paragraphs. :

Vetting comments of audit

No comments.

Ministry's further comments on vetting comments of aucit vetting comments of audit

No comments.

Special Secretary to the Government of India
(F.No.238/18/2016-CX-7)

OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION

The Commitiee observe that a criminal complaint in a Court of Law should be
filed only after the sanction of the Chief Commissioner .has been obtained for
prosecution and once prosecution is sanctioned, the complaint should be filed in court
without any considerable delay. However, Audit found that there were delays upto 15
years in filing complaints with the Courts of law. The Committee note from the reply of
the Ministry that the delays were procedural lapses and due to administrative reasons


12

which did not lead to any adverse revenue implications. The Committee while noting the
casual response of the Ministry are of the view that the Ministry should prescribe
timelines for every stage of filing a complaint with the court and any delays should only

be condoned by the highest authority.

[Para 5 of the 63" Report of PAC, 18"LokSabha]

Action Taken Reply

The Ministry has noted the recommendation for compliance. The Circular will be issued
at the time of implementation of the Prosecution Management Module {PMM).

Vetting comments of audit

As implementation of PMM may take some time, it is advised to sentize field formations
about adherence to tirnelines as assured in Recommendation No.4.

Ministry’s further comments on vetting comments of audit audit

Field formations will be suitably sensitized as advised. It is in the advance stage of
developrnent PMM software and will be implemented on or befare 319 July, 2017.

Special Secretary to the Government of India
(F.No.238/18/2016-CX-7)

ao

OBSERVATIONIREGCOMMENDATION

The Committee have tearnt that 30 out of 46 selected Commissionerates
reported that they are not doing any review on pending prosecution cases, lack of
proper attention by the Departmental officers leading to delay in Court proceedings, nat
informed the accuséd separately about the offer of compounding in 19 cases and have
not reviewed prosecution cases for withdrawal. The Committec, therefore, deprecate
the officers of the Ministry for their lackadaisical approach. The Ministry has been
issuing circulars but its own officials are conveniently ignoring the guidelines and
working on their own pace. The Committee strongly desire that the officers who are
prompt in disposing their work should be given incentives and those taking unduly long
time should be warned and penalised without loss of time.

[Para 8 of the 63" Report of PAG, 46" LokSabha}

YY


13
Action Taken Reply

However, with impiementation of Prosecution Management Module {PMM), fhe all
officers have to follow the timelines as prescribed under Circular No. 1009/16/20%5-CX
dated 23 October, 2015 as any delay on their part will be observed on time by the
senior officers of the department including Members of the Board and suitable action
initiated thereafter. हु

Vetting comments of audit

As implementation of PMM may take sore time, it is advised to sentize field formations
about adherence to fimelines as assured in Recommendation No.4. Further, the
Ministry reply is silent on the issue of giving incentives to officials adhering to timelines
and penalizing those delaying the case.

Ministry’s further comments on vetting comments of audit comments of audit

Itis in the advance stage of development PMM software and will be implemented on or
before 34% July, 2017.

Supervisory officers would be monitoring the work regarding prosecution as part of the

key result areas of work which would be part of the annual appraisal of the officer.

Special Secretary to the Government of India
(F.No.238/18/2016-CX-7)


14
CHAPTER Ili
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT

DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE
GOVERNMENT

-NIL-


15
CHAPTER IV

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRES REITERATION

OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION

The Comm itfee further note that in all cases where the Commissioner of Gentral
Excise in charge of judicial work is satisfied that prosecution should be launched, a
~ proposalfinvestigation report for the purpose of launching prosecution should be
forwarded to the Chief Commissioner for decision within one month of the adjudication
of the case. Hawever, according to Audit, in 138 prosecution cases, the forwarding of
investigation reports suffered delays ranging from a month fo {Oyears fo obfain
mandatory sanction of the Chief Commissioner to launch prosecution and in 65 cases
there was delay upto 4 years from DGCE units in forwarding the investigation reports.
The Committee are shocked to note that a Ministry which is levying penalties on other
parties on technical grounds is itself so casual in its working and is excusing itself with
the reasoning that the standard of evidence required for prosecution has to be totally
different and requires in-depth study and time consuming deliberation and therefore are
only of administrative nature. Further, the Committee observe that though the guidelines
prescribe that all the applications for compounding of offences must be disposed of
within 6 months, there were delays upto 25 months in the disposal of application of
compounding. Again, the Ministry stated that the guidelines have only been issued for
necessary guidance and advice to the field formations and the said time limit is only
advisory in nature. The Committee strongly deprecate the attitude of the Ministry as the
audit has only gone by the guidelines made by the Ministry itself which have also been
reiterated in the latest circular. The Committee earnestly desire that the Ministry may
sensitize its officials about the timelines which are to be followed invariably.

[Para 4 of the 63" Report of PAC, 46"LokSabha]
Action Taken Reply

A letter would be written to ail Chief Commissioners sensitizing them regarding
the observations of the PAC. However, with implementation of Prosecution
Management Module (PMM), all officers would have fo follow the timelines as


16

prescribed under Circular No. 1009/16/2015-CX dated 23" October, 2015 as any delay
on their part wilt be observed by the senior officers of the department including

Members of the Board.
Vetting comments of audit
Copy of the letter addressed to all Chief Commissioners may be provided.

Ministry’s further comments on vetting comments of audit

Copy of the letter addressed 10 all Chief Commissioners is enclosed as Annexure-A.

Special Secretary to the Government of India
है (F.No.238/1 8/2016-CX-7)

OBSERVATION/REGCOMMENDATION

ह The Committee also note that Director General (inspection) and Principal
Collector, who would be inspecting the offices of Collectors should specially check the
points contained in the Circular at the time of conducting inspection, however, in many
cases DG (inspection) failed to make any observations pertaining to the prosecution
cases as specified in the circular. The Committee are of the considered opinion that
inspections by higher officers are deterrent against the complacent behaviour of the
Officials. The OG should ensure that reasons for pendency and non-compliance of the
guidelines of the Ministry are checked during field inspections and remarks made in
writing and timelines be prescribed for action to be taken in this regard.

[Para 6 of the 63"! Report of PAC, 46LokSabhal

Action Taken Reply

Ht is submitted that the Prosecution cases are inspected and examined as per Board's
Circular 55800 from time fo time and irregularities naticed are recorded in the
Inspections Reports of the DGPM. An inspection report is attached as Annexure-2 for
reference. DG (Performance Management} has conducted the study regarding


7?

prosecution cases of all the zones, the report received fromm one of the zone is enciosed

as example for reference as Annexure-3.

Action Taken Reply
The Ministry has noted the recommendation for compliance.

Vetting comments of audit

Since she issue pointed out by PAC is noticed in many cases where DG (inspection) did
not mention any observation pertaining to the prosecution cases, itis suggested that the
Ministry may reiterate the instruction for scrupulously following the existing circular.

Ministry’s further comments on vetting comments of aver comments on vettin comments of audit :

The PMM module will take care of timely uploading of all the relevant documents and
information in the system. The same can be monitored at the highest level in the
Ministry. As stated earlier, PMM module will be implemented on or before 31% July,
2017.

Special Secretary to the Government of India
(F.No.238/18/2016-CX-7)

OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION

The Committee note that in 61 cases under 12 Commisssionerates and in four
cases under DGCE! Mumbai, Audit could not verify whether the investigation reports -
were submitted within the stipulated time or not due to fon- availability of records. The
Committee further note that Audit could not identify the pendency period in 43
prosecution cases as Department was not able to provide details of date of filing of
complaint. The Committee atso find that in five cases, the copies of approval by Chief
Commissioner were not available in the relevant records. The Committee are shocked
fo note that the papers might have been misplaced/ lost from the records when a clear
guideline exists that it shall be the responsibility of the officer who has been authorized

fo file complaint, to take charge of all documents, statements and other exhibits etc. The


48

Committee direct that the responsibility for 1050 misplaced documents be fixed and
appropriate action taken against the offfcers found responsible in this regard. The
Committee also desire that थी the all recordsfiles be stored in digitized format,
henceforth, so that they are always readily available for verification.

[Para 7 of the 63° Report of PAC, 16"LokSabha]
Action Taken Reply

The Ministry has noted the recornmendation for compliance. With implementation of
Prosecution Management Module (PMM), all the important documents of the
Prosecution cases will be uploaded in this module. Kindly refer Annexure-1 for details.

Vetting comments of audit

The reply is silent on the PAC instructions for fixing the responsibility for loss of
documents and taking necessary action.

Ministry's further comments on vetting comments of audit comments of audit

The PMM module will take care of uploading of all the important documents and the
information. Therefore, the documents will always be available for inspection.
However, for the past cases, wherever, the lost documents/files could not be re-
constructed, and in this regard Department has issued letter to ail Chief Commissioners
of Central Excise & Service Tax sensitizing them regarding the observation of the PAG
and reiterating instructions issued vide F.No.238/15/2015-CX-7 dated 16.12.2015
initiating action for fixing responsibility in cases of serious lapses noticed by the C&AG
Audit. 7

Special Secretary to the Government of India
(F.No.238/1 8/2016-CX-7}


19
CHAPTER ५

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISIIED INTERIM REPLIES

OBSERVATIONIRECONMMENDATION

The Committee note from the Audit observalion that there were 593 prosecution
cases pending as on 31 March, 2013 involving a money vatue of 2011.56 crore and
out of which 155 cases were pending in Surat | and Ahmedabad | Commissionerates
and from the reply of the Ministry that as on 31 March 2075 the total pendency of
Central Excise prosecution cases is 1292 and Service Jax is 34, The Committee
strongly feel that the tack of adequate monitoring on the part of the Department has
resulted in increasing pendency. The Committee while noting that pursuant to the Audit
observations, a comprehensive circitlar has been brought out superseding all the
circulars issued earlier are of the view that the Department should ensure that circular is
implemented in letter and spirit and make all out efforts to expedite withdraw the
prosecution proceedings by evolving a robust in-built monitoring mechanism whereby
review of all pending cases is done periodically to ensure adequacy of action taken by
the officers in disposal of the cases alongwith tracking of the expenditure details in
catrying out these prosecution proceedings. The Committee are of the view that
prosecution registers maintained at various commissionerates be also checked
periodically, the cases pending in the courts are pursued actively with the Chief Judicial
Magistrate for expediting the hearings, and the cases where on identical allegation a
noficee has been exonerated in the quasi judicial proceedings are withdrawn, The
Committee further observe that ali these measures would eventually help the Ministry in

a betfer administration of the prosecution and penalties.

[Para 2 of the 63 Report of PAC, 16"LokSabha}

Action Taken Reply

The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and the department has started
working on Prosecution Management Module (PMM) which is designed as part af the

implementation of the MIS electronically as per geiails enclosed as Annexure-1. The


20

suitable Circular/instruction would be considered with implementation of Prosecution
Management Module (PMM), a robust in-built monitoring mechanism to review all

pending cases of prosecution along with fracking of the expenditure details.

Vetting comments of audit

Finally vetted on the responsibility of the Ministry to ensure timely implementation of
PMM. Effectiveness of the same will be examined in future audit.

Ministry’s further comments on vetting comments of audit
‘
It is in the advance stage of development PMM software and will be implemented by on
or before 317 July, 2017.

Special Secretary to the Government of India
(F.No.238/4 8/2016-CX-7)

OBSERVATION/IRECOMMENDATION

The Committee note from the Audit observation that 11 cases involving an
amount of 71.82 lakh has been pending for more than 30 years and in 43 cases
pendency periods are not even available. The Committee are shocked to note that two
prosecution cases with petty amounts of 8000 and २750 are pending since 1973 and
1978 respectively. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that the
prosecution in both these cases were launched in the years 1973 and 1978 before the
monetary limit of €10000 for launching prosecution was prescribed. The Committee
while noting that 288 pending cases are older than 15 years and involve duty of 25
lakhs or less with an average of %80000/- per case conveyed their unanimous view
- during evidence cases involving meagre amounts pending for decades is more of a
harassment of the officials as well as the defendants. Also, charges of lawyers and TA/
DA claims of the officials often result in expending more than the amounts involved in
the prosecution. The Committee appreciate that the Ministry has now decided to
recommend filing of application before the court to withdraw from prosecution: of the
cases wheré evasion of Central Excise duty is fess than 5 lakh and is pending for more
than 15 years and desire that the fimits prescribed vide this circular be reviewed
periodically to factor in the inflationary trends. the Committee while acknowledging that
the bigger and habitual offenders should not be allowed to get away feel that the
Ministry should now ensure that the cases are disposed off timely and such huge
pendencies do not recur. The Committee also’ desire that fast track mechanism for
disposal of the pending cases may be evolved preferably by holding 1 adalats.

[Para 3 of the 63" Report of PAC, 16°LokSabhal


21
Action Taken Reply
The Ministry has noted the recommendation for compliance.

Vetting comments of audit

Finally vetted on Ministry's responsibility.

Ministry’s further comments on vetting comments of audit vetting comments of audit

No comments.

Special Secretary to the Government of india
(F.No.238/18/2016-CX-7} *

NEW DELHI; PROF. K.V, THOMAS
24 April, 2017 Chairperson

4 Vaisakha, 1939 (Saka} Public Accounts Committee


| fe 7 Ex Yk Boy
| (1४1४ vAE 2] Confidential

(2016-17) HELD ON 24 APRIL, 2017.

The Committee sat on Monday, the 24 April, 2017 from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in
Committee Room ‘B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT

Prof. K. ५. Thomas 7 Chairperson

MEMBERS"

LOK SABRA ‘
2. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra

Shri Nishikant Dubey

Prof. Richard Hay

Shi Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

ean # ४?

7. Smit. Riti Pathak

8. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
8. Shri Abhishek Singh

10. Dr. Kirit Somatya

RAJYA SABHA
11. Shri Naresh Agarwal

12, Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
13, Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
14, Shri Ajay Sancheti

15. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

1... Shri A. K. Singh - Additional Secretary
2. Shri S.C.Chaudhary - Joint Secretary

3. Shri T. Jayakumar - Director

4. Shri Paolienlal Haokip - Deputy Secretary

5 Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary

we


REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR
GENERAL OF INDIA

eke aeee
aeeK coer
Sore pres

REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS
WELFARE (DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, COOPERATION AND FARMERS
WELFARE). ‘

eee HARE
sake pen
अ&ऊ+ pres

REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS
WELFARE (DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH & EDUCATION).

neat anes
Fees wate
हक sate
exe aiee
Peers Prev
Part-|

2, At the outset, Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members, the officials of C&AG,
the Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture,
Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) and other representatives to the silting of the
Committee, apprising that the sitfing has been convened to hear the views of the Ministry
and others on 0) ******; »

i) mr and (ii ‘eee The Chairperson also informed the Members that after hearing
the submissions from the representatives, the Committee shall also undertake

consideration and adoption of five draft Reports placed before them. Hon'ble Chairperson

>+25%“


3
further drew attention of the witnesses to the confidentiality of the evidence fendered

before the Committee.

3. मम sawkae preeres
4. setae ferred wenaae
5. न prorees pereery
6. असर prevery aeetea
The witnesses then withdrew.
A copy of the. verbatim proceedings has been kept on record.
‘
Part-ll
1. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft reports one by one for
consideration.
(a} prveres peverrs prereed
(9) Draft Report on Action taken by Government on

observations/recommendations contained in 63 Report (16" Lok Sabha) on
“Administration of Prosecution and Penalties in Central Excise &
Service Tax”;

sawane prerrrs west
(०) |]
peewee areeae sanune,
(9) ; and
(9) RENEE ° ओके #औ के ओके औक ऊँ

+

2... After deliberations, the Draft Reports at 81 No. (a}, (०) & (d) were adopted by the
Committee without any modifications/changes The Committee then authorised the
Hon'ble Chairperson to present the adopted Reports to Hon'ble Speaker, Lak Sabha
under Direction 71 A (1) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.

3. The Chairperson, then, thanked the Members and the representatives of the Office

of tho C&AG of india for assisting the Committee in the examination of the subjects.

The Committee then adjot adjourned,

-24 -


MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE!
(DIRECT AND INDIRECT _ TAXES) _© OF PUBLIC ACCOUNT:

(2016-17) HELD ON 24" April, 2017.

The Sub-Committee-I!| sat from 4430 hrs. to 1445 hrs. on 24th April, 2047 in

‘Committee Room '8', Pattiament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT
Shri Nishikant Dubey - Convenor
MEMBERS,
, LOK SABHA
2. Prof. Richard Hay
RAJYA SABHA
Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
Shd Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
Shri Ajay Sancheti

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

4. Shi AK. Singh _ Additional Secretary (AK)

2, Shri S.C. Chaudhary - Joint Secretary (SC)

3. Shri T. Jayakumar - Director

4, Smt, Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary

2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the Members to the Tenth Sitting of the

Sub-Committee-Iil (Direct and Indirect Taxes). Thereafter, the Sub-Committee took up

the draft Report on "Performance of Import and Export Trade Facilitation through

s.Ports based on C&AG's Report No. 13 of 2045" and Action taken by

Custom
ons contained in 631 Report (16 Lok

Government on observations/recommendati

Sabha) .on “Administration of Prosecution and Penalties in Central Excise &

Service Tax”.

3. The Convenor invited suggestions of the Members on the above mentioned

draft. Report. After discussing the contents of th

adopted the same with minor changes/modifications.

28

8 draft Report, the Sub-Committee है

बा 202000७००:८-::

बनने rename nee yom tae AU


ize the Report in the tight

The Sub-Committee authorized the Convenor to finali
fions by the Audit and

4,
of consequential changes arising out. of the factual verifica'

Committee for consideration and adoption.

present the same before the Main

The Sub-Committee then adjourned, Sub-Committee then adjourned.

OE



APPENDIX Ww]

a rn eer 3 SS

1७ menuate 8 हि

रे : Cireular No. 1009/16/2015-CXx

F. No. 96/54/2014-(:४.1
Government of India
Ministry of ¥inance

-Departnent of Revenue

Central Roard of Excise & Customs ~

New Delhi, dated the 237 October, 2015

‘Yo
TF ‘Principal Chicf ‘Commissioner/ Chief Commissioner of Central Excise (AI),
Principal Chief Commissioner/ Chicf Commissioner of Central Excise and
Service ‘lax (Al), _
Madam/ Sir,
Sub: Central Excise Guidelines for launching of Prosecution wader the Central

Excise Act, 1944 aud Vinance Act, 1994 regarding Service fax-reg.

_ Tam directed to refer to foowing circulars/instuctions issucd by the Board regarding guidctines
for launching of prosecution under the Central Lixcise Act, 1944 and the Finance Act, 1994:

1. Cirentar No. 15/90-CX.6 dated 09.08.1990 issued from ४. No, 218/7/89-CX.6.
2. Circular No. 30/30/94-CX dated 04.04.1994 issued from 1९. No, 208/20/93/CX.6.
3. Letter F. No. 208/31/97-CX.6 dated 04.04.1994 regarding enhancement of monetary
limit. है
4. (जाकर No. 35/35/94-CX dated 29.04.1994 issued from FF, No. 208/22/93-CX.6.
5.- Letter F. No. 203/05/98-CX.6 dated 06.04.1998 regarding making DG, CEI competent
authority to sanction prosecution in respect of cases investigated by 00019.
6. Letter F, No, 208/05/98-CX.6 dated 20.10.1998.
7. Letter F. No, 208/21/2007-CX.6 dated 15.06.2007.
8. Circular no 140/9/2011-Service Tax dated 12-5-2011,

2. In supersession of these instructions and circulars, folowing consolidatcd gaidelines are
hereby issued for lainching prosécution under the Central Rxeise Act, 1944 and the Finance Act,
1994, . हु

3. Person liable to be prosecutcd

3.1 Whoever commits any of the offeaces specified under sub-section (1) of Section 9 of the
Central Excisé Act, 1944 or sub-section (1) of section 89 of the Finance Act, 1994, can be
prosecuted. Section 9AA (1) of Central Excise 8०, 1944 provides that where an offence under
this Act has been committed by a company, every person who, al the time offence was

“27 —-


cat

committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business
of the company, as well as the company, shall be deomed to be guilty of the offence and shall be
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. Section JAA (2) of Central Excise Act,
1944 pravides that where an offence tinder this Act has been committed by a company and it is
proved that (he offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is altributable
to any neglect on the parl of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company,
such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence and
shall be liable to be procecded against and punished accordingly. Explanation to Section 9AA.
provides that (a) _Company means anybody corporate and includes a firm or other association
of individuals and (b) director in relation to a firm means 2 partner of the fim. ‘These

" provisions under Section SAA of Central Excise Act, 1944 have becn made applicable to Service

Tax also vide Section 83 of the Finance Act, 1994.

4, Monetary limits: Central Uxcise and ServicerTax

4. Monetary Limit: In order io optimally utilize limited resowrees of the Department,
prosecution shovid normally not be launched unless evasion of Central Excise duty or Service
Tax, or misuse of Cenvat ercdit in relation to offences specified under sub-section (1) of Section
9 of the Central Excise Act, 1944 or sub-section (1) of section 89 of the Kinauce Act, 1994 is
equal to or more than Rs. (116 Crore.

4.2 Habitual evaders: Nolwithstanding the above limits, prosecution can be launched in the

- case of 8 company/assessee habitually evading tax/duty or misusing Cenvat Credit facility. A

company/assessee would be treated as habitually evading tax/duly or misusing Ceavat Credit
facility, if it has been involved in three or more cases of confirmed demand (at the first appellate
level or above) of Central Excise duty or Service Tax or misuse of Cenvat erédit involving fraud,
suppression of facts etc. in past Rve years from the date of the decision such that the total duty or
tax evaded or total credit misused is equal to or more than Rs. One Crore. Offence register
(3353) may be used to monilor and identify assessees who can be considered to be habitually
evading duty.

4.3 Sanction of prosecution has serious repercussions for the asscssce and therefore along with
the above monctary limits, the nature of evidence collected during the investigation should be
carefully assessed. The evidences collected should be adequate to’ cstablish beyond reasonable
doubt that the person, company or iidividuat had guilly mind, knowledge of the offence, or had
fraudulent intention or in any manner possessed mens-rea (guilty mind) for committing the
offence.

5. Authority-to sanction prosecution

5.{ The criminal complaint for prosccuting a person should be filed only after obtaining the
sanction of the Principal Chicf/Chicf Coramissioner of Central Excise or Service Tax as the case
may be. है

5.2 In respect of cases invesGgated by thie Directorate Genccal of Central Fxcise Intelligence
(DGCLD, the criminal complaint {or proseculing a person should be filed only afler obtaining
the sanction of Principal Diréelot General/ Director General, CEL

a

he


5.3 An order conveying sanction for prosecution shall be issuéd by the sanctioning authority and
forwarded to the Commissioncrate concemed for taking appropriate action for expeditious filing
of the complaint.

6. Procedure for sanction of prosecution

6.1 Prosecution proposal should be forwarded to the Chief Commissioner / Principal Chief
Commissioner or Director General / Principal Director General of DGCEI ( in respect of cases
booked by DGCED) after the ease has been carcfully examined by the Commissiones/Principal
Corimissioner or Additional Director General /Principal: Additional Director Generat
of DGCEI who has adjudicated the case, In all cascs of arrest, examination of the casc to
ascertain fitness for prosceution shall be necessarily carried out.

6.2 Prosecution should not be laumched in cases of technical nafure, or where the additional
claim of duly/ax is based. totally on a difference of opinion regarding interprefation of law.
Before launching any prosecution, it is necessary that the department should have evidence to
prove that thé person, company or individual had guilty knowledge’ of the offence, or liad
fraudulent intention to commit the offence, or in any manncr possessed mens.rca (guilty mind}
which would indicate his guilt. It fofiows, therefore, that in the case of public limited companies,
proscention should not be launched indiscrimiately against all the Directors of the company but
it should be restricted to only agains{ persons who were in charge of day-to-day operations of the
factory and have taken active part in committing the duty/taxevasion or had connived at it,

6.3 Prosecution should not be filed merely because a demand has been confirmed in the
adjudication proceedings particularly in cases of technical nature or where interpretation of law
is-involved. One of the important considerations for deciding whether prosecution should be
launched is the availability of adequate evidence. The standard .of proof required in a criminal
prosecution is higher as the case has to be established beyond reasonable doubt whereas the
adjudication proceedings.are decided on the basis of preponderance of probability. Therefore,
even cases where demand is confirmed in adjudication procecdings, c¥idenée collected should be
weighed so as to likely meet the test of being bcyond reasonable doubt for recommending -

“prosecution. Decision should be taken on casc-to-case basis considering various factors, such as

nature and gravity of offence, quantum of duty/tax cvaded or Cenvat credi{ wrongly availed and
the nature as well as quality of evidence collected. - a
6.4 Decision on prosecution shoult be normally taken jnimediately on completion of the
adjudication proceedings. However, Hon ble Supreme Court of India in the case of
Radheshyam Kejriwal [2021(266)ELT 294 (SC)] has #veralia, observed the following :- i}
adjudication proceedings and criminal proceedings cun be launched simultaneously; (ii) decision
in adjudication proceedings is sot necessary before initiating criminal prosecution; (iii)

- adjudication proceedings and criminal proceedings are independent in nature to each other and

(tv) the findings against the person facing prosecution in the adjudication proccedings is not
binding on the proceeding for criminal prosecution. ‘Therefore, prosecution may even be

‘Jauiched before the adjudication of the case, especially where offence involved is grave,

qualitative evidences are ayailable and it is also apprehended that parly may delay completioii of
adjudication proceedings.

6.5 Principal Comunissioner/Commiissioner or ADG {Adjudication} acting as adjudicating
authority should indicate at the time of passing the adpudication order itself whether he considers
the case to be fit for prosecution ‘so that it can be further processed and sent to Principal Chief
Commissioner/ Chief Commissioner or Principal Director General/ Director General of DGCEL,


as the case may be, for sanction of prosecution. Where at the time of adjudicalion proceedings no

view has been taken on prosecution by the Adjudicating Authority then the adjudication wing

- shal] te-submit the file within 15 days from the date of issue of adjudication order to the

Adjudicating Authority to take view of prosecution, Where, prosecution is proposed before the
adjudication of the case, Comrnissioner/Principal Cormmissioacr or Principal Additional Director
General/Additional Director General; 00000 who supervised the investigation shall record the
reasou for the same and forward the proposal to the sanctioning authority. The adjudicating
authority shall also be informed of the decision to forward the proposal so that there is no need

- for him to examine the case at the time of passing of adjudication order from the perspective of

prosecution. Principal Chicf Commissioner/ Chicf Commissioner or Principal Director Generaly
Ditector General of DGCEE may on his. own motion also, taking. into consideration the
seriousness of an offence, examine whether the case is fit for sauction of prosecution irrespective
of whether the adjudicating authority has recommended prosecution. है

6.6 In respect of cases investigated by DGCEI, the adjudicating authority would intimate the
decision taken regarding fitness of the case for prosecution to the Ptincipal Additional Director
General’ Additional Director General of the Zonal Unit or [eadquarters concermed, whore the
case was investigated and show cause 70४०8 issued. The officers of unit of Directorate General
of Central Excise Intelligence concemed would prepare’ an investigation report for the purpose of
taunching prosecution, within one month of the date of receipt of the decision of the adjudicating
authority and would send the same to the Dircetor General, CEI for taking decision on sanction
of prosecution. The format of investigation report is annexed as Annexure-I to this Circular. हि
6.7 In respect of cases not investigated by DGCEL,. where the — Principal
Commissioner/Commissioner who has adjudicated the case is satisfied that prosecution should
be launched, an investigation report for the purpose of lamching prosecution should be carefully
prepared within one month. of the date of issuance of the adjudication order . Investigation report

-should be signed by an Assistant/Deputy Consmissioner, endorsed by the jurisdictional Principle

Commissioner/Commissioner and scat to the Principal Chieff Chief Commissioner for taking a
decision on sanction for launching prosecution. The format of investigation: report is aunexed
as Annexure-I to this circular. A criminal complaint in a court af law should be, filed by the
jurisdictional Commissionerate onty after the sanctioa of the Principal Chief / Chief

‘Commissioner or Principal Diveclor General/Direclor Gencrat of DGCEE has heen obtained,

6.8 Principal Commissioner/Commissioncr or Additional Direclor Genexal (Adjudication) shafl

submit a repart by 107 of every month to the Principal Chief /Chiof Commissioner or the

Principal Dircotor General/ Director General of CEL, who is the sanctioning authority for

prosecution, conveying whether a view on launching prosecution has been taken in respect of

adjudication orders issued during the preceding month. :
‘

6.9 Once the sanction for prosccution has been obtained, criminal complaint in the court of law

“should be filed as early as possible by an officer of the jurisdictional Commisstoncrate

authorized by the Commissioner. -

6:10 It has been reported that delays in the Court proceedings ace often duc to non-availability of

the, records required te be produced before the Magistrate or due to delay in drafting of the

complaint, listing of the exhibits etc. [t shall be. the responsibilily of the officer who has been

authorized to file complaint, to take charge of all documents, stalernents and other exhibits that”
would be required to be producéd before a Court, The list of exhibits etc. should be finalized in

~ consultation with the Public Prosecutor at the time of drafting of the complaint. No time should

be lost in ensuring that all exhibits axe kept in safe custudy: Where a complaint has not boon filed
even after a lapse of three months from the receipt of sanction for prosecution,-{he reason for
delay shai] be brought to the notice of the Principal Chief! Chief Comunissioner or the Principal

[Ba

—30—


Director General or Director General of DGCE by the Principal Coramissioucr/ Commissioncr *
in charge of the Commissionérate responsible for fiting of the complaint. हर

7, Monitoring of Prosecution

7.1 Prosecution, once launched, should he vigoiously followed. The Principal
Commissioner/Commissioner of Centru) Bxcise/Service Tax should monitor cases of prosecution
at monthily iatervals and take the corrective action. wherever necessary to ensure that the progress
of prosecution js satisfactory. In DGCEI, an Addilional/ Joint Pirector in cach zonal unil and
DGCEI (qrs) shall supervise the prosegntion related work, For keeping a track of prosecution
cases, a prosecution register in the format enclosed as Annexure-LI to this Circular should be
maintained in the Prosecution Cclf of each Commissionerate. The register shal) be updated
regulary and inspected by the Principal Commissionér/Commissioner atleast ance_ia -cvery
quarterol cfinancial yest, »। ok _

7.2 For keeping a track of prosecution cascs, a prosecution register in the forinat cnuclosed
as Annexnye-LL to this Circular should be maintained in the Zonal Units of PGCE] and DGCEh
(Hars.} pertaining to cases investigated by them. Se

& Appeal against Court order in case of inadequate punish meut/acquit(al:

8.1 Principal. Commissioncr/Commissioner responsible for the conduct of prosecution or
Principal Additional Director General or Additional Director General of DGCEE (in respect af
cases booked by DGCED, should study the judgement of the Court and, where it appears that the
accused person have been let off with lighter punishment than what is envisaged in the Act or
has been acquitted despite the cvidence being strong, appeal should be considered against the
order, Sanction for appeal in stich cases shall be accorded by Principal Chicf/ Chief ~
Commissioner or Principal Director General Director General of 000,

9. Publication of names of persons convicted:

91 Section 9B of the Central Excise Act, 1944 also made applicable to Service Tax vide section
83 of the Finance Act,1994 grants power to publish name, place of business etc. of the person

convicted under the Act by a Court of Law. The power is being cxezcised very sparirigly by the

Courts, It is dirécted that in deserving cases, the department shoutd make 4 prayer to the Court to
invoke this section in respect of all persons who are convicted under the Act,

10. Procedure for withdrawal of Prosecution:

- 10.1 Procedure for withdraveal of sanctivn-order of prosecution

10.1.1 In cases where prosecution has been sanctioned but complaint has not been filed and new
facts or evidences have come to light necessitating review of the sanction for prosecution, the
Commissionerate or the DGCEI unit concerned should immediately bring the same (0 the notice
of the sanctioning authority. After considering the new facts and evidences, the sanctioning

- authority namely Principat Chief? Chief Commissioner or Principal Director General or Director

General of DGCEL, if satisfied, may recommend to the Board (Member of the policy wing
concemed) that the sanction for prosecution be withdrawn. हे .

a

7 &॥ +-


10,2 Procedure for withdrawal of Complaint already filed for prosecution

10.2.1 In cases where the cozplaint has already been filed complaint may be withdiawn as per
Circular No. 998/5/2015-CX dated 28.02.2015 which provides that where on identical allegation
a notices bas been exonerated in the quasi-judicial proceedings and such order has attaised
finality, Principal Chief Commissioner! Chicf Commissioner or the Principal Director General
Director General of DGCET shall give direction to the concerned Comniasionerate to file an
application through Public Prosecutor requesting the Court to allow withdrawal of the
Prosecufion in accordance with law.

11. Trausitional Provisions

11.) All cases where sauction for prosecution is accorded after the issue of this circular shall be
dealt in_accordance with the provisions of this -cixcular irespective-of the-date-of the vffence:

Cases where prosecution has becn sanctioned but no complaint has been filed before the

magistrate shall also be reviewed by the prosccution sanctioning authority in light of the

provisions of this circular,

12: Compounding of offences

12.1 Section 9A(2) of the Ceittral Excise Act, 1944 alsa made applicable to: Service Tax vide
section 83 of the Finance Act,1994 provides for compounding of ofiences by the Principal Chief? -
Chief Commissioner on payment of compounding amount. Circular no. 54/2005-Cus di 30-12-_
2005 and Circular no 862/20/2007-CX-8 dated 27-12-2007 on the subject of compounding ‘of
offences may be referred in this regard which inter alia provides that all persons against whem
prosecution ts mitiated or contemplated should be informed in writing, the offer of
compounding.

13, Inspection of prosecution work by the Directorate of Performance Management:

13.1 Director General, Directorate of Performance Management aud Chief Commissioners, who
are required to inspect the Commissionerates, should specifically check whether instruction
contained in this Circular are being followed scrupulously and to ensure that reasons for
pendency and non-compliance of pending prosecution cascs are looked into during field
inspections apart from recarding of statistical data

14. The field formations may suitably be informed. Receipt of this Ciecular may please be
acknowledged. Hindi version wil! follow.
: “Yours faithfally,.

(ROHAN}
Under Scerctary to the Govt. of India

नाली ना


है Anexure-T

कह, No.
INVESTIGATION REPORT LOR 107 PURPOSE OF LAUNCOING PROSECULION
AGAINST
COMMISSLONERATE DIVISION

1. Name & address of the person(s) (including 10881 person(s):
Central Lixcise/Service Tax Registration No.(Caay):
Nature of offence including commodity:
Charges:
Period of offence:

—Aremunt Of evasion involved

i की >>

Particular of persons proposed to be prosecuted :
Name: 4
Father s Name:
’ Age: Sex:
Address:
Occupation: 7
Position held in the Company/Firm:
Role playcd in the offence

Material evidence availabic against the accused (picasc indicate separately documentary
aud oral evidence). :

Action ordered against the aceuscd- in adjudication.
& Briefnote ‘whi prosecution is recommended :
(Deputy/Assistant Commissioner or Deputy/ Assistant Director, D GCED,

Fa mp ee छा 9

Place
Date

9, Thave carefully examined the Investigation Reporl and find it in order for filling criminal
complaint under Section 9 and 9AA of the Central Excise Act, 1944

(Commissioner, Central Excise
(Additional Director General, DGCEI------- )
Place - © 7

Date

1. The proposal should be made in the abové fonn in conformity with the guidelines issued
by the Ministry. With regard to column 4 above, all the charging sections in the Central
Excise, Act/Service Tax and other allied Acts should be mentioned. With regard to column
7, information should be filled separately for each person sought to be proscotited.

2. A copy of the.Show Cause Notice as well as the Order of Adjudication (Wherever
adjudication has been issued) should be enclosed with this report.

3. Tfany appeal has been filed, then this fact should be specifically stated.

ot —

3b


Annexure-i

ANNEXURE-I
ECUTION REGISTER TO BE MAINTAINED BY DGCEI

BoA


Ty |
!

Me [APPEND (४

है] Cee cae nena Fata

Annexure-1

NOTE FOR PAC ON PROSECUTION MANAGEMENT MODULE

2 In the Sixty-third report af the PAC {Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on vadininistration of
prosecution and penalties in Central Excise. and Service Tax”, the Hol vble PAC. has
recommended, interalia, that the Department should buiid a cobust monitosing mechanism fo
enyure that the Circular No. 7609/16/2015-CX gated 23 October, 2015 issued by the CBEC is
implemented in letter and spirit. fn deference to this recommendation, the Department has
taken the initiative to build, on top priority, 3 web-based solution for effective monitoring of

entire prosecution administration. ©

i हि In this context, it may be relevant to niention that the Department has already put in
piace in huly, 2015 3 Management Information System (MIS} for onfine monitoring of monthly
perfarmance of field formations in various key perfornvance indicators (KPI) including those
relaling to prosecution relation deta, The MIS requires the field formations 19 upload such
performance data on monthly basis, which are monitored by various levels of top management
including the CBEC regularly. gurther, in order to make such monitoring even mare effective, the

Oepaitment had already drawn an ambitious raadimap to expand the scope of the Management

Information System (MIS} so that the data relating to offences being booked by the field

formatiuns from the stage they are buoked till they are finaly concluded are uptoaded ina
ner on 3 real-time basis so that they can be readily monitored by various

comprehensive man
and any deficiencies in imptementation of the

levels of top management on 3 real-tine basts,

instructions issued are detected at the earliest and iramediate ceredial actions are taken.

While in view of the enormity-and complexity of the operations being undertaken by the
Department, development of such a comprehensive system to monitor afl the key performance
areas is bound to take some time, in view of the recommendations of the Hon'ble PAC, the

Department has decided ६० build, as a first priority, such & system for monitoring of prasecution

related operations.
rosecution’ Managernent Module (PMiM) is being designed as part of:

Accordingly, the P
the implementation ‘of the MIS. Once implemented, this would facilitate easy: monitoring-of the- fees
compliance of the prosecution “processes, as stipulated in the various instructions/eirculars* 7 ५

1. [8७8९6 by the Department fron time to time, by the top management. 27>

ni data on a realtime basis-at «=:

PMM would help in electronically capturing the imparta!
raposals till issue of the. -

rosecution process from initiation of prasecution 9
them in ar aniine prosecution database: The

critical stages of the 91
final order and judgement by the court and storing th
prosecution database and vartous useful reports derived from them would be readily accessible ०5 + *
- in user-friendly manner 109 the top manapementot CSEC on a:realtime busts to: facilitate”

st

effective monitoring of the prosecution processes.

ee

2 BS


Jhe design of the PMM ts at the advance stage of finalization, and the software

development would start soon. ‘this would followed by pilot testing and thereafter, it would be

operationalized at all India Sevel by 30" Hine, 2017

“Benefits of the PMM - highlights

4. PMM would readily provide faltowing pendencies, 1.8- the list of cases pending for action by the

५. concerned authorities: : पु
_ a} Prosecution proposals pending for endorsement
0). Prosecution proposals pending for sanction by sanctioning authority

c) Cases of com pounding
d) Prosecution Sunctions which are pending for filing complaint
e) Complaints which are pending before the courts

8 where decisions to prosecute have already been taken immediately

2. - Every case, except thos:
being reviewed within 15 days of passing the Oin-O to

afler completion of investigation, is
ascertain whether the case is fit for launching of prasecution or not.

_ 3. During the review after adjudication, a case has been found fit for fauaching af prosecution,
whether an Investigation Report with necessary endorsement by Pr. Cormmissiones/
Commissioner has been sent to the sanctioning authority i.e. Pr. CC{CC within one monlh of the

passing of O-in-O or not.
4. Whether a criminal complaint has been filed onty after the sanction of the Pr. CC/CC or Pr, OG/
OG.
5. Whether the Criminal complaint is being filed within three months after sanction has been
obtained. °
6. Once prosecution has been launched, whether Pr. Commr/Cammrare monitoring or rot the
prosecution cases on हे monthly basis

report giving the list of compounding casesferiminal

7, PMM would be able to readily gencrate &
: ६ hetow a certain specified threshold limit. Such: 5

- complaints” pending involving dity/tax amodn
report would be useful for monitoring withdrawal of low value cases by the field formation:

8, PMM would provide for uploading of scanned copies of imporlant- documents prepared.at
5 Investigation Report, Sanction Order, Withdrawal. Order-of o

0 for withdrawal of proseciition,. Note an”
5, these records will be ravallable +.

various stapes of prosecution such |
sanction, copy of the Complaints filed, Applicatio:
‘Proceedings, Final order and judgement of the Court, etc. Thu:
online in digitat formal for easy aad ready retrieval when needed.

9. fIMM woutdl alsa help in monitoring of expenses incusred on government counsel in a complaint सन

fited:


ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN

APPENDIX ४
(Vide Paragraph 5 of introduction)

BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

CONTAINED IN THEIR SIXTY-THIRD

(i}

(ii)

{ili)

(iv)

)

Total number of Observations/Recommendations

ObservationsiRecommendations of the Committee
which have been accepted by the Government:

Para Nos. 1,5 and 8

Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire fo pursue in view of the repties received
from the Government:

-Nil-
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Commitiee and which require
reiteration:
Para Nos, 4,6 and 7

Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which the Government have furnished interim replies:

Para Nos, 2 and 3

539 _

REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA}

08

Total : 03
Percentage:
37.5%

Total : 0
Percentage: 0%

Total : 03
Percentage:
37.5%

Total : 02
Percentage: 25%