      129  
 
 
APPAREL EXPORT PROMOTION COUNCIL 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
              
  
                      
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 

 
PAC NO.  2168 
 
 
O N E  H U N D R E D  A N D  T W E N T Y  
N I N T H R E P O R T 
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(20 18-19) 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH  LOK SABHA)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
                                       
   
                                                                              
Presented to Lok Sabha on:  19.12.2018 
 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   19.12.2018 
 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
December, 2018 /Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)  
  
 
 
APPAREL EXPORT PROMOTION COUNCIL 
 
 
 
 

CONTENTS 
  PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS  
COMMITTEE (2018-19)      
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………... …………………….. 
  
 
 
REPORT 
………………………………………………. 
 
 FLAWED TENDERING AND BIDDING 
PROCESS 
 
 
 UNDUE POST CONTRACTUAL BENEFITS TO 
M/S TUL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
 
APPENDICES*  
 
I 
 
Minutes of t he sitting of Public Accounts 
Committee (201 8-19) held on   
4th July, 2018 
 
 
II Minutes of the sitting of Public Accounts 
Committee (2018 -19) held on   
3rd October, 2018 
 
 
 
 
 *Not appended to the cyclostyled copy of the Report 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2018-19) 
 
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge   - Chairperson 
 M E M B E R S  
L O K  S A B H A  
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria  
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra 
5.    Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar   
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
7. Smt. Riti Pathak 
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank” 
9. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
10. Shri Abhishek Singh 
11. Shri Gopal Shetty 
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya  
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
15. Dr. Ponnusamy  Venugopal 
 R A J Y A  S A B H A  
16. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda 
17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
18. Shri Shwait Malik 
19. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
21. Shri C.M. Ramesh 
22. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A.K. Singh  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri T Jayakumar  - Director 
2. Smt. Bharti S Tuteja  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Ashikho Alemo  - Senior Executive Assistant 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2018-19), having been authorised by 
the Committ ee, do present this  One Hundred and Twenty Ninth Report (Sixteenth Lok 
Sabha) on "Apparel Export Promotion Council" relating to Ministry of Textiles.  
 
2. The Public Accounts Committee (2018 -19) also took evidence of the Ministry of 
Textiles on the 4th July, 2018. The Committee also took evidence of the Ministries of Textiles 
and Corporate Affairs on 3rd September, 2018. Based on the oral evidences and the written 
replies received from the Ministry of Textiles,  a draft Report was prepared and adopted by 
the Public Accounts Committee (2018 -19) on 14th December, 2018. Minutes of the sittings 
are appended to the Report.  
 
3.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold and form Part II of the Report.  
 
4.  The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministries of Textiles and  Corporate Affairs for tendering evidence before them and 
furnishing information in connection with the examination of the subject.  
 
5.  The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to them 
in the matter by the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.  
 
 
 
 
 
          NEW DELHI;                    MALLIKARJUN KHARGE  
December, 2018                         Chairperson, 
Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)      Public Accounts Committee 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REPORT 
PART – I 
I INTRODUCTORY 
This Report is based on Para No.17.1 of the C&AG Compliance Report No. 11 
of 2016. Based on the findings of Audit in respect of finan cial transactions of Civil 
Ministries/Departments and Autonomous Bodies the Committee took up the 
aforementioned Audit Para for detailed examination. 
 
2. The Public Accounts Committee (2018 -19) selected the subject for detailed 
examination and took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministries of Textiles 
and Corporate Affairs and representatives of Apparel Export Promotion Council 
(AEPC) and obtained written replies on the subject.  Based on the oral evidences 
and written replies, the Committee examined the subject in detail. 
 
3. In their Report, Audit found that Apparel Export Promotion Council (AEPC)    
published advertisements (August/September   2007)   in   newspapers   for   leasing   
of   furnished   office premises measuring 23,382 sq.  ft.  at  Bhikaji  Cama  Place,  
New  Delhi. In response, AEPC received eight quotations by the due date i.e.  15 
September, 2007. Three bidders, viz. M/s  E -Square  International,  New  Delhi  
(amount quoted ` 200-250 per sq. ft.), M/s The Institute of Planning and Management 
- IPM (amount quoted ` 235 per sq. ft.) and M/s Japan International Cooperation 
Agency  –  JICA  (amount  not  mentioned  in  the  bid)  were  shortlisted  and  called 
for negotiation on 26 September 2007. In the meantime, bid of ` 265/ sq . ft. was 
received from M/s Teesta Urja Limited (TUL) on 24 September 2007 i.e. after 
opening  of  bids  of  other  bidders  on  19 September 2007.  Though,  M/s TUL  did 
not  participate  in  the  tendering  process,  AEPC  invited  them,  along  with  th e 
short listed bidders, for further negotiations. M/s E -Square International did not turn  
up  for  negotiations  and  M/s  IPM  sought  one  day's  time  to  give  their  best offer   
on   27 September 2007,   but   finally   they   also   did   not   tur n   up. 
Representatives of M/s JICA intimated `175/ sq. ft. as their maximum price.  AEPC  
considered  M/s  TUL  as  highest  bidder  who  agreed  for  taking  the building at a 
rent of ` 270/ sq. ft. AEPC entered (1 December 2007) into a lease agreement w ith 
TUL for leasing of office premises for a period of six years with effect  from  1 st 
December  2007  to  30 November  2013.  As stipulated in the agreement, the lease 
rent was to be enhanced by 15 per cent of the basic rent after lapse of three years 
from the date of commencement of the lease. Further, as per clause 4 of the 
agreement the “lessee shall also pay annual property tax of the hired premises”.  
 
4. However, in November 2008, TUL informed AEPC the prevailing rental rates 
(based on real estate websites) for office complexes in South Delhi and requested for 
reduction in office lease rent from `270/sq. ft. to `150/sq. ft. Considering the request 
of M/s TUL, AEPC decided to reduce the rent from `270 per sq. ft. to `190 per sq. ft., 
with effect from 01-04-2009, without escalation in the rent for three yea ` An 
addendum to the agreement was signed (08 -05-2009) between AEPC and TUL 
stating that, except the aforesaid amendment all other terms and conditions of 
original lease agreement shall remain unchang ed. TUL again, requested (February 
2012) AEPC for considering reduction in monthly lease rent, reiterating prevailing 

rates for similar accommodation in Bhikaji Cama Place ranging between `80/sq. ft. 
and `130/sq. ft. AEPC agreed (21 March 2012) to reduce t he lease rent from `190 
per sq. ft. to `165 per sq. ft. for a period of two years with effect from 1 st April 2012 to 
31 March 2014 and signed another addendum (03 March 2012) with TUL, 
accordingly. After expiry of the lease period on 31 March 2014, the AEP C has 
enhanced the lease rent from `165 per sq ft to ` 225 per sq. ft. with effect from 1 
April, 2014 and the lease period has been extended for another three years. 
 
5. During oral evidence, the Committee were informed that the Ministry o rdered 
a special internal audit by CCA on AEPC accounts to establish source of funding for 
office at Bhikaji Cama Place. The audit observed that this office had been purchased 
out of the export promotion fund and Fashion Design cum Office Building Reserve 
Fund has no other source was available for purchase of this office in 1991.  
 
FLAWED TENDERING AND BIDDING PROCESS 
 
6. The Committee find that the entire tendering process was flawed starting from 
the advertisement given in the newspapers for inviting bids, to the final decision taken 
for giving the office premises on lease rent to M/s TUL. The advertisements for 
inviting bids contained incomplete information such as, advertisement dated 18 
August, 2007 did not indicate closing date of bidding and advertisement dated 02 
September, 2007 gave the last date of bids up to 15 September 2007 without 
indicating date and time of opening of bids. Despite M/s TUL not participating in the 
tendering process, their bid received on 24 September 2007 was considered, even 
after opening of b ids on 19 September 2007 and finally they were considered as the 
highest bidder. This puts doubts on the sanctity of the tendering process.  
 
7. When asked why the advertisements dated 18 August 2007 and 02 
September 2007, releases by the AEPC, not indicat e closing date of bidding and the 
date and time of opening of bids respectively and the reasons as to why the Ministry 
had not taken timely action to resolve the discrepancies in the advertisement, the 
Ministry stated as under: 
 
  “The advertisements relea sed on 18 th August 2007 and 1 & 2 
September 2007 in Times of India and in HT Estates respectively were short 
classified ads and   not the detailed tender enquiry per se.  Although closing 
date of quotation was mentioned in the classified ad published on 1 & 2 
September 2007 but date and time of opening of bid was not mentioned in the 
advertisements as the same was not decided at the time of release of 
advertisements. Ministry was not aware of the advertisements released by 
AEPC for renting out their office space at Bhikaji Cama Place.  AEPC is a 
Section 8 Company, registered under companies Act 2013 and governed by 
the Memorandum of Association and Articles of Association of the Company 
which   authorize the Council to take such decisions with the approval o f the 
competent authority in AEPC.” 
 

8. When the Committee sought the reasons as to why the Ministry failed to take 
disciplinary action against the erring officials who had blatantly violated the natural 
law of justice by leasing a furnished office to an o rganization who had not 
participated in the tender at all, ultimately leading to a loss of `17.42 crore to the 
exchequer, the Ministry replied as under:- 
 
  “AEPC is a company governed by relevant provisions of the Companies 
Act. The matter was formally br ought to the notice of the Ministry only on 
15.12.2015 through the Audit para received from the Principal Director, Audit. 
The Ministry immediately ordered an internal audit of the accounts of AEPC 
and deputed an audit team. Ministry of Textiles also wrote  to the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs (MoCA) on 12.7.2016 and 4.7.2018 regarding the 
appointment of a Govt. Administrator in AEPC. Secretary, M/o Corporate 
Affairs, (MoCA), vide D.O. letter dated 24.8.2016, communicated that they 
have ordered inspection of  the AEPC under section 206(5) of companies Act 
2013 on 22.8.2016. Further, MoCA stated that on receipt of inspection report, 
action would be taken as per the provisions of the Companies Act. In D.O. 
letter dated 14 th August, 2018 Secretary MoCA stated tha t the Inspecting 
Officer has submitted an interim inspection report.” 
 
9.  The Ministry further stated as under:- 
 
  “C&AG did not consult the files of Ministry of Textiles and conduct any 
entry and exit conferences.  Ministry ordered a Special Internal Au dit on 
7.9.2015. CCA conducted special audit from 16.11.2015 to 2.12.2015 for the 
period 1.4.2003 to 31.3.2015 to measure the performance with reference to 
the criteria and guidelines laid down in sanction orders and also to identify the 
points of short comings and deviations from the established rules. 
 
  A special internal audit was conducted in July, 2018 for reconciliation of 
the single account of AEPC, in order to ascertain whether office space at 
Bhikaji Cama Place was purchased from the Government.  It was observed by 
CCA that Council ultimately returned the principal amount of EMD and 
penalties / forfeitures of EMD.  However, Council has earned `214.44 crore as 
interest on EMD till the time it is fully returned to the exporters / Government.  
Out of this amount, only `9.90 crore was deposited in the Government 
Account.   
 
  Thereafter, Ministry referred the matter to the Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs for appointment of Government Administrator and for superseding the 
Executive Body of the Council.  In  response, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs 
ordered an inspection u/s 206(5) of the Companies Act, 2013 in the matter of 
AEPC in August 2016.   The Ministry of Corporate Affairs has also filed 
interlocutory application u/s 242(2) (k), 246 read with 336 of  the Companies 
Act 2013 before the Hon’ble National Company Law Tribunal, Principal bench, 
New Delhi in August 2018 seeking inter alia, suspension of the Executive 
Committee of the AEPC and for freezing of the assets of the management of 
AEPC to prevent di thering of the asset in view of large scale mismanagement 
and diversion of funds.   

 
  Ministry vide D.O. 8/1/2016 -EP dated 9.10.2018 to MoCA, has 
proposed the name of the officers from the MoT to be designated on the newly 
constituted 15 member board of A EPC to substitute the existing Executive 
Committee.” 
 
10. When asked whether a tendering committee was constituted to formulate the 
tender documents, the Ministry replied as under:- 
 
  “Since formal tender was not issued in this case, therefore, tendering 
committee was not constituted. However a negotiation committee comprising 
following members was constituted by the Secretary General after discussion 
with Chairman: 
 
i. Sh Rakesh Vaid, Sr. Vice Chairman 
ii. Sh Praveen Nayyar, Chairman (Finance &Budget) 
iii. Sh Virendra Uppal – EC member  
iv. Director (HR) - Member Secretary 
 
11. When asked whether Members of the Tendering Committee and those 
granting reduction and renewals the same over the years , the Ministry submitted as 
under:- 
  “Some of the Members wer e common in tendering committee and in other 
committees relating to the case. List of Members in various committees are 
attached. 
1. Tendering Committee: 
i. Sh. Rakesh Vaid, Sr. Vice Chairman 
ii. Sh. Parveen Nayyar, Chairman (Finance & Budget) 
iii. Sh. Virendra Uppal, EC Member 
iv. Director (HR), Member Secretary 
2. First Negotiation Committee in 2009 
i. Mr. Virendra  Uppal 
ii. Mr. Parveen Nayyer 
iii. Mr. HKL Magu 
iv. Mr. Vimal Kirti Singh 
3. Second Negotiation Committee in 2012 
i. Dr. Saktivel 
ii. Mr. HKL Magu 
iii. Mr. Praveen Nayyer 
 
UNDUE POST CONTRACTUAL BENEFITS TO M/S TUL 
 
12. The Committee also find that AEPC extended a number of post contractual 
benefits to M/s TUL, such as (a) instead of enhancing the lease rent by 15 per cent of 
the basic lease rent in terms of the agreement after the stipulated peri od, the AEPC 
Report No. 11 of 2016 considered the request of M/s TUL for reduction in lease rent 
and reduced the rent twice: initially to September 190 per sq. ft. (w.e.f. 1st April 2009), 

and thereafter to September 165 per sq. ft. (w.e.f.from 1 st April 2012) without carrying 
out any market survey. This tantamount to an undue benefit of `16.79 crore to M/s 
TUL. (b) M/s TUL was paying property tax till 2009 -10 in terms of clause 4 of the 
original agreement. Subsequently, considering the request of M/s TUL, AEPC agreed 
to undertake the liability of payment of property tax from year 2010 -11 and onwards 
(c) One month's moratorium from 1 st November, 2007 to 30 November, 2007 was 
allowed to the party without any provision for the same in the agreement. This 
resulted in loss of one month rent of ` 0.63 crore. 
 
13. When asked as to the reasons behind for extending a number of post 
contractual benefits to M/s TUL, such as granting reduction in lease rent and 
reducing the rent twice in contravention to the term agreem ent, which stipulates the 
rent lease would be enhanced by 15 percent of the basic lease rent after the 
stipulated period, the Ministry stated as follows:- 
 
  “As per records, when Teesta Urja requested for reduction of rent in 
2009 citing recession in the market and downfall in rentals, AEPC conducted 
an informal market survey to ascertain their claim. The Executive Committee 
evaluated consequences of cancellation of agreement with Teesta Urja, 
possible rent in the prevailing market scenario and revenue los s to AEPC if 
they would have gone for fresh advertisement. Taking all the above factors 
into account AEPC decided “to negotiate the rent with Teesta Urja in the larger 
interest of the organization.” 
  Teesta Urja again requested for rent reduction in  2012 to Rs 130 / Sq ft 
citing lower market rents in Bhikaji Cama place and also their financial loss 
due to damage to their projects in Sikkim after severe earthquake in 2011. 
AEPC again conducted a market survey and took a “considerate view to 
negotiate rent at Rs 165 Sq ft.” 
 
14. With regard to the rationale behind awarding the extension of contract to M/s 
TUL at ` 225 per sq. ft. which still lower than the original contract for ` 270 sq. ft, the 
Ministry stated as under:- 
 
  “AEPC conducted a market survey ag ain in 2014 just before expiry of 
lease agreement with TUL and found out that the rent for commercial space 
was ranging between 100 -170/sq.ft. in Bhikaji Cama Place.  Accordingly,  
AEPC estimated Rs 225/ sq ft. From the papers, it is seen that AEPC also 
tried to lease out this office space to SBI @Rs 225/sq ft in  2014 through a bid 
but did not succeed. Therefore they decided to make the offer to the existing 
tenant i.e., M/s TUL.” 
 
15. During oral evidence on the subject, the representatives of the Ministry also 
stated as under:- 
 
  “If one looks at the procedure, one would say that something wrong has 
happened because a person who did not apply within time was entertained. 
He got the bid because of paying the highest rent. He paid that rent for only 
one year and then he started asking them for reducing it. They kept reducing it 
at their request. So, this sounds something which is generally not acceptable 
in public functioning. But, when I see the trend, I find that they reduced it in 

2009 from `270 to `190; in 2012 from `190 to `165 and they also raised it in 
March 2014 to `225. The audit had begun on 25th May, 2016. When I look at 
this circumstance, I find that had they wanted to favour this company, then 
they would have reduced it continuously. But, while ex amining them at my 
level, I asked them as to why they had reduced it. The AEPC said that at that 
point of time, there was a glut in the market time all around and hence the 
rents had come down. So, since the rents had come down, they had either to 
leave it vacant or to continue with the tenant. They said that at this rent, they 
would not have got a tenant. So, they chose to continue with the tenant.” 
 
16. The representatives of AEPC also stated as under:- 
 
  “The main matter of contention was the Bhikaji Ca ma Place premises 
for which we have given on rent that was further reduced from  `270 to `190 
and `190 to `165. My submission is that we have taken all precautions as EC 
because we have been following the Companies Act; number of Articles of the 
Executive Committee or the Council. We were not following the GFR Rules. 
The rent is not the money given by the Government. Since the rent which we 
are receiving was not going to be deposited in the Consolidated Fund of India, 
there was no question of following the G FR Rules. But, yes, last time, as the 
hon. Members of Parliament mentioned, we are seeing to it that we follow 
GFR Rules in future. Although, we do not come under the purview but we will 
still follow it. It is a procedure lapse which I have admitted.” 
 
17. Noting that the Ministry of Corporate Affairs have submitted an interim report. 
The final report is awaited. The Ministry of Corporate Affairs have also filed an 
interlocutory application in NCLT for superseding the Executive Body of the Council, 
as also for freezing of its assets, the Committee sought to be apprised of the findings 
of the interim report, the Ministry of Textiles replied as under:- 
 
  “Ministry of Corporate Affairs ordered inspection into the affa irs of M/s. 
AEPC on 22.8.2016. The inspectors appointed have submitted interim report 
on 1.8.2018 & 14.9.2018.  The irregularities observed by Inspectors are as 
under:- 
 
i) AEPC has not complied with the directions of MoT issued under Article 
101 with regard to renting of premises, which is not an object of the 
Council. Accordingly, regulatory action for disobedience of Government 
directions by the company and officers had been suggested in the first 
interim report. 
ii) That the EC of AEPC be suspended and in terms of provisions of 
Section 242(2)(k) , 15 (fifteen) persons be appointed as directors, to 
manage the affairs of the company and such directors may report to the 
Hon’ble NCLT on such matters as it may direct. 
iii) In the first interim report, the Inspecting officers also reported regarding 
the loss of `17.42 crore caused to the company by extending undue 
benefit to a Private Party i.e. Teesta Urja Limited by letting out the office 
space at Bhikaji Cama Place, New Delhi at reduced rate which 
amounted to failure on the part of directors to discha rge their fiduciary 

duties to the company for generating revenue and managing the affairs 
of the Company.   
iv) The company invested the EMD in Fixed Deposit and has earned 
interest which has been reflected in the Books of Accounts as other 
income, which is required to be refunded to  Consolidated Fund of India 
(CFI).  
 
Ministry of Textiles conducted special internal audit in November -
December 2015 for the period 2003 -2015. On the basis of the observations of 
internal audit conducted in November, 2015 and ob servations of the then SG, 
AEPC in June, 2016, Ministry referred the matter to the Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs in July 2016 to appoint “Government Administrator” and for 
superseding the Executive Body of the Council.  In response, the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs ordered an inspection u/s 206(5) of the Companies Act, 
2013 in the matter of AEPC in August 2016.   The Ministry of Corporate Affairs 
has also filed interlocutory application u/s 242(2) (k), 246 read with 336 of the 
Companies Act 2013 before the  Hon’ble National Company Law Tribunal, 
Principal bench, New Delhi in August 2018 seeking inter alia, suspension of 
the Executive Committee of the AEPC and for freezing of the assets of the 
management of AEPC to prevent dithering of the assets in view of l arge scale 
mismanagement and diversion of funds.   
 
Ministry also ordered an internal audit in July 2018, for reconciliation of 
the accounts of AEPC and deputed an audit team.   
 
  Ministry of Textiles also wrote to the Ministry of Corporate Affairs 
(MoCA) on 12.7.2016 and issued various reminders and finally on 4.7.2018 
regarding the appointment of a Govt. Administrator in AEPC. Secretary, M/o 
Corporate Affairs,  (MoCA), vide D.O. letter dated 24.8.2016, informed that 
they have ordered inspection of the AEP C under section 206(5) of companies 
Act 2013 on 22.8.2016.  Further, MoCA stated that on receipt of inspection 
report, action would be taken as per the provisions of the Companies Act. In 
D.O. letter dated 14th August, 2018 Secretary MoCA informed that the  
Inspecting Officer has submitted an interim inspection report.  Ministry vide 
D.O. 8/1/2016-EP dated 9.10.2018 to MoCA, has proposed the name of the 
officers from the Ministry of Textiles to be designated on the newly constituted 
15 member board of AEPC to substitute the existing Executive Committee. 
 
 AEPC is a Section 8 Company, registered under Companies Act 2013 
and governed by the Memorandum of Association and Articles of Association 
of the Company which authorize the Council to take such decisions wit h the 
approval of the competent authority in AEPC. The Executive Committee of 
AEPC is empowered to take decisions under the Memorandum of Association 
and Articles of Association of AEPC.” 
 
18.  During oral evidence, the Committee were apprised of the prese nt 
status on the matter. The representatives of the Ministry stated as under:- 
 

  “After that letter was referred to the Ministry of Corporate Affairs, which 
actually had ordered an inspection. The interim report of that inspection has 
already come and it has been shared with us. Those findings, I would share 
with the PAC right now. In the meanwhile, what has happened is, there was a 
case filed in NCLT because if any action which we were actually planning to 
take and we had suggested that the Committee shou ld be superseded and 
there should be a administrator which needs to be appointed. That matter was 
referred to the Ministry of Corporate Affairs which had then to go to the NCLT. 
In the interim, what has happened was there was a case filed in the NCLT and 
an interlocutory application got filed by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs saying 
exactly the same thing. That hearing is actually slated for the 9th of October 
where we have also supported the same measure which has been suggested 
by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs From the inspection report, I would actually 
read out – the Ministry of Corporate Affairs were requested to take necessary 
action for streamlining functioning and management of AEPC. MoCA had 
conducted an inspection and has put out an interim report. Investigating 
Officer has concluded that the company’s response is not tenable and the 
officers on default are liable for mismanagement for letting out the office space 
at reduced rate and thereby causing loss of revenue to the company. The 
interim report has further stated, and I quote, that the company failed to 
discharge their fiduciary duty to the company for generating revenue and 
managing the affairs of the company. The said undue benefit extended to a 
private party is an act of mismanagement of company fund and invites 
corrective measures. While I say this, I would also like to read out what the 
AEPC has disputed and the following grounds on which they have disputed. 
 
  These are that the earnest money deposit/bank guarantee was 
performance guarantee liable to be refunded if quota obligations are fulfilled. 
Therefore, neither EMD/BG nor interest on this can be held as government 
money.  
 
  Second point which they have said is, only forfeited EMD can be 
revenue receipt which was already refunded  in the CFI. They have actually 
refunded about `345 crore.” 
 
19. The representatives of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs also stated as under:- 
  “I felt that the gravity was adequate for the Government to intervene in 
the matter and we agitated this befo re the NCLT very thoroughly and 
effectively in the last hearing and it has been fixed for aid. In the meantime, 
two interim reports had come. The law is such that, sometimes, completion of 
an investigation report where everything is ultimately conclusively  established 
could take time and the gestation period could be there. In order to see that in 
the interim period, people who may have failed to discharge their fiduciary 
duties do not get away. There is an interim prayer that they supersede the 
entire board and have a Government -appointed board. The second prayer is 
related to non-nominee directors. If there is a finding of causing wrongful gain 
to somebody and thereby wrongful loss to the State Exchequer, we have 
asked that there should be freezing of accounts of certain directors. These two 
prayers are pending.” 

 
20. When the Committee sought to be informed of the internal monitoring 
mechanism, the Ministry stated as under:- 
  
 “(a) The Internal Audit wing conducts the audit of 347 units of commerce 
and textiles with varying frequency of 1, 2, 3 & 4 years. Every year 154 units 
of both the ministries becomes due for audit but with a meager staff of 12 
persons only 60-70 units are audited annually. 
 (b) As per civil accounts manual, internal audit conducts th e audit of the 
implementing agencies for various schemes and programmes of the 
Ministry/Department. In this case AEPC was granted various grants from 
Ministry of Textiles and Commerce under various scheme i.e. 
MDA/MAI/DISHA etc. IAW had pointed out many omissions and errors in A/cs 
of grants and recovered huge amounts from AEPC in its audit reports. Since 
Internal Audit is attest audit. Therefore, it is not always feasible for an Audit 
party to figure out all the omissions and errors of an auditee during th e period 
of audit.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PART II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
 On detailed examination of Para No. 17.1 of C&AG Report 11 of 2016 on 
the subject “Undue benefit to a private party”, the Committee find gross 
mismanagement of Apparel Export Promotion Council ( AEPC), a body under 
the Ministry of Textiles,  has resulted in loss of `17.42 crore to the company. 
The Committee find that the Executive Committee of AEPC extended unfair 
benefit, while renting out office accommodations at Bhika ji Cama Place to M/s 
TUL at minimal rates and granted extension of contract without resorting to 
competitive bidding to attract other potential parties willing to pay higher rent 
rates. The Committee also find that the Ministry of Textiles had not taken 
immediate necessary measures to resolve the aforesaid discrepancy 
highlighted by audit. The recommendations/observations of the Committee are 
discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
2. Noting the progression of events from notification of advertisement via 
short classified ads in newspapers without detailed tender enquiry, incomplete 
information on opening and closing tender dates, awarding rent lease to a 
private party i.e M/s TUL despite it being non -party in the bidding process, 
grant of rent in favour of the private party and extension of rent contract to the 
same party without seeking response of other potential bidders etc., the 
Committee opine that the Executive Committee of AEPC has not been impartial 
and intentionally favo ured the private party in aw arding the rent contract. The 
Committee feel that the Ministry remained a mute spectator  instead of taking 
the officials o f AEPC to task. The Committee note that matter was formally 
brought to the notice of the Ministry by Audit  on 15.12.2015. However, the  
Special Internal Audit ordered by the Ministry for the period 1.4.2003 to 
31.3.2015 to evaluate the performance of AEPC and to identify the points of 
shortcomings and deviations from the established rules could not bring out the 
lapses in awarding rent co ntract to the private party. The Committee note from 
the submission of the Ministry that due to meagre staff strength, Internal Audit 
Wing could audit only less than half of the units as prescribed in a year and 
since internal audit is only an attest audit , it is not possible for it to figure out 
all omissions and errors of an auditee during the period of audit. The 
Committee are shocked to note that instead of strengthening its Internal Audit 
Wing, the Ministry is trying to cover up its inadequacies. The C ommittee desire 
that adequate staffing in the Internal Audit Wing may be done urgently to make 
sure that internal audits are conducted as per the schedule and the terms of 
reference for Internal Audit of the organizations in the Ministry may be 
reassessed to ensure that all the transactions above a threshold value are 
invariably audited. Further, a system of strong internal controls and reporting 
may be evolved to ensure transparent and fair dealings. 
 
3. The Committee note that the AEPC is a Company regist ered under 
Section 8 of Companies Act. Further, the Committee find from the submission 

of AEPC that since the rent money, collected from M/s TUL for leasing an office 
space at Bhikaji Cama Place, was neither received from Government nor to be 
deposited in Consolidated Fund of India, the question of following General 
Financial Rules did not arise. The Committee do not concur with the above 
statement of AEPC as being recognised by the Government it discharges state 
like functions whilst providing services to its members and therefore, is 
expected to emulate principles of financial propriety enshrined in the GFRs. 
The Committee while noting  that AEPC had purchased this office out of the 
Export Promotion Fund and Fashion Design cum Office Building Reserve Fund 
in 1991 , with grant from the Government of India, opine that the Executive 
Committee of AEPC has miserably failed in enforcing the relevant financial 
rules and therefore, their role in the same be inquired into and responsibility be 
fixed.  
4. The Committe e find that the out of the 32 Members/Exporters of the 
elected Executive Committee, three members are Government Nominees. 
Observing that these Government Nominees are purposely nominated in the 
Executive Committee to safeguard the interests of the Governm ent and public 
money, the Committee are unable to comprehend the inability of these 
Government Nominees to prevent the apparent mismanagement of funds and 
decisions taken in favour of a private party which resulted in a huge loss. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that explanation of the Government nominees for 
their inaction in the whole process may be called for an appropriate action. 
 
5. The Committee note that t he Chief Controller of Accounts (CCA) , 
pursuant to special internal audit, has  observed that t he Council returned the 
principal amount of Earnest Money Deposit (EMD) and penalties / forfeitures of  
EMD.  However, Council had  earned `214.44 crore as interest on EMD till the 
time it is fully returned to the exporters / Government.  Out of this amount,  only 
`9.90 crore was deposited in the Government Account. Thereafter, the matter 
was referred to the Ministry of Corporate Affairs for appointment of 
Government Administrator and for superseding the Executive Body of the 
Council.  In response, the Ministr y of Corporate Affairs had ordered an 
inspection u/s 206(5) of the Companies Act, 2013 in the matter of AEPC in 
August 2016.   The Ministry of Corporate Affairs has also filed interlocutory 
application u/s 242(2) (k), 246 read with 336 of the Companies Act  2013 before 
the Hon’ble National Company Law Tribunal, Principal bench, New Delhi in 
August 2018 seeking inter alia, suspension of the Executive Committee of the 
AEPC and for freezing of the assets of the management of AEPC. The 
Committee, however, observe that the matter was taken up by the Ministry only 
after their intervention. The Committee desire that the interest on EMD may be 
deposited in Government Account in a time bound manner. Disheartened to 
note the lackadaisical approach of both the Ministry of Textiles in monitoring 
the affairs of AEPC and Ministry of Corporate Affairs for taking more than two 
years in submitting an interim report , the Committee desire that a robust 
mechanism for speedy detection and timely processing of cases of apparent 
irregularities be developed by the Ministries/ Departments of Government of 
India so that such cases are finalized at the earliest . 

 
6. The Committee note that from the interim report of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs that AEPC had not complied with the d irections of the 
Ministry of Textiles , issued under Article 101 with regard to renting of 
premises, which resulted in the loss of `17.42 crore to the company. The report 
stated that e xtending undue benefit to a Private Party i.e. M/s Teesta Urja 
Limited in letting out the office space at Bhikaji Cama Place, New Delhi at 
reduced rate amounted to failure on the part of directors to discharge their 
fiduciary duties to the company for generating revenue and managing the 
affairs of the Company. The Interim repor t suggested regulatory action for 
disobedience of Government directions by the company and officers. The 
interim report also recommended that the Executive Committee of AEPC be 
suspended and in terms of provisions of Section 242(2)(k), 15 (fifteen) persons  
be appointed as directors, to manage the affairs of the company and such 
directors may report to the National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) on such 
matters as it may direct. The Committee desire to be apprised whether 
responsibility had been fixed  against o fficials responsible  for the lapses in 
discharging fiduciary duties and appropriate action taken against the officials. 
The Committee, noting that an interlocutory application is pending with the 
NCLT with regard to the management and functioning of AEPC, desire to be 
apprised of the arrangements made by the Ministry to oversee the functioning 
of AEPC before the decision on the matter is taken by the NCLT. The 
Committee also desire that the details of the outcome of the matter in  NCLT 
may be intimated to the Committee as and when it is taken. 
 
7. The Committee find that in response to the query regarding the 
composition of the tendering committee, the Ministry stated that since formal 
tender was not issued, tendering committee was not constituted. However, 
while replying to another query, the Ministry has given the list of the members 
of tendering committee, first negotiation committee and second negotiation 
committee respectively. Further, the Ministry has stated in its reply that the 
matter was formally bro ught to the notice of the Ministry only on 15.12.2015 
through the audit para received from the Principal Director, Audit and the 
Ministry immediately ordered internal audit of the accounts of AEPC and 
deputed an audit team. However, as per Ministry's own s ubmission the special 
internal audit for the period 1.4.2003 to 31.3.2015 was ordered on 7.9.2015 and 
the internal audit of the accounts of AEPC was conducted only in July 2018 
after being raised by the PAC. The Committee take strong exception to the 
callous approach in responding to their queries and contradictory replies sent 
by the Ministry which has seriously hampered the examination of the subject 
by them. The Committee desire that the Secretary may look into the matter and 
take appropriate action agai nst those responsible for such replies. Further, the 
Committee desired to be apprised of the correct position within one month of 
the presentation of the Report to the House. 
 
--------xxxxxx-------- 
 