1 
 
      104  
 
EXEMPTIONS TO CHARITABLE TRUSTS AND INSTITUTIONS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their 27th Report (16th Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE) 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
              
  
                      
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 

2 
 
 
 
 
 
PAC NO.  2138 
 
 
O N E  H U N D R E D  A N D  F O U R T H  
R E P O R T 
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(201 8-19) 
 
 
(SIXTEEN TH LOK SABHA)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their 27th Report (16th Lok Sabha)] 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE  
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE ) 
 
 
                                       
   
                                                                              
Presented to Lok Sabha on:  ………….…… 
 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   ………………. 
 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
July, 2018 /Ashadha, 1940 (Saka)  
 
EXEMPTIONS TO CHARITABLE TRUSTS AND 
INSTITUTIONS 
 
 

3 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
  PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS  
COMMITTEE (2017-18)      
(iii) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB COMMITTEE - III OF PUBLIC 
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2017-18) 
 
(iv) 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
 (2018-19) 
 
(v) 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………... ……………………..   
(vi) 
CHAPTER I                
Report ………………………………………………. 1 
CHAPTER II* Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government …………………….. 
 
CHAPTER III* Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pu rsue in view of the 
replies received from the Government ..………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV* Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration ……………………………………………. 
 
 
CHAPTER V* Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which the Government have furnished interim 
replies ………………………………………………… 
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES* 
 
I 
 
Minutes of the 8th sitting of the Sub-Committee III of 
Public Accounts Committee (2016 -17) held on  
16th February, 2017. 
 
II Minutes of the 4th sitting of the Sub-Committee III of 
Public Accounts Committee (2017 -18) held on   
29th August, 2017. 
 
III Minutes of the 15 th sitting of the Sub -Committee III 
of Public Accounts Committee (2017 -18) held on   
13th March, 2018. 
 
IV Minutes of the 17 th sitting of the Sub -Committee III 
of Public Accounts Committee (2017 -18) held on   
2nd April, 2018. 
 
V Minutes of the 23 rd sitting of the Public Accounts 
Committee (2017-18) held on 10th April, 2018. 
 
VI Minutes of the 8 th sitting of the Public Accounts 
Committee (2018-19) held on 4th July, 2018. 
 

4 
 
VII Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public 
Accounts Committee contained in their Twenty -
seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
 *Not appended to the cyclostyled copy of the Report 

5 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2017-18) 
                                                 
1 Shri Neiphiu Rioh Ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon acceptance of his r esignation from Lok 
Sabha w.e.f. 22 February, 2018.  
2 Shri Naresh Agrawal ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 
2 April, 2018 
3 Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya 
Sabha on 2 April, 2018 
4 Elected w.e.f. 29 December, 2017 in lieu of vacancy caused due to retirement of Shri Shantaram Naik.   
5 ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 18 August, 2017 and 
re-elected w.e.f. 29 December, 2017. 
6 Shri Ajay Sancheti ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 2 
April, 2018 
7 Shri Bhupender Yadav ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha 
on 3 April, 2018 
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge   - Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay  
3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra 
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey 
6. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar   
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
8. Smt. Riti Pathak 
9. Vacant1 
10. Shri Abhishek Singh 
11. Prof. Ram Shanker 
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi 
15. Dr. P. Venugopal 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Vacant2 
17. Vacant3 
18. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
19. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan4 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy5 
21. Vacant6 
22. Vacant7 

6 
 
  
       Sub-Committee – III (Direct and Indirect Taxes)  
 
 
Convenor                  : 1. Shri Nishikant Dubey                     
Alternate Convenor   : 2. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
Members                   : 3. Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi 
 4. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
 5. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
 6. Shri Ajay Sancheti 
 

7 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
 (2018-19) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge   - Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria  
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra 
5.    Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar   
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
7. Smt. Riti Pathak 
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank” 
9. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
10. Shri Abhishek Singh 
11. Shri Gopal Shetty 
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya  
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
15. Dr. Ponnusamy  Venugopal 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda 
17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
18. Shri Shwait Malik 
19. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
21. Vacant 
 
22. Vacant 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri T. JayaKumar - Director 
3. Smt. Anju Kukreja - Under Secretary 

8 
 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2018 -19), having been authorised by 
the Committee, do present this One hundred and fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action 
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained 
in their Twenty -seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on “Exemptions to Charitable Trusts 
and Institutions" relating to Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue). 
 
2. The Twenty -Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on  
16th December, 2015.  Replies of the Government to all the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report were received.  The Sub -Committee III of PAC (2016 -17) took oral 
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) on non -
submission of Action Taken Notes on the aforesaid Report on 16 th February, 2017.  The Sub -
Committee III (Direct and Indirect Taxes) for the year (2017 -18) also took oral evidence of the 
representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) on the subject on 29 th 
August, 2017 and 13 th March, 2018.  The Sub -Committee considered and adopted the draft 
Action Taken Report on the subject at their sitting held on 2 nd April, 2018.  The Report was also 
considered and adopted by the Public Accounts Committee (2017 -18) during their sitting held 
on 10 th April, 2018. As the Report could not be presented to the Parliament  during the last 
tenure of the Committee (2017-18), the Report was considered again and adopted by the Public 
Accounts Committee (2018-19) during their sitting held on 4 th July, 2018. Minutes of the sittings 
form Appendices to the Report. 
 
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to them in 
the examination by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty -seventh Report ( Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given at 
Appendix-VI. 
 
 
 
 NEW DELHI;                                                        MALLIKARJUN KHARGE 
 18 July, 2018                                                                               Chairperson, 
 27 Ashadha, 1940 (Saka)                                             Public Accounts Committee 
 

9 
 
 
REPORT 
PART – I 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations and Recommendations contained in their 27th Report (16th Lok Sabha) 
on the subject "Exemptions to Charitable Trusts and Institut ions" based on C&AG 
Report No. 20 of 2013, Union Government (Performance Audit) relating to the Ministry 
of Finance (Department of Revenue). 
 
2. In their 27th Report (16th Lok Sabha) which was presented to the Lok Sabha  on 
16th December, 2015, the Committee h ad dealt with the various issues such as lapses 
in registration process, allowance of exemptions during assessment, non -monitoring of 
accumulations of surplus income and Foreign Contributions (FCs) received, 
inconsistencies in the Act which apparently led to incorrect assessment and non -levy of 
taxes, irregular exemption to Trusts which were not charitable in nature etc.  
 
3. The 27 th Report contains 23 observations/recommendations.  The Action Taken 
Notes in respect of all the 23 observations/recommendations have been received from 
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) and these have been categorized as 
follows: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee which have been 
accepted by the Government: 
 
  Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 14,16,17,19,20,21,22 & 23 
           
          Total: 15           
          Chapter - II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
 
  Para Nos. 11,12 & 13  
           
          Total:    03      
          Chapter - III 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
 
  Para Nos. NIL 

10 
 
           
          Total:     NIL 
          Chapter – IV 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies: 
 
  Para Nos. 6,7,10,15 &18 
           
          Total:    05 
          Chapter –V 
 
 
4. The Committee desire that Government should furnish final/conclusive 
action taken replies to the recommendations for which interim replies have been 
furnished.  
 
5. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Revenue) have been reproduced in the relevant chapters of this Report. In the 
succeeding Paragraphs , the Committee will deal with the action taken by th e 
Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations made in the original 
Report, which need reiteration or merit comments:  
 
A. Delay in submission of Action Taken Notes   
6. The 27 th Report (16 th Lok Sabha) of the Public Accounts Committee was 
presented to Lok Sabha/ laid in Rajya Sabha on 16 th December, 2015.  As per 
procedure, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) was required to furnish the 
Action Taken Notes duly vetted by Audit on the o bservations and recommendations as 
contained in the Report within a period of six months from the presentation of Report to 
Parliament i.e. by 15 th June, 2016.  However, the vetted Action Taken Notes were 
received in th is Secretariat only on 15th March, 2017 i.e. after being pointed out by the 
Sub-Committee III (Direct and Indirect Taxes) of Public Accounts Committee  at their 
sitting held on 16th February, 2017. 
 
7. On being asked about the reasons for delay in submission of A ction Taken 
Notes, the Secretary , Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) in his deposition 
before the Committee on 16th February, 2017 stated as under: 
 
“This Report of the Public Accounts Committee was presented to the Parliament 
on 16th of December, 2015, and, we, of course, receive d it very soon, that is, on 

11 
 
18th December. I was given to understand that normally six months time is 
available to us for compliance of the PAC’s recommendations. But since we 
could not do it before 16 th of June, we requested for extension of time on 14 th of 
June and then the report was finally submitted not very late but by 28 th of July. 
That was the time when the first action taken report on this was submitted. After 
that, after three months, we got some comments from the C&AG because they 
had vetted the reply which was given by us to the Report of the Public Accounts 
Committee and they had raised 23 paragraphs. In respect of 23 paragraphs, we 
were asked to submit some extra explanation. Now it has already been three 
months. Since then we are trying becaus e this entire audit is for the period of 
2011-13. So, those three years, the entire work of giving exemption and keeping 
the files of exempted entity was with the field authority. Then, we created in 2014 
a Directorate which is centrally now giving all the  exemption certificates, etc. So, 
this is for that period. We have already, since October, 2016, in the last three 
months, been trying to collect all the information from the field authority. 
Sir, my request would be that if you can kindly grant us time up  to 15th of March, 
then we would be able to submit a response to these 23 paragraphs because we 
want to do a good job.” 
   
8. As per procedure in vogue since 1996, it is incumbent upon all the 
Ministries to furnish Action Taken Notes to the PAC duly vetted by  C&AG, within 
six months of presentation of PAC Report in Parliament. The Committee are 
constrained to observe f rom the ATNs that there was avoidable delay at every 
stage on the part of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) in the 
finalization of the Action Taken Notes.   The Ministry of Finance have sought to 
justify the delay by simply enumerating that  they were trying to collect further 
information from the field authority  as sought by the C&AG during the course of 
vetting of ATNs.  The Committ ee find this reply of the Ministry unconvincing 
because responsibility rested with the Ministry of Finance for timely preparation 
of ATNs, submission of those to C&AG for vetting and furnish the same to P AC 
within the prescribed time frame.   The Committee also feel that with advanced 
Information Technology the Ministry could have furnished the requisite Action 
Taken Notes within the stipulated period of six months.  That the Ministry failed to 
do so is nothing but regrettable.  The Committee would now expec t the Ministry 
of Finance to fix responsibility of the officials concerned in this regard and desire 
to evolve an effective mechanism for taking suitable action at various stages in 
finalization/vetting of these Action Taken Notes for their timely submissi on to the 
Committee in future.   
 
(B) Delay in granting registration/approval/notification  
(Recommendation Para No. 6) 

12 
 
 
9. Upon noticing that in 594 Trust cases, ITD delayed in issuance of 
registration/approval/notification after stipulated period of 6 or 12  months despite having 
clear provisions U/s 10 (23C), 12A and 80 G of the Act, the Committee felt that there 
was certainly something amiss in the working of the Income Tax Department which 
drastically needs to be streamline d.  The Committee had, therefore,  desired that 
application seeking registration for Trusts must be disposed of expeditiously.  They had 
also desired to incorporate provisions to this effect in the Income Tax Act.  Further, they 
had recommended that all cases where exemptions had been gran ted wrongly/illegally 
need to be probed with a view to fix responsibility.     
 
10. The Ministry of Finance (De partment of Revenue) in their Action Taken Note on 
the aforementioned recommendation have stated as under: 
“The time limit currently provided under s ection 12A of the Act is indicative in 
nature.  In the context of such provisions, generally the courts have held that 
non-rejection within specified period does not automatically result in deemed 
approval.  However, considering the fact that in section 10  (23C) of the Act in 
context of approval, the proviso prescribes specifically that order of approval or 
rejection shall be passed within one year,  similar provision in context of section 
12AA of the Act can be considered.  This would require amendment of the Act 
and may be considered during the budgetary exercise of 2017 -18.  The Income 
Tax Department is shortly computerizing the functions and processes of 
Exemption Wing of the Department through the launch of the Exemption Module 
of the new Income Tax Bus iness Application (ITBA).  This will enable the ITD 
authorities to grant registration u/s 12AA and approval u/s 80G using the online 
system.  This functionality is expected to be launched in July 2016.  Once this 
system stabilizes and all ITD authorities a re trained, thereafter, all registrations 
u/s 12AA and approvals u/s 80G will be done on the system and will be available 
in the Centralized database.   In the next step, CBDT may consider making e -
filing of application for registration u/s 12AA and approva l u/s 10(23C) and 80G 
mandatory which will then ensure that taxpayer is able to submit the applications 
under form 10G (for section 80G), form 56 [for section 10(23C)(iv)&(v)] and form 
56D [for section 10(23C)(vi)&(via)] online and also track to their status.” 
 
11. The C&AG during the course of vetting of above  said Action Taken Note, made 
the following comments: 
“The Committee may be apprised of the latest status of the Exemption Module of 
the new Income Tax Business Application (ITBA) and mandatory e -filing o f 
application for registration under section 12AA and approval u/s 10(23C) and 
80G.” 
 

13 
 
12. The counter comments of the Ministry on the above mentioned Audit Comments 
are as under: 
“The Exemption module of ITBA has been implemented.  Registration/approval 
u/s 12 AA, 80G(5) [w.e.f. 08.07.2016] and 10(23C)(iv), (v), (vi) and (via) [w.e.f. 
23.09.2016] can be done on ITBA by the Principal Commissioner of Income Tax/ 
Commissioner of Income Tax (Exemption).  Training for officers and staff from 
Exemption division was co nducted.  As on 05.03.2017, 143 orders have been 
passed in the Module for grant of registration / approval and 1581 orders passed 
manually have been uploaded in the Module.  As a next step, the respective 
Forms for application for registration u/s 12AA and  approval u/s 10(23C) and 
80G(5), are being examined for changes and enhancements to make them 
compatible with E -filing.  This process is expected to be completed by 
31/03/2017.  After this is done, the proposed Forms will be considered for 
notification in Income Tax Rules and a decision to make E -filing mandatory will 
be taken." 
 
 
13. The Committee observe from Action Taken Notes that in regard to 
mandatory e -filing of application for registration  of Charitable Trusts and 
Institutions under section 12AA and ap proval u/s 10 (23C)  and 80 G, the 
respective forms for application for registration under these sections were  being 
examined for changes and enhancements to make them compatible with E -filing.  
This process was expected to be completed by 31 st March, 2017.  Thereafter, the 
proposed Forms will be considered for notification in Income Tax Rules and a 
decision to make E -filing mandatory would be taken.  The  Committee are 
constrained to observe that this issue was pointed out by Audit in their Audit 
Report for the year 2013 but the Ministry is yet to take such a decision.  As delay 
in granting registration/approval results in revenue loss to the Government t he 
Committee desire that the Department of Revenue should undertake such an 
exercise expeditiously and ap prise the Committee of the progress made in this 
regard.  
 
(C) Irregularities in the process of registration of Charitable Trusts/Institutions 
 (Recommendation Para No. 7) 
14. Keeping in view the irregularities in the process of registration of Charitable 
Trusts/Institutions, the Audit had desired that the process of registration under the 
Income Tax Act should be brought under the purview of Internal Audit. In this regard, 
the Ministry had informed that in case this proposal was found acceptable by the CBDT, 

14 
 
suitable amendment to the Instruction No. 3/2007 would be required. They ha d also 
submitted that a Review Committee has already been constituted by the Board for the 
Review of Internal Audit Manual, 2011. The said Committee was being suitably advised 
to inc lude the said proposal of the C&AG for its consideration. The Committee , 
therefore, desired that the Department of Revenue should undertake such an exercise 
expeditiously in consultation with the Audit and in the meantime the process of 
registration of Charitable Trust/Institutions under the Income Tax Act should be brought 
under the purview of Internal Audit.  
 
15. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) in their Action Taken Note 
have stated as under: 
“Review of Internal Audit Manual is in progress.  Necessary action will be 
completed as early as possible.” 
 
16. In their vetting comments, the Office of C&AG stated: 
“The Committee may be apprised of the latest status of the review of Internal 
Audit manual.” 
 
 
 
17. In this regard, of the Ministry responded as below: 
“The observations of the Hon’ble PAC were considered by the Committee 
appointed for revision of Internal Audit Manual (IAM).  The IAM Committee has 
now on 27/02/2017 submitted its final report to the CBDT.  The same shall be 
considered and a final decision on the recommendation shall be taken.” 
 
18. The Committee note that the Internal Audit Manual Committee had 
submitted its final Report to the CBDT on 27 th February, 2017 for consideration 
and final decision thereon by the Ministry on this report .  The Co mmittee are 
disappointed with the reply given by the Ministry which is devoid of any details.  
In view of this the Committee are doubtful as to whether any concrete action has 
been taken by the Ministry  on the report of the Internal Audit Manual Committee 
presented on 27.02.2017.  The Committee deplore the casual approach shown by 
the Ministry to their very specific recommendation  for revision of Internal Audit 
Manual.  The Committee would, therefore, like to be apprised of the 
recommendations made by the I nternal Audit Manual Committee in their Report 
and action taken thereon by the Department of Revenue  within three months of 

15 
 
the presentation of this report.   The Committee expect a detailed, complete, clear 
and specific reply from the Ministry in this regard.  
 
(C) Irregular exemption to Trusts creating huge surpluses consistently  
 (Recommendation Para No. 9) 
 
19. The Committee had noted that 22 educational institutions in Delhi, Mumbai, Pune 
Chennai, Coimbatore, Kolkata and Odisha had huge excess of income over expenditure 
of ` 819.40 crore during AY 07 and AY 11 and accumulated these surpluses ranging 
from 35.7 to 84.8 percent of their total income. Further, the Committee f ound that three 
institutions namely TatwajananaVidyapeeth, DIT -E, Mumbai, Ishan Educati onal 
Research Society, DIT-E, Delhi and Symbiosis Society Group, CIT-I, Pune earned profit 
ranging from 50 to 84 percent consistently during AY 07 and AY 11 and accumulated 
surpluses of ` 622.20 crore. The Committee were given to understand that 
accumulation of surplus is permitted by law as accumulation of surplus upto 15 % is 
allowed u/s 11(1) and beyond 15 % too, it can be accumulated upto 5 years u/s 11(2) by 
filing Form 10. However, at present none of the provisions of law have put any cap on 
the amoun t that can be accumulated. Keeping in view the aforesaid provisions for 
accumulation the Ministry ha d not accepted the audit objections in regard to the said 
three illustrative cases. In this regard, Audit had cited a case of CIT 
vsSreeSeetharaman Anjaneya Veda Kendra (2008) 174 Taxman 523 (Ker.) where it 
was held that the carry forward of income upto 85 percent, though permitted u/s 11(1) 
and 11(2) of the Act, should not be adopted on a routine basis and if it is done, the 
genuineness of the activities of Trust itself should be examined by the Assessing 
Officer. However, the Committee note d that in the aforesaid cases, the Trusts had 
accumulated the surpluses of more than ` 500  crore consistently during the AY 2007 to 
AY 2011. As the consistent accumulation of funds defeats the very purpose of Trust and 
could led to misuse of such accumulations by the Trust, the Committee had felt that 
appropriate amendment to this effect may be made in the Act so that Trusts are not 
allowed to keep accumulations for a long  period without spending the same on 
fulfillment of its objectives. Besides, they had desired that the cases viz. 
TatwajananaVidyapeeth, DIT -E, Mumbai, Ishan Educational Research Society, DIT -E, 
Delhi and Symbiosis Society Group, CIT -I, Pune as pointed out  by Audit where 
accumulations have been spent wrongly or illegally must be re -investigated thoroughly 
with a view to fixing responsibility and their registration be cancelled. The Assessing 

16 
 
Officers concerned who were in connivance with the Trusts, should be awarded 
exemplary punishment. The Committee had also desire d that a survey of all the 
educational Trusts be conducted in a time bound manner so as to verify whether they 
are misusing the provisions of 'Charitable Trusts' in the Income Tax Act considerin g the 
huge profits generated and surpluses accumulated by most of these Trusts. 
 
20. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), in their Action Taken Note on 
the abovesaid recommendation have stated as under: 
“As per the existing provisions of the Act re lating to exemption to Trust or 
institution in respect of income derived from property held under Trust and voluntary 
contribution, whereas 15% of the income can be accumulated indefinitely by the 
Trust or Institution, 85% of such income can be accumulated  for a period of five 
years subject to certain conditions.  The conditions are that,- 
(i) The purpose of accumulation and period of accumulation is specified in  writing, 
and  
(ii) The money remains invested in prescribed mode only. 
  
Further, the Finance Act, 2016 , inter alia, has introduced a new Chapter XII -EB 
containing sections 115TD to 115TF titled ‘Special provisions relating to tax on 
accreted income of certain Trusts and Institutions’ to provide, inter alia, that where a 
Trust or Institution being regulated  u/s 12AA of the Act ceases to be charitable 
organisation by way of its conversion into any form which is not eligible for grant of 
registration under section 12AA, or merger with any entity other than an entity which 
is a Trust or institution having objects similar to it and registered under section 12AA, 
or transfers its assets to any trust which is non -charitable or does not transfer it to 
another charitable trust within a period of one year from dissolution, then amount of 
net asset based on fair market  value as on date of such conversion or merger or 
dissolution which represents the income accreted to the trust over period of time 
shall be charged to additional income-tax at the maximum marginal rate.  
 
Therefore, the Act has provisions which draw the r equisite balance in ensuring 
enough funds and flexibility with the Trust to plan long-term investment requirement 
on one hand and on the other placing restrictions to ensure utilisation for charitable 
purpose in time bound manner.  The potential misuse of assets created out of 
benefit or exemption has also now been addressed through levy of tax on accreted 
income which is in the nature of exit tax.  Therefore, providing legislatively that 
accumulation should only be an exception would not be feasible.  Howe ver, as 
indicated in para 9, the Assessing Officer can examine more closely such cases of 
routine and persistent accumulation of income to detect genuineness of activities.   
  
As regards the suggestion for putting a cap on the amount that can be accumulat ed, 
it may be mentioned that providing upper cap of amount to be accumulated would 
not only amount to micro managing the affairs of the Trusts, but also create anomaly 
of the sort wherein the upper limit of an amount, say Rs 50 lakhs, may be too much 
for a small Trusts having an annual income of Rs 25 lakhs and meagre for a trust 

17 
 
with higher annual income, say Rs 5 crore, for which, it would be only 10%. 
Accordingly, to provide a cap would not be pragmatic.   
 
The proposal of the Committee that Trusts are not allowed to keep accumulations for 
a long period without spending the same on fulfilment of its objectives has been 
referred to the CBDT for further necessary action at their end.  As regards the 3 
cases where accumulations have been spent wrongly or ill egally, requisite reports 
were called for from the concerned authorities and the same are detailed as below:- 
 
S.No. Name of the 
Case 
Action Taken 
1. Ishan 
Educational 
Research 
Society, 
Delhi. 
CIT(E)Delhi has reported that   assessment proceedings 
u/s 147  of the I.T. Act 1961 is being initiated for the A.Y. 
2013-14 for taxing the accumulated income of Rs. 38.92 
lac which is  not utilized during the stipulated period and  
similarly notice u/s 143(2) of the I.T. Act, 1961 shall  be 
issued for A.Y. 2015 -16 by  30.09.2016 for taxing the 
amount of Rs. 2.09 crore which has not been utilized during 
the stipulated period in case it is not selected for scrutiny 
under Computer Assisted Scrutiny Selection (CASS).  
2. TatwajanaVid
yapeeth, 
Mumbai. 
CIT(E), Mumbai, has re ported that in the case of 
TatwajanaVidyapeeth - for the A.Y. 2012 -13 and 2013-14 - 
no action is proposed as cases have been completed 
under scrutiny and details have been verified. For A.Y. 
2010-11 and 2011 -12, details are being verified and if 
utilisation is not found to be in order, re -opening will be 
made in these Assessment Years. For A.Y. 2014 -15 case 
has been re -opened and is getting time barred on 
31.12.2016. For A.Y. 2015 -16 and 2016 -17, the utilisation 
of accumulation can be verified during the as sessment 
proceedings. If the amount remains unutilized same may 
be added back in next year.   
3. Symbiosis 
Society 
Group, Pune. 
It has been reported by CIT(E) Pune that  the assessee 
Trust accumulated the surpluses and utilized the same 
without violating any provisions of I.T. Act, 1961 and  the 
accumulations have not been spent wrongly or illegally as 
has been verified by the Assessing Officer and therefore 
there is no need for fixing responsibility on the part of then 
Assessing Officers in respect of these nor is there any case 
which can be made out for cancellation of the registration 
granted u/s 12AA of the IT Act, 1961 in these cases.   
 
21. The C&AG of India in their vetting have desired to be apprised of the latest status 
of the issue referred to CBDT.  In this regard, replies of the Ministry are as under: 
“As per the provisions of the Income Tax Act relating to exemption to Trust or 
Institutions in respect of income derived from property held under Trust and 
voluntary contributions, 15% of the income ca n be accumulated indefinitely whereas 
maximum 85% of such income can be accumulated for a period of 5 years subject to 
the conditions –  

18 
 
 
(i) The purpose of accumulation and period of accumulation is given by assessee in 
Form No. 10. 
(ii) The money is invested in specified modes as per section 11(2) of the Income Tax 
Act, 1961. 
 
The above provisions of Income Tax Act, 1961 are examined by the AOs regularly 
during scrutiny assessment u/s 143(3) of the Income Tax Act, 1961. The cases 
which are not selected in scrutiny  are assessed summarily u/s 143(1) of the Income 
Tax Act, 1961 by the CPC, Bangalore. However in these cases accumulation issue 
cannot be verified by CPC as in many cases assessee leaves accumulation column 
blank. To plug this loophole a committee was form ed in November 2016 in the  
Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT). The committee has been asked to consider 
the feasibility of amending ITR -7 Form to make accumulation column as a 
mandatory field to be filled by the assessee.  The Committee is expected to su bmit 
its report shortly. 
 
Keeping in view the existing provisions in the Income Tax Act as mentioned above, 
the amendment for not allowing accumulation for a long period without spending the 
same on fulfilment of the objectives was not considered necessary . However, In 
Finance Bill 2017, Exemption Charges have been given survey power u/s 133A for 
on the spot verification interalia in the accumulation issue and other issues of the 
Income Tax Act, 1961 w.e.f. 01.04.2017  
 
Updated status report of action taken in three cases is as under:  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Case Action Taken 
1. Ishan Educational 
Research Society, 
Delhi. 
CIT (E) Delhi has reported that assessment 
proceedings u/s 147 of the I.T. Act 1961 has 
been initiated for the A.Y. 20 13-14 and 2015 -16 
for t axing the accumulated income of Rs. 38.92 
lac and Rs. 2.09 crore respectively, which has 
not been utilized during the stipulated period. 
Assessments are pending. After completing the 
assessments, if required explanation of the 
concerned officer will be called accordingly. 
2. Tatwajana Vidyapeeth, 
Mumbai. 
CIT(E), Mumbai, has reported that in the case of 
Tatwajana Vidhyapeeth for the A.Y. 2008 —09 
case was re -opened and has been completed at 
income of Rs. 1.34 crores for AY 2009 -10 the 
case was completed at Income of Rs. 4.36 crores 
for the A.Y. 2012 -13 and 2013 -14 no action is 
proposed as cases have been completed under 
scrutiny and details have been verified for A.Y. 
2010-11 and 2011 -12, cases have been re -
opened u/s 147 of the Income Tax Act, 1961. For 
A.Y. 2014-15 assessment has been completed 
on 18.11.2016 and a demand of Rs. 36.93 lacs 
has been raised. For A.Y. 2015 -16, case has 
been selected under compulsory scrutiny so that 
the utilization of accumulation can be verified 

19 
 
during the assessment proceeding s. If the 
amount remains unutilized same may be added 
back in next year. For AY 2016 -17 case is yet to 
be selected for scrutiny. Explanation of the 
concerned officer has been called for in respect 
of the completed assessments. 
3. Symbiosis Society 
Group, Pune 
It has been reported by CIT(E) Pune that the 
assessee Trust accumulated the surpluses and 
utilized the same without violating any provisions 
of I.T. Act, 1961 and the accumulations have not 
been spent wrongly or illegally as has been 
verified by the Assessing Officer. Therefore there 
is no need for fixing responsibility on the part of 
then Assessing Officer in respect of these cases. 
Nor is there any case which can be made out for 
cancellation of the registration granted u/s 12AA 
of the IT Act, 1961 in these cases. 
 
 
22. The Committee note that to plug the loophole of leaving accumulation 
column blank in the ITR , a Review Committee was formed in November 2016 in 
the CBDT, which had been asked to consider the feasibility of amending ITR -7 
Form to make accum ulation column as a mandatory field to be filled by the 
assessee.  The Committee  would like to know about the  details of the  Report of 
that Committee and the steps taken by the Ministry thereon.  The Committee 
would also like  to be apprised as to whether the ITR -7 Form has since been 
amended, if so, when and how many cases of consistent accumulation of funds 
have been noticed by the ITD as a result thereof.  The Committee would also 
desire to be apprised of the present position of assessment proceedings in  cases 
of Ishan Educational Research Society, Delhi, Tatwajana Vidyapeeth, Mumbai and 
Ritnand Balved Education Foundation , DIT -E, Delhi    The Committee feel that 
since these cases are very old, the Department of Revenue should make earnest 
and vigorous ef forts to complete the same and recover the outstanding dues at 
the earliest.  
 
(D) Availing exemptions by accumulating maximum funds 
 (Recommendation Para No. 10) 
23. While observing that the Act does not prescribe the limit of accumulation of funds 
and Trusts are availing exemptions by accumulating maximum funds consistently year 
after year, the Committee recommended the following:   

20 
 
(i) In cases where there wa s consistent and increased accumulation of income, the 
Assessing Officer may carry out physical inspection of the activities of the Trust.  
(ii) The Ministry may bring suitable amendment to the Act or evolve a suitable 
mechanism to ensure that first Trusts are allowed accumulations consistently 
only as exceptions and secondly, the accumulated income is ap plied for 
objectives of the Trusts/institutes within a specified time frame.  
(iii) The Ministry may perform strict monitoring of Form 10 invariably in all the cases 
to cover all assessments.  
(iv) In order to carry out the monitoring of Form 10 in all cas es, CBDT and the 
Ministry may take necessary steps to increase manpower at their disposal. The 
Committee may be apprised of the progress in this regard.  
 
24. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) in their Action Taken Note 
have stated as follows: 
“As recommended in (i) physical inspection of the activities of the Trusts, can 
always be conducted by the Assessing Officers in suitable cases u/s 133A.  Strict 
monitoring of Form 10 invariably in all the cases to cover all assessments does 
not seem to be f easible given the limited manpower and policy of conducting 
scrutiny in limited number of cases.  
Cadre restructuring took place in November 2014.  The process of recruitment is 
progressing.” 
 
 
25. In their vetting comments to the aforesaid Action Taken Note, the Audit have 
desired to be apprised of the latest status of the recruitment made so far after Cadre 
restructuring. 
 
26. In response, thereto, the Ministry submitted as follows: 
“The status of recruitment(s)/Promotions made so far after cadre restructuring is  as 
under: 
Cadre/Year 2013 2014 2015 2016 Remarks 
PCCIT - 19 29 * *Process initiated 
CCIT - 35 27 30 + 
68* 
*Process initiated 
PCIT - 292 - -  
Commissioner 4 48 - -  
ACIT (PR) 189 199 196 * *Process initiated for considering 
around 180 officers 
AssttComm-
issioner (DR) 
180 179* 176* awaited * As on 28/02/2017 
Inspector 1449 452 323 319* *Requisition sent to SSC and result 
awaited 
Tax Assistant 329 1017 1528 658* *Requisition sent to SSC and result 
awaited 


21 
 
Stenographer 389 87 587 280* *Requisition sent to SSC and result 
awaited 
M.T.S.   4500*  *Requisition sent to SSC and result 
awaited 
 
Sr no (ii) of para 10 states as under: 
 
“(ii) the Ministry may bring suitable amendment to the Act or evolve a suitable 
mechanism to ensure that first Trusts are all owed accumulations consistently 
only as exceptions and secondly, the accumulated income is applied for 
objectives of the Trusts/ institutes within a specified time frame” 
 
As per the existing provisions of the Act relating to exemption to trust or 
institution in respect of income derived from property held under Trust and 
voluntary contribution whereas 15% of the income can be accumulated 
indefinitely by the Trust or Institution, 85% of such income can be accumulated 
for a period of five years subject to certain conditions.  The conditions are that: 
(i) The purpose of accumulation and period of accumulation is specified in writing, 
and 
(ii) The money remains invested in prescribed mode only. 
Further, the Finance Act, 2016, inter alia, has introduced a new Chapter XII -EB 
containing sections 115TD to 115TF titled ‘Special provisions relating to tax on 
accreted income of certain Trusts and Institutions’ to provide, inter alia, that 
where a trust or institution being regulated u/s 12AA of the Act ceases to be 
charitable organisation by way of its conversion into any form which is not eligible 
for grant of registration under section 12AA, or merger with any entity other than 
an entity which is a Trust or Institution having objects similar to it and registered 
under section 12AA, or transfers its assets to any trust which is non -charitable or 
does not transfer it to another charitable Trust within a period of one year from 
dissolution, then amount of net asset based on fair market value as on date of 
such conversion or merger  or dissolution which represents the income accreted 
to the Trust over period of time shall be charged to additional income -tax at the 
maximum marginal rate.  
Therefore, the Act has provisions which draw the requisite balance in ensuring 
enough funds and f lexibility with the Trust to plan long -term investment 
requirement on one hand and on the other placing restrictions to ensure 
utilisation for charitable purpose in time bound manner.  The potential misuse of 
assets created out of benefit or exemption has also now been addressed through 
levy of tax on accreted income which is in the nature of exit tax.  Therefore, 
providing legislatively that accumulation should only be an exception would not 
be feasible.  However, as indicated in para 9, the Assessing Offi cer can examine 
more closely such cases of routine and persistent accumulation of income to 
detect genuineness of activities.   
 
As regards the suggestion for putting a cap on the amount that can be 
accumulated, it may be mentioned that providing upper cap  of amount to be 
accumulated would not only amount to micro managing the affairs of the trusts, 
but also create anomaly of the sort wherein the upper limit of an amount, say Rs 
50 lakhs, may be too much for a small trusts having an annual income of Rs 25 
lakhs and meagre for a trust with higher annual income, say Rs 5 crore, for 

22 
 
which, it would be only 10%. Accordingly, to provide a cap would not be 
pragmatic. 
 
In this regard, it may be mentioned that the Finance Bill, 2017 has proposed with 
effect from 1st  April, 2017 to widen the scope of section 133A of the Act, which 
empowers an income -tax authority to enter any place, at which a business or 
profession is carried on, or at which any books of account or other documents or 
any part of cash or stock or other valuable article or thing relating to the business 
or profession are kept, for the purposes of conducting a survey, to include any 
place, at which an activity for charitable purpose is carried on. 
 
As regards second limb of the recommendation, it may be further mentioned that 
clause (a) of sub -section (2) of section 11 of the Act provides for furnishing of a 
statement in the prescribed form and in the prescribed  manner to the Assessing 
Officer, stating the purpose for which the income is being accumulated  or set 
apart and the period for which the income is to be accumulated or set apart, 
which shall in no case exceed five years.” 
   
27. The Committee are constrained to observe that since the cadre 
restructuring took place in November, 2014, recruitment of Insp ector, Tax 
Assistant, Stenographer, and M.T.S., requisition was sent t o SSC and results are 
still pending.  Again the reply is silent about the date of sending of requisition to 
SSC and latest position in this regard.  Since increase in manpower would help  in 
timely disposal of cases, increase in tax deduction from the trusts, the Committee 
would desire that such posts should be filled up expeditiously. 
 
The Committee also take note of the steps taken by the Ministry with effect 
from 01.04.2017 (i) to widen  the scope of Section 133A of the Act empowering 
Income Tax Authority to enter any place and conduct a survey where an activity 
for charitable purpose is carried on; and (ii) empowering the Assessing Officer to 
obtain a statement, under sub Section 2 of Se ction 11 of the Act, indicating 
purpose for which income accumulated or set apart and such accumulation shall 
in no case exceed five years.   The Committee hope that the Ministry will enforce 
the new rule in letter and spirit without enhancing scope of har assment and 
corruption by Assessing Officers  and at the same time to ensure that the 
accumulated income is used for objectives of the Trusts/Institutes within five 
years of its accumulation. 
 
(D) Foreign Contributions (FCs) not utilized for the purpose 
 (Recommendation Para No. 15)  

23 
 
  
28. The Committee observed that in DIT -E, Mumbai there was diversion of funds by 
two trusts (i) Pratham-Mumbai Education Initiative (AY 10) and (ii) World Renewal 
Spiritual Trusts (AY 09 and AY 10), who received F oreign Contributi ons (FCs) to the 
extent of ` 97.14 crore during AY 09 & AY 10 found to be differing in purpose of 
donation and its utilization. The DIT-E, Chennai, in 4 cases, utilized the FCs for other 
purposes resulting in the tax effect of Rs. 6.18 crore. In one case i n CIT, Trichy and in 
one case in CIT Madurai, the amount received as FC was not utilized for the real 
purpose. According to the Ministry, ITD can only verify whether the funds received have 
been used for the purpose of Trusts and only in those cases which are selected for 
scrutiny. The Committee, however, noted that there was no mechanism in the CBDT to 
inspect the functioning of the Trust at every stage with a view to ensuring that the FCs 
are utilized strictly in accordance with the objective for which th ose have been received. 
It was only during the test check by the Audit, the cases of defaulting Trusts came to the 
notice of the IT Department and taxes were levied. The Committee, therefore, 
recommended that the ITD/CBDT should formulate a data sharing me chanism with the 
MHA to keep a track of FCs received and their application for the purpose those have 
been received. A mechanism may also be developed to particularly monitor application 
of foreign contributions received and a clear set of guidelines in th is regard may be 
issued to all Assessing Officers within three months of presentation of this Report to the 
Parliament. Ministry of Home Affairs should also have a proper monitoring mechanism 
to prevent the violation of FCR Act. by the Charitable Trusts. 
 
29. In their Action Taken Notes, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) 
stated as under: 
“FCRA Act is administered by MHA which has a database of entities who have 
received foreign donations.  CBDT has signed an MOU with CBEC on 23rd 
November 2015 to streamline data exchange.  Similar MOU for data exchange is 
proposed to be signed with other data exchange partners.  A secure data 
exchange platform to streamline exchange and utilization of information will be 
implemented under Project Insight in a phase d manner in 2017 -18.  CBDT will 
initiate discussion with MHA for sharing of data related to foreign contributions 
received.  The data sharing mechanism will be streamlined after considering the 
learning of data matching results.” 
 

24 
 
30. In this connection Audit in their vetting comments had desired to be apprised of 
the latest status of similar MOU for data exchange proposed to be signed with other 
data exchange partners.  In their counter comments, the Ministry submitted that: 
 
“The draft MOU for data exchange w as shared with MCA on 24 th December 
2015.  The list of important MCA forms relevant for Income Tax Department was 
also shared with MCA on 26 th February 2016.  A copy of MOU was also shared 
with SFIO on 22nd August 2016.  In February 2017, MCA has communicated their 
data requirements.  The data sources, data structure and exchange mechanism 
are being discussed.  The MOU is expected to be finalized in consultation with 
MCA in March 2017.” 
 
31. The Committee are constrained to observe that the CBDT has still not 
formulated a data sharing mechanism with the MHA to keep a track of Foreign 
Contributions (FCs) received and their utilisation for the declared purpose.  The 
Department of Revenue have merely submitted that a secure data exchange 
platform to streamline exch ange and utilization of information will be 
implemented under Project Insight in a phased manner in 2017-18 and CBDT will 
initiate discussion with MHA for sharing of data related to foreign contributions 
received.  Once again the Ministry have submitted a vague reply to a specific 
recommendation of the Committee.  The reply is devoid of particulars about 
implementation of data exchange programme, sharing of data related to foreign 
contributions with the Ministry of Home Affairs etc.  The Ministry have also not 
apprised about the finalization of MoU with the MCA for data exchange.  The 
Committee are, unhappy to note that inspite of  lapse of more than two years of 
presentation of PAC Report to Parliament, the data sharing mechanism has still 
not been develope d by the Department of Revenue with the Ministry of Home 
Affairs.  The Committee would, therefore, desire to furnish a detailed reply 
containing comprehensive information and present status of streamlining the 
data exchange system alongwith the action taken against officials responsible for 
the delay.   
 
(E) Inconsistencies in the Income Tax Act, 1961 
 (Recommendation Para No. 18) 
 
32.  The Committee observe d several inconsistencies in the Income Tax Act, 1961 
such as there being no internal mechanism within IT D to have control over the receipts 

25 
 
issued by the entity having registration under section 80G. There was no provision in 
the Act to invest corpus fund in specified mode and tax interest earned thereon. The 
word “substantially financed” was not defined in Act. ITD in 30 cases allowed 
exemptions to Trusts who were claiming exemption benefit simultaneously/alternatively 
in both sections 10(23C) and 12A in different AYs. Audit also noticed deficiencies in 
Forms specified for Audit Report to be enclosed with th e returns. In this regard, the 
Committee were apprised by the Ministry that the Income Tax Act has been amended to 
provide that under section 11 and section 10(23C), income for the purpose of 
application shall be determined without any deduction or allowan ce by way of 
depreciation or otherwise in respect of any asset, acquisition of which has been claimed 
as application of income under these sections in the same or any other previous year. 
This amendment is effective from 1st April, 2015. There was no provision under the Act 
to carry forward deficit. However, in view of adverse decisions of High Courts, the issue 
was under examination by the CBDT. In respect of issue of repayment of loan also, the 
suggestions were being examined in CBDT. The Committee had desired to be apprised 
of the latest position of the issues under examination of CBDT. The Committee were 
again perturbed to find that there was no enabling provision in the Act to disallow 
expenses on which TDS ha d not been deducted by Trusts similar to the  Section 40 (a) 
(ia), applicable for the entities computing income under chapter IV. Further, statutory 
requirements imposed on Trusts like Audit Reports in Forms 10B or 10BB have no 
disclosure with regard to compliance with TDS provisions. However, accord ing to the 
Ministry under the existing provisions of the Act the Trust was treated at par with the 
other deductors for non-compliance of the TDS provisions. No specific dispensation had 
been provided to the Trust deductors vis-à-vis other deductors. Furthe r, with regard to 
making proper disclosure of TDS deducted/deductible in the Audit Report relating to a 
Trust assessee, the Committee were apprised that at present the Audit Report relating 
to an assessee being a Trust does not contain a column for capturi ng such information. 
However, the Ministry ha d noted this suggestion. The Committee were of the opinion 
that only noting the suggestion would not suffice until this was adequately implemented. 
The Committee, had therefore, recommended that appropriate provisions may be made 
for inclusion of such information in the Audit Reports of Trusts which as pointed out by 
Audit would be an effective tool for greater transparency during assessment 
procedures. 
 

26 
 
33. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) in their Ac tion Taken Note 
have stated as under: 
The comments in this regard are as under: 
o Invest corpus fund in specified mode and tax interest earned thereon; 
The provisions relating to investment of accumulated income in specified mode as 
contained under section 1 1(5) of the Act. Section 13(1)(d) of the Act provides that 
no benefit of exemption shall be available, if any funds of trust or institution are 
invested or deposited in any form or mode otherwise than that provided u/s 11(5) 
of the Act.  Therefore, all fun ds including corpus fund have to be invested in 
specified mode.  Further, the Act mentions income to be income derived from 
property held under trust and it does not exclude any income to the trust by way of 
interest from corpus. As such, the interest earn ed on the investment made shall 
only be exempt subject to procedural requirement and conditions under sections 
11 to 13 of the Act.  If these conditions are not satisfied then interest income is 
taxable.   
o carry forward deficit; 
o repayment of loan. 
The prov isions of law are based on utilisation of income towards charitable 
purposes.  Therefore, no provision for treatment of deficit or its carry forward has 
been provided in respect of use of borrowed money and repayment of loan. Vide 
CBDT circular No 100 date d 24.01.1973, it has been clarified that repayment of 
the loan originally taken to fulfil one of the objects of the Trust will amount to an 
application of the income for charitable and religious purposes.  
Further as regards, the recommendation that as Aud it report relating to a Trust 
does not contain a column for capturing an information regarding TDS deducted/ 
deductible, appropriate provision may be made for inclusion of such information in 
the audit report of Trusts, it may be mentioned that in this reg ard, proposal for 
amending Income -Tax Rules,1962 to carry out necessary amendments is under 
examination for making necessary changes in the audit report to be furnished for 
A.Y 2017-18.” 
 
34. Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) in their further Action Taken Notes 
have submitted as below; 
“The proposed amendment of the Income -tax Rules is under progress.  The 
CBDT has constituted a Committee of officers to examine the changes to the 
audit report in Form No. 10B including the issues raised by the PAC.  Th e 
Committee has been required to submit its report by 31/03/2017.  Necessary 
amendment will be made thereafter.” 
 
35. The Committee are unhappy to note that the proposed amendment of 
Income Tax Rules is still under progress.   The Committee would desire to be 
apprised of the present position of amendment of the Income -Tax Rules, and 

27 
 
whether the Committee of officers constituted for examination of changes to the 
Internal Audit report of the Trusts in Form No. 10B have submitted their report, if 
so, what observati ons they have made and action taken thereon by the Ministry.  
They would desire the Ministry to furnish the requisite details within one month of 
presentation of this Report to expedite Parliament.  
 
(F) Exemption to Tata Educational and Development Trust 
36. The Committee find that the Tata Educational and Development Trust, 
established on 27.7.2008 was allowed exemption (November 2015) under section 11(1) 
(c) towards foreign contributions (USD 100 million) made during 2008 -09 to 2015-16 to 
two foreign Universities namely (1) Cornell University and (2) Harvard Business School 
for creation of Endowment Fund and Construction of a new Executive Building named 
“Tata Hall” respectively.  Section 11 (1) (c) of the Income Tax Act 1961 provides that in 
the case of trus ts created after 01.04.1952, the application of income outside India 
should be with reference to international welfare in which India is interested whereas the 
order of CBDT is for charitable purpose. The order of CBDT is not in accordance with 
the provisions of the Act.  Charitable or religious purpose could be applied only in the 
case of trusts created before 01.04.1952.  The funds for the said donations/foreign 
contribution were received from group companies and other Tata trusts.  The group 
companies sp onsoring such grants to Harvard for Tata Hall claimed it as business 
promotion expenses.  Claim of the assessee for exemption was rejected by the Board in 
June 2014 on the ground that there was no international welfare where India was 
interested was served  the said granting of funds.  Construction of Tat a Hall at Harvard 
did not amount to international welfare in which India was interested.  Assessments 
already decided prior to the issue of CBDT’s order were reopened under section 154, 
which was irregular. 
Year wise details of Foreign Contribution made 
Assessment year 
 
Amount (USD in Million) 
2009-10 12.50 
2010-11 18.75 
2011-12 43.75 
2012-13 5.0 
2013-14 5.0 
2014-15 5.0 
2015-16 5.0 
2016-17 5.0 

28 
 
Total 100 
 
37. While furnishing the explanation for such imp roper exemption which is for 
promotion of business brand name, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) in 
their written replies submitted as follows: 
“In the case of M/s Tata Educational and Development Trust, the trust  was 
permitted u/s 11(1)(c) {vide CBDT’s Order No. 180/9/2010 – ITA 1 dated 
10/11/2015 –to divert the fund to the extent of `100 crores for the purposes of 
application of the same to the extent the same is applied outside India for 
charitable purpose for grant for creation of endowment funds through contribution 
at the Cornell University, for scholarship of Indian Students as well as for joint 
collaboration project between India and Cornell Scientists and grant for financial 
assistance to Harvard Business School for construction of a new Executive 
Building named “Tata Hall”.  Therefore, the exemption allowed to the Trust was 
within the purview of the Act.” 
   
38. The Audit in their vetting comments to the aforesaid reply stated as under: 
“Ministry stated that the exemption in the case of M /s Tata Educational and 
Development Trust was permitted u/s 11(1)(c) vide CBDT’s Order No 
180/9/2010-ITA 1 dated 10/11/2015 and the exemption allowed to the Trust was 
within the purview of the Act.The reply of the Ministry not tenable on the following 
grounds: 
 
M/s Tata Educational and Development Trust was established on 25/07/2008 
with the objectives of establishment of projects by way of foundations or grants in 
India or outside, support study and exchange programmes that promote the 
spread of knowledge by way of scholarships and freeships to students and 
teachers in programmes in India or outside, scholarships/ free -ships to resident 
Indian students in India and abroad amongst other charitable purpose in India. 
 
(i) As per section 11(1)(c), in the case of tr usts created after 01.04.1952, the 
application of income outside India should be with reference to international 
welfare in which India is interested whereas the order of CBDT is for charitable 
purpose, which is not in accordance with the provisions of the  Act. Charitable or 
religious purpose could be applied only in the case of trusts created before 
01.04.1952. Further, even the authority of the Board for issuing an order 
modifying the provisions of the Act is not covered by the provisions of section 
119 o f the Act, which enables the Board to give relaxation in cases covering 
issues related to Chapter IV and VI -A, certain relaxation for condoning delay in 
application for refund etc and issuing orders for efficient management of 
assessment and collection of revenue but not for changing provisions of the Act.  
The claim of the assessee  for exemption was rejected by the Board in 2014 vide 
order dated 02.06.2014, after considering the various submissions made by the 
assessee justifying the gifting of fund, on th e ground that there was no 

29 
 
international welfare where India was interested was served by the said granting 
of funds. There was no reason for reversing the decision taken in 2014, in 
November 2015 for grant of exemption as there was no change in the provis ions 
of the Act nor the purpose of the grant of exemption underwent any change so as 
to attract international welfare in which India was interested. Bulk of the grants 
were released before the issue of the order and authority under which it was 
made with r etrospective effect is not known. The wording of the provision 
emphasise that the order should be in existence prior to claiming, i.e., filing of 
return, to be eligible for exemption. 
(ii) Construction of Tata Hall at Harvard did not amount either to charity or  
international welfare in which India was interested.  Instead it was for the 
promotion of personal interest of one/some of the trustees of various Tata trusts. 
‘Gift Agreement’ executed between the Dean, Harvard Business School (HBS) 
and Shri Ratan Tata p rovided that the pledge for US$ 50 Million was in 
consideration of the donors abiding interest in Harvard Business School and that 
in recognition of donors generous support, a new building to be constructed on 
the HBS campus will be named in the donor’s ho nour, the Tata Hall. Thus the 
funding to the HBS is neither charity nor in International welfare in which India 
was interested.The funds for the said donations were received from group 
companies and other Tata trusts. The group companies sponsoring such gr ants 
to Harvard for Tata Hall claimed it as business promotion expenses as can be 
seen from their annual accounts (e.g.accounts of M/s Tata Motors Ltd for 
FY2010-11). 
(iii) The trust deed did not support such grants towards any of the objects of the trust. 
The purposes for which donation was made did not match with the objects of the 
trust. 
(iv) Assessments for AYs 2011-12 and 2012-13 already decided prior to the issue of 
CBDT’s order were reopened under section 154 to give the benefit of CBDT’s 
order. In these cases,  such reopening under section 154 was irregular as there 
was no mistake apparent from the records to be rectified. 
 
39. The Committee are concerned to note that Public Charitable Trusts are 
used to run commercially for profit businesses, and have repeatedly vi olated 
provisions of the Income Tax Act.  The Committee are aghast to note that the 
Trusts are investing money in prohibited modes of investments despite the law 
which strictly prohibiting Public Charitable Trusts from holding such assets post 
1973.  The v alue of these prohibited investments run into thousand of crores.  
The Committee are appalled to note that no action has been taken by the Trustees 
or the Income Tax Department t o remedy the situation.  The Committee are again 
perturbed to find that Tata T rusts have been claiming dividend income which 
forms the majority of their income, is exempt from the requirement of applying 85 

30 
 
percent of Trust income towards charitable purposes.  This accumulation of 
funds as corpus, without applying towards charitable  purposes is seemingly 
against the very spirit and objects of the Trust itself.  In addition, it is seen that 
tax exempt public charity money is being funneled outside the country to fund 
rich foreign universities by the Tat a Educational and Development Tr ust as 
opposed to being used for the benefits of the people of our country. (The Tata 
Education and Development Trust was set up in 2008 with funds from other Tata 
Trusts and included a provision that allowed it to spend public charity money 
overseas, when the mandate of the original Tata Trusts was to spend the public 
charity money exclusively in India. )  At a time when under - privileged students of 
universities such as Tata Institute of social sciences are protesting lack of basic 
funds and scholarships, it is difficult to comprehend the justification of spending 
millions of dollars of public charity money on foreign universities.  Given the 
repeated nature of these violations, the Committee are of the view that these 
Trusts do not meet the criteria for ho lding exemption u/s 12AA of the Income Tax 
Act.  The Committee further observe that in 2014, the CBDT vide its order dated 2-
6-2014 had rejected the application for exemption of these foreign donations, on 
the ground that there was no international welfare  in which India is interested.  
However, the same was reversed with retrospective effect vide an order dated 
10.11.2015, without assigning any reason.  The Committee are concerned over the 
serious nature of all the aforesaid issues including continued and blatant tax 
violations by Trusts and Charitable Institutions including Tata Trust s.  
Surprisingly, no efforts have been made by the Income Tax Department to 
monitor whether the Trusts have been fulfilling the objectives under which they 
have been establish ed and also for ensuring that there is no abuse of the 
concessions which are enjoyed by such Trusts.  The Committee, therefore, desire 
that an Expert Group under the Income Tax Department may be constituted to 
look into the violations committed by Tat a Trust afresh with a view to devising a 
procedure for proper and systemic evaluation of such Trust s so that these Trusts 
do not escape the tax liability and the funds transferred out of country are used 
by these trusts in supplementing the work of the welfare of the people  with in 
India by catering their educational, medical, socio -economic and religious needs. 
The Committee desire to be apprised of the list of Charitable Trust/Institutions 
outside the country who have given scholarships to students of India fr om the 

31 
 
funds transferred to foreign universities by the Tata Trust during the last five 
years. The Committee further be apprised of the number of poor and rich 
students who had received such scholarships.  The Committee is also concerned 
that in addition to the violation of the Income Tax Act, the Committee has also not 
seen any document to prove that the Trusts have secured permission from the 
Charity Commissioner to hold these prohibited modes of investment. The 
Committee recommend that this matter should be brought to the attention of the 
Charity Commissioner for appropriate action.   The Committee also desire the 
office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India to submit a report on the 
violations of the Public Charitable Trusts, and make recommendations on how to 
remedy the gaps and prevent such recurrences in future.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                            MALLIKARJUN KHARGE 
18 July, 2018                                                                                  Chairperson, 
 27 Ashadha, 1940 (Saka)                                                  Public Accounts Committee 
 