DUTY DRAWBACK SCHEME
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
2014-15
SEVENTH REPORT
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

SEVENTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2014-15)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
DUTY DRAWBACK SCHEME
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.12.2014
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 11.12.2014
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2014/Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka)

PAC No. 2038
Price: ` 83.00
© 2014 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and  Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2014-15)..................... (iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2013-14)..................... (v)
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-III (DIRECT/INDIRECT TAXES) OF THE
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2013-14).................................................... (vii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................  (ix)
REPORT
PART I
I. INTRODUCTORY ......................................................................... 1
II. DRAWBACK ON RE-EXPORTS : SECTION 74............................ 2
(a) Identification of goods .......................................................... 2
(b) Determination of use .............................................................. 5
(c) Time Barred Claims and Delayed Replies to Deficiency Memo . 7
III. DRA WBACK ON EXPORTS : SECTION 75.................................. 8
(a) Delays in Claims Processing .................................................. 8
(b) Declaration of Freight ............................................................ 13
(c) Realisation of Export Proceeds .............................................. 16
(d) Declaration of  V alue .............................................................. 19
(e) Fixation of All Industry Rate of Drawback............................. 21
(f) Fixation of  Brand Rate........................................................... 23
(g) Verification ............................................................................. 26
(h) Availment of CENVAT Credit................................................. 27
(i) Restoration of Scrolls ............................................................ 29
(j) Monitoring of Declarations ................................................... 30
(k) Sanction of Drawback on products not specified in Brand
` Rate Letters ............................................................................ 31
IV . COMPLIANCE OF AUDIT OBJECTIONS.................................... 32
V. WEAK INTERNAL  AUDIT ......................................................... 35
VI. EV ASION PRONE COMMODITIES.............................................. 39
VII. WORKING OF THE ECONOMIC INTELLIGENCE  AGENCIES.... 39
VIII. CUSTOMS OVERSEAS INTELLIGENCE NETWORK (COIN)...... 43

PAGE
IX. INTERNATIONAL BEST PRACTICES FOR COMPENSATING
DUTY INCIDENCE TO EXPORTERS............................................ 45
PART II
Observations and Recommendations ....................................................... 46
ANNEXURES
I. Status of compliance issues in audit paras on Duty Drawback
Scheme (C&AG Report No. 15 of  2011-12)................................... 58
II. Intelligence Agencies working under the Department of
Revenue ........................................................................................ 64
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the first sitting of the Sub-Committee-III  (Direct/Indirect
Taxes) of the PAC (2013-14) held on 11th September, 2013........... 70
II. Minutes of the Ninth sitting of the PAC (2014-15) held on
 25th November, 2014.................................................................... 72
(ii)

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2014-15)
Prof. K.V . Thomas — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
4. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey
6. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank"
9. Shri Neiphiu Rio
*10. Shri Dushyant Singh
11. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
**12. Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi
13. Dr. Kirit Somaiya
14. Shri Anurag Thakur
***15. Dr. P. Venugopal
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
17. Shri Vijay Goel
18. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya
19. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
20. Shri Shantaram Naik
21. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
22. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Director
3. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri S.L. Singh — Under Secretary
* Elected w.e.f. 3rd December, 2014 vice Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy who has been appointed as
Minister w.e.f. 9th November, 2014.
** Elected w.e.f. 3rd December, 2014 vice Shri Jayant Sinha who has been appointed as Minister
w.e.f. 9th November, 2014.
*** Elected w.e.f. 3rd December, 2014 vice Dr. M. Thambidurai  who has been chosen as Hon'ble
Deputy Speaker, Lok Sabha and has since resigned from the membership of the Committee.
(iii)

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2013-14)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Ramen Deka
5. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
6. Dr. M. Thambi Durai
7. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
8. Shri Jayaprakash Hegde
9. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
10. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
12. Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam
13. Shri Ashok Tanwar
*14. Shri Ajay Maken
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Prakash Javadekar
**18. Shri Ashwani Kumar
19. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
***20. Dr. V . Maitreyan
21. Shri N.K. Singh
22. Smt. Ambika Soni
* Elected w.e.f. 14th August, 2013 vice Dr. Girija Vyas appointed as Minister of Housing,
Urban Development & Poverty Alleviation w.e.f. 17th June, 2013.
** Elected w.e.f. 3rd September, 2013 vice Dr. V . Maitreyan ceased to be a Member upon his
retirement as a Member of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 24th July, 2013.
*** Elected w.e.f. 3rd September, 2013 vice Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan appointed as
Minister of State for Commerce and Industry w.e.f. 17th June, 2013.
(v)

(vi)

COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-III (DIRECT/INDIRECT TAXES)
OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2013-14)
Shri N.K. Singh — Convenor
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2.  Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
3. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
Rajya Sabha
4. Smt. Ambika Soni
5. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
(vii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2014-15), having been authorised
by the Committee, do present this Seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Duty
Drawback Scheme' based on C&AG Report No. 15 of 2011-12, Union Government
(Performance Audit) relating to the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue).
2. The Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid on the Table
of the House on 23rd August, 2011.
3. The Public Accounts Committee (2011-12), the Public Accounts Committee (2012-
13) and the Public Accounts Committee (2013-14) took up the subject for detailed
examination and report. A Sub-Committee on Direct/lndirect Taxes specifically
constituted for the purpose under the Convenorship of Shri N.K. Singh, MP and a
Member of the Public Accounts Committee (2013-14) procured written replies and took
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)
on the subject at their sitting held on 11th September, 2013. The draft Report on the
subject was finalized and approved by the Convenor and subsequently approved by
the then Chairperson, PAC. However, due to dissolution of the Fifteenth Lok Sabha,
the draft Report could not be considered for adoption by the Public Accounts
Committee (2013-14).
4. The subject was subsequently carried forward by the successor Committee (2014-
15) for examination. The draft Report which was placed before the main Committee was
considered and adopted at their sitting held on 25th November, 2014. The Minutes of
the sitting are given at Appendix I .
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
6. The Committee thank their predecessor Committee and the Sub-Committee for
taking oral evidence of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) and obtaining
the requisite information on the subject.
7. The Committee would also like to express their thanks to the representatives of
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) for tendering evidence before the
Sub- Committee and furnishing information in connection with the examination of the
subject.
8. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. K.V. THOMAS
08 December , 2014 Chairperson,
17 Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(ix)

REPORT
PART I
I.  INTRODUCTORY
Duty Drawback is a duty neutralization scheme designed to promote exports. Its
aim is to compensate all duties/taxes embedded in the cost of manufacture of exported
products. The basic concept of the Scheme is that export products should not carry
the country's taxes so that these are revenue neutral and can compete on an equal
footing in the world market. Section 74 and Section 75 of the Customs Act, 1962,
Section 37 of the Central Excise Act, 1944 and the Finance Act, 1944 empower the
Central Government to grant duty drawback. During the period between April, 2006
and March, 2010 the total payment of drawback was 36,000 crore. The bulk of these
payments were made on Section 75 cases.
2. Audit carried out a review of the Scheme in 39 out of 93 Customs
Commissionerates across 12 States (Delhi, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Karnataka,
Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Gujarat, Bihar, Punjab, Andhra Pradesh and Rajasthan)
where the volume of drawback transactions was relatively higher and had altogether
paid `31,616 crore as drawback out of the aforesaid total of  `36,000 crore. Data
accessed by Audit related to  34.58 lakh drawback cases out of 46 lakh cases (i.e. 75 per
cent settled between April, 2006 and September, 2009)  and executed queries on the
data and scrutinized selected case files to examine the rules, regulations and procedure
that were followed. This was done to identify ambiguities and lacunae that were required
to be addressed; seek assurance that the fixation of All Industry Rates and Brand
Rates was carried out in the prescribed manner; and identify instances of non-compliance
to drawback provisions which was leading to loss of revenue.
3. For this, Audit also examined the fixation of the All Industry Rate in the Ministry
of Finance, Government of India and Brand Rates of drawback in 28 Central Excise
Commissionerates. Further, the Audit scrutinized the records of 19 Regional Director
General Foreign Trade (DGFTs)/ Development Commissioners for drawback allowed
on deemed exports, under the Foreign Trade Policy (FTP). The Audit review had
revealed various deficiencies, lapses shortcomings and irregularities in the
implementation of the Scheme. The gist of the Audit findings inter-alia is as follows:
(i) No supplementary rules had been framed under Section 74(3) of the Customs
Act, 1962 laying down the parameters for identification of goods in case of
re-exports;
(ii) The CBEC had not issued instructions specifying how to determine whether
goods were "used" or not;

2
(iii) There were delays in claim processing and absence of floor value in the
Customs Valuation rules for freight charges on exported goods;
(iv) Market verification of the declared price had not been initiated in cases where
there was material difference between the declared price and declared market
value;
(v) Fixation of All Industry Rate of drawback had not been fully documented;
and
(vi) There were instances of non-compliance to rules and provisions on processing
of time barred claims, delay in fixation of brand rates, sanction of drawback on
products not specified in brand rate letters and excess payment of drawback
due to mis-classification.
4. Against the above backdrop, the Committee selected Chapters 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3 of
C&AG Report No. 15 of 2011-12 (Performance Audit), Union Government (Indirect
Taxes - Service Tax and Customs) on 'Service Tax Banking and Other Financial Services
and Duty Drawback Scheme' for examination and report. In the process, the Committee
obtained the requisite information/materials/written replies from the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue). The Committee also took oral evidence of the representatives
of the Department. Based on the information gathered and examination of the testimony,
the Committee proceed with the examination of the issues in detail in the succeeding
paragraphs.
II. DRAWBACK ON RE-EXPORTS: SECTION 74
(a) Identification of goods
5. Audit scrutiny revealed that no supplementary rules have been framed under
Section 74(3) ibid  laying down the parameters for identification of goods in case of
re-exports. In the absence of specific instructions the establishment of such identity
remained with the discretion of the concerned Assistant Commissioner of Customs.
Test check of cases indicated that the markings on the export items were used as an
important criterion for identification. However, Audit scrutiny revealed instances of
discrepancy in other parameters like dimension, gross weight, chemical properties, etc.
Audit found 12 such cases involving drawback payment of ` 1.42 crore. The nature of
the discrepancies in these cases are as follows:—
(i) There was a significant rise in gross/net weight of the re-exported goods;
(ii) Identity of the imported item was established only with reference to the
markings in the drums and names of enzyme indicated in the Bill of entry; and
(iii) Re-exported goods were identical to goods lying in the import area which
were related to other consignments.

3
6. In the above context, the Committee sought to know the measures taken by the
Ministry for identifying re-exported goods with the originally imported items. In reply,
the Ministry submitted as under:—
"The Ministry has issued Instructions vide Circular No. 46/2011- Customs dated
20.10.2011 that identification of goods require examination and verification of
various parameters, including but not limited to physical properties, weight,
marks and numbers, test reports, documentary evidences vis-à-vis import
documents, etc. and that the Assistant/Deputy Commissioner of Customs shall
pass a speaking order, following the principles of natural justice, giving detailed
reasons with regard to establishing the identity or otherwise of the goods under
re-export while sanctioning drawback (either in full or part) or denying it".
7. Asked about framing and issuing supplementary rules for identifying re-exported
goods, the Ministry replied as under:—
"Audit recommendations were implemented by issuance of instructions vide
Circular No. 46/2011-Cus. dated  20.10.2011 prescribing that identification of
goods require examination and verification of various parameters, including but
not limited to physical properties, weight, marks and numbers, test reports,
documentary evidence vis-à-vis import documents, etc., and directing that
Assistant/Deputy Commissioner shall pass speaking order, following the
principles of natural justice, giving reasons with regard to establishing the identity
of goods under re-export while sanctioning the drawback (either in full or part) or
denying it. These speaking orders passed are subject to review by Commissioner
and can be appealed against by department or the exporter as per provisions
under the Customs Act, 1962.
In view of the above stated framework to mandatorily pass reasoned speaking
order in each case of re-export, which are subjected to mandatory review by
Commissioner who may order filing of appeal in deserving cases, the Ministry is,
at present, not considering issuing supplementary rules as the Instruction shall
serve the purpose".
8. The Committee then specifically enquired about the action taken in cases
illustrated by Audit and recovery made thereon. In reply, the Ministry stated as under:—
"With respect to identification of re-export goods, 12 cases involving drawback
payment of  ` 1.42 crore were illustrated by Audit.
All the cases were verified. In 11 cases the identity of the goods under re-export
was found to have been established and the manner of identification was
satisfactorily explained. In the case of Syncrolift Inc., the demand of drawback
` 1.11 Lakh is confirmed, and the DGFT requested to suspend the importer-
exporter code".
9. On being asked whether the Ministry reviewed similar cases other than those
highlighted by Audit, the Ministry apprised as under:—
"The Ministry had brought the entire Audit Report to notice of field formations.
The status of review received from 8 Customs Zones indicates that similar cases
have not been noticed".

4
10. The Committee further enquired whether the Ministry had adopted any system
for crossverifying physical properties of goods placed for re-export along with the
documentary declarations. To this, Ministry replied as under:—
"Export requires physical presentation of the goods declared in the shipping
bill. In case of re-export under claim for drawback the Section 74 requires the
goods to be identified as the goods which were imported. Thus, prior to allowing
the export, examination of the goods is done to check that the goods are the
same goods on which duty had been paid on importation.
This involves cross-verification of the goods placed for export, along with the
documentary declarations like bill of entry, import invoice.
The Ministry's Instructions vide Circular No. 46/2011- Customs dated 20.10.2011
also direct, inter alia, that identification of goods may require examination and
verification of various parameters, including but not limited to physical properties,
weight, marks and numbers, test reports, documentary evidences vis-à-vis import
documents, etc".
11. Responding to the Audit observations that the Department of Revenue might
consider issuing necessary instructions/frame rules under section 74(3) indicating
parameters for identification of re-exported goods with the originally imported items,
the Ministry inter-alia submitted as under:—
"It may be noted that considering the spread of commodities under re-export, it
may not be possible or advisable to specifically lay down parameters in each and
every case of re-export. The basic issue which needs to be appreciated is that
the proper officer, in terms of the statute, is expected to exercise due diligence
before being satisfied that the goods under re-export, are indeed the identical
goods which had been imported. It is felt that laying down parameters and
guidelines for field officers to exercise due diligence in establishing the identity
of the goods to his/her satisfaction. It is feared that while such instructions may
or may not benefit the officers, it would almost certainly result in routine denial
of the benefit.
The Ministry has since issued circular no. 46/2011-Cus. dated 20.10.2011 directing
the officers to ensure that detailed speaking orders are issued specifying the
reasons why the re-exported goods have been held to be fulfilling the requirement
of section 74 or otherwise".
12. In this regard, the Committee wanted to know the reasons due to which the
Ministry was unable to lay down parameters in case of re-export and the reasoning of
the Ministry was:—
"Ministry examined the matter and noted that because of the spread of
commodities under re-export it may not be possible to lay down specific parameters
in each and every case; that specific parameters could constrict and restrict the
officer's capacity to exercise due diligence in identifying the goods and lead to
routine denials of benefit to exporters.

5
Since under the Customs Act, 1962 the identity of the goods has to be established
to the satisfaction of the Assistant Commissioner of Customs, the Ministry
recognized that the basic issue was that this should be through the exercise of
due diligence. Therefore, the Circular No.46/2011- Customs was issued illustrating
the nature of some of the parameters relevant for identification but directing that
reasoned speaking orders should be issued in each case".
(b) Determination of use
13. According to Audit there were no instructions of the board specifying how to
determine whether goods were "used" or not. Test check of cases in Audit indicated
that a large number of goods fulfilled the criteria for "used after import" but were
treated as unused goods. In 55 such cases drawback paid was ` 1.74 crore.
14. With regard to the above, the Committee enquired about the guidelines issued
by the Ministry/Department in respect of imported goods which are re-exported after
being used or otherwise. In reply, the Ministry submitted as under:—
"The Shipping Bill provides for the exporter to make declaration whether the
goods had been taken into use or not after importation.
The Ministry has issued Instructions vide Circular No. 46/2011- Customs dated
20.10.2011 that it is to be determined if the goods had been used after import in
the cases where drawback under section 74 is claimed, and that the Assistant/
Deputy Commissioner of Customs shall pass a speaking order following the
principles of natural justice giving detailed reasons with regard to determination
of use, if any, while sanctioning drawback".
15. When asked about the monitoring system put in place to ensure that drawback
is not paid to ineligible goods, the Ministry submitted as under:—
"In cases of re-export under claim for drawback, the eligibility of the goods to
drawback is dependent not only on their identification as the goods which had
been imported on payment of duty but also with reference to the goods being
unused or used after importation and this is subject to the satisfaction of the
Assistant/Deputy Commissioner of Customs and not of any officer lower than
that rank.
Secondly, all payments of such drawback are subject to internal audit.
After the Audit pointed out instances amongst which there were certain cases
where ineligible drawback was paid and recommended to clarify the typical
conditions when goods would be treated as used, the Ministry examined the
matter further.
Consequently, by issuing Circular No.46/2011-Customs and No.35/2013- Customs
mandating that Assistant/Deputy Commissioner of Customs shall pass speaking
order on identification, determination of use of the goods and all aspects of
compliance with the legal provisions, a framework of quasi-judicial decision has
been introduced whereby the Assistant Commissioner is bound to consider all
aspects and come to a reasoned finding.

6
This has the added advantage that the Commissioner of Customs becomes
bound to examine the order and satisfy itself of the legality and propriety of the
decision, and accept or file an appeal against the decision in terms of section
129D(2) of Customs Act, 1962".
16. Regarding the outcome of the Ministry's consultations with their field formations
on this issue, the Committee were apprised as under:—
"Audit observed 55 cases involving ` 1.74 crore relating to determination of use.
These were checked in consultation with field formations. The outcome indicates
that —
(a) In 27 cases it was established that the goods were either unused or the
lower drawback was paid taking into account that the goods were used;
(b) In 28 cases involving ` 38.11 lakh, recovery has been made in 1 case,
7 cases are confirmed and 20 cases are under adjudication".
17. The Ministry further stated that of the 20 cases earlier reported under
adjudication, in 16 cases the drawback (including interest) ` 9.08 lakh had been
recovered and 4 cases, involving drawback ` 7.97 lakh, remained under adjudication.
18. To the view that the Department of Revenue might issue suitable instructions to
clarify the typical conditions under which goods are to be treated as "used after
import", the Ministry inter alia  stated that Circular No. 46/2011-Cus. dated 20th
October, 2011 had since been issued directing the officers to pass detailed and reasoned
speaking orders covering both these features before sanctioning the drawback claims
under Section 74 or otherwise.
19. On being enquired about the outcome of the aforesaid Circular, the Ministry
replied as under:—
"The Circular No.46/2011 — Customs was issued on 20.10.2011 directing passing
of speaking orders on issues of establishment of identity and 'determination of
use'.
Between November 2011 and June 2013, a total of 2442 speaking orders have
been passed and in 13 cases the Commissioners were not satisfied of the legality
and propriety of the decisions and ordered filing of appeal.
Making "determination of use" a quasi-judicial process after the exporter has
declared that the goods were not taken into use or were taken into use would
ensure that the Assistant/Deputy Commissioner of Customs takes into account
and records all relevant facts and aspects for arriving at a decision.
This is expected to ensure due diligence and lead to avoidance of doubtful cases
in future, especially since the head of office, namely the Commissioner, has to
also subsequently satisfy itself that the determination of use or non-use was
legal and proper".

7
(c) Time Barred Claims and Delayed Replies to Deficiency Memo
20. As per Rule 5 of Re-export of Imported Goods Rules, 1995, a claim for drawback
shall be filed with relevant documents within three months from the date on which Let
Export Order (LEO) is granted. If the Assistant Commissioner of Customs is satisfied
that the exporter was prevented by sufficient cause to file his claim within the aforesaid
period of three months, he can allow the exporter to file his claim within a further period
of three months. Sub rule 5(3) states that the date of filing of the claim shall be the date
of affixing the dated receipt stamp on the claim which is complete in all respects and for
which an acknowledgement is issued. Further, as per sub-rule 4(a) of Rule 5, any claim
which is incomplete in any material particulars or is without the documents shall not be
accepted and returned to the claimant with deficiency memo within 15 days of
submission and shall be deemed not to have been filed. Where exporter complies with
the requirement specified in deficiency memo within 30 days from the date of receipt of
deficiency memo, the same will be treated as a claim filed under Sub-Rule (1) of Rule 5.
21. Audit scrutiny revealed that in 54 cases in Bengaluru, Chennai, Delhi, Hyderabad II
and Kandla, time barred claims were admitted and drawback of  ` 1.19 crore was paid.
Audit also found that 171 claims were filed in ACC Shamsabad under Hyderabad II
during the review period. The Department had neither affixed receipt stamp nor issued
acknowledgment in any of these cases. Even though internal audit of these payments
were carried out in the Commissionerates at Hyderabad, no observations in this regard
were made in any of the Commissionerates.
22. Asked to explain the cases revealed in Audit scrutiny wherein time barred claims
had been admitted and drawback paid, the Ministry submitted as under:—
"The reference here is to processing of certain cases of re-export drawback
under section 74 of Customs Act, 1962. Such instances may be said to arise from
lesser than desired diligence. Moreover, if the error had been pointed out by
Internal Audit it would have ensured much earlier remedial actions on compliance
and systemic fronts".
23. The Ministry further submitted as under:—
"All the 54 cases pointed out by Audit were reviewed. One case of M/s Golconda
Corrosion (involving drawback of  ` 0.99 lakh) has not been admitted.
Out of remaining 53 cases involving ` 117.81 lakh, in 7 cases recovery of  `19.51
lakh (drawback amount ` 15.99 lakh alongwith interest ` 3.52 lakh) has been
made, in 41 cases demands for ` 74.22 lakh are confirmed and remaining 6 cases
(amount ` 27.58 lakh) are under adjudication".
24. On being asked about the checks and balances put in place to ensure that such
irregularities do not recur, the Ministry stated as under:—
"Ministry's Instructions dated 31.7.13 had directed field formations to,
inter alia, ensure due diligence in the application of Rule 5 of Re-export of
Imported Goods (Drawback of Customs Duties) Rules, 1995.

8
Since the Ministry had also earlier issued Instructions that speaking orders are
to be issued in re-export (section 74) cases, a further Circular No. 35/2013- Customs
dated 5.9.2013 was issued directing that the aspect of how the provisions, of the
various sub-rules of said Rule 5, are satisfied or not satisfied, as also other
attendant aspects relevant to sanction of the re-export drawback, should
invariably be covered in the speaking order issued by the officer. The coverage
of such details in the speaking order in original is expected to ensure due diligence
by Assistant/Deputy Commissioner of Customs.
With each order in original being required to be specifically examined by the
Commissioner of Customs for its propriety and legality, a double check against
irregularities is ensured".
25. With respect to the 171 cases filed in ACC Shamsabad under Hyderabad II, the
Committee called for the reasons for the lapses and the failure of the internal audit to
point them. To this, the Ministry submitted as under:—
"The matter was examined in consultation with the field formation. It is reported
that in order to determine the date of filing the claim to check that the claims were
not time barred, the ACC Shamsabad was maintaining a drawback register
containing details of name of claimant, date of claim, file number, shipping bill
details, drawback amount claimed, etc. The time barred claims could be ascertained
from shipping bill details and date of claim in the register. Out of the 171 claims
for the period April 2006 to March 2009, 6 claims were rejected on account of time
bar and 23 claims were rejected on account of other reasons such as
non-submission of documents. In the balance 142 cases, the precautions for
monitoring eligibility were taken by ACC Shamsabad.  As a result, there was no
lapse in processing the drawback claims and due precautions were taken in
monitoring the eligibility.
It appears that on account of the maintenance of the above-mentioned drawback
register, the aspect, that neither receipt stamp was being affixed nor
acknowledgments issued, remained to be pointed out by Internal Audit.
Commissioner Hyderabad-II has reported that the point made by Audit had been
noted for the future".
III. DRAWBACK ON EXPORTS: SECTION 75
(a) Delays in Claims Processing
26. Section 75A of the Customs Act 1962 provides that where any drawback payable
to claimant is not paid within one month from the date of filing of the claim, interest at
six per cent per annum is to be paid to the claimant thereafter. In 2002, the Board
directed that drawback claims should be cleared within 3/5 working days from the date
of shipment and electronic filing of EGM where processing is done online/manually.
As per Drawback Rules, if a drawback claim is incomplete, deficiency memo is to be
issued to the exporter within 10 days. Audit examined the drawback transactions data
pertaining to Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat and found significant delays in processing
drawback claims in the Commissionerates situated in these locations. In Andhra Pradesh,

9
Audit noted delays in processing in 10,177 cases — more than half of which were
processed after more than three months. In 20 per cent of these claims, settlement was
delayed beyond a year. In Gujarat, out of 88,000 claims analysed/queried, delays
occurred in 20,856 (23.7 percent) cases. Delayed settlement of cases held up the payment
of drawback and in 4048 cases of delayed processing at Kandla and Ahmedabad Audit
found deficiency memos were raised much later (ranging from 31 days to more than
2 years) after filing of claim. Similarly, 2,276 claims settled at Bihar, Mumbai, Rajasthan
and UP, Audit noted delays between 13 days to four years in processing the claims.
Audit also found that the queries were raised much beyond the stipulated time of
10 days. Moreover, numerous queries were incomplete with comments like 'please
produce documents' without clearly specifying the deficiencies.
27. In the above context, the Committee enquired whether the Ministry had examined
the issue of delayed payments in respect of drawback claims. To this, the Ministry
replied as under:—
‘‘The Ministry has noted that a time bound process for sanction of drawback is
in place and generally adhered and the claims are being processed in a faster and
transparent through automated processes. Further, under citizens’ charter of the
department and "sevottam" certification initiative, the process has been defined
against time lines.
However, there are instances where the processing of the drawback claims gets
delayed. A reason for this in certain instances, as observed by Audit as well, is
that the deficiencies in the claim get pointed out beyond the stipulated period of
10 days. Other reasons include that generalized queries get raised and the time
taken to communicate the deficiencies to the exporters. After sanction of claims
there is also the time factor before consolidated payments are scrolled to the
banks.
From another perspective, a delay by the carriers incorrectly filing Export General
Manifest (EGM) implies absence of proof of export to initiate the drawback
process. Similarly, time taken by the banks to credit the exporters’  accounts,
after Customs has scrolled payment to the bank, is also a factor".
28. Asked about the steps taken by the Ministry/Department to streamline the
verification procedures to enable faster processing of claims, the Ministry explained
as under:—
"To streamline specifically the verification process—
(a) The Ministry instructed vide Circular no. 46/2011-Customs dated 20.10.2011
that the field formations issue deficiency memo within the stipulated
10 days and take necessary action to resolve the matters in all such cases.
It was also directed that drawback claims be disbursed in accordance with
the timelines as specified in the citizens’  charter and that the Commissioners
of Customs undertake periodic review and monitoring of the status of
pending drawback claims;

10
(b) The Board's letter dated 26.6.2012 directed that the tendency to raise
generalized queries is to be checked and the concerned officers, as well as
their supervisory officers, should to be made responsible if the norm of
specificity in queries is violated;
(c) The Customs EDI system has provided Importer-Exporter Code-wise facility
to view status/reasons of pending drawback shipping bills. This shall
ensure timely communication of deficiencies/queries to the exporters.
From the larger trade facilitation perspective,—
(a) The Board's letter dated 26.06.2012 directed the Chief Commissioners to
include in their monthly monitoring, the levels of pendency of Export General
Manifests (EGMs) not filed, of EGMs filed in error and of non- filing of
stuffing reports. It was also directed to begin monthly monitoring of dwell
time (from time EGM is correctly filed to the time of actual scrolling out of
payment to the bank)for ensuring performance levels;
(b) The Customs EDI system was enabled with Importer-Exporter Code-wise
facility to view the date the Customs have scrolled payment to the banks.
This enables exporter to take up the matter with the bank, if necessary; and
(c) A sample study has been initiated to ascertain time taken by banks for
disbursal of drawback payments into the exporter's accounts".
29. When specifically asked as to how the cases of delayed payments were monitored
regularly by the Commissionerates, the Ministry submitted as under:—
"The EDI system makes every officer aware of the work in his/her work queue
and this is monitored daily by senior officers through officer-wise pendency and
disposal reports in EDI. Overall monitoring to avoid delay is separately enabled
by several reports that can be generated indicating pendency breakup on account
of the various reasons such as shipping bills for which EGM is yet to be filed or
is filed with errors, query reply pending, samples sent for testing, whether pending
with Superintendent or Assistant Commissioner, etc. The monitoring of dwell
time (from time EGM is correctly filed to the time of actual scrolling out of
payment to the bank) highlights the time taken at pre-defined stages and can
also be effectively used by Commissioners to improve performance levels".
30. On being asked whether any study on dwell time of customs procedure was
conducted, the Ministry apprised as under:—
"The Ministry had addressed letter dated 26.06.2012 to the Chief Commissioners
to begin monitoring of dwell time for drawback and to ensure that performance
level set by Citizens' Charter is met by the Commissioners. This letter has also
been made part of Ministry's Instructions dated 31.07.2013. However, no specific
study on dwell time for drawback has been conducted by Ministry".

11
31. In this regard, the Chairperson, CBEC while deposing before the Committee
testified as under:—
"There is a demand by the exporters that the drawback should not be withheld.
So, in our desire to expedite the process, we have laid certain mechanisms in
place which ensure that as soon as the exporter submits his papers, within a
span of five days' time, it is done".
32. On being pointed out that in a number of cases, it had not been done in five days
but had taken enormously long time, the Chairperson deposed as under:—
"I am sure that is also correct. There would be certain cases where there would
be a delay. Perhaps, the delay may be on account of the documents not available.
I am not saying that in all the cases, we are right".
33. Asked if lack of proper dissemination of information regarding the documents
that were to be submitted was causing delays in claims process, she further deposed
as under:—
"Very rightly. These do exist. I accept that. To tide over that, we have issued
instructions, as the Revenue Secretary has just mentioned. There is the Circular
of 2011 which you mentioned. There are subsequent instructions which have
been reiterated. You would appreciate that there is large number. There are
114 EDI locations where I am implementing this. There are about 14 banks where
this facility does exist. So, there are bound to be some delays. Perhaps, some
places may not be so desirable. So, to overcome that, we are doing our best to
make sure that there are no generalised queries and these are not raised time and
again; they should be raised in a comprehensive manner at one point of time so
that we can take care of that.
You have expressed concern about export proceeds. On the one hand, we are
trying to expedite it, trying to ensure that there is no harassment to the exporters.
On the other hand, we have also to ensure that the export proceeds come on
time. For that, we have very well-defined drawback disbursal mechanism and
also a monitoring system is in place. We are constantly in touch with the RBI.
We are working on something called the e-BRC modules. We have been working
on it very hard because there are delays. So, they have assured us that the feed
for modules would be in place by December, 2013’’.
34. To a pointed query as to whether the filed documents which were found to be
deficient were being communicated to the applicant within the stipulated period of
10 days, the Ministry responded as under:—
"Once the Export General Manifest (EGM) is correctly filed by the carrier of the
goods, the EDI system retrieves the shipping bill and places it in the drawback
queue for processing. From this stage, the deficiency is to be raised and
communicated in 10 days.
On the aspect of communicating the deficiency, the Department has recently
enabled the exporter to directly view the shipping bill-wise reason/query for

12
pendency in the EDI system. This is expected to effectively communicate the
matter to the exporter.
The Circular 46/2011 — Customs dated 20.10.2011 has directed raising and
communication of deficiency/query within stipulated period of 10 days.
However, a general assessment indicates that it may not be always possible to
adhere to the10 day limit in every case. Part of the reasons lie in the "batch" and
"queue" nature of processing. Moreover, the officers also handle multiple screens
relating to query, query reply, sanction of drawback, scrolling of drawback
payments. Aspects such as intervening holidays or leave periods also have a
bearing. The quantum increase in workload from 1.10.2010, when erstwhile DEPB
items began to be exported under drawback scheme, is also a factor.
However, the field formations shall make every effort to adhere to the time limit of
10 days".
35. Pursuant to the Ministry's admission that it may not be possible to adhere to the
10 day limit in every case for some reason or other, the Committee wanted to know
whether the Ministry had conducted any study as to what extent delay was attributable
to the aforesaid reasons. In reply, the Ministry stated as under:—
"While a specific study has not been made, it is relevant to mention that the
number of drawback shipping bills has increased from 14.73 lakh in 2010-11 to
28.40 lakh in 2012-13. Thus, there is a distinct effect of increased work load from
01.10.2011 onwards. The Ministry had sensitized the field formations in this
regard in advance vide letter dated 23.09.2011".
36. When asked to provide the details of the delay in settlement of claims in
2,276 cases in Bihar, Mumbai, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh along with the details
regarding the period of delay and amount involved therein, the Ministry apprised the
Committee as under:—
"In various locations in Rajasthan, Audit observed delay of 30 days to
1813 days in 2135 cases. This involved drawback of  ` 9.87 crore. It is reported
that delay was due to various reasons on account of exporters. At ICD Agra in
Uttar Pradesh, Audit observed delay of 13 to 17 days in 22 cases. It is reported
that time taken in granting drawback was on account of incomplete claims where
deficiency memo was issued and claims settled after required documents were
filed. At ICD Saharanpur in Uttar Pradesh, Audit observed delay of 17 to
300 days in 10 cases. It is reported that in most of the cases the delay is due to
deficiency of documents submitted at the time of filing drawback claims.
At, JNCH in Maharashtra, Audit observed delay of 50 to 420 days in 37 cases.
These cases related to section 74 drawback of ` 1.68 Cr. and time taken were on
account of factors such as collection of certificates from Central Excise and
Banks and verification of imports from other ports.
In Patna (Preventive) Commissionerate in Bihar, Audit observed delay of
30 days to 4 years in 72 cases. It is reported that export under drawback scheme

13
to Nepal is governed by special conditions and procedures under Notification
No. 208- Customs dated 1.10.1977. The claim also does not become due till
certificate (signed by bank) of receipt of sale proceeds is produced".
37. Asked whether any time frame was being considered to comply with deficiency
memo by exporters as in the case of Section 74, the Ministry replied as under:—
"In the rules framed under Section 74, when a claim is returned with a deficiency
memo to the exporter, it is treated as filed when the exporter complies with the
requirements specified in the deficiency memo within 30 days of receipt of the
deficiency memo.
The nature and purpose of Sections 74 and 75 of Customs Act, 1962 are quite
different. Drawback on re-export under Section 74 is a refund of duties paid at
the time of import and the number of such cases is relatively very less. On the
other hand, Drawback on export of goods under Section 75 is in relation to
goods manufactured in India, and it is a rebate of duty/tax chargeable on input
materials or input services used in the manufacture of goods exported. Keeping
this difference in view, as well as because Section 75 drawback is a factor in
export pricing and competitiveness, such a provision does not have relevance
for Section 75 cases".
38. With regard to the delay and deficiencies in raising queries, the Committee
sought the Ministry's views and desired to know the action taken to ensure that the
queries were raised within the stipulated time of 10 days. The Ministry submitted as
under:—
"The Board's letter dated 26.6.2012 instructed the Chief Commissioners that any
tendency to raise generalized queries that do not clearly specify the exact
deficiency is to be checked and that the concerned officers, as well as their
supervisory officers, need to be made responsible if the norm of specificity is
violated. This letter has also been placed in public domain on CBEC website
along with Instruction No. 603/01/2011-DBK dated 31.7.2013. Secondly, the
Customs EDI system has recently provided the Importer-Exporter Code-wise
facility to view the queries raised. Both these measures, taken together, are
expected to minimize any tendency to raise generalized queries".
(b) Declaration of Freight
39. For claims U/Sec. 75, drawback is allowed on ad valorem basis on the FOB
value. Wherever transaction value is inclusive of freight cost, the freight component is
reduced from the transaction value and drawback is paid on the FOB value. In May
2000, the Department issued a circular which mandated the exporter to declare the
actual freight paid or payable by him on the shipping bill. The circular, inter alia,
stated that the Commissioner of Customs should also ensure that a regular test check
of 10-15 per cent of claims be carried out to verify the declaration of freight by the
exporter and take appropriate action on mis-declaration. However, unlike Rule 10(2) of
valuation rules for imports (which considers freight at 20 per cent of FOB value when

14
not ascertainable), no floor value has been imposed in Customs Valuation rules for
freight charges on exported goods.
40. The above provisions imply that it is possible to claim a larger sum as drawback
by under declaring the freight value. Audit reviewed the freight declarations made by
exporters by running SQL queries on the transactions data and found that the freight
declared was less than five per cent of FOB value in a significant number of cases in
Gujarat, Punjab, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. In 4,519 out of the 88,000 cases (5.13 per
cent) in Gujarat (Ahmedabad and Kandla Commissionerates) the freight declared was
found to be less than 1 per cent indicating risk of underreporting of freight.
41. On the Audit findings, the Ministry submitted as under:—
"Audit found the freight declared was less than 5 per cent of FOB value in a
significant number (approx. 20%) of cases in certain States and in 4,519 cases in
Ahmedabad and Kandla Commissionerates, the freight declared was less than
1% of FOB value. Audit observed that in absence of floor value for freight, there
can be possibility of claiming higher drawback on an over-declared FOB value
by under-declaring the freight value. Hence, the sample verification through test
check of 10- 15% of the freight declarations, as mandated by Circular No.44/2000
— Customs dated 15.05.2000, assumed significance and should be implemented
strictly by the Board.
The Ministry agrees with the above observation. Vide Circular No. 46/2011 —
Customs dated 20.10.2011, the Ministry has directed the field formations to
ensure that periodic sample checks and verifications are carried out with respect
to the actual freight payment certificates and the previous Circular be strictly
followed. In addition, for the cases indicated by Audit, the Ministry's letter
dated 15.7.2013 has directed concerned Commissioners to conduct sample
verifications as follows — 100% where the freight as percentage of FOB value is
upto 1%, and 10% in cases where it is upto 5%".
42. On being asked whether random verification of freight values of 10-15 per cent
cases as stipulated in the May 2000 Circular had been carried out, the Ministry submitted
as under:—
"The verification is carried out by field formations headed by the Commissioners.
The Ministry collated information on sample verification of the actual freight
payment certificates during the period 1.4.2011 to 31.5.2012.The period involved
covered 7 months prior to Ministry reiterating (on 20.10.2011) the instructions
for sample verification of actual freight payment certificates and the subsequent
7 months. It was reported that 3529 freight certificates were got specifically
verified and ` 4.75 lakh drawback with `0.02 lakh interest was recovered.
In addition, the field formations reported that the amount of freight declared at
the time of export is bein7g compared with that shown in the relevant bank
realization certificate when submitted in respect of export proceeds and action
for recovery of excess drawback, if any, is taken. However, separate data is not
available for this".

15
43. Asked about the steps taken by the Ministry for determining and fixing a suitable
floor value for freight charges on exported goods, the Ministry apprised the Committee
as under:—
"It was noted that the possibility of deducting a standard freight @ 16% to
arrive at the FOB value was considered earlier and the Board's Circular No.44/
2000 — Customs dated 15.5.2000 had conveyed that considering very large
number of shipments under drawback claims, it would cause considerable
administrative problems if provisional drawback was given on that basis and
later supplementary drawback claims on the basis of actual freight were to be
handled. Therefore, it had been decided that the exporter must generally declare
the actual freight paid or payable.
Ministry further noted that the freight component of an export consignment
depends upon varying factors such as destination, type and mode of carrier,
airway bill/ bill of  lading issued on volume basis, nature of goods being perishable,
etc.
For these reasons, Ministry viewed that determining a floor value for exports
may not be feasible and practical".
44. Asked whether the Ministry were considering using EDI data to detect cases of
under declared freight value, it was replied as under:—
"(a) Ministry had issued Circular No. 46/2011 dated 20.10.2011 directing field
formations for sample verification of actual freight certificate. Further,
Instructions dated 11.10.2013 have highlighted the importance of regular
sample checks of the veracity of declarations made by exporters (including
actual freight certificate where price declared on CIF or CIF basis) that are
accepted for disbursal of AIR drawback and directed that these should be
regarded as a form of audit checks for which proper record should be
maintained. Hence, Board has taken the requisite steps for strict implementation
by the field formations;
(b) D.G. (Systems) has been given the mandate to integrate export realization
data feed (once received from RBI under future arrangement) with the ICES.
This feed is expected to include the field for freight and would enable cross
check of details".
45. To a query as to whether a suitable floor value for freight could be determined
and fixed, the Ministry replied as under:—
"The freight component of an export consignment depend upon varying factors
such as destination, type and mode of carrier, AWB/BL issued on volume basis,
nature of goods being perishable etc. Therefore, determining a floor value for
exports may not be feasible and practical. However, the instructions for verification
of freight amount based on actual freight payment certificate have been issued
and reiterated vide Ministry's circular no. 46/2011 — Cus. dated 20.10.2011".

16
46. On being specifically asked about the effectiveness of the aforesaid Circulars
issued by the Ministry and how the Ministry monitored the field formations, the
Ministry replied as under:—
"The recovery of excess drawback indicates that regular verification of actual
freights is an effective mechanism to check over payment.
To ensure uniformity in implementation, certainty in data and improved
monitoring, the Ministry is prescribing a 6-monthly report regarding verification
of freight declarations.
Separately, the Ministry is working on a future arrangement with the Reserve
Bank of India to electronically receive a feed of bank realization data which the
banks would be obliged to upload on a separate RBI server. It is intended to
capture the freight in relevant cases in this feed. The Director General of Systems,
CBEC has been mandated the task of integrating this future data feed with
Customs EDI".
(c) Realisation of Export Proceeds
47. According to Audit the instruction issued by the Board in February 2009 for
monitoring the realization of export proceeds through the Bank Realisation Certificate
(BRC) module had not been followed by the field formations uniformly. While monitoring
work had been initiated and SCNs were being issued to the defaulting exporters in six
Commissionerates (Ahmedabad, Kandla, Chennai Sea, JNCH, Mumbai, Bengaluru)/
ICDs (Tughlakabad, Patparganj, and Rajsico) monitoring of realization through the
BRC module had not been introduced in six Commissionerates, viz. Kolkata (Port),
Kolkata (Airport), Hyderabad - II, Ahmedabad, Kandla and Cochin Commissionerates.
In Bengaluru Commissionerate, where the monitoring had been initiated, Audit found
that 150 letters issued to exporters, asking for submission of BRCs for exports involving
drawback payment of ` 27.23 crore between 2004 and 2007, returned undelivered. In
NCH, Delhi Audit were informed that the BRC module was unable to track outstanding
realisations due to technical problems.
48. Asked about the steps taken by the Ministry/Department for timely submission
of Bank Realisation Certificates by all exporters and entering the same into the system
promptly, the Ministry apprised as under:—
"Taking into account, inter alia, the legal provisions under section 75(1) of
Customs Act, 1962 read with rule 16A of the Drawback Rules, 1995 an in-house
mechanism, devised in consultation with trade and field formations and based
on EDI but involving manual entry of realization details, has been introduced
vide Circular No.5/2009- Customs dated 2.2.2009.
To ensure timely submission of details of export realisation, the exporter is put
on notice at the time of export itself with the due date for submission of realization
certificates being printed on shipping bills. Further, the submission process is
facilitated by requiring bank realisation certificates (BRCs) in six-monthly blocks
and option is given to submit certificates in the form of negative statements from
authorised dealers/statutory auditors.

17
For promptly entering the port-wise certificates, each Custom House is mandated
to create a special cell and the Commissioner is to designate the officers who will
make entries in the BRC module.
The progress of implementation has been reviewed periodically. In the Instruction
No. 609/119/2010-DBK dated 18.1.2011, the Board emphasized the accomplishment
of the work of feeding the details of BRCs/negative statements into the System
in a methodical and time bound manner. Vide Circular No. 46/2011- Customs
dated 20.10.2011, the field formations were directed to ensure proper data entry.
Vide Instruction No. 609/35/2013-DBK dated 4.4.2013 the Board issued strong
disapproval of instances where the exporters were asked to submit BRC/negative
statements more than once and directed Commissioners to ensure proper
management, guidance and close supervision of the reconciliation process.
It is relevant to mention that the process of issuing show cause notices following
the reports generated from the BRC module has also acted to sensitize the
exporters to timely submit the certificates.
The Ministry is working on a future arrangement with the Reserve Bank of India
to electronically receive data feed of sales proceeds realization details including
freight, commissions, item-wise realization, shipping billwise part payments, etc.
that the banks would be obliged to upload on a separate RBI server. The Director
General of Systems, CBEC has been mandated the task of integrating this future
data feed with Customs EDI. This would not only reduce manual work of feeding
reconciliation but also enable cross check of relevant details electronically".
49. On being asked about the implementation of the BRC module in all Customs
locations, the Ministry submitted as under:—
"The BRC Module has been implemented at all EDI locations under Indian
Customs EDI System (ICES). These number 114 at present and account for over
90% of the drawback paid. In few manual locations, export proceeds realization
is monitored manually. In the case of exports to Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar, Tibet,
Sinkiang, on account of the risk of exported goods being smuggled back into
India, the certificate of receipt of sale proceeds is a pre-condition to payment of
drawback".
50. About the mechanism put in place to quantify the outstanding foreign exchange
realization and drawback recoverable on those exports as on any particular data, the
Ministry submitted as under:—
“The bank realisation certificate (BRC) Module will indicate all the cases of
drawback shipping bills which are not accounted by the BRC/negative statement
details fed manually by officers into the EDI system.
A standard report can be generated at each EDI location which provides the
outstanding shipping billwise, authorized dealer code, FOB value in Indian Rupees
and drawback amount.

18
It is possible to generate a special report to quantify the outstanding foreign
exchange realisation against the said drawback shipping bills/FOB value".
51. Further asked whether any special cell had been set up for monitoring the Bank
Realisation Certificates, the Ministry submitted as under:—
"Special cells were set up by field formations in terms of the following directions —
(a) Circular No.5/2009- Customs dated 2.2.2009 mandated that each Custom House
shall create a special cell for management of declarations, amendments thereto,
annexures, certificates, registers etc. The cell shall be responsible for keeping
the declarations and other relevant papers in a proper manner and tracking
the remittance of export proceeds. Further, officers will be specially designated
by the Commissioner to verify the BRC/negative statement and to make entries
in the BRC module. Notices are to be issued to recover drawback paid on
export consignments in respect of which export proceeds have not been
realized.
(b) Instruction No. 609/119/2010-DBK dated 18.1.2011 directed that the bank
realization certificate (BRC) module should be implemented earnestly by all
Custom Houses. Complete and effective implementation was highlighted that
there should not remain any cases in the Custom Houses where the realization
has become due but the exporter has not submitted BRC/negative statement
and the SCN for such non submission has not been issued within a reasonable
time. It was directed that further action including adjudication of the cases for
recovery of drawback has to be accomplished in a methodical and time bound
manner.
Ministry has collated that in the 4 years from 2009-10 to 2012-13, `56.83 crore
drawback and interest was recovered on account of reconciliation work by
Custom Houses. Of 30,349 show cause notices issued (drawback `7558 crore),
as on 31.5.2013, 11,248 notices (`4676 crore) had been dropped as reconciled,
16,687 notices ( `2672 crore) were under adjudication and 2,422 notices
(` 210 crore) were confirmed under appealable orders. Ministry's letter dated
4.9.2013 has directed field formations for expeditious follow-up and disposal".
52. During oral evidence, the Committee desired to know the time period of realization
of export proceeds, the quantum of export proceeds which were realized and yet to be
realized and also whether the exporters delayed realization of export proceeds to get
the benefit of the depreciation. The Ministry responded in a written submission as
under:—
"(i) On 20.5.2013, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has reduced the time period for
realization and repatriation to India, of the amount representing the full value
of goods or software exported from twelve months to nine months from the
date of export.

19
(ii) The details of all exports proceeds realized and yet to be realized obtained
from Reserve Bank of India are as follows:—
Year Exports proceeds Exports proceeds Exports proceeds yet
realized ( ` in yet to be realized to be realized as
crore) ( `in crore) percentage of total
exports proceeds
2010-11 13,26,396 45,462.39 as on 3.31%
30.6.11
2011-12 17,30,564 75,677.20 as on 4.19%
30.6.12
2012-13 19,54,365 73,349.35 as on 3.62%
30.6.13
(iii) It wo uld appear that reducing the time period for realization and repatriation
of export proceeds suitably curtail a possible tendency by exporters to delay
realization of export proceeds to get the benefit of the depreciation in situation
where there is expectation of further depreciation".
53. The Committee also sought to know that if realization of export proceeds was
not made within the specified time, whether the drawback alone was recovered or any
penal action taken in this regard. The Ministry submitted as under:—
"Apart from drawback, the interest is also recovered from the date of payment of
drawback till the date of its recovery. The interest is recovered in terms of section
75 A (2) of Customs Act, 1962. The rate of interest is 18% since 1.4.2011".
54. Asked whether the Department had given wide publicity to rules and norms
disseminating information and the awareness that violation would lead to penal action,
the Ministry submitted as under:—
"Yes. All the basic Statutes, Rules, Notifications, Circulars and Instructions are
published on the Board's website. The Commissionerates issue Public Notices
and Trade Notices which are also published on their respective websites. These
facilities are freely accessible. This effectively disseminates information and
awareness of all provisions including penal provisions".
(d) Declaration of Value
55. Board Circular No.7/2003 dated 5th February 2003 stipulates that exporter has to
declare Present Market V alue (PMV) of the goods in every case in the shipping bills.
Market verification is to be initiated in cases where specific information is available
that the FOB value declared is inflated or there is prima facie evidence to suggest such
overvaluation and/or where the goods are sub-standard and it appears that the
acceptance of the declared FOB value would result in accrual of substantial unintended
drawback benefits.
56. In Hyderabad-II and Visakhapatnam Customs Commissionerates, Audit observed
that during the period from April 2006 to September 2009, there were 984 claims where
shipping bills showed Present Market Values (PMVs) that were lower than the Free on

20
Board (FOB). In 221 out of these 984 cases, Audit noted that the difference between
the declared price (FOB) and the PMV was material. In more than 50 per cent of the
221 SBs, the FOB declared was about 10 times the PMV of the items. Although such
differences fulfilled the criteria of prima facie evidence for triggering PMV enquiry,
market verification was not done in any of the 221 cases.
57. The Committee sought to know whether any market verification was conducted
in cases where the total claims in shipping bills showed Present Market Value lower
than the FOB and what action had been taken in erroneous cases. Further it was also
enquired whether the Ministry had any means to verify the declared value of the
export goods. To these queries, the Ministry replied as under:—
"Based on the Circular No.7/2003-Customs dated 5.2.2003, the Audit has observed
the need for conducting Present Market Value (PMV) enquiries in the cases
where PMV was lower than the FOB value, especially where the FOB was more
than 10 times the PMV declared.
There have been subsequent changes in legislation, which also need to be taken
into account —
(a) The Notification No.10/2006 - Customs (NT) dated 15.2.2006 amended the
Drawback Rules, 1995 to insert rule 8A to provide that AIR drawback shall
not exceed 1/3rd of the market price of the export product. Thus, apart from
the limitation that drawback would become zero if drawback exceeded PMV,
a further limitation was introduced that restricted drawback to a third of the
PMV, irrespective of the extent to which the FOB was higher than PMV.
(b) The Customs Valuation (Determination of Value of Export Goods) Rules
2007 were introduced with effect from 10.10.2007 to provide the legal basis
for the valuation of export goods and to check deliberate over valuation.
These rules have been framed emphasizing the acceptance of transaction
value for export goods subject to rejection of declared value in certain
exceptional cases on the basis of objectivity. The raising of doubts on the
declared value is to be based on certain reasons which may include — (a)
the significant variation in value at which goods of like kind and quality
exported at or about the same time in comparable quantities in a comparable
commercial transaction were assessed (b) the significantly higher value
compared to the market value of goods of like kind and quality at the time of
export (c) the mis-declaration of goods in parameters such as description,
quality, quantity, year of manufacture or production.
Hyderabad-II Commissionerate has reported that it has noted Audit’s
observations for future. However, with respect to the specific cases, it has been
reported that many of the exporters were manufacturer-exporters. Further, they
were awarded GMP (Good Manufacturing Practices) certificates by the
concerned Drug Controllers/ISO 9002 certificates by the BIS and also the goods
were FDA approved. Hence, the export goods were not sub-standard. Many
exporters did not also have any domestic clearances. The proof of receipt of the
export proceeds was produced.

21
In the case of Visakhapatnam Customs, in majority of the cases, the drawback
sanctioned was based on the brand rate fixed by Central Excise. In two cases of
AIR drawback, there appeared to have been incorrect feeding/typographical
errors of PMV against certain items, which was not noticed during assessment.
However, on 15 items pertaining to RAK Ceramics is reported that PMV is correct.
Ministry finds it relevant to state that in relevant cases where sufficient reasons
exist, verification of market price is being undertaken by field formations. Details
of the number of enquiries for present market value conducted with respect to
goods presented for export or exported under AIR duty drawback during the
period 2008-09 to 2012-13 were collated. A total of 780 such enquiries were
conducted across the country. Hence, action is being taken by field formations
in suspected erroneous cases.
On the question whether the Ministry has any means to verify the declared
value of the export goods, it is relevant to mention that in deserving cases
overseas enquiry may be done through the Directorate General of Revenue
Intelligence under certain conditions’’.
58. On being asked whether any recovery of drawback had been made in selected
cases, the Ministry apprised as under:—
"From amongst the cases highlighted by Audit, the Hyderabad - II
Commissionerate has reported recovery of `11,477 with interest of `3,781 in
1 case. The Visakhapatnam Customs have reported that though there was
evidently a typographical error or erroneous entry, an amount of `5,723 and an
amount of ` 4,584 was paid by two exporters".
(e) Fixation of All Industry Rate of Drawback
59. The All Industry Rate (AIR) is fixed under rule 3 of Drawback Rules by the GoI
for different commodities after an assessment of average incidence of Customs and
Central Excise duties suffered on inputs utilized in the manufacture of export products.
For fixation, average quantity and value of each class of inputs used in manufacture of
any product class along with average amount of duties paid is considered. The rates
are fixed for broad categories of products. The rate for any particular product group is
fixed on the basis of weighted averages of consumption of imported/indigenous inputs
of a representative cross section of exporters and average incidence of duties. Normally,
the rates are revised every year from 1st June,  i.e. after considering changes in duty
rates made in the budget presented. The AIR is usually fixed as a percentage of FOB
price of export products. However, in respect of many items specific rates are also
notified to provide a ceiling on drawback.
60. The Drawback Committee decides the modalities of holding deliberations and
meetings with the stakeholders and conducts field visits to study specific production
processes as it may consider necessary for the formulation of All Industry Rate (AIR).
It also interacts with the Administrative Ministries, Export Promotion Councils,
Commodity Boards, Trade Bodies and other stakeholders to elicit their views on the
existing Duty Drawback Scheme and the schedule (All Industry Rates).

22
61. Audit found that the working of the Committee to arrive at declared rates was
not fully documented. The Directorate of Drawback could not produce year-wise data
regarding cost sheets of various commodities, Import-Indigenous ratios of various
inputs used in manufacture, details on manufacturing processes of various products,
etc. that would have been the basis for fixation of AIR. Audit further found that the
Committee had not submitted any calculation sheets/worksheets along with their reports
to support the fixation of AIR. In the absence of working papers, Audit was not in a
position to assess or verify the procedures adopted for determination of All Industry
Rates of drawback. Further, the trend of rate revisions in the AIR drawback schedules
vis-a-vis changes in import/excise duty rates could not be correlated.
62. In the above context when asked about the role of the Drawback Committee and
sought explanation on the Audit finding that the Drawback Committee had not fully
documented the way the declared rates were worked out, the Ministry apprised the
Committee as under:—
"The Drawback Committee interacts with Export Promotion Councils, Trade
Bodies, Administrative Ministries and other stakeholders, conducts field visits
to study production processes and works out modalities for calculation of Duty
Drawback. The Committee suggests the All Industry Rates of Duty Drawback
on the basis of broad parameters including, inter alia, the prevailing prices of
inputs, input output ratios, share of imported materials, rates of duty, value of
export goods and also factors the incidence of duty on packaging, HSD/Furnace
Oil, service tax paid on taxable input services, etc.
The Audit's observation that Drawback Committee had not fully documented
the way the declared rates were worked out related to non-availability of
calculation sheets/worksheets behind All Industry Rates suggested by the
Committee. This was accepted by the Ministry and a beginning made in line with
Audit observations from 2010-11 onwards".
63. To a query whether the Directorate of Drawback maintained year-wise data
regarding cost sheets of various commodities, import-indigenous ratios of various
inputs used in manufacture and details on manufacturing processes of various products,
the Ministry submitted as under:—
"The data and information sought and received, from various sources like Export
Promotion Councils, Trade Associations, field formations, and Government
Ministries/Departments/Organizations as well as gathered from representations
from individual units, Government websites, CBEC databases and other sources,
is segregated, broadly by sectors, and made available to the Drawback Committee.
The Drawback Committee takes this information into consideration in working
out the All Industry Rates for which it has begun to provide worksheets for
major commodities indicating the input quantity and price, import-indigenous
ratios, duty incidence, export value, etc. Consequently, the Drawback Division
is also keeping the said data/information with the Drawback Committee's reports".

23
64. Further, when asked about how the All Industry Rates were fixed, the Ministry
inter alia submitted as under:—
"The All Industry Rate (AIR) is based on average quantity and value of inputs
and duties (both excise and customs) borne and service tax on input services
suffered in the manufacture of export product and is expressed as a percentage
of ratio of the average duty incidence and the average FOB value, per unit of the
export product.
This is illustrated for the export item adult shoes made of leather (drawback tariff
item No. 640305 for the Schedule effective 21.9.2013) in the attached worksheet.
The quantum of individual inputs taken for making one shoe pair are multiplied
with their average import/domestic price, import/indigenous ratio and the
applicable duty rates to arrive at the customs and central excise portions of the
duty incidence. The average prices are taken from National Import Database
(NIDB) and the Council for Leather Exports. The said duty incidence has been
totalled and then divided by the average FOB value of adult shoe pairs arrived
from Export Commodity Database (ECDB) to get the ad valorem rate. Then, the
average rates for duty incidence on fuel & packaging and for incidence of service
tax have been individually factored in the worksheet to arrive at the AIR
'composite rate' of 9.1% and customs rate of 2.3%".
65. To a specific query as to whether the fixation of AIR for major commodities was
documented, the Ministry stated as under:—
"From 2010-11 onwards, except for the year 2011-12, the Drawback Committee
has been documenting its worksheets indicating the input quantity and price,
import-indigenous ratios, duty incidence, export value, etc. for certain major
commodities under export which are used by the Committee for developing the
schedule of All Industry Rates.
In 2011-12, the erstwhile DEPB items were provided drawback rates in a transitional
arrangement and keeping in view aspects such as over lapping products between
Drawback and erstwhile DEPB scheme, Drawback Committee did not provide
worksheets".
(f) Fixation of Brand Rate
66. As per the provisions of Rule 7 (1) of the Drawback Rules 1995, whenever an
exporter finds that the amount or rate of drawback declared under the AIR schedule is
less than four-fifth of taxes or duties paid on inputs, he may apply to the jurisdictional
Commissioner of Central Excise for fixation of Brand Rate within 60 days from the first
Let Export Order date which can be extended for further period of 30 days by the
Commissioner. Board Circular No.14/2003 dated 6 March, 2003 prescribed that the
jurisdictional Deputy Commissioner of Central Excise is required to carry out verification
within a maximum period of 15 days from the date of receipt of a Brand Rate application
in the Headquarters of the Central Excise Commissionerate and thereafter the Brand
Rate is to be fixed within 10 days of receipt of verification report.

24
67. However, Audit found significant delays in Brand Rate fixation across the
Commissionerates as detailed below:—
• In Delhi, 17,692 claims were pending settlement for more than three months as
on January, 2010 due to delay in fixation of Brand Rates.
• In Central Excise Commissionerate, Mangalore, there were delays in 26 out of
the 27 cases of Brand Rate fixation during the review period. The average time
taken in verification by the Divisional Office was more than three months
against the norm of 15 days. After receipt of the verification report, the
Commissionerate took more than 8 months, on average, to fix the Brand Rate
against the norm of 10 days. The entire process of fixation took almost a year.
• Similarly, in Commissionerate Excise Jaipur-I —for the 35 applications examined,
the average delay in verification was found to be beyond three months and
delay for rate fixation after verification was close to three months. The total
delay in fixation of Brand Rate of drawback in each of the 35 cases examined
was beyond 6 months.
• Delays upto one month were noticed in 104 cases in Hyderabad-IV
Commissionerate as well.
68. With regard to the above Audit findings, the Ministry submitted the following:—
"The Ministry took up the matter with these jurisdictions. Hyderabad-IV Central
Excise reported that in most of the cases, the delay arose from non-furnishing of
required data/information by the assessee which deferred the required
verification. Mangalore Central Excise reported that in many of these cases the
exporter had submitted copies of application for removal for export (ARE-1) that
did not bear the signatures of the Customs authority at port of export and that
the verifications had involved a large amount of arithmetical calculations.
Jaipur-I Central Excise has noted Audit's observations for future.
Reasons for delay reported on all-India basis were collated by the Ministry.
Broadly, these include reasons attributable to exporters, such as non-submission
of original documents and related documents/information, explanation of use of
inputs and process of manufacture, inclusion of free shipping bills in claims,
non-compliance with deficiency memo etc; and also reasons attributable to the
nature of authentication being handled by field formations which involves
voluminous documents requiring verification, process verification in cases where
large number of inputs involved, large amount of arithmetic calculations, etc.
The Ministry vide Circular No. 46/2011-Customs 20.10.2011 has again directed
the field formations to ensure that brand rate drawback claims are disposed in a
time bound manner and to strictly follow the previous instructions".

25
69. Regarding the steps taken by the Department for quick disposal of Brand Rate
claims in order to facilitate exporters (as prescribed in the Board Circular of 2003), the
Ministry submitted that:—
"After the decentralization of work of fixation of Brand Rates to the Central
Excise Commissionerates with effect from 1.4.2003, the matter was reviewed
periodically to ease difficulties. Some of the important measures taken to facilitate
exporters were following —
(a) Vide Circular No. 83/2003 dated 18.9.2003, as a matter of further
decentralisation and for speedier issuance of the Brand Rate letters the
power to decide fixation of Brand Rate involving duty drawback above
 ` 5 lakh without any limit was delegated to the Additional/Joint
Commissioner of Central Excise.
(b) Board's letter No. 609/110/2005-DBK dated 26.8.2005 directed that subject
to certain conditions, for five categories of exporters the rates were to be
normally fixed without pre-verification of the data (verified and certified by
applicant and chartered accountant/chartered engineer) and exporter
authorized by Central Excise with a provisional Brand Rate letter (within 15
days where complete applications are filed) to claim the drawback from the
Customs and the rates fixed revised if necessary based on post-facto
checking to be completed within 2 months of the receipt of the application.
It was also directed that in the case of other exporters ( i.e. other than the
above-mentioned five categories), the normal procedure for fixation of Brand
Rate would apply. However, these exporters may be granted All Industry
Rate (AIR) in respect of applications filed under Rule 7 (Special Brand
Rate) pending verification and fixation of Brand Rates.
(c) Vide amendments dated 17.6.2010 to the Drawback Rules, 1995 the time
limit for filing application for fixation of Brand Rate was revised from a
maximum period of 90 days (from export including extension) to 12 months.
These higher levels of extension were made allowable at level of field
formations and advice issued that delays on the part of exporters may
generally be condoned on receipt of the exporter's applications".
70. Asked whether the process of fixing Brand Rate had been streamlined and how
the cases of delayed fixation of Brand Rate were being monitored regularly by the
Commissionerates, the Ministry submitted as under:—
“The decentralization of work of fixation of Brand Rates to the Central Excise
Commissionerates with effect from 1.4.2003 was ensured in a smooth manner
with advance directions to field formations to gear up for discharging the work,
creation of a Unit (in the Headquarters of the Commissionerate) to handle Brand
Rate fixation, specifying the broad parameters for taking decisions, maintenance
of records, grievance redress. The Board also clarified all the initial doubts that
Commissionerates raised on specific issues. Therefore, the organisational and
technical aspects of the process of fixing Brand Rate have been streamlined.
Since, the emphasis is for disposal of Brand Rate applications on priority and
transparent basis, the Commissioners of Central Excise closely supervise the
overall functioning of the Brand Rate Unit and draw monthly reports on receipt

26
and disposal of applications. The Chief Commissioners of Central Excise review
the functioning of Commissionerates in the Zone and grievances of the exporters
on this account are redressed through conduct of Open House".
71. Further, when asked whether the process of disposal of Brand Rate drawback
claims in a time bound manner had been streamlined and if there would be no delays on
this count in future, the Ministry responded as under:—
"As per Rule 13 of the Customs, Central Excise Duties and Service Tax Drawback
Rules, 1995, the claim for drawback is to be accompanied by specified documents
including copy of communication regarding rate of drawback where the drawback
claim is for a rate determined by the Commissioner of Central Excise under rule 6
or rule 7 of the rules.
Accordingly, the exporters provide the Brand Rate letters (fixing either the rate
for a period of time or the rate in respect of specific Shipping Bills) to the Custom
House for claiming the payment of Brand Rate of duty drawback.
No specific impediments in the process of timely disposal of such claims, once
the documents have been submitted, have been reported. However, if any issues
arise Ministry would have them resolved".
(g) Verification
72. As per para 3(c) of Customs Circular 14/2003, the authenticity of the data
furnished by the applicant in the specified statements for fixation of Brand Rate are
required to be verified by the jurisdictional Central Excise authority within 15 days of
filing of the application. However, Audit found that there was a problem in verifying
data furnished by Indian Oil authorities in their Brand Rate applications.
73. In one such instance, the Central Excise Commissionerate, Haldia issued
26 Brand Rate letters for an aggregated sum of  `12.93 crore between June, 2006 and
June, 2009, in favour of the exporter, Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. Audit found that the
exporter had claimed use of 1.04 MT and 1.08 MT of crude oil to produce 1 MT of ATF
and 1 MT of SKO respectively. However, the production process indicated that a wide
range of products were obtained from crude oil that together constituted the final
output. It was not clear how the output of single product was worked out. This called
for a detailed technical verification.
74. About the problem in verifying data furnished by Indian Oil authorities in their
Brand Rate applications owing to a large number of by-products that are obtained
during processing of crude oil, the Committee asked the Ministry to explain how they
arrived at Brand Rate in these cases. The Ministry apprised as under:—
"The question is in the context of fixation of brand rate in 26 cases by Haldia
Commissionerate. Audit noted that IOC Ltd. claimed crude oil to ATF ratio of
1.04:1 and crude oil to SKO ratio of 1.08:1. In light of wide range of products
being obtained from crude oil, the Audit observed that it was not clear how
output of single products was worked out which required technical verification.

27
The brand rate is determined and fixed by the jurisdictional Central Excise
Commissionerate. The Haldia Central Excise Commissionerate has reported that
in the documents submitted by the IOC Ltd. the input-output ratio for ATF and
SKO was particularly supported by Chartered Engineer's certificate".
75. To a specific query as to whether the Department had any mechanism of their
own to verify the declaration made by the exporters, the Ministry replied as under:—
"Based on Ministry's instruction, the D.G. (Audit), Customs & Central Excise
letter dated 13.07.2012 has directed all field formations to ensure that while
conducting audit of such assessees, the documents/declarations pertaining to
drawback claims should be randomly compared with their original production
records and in case, any discrepancy is noticed appropriate action to safeguard
the revenue is taken. The details of discrepancies noticed are also to be included
in draft audit report".
76. On being asked whether the creation of standard industry norms would
negate the very purpose and objective of Brand Rate, the Ministry reasoned as under:—
"Since, the brand rate is determined and fixed essentially based on actual incidence
suffered in the export product and the norms of output vary from refinery to
refinery due to age of machinery, level of technology used in refining and quality
of the crude used, it was conveyed that the creation of a standard industry norm
would go against the concept of brand rate.
However, Ministry had also noted the Audit observation that some standard
norms are necessary for products (petroleum products and other products with
similar technical complications) to enable verification of information and ensuring
uniformity. In this connection, Ministry had already stated (June, 2011) that the
documents submitted are duly verified by the chartered engineers. The Audit's
further recommendation on this for random checks was also implemented and
the Director General of Audit (CBEC) issued directions dated 13.7.2012 to all field
formations to ensure that while conducting audit of such assessees, the
documents/declarations pertaining to drawback claims should be randomly
compared with the original production records and details of discrepancies noticed
included in draft audit report and action taken to safeguard revenue".
77. On the feasibility of creating standard industry norms in order to enable
meaningful verification of information and ensure uniformity in fixation of Brand Rates,
the Ministry inter alia submitted as under:—
"The very nature of fixing brand rate makes it necessary that it has to be on the
basis of actual incidence of taxes suffered and creation of standard industry
norms as suggested by Audit would negate the very purpose and objective of
brand rate".
(h) Availment of CENV AT Credit
78. Drawback Schedule specifies higher All Industry Rate of drawback including
central excise component if CENVAT credit is not availed by the manufacturer of export

28
product. To avail this benefit, the exporter cannot avail CENVAT credit on inputs and
input services and has to produce a non-availment certificate from the jurisdictional
excise authorities. However, Audit found 2,160 cases in nine Commissionerates namely
Chennai Sea, Chennai Air, Tuticorin, Kandla, Jamnagar, Ahmedabad, Bengaluru,
Mangalore and Cochin where higher All Industry Rate of drawback was allowed to the
exporters but the "CENV AT not availed" certificates were not available with the
drawback claims files. Drawback of  `5.70 crore was sanctioned in these cases.
79. To a specific query as to how the Ministry ensured that CENV A T had not
been availed in the cases pointed out by Audit, the Ministry submitted that:—
"In the 1784 cases of Air Cargo in Tamil Nadu, the CENVAT certificates were
verified at the time of examination/export. In the 24 cases of Tuticorin in Tamil
Nadu, the drawback was sanctioned after checking the examination report of the
examining officer who had verified the non-availment of CENVAT Credit at the
time of examination of the export goods or that the goods were animal origin
product, where CENVAT is not applicable. After verification in respect of 212
cases, the Chennai (Seaport) Customs have reported that they are re-examining
63 cases.
The 24 cases of Cochin in Kerala pertained to two exporters. The first exporter
submitted CENV AT non-availment certificate from its supporting manufacturer
which was verified and confirmed from the jurisdictional Central Excise. The
second exporter shipped artistically hand carved wood furniture (mahogany
wood chair) for which the drawback rates in 2007 and 2008 were same whether
CENVAT credit was availed or not, which made the CENVAT non-availment
certificate inapplicable.
In 81 cases of export by Palvi Power Tech Sales Pvt. Ltd. higher drawback to the
extent of  `48.54 lakh was paid. The reversal of CENVAT credit (`6.03 lakh)
related to service tax on input services was done after export. The exporter has
appealed against confirmation of demands.
In Bengaluru Customs, 7 cases were found to relate to exports from units not
registered with Central Excise and 25 cases were verified as correctly paid. It is
reported that in 1 case of Birdy Exports Pvt. Ltd. the Bengaluru Customs found
higher drawback was claimed by mis-de claration that CENVAT credit is not
availed. The enquiry was widened and demand of  `2.44 cr. has been confirmed.
In the 2 cases of Mangalore Customs, declaration of non-availing of CENVAT
credit of supporting manufacturer was verified and found correct".
80. On being asked on what basis drawback claims were processed in cases where
the mandatory certification of "CENV AT not availed" was not produced by exporters,
the Ministry submitted as under:—
"In cases where mandatory proof of CENVAT not availed (the declaration made
by the exporter in the ARE-1 in case of a Central Excise registered manufacturer
or a self-declaration in case of others as provided for in Board's Circular No.8/
2003- Customs dated 17.02.2003) is not produced, the Central Excise and Service

29
Tax portion of AIR of duty drawback is not due and drawback rate 'when CENV AT
facility has been availed' may only be allowed".
81. The Ministry further stated as under:—
"In the extant procedure, the "Non- Availment of CENVAT Certificate" appears
in the list of documents in ICES (Indian Customs EDI System). The Certificate is
verified and this is recorded in the System document menu after which the
shipping bill moves to Let Export Order (LEO) stage. Non-availability of Certificate
requires amendment of shipping bill to show lower drawback rate, but in
subsequent (post LEO) drawback processing, the exporter can file supplementary
claim to restore higher drawback claim by producing the Certificate.
It has also been reported to Ministry that so as to not hold up export consignment
for the purpose of amendment, there has been a practice of recording comments
in the field for "departmental comments" in ICES of the non-availability of the
Certificate while it is shown as available in the System document menu that
enables LEO to be granted without delaying the export consignment and
subsequently the drawback claim is to be processed in terms of the departmental
comments requiring the production of the Certificate, else the lower rate is
sanctioned. Ministry shall examine this reported matter so as to ensure a uniform
procedure".
82. Asked about the latest position of recovery of drawback of  `18.90 lakh that
was paid in excess in respect of 36 cases, the Ministry stated as under:—
"The exporter's appeal, against confirmation of demand for drawback, was rejected
by Commissioner (Appeal) but in Revision it was ordered that exporter is to
deposit 25% of the drawback amount after which his appeal will get restored
before the Commissioner (Appeal). The time period for pre-deposit is till
8.10.2013".
83. The Ministry further stated that the exporter had predeposited `4.73 lakh
(25 per cent of 
 ` 18.90 lakh) on 30.09.2013 and the exporter's appeal was pending
before Commissioner (Appeals).
(i) Restoration of Scrolls
84. In the ICES, the Assistant Commissioner is authorized to generate a scroll
enumerating all the claims sanctioned on a particular day/week. The same is sent to the
Bank for direct credit to exporter's account. The Assistant Commissioner can also
restore a previous scroll for rectification of mistakes made while sanctioning the
drawback amount. Audit examination revealed that the Assistant Commissioner (DBK),
Custom House Kandla restored scroll No. 825/2009 on 1 April, 2009. Consequently, all
the drawback shipping bills in the restored scroll became ready for reprocessing.
Thereafter, scroll No. 845/2009 dated 8.4.2009 was re-generated and sent to the Bank.
This led to double payment of drawback of  `1.88 crore in 109 cases (April, 2009). This
was later detected and recovered in a phased manner with interest. However, this issue
was not brought to the notice of DG (Systems) for rectificatory action.

30
85.  When enquired about the control mechanism, if any, devised by the Ministry in
order to rule out the risk of bulk reprocessing of shipping bills, the Ministry submitted
as under:—
"The risk of bulk re-processing of drawback shipping bills arose from an option
to 'restore scroll' in the EDI system. The purpose of this option was to enable
rectification of mistakes in the generated scroll sent to bank for payment. At the
instance of Audit, double payment arising from restoring a 'paid scroll’, which
had to be recovered with interest, was highlighted and the Systems Directorate
decided to remove the option to ‘restore scroll’  itself. This was implemented in
May, 2010. Presently, a temporary scroll is generated which enables internal
checks before being finally generated and sent to the bank".
86. Asked whether any action had been taken against the erring officials, the
Ministry responded as under:—
"The 'restore scroll' option was exercised by the Assistant Commissioner leading
to double payment because amounts had already been credited from the earlier
scroll. While there was error, the double payment was detected and the entire
amount was recovered with interest within 5 months. Moreover, the decision to
altogether remove the ‘restore scroll’ option indicates its nature. In the overall
facts, no action was taken against the officers concerned".
(j) Monitoring of Declarations
87. Conditions 8(e) and (f) of Notification No.103/2008-cus dated 29th August,
2008 stipulated that AIR of duty drawback, including the customs component, could
not be availed when the inputs used in the manufacturing of exported goods were
procured either duty free under Rule 19(2) of Central Excise Rules, 2002 or when rebate
of duty paid on them had been taken under Rule 18 of Central Excise Rules, 2002. To
keep a check on the possibility of dual claim, the department had devised a mechanism
in the form of declarations (ARE-1 and 2) where the manufacturer would declare the
details of goods to be exported and non-claiming of rebate etc. under Excise Rules.
These declarations would thereafter be certified by both Central Excise and Customs
authorities.
88. Audit found 335 cases in Customs Commissionerate, Visakhapatnam, where
drawback of  `6.59 crore in respect of exports of 4.89 lakh tones of soya meals falling
under drawback serial No. 23 was sanctioned at AIR rate. The claims of the
manufacturing exporters were cleared without insisting on ARE-2 declarations on non-
availment of rebate as required under the rules ibid. This resulted in irregular sanction
of drawback of  `6.59 crore and the risk of dual benefit was not addressed.
89. The department while accepting the audit observation stated (August, 2010)
that the matter was under investigation of the Special Intelligence and Investigation
Branch (SIIB).

31
90. Regarding the outcome of the investigation conducted by the Special Intelligence
and Investigation Branch (SIIB) with reference to monitoring of declarations, the
Ministry submitted as under:—
"Audit had pointed out that in 335 cases at Visakhapatnam Customs, `6.59 cr.  of
drawback was sanctioned without addressing the risk of double benefit as there
was no insistence on ARE-2 declarations regarding non-availment of duty free
excisable inputs under rule 19(2) or rebate of duty paid on excisable inputs under
rule 18 of Central Excise Rules, 2002 in relation to the exported soya meal.
It was reported that the merchant-exporters had given declarations stating that
the exported goods were not manufactured by availing the procedure under
rule 18 or 19 of Central Excise Rules. In view of this, the insistence on submitting
ARE-2 at time of export would not arise.
However, the manufacturer-suppliers of one merchant-exporter (Suraj Impex)
appeared to have procured duty free inputs (hexane) under rule 19(2) of Central
Excise Rules in relation to the exported soya meal. This was suppressed through
mis-declarations by the merchant exporter with respect to exports under 135
shipping bills".
91. The Ministry further stated as under:—
"The investigation was done by lndore Regional office of Director General of
Central Excise Intelligence. It detected totally 57 cases of wrong availment of
duty drawback amounting  `29.68 crore on exported goods (de-oiled cake)
manufactured availing benefit of rule 19(2) of the Central Excise Rules, 2002.
Show cause notices were issued in all these cases. 7 cases have been decided in
Settlement Commission and 8 cases adjudicated. Recovery of  `11.86 crore has
been made so far. Remaining cases, including that of M/s.  Suraj Impex involving
drawback of 2.33 crore against 135 shipping bills filed at Visakhapatnam, are in
the process of adjudication."
92. Asked whether any remedial action had been initiated in this regard, the Ministry
stated as under:—
"Mis-declaration by one merchant exporter Suraj Impex in the case of 135 shipping
bills has been addressed by issuing show cause notice dated 11.11.2011 for
wrong availment of drawback amounting to `2.33 cr. This notice is also issued to
the alleged manufacturers who availed the rule 19(2) procedure. The adjudication
is likely to be completed around end of October, 2013. Other exports did not
involve obtaining duty free excisable inputs or availing rebate of duty paid on
excisable inputs.
In order to ensure integrity of the declarations made by exporters, the Board's
Circular No. 46/2011-Customs dated 20.10.2011 has directed field formations to
carry out periodic sample checks and verifications of export declarations".
(k) Sanction of Drawback on products not specified in Brand Rate Letters
93. As per Duty Drawback Rules, 1995, where brand rate of drawback has been
determined in respect of a particular category of export goods, the drawback has to be
paid as per the specifications mentioned and the terms and conditions stipulated in the
brand rate letters issued by the competent authority.

32
94. In the Commissionerate of Customs (Preventive), West Bengal, drawback was
sanctioned on the basis of brand rate letters issued by Commissioner of Central Excise,
Chandigarh and Faridabad for export of 'agricultural tractors' of specified models.
Audit scrutiny of the export documents (shipping bills, invoice, packing lists etc.)
revealed that the exported agricultural tractors were different from the models that
were mentioned in the brand rate letters. This resulted in irregular payment of drawback
amounting `45.07 lakh which was recoverable with interest. Action taken on the
departmental personnel responsible for the mistake had not been communicated.
95. When asked to furnish reasons for sanction of drawback on products not
specified in Brand Rate letters, the Ministry justified its action as under:—
"Audit observed that the export documents revealed that exported agricultural
tractors were different from the models that were mentioned in the brand rate
letters which resulted in irregular payment of drawback by the Commissionerate
of Customs (Preventive), West Bengal.
On examination of the matter it was found that agricultural tractors were exported
under bills of export accompanied by requisite documents which mentioned the
description of the goods (model number and corresponding horsepower). The
brand rate was fixed, for exports made under these bills of export, by the Central
Excise Commissionerate where the goods were manufactured and cleared for
export. The brand rate fixation letters issued by Central Excise mentioned the
specific bill of export number, model number and quantity of tractors.
For example, in the bill of export No.7614 dated 30.11.2008, the model number is
PT-439 (39 h.p.) agricultural tractor and the brand rate letter dated 19.1.2009 of
Faridabad Central Excise mentions details as the shipping bill No. 7614 dated
30.11.2008 for agricultural tractor Powertrac — 439.
Thus, in the above cases, the identification of the goods flowed from the brand
rate letters which mention both bill of export number and the description. Hence,
the Audit observation is not admitted.
However, to avoid unnecessary room for doubt in future, the Ministry has vide
Instructions dated 31.7.2013 highlighted the instance to all field formations and
directed that full and comprehensive details of the exported goods should be
indicated clearly in the brand rate letters".
IV. COMPLIANCE OF AUDIT OBJECTIONS
96. In his deposition before the Committee, the Revenue Secretary while expressing
gratitude to Audit, admitted that the Audit Report had assisted greatly in devising
enhanced provisions for proper disbursement of drawback. He inter-alia testified as
under:—
"Recommendations regarding proper procedure for identification and use of
imported goods re-exported, better documentation in fixation of All Industry
Rate, introducing validation in EDI system for net weight, removing risk in EDI
of reprocessing of drawback scrolls, have been implemented.

33
The Audit had highlighted instances where re-export drawback had been
extended inconsistently with the provisions for time and manner of claiming the
drawback. Board has directed that the speaking orders passed in the cases of re-
export relating to identification and determination of use of the goods shall
encompass all relevant aspects including compliance with provisions of Rule 5.
After Audit had emphasized the issue of mismatch in shipping bill and drawback
declarations, the Board specifically advised the field formations of the need for
continued scrutiny to avoid any sanction of excess drawback. Moreover, a large
number of cases have been verified, and the balance undergoing verification
with Audit being periodically updated".
97. He added:—
"In line with recommendations to take measures for faster claims processing, the
Board has directed checks on raising generalised queries, monitoring of EGM
pendency (since drawback is processed after EGM is filed as proof of export)
and monitoring of time taken to pay drawback. The exporter has also been given
access to electronically view status/reasons of pending drawback claims.
While reiterating instructions for periodic sample verification of actual freight
payment certificates, the Board has also issued directions for sample verification
of the cases observed by Audit and for reporting outcomes.
For better tracking of defaults in realization of export proceeds—
• The bank realization certificate (BRC) module is now implemented at 114 EDI
locations.
• To keep field formations sensitized, all India survey was conducted for
4 years period from 2009-10 to 2012-13. During this period, the field formations
issued 30349 notices of which 11248 were closed as proof of realization was
produced, 2422 notices were confirmed, and 16687 notices were under
adjudication as on 31 May, 2013. Recovery of  `56.83 crore drawback including
interest has been made in this period. Orders have also been issued for
expeditious follow-up and disposal of these cases.
• The Board has decided to move to an Electronic-BRC system in which the
data feed shall be received from a Gateway set up by RBI in which all banks
shall be obliged to upload the export realizations. The data feed, expected to
begin in December, 2013 shall be integrated with the Customs EDI system".
98. He also stated:—
"On the provisioning in EDI to record justification for changes made by assessing
officers and to capture brand rates, the EDI system records the AIR drawback
rate declared and the altered rate, if any. Reasons can be recorded in the field for
departmental comment, and the Board has directed that speaking details,
including related to brand rates, should be recorded. Meanwhile, a mechanism

34
of either capturing brand rate details electronically in Central Excise software or
capturing the particulars of the brand rate letters in Customs EDI, is being
explored.
On the compliance aspects of the Report, while certain aspects are contested, in
other cases either the recovery is made ( `3.16 crore) or demands confirmed
(`2.15 crore). Certain cases remain under process of verification or adjudication
and reporting outcomes to Audit shall remain an on-going process".
 99. When asked that in spite of these remedial measures, the same lapses and
irregularities continued to persist as reported in a subsequent Audit Report (No. 8 of
2013), the Revenue Secretary deposed as under:—
"Based on the Audit Report, a whole lot of actions have been put in place by the
CBEC and by the Department. The next Report also picks up many of these
weaknesses is not surprising. It is because a whole lot of instructions, for example,
went out in the month of June, 2012. Some instructions went out in
October, 2011. A whole lot of instructions have gone out in July, 2013. So, this is
an on-going process."
100. A tabulated statement of the compliance to Audit findings as furnished by
the Ministry is given in Annexure I.
101. When specifically asked about what was meant by acceptance of Audit
recommendation, the Ministry submitted as:—
"The acceptance of recommendation implies that the appropriate action for its
implementation is initiated. A few illustrations are given below.
The recommendations to issue instruction indicating parameters for identification
of goods under re-export and clarify the typical conditions under which goods
are to be treated as used after import were followed by instructions to the field
formations that identification of goods require examination and verification of
various parameters, including but not limited to physical properties, weight,
marks and numbers, test reports, documentary evidences vis-à-vis import
documents etc., and that the Assistant/Deputy Commissioner of Customs would
pass a speaking order, giving detailed reasons with regard to establishing the
identity and determination of use for all cases of re-export drawback.
Subsequently, taking cognizance of other Audit observations related to re-export
cases, these instructions were expanded to cover all aspects of section 74 and
the related rules. This not only ensures objectivity in action, but also requires
that the Commissioner to be satisfied of the legality and propriety of the decisions.
The instructions for sample verification of actual freight paid were reiterated as
recommended. Observations to document fixation of AIR by Drawback Committee
were conveyed to Committee and a beginning made from 2010-11 onwards by
Committee providing worksheets for certain major commodities. Validation for
net weight declared was implemented by an EDI provision that sum total of

35
drawback quantity does not exceed net weight of Shipping Bill for like quantities.
Devising of control mechanism to rule out risk of bulk reprocessing of drawback
was implemented by removing the 'restore scroll' option from EDI.
In areas of mismatch in the related declarations for commercial purposes or
drawback purposes, where it was not found feasible to fully build provisions in
EDI to ensure consistency of data, field formations were specifically instructed
of the need for continued scrutiny of the details so that excess drawback did not
arise from the mismatch. Similarly, for capturing the brand rates in the Customs
EDI system, directions were issued to record speaking details in the field for
departmental comments while EDI options are explored".
102. During evidence, the Chairperson, CBEC informed the Committee that they had
recovered `3.16 crore based on the Audit recommendations and an amount of
`2.15 crore had been confirmed.
V .  WEAK   INTERNAL   AUDIT
103. In the light of accepted audit objections, the Committee during evidence enquired
about the measures undertaken for strengthening internal audit procedures. The
Revenue Secretary inter alia deposed as under:—
"I think certainly the internal audit procedures are important. But I would also
mention that there has been - even following this audit report - further codification.
Codification helps in both the exporters and our officers knowing the rules. It
has followed — all the instructions. Ones issued in 2011; ones issued in 2012. All
are in those directions. Certainly, the internal audit and vigilance checks will
help. We have been taking actions against our officials who are involved in any
of these irregularities, pretty stringently. And the whole lot of departmental
proceedings which take place against officers or on issues related to drawback
too".
104. When asked about its implications it had for Internal Audits’ functioning and
strengthening it, the Ministry submitted as under:—
"Ministry has noted that there are aspects highlighted by C&AG of India on
compliance side, particularly those related to processing of re-export drawback
cases under section 74 of Customs Act, where Internal Audit could not point out
the deficiencies. Hence, there is room for improvement in functioning of Internal
Audit.
While the entire section 74 re-export drawback process stands strengthened by
the mandate for passing appealable orders in original and their examination by
Commissioner, the perceived deficiency in Internal Audit functioning is being
highlighted to Commissioners with regard to section 74 cases, cases of manual
drawback and fixation of brand rates so that steps are taken to strengthen and
ensure desired diligence and improved performance".

36
105. About the existing mechanism to monitor the Scheme with specific reference to
its review, adequacy to avoid lapses in future and steps to strengthen the internal
control and monitoring mechanism, the submission of the Ministry was as under:—
"Shipping bills filed under drawback scheme are subjected to scrutiny by different
levels of field officers. The Export Commodity Data Base (ECDB) developed by
CBEC is an important tool to verify the values as declared for export commodities.
Examination norms for drawback shipping bills are in place and these vary with
amount of drawback, sensitivity of destination, splitting of consignments, etc.
At examination stage, the requirement of documentation that assists in
subsequent processing has been provided in the EDI system. Feasible EDI
system validations have been provided. Once goods are exported, the processing
of drawback claims in EDI acts as a second stage check. The level of scrutiny is
automatically raised depending on drawback amount. Suitable instructions ensure
that appropriate checks are exercised by field officers at these stages before
payment.
A number of sample checks on the declarations made by exporters are prescribed.
Reconciliation of export sales proceeds is provided for. The Commissioners are
expected to also exercise special checks in case of first time exporters, exporters
who have taken large amounts of drawback suddenly, sensitive destinations,
sensitive products etc. as well as random audit checks in respect of other exporters
to ensure that all export proceeds are realized, including confirming on random
basis whether the certificates given by the authorized dealers are genuine. These
aspects enable recovery in deserving cases, including wider investigation where
necessary, which are on-going processes.
As aids to monitoring, the Special Intelligence and Investigation branches of
field formations conduct checks. Similarly, Customs (Preventive) formations have
concurrent jurisdiction to carry out checks and investigations. The Directorate
of Revenue Intelligence also makes appropriate interventions in deserving cases".
106. The Ministry further stated as under:—
"From point of service delivery, the supervisory officers take corrective steps on
periodical basis taking into account the nature of queries, status of EGMs, etc.
The monitoring of fixation of Brand rates is done by Central Excise field formations
and brand rate fixation is subjected to internal audit. The pendency of claims and
disbursal is also reviewed by the Ministry.
Based on dialogue between field formations, Systems Directorate, stake holders
and the Ministry as well as inputs from Audit and other wings of Government,
the functioning of the Drawback Scheme is regularly reviewed.
Some of the recent steps taken to strengthen internal control and monitoring
mechanism include deciding the section 74 re-export drawback cases through
quasi-judicial  orders that invariably get subjected to examination by the
Commissioners, re-iteration of directions for sample checks of exporters various
declarations, introduction of Risk Management System on export side on pilot

37
basis which shall be extended to all EDI locations, newer EDI system validations
such as for consistency of net weights declared, provisioning for all India alerts
in EDI system, introducing temporary payment scroll before final scroll for
ensuring additional checks, enabling more effective monitoring through making
available to supervisory officers the text of departmental queries, the Chief
Commissioners and Commissioners being enabled to electronically view
pendency and disbursal details for all locations in their jurisdictions/Zones,
making daily EDI drawback disbursal and stage-wise pendency on all India and
location basis available through CBEC website.
With these steps, Ministry hopes to improve internal control and monitoring at
all levels and minimise instances that lead to less than desired levels of
performance. This shall be a continuous process".
107. Further asked to elucidate the steps taken to strengthen the Internal Audit, the
Ministry responded as under:—
"Ministry has issued instructions dated 11.10.2013 pointing out to field
formations that the Audit Report had highlighted aspects on compliance vide
which Internal Audit did not notice and that better performance by Internal
Audit would have enabled remedial actions to be taken earlier. The Commissioners
have been directed on 11.10.2013 to appropriately strengthen their Internal Audit
Wings to achieve desired diligence levels and significantly improved performance
in areas such as payment of re-export drawback, manual drawback and fixation
of Brand Rates. The respective Commissioners would be taking further action in
this regard.
The audit conducted by Pr. CCA is related to accounting, while that conducted
internally by Commissionerates is in the perspective of assessment and
compliance issues".
108. Enquired whether ECDB was linked to the ICES and how it was used and what
percent of confidence did the two stage check provide to CBEC, the Ministry submitted
as under:—
"Relevant export data from ICES is made available to Directorate of V aluation for
ECDB. ECDB is used by Customs officers to access information on valuation
including for live consignments. ECDB is a web-based application where FOB
value of export goods can be ascertained for exports made over a period of time
from different Customs locations. Search options are available in respect of
commodity description, RITC code, Drawback serial number, Country of
destination etc.
Two stage check in the case of Drawback Scheme i.e. at the time of export and at
the time of sanction of drawback, ensures that deficiencies are addressed and
different set of officers exercise scrutiny, thereby instilling the confidence of
compliance with the rules".

38
109. On being asked about auditing the entire Import/Export data captured in the
EDI system of customs, the Ministry stated as under:—
"The import/export data captured in EDI Systems of Customs is transactional
data. Prior to implementation of RMS in Imports, there was concurrent audit of
bills of entry. RMS in Imports substituted concurrent audit with selective Post
Clearance Audit (PCA). In exports the subsequent stage in which shipping bills
are processed for sanction of drawback in EDI, acts as a second check.
Implementation of RMS in exports has begun. In first phase, which is under
implementation, the RMS in exports processes the data upto goods examination
stage. In the second phase, the RMS in exports shall process shipping bill data
after the Export General Manifest (EGM) is filed and select shipping bills for
drawback scrutiny and PCA".
110. Further asked whether the findings of this audit were different from the findings
of the statutory audit findings, the Ministry replied as under:—
"As explained above, in the case of drawback sanctioned in EDI system, the
processing stage that is subsequent to filing of the EGM is acting as a second
stage check before drawback is disbursed. The statutory audit occurs after this
stage. The systems and processes have benefitted and have been strengthened
based on the findings and recommendations of statutory audit".
111. Asked whether RMS had been introduced in the EDI ports, the Ministry
submitted that out of the 116 ports under EDI, RMS (Imports) had been introduced at
87 ports and RMS (Exports) at 14 ports.
112. To a specific query as to what were the kinds of MIS, exception reports, alerts
generated at different levels, the Ministry explained as under:—
"(a) There are various kinds of MIS Reports generated which include the following:
• Pendency Reports for Imports and Exports: Through these reports, status of
pendency at each stage of processing of import documents or export
documents, as well as drawback pendency, in a custom location can be
monitored. Facility to drill down to individual document level has also been
provided.
• Periodic Import & Export reports: Through these reports, details of duty
collection, documents submitted, drawback sanctioned, cess collected,
Scheme wise export FOB, etc. can be monitored.
• Top Commodity/Duty/Importer/Exporter/Drawback Reports for Imports and
Exports.
• RMS Reports
(b) Facility has also been provided in ICES 1.5 for viewing National MIS reports
based on role and location. In addition, there are more than 150 other MIS
reports available to the officers of the Commissionerate for monitoring,
reporting and control.

39
(c) Alerts are generated at different levels. These may relate to valuation, quantity,
any type of mis-declaration or modus operandi etc. For imports, alerts are
placed by the Local Risk Manager of the Commissionerate or by Risk
Management Division (RMD). In RMS in Exports, the local alerts can be
placed in similar manner after due approvals of the Commissioner or an officer,
not below the rank of Additional/ Joint Commissioner, designated by him or
by RMD”.
VI.  EV ASION  PRONE  COMMODITIES
113. Deposing before the Committee, the Chairperson, CBEC conceded that there
were traditionally evasion prone commodities and ready made garments (RMG) was
one of the very sensitive commodities where it was difficult to ascertain the present
market value and consequentially the amount of drawback which was due to the
exporter.
114. She inter alia deposed:—
“That is the sensitive commodity that does receive our attention. The DGRI
would bear me out, on a large number of cases that we have made on RMGs and
as you are aware, there are drawback caps that have been put, which ensure that
beyond a certain level, they cannot claim what is not due to them".
115. When the Committee pointed out the need for having a value cap, the Director
General, Directorate of Revenue Intelligence deposed as under:—
"Ready Made Garments lends itself to such misuse. But there are value caps.
Basically, what this value cap means is that you cannot get more than a certain
percentage irrespective of the value you declare and these value caps are running
across the entire drawback schedule and except for around 30 per cent of the
commodities, everything else has a value cap."
He added that if the value cap for a ready made shirt was `31 which was also duty
component then the price of the shirt would be around ` 400.
116. When it was pointed out that there had been a tendency of the RMG exporters
to overvalue the declared price of the garments much above the actual selling price
and grab the high rate of drawback, the Chairperson, CBEC conceded this and stated
that because of such trends and evasions more attention was being paid to this sector
so as to prevent wrong doings.
VII.  WORKING  OF  THE  ECONOMIC  INTELLIGENCE  AGENCIES
117. During evidence, the Revenue Secretary apprised the Committee that the total
incidence of duty drawback abuse during 2012-13 was ` 20,061 crore (` 17,354 crore on
duty drawback and ` 2,706 crore on DEPB duty foregone and others). When asked
about the action taken in the fraudulent cases, the Chairperson, CBEC deposed as
under:—
"Wherever there was a deliberate connivance found — in some cases, there has
been connivance and I admit that — very serious charge-sheets have been

40
issued, officers have been punished. The exporters have also been arrested
wherever we could find this. In some cases, as you know, they just disappear
after six months. But we take very stringent action wherever it is necessitated.
You wanted to know that in the case of default, what do we do. The interest part
is recovered from the exporter".
118. Asked about the mechanisms put in place to prevent/check the organized
misuse of drawback and to ensure verification of exports, the Ministry apprised the
Committee as under:—
"The monitoring mechanisms serve as checks on organized misuse of drawback
scheme. These include the assessment and examination mechanisms on exports,
use of export commodity database (ECDB), provision of drawback caps,
restrictions on quantum of drawback related to market value, insistence on
certificates supporting drawback claims, mechanisms of recovering drawback
when export proceeds are not realized, sample verifications of certificates and
declarations, and concurrent checks by different agencies.
In addition, specific legislative provisions assist in checking organized misuse.
For example, in year 2007 the section 114 of Customs Act was suitably amended
to provide for penalty not exceeding the value of the goods, as declared by the
exporter or the value as determined under the Act, whichever is higher. Thus,
cases of over-valuation could be more effectively penalized. Similarly, section
135 of Customs Act relating to punishment for offenses was suitably amended
to expressly provide that offence related to fraudulent availing of drawback was
punishable.
The role and functions of DRI have relevance in checking organized misuse of
drawback scheme. DRI receives intelligence, inter alia, from officers posted
with Customs Overseas Intelligence Network (COIN). It also coordinates the
requests for overseas inquiry or investigative assistance, made by the Indian
Customs authorities, through the COIN units either under various bilateral
agreements or the International Convention on Mutual Administrative Assistance
for the Prevention and Repression of Customs offences (Nairobi Convention
1977)".
119. When the Committee sought to know the number of cases of fraudulent claims
of duty drawback were detected by the DRI in 2012-13, commodities/private ports/
exporters/officials found involved in these cases and the actions initiated thereon, the
Ministry responded as under:—
"In 2012-13, the DRI detected 39 cases involving drawback amount of `67.79
crore. No specific role of officers requiring action against them was found. Details
of the major cases are:
(a) 5 cases of over-valuation by Ludhiana based exporters (Century Knitters,
Rajesh Hosiery Mills, Rama Krishna Knitters Pvt. Ltd., Famina Knit Fab;

41
Radhika Knitters) exporting readymade garments through ICD,
Tughlakabad. The amount of excess duty drawback availed is estimated
to be `55 crore of which voluntary deposit of  `2.9 crore has been received.
(b) 10 cases of overvaluation and non-realisation of foreign exchange by
Tirupur based exporters (Morning Star Apparels, Cherish Knits, High Breed
Fashions, VTX Industries Ltd., Tunic Fashion Apparel, R.K. Cottons, Excel
Sourcing Co., Anugraha Fashion Mills Pvt. Ltd., Naveena Apparels, Pounds
Apparels) exporting readymade garments and textiles from Tuticorin and
Chennai. Show cause notices have been issued. Amount recovered is
`2.05 crore.
(c) cases of mis-classification of goods by Hind Steels (Gandhi Dham), Vinod
Electroplating Works (Jalandhar), Bright Steels & Alloys (Phagwara), Ravi
Technoforge Pvt. Ltd. and Upkar International (Rajkot) and Jaykal Exports
(Mumbai) exporting threaded rods, alloy steel, forged rings and diesel
engine parts through the privately owned Mundhra Port. Estimated
drawback involved is `1.98 crore.
(d) 3 cases of over-valuation by the Ahmedabad based exporters (Ganesh
Trading Co., Pearl Exim and Midland Trading Co.) exporting scarves and
readymade garments made of man-made fabrics from ICD, Khodiyar and
Air Cargo Complex, Ahmedabad. Show cause notices involving drawback
of `33 Lakh have been issued.
(e) 1 case of non-realization of export proceeds by Shree V allabh Overseas,
Ludhiana who exported readymade garments through ICDs at Ludhiana
and Tughlakabad availing drawback of `4 crore investigation is underway”.
120. Asked whether any exercise had been undertaken to detect instances of nexus
between the Customs officials and the exporters, the Ministry replied as under:—
"The remedial action in cases that have been accepted has been undertaken or
initiated. However, it is reported that these cases are not of nexus between
officers of the Department and exporters.
In deserving cases, the Department examines roles of officers, including in cases
of wrongful drawback. The Director General (Vigilance), CBEC has reported that
since 2010-11 (till November 2013), a total of 22 officers (of the rank of AC, DC
and JC) have been proceeded against for failure to maintain absolute integrity in
connection with cases related to duty drawback".
121. On the issue whether FEMA was attracted when there was non-realisation
of export proceeds for drawback exports and whether DRI had taken any action in such
cases, the Ministry submitted in a note as under:—
"FEMA, 1999 is also attracted when non-realisation of export proceeds of
drawback occurs. Section 8 of the FEMA, 1999 deals with realisation and
repatriation of foreign exchange and Section 13 deals with penalties for
contravention of any provision of the FEMA, 1999.

42
While the DRI generally does not itself investigate non-realisation of exports
proceeds, but if there is specific intelligence such cases are taken up for
investigation. Moreover, once cases related to fraudulent availing of drawback
are initiated all the aspects, including non-realisation of export proceeds, are
investigated".
122. When the Committee specifically asked how vigilant and well equipped was
the DRI to deal with cases of systemic frauds and gather advance information to
prevent the frauds, the Director General, Directorate of Revenue Intelligence, deposed
as under:—
"Wherever we do notice substantial enhancement in values to claim unduly
large benefits in the form of drawback, we capture all export data in export
commodity data base; we see values of goods so being exported. And based on
that, we pick up some cases for scrutiny. We have made such cases which the
Chairperson has mentioned. The challenges really in all these cases are that the
export proceeds invariably gets realised and money comes into the country. The
second challenge thereafter is that in terms of valuation rules, we have to prove
that the values declared by them are incorrect and similarly priced goods could
not have been valued so. That remains a challenge. Having said that, we have
detected a few cases".
123. Regarding the measures that could be taken to strengthen DRI, the Ministry
apprised as under:—
"Looking at the mandate, functions, jurisdiction and challenges faced by DRI,
the Ministry is examining a range of measures to strengthen the functioning of
DRI. These include enhancement of organizational strengths in terms of persons,
office premises, anti-smuggling equipment, logistics, parity with CBI in special
incentives for personnel, dedicated residential accommodation, fixed tenure of
2 years for the Director General. It is also being examined if DRI should have
powers under PMLA limited to cases related to the Customs Act".
124. On the issue of working of the Economic Intelligence Agencies like DRI, CEIB
and ED and synergizing their actions for avoiding needless overlap, the Ministry
submitted in a note as under:—
"A number of economic intelligence agencies are working under the Department
of Revenue, Ministry of Finance, Government of India. A brief note on the
functions and mandate of these agencies is enclosed as Annexure II.
Each of these agencies has a specific mandate and pursues investigations
concerned to the respective laws it administers. However, since the mandate of
operation of these agencies is primarily related to economic intelligence, there
may be instances of unintended overlap in their functioning. Many a times,
while pursuing investigations under its mandate, an agency can come across
information that may not be directly relevant to its own mandate, however the
same may be directly relevant to another agency. It is in this background that the
need for synergizing the actions of all these agencies is highlighted.

43
Department of Revenue has over the years formulated various methods and
mechanism to ensure that all economic intelligence agencies working under it
function with complete synergy. Some of these mechanisms are detailed as
under:—
(a) The Central Economic Intelligence Bureau (CEIB) has been designated as the
Nodal Agency on Economic Intelligence. The CEIB coordinates in the field of
economic intelligence to ensure active information exchange and smooth
interface between the different agencies using the following mechanisms—
(i) The Economic Intelligence Council (EIC) (ii) The Working Group on
Intelligence Apparatus (iii) Heads of Agencies Committee (iv) Group on
Economic Intelligence (v) Regional Economic Intelligence Committees (REICs)
and (vi) Secured Information Exchange Network (SIEN);
(b) The Department of Revenue has also constituted a High Level Committee
(HLC) under its aegis to expedite exchange of relevant information emerging
from on-going investigations into alleged economic offences and to facilitate
a coordinated investigation by different law enforcement agencies. The HLC
is headed by the Revenue Secretary and comprises of Deputy Governor
(RBI), Director (IB), Director (Enforcement), Director (CBI), Chairman CBDT,
DG (NCB), DG (Revenue Intelligence), Director (FIU) and JS (FT&TR-I) CBDT
as members. The main mandate of the High Level Committee is to ensure a
multi-disciplinary approach for a coordinated investigation under different
laws”.
125. About the need for ensuring harmonious functioning of the Economic
Intelligence Agencies, the Director General, Directorate of Revenue Intelligence deposed
as under:—
"It sees whether there is misdeclaration of value which has taken place. Having
seen that, it takes action to ensure that benefits which accrue from this
misdeclaration of value are recovered. The next issue is purely on hawala to
finance this misdeclaration. That aspect, the Enforcement Directorate would be
better equipped to handle it. We pass on all the details to them and they
concurrently also do that task. So, we do the task relating to the customs,
getting back the incorrectly availed benefits and the Enforcement Directorate
does the hawala part of it".
VIII.  CUSTOMS  OVERSEAS  INTELLIGENCE  NETWORK  (COIN)
126. When the Committee sought to know about the performance and efficiency of
the foreign post of the customs officials in minimizing incidents of invoice manipulation
and other actions of aberrations, the Director General, Directorate of Revenue
Intelligence deposed as under:—
"We have nine officers posted outside in Dubai, Hong Kong, Kathmandu,
London, New York, Moscow, Singapore and Brussels. We have two officers
posted there. We have Customs Mutual Agreements with some of these countries
which provide the framework within which we can seek information. We have

44
had excellent results from officers in New York, London, Hong Kong and Russia
where we have been able to get details of declaration as given by the party,
quote from this end to the other end and there was a mismatch.
We have had some problems in using this information in some cases because
they gave it with a caveat, not to use it for any purposes other than for limited
purposes of investigation and not to be used in the courts of law. Hong Kong,
however, has been permitted as also to use it without any caveat whenever we
specifically bring to notice the details of the case itself. So the Customs Overseas
Intelligence Network Officers have been doing outstanding work. We have also
had cases where they have detected round tripping in the case of export of
diamonds where again it was values only which had been shown to get moneys
in and out of the country. So, they have been extremely useful".
127. To a pointed query as to whether the instances and volumes of invoice
manipulation had come down as a result of the aforesaid measures, he deposed as
under:—
"I would not be so brave enough to make such a venture. But having said that,
it has definitely acted as a deterrent: the presence of the officers and the fact that
we have been able to get information in such cases. It is because, we do it on
selective basis, on the basis of specific intelligence. We cannot do anything
more than that and it has been useful to that extent".
128. In a subsequent note, the Ministry summed up the performance of COIN and
the measures to strengthen it as under:—
“With respect to performance of COIN units, these have played a major role in
rendering investigative assistance in matters related to smuggling, drug
trafficking, commercial frauds and national security to the DRI, and other Indian
Customs formations, through the formal network of cooperation with other
Customs administrations and the informal network of sources cultivated overseas.
COIN has been vital in exposing the scam in Rupee-Rouble trade with Russia,
effecting seizures of FICN in Bangkok, Nepal and Bangladesh and narcotic
drugs/psychotropic substances in South East Asian countries (like Singapore,
Indonesia and Hong Kong) and Canada. The COIN unit in Dubai has often
provided vital inputs relating to business and commercial activities of syndicates
involved in anti-national and terror activities which are shared with sister
intelligence agencies. COIN units also play an active role in passing on actionable
intelligence inputs to DRI in number of cases relating to trans-border movement
of goods including CITES goods like Red Sanders logs and hazardous waste(s).
Moreover, the officers in COIN units have been successful in making the presence
of Indian Customs felt globally, and in international such as WCO, RILO A/P,
WTO and UNEP. Their COIN officers' also contribute significantly in the area of
bilateral negotiations and implementation of bilateral/multilateral agreements.
With regard to measures for strengthening COIN, the single most priority area is
to set up new COIN units. With trade expanding and covering more regions of

45
the world, the present COIN units located in Birganj, Brussels, Dubai,
Hong Kong, Kathmandu, London, Moscow, New York and Singapore have come
to have vast jurisdictions and the new units are essential to have more effective
development of intelligence on smuggling and cross border commercial frauds
and create a holistic intelligence network with an eye on security related issues.
A proposal for creation of seven (7) COIN units is pending with the Ministry of
External Affairs (MEA). Three COIN units have been proposed at Colombo,
Dhaka and Bangkok with a clear focus on FICN smuggling. Beijing and Guangzhou
have been proposed because of the exponential growth of the trade between
India and China and the intelligence supported by cases of undervaluation and
anti-dumping duty. Brasilia and Pretoria have been proposed in view of their
increasing importance and in the context of IBSA (India, Brazil, and South Africa)
framework. The proposal has undergone numerous rounds of discussion with
Ministry of Finance and Ministry of External Affairs. The MHA has actively
supported the creation of three units at Colombo, Dhaka and Bangkok. The
MEA has given in principle approval for creation of two posts at Beijing and
Guangzhou in China".
IX.  INTERNATIONAL BEST PRACTICES FOR COMPENSATING DUTY INCIDENCE
TO EXPORTERS
129. Enumerating the international benchmarks/best practices in other emerging/
Asian countries for compensating duty incidence to exporters, the Ministry elaborated
as under:—
"Broadly, the international benchmark is to permit remission of duties or taxes in
amount not in excess of those which have accrued in the exported product.
It is gathered that in the case of USA the drawback is basically on individual
claim basis. It is linked with certain designated and prior identified duty paid
imports received for production for exports. It is on actual basis and takes due
note of consumption pattern and is given subject to verification from records.
Similarly, in the United Kingdom, the drawback claim is related with detailed
record keeping, establishment of yield and linkages of use of duty paying inputs
with export products, and verification.
Thailand's provisions governing drawback are somewhat similar to USA
provisions. There is facility of "substitution drawback" in which only duty paid
inputs are not required to be used in exports for claiming drawback, but a
commercially interchangeable input will also do, provided the duty paid input
are used for domestic production and not disposed of in any other manner
which may give any excessive benefit to the claimant. In Malaysia, duty drawback
is provided to manufacturers on imported materials that are physically
incorporated into exported products.
These systems of drawback do not appear to have provisions for an average or
simplified general rate which can be claimed by a class of exporters, enterprises
or exempt sectors".

PART II
OBSERV ATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Introductory : International trade takes place on the principle that no sovereign
country should export its taxes to another country because citizens of another country
will have to bear these taxes. Hence, the practice the world over is to refund or exempt
the taxes borne on export goods. Like in other countries, the country's Duty Drawback
Scheme is a duty neutralization scheme which seeks to rebate the duties or taxes
chargeable on any imported/excisable input materials and input services used in the
manufacture of export goods. Designed to promote exports, the basic concept of the
Scheme is that export products should not carry the country's taxes so that its products
can compete on an equal footing in the world market. The duties and taxes neutralized
under the Scheme are (i) Customs and Central Excise Duties in respect of inputs; and
(ii) Service Tax in respect of input services. Section 74 and Section 75 of the Customs
Act, 1962, Section 37 of the Central Excise Act, 1944 and the Finance Act, 1944
empower the Central Government to grant duty drawback. During the period between
April 2006 and March 2010, the total payment of drawback was `36,000 crore. An
Audit review was carried out in 39 out of 93 Customs Commissionerates across
12 States (Delhi, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh, West
Bengal, Gujarat, Bihar, Punjab, Andhra Pradesh and Rajasthan) where the volume of
drawback transaction was relatively higher and which altogether paid as much as
` 31,616 crore out of the aforesaid total of  `36,000 crore. The Audit got access to
data relating to 34.58 lakh drawback cases out of 46 lakh cases (i.e. 75 per cent)
settled between April, 2006 and September, 2009 and found serious lapses and
irregularities in the implementation of the Scheme resulting inter-alia in fraudulent
availment of drawback amount. These and other relevant issues have been dealt with
in the succeeding paragraphs.
2. Identification of Goods : The Committee are constrained to find that the rules
which lay down parameters for identification of goods in case of re-exports are not
only inadequate but also beset with discrepancies. Audit in their test check found
12 cases of discrepancy in parameters like dimension, gross weight, chemical
properties etc. involving drawback payment of  `1.42 crore due to discrepancies and
ambivalence in the rules. In the absence of specific instructions, the establishment of
such identity remained with the discretion of the Assistant Commissioner of Customs
concerned leading to the discrepancies. To the suggestion to issue supplementary
rules for ensuring accurate identification of re-exported goods, the Ministry replied
that necessary instructions in this regard inter-alia emphasizing physical verification
and passing of speaking orders had been issued vide Circular No. 46/2011-Cus.
dated 20.10.2011. While the effectiveness of this measure remains to be seen, the
Committee urge the Ministry to initiate tangible measures for removal of lapses,
irregularities and discrepancies in the identification of the goods for re-export. Taking
note of the fact that due to the spread of commodities under re-export, it may not be
46

47
possible to lay down specific parameters in each and every case as these would constrict
and restrict the officers' capacity to exercise due diligence in identifying the goods
and would lead to routine denials of benefit to exporters, the Committee recommend
that suitable mechanism be put in place to prevent negative discretion of the customs
officials concerned so as to help ensure identification of re-exported goods with the
originally imported goods as well as cross verification of the physical properties of
goods placed for re-export alongwith documentary declarations.
3. Determination of use: The Committee find that no CBEC instruction exists
specifying how to determine whether goods were "used" or not and thereby resulting
in fraudulent claim of drawback in many cases. Audit in their test check found
55 cases involving drawback payment of  `1.74 crore where a large number of goods
fulfilled the criteria for "used after import", but were treated as unused goods. Such
gross misuse of this provision indicates defects in the rules requiring the exporters
to make declaration whether the goods had been put into use or not after importation
in the Shipping Bill. The Committee were informed that the Ministry had since
issued instructions vide Circular No.  46/2011 — Customs dated 20.11.2011 in
respect of duty drawback claims under Section 74 the Assistant/Deputy Commissioner
of Customs should pass a speaking order following the principles of natural justice
giving detailed reasons with regard to determination of use, if any, while sanctioning
drawback thus making it a quasi- judicial process for ensuring proper examination
of the cases. The Committee, however, find that between November, 2011 and
June, 2013, a total of 2442 speaking orders were passed and in 13 cases the
Commissioners were not satisfied with the legality and propriety of the decisions and
ordered filing of appeal. Deeply concerned over the functioning of the field formations
and the concerns expressed by the Commissioners, the Committee urge the Ministry
to put in place a robust monitoring system so that fraudulent claim of drawback on
"used after import goods" can be prevented. The Committee would also like the
Ministry to earnestly act in the 55 cases involving  ` 1.74 crore relating to
determination of use reported by Audit and recover the drawback fraudulently claimed
by the exporters.
4. Time barred claims and delayed replies to deficiency memo: The Committee are
perturbed to find that against Rule 5 of Re-export of Imported Goods Rules, 1995,
Audit found 54 cases in Bengaluru, Chennai, Delhi, Hyderabad II and Kandla where
time barred claims were admitted and drawback to the tune of  `1.19 crore was made.
Worse, in 171 claims filed in ACC Shamsabad under Hyderabad II, the Department
had neither affixed receipt stamp nor issued acknowledgement in any of these cases.
The Ministry conceded that such instances may have arisen from lesser than desired
diligence. The Ministry also informed that necessary instructions had been issued
directing field formations to, inter-alia, ensure due diligence in the application of the
aforesaid Rule 5. While urging for meticulous compliance of the instructions to
avoid further instances of time barred claims, the Committee would like the Ministry
to periodically review the effectiveness of the extant Rules and Instructions in this
regard so that the system is able to evolve itself and meet the emerging challenges.
The Committee further desire the Ministry to recover the drawback payment made
on time barred claims and take suitable corrective action in the matter.

48
5. Delays in claims processing: The Committee are concerned to note significant
delays in processing drawback claims in the Commissionerates in Andhra Pradesh,
Gujarat, Bihar, Mumbai, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. In Andhra Pradesh, there
were delays in processing 10,177 cases with more than half of which were processed
after more than three months. In 20 per cent of these claims, settlement was delayed
beyond one year. In Gujarat, out of 88,000 claims analysed, delays occurred in 20,856
cases i.e. 23.7 per cent. Delayed settlement of cases held up the payment of drawback
and in 4048 cases of delayed processing at Kandla and Ahmedabad, deficiency memos
were raised much later (ranging from 31 days to more than 2 years) after filing of
claims. Similarly,  2,276 claims settled in Bihar, Mumbai, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh
recorded delays between 13 days to four years in processing the claims. The main
reason for delays in claims processing was that the deficiencies in the claim were
pointed out beyond the stipulated period of 10 days. Other reasons included submission
of deficient documents at the time of filing drawback claims, raising of generalized
queries and the time taken to communicate the deficiencies to the exporters, time
factor before consolidated payments were scrolled to the banks, incorrect filing of
Export General Manifest (EGM) by the carriers and time taken by the banks to credit
the exporters accounts. These clearly indicate lack of awareness on the part of the
exporters in filing the claims and absence of proper supervision by the officials
concerned. The Committee were informed that certain measures had been taken to
enable faster processing of claims. Notably, in order to streamline the verification
process, the Ministry have issued instructions and directives in October 2011 and
June 2012 and the Customs EDI system has provided Importer-Exporter Code-wise
facility to view status/reasons of pending drawback shipping bills so as to ensure
timely communication of deficiencies/queries to the exporters. The Committee,
however, find that no specific study on dwell time of customs procedure for drawback
has been conducted by the Ministry. In the absence of such a study, the Committee feel
that the instructions and directives issued by the Ministry would not be comprehensive
enough to yield the desired results. As per the Ministry's admission, it may not be
possible to adhere to the 10 day time limit of raising and communicating the
deficiencies in claims filing in every case due to sheer increase in the number of
drawback shipping bills which had increased from 14.73 lakh in 2010-11 to 28.40 lakh
in 2012-13. This further strengthens the need for a proper study of the process to
identify the attributes which cause delay and address them by proper designing of the
system in automated environment. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to
undertake the aforesaid studies with a view to fine tune the system and streamline the
verification procedure so as to enable faster processing of claims. Further, appropriate
report/MIS of the IT system available should be generated to watch the timely issue of
queries after issue of the instructions for monitoring, etc. This would help in ensuring
communication regarding the deficient documents filed, if any, to the applicants in
clear, unambiguous terms within the stipulated time frame of
10 days. The Committee would also like the Ministry to take earnest efforts to make
the exporters aware of the relevant rules, procedures, processes, etc. concerning
claim processing so as to avoid wastage of time. The Committee would like to be
apprised of this within 6 months of the presentation of the Report.

49
6. Declaration of Freight: The Committee find that no floor value has been imposed
in Customs Valuation rules for freight charges on exported goods thus providing an
opportunity to the exporters to claim a larger sum as drawback by under declaring
the freight value. Audit found that the freight declared was less than five percent of
FOB value in a significant number of cases in Gujarat, Punjab, Karnataka and Tamil
Nadu. Worse, in 4,519 out of the 88,000 cases ( i.e. 5.13 per cent) in Gujarat
(Ahmedabad and Kandla Commissionerates), the freight declared was found to be
less than one per cent indicating risk of underreporting of freight. The instances of
under declaring of freight was so widespread as can be gauged from the fact that
during the period 01.04.2011 to 31.05.2012, a sum of `4.75 lakh drawback with
`0.02 lakh interest was recovered pursuant to specific verification of 3529 freight
certificates. As a remedial measure, the Ministry had directed field formations for
sample verification of actual freight certificate. Instructions have also been issued
highlighting the importance of regular sample checks of the veracity of declarations
made by exporters. In addition, integration of export realization data feed with the
ICES had been initiated to enable cross checking of details. The Committee have also
been informed that the Ministry were working on a future arrangement with the
Reserve Bank of India to electronically receive a feed of bank realization data for
integration with customs EDI. Taking note of these initiatives aimed at checking the
cases of under declaration of freight value, the Committee would like the Ministry to
ensure strict compliance of their remedial measures so that there is no under
declaration of freight. The Committee would also like the Ministry to initiate
appropriate punitive action where violation of rules and procedure is established.
7. Realisation of Export Proceeds: The Committee are concerned to note that the
instruction issued by the CBEC in February,  2009 for monitoring the realization of
export proceeds through the Bank Realisation Certificate (BRC) module had not
been followed by the field formations uniformly. While monitoring work had been
initiated and Show Cause Notices were being issued to the defaulting exporters in six
Commissionerates (Ahmedabad, Kandla, Chennai Sea, JNCH, Mumbai, Bengaluru)/
ICDs (Tughlakabad, Patparganj and Rajsico), monitoring of realization through the
BRC module had not been introduced in six Commissionerates viz. Kolkata (Port),
Kolkata (Airport), Hyderabad II, Ahmedabad, Kandla and Cochin. In Bengaluru
Commissionerate, where the monitoring had been initiated, Audit found that
150 letters issued to exporters asking for submission of BRCs for exports involving
drawback payment of  `27.23 crore between 2004 and 2007, returned undelivered. In
NCH, Delhi, the BRC module was unable to track outstanding realization due to
technical problems. These indicate crippling failure of the CBEC in exercising their
authority over the Commissionerates and field formations. The Committee were
apprised that a slew of measures had been taken up by the Ministry for timely
submission of Bank Realisation Certificates by all the exporters and entering the
same into the system promptly. While appreciating these initiatives which would help
proper realization of export proceeds and monitoring thereof, the Committee
recommend that corrective/punitive action be taken against those Commissionerates
and field formations which failed to comply with the instructions of the CBEC. Besides,
the cases of non-delivery of 150 letters to exporters in Bengaluru Commissionerate

50
should be probed and appropriate punitive action taken against those found guilty.
The Committee further desire that all the Customs units/locations in the country
should be computerized under an integrated IT network and operationalised for
achieving an improved performance in realization of export proceeds.
8. Declaration of Value: The Committee are concerned to find marked discrepancies
in the declaration of value of exported goods for claiming drawback. To illustrate,
there were 984 claims where shipping bills showed Present Market Values (PMVs)
that were lower than the declared price (FOB) during the period from April, 2006 to
September,  2009 in Hyderabad II and Visakhapatnam Customs Commissionerates.
In 221 out of these 984 cases, the difference between the FOB and the PMV was so
significant that in more than 50 per cent of the 221 Shipping Bills (SBs), the FOB
declared was about 10 times the PMV of the items. To make matters worse, no market
verification was done in any of the 221 cases although such differences fulfilled the
criteria of prima facie evidence for triggering PMV enquiry. The Committee express
their serious concern over the inability of the CBEC to make the Commissionerates
comply with their Circular issued in February,  2003 and prevent such irregularities.
The Committee would like the Ministry to take appropriate follow up action in the
cases reported by Audit with regard to discrepancy in declaration of value. Further,
the errant exporters be penalized and also the drawback erroneously claimed by them
recovered with interest at the earliest. The Committee would also like the Ministry to
take necessary measures to prevent recurrence of such incidents.
9. Fixation of All Industry Rate (AIR) of drawback: The Committee are distressed
to find that fixation of All Industry Rate (AIR) of drawback was not done in a transparent
manner. While the working of the Drawback Committee to arrive at declared rates
regarding fixation of AIR of drawback was not fully documented, the Directorate of
Drawback could not produce year-wise data regarding cost sheets of various
commodities, Import-Indigenous ratios of various inputs used in manufacture, details
on manufacturing processes of various products, etc. that would have been the basis
for fixation of AIR. Further, the Drawback Committee had not submitted any calculation
sheets/worksheets along with their reports to support the fixation of AIR. In the
absence of such working papers, the procedures adopted for determination of All
Industry Rates of drawback could not be verified in Audit. Furthermore, the trend of
rate revisions in the AIR drawback schedules vis-a-vis changes in import/excise duty
rates could not be correlated. The mandate of the Drawback Committee and the
Directorate of Drawback is to fix AIR for drawback and the manner of its functioning
calls for speedy improvement. The Committee feel that reasonableness of the AIRs so
fixed needs to be reviewed to rule out the possibility of any financial loss to the
exchequer. The Committee also desire that the process of rate fixation by the Drawback
Committee should be fully documented in order to ensure transparency in the
procedure.
10. Delay in fixation of Brand Rate: The Committee note with concern that there
have been significant delays in fixation of Brand Rate across the Commissionerates.
In Delhi, 17,692 claims were pending settlement for more than three months as on
January, 2010 due to delay in fixation of Brand Rates. In Central Excise

51
Commissionerate, Mangalore, there were delays in 26 out of the 27 cases of Brand
Rate fixation during the audit review period. In these cases, the average time taken in
verification by the Divisional Office was more than three months against the norm of
15 days. After receipt of the verification report, the Commissionerate took more than
8 months on average to fix the Brand Rate against the norm of 10 days. Thus, the
entire process of fixation took almost a year. Similarly, in Excise Commissionerate
Jaipur I, the average delay in verifications examined was more than three months and
delay for rate fixation after verification was close to three months making the total
delay in fixation of Brand Rate of drawback in each of the 35 cases beyond six months.
Further, delays upto one month were noticed in 104 cases in Hyderabad IV
Commissionerate. Reasons for the delays, as submitted by the Ministry, broadly
include non-furnishing of required data/information original documents and related
documents/information; explanation of use of inputs and process of manufacture;
inclusion of free shipping bills in claims; non-compliance with deficiency memo etc.
which were attributable to the exporters and involvement of voluminous documents
requiring verification, large number of inputs in process verification, large amount
of arithmetic calculation, etc. which were attributable to the field formations. The
Committee deprecate such stark mistakes of the exporters and the sheer inability of
the field formations to meet the challenges leading to the delay in fixation of Brand
Rate. The Ministry have informed that they have been taking measures to ensure
quick disposal of Brand Rate claims in order to facilitate exporters and a Circular
and a Letter in this respect were issued in September 2003 and August 2005
respectively pursuant to the Board circular of March 2003. Subsequently, the field
formations have been directed on 20th October 2011 to comply with the instructions
strictly and ensure that Brand Rate drawback claims are disposed in a time bound
manner. Besides, vide amendments dated 17.06.2010 to the Drawback Rules, 1995,
the time limit for filing application for fixation of Brand Rate was revised from a
maximum period of 90 days to 12 months. The Ministry further claimed that the
organizational and technical aspects of the process of fixing Brand Rate have been
streamlined. The Committee are, however, skeptical about the efficacy of these
measures, which are mostly instructions and circulars, considering the widespread
cases of delay in fixation of Brand Rate and the nature of the human failures as
reported by Audit. To surmise, the Ministry need to do something more serious and
tangible to pin point the causes of the delays and devise and put in place an effective
system to prevent delays and malpractices. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry
to identify the problematic areas and streamline the system. Since the delays were
also seemingly on account of lack of awareness of the due procedures and formalities
on the part of the exporters, the Ministry need to sensitize them through wide publicity
campaigns, etc. Further, wherever instances of wilful violation of rules by officials
leading to irregularities is prima facie evident, the Committee would like appropriate
punitive action to be taken in the matter. The Committee would like to be apprised of
the corrective measures taken in due course of time.
11. Verification: The Committee are concerned that problems did surface in
verifying data furnished by Indian Oil authorities in their Brand Rate applications.
To cite an example, the Central Excise Commissionerate, Haldia issued 26 brand rate

52
letters for an aggregated sum of  `12.93 crore between June 2006 and June 2009 in
favour of the exporter, Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. While the exporter had claimed
use of 1.04 MT and 1.08 MT of crude oil to produce 1 MT of ATF and 1 MT of SKO
respectively, the production process indicated that a wide range of products were
obtained from crude oil that together constituted the final output. This made it unclear
as to how the output of single product was worked out. The Ministry informed that in
the documents submitted by the IOC Ltd., the input-output ratio for ATF and SKO was
particularly supported by Chartered Engineer's certificate. The Ministry, submitted
that creation of a standard industry norm towards enabling meaningful verification
of information and ensuring uniformity in fixation of Brand Rates would go against
the concept of Brand Rate. Statedly, as a remedial measure, necessary directions
were issued on 13th July 2012 to all field formations to ensure that while conducting
audit of such assessees, the documents/declarations pertaining to drawback claims
should be randomly compared with the original production records and details of
discrepancies noticed included in draft Audit report and action taken to safeguard
revenue. Taking into consideration these initiatives,the Committee urge the
Ministry to further introspect in the matter specially in the case of petroleum products
and improvise the system in order to ensure smooth verification of the data furnished
by the applicants.
12. Availment of CENVAT Credit: In yet another disquieting lapse, the Committee
find that drawback of ` 5.70 crore was irregularly sanctioned in 2,160 cases in nine
Commissionerates viz. Chennai Sea, Chennai Air, Tuticorin, Kandla, Jamnagar,
Ahmedabad, Bengaluru, Mangalore and Cochin. In these cases, higher All Industry
Rate of drawback was allowed to the exporters but the "CENVAT not availed"
certificates which were mandatory for the purpose were not available in the drawback
claims files. The Ministry informed that in most of the cases (i.e. 2008 cases) either
the CENVAT certificates were verified at the time of examination/report or the
drawback was sanctioned after checking the examination report of the examining
officer who had verified the non-availment of CENV AT Credit at the time of examination
of the export goods. The Ministry also stated that in some cases, the CENVAT non-
availment certificate was inapplicable. However, the Ministry admitted that in certain
cases higher drawback was paid to the exporters. The Committee are concerned that
the file maintenance system could not ensure availability of crucial documents. The
Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to take corrective action for improper upkeep
and maintenance of files and also in cases wherein higher drawback was sanctioned
without the mandatory "CENV AT not availed" certificates. Further, the higher
drawback paid to the ineligible exporters be recovered at the earliest.
13. Monitoring of Declarations:The Committee are dismayed to note that in
Customs Commissionerate, Visakhapatnam, there were 335 cases wherein the claims
of the manufacturing exporters were cleared without insisting on the mandatory
ARE-2 declarations on availment of rebate as required under the Central Excise
Rules 2002. This resulted in irregular sanction of drawback of `6.59 crore and the
risk of dual benefit was not addressed. The matter investigated by the Special
Intelligence and Investigation Branch had detected a total of  57 cases of wrong
availment of duty drawback amounting to `29.68 crore and issued Show Cause Notices

53
in all these cases. Subsequently, in 7 cases decided in Settlement Commission,
recovery of  `11.86 crore was made while the remaining cases were in the process of
adjudication. In this regard, the Ministry informed that the merchant-exporters had
given declarations stating that the exported goods were not manufactured by availing
the procedure under Rule 18 or 19 of Central Excise Rules. In view of this, the
insistence on submitting ARE-2 at time of export would not arise. The Committee
have been informed that in order to ensure integrity of the declarations made by
exporters, field formations had been directed in October 2011 to carry out periodic
sample checks and verifications of export declarations. Though belated, the Committee
hope that the Ministry would make further efforts in this direction to monitor such
declarations and avoid revenue leakage in the form of drawback on account of
misdeclarations. To set a deterrent, the Committee further desire that appropriate
punitive action be taken against the errant exporters.
14. Sanction of drawback on products not specified in Brand Rate letters: The
Committee are dismayed to note that unnecessary controversy had arisen in the
sanction of drawback in the Commissionerate of (Customs Preventive) West Bengal
for export of agricultural tractors on the basis of Brand Rate letters issued by the
Commissioner of Central Excise Chandigarh and Faridabad. Audit scrutiny of the
export documents viz., shipping bills, invoice, packing lists, etc. revealed that the
exported agricultural tractors were different from the models that were mentioned in
the Brand Rate letters. While Audit observed that this resulted in irregular payment
of drawback amounting to `45.07 lakh, the Ministry claimed that the identification of
the exported goods flowed from the brand rate letters which mentioned both bill of
export number and description and there was no irregular payment. The Committee,
however find that there were some differences in the description of model number and
name of the tractors in the bill of export and the Brand Rate letters which apparently
was the cause of the controversy. Since such discrepancies could lead to manipulation
and organized fraud, the Committee were informed that to avoid unnecessary room
for doubt in future, the Ministry had in July 2013 instructed all the field formations
that full and comprehensive details of the exported goods should be indicated clearly
in the Brand Rate letters. Noting that though it is a belated measure, the Committee
hope the Ministry would be more vigilant in future.
15. Compliance of Audit objections and Weak Internal Audit: The Committee find
that the Ministry have accepted most of the Audit observations regarding weak internal
audit thus affirming/admitting that there were lapses and irregularities in the
implementation of the Duty Drawback Scheme. Surprisingly, these lapses could not
be detected by the Internal Audit of the Ministry. The Ministry themselves conceded
that there is room for improvement in the functioning of their Internal Audit. The
Ministry claimed that necessary remedial measures have been initiated by issuing a
series of instructions/directives to the Commissionerates/field formations and
improvising their IT system. The Committee, however, find that similar lapses/
irregularities have been pointed out in a subsequent Audit Report (No. 8 of 2013).
Though the Ministry attributed the repetition of the lapses/irregularities to the late
issue of instructions/directives which went out in October 2011, June 2012 and July
2013, the Committee do not feel that the Ministry's mechanism of Internal Audit will

54
be strengthened just by issuing instruction/directives alone. The need of the hour is
the systemic overhaul of the entire machinery. Deplorably, the Ministry failed to give
serious attention to strengthening their Internal Audit with a view to detecting the
lapses well in time. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry
strengthen their Internal Audit so that lapses/irregularities/deficiencies are promptly
detected and appropriate remedial action taken to protect the revenue.
16.  Evasion Prone Commodities: While examining the traditionally evasion prone
commodities like Readymade Garments (RMGs) which is fuelling the abuse of the
Duty Drawback Scheme, the Committee found that it was because the Present Market
Value (PMV) of such a sensitive commodity was difficult to ascertain and
consequentially not easy to fix the amount of drawback. During evidence, the Director
General, Directorate of Revenue Intelligence conceded that readymade garments
lend themselves to such misuse but there are value caps which basically meant that
an exporter cannot get more than a certain percentage irrespective of the value they
declare. The Committee, however, find that the value cap for a readymade shirt was
`31 which was duty component and the price of the shirt would be around ` 400. But
there are widespread instances of the exporters selling such shirts at a price much
below this declared price which meant that they were earning a much higher drawback
than what was justified or due. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to beef
up vigilance on such evasion prone commodities by putting in place a suitable foolproof
procedure.
17. Working of the Economic Intelligence Agencies: The Department of Revenue
have six economic Intelligence Agencies mandated with the task of securing the
country's economic and revenue interest viz. the Directorate of Revenue Intelligence,
the Central Economic Intelligence Bureau and the Enforcement Directorate, the
Financial Intelligence Unit, the Directorate General of Central Excise Intelligence
and the Directorate of Criminal Investigation. Though they have been able to detect
some of the economic frauds, their overall performance in tackling such frauds left
much to be desired as can be gauged from the admission of the Revenue Secretary
that the total incidence of duty drawback abuse alone during 2012-13 was `20,061
crore. The Ministry admitted that 39 cases of fraudulent claim of duty drawback were
detected by DRI in 2012-13 but the chances of many other such cases going undetected
are high. Moreover, since 2010-11 (till November, 2013), as many as 22 customs
officials of the ranks of Assistant Commissioner, Deputy Commissioner and Joint
Commissioner were proceeded against for failure to maintain absolute integrity in
connection with cases related to duty drawback which indicates possible nexus between
the customs officials and the exporters. With successive Audit Reports and the media
highlighting frauds, lapses and irregularities in revenue assessment and collection,
the actual revenue loss to the public exchequer in the entire Central Excise and
Customs sector needs to be ascertained and plugged. This calls for urgent revamping
of the six Economic Intelligence Agencies. Though certain initiatives have been taken
towards this goal, yet a lot remains to be done. Besides, one handicap affecting the
overall performance of the six agencies is the avoidable overlapping of their functions.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that earnest efforts be made to examine this
aspect and demarcation of powers and responsibilities among these six entities be

55
revisited so as to avoid overlapping of their functioning and ensure harmonious
functioning with optimum synergy. Keeping in mind the emerging challenges, they
should also be provided with adequate manpower and infrastructure to ensure that the
guilty are not allowed to go scot free. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
specific actions taken in this regard.
18. Customs Overseas Intelligence Network: The Committee note that the Customs
Overseas Intelligence Network (COIN) of the DRI presently at 9 Indian Missions
abroad viz. Birganj, Brussels, Dubai, Hong Kong, Kathmandu, London, Moscow,
New York and Singapore have been playing a key role in gathering economic
intelligence and interacting with the foreign administrations to obtain investigative
assistance and to strengthen the overall bilateral relations. In fact, it is with their
inputs that fraud/abuse of such a crucial scheme like the Duty Drawback Scheme
could be detected. The Committee, however, find that at present each of the COIN
officers is in charge of a large geographical area, which is not conducive for efficient
discharge of duties. Many countries have emerged as the country's important trade
partners but COIN officers were yet to be posted there. Moreover, with the increase in
'related party' transactions between global arms of transnational corporations and
Free Trade Agreements, the complex nature of frauds has acquired new dimensions.
Thus, the need for overseas enquires and external intelligence feeding into the risk
management system of Indian customs is on the rise. Under the circumstances, the
additional posts for customs officials in Indian Embassies/Missions abroad for
compliance of foreign exchange laws, and for combating illicit trafficking of narcotics
and prohibited/contra-band goods needs to be reinforced by other changes like
increased surveillance and use of modern technology. While the case for expansion
of COIN was a credible and persuasive one, this should be done in conjunction with
other administrative and structural measures with other agencies and possibilities
of sharing intelligence and benefits of using newer technologies. However, the action
for additional foreign offices should be expedited in a time bound manner.
19. International Best Practices with regard to compensation of duty incidence to
exporters: The Committee note that the Duty Drawback Scheme is not sui generis
only to India as the countries all over the world incentivize their exports and exporters
by making sure that they do not suffer the disability of local duties and taxes. There
would have been many emerging markets which have proved very successful in their
export market and administering the scheme of duty drawback. The country needs to
study them for learning broad lessons. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry
to find best international benchmarking in the realm of duty drawback scheme and
suitably formulate benchmarks befitting the national need.
20. Strengthening the IT activities of the Department: The Committee note that
the Directorate of Systems in the CBEC provides the IT support for the Department.
Over the years, automation levels have been steadily increasing in tune with the
multiproliferation of revenue activities. Given the complexity of the processes, vast
and highly technical nature of IT activities under the CBEC, there is a case for hiving
these activities into a Special Purpose Vehicle under the strategic control of the
Board. This will ensure financial agility and flexibility in hiring experts in the fields

56
of IT and Finance Vendor Management towards achieving greater professionalism
under the overall supervision and direction of the CBEC officers. Such a move will
also strengthen Internal Audit mechanism of the Department for better monitoring
of various schemes. The Committee would like to have a detailed Action Plan in this
regard from the Ministry.
21. Dispute Resolution: The Committee observe that tax litigation has been on a
continuous rise clogging the courts and other appellate bodies, locking up revenue
and creating an atmosphere of uncertainty for the trade. Simplification and
rationalization of tax law is a key solution which was sought to be addressed by
various Committees in the past and is being looked into by the Tax Administration
Reforms Commission now. Creation of additional benches for CESTAT has been
another step taken recently for expeditious disposal of appeals. The Committee feel
that another important measure would be the separation of executive and
quasi- judicial functions at the field level. The Committee, therefore, recommend
creation of a vertical hierarchy with a Commissioner (Judicial) supported by a compact
complement of officers exclusively responsible for issue of notices and adjudication
of cases not only to vest some independence in the functionaries discharging this role
but also to enable a speedier and qualitatively superior decision making.
22. Improvement in Tax Payer Services: The Committee observe that facilitation
of trade and rendering tax payer services of assured quality is one of the main functions
of every regulatory/law enforcement agency. However, there needs to be greater
cohesion and coordination even among such agencies. It is also important to encourage
cross-agency initiatives that redress the traders' problems. The Committee feel that
one of the key solutions to the challenges posed by multiple border regulatory is
single window as it enables entities involved in international trade to lodge standardized
information and documents at a single entry point to fulfil all import, export and
transit related regulatory requirements. Customs is in an advantageous position to
develop single window since it is almost fully automated in that 95 per cent of import
and 98 per cent of export volumes and documents are handled by ICES which interacts
electronically with over 15 agencies including RBI, DGFT, Airlines, Banks, DGCI&S,
Apparel Export Promotion Council etc. However, consensus building amongst agencies
concerned, inter-agency differences in degree of automation and data requirements
impede the development of this initiative. The Committee, therefore, recommend the
Government to spell out necessary mandate clearly designating the CBEC as the lead
agency for this purpose as per international practice and lay down a time bound road
map for its implementation. In providing a single window to the tax payers, the Board
could consider greater outreach programmes, tax payer education, etc. so as to
increase responsiveness and compliance.
23.  Large Enterprise Management: From the relevant data, the Committee
understand that a handful of large companies bring in substantial revenue to the
Government. These large enterprises are also more likely to have complex issues
that challenge the tax administrations. The Committee, therefore, recommend both
from compliance monitoring and facilities perspective, setting up of administrative
units to manage the taxation matters of large enterprises. These units would not only

57
act as single window facilitation mechanism for the large enterprises for their central
taxes but also develop the expertise necessary to understand the operations of such
enterprises and conduct the scrutiny and audit in a more meaningful manner.
24. Focus on infrastructural development: The Committee feel that a modern tax
administration needs to be suitably equipped to discharge its mandate effectively and
efficiently. In such matters, cadre restructuring of the CBEC assumes great
importance. The Committee understand that the cadre restructuring proposal of the
CBEC has been approved by the Union Cabinet. The Committee urge the Ministry to
expedite this exercise and provide the consequent infrastructural requirements
including properoffices, residential facilities, IT equipment, communication
networks, non-intrusive inspection equipment, mobility solutions, etc. for their
personnel which should not be hit by austerity measures introduced from time to time
as in the case of paramilitary forces.
25. Strengthening of the CBEC: The Committee feel that the CBEC, being at the
apex of the Customs, Central Excise and Service Tax Wings, has been witnessing
multiproliferation of activities and needs to be provided with adequate human resource
support. Each of the above streams of taxation collects over  `1.6 lakh crore annually.
Y et the support in the Board at the levels of Joint Secretaries, Directors and
Under Secretaries has not changed over the past decade. The Committee would like
the Ministry to undertake a comprehensive exercise to identify the posts needed in
the Board for the technical functions as well as for human resource management
functions. Steps should also be taken to create and man these posts from the officers
with the requisite technical skills. Further, hiring of Research Assistants should be
encouraged to meet the needs of specific projects and research activities.
26. Grant of Financial Autonomy to the CBEC: The Committee find that currently,
the CBEC has no financial autonomy. Vesting well defined financial powers and the
funds with the Board will enable it to pursue its prioritized needs and bring them to
fruitition expeditiously. This step will also reduce the delays associated with movement
of proposals between the field formations, the Board and IFU besides increasing
flexibility and accountability. A Financial Adviser can be posted in the Board to
scrutinize the proposals prior to consideration by the Board Chairman. The Committee,
therefore, urge the Ministry to consider granting financial autonomy to the CBEC on
the above lines and apprise them in due course.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. K.V. THOMAS
08 December, 2014 Chairperson,
17 Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

58
ANNEXURE I
(With Reference to Para 100 Of the Report)
Status of compliance issues in audit paras on Duty Drawback Scheme (C&AG Report No. 15 of 2011-12)
Para No./ Amt. in Not Admitt-Recov-Remedial action in brief Vetting statusConfir-Update
Gist`Paraadmitted ed/ ery of CAG med
SCN incl. demand
issuedinterest Rs.
Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Lakh
Lakh Lakh Lakh Lakh
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
2.2.2 141.87 140.761.11 11 cases not admitted/ No comment./1.11Rs. 1.11 lakh confirmed
Identification 1 case SCN issued.present status
of Goods
(12 Cases)
2.2.3 173.72135.61 38.110.02 27 cases not admitted/20 No comments
Determinationcases (JNCH) SCN issued.
of use
(55 cases)
Kandla—SCN to Ajanta
Manufacturing Ltd; CFSPresent status19.62SCN for Rs. 19.62 lakhs and
Ludhiana—SCN issued + 3.6Rs. 3.6 lakhs confirmed. In 1
for 6 SB.other SB Rs. 1,995/-
recovered.
2.2.4(i)118.790.99117.81 19.51Kandla—36 cases, No comments66.45
Time barred Bangalore—03 cases,
claimsDelhi —11 cases, Chennai
(54 Cases) Air—03 cases,  where either
SCN issued or recovery made

59
Hyderabad II—M/s GolcondaRebuttalConfirmed that original Bills of
Corrosion (Rs. 0.99L)—As perEntry were defaced. It is not
standard practice Bill of Entry is possible to file claim at other
defaced. These rules out filingport since neither the identical
drawback claims at other ports. goods nor original import
documents will be available.
2.2.4.1. (ii)152.02 91.69 60.31 24.88Bangalore—Recovery Rs. 24.88 No comments
Deficiencylakh in 2 cases and explanation
memos (12 in 1 case; Hyderabad II—Noted
cases) audit observation for future
compliance.
Chennai Air Cargo—SCN forFinal outcome45.15Rs. 45.15 lakh confirmed
Rs. 45.15 lakh.
2.2.4.253.14 53.14Chennai and Visakhapatnam— No comments
CenvatPosition explained and not
reversal (3admitted.
cases)
2.3.2 236.66 236.66Remedial measures taken under No comments
Delays in Circular 46/2011 Cus. and
processing Board's letter dated 26.6.2012
explained.
2.3.3 N/A 12.03 12.03Directions issued vide Circular No comments
Declaration46/2011-Cus. and matter
of freight (73 explained.
cases of ICD Sabarmati)
2.3.4 N/A 57.08Cases pointed out by Audit were No comments
Realisationscrutinized by field formations
of proceeds and remedial corrective actions
taken.

60
2.3.5 30.42 30.320.21 0.21Hyderabad-II—Nature of No comments
Declarationexporters explained to provide
of value reasons why PMV enquiry not
conducted. Recovery in 1 case;
Visakhapatnam—PMV found
correct in certain cases and
erroneous entry in others where
recovery made in 2 cases while
other SBs under brand rate of
drawback.
2.3.6 N/AObservations conveyed to No comments
Fixation of Drawback Committee and
AIR remedial steps initiated.
2.3.7.11883.07 1883.07Reasons behind delays were No comments
Brand rates explained. Remedial directions
fixation delay to ensure timely disposal and
following previous instructions
issued by Circular 46/2011-Cus.
2.3.7.2 Time3443.81 3443.81Applications were either not No comments
barred BR  time-barred or delay was
applicationcondoned by Competent
Authority.
2.3.7.31293.0 1293.0Chartered Engineers certificate No comments
V erification supporting input-output ratios
for Brand in refinery being used. Instruction
rate issued that audit of assessee to
involve random checks of
comparing the documents and
declaration given for drawback
with original production records.
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

61
2.3.8 569.96521.42 48.54Chennai (Air), Tuticorin and No comments48.54Bangalore: 32 cases found in
Availing Cochin—Not admitted. Alsoorder. In 1 shipping bill of
CenvatICES has provision to record the Birdy Exports from the Audit
creditdocuments received and verifiedlist, it was found mis-declared
at the time of export including that cenvat credit was not
non-availment of Cenvat  availed.
certificate; Gujarat—SCN for
Rs. 48.53 lakh in 81 cases were Based  on  this  investigation
confirmed; Mangalore—2 caseswas   expanded   and   period
found in order.June 2006 to September 2012
covered  and  a  demand  for
Rs. 244.56  lakh  confirmed.
Hence, this  amount  though
linked with Audit, is not taken
to be included in Audit figure.
2.3.92.63 0.24All cases pointed out by AuditFinal outcomeJNCH: 8 SCN dropped as
Net weight were taken up for verification. found in order; Tuticorin: No
declaredFurther, necessary validation inexcess found; Chennai Sea
ICES for net weight. Port: No excess in 79 cases
and recovery of Rs. 24,434
in 1 case; Chennai ACC: 8 cases
reconciled, SCN issued in 27  cases.
2.3.10 109.00 105.3210.5All cases ordered for verificationFinal outcome105.32The specific cases on which
Mismatch inwhich is ongoing and details in specific outcome sought are as follows—
relatedbeing updated to Audit.casesJNCH: Objection not found
declarationssustainable in r/o SB No.5066227
dt. 08.03.07 and SCN dropped;
In 500 cases of unit of measure-
ment same but quantity different,
no excess drawback found in 54 cases,
Rs. 3.27 lakh recovered in 37
cases and rest and under scrutiny;

62
Bangalore: EDI Data-dump
provided to Audit to identify the
cases for scrutiny;  Mangalore:
24 cases correct; Kandla: demand
Rs. 105.32 lakhs confirmed
against Jayant Agro and M.
Lakhamsi & Co.
2.3.11.1188.0 188.0 188.0The option for restoration of No comments
Restoration(109scroll removed from system
of Scrollcases)
2.3.11.21150 1150Amount paid was lesser by this No comments
Audit Trailamount. Position explained.
2.3.12 659 659Objection that ARE-2 was to beFinal outcomeShow cause notice is likely to
Monitoring ofinsisted was contested. Exporter be adjudicated by end of
declarationshad declared the exported goodsOctober, 2013.
were manufactured without
availing rule 19 of central excise
rules.
However, in 135 shipping bills this
was a mis-declaration and based
on DGCEI investigation, SCN for
Rs. 233 lakh issued to merchant
exporter and alleged manufacturers
for fraudulently taking drawback.
2.3.13 45.07 45.07 Not admitted. However, to avoidFinal outcomeProtective demand is issued.
Sanction of room for doubts in future fieldObjection is not admitted.
drawback onformations advised to indicate full
product notand comprehensive details of the
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

63
mentioned inexported goods in the brand rate
Brand rateletters.
letters
2.3.14 174.65 149.06 25.59 11.86All cases reviewed. SCN were No comments2.24
Excessissued/recoveries made in
drawback certain cases. In some cases,
due toAudit objections were not
misclassificationadmitted and position explained
supported by technical details.
Total CBEC10424.81 9833.6 595.03 324.33 292.03
An amount of Rs. 244.56 lakh confirmed by Bangalore Customs is also attributable to Audit intervention though it is not included in financial implication of
Rs. 10424.81 lakh.

64
ANNEXURE II
(With Reference to Para 121 of the Report)
Intelligence Agencies working under the Department of Revenue
Sl. IntelligenceBrief Mandate
No. Agency
12 3 4
1. Directorate of
Revenue
Intelligence
(DRI)
The Directorate of Revenue Intelligence, formed in 1957,
is an intelligence agency and its primary function is
collection of intelligence, its analysis, collation,
interpretation and dissemination on matters relating
mainly to cross border movement of goods, violations of
customs laws, and other allied Acts, In order to ensure
effective discharge of its responsibilities, DRI maintains
close liaison with all the important enforcement agencies
in India like Income-Tax department, Enforcement
Directorate, Narcotics Control Bureau, Directorate
General of Foreign Trade, Border Security Force, Central
Bureau of Investigation, Coast Guard, the State Police,
authorities, Intelligence Bureau, Cabinet Secretariat and
also with all the Customs and Central Excise
Commissionerates. It also maintains close liaison with
the World Customs Organisation, Brussels, the Regional
Intelligence Liaison Office at Seoul, INTERPOL and
foreign Customs administrations.
CHAPTER OF DRI
(a) Collection of intelligence about smuggling of contraband goods,
narcotics, under-invoicing etc. through sources in India and abroad,
including secret sources.
(b) Analysis and dissemination of such intelligence to the field
 formations for action.
(c) Working out of intelligence by the Directorate officers themselves
to a successful conclusion, where necessary.
(d) Keeping watch over important seizures and investigation cases.
(e) Associating or taking over the investigations which warrant
specialised handling by the Directorate.
(f) Guiding important investigation/prosecution cases.
(g) Functioning as the liaison authority for exchange of information
among ESCAP countries for combating international smuggling
and customs frauds in terms of the recommendation of the ESCAP
conference.
(h) Keeping liaison with foreign countries, Indian Missions and
Enforcement agencies abroad on anti-smuggling matters.
(i) To keep liaison with C.B.I. and through them with the INTERPOL.
(j) To co-ordinate, direct and control anti-smuggling operations on
the Indo-Nepal border.
(k) To refer cases registered under the Customs Act to the Income Tax
Department for action under the Income Tax Act.

65
2. Enforcement
Directorate
(ED)
(l) To keep statistics of seizures and prices/rates etc. for watching trends
to smuggling and supply required material to the Ministry of
Finance and other Ministries.
(m) To study and suggest remedies for loopholes in law and procedures to
combat smuggling.
The main functions of the Enforcement Directorate are as under:—
(i) To collect, develop the share intelligence relating to contraventions
of FEMA. The intelligence inputs are received from various sources
such as Central and State Intelligence agencies, RBI, complaints,
information gathered by officers, etc.
(ii) To investigate suspected contraventions of the provisions of FEMA
relating to activities such as Hawala, unauthorized dealings in foreign
exchange, non-realization of export proceeds, unauthorized
retention of funds abroad including bank accounts, unauthorized
acquisition of immovable properties abroad, contraventions relating
to Foreign Direct Investments (FDIs), External Commercial
Borrowings (ECBs), Foreign Currency Convertible Bonds (FCCBs),
etc.
(iii) To adjudicate cases of violations of the erstwhile FERA, 1973 and
FEMA, 1999.
(iv) To realize penalties imposed on conclusion of adjudication
proceedings.
(v) To handle appeals under FEMA.
(vi) T o handle appeals and prosecution cases under the erstwhile FERA,
1973.
(vii) To process and recommend cases for detention under the Conservation
of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act
(COFEPOSA) in respect of contravention under FEMA.
The Directorate of Enforcement implements two Acts
viz. Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (FEMA)
and Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 (PMLA).
FEMA replaced the Foreign Exchange Regulation
Act, 1973 (FERA) with effect from 01.06.2000. The
Directorate also continues to perform the residual work
under the repealed FERA, 1973. The Directorate also
implements the provisions of COFEPOSA, 1974.

66
3. Central
Economic
Intelligence
Bureau
(CEIB)
(viii) To initiate investigations under PMLA to ascertain whether proceeds
of crime have been generated from the Scheduled offence booked
by the concerned Law Enforcement Agency and such proceeds
have been laundered. If a prima facie case of money laundering is
made out, to attach the property derived from the proceeds of
crime.
(ix) To file prosecution complaints in the designated PMLA Court for
the offence of money laundering under PMLA.
(x) To provide and seek mutual legal assistance to/from contracting
states in respect of attachment/confiscation of proceeds of crime
as well as in respect of transfer of accused persons under PMLA.
(xi) To facilitate international cooperation in Anti Money Laundering
(AML) matters.
In terms of its existing Charter, the CEIB functions as—
(a) The Secretariat to the Economic Intelligence Council (EIC)
(b) Coordinator and repository of economic intelligence (ECOINT)
and
(c) Administrator of the COFEPOSA Act, 1974 at Central
Government level.
As part of its mandate, the CEIB—
(i) Maintains database on economic offenders.
(ii)Acts as a Think Tanks and studies and analysis macro level economic
activities.
(iii)Supervises and monitors the functioning of 22 Regional Economic
Intelligence Committees (REICs) which is a coordinating body at
the field level and comprises of representatives from various central
The Central Economic Intelligence Bureau is the nodal
agency on Economic Intelligence. It was set up in 1985
for coordinating and strengthening the Economic Intelli-
gence and enforcement activities under Department of
Revenue, Ministry of Finance.
12 3 4

67
4. Financial
Intelligence
Unit (FIU-IND)
and state enforcement and investigative agencies dealing with
economic offences.
(iv)Organizes training programmes in premier training institutions for
officers of the Department of Revenue/Member Agencies of REICs.
In addition, the Bureau implements the directions received from Economic
Intelligence Council (EIC) headed by the Hon'ble Finance Minister and the
Working Group on Intelligence Apparatus chaird by the Revenue Secretary.
For coordinating Intelligence and Investigations, the Bureau works with
the Heads of Agencies Committee  and the Group on Economic
Intelligence (GEI) set up in CEIB.
The main functions of FIU-IND include all matters pertaining to—
(a) Analysis of information/reports received from Reporting Entities
as per the provisions of PMLA 2002 and Rules made thereunder and
their dissemination to authorized domestic agencies for further
action.
(b) Enforcement of the provisions of PMLA in so far as it relates to
FIU-IND.
(c) Egmont Group and exchange of information with foreign FIUs.
(d) Interface with reporting entities and their regulators and domestic
agencies authorized to receive information from FIU-IND including
Financial Intelligence Unit-India (FIU-IND) was set up
by the Government of India vide Ministry of Finance,
Department of Revenue, Office Memorandum dated
18th November, 2004 as a central national agency
responsible for receiving, processing, analyzing and
disseminating information related to suspicious financial
transactions. It receives prescribed information from
various entities in financial sector under the Prevention
of Money Laundering Act, 2002 (PMLA) and in
appropriate cases disseminates information to relevant
intelligence/law enforcement agencies which include
Central Board of Direct Taxes, Central Board of Excise
& Customs, Enforcement Directorate, Narcotics Control
Bureau, Central Bureau of Investigation, Intelligence
Agencies and regulators of financial sector. FIU-IND does
not investigate case.

68
promoting awareness about AML/CFT, capacity building and
training.
The main functions of DGCEI are—
(a) To collect, collage and disseminate intelligence relating to evasion
of Central Excise duties and Service Tax;
(b) To study the price structure, marketing patterns and classification
of commodities vulnerable to evasion of Central Excise duties;
(c) To coordinate action with other Departments like Income Tax etc.
in cases involving evasion of Central Excise duties and Service Tax;
(d) To investigate cases of evasion of Central Excise duties and Service
Tax having inter-Commissionerate ramifications;
(e) To advise the Board and the Commissionerates on the modus
operandi of evasion of Central Excise duties and Service Tax and
suggest appropriate remedial measures, procedures and practices in
order to plug loopholes, if any.
The DCI, in discharge of its responsibilities under the direct tax laws, is
required to perform the following functions:—
(a) To seek and collect information about persons and transactions
suspected to be involved in criminal activities having cross-border,
inter-state of international ramifications, that pose a threat to
national security and are punishable under the direct tax laws;
(b) To investigate the source and use of funds involved in such criminal
activities;
5. Directorate
General of
Central Excise
Intelligence
6. Directorate
of Criminal
Investigation
Directorate General of Central Excise Intelligence (DGCEI)
is an intelligence organization functioning under the
Central Board of Excise & Customs, Department of
Revenue, Ministry of Finance, entrusted with detection
of cases of evasion of duties of Central Excise and Service
Tax. It was established in the year 1979 as an independent
wing under the control of Directorate of Revenue
Intelligence and became a full-fledged Directorate in 1983
headed by a Director. In 1988, the Directorate was upgraded
to Directorate General. At present DGCEI, with its
Headquarters at New Delhi, has 6 Zonal Units and
18 Regional Units.
A Directorate of Criminal Investigation (DCI) has been
created to assist the CBDT tracking financial transactions
relating to illegal/criminal activities, including illicit cross
border transactions, from the direct taxes angle. Creation
of DCI is also in line with FA TF recommendations to
exclusively deal with tax crimes, including direct taxes.
The Directorate also continues to do the intelligence
functions aimed at widening and deepening of the tax
base.
12 3 4

69
(c) To cause issuence of a show cause notice for offences committed
under any direct tax law;
(d) To file prosecution complaint in the competent court under any
direct tax law relating to a criminal activity;
(e) To hire the services of special prosecutors and other experts for
pursuing a prosecution 'complaint filed in any court of competent
jurisdiction;
(f) To execute appropriate witness protection programmes for effective
prosecution of criminal offences under the direct tax laws, i.e. to
protect and rehabilitate witnesses who support the State in
prosecution of such offences so as to insulate them from any harm
to their person;
(g) To coordinate with and extend necessary expert, technical  and
logistical support to any other intelligence or law enforcement
agency in India investigating crimes having cross-border, or
international ramifications that pose a theart to national security;
(h) To enter into agreements for sharing of information and other
cooperation with any Central or State agency in India;
(i) To enter into agreements for sharing of information and other
cooperation with such agencies of foreign states as may be permissible
under any international agreement or treaty; and
(j) Any other matter relating to the above.

APPENDIX  I
MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE- III (DIRECT/
INDIRECT TAXES) OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2013-14)
HELD ON 11TH SEPTEMBER, 2013
The Sub-Committee III (Direct/Indirect Taxes) of the Public Accounts Committee
sat on Wednesday, the 11th September, 2013 from 1100 hrs. to 1215 hrs. in Committee
Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri N.K. Singh—Convenor
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Brij Kishorlal Nirupam
Rajya Sabha
3.  Smt. Ambika Soni
SECRETARIA T
1.  Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Dr. Prasanjit Mukherjee — Dy. CAG (Accounts and Central Receipts)
2. Shri N. Goswami — Principal Director (Customs)
3. Shri Purushottam — Principal Director of Audit (PAC)
Tiwary
Representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) and
the Ministry of Commerce and Industry
1. Shri Sumit Bose — Revenue Secretary
2. Ms. Praveen Mahajan — Chairperson (CBEC)
3. Ms. J.M. Shanti — Member (Central Excise and
Sundharam Computerization), CBEC
4. Shri Rajiv Talwar — Joint Secretary (Drawback)
5. Shri Najib Shah — Director General, DRI
6. Shri J.K. Singh — Joint DGFT
70

2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the Members and the Audit Officers to
the first sitting of the Sub-Committee. The Convenor then apprised the Members that
the sitting was convened to take oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Revenue) on the points arising out of Chapter—II of the
C&AG Report No. 15 of 2011-12 relating to 'Duty Drawback Scheme'. Thereafter, the
representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) were called in.
Before commencing the examination, the convenor made it clear that the deliberations
of the Sub-Committee were confidential and were not to be divulged to any outsider
until the Report on the subject was presented to the Parliament. The Sub-Committee
then proceeded with the examination of the subject.
3. During the course of examination, the Members sought clarifications on various
issues which inter-alia included the delay in export remittances,delay in realization of
export proceeds, inadequacy of internal Audit Wing in the Ministry to detect deficiencies
in Duty Drawback Scheme and the steps taken to strengthen the same. The Members
also sought information regarding break-up of total volume of duty drawback,
percentage of duty drawback abuses that had come to the notice of the Ministry, the
products in which this was more rampant, the ports in which duty drawback cases
were more pronounced and the steps taken by the Ministry to plug the loopholes in
the Duty Drawback Scheme. Further, the Sub-Committee also wanted to know about
the best international standards that cound act as benechmark and help in minimising
the misuse of the Scheme.
4. At the end, the Convenor thanked the representatives of the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Revenue), Ministry of Commerce and Industry and also asked
them to furnish the requisite information on the various points raised by the Members.
The Convenor also thanked the representatives of the Office of the C&AG of India for
providing valuable assistance to the Sub-Committee in the examination of the subject.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting was kept on record.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

APPENDIX II
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2014-15) HELD ON 25TH NOVEMBER, 2014
The Committee sat on Tuesday the 25th November, 2014 from 1500 hrs. to
1730 hrs. in Committee Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. K. V . Thomas—Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nishikant Dubey
3. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
6. Dr. Kirit Somaiya
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
8. Shri Shantaram Naik
9. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Director
3. Shri Jayakumar T. — Additional Director
Representatives from the Office of  the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1.  Shri P. Shesh Kumar — Director General
2.  Ms. Tanuja Mittal — Principal Director
3.  Ms. Gurveen Sidhu — Principal Director
4.  Shri N. Goswami — Principal Director
5.  Shri P. Tiwari — Principal Director
72

2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the representatives
of the Office of the C&AG of India to the sitting of the Committee. The Chairperson
then apprised the Members that during the sitting, the Committee would consider the
three draft Reports for adoption in the first instance. Thereafter, the Committee would
take oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Revenue) on the subject 'Exemptions to Charitable Trusts and Institutions' based on
the C&AG’s Report No. 20 of 2013 (Direct Taxes).
3. The Committee, than took up the following draft Reports for consideration.
(i) Draft Report on the subject ' Duty Drawback Scheme' based on C&AG
Report   No. 15 of 2011-12;
(ii) *** *** ***; and
(iii) *** ***  ***
4. Giving an overview of the issues contained in the draft Reports and the
comments of the Committee thereupon, the Chairperson soliciated the views/
suggestions of the Members.
5. After some discussions, the Committee adopted the two draft Reports
mentioned at Sl. No. (i) and (ii) with minor modifications suggested by the Members.
The Committee, then, authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Reports in the light of
the factual verifications, if any, made by the Audit and present them to Parliament on a
convenient date.
6. *** *** ***
7. *** *** ***
8.*** *** ***
The witnesses then withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceeding of the sitting was kept on record.
9. *** *** ***
The Committee then adjourned.
***Matter does not pertain to this Report.
73
GMGIPMRND—3599LS—28-01-2015.

74
74
"All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are available on sale at the
Sales, Counter, Reception, Parliament House (Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496),
Agents appointed by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi (Tel. Nos.
24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said information is available on website
Iwww.parliamentofindia.nic.ini.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales Counter,
Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir items with Parliament Museum
logo are available for sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these items are available on the website
mentioned above."