INTEGRATED CHILD DEVELOPMENT
SERVICES (ICDS) SCHEME
MINISTRY OF WOMEN & CHILD
DEVELOPMENT
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2014-2015
FOURTEENTH  REPORT
SIXTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
14

FOURTEENTH  REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2014-2015)
(SIXTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
INTEGRATED CHILD DEVELOPMENT
SERVICES (ICDS) SCHEME
MINISTRY OF WOMEN & CHILD DEVELOPMENT
Presented to Lok Sabha on 27.04.2015
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 28.04.2015
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
April, 2015/Vaisakha, 1937 (Saka)

PAC  No. 2045
Price:  `  75.00
© 2015  BY  LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager,
Government of India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2014-15)...................... (iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2013-14)...................... (v)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (vii)
REPORT
PART  I
Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) Scheme.......................... 1
Convergence ............................................................................................ 4
Funding Pattern ....................................................................................... 5
Budgetary Allocation............................................................................... 5
Organizational set-up............................................................................... 5
Coverage & Beneficiaries......................................................................... 5
Strengthening & Restructuring of ICDS Programme ............................... 5
National Plan of Action for Children (NPAC)........................................... 6
Universalization of Scheme...................................................................... 7
Reconciliation of Figures......................................................................... 9
Coordination Committees......................................................................... 9
Infrastructure ........................................................................................... 10
Staff and Training .................................................................................... 14
Supplementary Nutrition Norms.............................................................. 18
IEC and Community Mobilization............................................................ 24
Diversion of funds ................................................................................... 27
Monitoring ............................................................................................... 27
PART II
Observations and Recommendations .................................................... 33
ANNEXURES
I. Organisational and Implementation Structure of ICDS Scheme....... 45
II. Guidelines for Constitution of Monitoring and Review Committees.... 46
List of Abbreviations used in the Report ........................................ 60
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Thirteenth sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
(2013-14) held on 24.09.2013......................................................... 63
II. Minutes of the  Sixth sitting of the Public Accounts  Committee
(2014-15) held on 8.10.2014.......................................................... 65
III. Minutes of the Eighteenth sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
(2014-15) held on 27.03.2015......................................................... 67

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2014-15)
Prof.  K.V . Thomas  —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
4. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey
6. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank”
9. Shri Neiphiu Rio
*10. Shri Dushyant Singh
11. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
†12. Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi
13. Dr. Kirit Somaiya
14. Shri Anurag Thakur
††15. Dr. P. Venugopal
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
17. Shri Vijay Goel
18. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya
19. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
20. Shri Shantaram Naik
21. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
22. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Director
3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja — Deputy Secretary
* Elected w.e.f. 3 rd December, 2014 vice  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy who has been appointed as
Minister w.e.f. 9 th November, 2014.
† Elected w.e.f. 3 rd December, 2014 vice Shri Jayant Sinha who has been appointed as Minister
w.e.f. 9 th November, 2014.
† † Elected w.e.f.  3 rd December, 2014 vice Dr. M. Thambidurai who has been chosen as
Hon’ble Deputy Speaker, Lok Sabha and has since resigned from the membership of the
Committee.
(iii)

(v)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2013-14)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Adsul
3. Dr.  Baliram
4. Shri Ramen Deka
5. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
6. Dr. M. Thambi Durai
7. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
8. Shri Jayaprakash Hegde
9. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
10. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
12. Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam
13. Shri Ashok Tanwar
*14. Shri Ajay Maken
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Prakash Javadekar
†18. Shri Ashwani Kumar
19. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
††20. Dr. V . Maitreyan
21. Shri  N.K. Singh
22. Smt.  Ambika Soni
* Elected w.e.f. 14 th August, 2013 vice Dr. Girija Vyas appointed as Minister of Housing, Urban
Development and Poverty Alleviation w.e.f. 17th June, 2013.
† Elected w.e.f. 3 rd September, 2013 vice Dr. V . Maitreyan ceased to be a Member upon his
retirement as a Member of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 24 th July, 2013.
†† Elected w.e.f. 3 rd September, 2013 vice Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan appointed as Minister
of State for Commerce and Industry w.e.f. 17 th June, 2013.

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2014-15), having been authorised
by the Committee, do present this Fourteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) Scheme’ based on C&AG Report
No. 22 of 2012-13 Union Government (Civil)  relating to the Ministry of Women and
Child Development.
2. The Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid on the Table of
the House on 5th March, 2013.
3. The Public Accounts Committee (2013-14) selected the subject for detailed
examination and report. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Women and Child Development on the subject at their sittings held on
24th September, 2013. As the examination of the subject could not be completed, the
Public Accounts Committee (2014-15) re-selected the subject for examination and took
further evidence on 8th October, 2014. The Committee considered and adopted this
Report at their sitting held on 27th March, 2015. Minutes of the Sittings form
Appendices to the Report.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in thick type and form Part II of the Report.
5. The Committee thank their predecessor Committees for the valuable work done
by them.
6. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Women and Child Development for tendering evidence before them and
furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in connection with the examination
of the subject.
7. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. K.V. THOMAS
22 April, 2015 Chairperson,
2 Vaisakha, 1937 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(vii)

REPORT
PART I
Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) Scheme
Prosperity of a nation depends upon the health and happiness of its children
and the care they receive from family and society to grow up as good human beings
and citizens. The National Policy for Children (1974) laid down that the State should
provide adequate services to children before and after birth and during the period of
growth to ensure their full physical, mental and social development. This was in response
to a shift in focus from 'Child Welfare' to 'Child Development' during the Fifth Five Year
Plan (1974-79) with emphasis on integration and coordination of a multitude of inter-
related services within the ambit of a broad-based objective. In pursuance of this
policy, Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) Scheme was launched on
2 October, 1975 by the Government of India as a centrally sponsored scheme of the
Ministry of Women & Child Development (earlier a department under Ministry of
Human Resource Development). It is one of the world's largest programmes for Early
Childhood Care and Education and represents country's commitment to its children
and nursing mothers, its response to the challenge of providing Pre-school non-formal
Education on one hand and breaking the vicious cycle of malnutrition, morbidity,
reduced learning capacity and mortality on the other. The ICDS is a Self selecting
scheme and is open to all children below six years of age for their holistic development
and Pregnant and Lactating (P&L) Mothers, irrespective of their economic status. The
broad objectives of the schemes are:—
• to improve the nutritional and health status of children in the age-group
0-6 years;
• to lay the foundation for proper psychological, physical and social
development of the child;
• to reduce the incidence of mortality, morbidity, malnutrition and school
dropout;
• to achieve effective co-ordination of policy and implementation amongst the
various departments to promote child development; and
• to enhance the capability of the mother to look after the normal health and
nutritional needs of the child through proper nutrition and health education.
The Scheme provides a package of six services viz. supplementary nutrition,
immunization, referral services, health check-up, pre-school non-formal education and
health and nutrition education.
Three out of above six services namely supplementary nutrition, pre-school
education and nutrition and health education are delivered in an integrated manner by

2
the Anganwadi Centres (AWCs) at the village level, each of which is run by an
Anganwadi worker and a helper.
Other three services namely Immunization, Health Check-ups and Referral
Services are delivered through Public Health Infrastructure under the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare.
2. Audit Report on ICDS (No. 3 of 2000 (Civil) had revealed that the policy of
universalization of ICDS Scheme remained unattained and the Scheme could not achieve
the desired goals. Hence, C&AG decided to conduct a follow-up audit to assess:—
(a) the status of the ICDS Scheme;
(b) whether the issues highlighted in the previous report had been appropriately
addressed; and
(c) the implementation of new interventions in the wake of the Supreme Court
orders.
3. In this backdrop, C&AG conducted a Performance Audit which covered test
check of 2730 Anganwadi Centres (AWCs) from 273 project offices of 67 districts from 13
States (Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Jharkhand, Karnataka,
Madhya Pradesh, Meghalaya, Odisha, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and
West Bengal) for the period 2006-07 to 2010-11 on three services, viz. supplementary
nutrition, pre-school education and nutrition and health education under the Scheme. It
involved scrutiny of records of the five programme divisions in the Ministry, Food and
Nutrition Board (FNB), National Institute of Public Cooperation and Child Development
(NIPCCD) and the implementing agencies in the 13 selected States. The States were
selected on the basis of their population, funds released to them during the period of audit
and nutrition indicators as mentioned in the National Family Health Survey-3, 2005.
The major findings of the Audit as contained in Audit Report No. 22 of 2012-13
are:—
(i) To universalize the ICDS, Hon'ble Supreme Court had directed the Central
and State Governments to operationalise 14 lakh AWCs by December, 2008.
The Ministry sanctioned 13.71 lakh AWCs and could operationalise
13.17 lakh. This left a shortfall of  0.54 lakh. Similarly, out of 7075 sanctioned
ICDS projects, 7005 projects were operationalised.
(ii) Sixty one per cent of the test checked AWCs did not have their own buildings
and 25 per cent were functioning from semi-pucca/kachcha buildings or open/
partially covered space. Separate space for cooking, storing food items and
indoor and outdoor activities for children was not available in 40 to 65
per cent of the test checked AWCs.
(iii) Poor hygiene and sanitation were noticed in the AWCs due to the absence of
toilets in 52 per cent of the test checked AWCs and non-availability of drinking
water facility for 32 per cent of the test checked AWCs.
(iv) Functional weighing machines for babies and adults were not available in
26 and 58 per cent, respectively, of the test-checked AWCs. The essential

3
utensils required for providing supplementary nutrition to the beneficiaries
were also not available in several test-checked AWCs.
(v) Medicine kits were not available in 33 to 49 per cent  of the test checked
AWCs due to failure of the State Governments in spending the funds released
to them by the Centre.
(vi) Fifty-three per cent of the test checked AWCs did not receive annual flexi
fund of Rs. 1,000 from the State Governments during the period 2009-11.
(vii) There were shortages of staff and key functionaries at all levels.
(viii) The shortfall under various categories of training ranged from 19 to 58
per cent of the targets fixed under the State Training Action Plan (STRAP).
(ix) The shortfall in expenditure on Supplementary Nutrition (SN) ranged between
15 per cent and 36 per cent of the requirements during the period 2006-11. The
average daily expenditure per beneficiary on SN was Rs. 1.52 to Rs. 2.01
against the norm of Rs. 2.06 during 2006-09 and Rs. 3.08 to Rs. 3.64 against the
norm of Rs. 4.21 during 2009-11.
(x) Thirty-three to 47 per cent children were not weighed for monitoring their
growth during 2006-07 to 2010-11. The data on nutritional status of children
had several discrepancies and were not based on World Health Organisation's
growth standards.
(xi) There was a gap of 33 to 45 per cent between the number of eligible beneficiaries
identified and those receiving the SN during 2006-07 to 2010-11.
(xii) The Wheat Based Nutrition Programme suffered from lack of proper
coordination among the Ministry of Women and Child Development, the
Department of Food and Public Distribution and the State Governments. The
Ministry could allocate 78 per cent of food grains demanded by the States.
The actual off-take by the States was merely 66 per cent  of total demand
placed by them.
(xiii) Pre-School Education (PSE) kits were not available at 41 to 51 per cent of the
test-checked AWCs during the period 2006-11.
(xiv) In six of the test-checked States (Bihar, Haryana, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh,
Uttar Pradesh  and West Bengal) data on beneficiaries of PSE who joined
mainstream  education were not available. In five States (Andhra Pradesh,
Chhattisgarh, Odisha, Rajasthan and Karnataka) shortfall in the number of
children who actually joined the formal education during 2006-11 ranged
between seven and 30 per cent.
(xv) Shortfall of 40 to 100 per cent was noted on the expenditure against the funds
released for Information, Education and Communication (IEC) in many States.
(xvi) Against the total release of Rs. 1753 crore to 13 States during 2008-09 and
15 States during 2009-11 for meeting the expenditure on salary of ICDS

4
functionaries, the actual expenditure was Rs. 2853 crore indicating unrealistic
budgeting and consequent diversion of funds from other critical components
of the scheme.
(xvii) The Central Monitoring Unit (CMU) under the ICDS Scheme failed to
efficiently carry out assigned tasks, which included concurrent evaluation of
the Scheme, monitoring through the progress reports received from the States.
(xviii) Impact assessement of the services under the SN and the PSE based on
outcome indicators, such as nutritional status of the children, was not being
done.
(xix) The follow-up action on internal monitoring and evaluation by the Ministry
was not adequate and resulted in recurrence of shortcomings and lapses in
the Scheme implementation.
4. Convergence: For better governance in the delivery of the Scheme, convergence
is in built in the Scheme which provides a platform in the form of Anganwadi Centres
(AWCs) for providing all services under the Scheme. The Ministry of Women and
Child Development and the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare jointly instructed in
November, 2005 and January, 2006 to all the States/UTs to ensure convergence of
services under the ICDS Scheme and the National Rural Health Mission (NRHM).
Services Tar get Group Service Provided by
Supplementary Nutrition Children below 6 years: Anganwadi Worker (AWW)
Pregnant & Lactating and Anganwadi Helper (AWH)
Mother (P&LM)
Immunization* Children below 6 years: Auxiliary Nursing Midwifery
Pregnant & Lactating (ANM)/Medical Officer (MO)
Mother (P&LM)
Health Check-up* Children below 6 years: ANM/MO/AWW
Pregnant & Lactating
Mother (P&LM)
Referral Services Children below 6 years: A WW/ANM/MO
Pregnant & Lactating
Mother (P&LM)
Pre-School Education Children (3-6 years) AWW
Nutrition & Health Women (15-45 years) A WW/ANM/MO
Education
*AWW assists ANM in identifying the target group.
5. The Ministry of Women and Child Development is facilitated in the
implementation of this programme by a Food and Nutrition Board [FNB] and the
National Institute of Public Cooperation and Child Development [NIPCCD]. FNB imparts
education and training in nutrition, promotes advocacy and works towards generating
awareness through various programmes including use of electronic and print media.

5
Funding pattern: The ICDS Scheme is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme and the
Government releases Grant-in-Aid to the States/UTs on a cost sharing ratio of 90:10 for
all components including Supplementary Nutrition Programme (SNP) for North East
and 50:50 for SNP and 90:10 for all other components for all States other than North
East. However, under the Strengthened and Restructured ICDS, all the new components
are on 75:25 ratio in respect of States other than NER.
The international agencies like United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF),
Swedish International Development Agency (SIDA), Co-operative Assistance and
Relief Everywhere (CARE), World Food Programme (WFP) and World Bank have also
supported the scheme. Three World Bank assisted ICDS projects were implemented in
tribal and socio-economically backward blocks during the the period 1991-2006.
Budgetary Allocation: There has been significant increase in Budgetary
allocation for ICDS Scheme from Rs. 44,400 crore for the XI Plan period to Rs. 1,23,580
crore for the XII Plan period. However, the allocation for ICDS as per Planning
Commission GBS in XII Plan is Rs. 1,03,003 crores leaving a gap of Rs. 20,577 crore.
Organizational set-up: ICDS Scheme is a centrally sponsored programme. The
nodal Ministry in the GoI is the Ministry of Women and Child Development. A chart
depicting role and responsibilities of various authorities at the Central, State and field
levels in planning, funding, executing and monitoring the Scheme is given in the
Annexure-I.
Coverage & Beneficiaries: The Schemes of ICDS was launched in 1975 with
33 Projects and 4891 Anganwadi Centres (AWCs) and was gradually expanded to
5652 Projects and 6 lakh sanctioned AWCs in the country, by the end of IX Plan. The
Scheme has been expanded in three phases in the years 2005-06, 2007-08 and 2008-09.
The scheme today operates through a network of 7067 fully operational Projects and
13.42 lakh AWCs as on March, 2014. The services are currently being provided to
1045.08 lakh beneficiaries of which 849.40 lakh are children under six and 195.68 lakh
are P&L Mothers. 370.70 lakh children of 3-6 years are provided pre-school education
of which 188.19 lakh are boys and 182.51 lakh are girls.
Strengthening & Restructuring of ICDS Programme: Government has
approved Strengthening and Restructuring of ICDS Scheme in September 2012 with an
over-all budget allocation of Rs. 1,23,580 crore during 12th Five Year Plan. Restructured
and Strengthened ICDS has been rolled out during the year 2012-13 to 2014-15 in a
phased manner.
6. The key features of Strengthened and Restructured ICDS inter-alia include
addressing the gaps and challenge with (a) special focus on children under 3 years and
pregnant and lactating mothers; (b) strengthening and repackaging of services
including, care and nutrition counseling services and care of severely underweight
children; (c) a provision for an additional Anganwadi Worker cum Nutrition Counselor
for focus on children under 3 years of age and to improve the family contact, care and
nutrition counseling for P&L Mothers in the selected 200 high-burden districts across
the country, besides having provision of link worker, 5% creache cum Anganwadi

6
centre; (d) focus on Early Childhood Care and Education (ECCE); (e) forging strong
institutional and programmatic convergence particularly, at the district, block and
village levels; (f) models providing flexibility at local levels for community participation;
(g) introduction of APIP; (h) improving Supplementary Nutrition Programme including
cost revision; (i) provision for construction and improvement of buildings of Anganwadi
centres; (j) allocating adequate financial resources for other components including
Monitoring and Management and Information System (MIS), Training and use of
Information and Communication Technology (ICT); (k) to put ICDS in a mission mode
etc.; and (l) revision of financial norms etc.
7. The goals/targets fixed for strengthened and restructured ICDS Scheme are as
under:—
(i) Prevent and reduce young child under nutrition by 10% points in 0-3 years;
(ii) Enhance early development and learning outcomes in all children below six
years of age; and
(iii) Improved care and nutrition of girls and women and reduce anaemia prevalence
in young children, girls and women by 1/5th.
8. National Plan of Action for Children (NPAC): As per Audit "The NPAC was
formulated by the Department of Women and Child Development in 2005 to ensure all
rights to all children up to the age of 18 years. It sets certain goals on universalisation
of early childhood services to ensure children's physical, social, emotional and cognitive
development and objectives to achieve them”.
9. The primary responsibility for implementation of the National Plan of Action
for Children (NPAC) rests with the Central, State and local Governments. The Ministry
was to coordinate with implementing Departments and State Governments and publish
annual reports on its implementation and the status of India's children.
10. The Ministry stated (June 2012) that it had written letters to Ministries/
Departments and State Governments seeking information on the progress made under
the provisions of the NPAC, 2005. So far 12 Ministries/Departments and one State
Government (Meghalaya) have sent information. No reports were stated to be published
by the Ministry on the status of NPAC, 2005.
11. When the Ministry was asked as to why no Reports have been published by
the Ministry on the status of National Action Plan for Children 2005, whereas it was
envisaged that Annual Reports would be published regularly and how in absence of
the Annual Reports the universalization goals are being monitored by them, the Ministry
replied as follows:—
"It is a fact that no Annual Reports were published on the Status of National
Plan of Action for Children 2005. However, the key areas identified in the National
Plan of Action for Children, 2005 related to different Ministries and the monitoring
of these activities was being done by the respective line Ministries/Departments
and also by the State Governments concerned.

7
It is further added that this Ministry has notified a new National Policy for
Children, 1013 on 26th April, 2013. In pursuance of this, the Ministry has developed
a draft National Plan of Action for Children (NPAC) for a period of five years. The
Plan of Action has been drafted keeping in view the existing schemes/programmes
of various Ministries, which have provision of budget allocations. The purpose
is to identify and monitor the progress made so far on the issues related to
children across Ministries and sectors.
The draft NPAC has been circulated to all the key Ministries/Departments
working for children, institutions such as NCPCR, NIPCCD, NCW, etc. and all
the State Governments and UT Administrations inviting comments and
suggestions thereon."
12. Universalization of Scheme: As per the C&AG , the Ministry decided (1995)
to universalise the Scheme by covering all the 5239 Communally Development blocks
and 684 identified major urban slums in the country by the end of the Eighth Plan
(1992-1997). In their previous Audit Report (2000), the C&AG had pointed out that
universalisation plan was contemplated without carrying out systematic assessment
of infrastructural requirements. Only 4200 projects were made operational. The Hon'ble
Supreme Court, vide its interim orders dated 28 November, 2001, 29 April, 2004,
07 October, 2004 and 13 December, 2006, had directed the GoI to universalise the
coverage of ICDS Scheme. The universalisation involved extending all services offered
under the Scheme to every child under the age of six and all pregnant and lactating
mothers. The Supreme Court directed the GoI in April, 2004 to state the period within
which number of AWCs would be increased so as to cover 14 lakh habitations. In
December, 2006, the Court directed the Government to sanction and operationalise a
minimum of 14 lakh AWCs by December, 2008 in a phased and even manner. The
Supreme Court order dated 13 December, 2006 stipulated, inter alia that rural
communities and slum dwellers should be entitled to an Anganwadi on demand, not
later than three months from the date of demand in cases where a settlement has at
least 40 children under six but no Anganwadi. The GoI, during third phase of expansion
of ICDS Scheme (October, 2008), approved 20,000 additional Anganwadis on Demand
(AOD). The Ministry directed the States (May, 2009) to submit the proposal relating to
opening up of AOD within 45 days from the date of demand after observing all formalities.
13. Audit however, noted that only 2,030 AODs were sanctioned to six States by
the Ministry in 2011-12. The Ministry attributed the reasons for delay in sanction of
AODs to the failure of State Governments to send their proposals for the same in
prescribed format. The State Governments mixed the proposals for AODs with the
proposals for setting up new AWCs under third phase of expansion.
14. In Odisha, 4,427 applications for AODs were received from the District
Programme Officers (DPOs) on the recommendation of Child Development Project
Officers (CDPOs) during the year 2010-11. However, the State Government sent
proposals fror 3,859 AODs to Central Government with a delay ranging between 90 to
570 days. The delay was attributable to the delay in convening the meeting of Block

8
Level Coordination Committee as per the convenience of the Members of Legislative
Assembly (MLAs) and representatives of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) who are
the members of the said Committee which is chaired by the Sub-Collector.
15. The Hon'ble Supreme Court, in November, 2001, directed the Central
Government and the State Governments that ICDS Scheme be implemented in full and
a disbursement centre (AWC) established in every human settlement.
16. Further, the Supreme Court order dated 13 December, 2006 stipulated, inter
alia, identification of SC and ST hamlets/habitations for opening of new Anganwadi
Centres (AWCs) on a priority basis.
17. The Ministry, in turn, issued sanctions for opening of additional AWCs to
States/UTs with the conditions that (a) villages pre-dominantly inhabited by population
belonging to SC/ST and minority community should be given priority and (b) within a
village also location of an AWC, as far as feasible should be the areas inhabited by
population from SC/ST and minority community. The State Governments were to certify
that all SC, ST, OBC and minority community habitations had been saturated.
18. The data regarding coverage of all habitations predominantly inhabited by
SC, ST, OBC and minority communities in remaining States/UTs was not available with
the Ministry.
19. The Ministry was not in a position to give assurance that the order of the
Court in this regard had been fully complied with and all the predominantly SC/ST/
other weaker section habitations were covered under ICDS scheme.
20. The Ministry stated (November, 2012) that the progress in sanction and
operationalisation of ICDS Projects/AWCs was slow in the initial stages. The ICDS
Projects/AWCs were sanctioned to the States/UTs by the Ministry on need basis and
the proposals received from them. Their operationalisation took time due to
administrative issues, court cases and financial processes involved. Against
7075 sanctioned projects and 13.71 AWCs 7005 Projects and 13.17 lakh AWCs were
operational as on June, 2012.
21. On being asked whether any target date has been fixed for achieving the
objective of the universalization of the scheme, the Ministry stated:—
"In order to universalize the ICDS Scheme, the Ministry is monitoring the
operationalization of AWCs. As on 31.3.2014, there were 13.42 lakh operational
AWCs. The Ministry is targeting to operationalize 13,000 more AWCs thereby
reaching a total of 13.55 lakhs operational AWCs by 31.3.2015."
22. When asked that whether any timelines had been fixed for establishing
AWCs so as to cover 7005 projects and 14 lakh habitations, as directed by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court, the Ministry replied:—
"In order to universalize the ICDS Scheme, the Ministry is monitoring the
operationalization of AWCs and is targeting to operationalize 13,000 more AWCs
thereby reaching a total of 13.55 lakhs operational AWCs by 31.3.2015. Ministry

9
has been reviewing the status of operationlisation from time to time and
requesting the States/UTs to operationalize all the sanctioned projects and AWCs.
As a result of these efforts, 7067 projects (99.99%) and 13.42 lakh AWCs (97.6%)
have been operationlised as on 31.3.2014."
23. The Ministry, on being asked whether any survey has been conducted
recently to ensure that all habitations, especially those inhabited by SC/ST/OBC/
Minority community population have been covered under the Scheme, stated that it
has asked all States/UTs to ensure that all habitations, especially those inhabited by
SC/ST/OBC/Minority community population have been covered under the Scheme.
No Survey has, however, been conducted by it in this regard.
24. Reconciliation of Figures: The Ministry maintains data of sanctioned and
operational projects and AWCs on the basis of sanctions issued to all the States/UTs
and periodical progress reports received from them. The States/UTs are also required
to furnish quarterly/annual Statement of Expenditure (SoE) giving inter alia the details
of sanctioned and operational AWCs.
25. The number of projects/AWCs sanctioned by the Ministry was verified by
Audit against the number of sanctioned projects/AWCs reported by the States
Governments in their SoEs. Audit noted that there was no system of reconciliation of
data between the Ministry and the State/UT Governments in respect of sanctioned
and operational Projects/AWCs. This was significant because the number of operational
projects/AWCs formed the basis of financial support to the States under the scheme.
26. The Ministry stated in their reply dated July 2012 that compilation of data on
operational projects and AWCs by the States/UTs was a time consuming process.
Most of the States/UTs submitted these reports to the Ministry with a delay resulting
in mismatch in figures shown by it. These figures indicated the last reported figures
while preparing the consolidated report at the national level.
27. In their latest reply dated 2014 the Ministry stated as under:—
"As already informed to the Audit, the data given in the monthly report of the
monitoring unit of the Ministry is for a particular month of report whereas the
data reported by the State in the SoE/utilization certificate is the average of a
quarter. Therefore the two sets of data are incomparable."
28. Coordination Committees: Audit observed that the convergence among
various departments and programmes for the delivery of ICDS requires constitution of
coordination committees at the Central, States, District, Block and Village levels to
review the progress of the ICDS Scheme. Under State Level Coordination Committee
(SLCC), joint meeting of State Nodal department with National Rural Health Mission
(NRHM) functionaries was required to be held in every quarter to discuss about
different health aspects of ICDS and to gather inputs on immunization and other health
concerns of the ICDS from the State on regular basis. The inter-departmental
convergence required for coordinated policy of integrated delivery of multiplicity of
ICDS Scheme was not effective. Further, the objective of the ICDS Scheme to achieve

10
effective coordination of policy and implementation amongst the various departments
to promote child development remained unaccomplished for want of effective inter-
sectoral convergence.
29. The Ministry in its reply stated:—
"For monitoring of ICDS, MWCD issued guidelines on 31.3.20011 (Annexure II)
to constitute Monitoring & Review Committee at different levels viz. State, District,
Block and Anganwadi. As per these guidelines, Secretaries of line Ministries
namely Planning, Finance, Health & Family Welfare, Rural Development,
Panchayati Raj Institution, Drinking Water Supply & Sanitation, Education,
Agricualture/Horticulture, Food are members of State Level Monitoring and
Review Committee. State Level Committee is required to Monitor and review the
convergence with line Departments/Programme like (a) Health/NRHM: Status of
full immunization at AWCs, provision of antenatal and health check-ups, referral
services and supply of micronutrients (Vit-A, IFA, de-worming tablet) to AWCs;
Functioning of VHND, VHSC and promotion of IYCF; (b) Water & Sanitation:
Provision of potable water and sanitation facility at AWCs through convergence
with Total Sanitation Campaign and Rajiv Gandhi National Drinking Water Mission
or any other schemes of State Govt; (c) Sarva Siksha Abhiyan (SSA): Co-location
of AWCs with primary schools, integration of PSE in AWCs, support from SSA,
etc.;  (d) PRIs: Involvement of PRIs and community in overseeing and coordinating
the delivery of services at AWCs etc. Similarly, Committee at District, Block and
Anganwadi Level suggest/take appropriate corrective actions including
coordination and convergence with the departments/programmes.
ICDS Scheme provides a package of six services viz. Supplementary Nutrition,
Pre-school non-formal education, Nutrition & Health education, Immunization,
Health check-up and Referral services. Three of the six services viz., immunization,
health check-up and referral services, are related to health and are provided by
Public Health Infrastructure. Inter-sectoral convergence is therefore inbuilt and
integral to the ICDS Scheme. The target groups for these services are children
below 6 years and pregnant and lactating mothers.
National Rural Health Mission (NRHM), the Reproductive and Child Health
Programme Phase-II, comprehensively integrate interventions that improve child
health and address factors contributing to morbidity and mortality. Some of
these include Infant and Young Child Feeding, Immunization against six vaccine
preventable diseases, vitamin A and iron & folic acid supplementation, setting
up of Nutritional Rehabilitation Centres to address severe and acute malnutrition
etc. These programmes under NRHM are implemented in convergence with
ICDS. This convergence gets effectuated through the grass-root functionaries
i.e. AWW under ICDS and ANM and ASHA under Ministry of Health & Family
Welfare at the AWC."
30. Infrastructure: An Anganwadi Centre (AWC) is the focal point for delivery
of ICDS services accommodating up to 40 children during day-time. In order to discharge

11
the functions effectively, the AWCs require basic infrastructure. As per the norms for
construction of AWC building prescribed by the Ministry (2011), an AWC must have
a separate sitting room for children/women, separate kitchen, store for storing food
items, child friendly toilets, separate space for children to play (indoor and outdoor
activities) and safe drinking water facilities.
31. Audit noted that out of 2701 test-checked AWCs, 1043 AWCs were operating
from dedicated ICDS buildings. Further, 792 AWCs were running from rented premises,
while the remaining 866 AWCs were running neither in ICDS buildings nor in rented
premises, but at other places/sites.
32. As per the Scheme guidelines, the AWCs are required to provide hot cooked
foods under Supplementary Nutrition (SN). In addition to the SN, the AWCs are also
required to provide pre-school education to children between the age-group of three
to six years.
33. As per the norms for construction of an  AWC building prescribed by the
Ministry (2011), an AWC must have a separate sitting room for children/women, separate
kitchen, store for storing food items and separate space for children to play (indoor
and outdoor activities). Besides, the State Governments are allowed to spend Rs. 5,000
for each AWC for providing the basic and necessary equipment and furniture.
34. During 2006, 11 construction of 68,272 AWCs was taken up in seven audited
States, out of  which construction of 39,606 AWC buildings (58.01 per cent) was
completed. The work in respect of remaining AWC buildings was either in-progress or
was yet to commence even after a lapse of one to five years of their sanction.
35. The hygiene of AWCs is paramount in view of the fact that beneficiaries were
required to stay at AWCs for considerable time during the day. As per the Ministry's
instructions (2011), child friendly toilet and drinking water facility were the basic minimum
requirements for the effective functioning of an AWC.
36. Audit, however noted that a large number of  AWCs lacked essential
infrastructure for maintenance of hygiene and sanitation.
37. Nutrition and supplementary nutrition programme under ICDS scheme
provides for growth monitoring and nutrition surveillance. Children below the age of
three years are to be weighed once a month and children 3-6 years of age are to be
weighed quarterly. Further, health-check up component under the scheme requires
health care of children less than six years of age, ante-natal care of expectant mothers
and post-natal care of nursing mothers.
38. Audit has observed that baby weighing machines were not found functional
in 26 per cent Anganwadi Centres (AWCs) and functional adult weighing machines
were not available in 58.17 per cent AWCs.
39. Under the ICDS Scheme, children in the age group of three to six years were
to be served hot cooked meals in Anganwadi Centres (AWCs) and mini-AWCs. States/
UTs were required to make arrangements for the same as a part of the supplementary
nutrition component under the Scheme. Test check of sample of 2716 AWCs revealed

12
that utensils required for preparation of foods at AWCs and serving them to the
beneficiaries were not available at many Anganwadi Centres (AWCs).
40. ICDS guidelines of March, 2000 stipulated State/UT level procurement of
medicine kits and distribution thereof to the AWCs. The decentralization of procurement
of medicine kits for AWCs was done in order to streamline the process and make kits
available in tie to the AWCs. The Ministry provided funds at the rate of Rs. 600 per
operational Anganwadi Centre (AWC) to the State/UT for procuring the medicine kits.
41. An analysis of the funds released to the States/UTs by the Ministry for the
procurement of medicine kits and the expenditure reported by them in their Statements
of Expenditure (SoEs) revealed significant shortfall in expenditure. The States which
did not incur any expenditure on the procurement of medicine kits and where the
shortfall in the expenditure was more than 30 per cent were Manipur, Andhra Pradesh,
Odisha, Punjab where no funds were spent in 2010-11, 50% of the funds in
Uttar Pradesh and 35% in Uttarakhand were spent in 2010-11.
42. Audit noted that the State Governments failed to procure medicine kits despite
availability of funds. The Ministry annually released funds to the States for all
components of ICDS (General) including medicine kits, but failed to review component-
wise utilization of funds by the States, specially the procurement of medicine kits and
supply thereof to the A WCs. The Committee noted all the above observations and
sought clarifications on the same from the Ministry.
43. On being asked about how the Ministry has taken up the issue regarding
improvement of physical infrastructure of the AWCs with the States/UTs, the
Ministry replied:—
"In order to improve the physical infrastructure at AWC, States/UTs have been
requested from time to time to tap funds from various schemes like MPLADs,
MLALADs, PRI, MSDP of Minority Affairs, Tribal Sub-Plan, State Plan, BRGF,
LWE/IAP, Finance Commission, etc. They have also been requested to leverage
the funds from various other schemes like Total Sanitation Campaign, etc. for
providing water and sanitation facilities at the AWCs.
As per the information available, about 1.90 lakh AWC buildings have been
constructed with assistance from various schemes like MPLADs, MLALADs,
PRI, MSDP of Minority Affairs, Tribal Sub-Plan, State Plan, BRGF, LWE/IAP,
Finance Commission, etc. as on 31.3.2013. Ministry of Rural Development has
included construction of Anganwadi Centres in the list of new works for activities
permitted under MGNREGS. A joint letter from Secretary, Ministry of Women
and  Child Development and Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development has been
issued to all the States/UTs vide letter No. 19-4/2008-CDI dated 29.1.2013.
Drinking water and sanitation facilities are being provided in convergence with
the Schemes of the Department of Drinking Water Supply under the National
Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP) and the Total Sanitation Campaign
(TSC). Such convergence has been advocated at Central and State levels. A joint

13
letter under the signatures of Secretary, WCD and Secretary, Department of
Drinking Water Supply was issued to all the States/UTs on 10.2.2010 advising
the States/UTs to create synergies at different levels to further the objectives of
TSC and ICDS.
To facilitate and augment convergence between the ICDS and TSC, the Ministry
has also issued a joint letter vide No. W-11042/04/04-CRSP Pt. dated 10th February,
2010 to the Secretaries in charge of ICDS in all States/UTs urging them to utilize
the TSC funds for construction of Baby Friendly Toilets in AWCs operating out
of Govt. buildings and also in private buildings by utilizing the revolving fund
component under the TSC. The Ministry of Rural Development has also been
addressed to provide potable water at the AWCs under the Rajiv Gandhi Drinking
Water Mission."
44. On being asked whether the Ministry has prescribed any mechanism to
monitor the availability of minimum basic physical infrastructure at the Anganwadi
Centres (AWCs), it stated:—
"The Government has introduced 5-tier monitoring and review mechanism at
National, State, District, Block and Anganwadi Levels and has issued the
guidelines on 31.03.2011. As per these guidelines, Anganwadi Level Monitoring
and Support Committee (ALMSC) is required to Review facilities available at the
AWC like infrasturcture including clean water, functioning toilet, play area, PSE/
medicine kits, cooking utensils, etc. and take/suggest actions to the Block Level
Monitoring Committee on ICDS to improve delivery of services at the AWC."
45. On being asked whether the Ministry has formulated any list of minimum
essential equipment, furniture, utensils, etc. mandatory for Anganwadi Centres (AWCs)
and the percentage of AWCs having all the basic facilities, the Ministry stated:—
"Under the ICDS Scheme, list of basic equipment for Anganwadi Centres (AWCs)
like items for General use viz. Small mats or durries, First Aid Box, One closed
shelf (for storage equipment) 1 or 2 racks, etc., kitchen equipment like Tumblers,
plates and spoons, 2 or 3 vessels with lid, etc., bathroom equipment like 2 buckets
or vessels for storing water, mugs (1 or 2), towels, disinfectant fluid, etc. and
indoor play equipments like counting frames, dholaks, building blocks, etc. have
been prescribed.
The existing reporting of MIS on ICDS Scheme do not capture this information.
However, MWCD through National Council of Applied Economic Research
(NCAER), New Delhi conducted a survey namely "Rapid Facility Survey of
Infrastructure at Anganwadi Centres" in the year 2004 according to which out of
2.87 lakhs surveyed AWCs, (i) 167075 AWCs (58.08%) had Mats; (ii) 158289
AWCs (55.02%) had Shelf; (iii) 88796 AWCs (30.87%) had Chowki; (iv) 134186
AWCs (46.64%) had Table; (v) 152527 AWCs (53.02%) had Chair; and (vi) 158990
AWCs (55.27%) had National Flag, etc. States/UTs have been requested from
time to time to improve the basic facilities at the AWCs.

14
Under the restructured ICDS Scheme, Rs. 7000 per AWC is provided once in five
years for purchase of equipment like utensils, gas burner with connection, mat/
carpet and other necessary equipment."
46. When the Ministry was asked whether it has ascertained the reasons for
non-incurring of expenditure on procurement of medicine kits by the States/UTs and
the steps taken by the Ministry to overcome the problem, the Ministry replied:—
"The Ministry has ascertained the reasons for non-incurring of expenditure on
procurement of medicine kits by the States/UTs. States have expressed
procedural/administrative difficulty in procurement of medicine kits. One of the
reasons for non-incurring of expenditure on procurement of medicine kits, as
reported by the States, is non-release of funds for this purpose by the Government
in one lump-sum. It is to inform that the cost of programme component like
medicine kit, pre-school education kit, etc. form part of the funds released under
ICDS (General). These funds were earlier released quarterly in equal instalments
@ 25% per quarter. As a result of the cost of programme components being
released to the States in instalments, the States were finding it difficult to make
the procurement. The Ministry has addressed this issue and from 2012-13, funds
for expenditure on programme component like medicine kit, etc. are being released
to the States/UTs separately in one go in the second quarter of the year.
Further, from 2013-14, release of funds to the States/UTs is linked to their
submission and approval of APIP by the Empowered Programme Committee
chaired by Secretary, MWCD. APIP includes State's Plan of expenditure on all
programme components to ensure effective implementation of the scheme with
all its programme components including Medicine Kits.
States/UTs have also been separately requested to inform the Ministry on
availability of these kits at each AWC in a prescribed format. MIS which has
been revised is also designed to capture information on availability of these kits
at each AWC."
47. Staff and Training: An ICDS project area, coterminous with the community
development block in the rural areas and ward/slum with a population of one lakh in
urban areas, is the lowest administrative unit for implementation of the Scheme. As per
the Scheme guidelines, 100 Anganwadi Centres (AWCs) were to function under each
ICDS Project (50 AWCs in tribal blocks). The Project is headed by a Child Development
Project Officer (CDPO). CDPO was to supervise, coordinate and guide work of AWCs
in the entire project. For this purpose, five-six supervisors were assisting a CDPO. The
supervisors were responsible for providing  continuous on-job guidance to and
supervision of Anganwadi Workers (AWWs) by visiting each AWC at least once a
month and organising monthly meeting of AWWs with village level health functionaries.
48. The delivery of services to the beneficiaries is provided through Anganwadi
Centres (AWCs) comprising an Anganwadi Worker (AWW) and an Anganwadi Helper
(AWH).

15
49. As per the reply of the Ministry, the position of vacant posts of CDPOs,
Supervisors and AWWs as on 31.12.2013 is an under:—
Name of functionary Sanctioned In-position V acant
CDPOs/ACDPOs 9036 5827 3209
Supervisors 54166 34335 19831
AWWs 1374935 1260567 114368
50. The Ministry stated (November, 2012) that the issue relating to filling up of
vacancies at various levels under the ICDS Scheme was being taken up regularly with
the States during review meetings. The Minister for Women and Child Development
had taken up the matter with all the State Chief Ministers for expeditious filling up of
these vacancies vide letter dated 18 July, 2012. It was further stated that being a
centrally sponsored scheme implemented across the country, micro management at
the Central level was not feasible. However, the Government has introduced a 5-tier
monitoring and supervision mechanism at all levels including District and State levels
with specific responsibility to review vacancy  position at all levels under the scheme
and to take corrective measures. The Ministry had reportedly been consistently
impressing upon the States to have a separate cadre for the ICDS staff. However, the
response was not encouraging.
51. The honorarium of AWWs/AWHs has been increased from Rs. 1000/- per
month to Rs. 1500/- p.m. and Rs. 500 p.m. to Rs. 750 p.m. for AWW and AWH respectively
in 2002. It was further increased to Rs. 3000/- p.m. and Rs. 1500/- p.m. for AWW and
AWH respectively in 2011 and Rs. 2250/- p.m. for AWW of Mini-AWCs from July,
2013.
52. As per the Ministry's instructions (August, 2000), a grievance redressal
committee  was to be set up at district and State levels with representation of the
AWWs and the AWHs. The said committee was to regularly and expeditiously redress
grievances and day-to-day problems faced by the AWWs/AWHs in the quarterly
meetings.
53. Audit, however, observed that no grievance redressal committee was set up
in  Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat and Jharkhand till April, 2011.
54. As per the ICDS guidelines, in order to appreciate commendable services of
Anganwadi Workers (AWWs), annual National and State level cash awards along
with citation were instituted from the year 2000-01.
55. Audit noted delays in awarding the AWWs rendering exemplary services at
the National as well as State levels. At the Ministry level, nominations for giving
awards for the period 2006-09 were finalised in 2012. However, awards were yet to be
given (November, 2012). The nominations for the period 2009—11 were awaited from
19 States/UTs as of July, 2012. It is pertinent that last time the National level awards
were given in February, 2009, which pertained to the years 2004-06. AWW/AWH Welfare
Fund was to be created out of the contributions made by AWWs/AWHs and the State

16
Government to bring them under social security network. However, no such fund was
created in 10 test checked States.
56. The Ministry was asked about any improvement in availability of staff at the
core level since the introduction of 5-tier monitoring and supervision mechanism by
the Ministry and whether any target dates to fill up the vacancies at various levels has
been fixed and the Ministry replied:—
"The occurrence of the vacancies is a continuous process and is not a one-time
incident. States/UTs have been advised to fill up vacancies urgently. However,
since State Public Service Commissions are involed in the recruitment of CDPOs,
it is a time consuming process. Considering the above difficulty in making
appointment of CDPOs on regular basis, the Government of India while
restructuring the ICDS, have authorized the States to fill up the vacancies on
ad hoc/contract basis till these posts are filled on regular basis.
MWCD is regularly taking up the matter with the States/UTs through letters and
review meetings to improve implementation of ICDS Scheme including filling up
of vacant posts at various levels. As a result, the number of in-position CDPOs/
ACDPOs have increased from 5658 in 2010 to 5827 as on 31.12.2013. Similarly, the
number of Supervisors have increased from 31703 to 34335 and AWWs from
1080586 to 1260567 during the same period."
57. With regards to training of AWWs, the Ministry stated as follows:—
"Training programmes for skill development to various field functionaries in
ICDS are currently organised through (a) Anganwadi Workers Training Centres
(AWTCs) for the training of Anganwadi Workers and Helpers; (b) Middle Level
Training Centres (MLTCs) for the training of Supervisors and Instructors of
AWTCs; (c) State Training Institute for the training of Instructors of MLTCs
and CDPOs/ACDPOs in Tamil Nadu; and (d) National Institute of Public
Cooperation and Child Development (NIPCCD) and its four Regional Centres (in
Guwahati, Lucknow, Bangalore and Indore) for training of CDPOs/ACDPOs and
Instructors and MLTCs.
As a follow up of the National Consultations organised on October 3-4, 2013, the
existing training infrastructure is envisaged to be augmented both quantitatively
as well as qualitatively to meet the training requirements of ICDS functionaries."
58. On being asked about the steps taken by the Ministry to accelerate the
training of ICDS functionaries including refresher course, the Ministry replied:—
"Under the restructured ICDS, which has been approved in October, 2012, the
training needs of the ICDS functionaries have increased multi-fold due to
proposed recruitment of over 4-7 lakh new AWWs/link workers. Besides this, a
large number of community/women's group representatives, members of
Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs), programme partners, team members of other
related sectors will also need to be trained. In view of such massive training
needs, MWCD has proposed to use IT/ICT as a means to both enhance outreach

17
of training using TV/Radio/Internet/Mobile Telephone etc. as well as to strengthen
the existing training infrastructure of AWTCs and MLTCs, and State Training
Institutes (STI). Keeping in view the above, MWCD in collaboration with NIPCCD
organised a two day National Consultation on Revision of ICDS Training on
3-4 October, 2013 in New Delhi with participation of the State Governments, Training
Institutes, Development Partners, Universities, Experts and other stakeholders.
Steps initiated/envisaged by the MWCD to accelerate the training of ICDS
functionaries are as under:—
(i) States to focus on training and make all possible efforts for optimal utilization
of their available training capacity.
(ii) S tates to scale up the number of AWTCs and MLTCs with special emphasis
on all districts having at least one AWTC and strive to have two MLTCs in
each district in the next two years.
(iii) Setting up of training cells at State levels.
(iv) Setting up of State Training Institutes for ICDS in 10 States.
(v) Revision and development of course curricula/modules/training and learning
Materials.
(vi) Upgradation of training facilities.
(vii) Training needs assessment.
In addition, the following are being considered:—
(a) Collaboration with institutions and national/local NGOs/Voluntary Action
Groups (V AGs) under the Training component.
(b) Greater involvement of NIPCCD and its regional centres for development of
training curricula, identification of master trainers with linkage of appropriate
skill training and working out partnerships;
Greater emphasis on newer technology and methodology such as Video
Conferencing, audio-visual aids, use of Gyanvani, Gyandarshan (IGNOU), Mobile
Telephony-cum-academy and ICT/Science and Technology/Edusat etc."
59. When asked about the mechanism for monitoring the targets set by the
Ministry for training of various ICDS functionaries in accordance with the need of
different categories, the Ministry stated:—
"Every year, State Training Action Plans (STRAPs) are received from the States/
UTs giving the total sanctioned strength, vacant and filled up positions, trained
and untrained ICDS functionaries, in respect of both Job/orientation as well as
Refresher Training. The STRAPs also provide information on the number of
functional AWTCs/MLTCs in the respective States/UTs. Training Calendar is
prepared by the States based on 300 training days per AWTC/MLTC for the
year. Targets provided in STRAPs are approved keeping in view the training
capacity of a particular State. States/UTs are expected to make optimal utilization

18
of the existing training infrastructure with the objective of meeting the targets
set out in STRAP. There is already a mechanism in place at the MWCD level to
monitor State-wise progress in implementation of training activities. Progress
Reports are required from the States on quarterly basis to see the progress made
by the State against the targets fixed in the annual STRAPs. Incidentally, the
entire data, which formed the basis of the performance audit of C&AG, had been
culled out from the same QPRs. Apart from this, faculty members and the
Consultants from NIPCCD  periodically visit the States/UTs and some of the
training centres to monitor and review the quality of training."
60. Supplementary Nutrition Norms: The 'moderate and severe underweight
children' are measured as percentage of children aged 0-59 months who are below
minus two standard deviations from median weight for age of the World Health
Organisation (WHO) Child Growth Standards. The 'severe underweight children' are
measured as percentage of children aged 0-59 months who are below minus three
standard deviation from median weight for age of the WHO Child Growth Standards.
Supplementary Nutrition under the ICDS is primarily designed to bridge the gap
between the Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) and the Average Daily Intake (ADI).
Financial Norms:—The Government of India has recently revised the cost of
supplementary nutrition for different category of beneficiaries, the details of which are
as under:—
Sl. Category Pre-revised Revised rates†
No. rates (per beneficiary per day)
1. Children (6-72 months) ` 4.00 `6.00
2. Severely malnourished ` 6.00 `9.00
children (6-72 months)
3. Pregnant women and `5.00 `7.00
Nursing mothers
† The revised rates were rolled out in a phased manner i.e. 200 high burden districts in 2012-13, 200
more districts in 2013-14 and all other districts in 2014-15.
Nutritional Norms:—
Sl. Category Existing Revised (Per beneficiary
No. per day)
Calories Protein Calories Protein (g)
(K Cal) (g) (K Cal)
1. Children (6-72 months) 300 8-10 500 12-15
2. Severely malnourished children 600 20 800 2 0-25
(6-72 months)
3. Pregnant women and Nursing 500 15-20 600 1 8-20
mothers

19
61. As per Audit, the reasons for shortfall in expenditure in test checked States
were non-assessment of the requirement of funds, short provision of funds in the
budget, short release of funds by the Ministry, inadequate allocation of State Share,
release of funds at the fag end of the financial year, delay in transfer of funds by the
ICDS directorate, non-finalization of tenders for procurement of food material and
non-availability of the targeted number of children in Anganwadi Centres (AWCs).
62. The Ministry stated (February, 2012) that the responsibility of implementation
of  ICDS Scheme rest with the States/UTs. It further stated (November, 2012) that the
cost norms were revised in November, 2008 and some States actually took longer time
to implement the revised financial norms which may be the reason for fall in average
daily expenditure.
63. On being asked whether the Ministry has assessed the reasons for shortfall
in expenditure on SN and the steps taken to attain the prescribed norm, it stated:—
“In order to meet the nutritional norms, the cost norms of SN have been further
revised to ` 6/-, ` 9/- and  ` 7/- for Normal Children, Malnourished Children and
Pregnant and Lactating Mothers respectively under restructured and
strengthened Scheme of ICDS in 12th Plan. These revised cost norms are to be
implemented by States in a phased manner i.e. 200 districts in 2012-13, another
200 districts in 2013-14 and to all district from 1.4.2014. States/UTs are being
emphasised to adhere to the SNP norms as prescribed in GoI Guidelines dated
24.2.2009 and ensure supply of SN to all eligible beneficiaries for 300 days as per
norms. As informed already, the reasons for shortfall in expenditure on
Supplementary Nutrition by States is due to longer time taken by some of the
States to implement the revised financial norms for SNP and also delay in supply
of Supplementary Nutrition at the AWC due to various unavoidable reasons at
the field level etc.
The Government has introduced 5-tier monitoring and review mechanism at
National, State, District, Block and Anganwadi Levels and has issued the
guidelines on 31.03.2011. As per these guidelines, Anganwadi Level Monitoring
and Support Committee (ALMSC) is required to Review status of supply of
Supplementary Nutrition to all beneficiaries for at least 21 days in a month and to
find reasons for any shortfalls from expected norms or discrepancies in stocks
etc. and take/suggest actions to the Block level monitoring Committee on ICDS
to improve delivery of services at the AWC. The reported expenditure on
Supplementary Nutrition by the States/UTs has considerably increased from
`11176.15 crores in 2011-12 to ` 11830.05 crores in 2012-13 and is expected to
increase to ` 12250 crore during 2013-14.”
64. When asked whether the Ministry had assessed the reasons for shortfall in
growth monitoring by the States/UTs and the remedial measures taken, the Ministry in
their reply stated:—
“The AWW is required to weigh the children enrolled/attending AWC on monthly
basis to detect the change in nutrition status of children. The shortfall in figures is

20
on account of non-enrolment of children at AWCs or gap in actual attendance of
children with regard to total child population at  AWCs since ICDS is a self selecting
scheme.
Further, there was no provision for periodical replacement of weighing scales earlier.
This issue has been addressed in the restructured ICDS and now, not only the cost
norms have been revised for three types of weighing scales but provision has been
made for replacement of the weighing scales every five years.
As per schematic norms of the scheme, Anganwadi Worker is required to weigh
each child (0-6 years) in the Anganwadi area. States are impressed upon from time
to time to take all required measures in improving the nutrition status of children.
Out of weighed children, the per cent normal children have increased from 49.90%
as on 31.3.2007 to 58.84% as on 31.3.2011 and further to 71.62% as on 31.12.2013.
State-wise details of nutritional status of children as on 31.12.2013 is Annexed
(ANNEX-I).
The restructured ICDS Scheme has a separate provision of ` 5000 per AWC/mini-
AWC for replacement of weighing scale in 15% AWCs per annum. This will improve
the availability of weighing scales at the AWCs. The revised MIS on ICDS would
capture information for monitoring the growth standard of beneficiaries including
availability of weighing scales at the AWCs.”
65. On being asked whether the Ministry conducted periodical surveys on the
nutritional status of children by engaging independent consultants, the Ministry stated:—
“The data on the nutritional status of children is received from the States/UTs
through the periodical returns i.e. Quarterly/Monthly progress reports submitted
to the Ministry. Also, this is captured through the revised MIS. The data on the
nutritional status of children is received through various surveys conducted by
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and other agencies i.e. National
Family Health  Survey, DLHS, AHS. etc.
Recently, UNICEF and MWCD jointly conducted a Rapid Survey on Children
covering 29 States/UTs. This survey covers nutritional status of children also.
Final results of the survey are awaited.
Further, as per the directions of PM's Council on India's Nutrition Challenges,
Ministry has started two new schemes i.e. IEC campaign against malnutrition
and Multi-sectoral Nutrition Programme in 200 High Burden Districts to address
maternal and child malnutrition. The  implementation of these schemes, is likely
to arrest the menace of malnutrition.
The Ministry in consultation with the Planning Commission and other line
Ministries has identified 200 districts in the country which have high incidence
of malnutrition. These districts are termed as "200 High Burden Districts". Special
focus has been laid on these districts in the recently restructured ICDS and
Multi-Sectoral Nutrition Programme to address maternal and child malnutrition
in these Districts."

21
66. When asked whether the discrepancy in data maintained by the Ministry and
that reported in the SoE had been reconciled, the Ministry replied:—
"Under the existing MIS on ICDS, States/UTs are required to furnish the
information on nutritional status of children to GoI every month. The data  on
nutritional status of the children furnished by the States/UTs in their SoE is
taken for calculating financial entitlement of the State/UT under SNP and is the
weighted average of number of children attending AWCs in a quarter (for three
months) whereas the data maintained by the Monitoring Unit of the Ministry
through MPR is for a particular month which cannot be the same as already
intimated to Audit. However, in the revised MIS on ICDS, feeding efficiency of
children has been introduced through which feeding efficiency against actual
beneficiaries would be calculated.
At present, States/UTs are in various stages of implementation of WHO Growth
charts at AWCs and data of some of the AWCs was taken from old growth chart
and the remaining from new WHO Growth Standards, resulting in increase/
decrease in data over the period. States/UT have been requested from time to
time to implement the New WHO Growth standards in all AWCs so that there is
no discrepancy in data."
67. When asked about the reasons for non-introduction of WHO growth
standards in all operational AWC and the measures being considered to ensure
implementation of new growth standards throughout the Country at the earliest so as
to enable timely identification of children at risk for necessary intervention, the Ministry
in its reply stated:—
"MWCD has prescribed the New WHO Growth Chart to the States/UTs in 2008
with instructions to implement the same at all the AWCs. MWCD is monitoring
the implementation of the Chart through review meetings, letter and through
CMU, NIPCCD. The reasons for non-introduction of WHO growth standards in
all operational AWCs are backlog in training of AWWs at AWTCs and delay in
printing and distribution of WHO growth charts at the AWCs.
As per information received from templates sent by the State Government and
CMU, NIPCCD, WHO growth charts have been rolled out in 6666  projects and
1271889 AWCs as on March, 2013. State-wise details are annexed (Annex-II).
States/UTs have been requested to implement in all the operational AWCs.
MWCD has revised MIS format at all levels in March, 2012 which would capture
information based on New WHO Growth Charts and it would be mandatory for
the States/UTs to report the status in new formats/MPR."
68. The scheme prescribes maintenance of growth chart/card for every child at
Anganwadi Centres (AWCs) for assessing their growth using weight-for-age as an
indicator. Children up to the age of three years are to be weighed monthly and children
between the age three to six years are to be weighed quarterly. The growth charts are
required to be analysed by Child Development Project Offices/health personnel to
identify malnourished children for taking remedial measures.

22
69. Audit noted significant shortfall in growth monitoring under the scheme.
Around 33 to 47 per cent† children were not weighed during 2006-07 to 2010-11.
70. The Ministry stated (July, 2012) that shortfall in growth monitoring was on
account of non-enrolment of children at AWCs and gaps in their attendance, as ICDS
is self selecting Scheme. In a subsequent reply (November, 2012) the Ministry informed
that it was continuously reviewing with States/UTs to optimise coverage of beneficiaries.
71. The scheme guidelines envisaged provision of Supplementary Nutrition
(SN) for 300 days in a year (25 days in a month) at AWCs.
The reasons for disruption in providing SN were as under:—
• Non/short supply of foodgrains/Ready to Eat Food (RTE);
• Delay in suply of Supplementary Nutrition;
• Delay in transportation of nutrition from Child Development Project Office
godown to Anganwadi Centres (AWCs);
• Availing of leave intermittently by Anganwadi Workers (AWWs); and
• Non-availability of funds with AWWs for purchasing foodgrains.
72. Following reasons were given as per the reply of the Ministry:—
“The reasons for disruptions in providing SN by States have been ascertained.
These are mainly due to non-procurement of material by the State, non-lifting of
wheat and rice provided under Wheat Based Nutrition Programme at subsidized
rates, non-release of funds by the State/Distt. in time to the AWC for procurement
of material, issues of supply made by SHGs/NGOs, vacancies of AWW/AWH,
administrative and other delays.
MWCD has taken various steps to reduce disruption in delivery of services
including supplementary nutrition. These include involvement of community
and PRIs, better monitoring through 5-tier Committee, APIP linked release of
funds, revision of SNP cost norms, inclusion of procurement plan in the APIP,
improved financial management at the State level which is to be reflected in the
APIP by the States, etc. Besides, the States are also advised from time to time
through review and other meetings to ensure uninterrupted supply of SNP at the
AWC. These efforts are expected to reduce the disruption in delivery of services
including supplementary nutrition under ICDS Scheme."
73. On being asked about the revision of MIS, the Ministry replied:—
"All 35 States/UTs have since been provided print-ready (soft-copies) formats
in regional languages, designed centrally by the MWCD. Necessary  guidelines
for printing of the formats with standard print specifications and for roll-out of
revised MIS including induction training of the field functionaries (Supervisors
and AWWs) have also been issued. A pool of State Government officials from
† 2006-07: 47 per cent, 2007-08: 47 per cent, 2008-09: 44 per cent, 2009-10: 33 per cent and
2010-11: 35 per cent.

23
31 States/UTs has been given training as Master Trainers by the Central Team.
Printing of the revised MIS formats has been completed by 25 States; induction
training plans have been approved for 29 States and 7 States have completed
training upto AWW level and in another 12 States, training is underway."
74. As per audit, two out of the 19 projects to which the RTE food was supplied
refused to accept the stuff observing that the same was not as per the norms prescribed
in the supply order. The same was brought to the notice of the State ICDS Directorate.
However, no further testing of food stuff accepted by the remaining 17 projects was
done. This posed a question mark over the standard of serving of 14,516.20 quintal
food costing Rs. 2.69 crore in these projects. The State ICDS Directorate failed to take
cognizance of the rejection of food stuff by two projects for taking remedial measures.
75. In this connection the Ministry explained as under:—
"Food & Nutrition Board (FNB) has four Quality Control Laboratories at Delhi,
Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai, which analyse samples of various supplementary
nutrition foods provided under the ICDS scheme. The samples are received from
State Governments as well as collected by field units of FNB during the course
of regular inspection of AWCs.
Government has also since outsourced analysis of supplementary food in 10%
of total operational AWCs under ICDS to not-for-profit NABL Accredited
Laboratories on pilot basis initially for one year. All cases of food non-conforming
of the prescribed standards in SNP are brought to the notice of the concerned
State Governments/UT Administration for taking corrective measures.
In addition, the State Governments have also been advised to get the SNP
samples analyzed from NABL Accredited State Government Laboratories to
ensure that the food served to the beneficiaries conforms to the prescribed
standards. Besides the periodical checks by the State Governments and FNB to
carry out analysis of the food samples as per the prescribed nutritional norms,
Government has also since outsourced the analysis of supplementary food to
not-for-profit NABL  Accredited Laboratories on pilot basis to check the food
quality on various other parameters such as vitamin and minerals, toxic metals,
pesticide residues, aflatoxin, and shelf life etc. for avoiding sub-standard and
infested food. In case, any SNP sample is found sub-standard and infested, the
lapse is immediately brought to the notice of the concerned State Government/
UT Administration to take corrective measures at their end. The Ministry has
also issued Operational Guidelines for Food Safety and Hygiene for
Supplementary Nutritition under ICDS.
In addition to the aforesaid measures, checklists for making monitoring and
supervision visits to ICDS Blocks/AWCs by officials of the State Governments
and Central Government have also been issued which inter alia also inspected
the quality of food being supplied. Under the 5-tier monitoring and review
mechanism local MPs, MLAs, PRIs. Mothers groups and teachers/retired
Government officials have also been involved in the Committees to oversee and

24
coordinate the delivery of services at AWCs. ICDS being a centrally sponsored
scheme, the responsibility of programme implementation rests with the State
Government. All cases of non-conforming of the prescribed standards in SNP
are brought to the notice of the concerned State Government/UT Administration
for taking corrective measures/fixing responsibility."
76. Wheat Based Nutrition Programme was started in January 1986. Under the
scheme, foodgrains (wheat/rice) are annually allocated from central reserves to the
Ministry on Below Poverty Line (BPL) rates by the Department of Food and Public
Distribution. This was subsequently allocated to the States/UTs for use in
Supplementary Nutrition (SN). The purpose was to reduce the procurement cost of the
SN and ensure the availability of more foodgrains for the beneficiaries.
77. The Ministry was responsible for coordinating between Department of Food
and Public Distribution and the States so as to ensure uninterrupted supply of
Supplementary Nutrition (SN). It was required to provide firm annual requirements to
the Department of Food and Public Distribution, which ultimately depended on annual
requirements received from the States.
78. The Ministry failed to properly coordinate the implementation of WBNP so
as to maximise the use of foodgrains available on BPL rates for providing Supplementary
Nutrition (SN) under the ICDS scheme.
79. The Ministry stated (November, 2012) that with a view to streamline the
assessment of foodgrains required under WBNP, all States/UTs had been requested to
furnish the basis of their requirements indicating number of SN days to be provided,
quantity of SN to be provided and number of beneficiaries from 2010-11onwards. In
addition to this, a policy decision had also been taken where States/UTs would be
allocated foodgrains only if at least 70 per cent of the allocated foodgrains had been
lifted by the States.
80. IEC and Community Mobilization: The objective of the IEC and Community
Mobilization component under ICDS scheme are essentially to: (i) create awareness
and build-up image of ICDS Programme, (ii) stimulate demand for ICDS Services,
(iii) affect and sustain behavioural and attitudinal changes in child caring, nutrition
and health behaviour, and (iv) muster and sustain community participation.
81. The general guidelines given by the Ministry to the States/UTs was for
devising States IEC strategy and implementation plan after assessing communication
needs for a particular community/region. The Ministry issued guidelines in this regard
to States/UTs in August, 2008 which were subsequently, reiterated in February, 2009
with revision in Financial Norms due to cost escalation over the years.
82. As per audit, the two components of ICDS i.e. Information, Education and
Communication (IEC) and the Nutrition and Health Education (NHED) are aimed at
sustained behaviour and attitudinal change of society for holistic development of
child and the State Government was to prepare annual implementation plan after
assessing communication needs for a particular community/region in consonance
with the objectives and accordingly formulate IEC strategy.

25
83. As per the Scheme guidelines, IEC activities were to be carried out through
district and project level seminars, audio and visual media, folk media, village camps,
Mahila Mandal/Mother's Group meetings, home visits and other local media such as
posters, slides, flash cards, flip charts, periodical newsletters etc.
84. As per the Scheme guidelines, a sum of Rs. 25,000 per operational project per
year was provided up to the year 2008-09 for conducting IEC activities, which was
revised to Rs. 1,000 per operational AWC per year from the year 2009-10.
85. In 40 districts of eight States, the IEC material was not received by any of the
1,637 test checked AWCs. No information regarding receipt and utilisation of the IEC
material was available on record in 480 test checked AWCs of 12 districts in four States.
In Gujarat, IEC material was received and used in only one out of four sample districts
during 2007-08 and 2010-11 and in three districts during 2008-09. IEC material was not
received during the remaining period. In Rajasthan, IEC material was not received by
40 out of 240 sample AWCs.
86. Test check of Statements of Expenditure (SoEs) available in the Ministry
revealed significant shortfall in expenditure incurred on conducting IEC activities
vis-a-vis the funds released to the States/UTs on this account.
87. The Scheme guidelines provide for conducting periodic evaluation of various
activities performed under IEC to assess the awareness, knowledge and impact among
the community. During the period covered under audit, no evaluation was done to
assess the effectiveness of IEC on the ICDS scheme in 10 selected States. In respect of
remaining three States, no information was available on record.
88. Nutrition and Health Education (NHED) is the key element of the work of the
Anganwadi Worker (AWW). NHED has the long term goal of capacity-building of
women so that they can look after their own health, nutrition and development needs
as well as that of their children and families. Under this programme, counselling sessions,
home visits and demonstrations are to be carried out by the AWW. The entire
responsibility of implementation and monitoring of NHED rests with State Governments.
89. The Scheme guidelines provided for at least two to three home visits daily by
AWWs. Further, one meeting of mothers' group was to be conducted every month in
each Anganwadi Centre (AWC).
90. The Ministry stated (July 2012) that the States/UTs had repeatedly been
asked to furnish reasons for not incurring expenditure under IEC. The issue had also
been taken up during review meetings and State visits/inspection. It further stated
(November 2012) that from the year 2012-13, the entire cost of programme components
including the IEC had been included in the second instalment of the grant to enable the
States to spend funds earmarked for IEC activities in time.
91. The Ministry informed that under restructured ICDS in 12th Plan, States/UTs
submit their Annual Programme Implementation Plans (APIPs) since 2013-14 including
Annual Action Plan on IEC activity. The APIP of State Government is considered by
the EPC chaired by Secretary (WCD) for taking appropriate decision. Further, the

26
Ministry stated that in so far as IEC activity at the Central Level is concerned, the Food
and Nutrition Board organises such campaign in consultation with Government Media
Agencies like DA VP, Doordarshan, All India Radio etc. The Ministry, therefore, depends
on these Government media agencies for effectiveness of the IEC strategy. The Food
and Nutrition Board of the Ministry develops various posters, booklets, recipe books,
calendars etc. on nutrition and distributes them to the different Ministries and line
departments at National as well as State/UT levels. Recently a nationwide Information,
Education and Communication (IEC) Campaign against malnutrition was launched on
19th November, 2012 by the Hon'ble President of India to create awareness about
nutrition challenges, promote home-level feeding practices, etc. The campaign
comprises of four stages: Stage 1— create awareness (8 weeks), Stage 2— clarion call
(6 weeks), Stage 3— action points (16 weeks) and Stage 4— community using tools/
services (8weeks) and it was covered in multi-channel media including print and
electronic media. The first cycle is already completed.
92. Under the existing MIS on ICDS Scheme, information on Nutrition and Health
Education, namely (i) number of times NHED activities were organised, (ii) total number
of women participated in all these activities, (iii) number of times audio-visual aids
were used, and (iv) number of NHED sessions organised at AWC in which health staff
participated, are monitored by CDPOs through Anganwadi MPR. This micro-level
information is not maintained at Central Level.
93. Food & Nutrition Board (FNB) has a countrywide set up comprising of a
Technical wing at centre, four Regional Offices and Quality Control Laboratories at
Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai and 43 Community Food and Nutrition Extension
Units (CFNEUs) located in 29 States/UTs.
94. Nutrition and Health Education, which is one of the components of ICDS is
facilitated by Food and Nutrition Board of the Ministry through its field units located
in 29 States/UTs. FNB undertakes the major task of providing inputs for nutrition
education and awareness through a wide range of nutrition education & extension
services including live demonstration on low cost nutritious recipes, training to the
field functionaries/grass root level workers on different topics to create awareness on
nutrition so as to improve dietary habits, overcome ignorance and prejudice in food &
dietary habits.
95. FNB organizes five days "Training of Trainers" programme of Master Trainers
comprising of Child Development Project Officers (CDPOs), Assistant Child
Development Project Officers (ACDPOs), Senior Supervisors of ICDS etc. who, in
turn, act as trainers for the gross-root level functionaries of ICDS, such as Anganwadi
Workers and the community at large.
96. FNB organizes two days training "Orientation Training Courses" for grass-
root level functionaries from ICDS such as AWWs, Helpers and ASHAs, adolescent
girls, pregnant women and lactating mothers, communities and PRIs etc. The topics for
OTC are (i) Infant and Young Child Feeding, (ii) Health and Nutrition, and,
(iii) Management of Severe malnutrition.

27
97. During the visit of AWCs, the technical staff provides technical support-cum
practical demonstration on nutrition and health education at the AWC. FNB also
organize Nutrition Education Programmes in rural and tribal areas and urban slums.
98. FNB also disseminated nutrition imformation to the masses by organizing
exhibitions on nutrition at different events/occassions in the prestigious melas/fairs/
exhibitions by the CFNEUs.
99. Diversion of funds: The Ministry in their reply to the query regarding impact
of diversion of funds stated that funds under ICDS (General) are released in lump sum
for meeting expenditure on Salary of functionaries, honoraria for Anganwadi Workers/
Helpers and other Programme components. Due to pending arrears on salary and
honoraria in States/UTs, funds sometimes available for other components becomes
less, resulting in low expenditure on other components. However, under restructured
ICDS, the administrative approval given to the State/UTs on their APIPs indicates
component-wise funds approved for expenditure. The States are required to report the
expenditure component-wise. This will improve expenditure on all components of
ICDS.
100. Monitoring: The ICDS Scheme envisages an inbuilt system of its monitoring
through regular reports and returns flowing upwards from Anganwadi Centre (AWC)
to Project Headquarter, District Headquarter, State Headquarter and finally to the
Ministry. The monitoring and supervision of the Scheme had a three-tier set up, viz. at
the National, the State and the Community levels.
101. The Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Unit of the Ministry was the sole
monitor of the Scheme till 2006-07. In view of the expansion of the scheme, the Ministry
decided in 2006-07, to set up a regular monitoring and supervision mechanism of ICDS
Scheme through National Institute of Public Co-operation and Child Development
(NIPCCD), an autonomous body of the Ministry. This set up was established in the
form of a Central Monitoring Unit (CMU), in addition to the existing M&E Unit in the
Ministry. The CMU was set up at National Institute of Public Co-operation and Child
Development (NIPCCD) in January 2007 with the appointment of one consultant.
102. As per the scheme guidelines, NIPCCD was responsible for hiring a team of
six professional consultants for  CMU, each having expertise in public health, nutrition,
Management Information System (MIS), early childhood education, statistics and
ICDS administration, on contractual basis for accomplishment of the desired task at
the Central level.
103. Audit found that during most of the period during 2006—11, the operations
of the Central Monitoring Unit (CMU) were managed without a professional consultant.
A retired officer of the Ministry worked as a consultant during January 2007 to March
2009. Another consultant worked at CMU during April to October 2007. CMU was
functioning without any consultant since April 2009.
104. The Ministry stated (November 2012) that though the financial sanction for
setting up of the CMU was accorded in December 2006, the administrative approval for

28
the same was given in February 2008. The efforts to engage consultants suffered due
to low response of the suitable candidates for the post against the advertisement for
the same and unwillingness of two selected candidates to join on account of meagre
honorarium proposed for the post.
105. When asked about the Monitoring of ICDS through CMU in absence of
Consultants the Ministry stated that:—
"It is not done only by Professionals/Consultants posted at the H.Qrs. In fact,
the data is collected from the field for monitoring purpose through
129 Consultants of 43 Institutions. These consultants are mainly working in
Community Medicine Departments of various Medical Colleges, College of Home
Science and Social Work. On the basis of their data many reports have been
generated since 2009. NIPCCD has already appointed professional Consultants
at its Headquarters who are contributing and generating monitoring reports for
submission to MWCD as well as to State Governments. In addition, CMU has
also conducted Concurrent Independent Evaluation of ICDS in 100 Blocks of
High Burden Districts during 2013-14."
106. Audit found that the CMU had not done any concurrent evaluation of ICDS
on scheme outcomes and nutritional status of children till March 2012. The CMU had
instead prepared concurrent evaluation reports on input indicators. The data for the
same were sent by 42 State-level academic institutions selected by National Institute
of Public Co-operation and Child Development (NIPCCD). The report focussed on
issues such as infrastructure of Anganwadi Centres (AWCs), profile of ICDS
functionaries,  status of supplies, supervision by Child Development Project Officer
(CDPO)/Supervisor, status of community participation, ICDS delivery status etc. The
CMU had mainly selected faculties of medical colleges (34), home science (5) and
social sciences (3) to act as selected institution for concurrent evaluation. However, it
failed to utilise their services for conducting concurrent evaluation of scheme outcomes
and nutritional status of children.
107. The Ministry stated (November 2012) that concurrent evaluation of the
Scheme was not taken up by the CMU in order to avoid duplication with initiatives of
the Planning Commission which started evaluation of the ICDS Scheme at the national
level. Further, January 2012 Report of the CMU contained data on some new parameters
such as World Health Organisation (WHO) Growth Standards, Pre-school Education
(PSE) and Mother and Child Protection Card (MCPC) and the Report was not entirely
based on the old data. The practice of using old data in its Report is being discontinued
by the CMU in view of the audit observation.
108. The Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Unit in the Ministry was responsible
for collection and analysis of the periodic work reports prepared by the States in the
prescribed formats.
109. Audit noted that the unit was monitoring two components of the scheme,
viz. Supplementary Nutrition (SN) and Pre-School Education (PSE). It monitored only
the number of beneficiaries availing these two services. Impact assessment of the

29
services was not being done. The data on nutritional status were compiled from the
reports received from the State Governments. The Ministry had not made any evaluation
of nutritional status of children at the National level. The task was assigned to the
CMU. However, in view of the failure of the CMU to deliver, the Ministry was not able
to monitor the Scheme on outcome indicators.
110. As regards capacity building of CMU, the Ministry stated:—
"NIPCCD has already appointed trained Consultants and other staff in CMU
who work in coordination with other faculty members of NIPCCD engaged in
training and capacity building of ICDS functionaries. This results in the capacity
building of CMU consultants as well.
In Performance Audit of ICDS conducted by Comptroller and Auditor General of
India, it was recommended that MWCD should augment the capacity of CMU
so to evolve it as a unit capable of supplementing the MWCD task of monitoring
and evaluation of the scheme. It was also recommended that role and
responsibilities of CMU should be made specific so as to avoid duplication of
efforts with other agencies involved in monitoring of the scheme.
As a follow up of recommendation of Performance Audit of ICDS conducted by
CAG, a review meeting for strengthening of CMU was held on 18th Jan., 2013
under chairmanship of Joint Secretary with participation of other senior officials
of MWCD. A working group was formulated during this meeting to review the
existing pattern of CMU and to suggest further measures for strengthening of
CMU. Besides MWCD senior officials, technical experts are also members of the
working group. The meeting of the working group was held on 22nd March,
2013. It was decided in the  working group to revise the functions of CMU in the
light of restructured ICDS and to revise the monitoring indicators too, financial
norms and other administrative guidelines concerning setting up of institutions
in States/UTs, staffing and engagements of consultants etc. may be decided by
Director, NIPCCD as the CMU has now been made a project of NIPCCD funded
by its own plan funds.
As per recommendation of the working group appointed by MWCD,
administrative and financial guidelines for setting up of CMU institutions in
States/UTs were revised in 2013. Various functions assigned to CMU were also
revised in April, 2014 keeping in view the recommendations of Performance
Audit of ICDS conducted by CAG.
The basic function of the CMU is to undertake concurrent evaluation of
implementation of ICDS and therefore accordingly CMU is preparing its reports
to assess the service delivery status at the ground level under ICDS Scheme.
With restructuring and strengthening of ICDS in 12th five year plan, the new
outcome/result indicators of the scheme have been identified. The same would
be assessed at the end of the 12th five year plan using the data from various
means of verification as indicated in the ICDS mission document.

30
Impact of ICDS on Nutritional Status of children and on Child Mortality Rate
(CMR) was assessed in Evaluation Study of ICDS carried out by National Council
of Applied Economic Research (NCAER) in the year of 2010 and subsequently
published by Planning Commission in the year of 2011. CMU was associated in
conducting the study by NCAER. A separate cross sectoral survey for this is
required from time to time like DLHS.
CMU has noted down the observations of Performance Audit of ICDS concerning
concurrent evaluation. Now CMU is analyzing annual data for the purpose of
concurrent evaluation and sharing it with States for improvement in ICDS.
For the year 2014-15, CMU has been assigned the targets of various activities
which includes reporting and monitoring, organization of theme based workshops,
cross state sharing workshops, providing assistance to MWCD for conducting
review/APIPs meetings with States and for visits of senior officials to States,
induction of personnel, consolidation of data, capacity building of ICDS
functionaries in collaboration with ME and Training division, conducting issue/
area specific operational research studies and periodic social assessment etc."
111. On being asked whether the Ministry has developed outcome indicators so
as to periodically evaluate impact of the ICDS Scheme, the Ministry replied that:—
"Government has approved strengthening and restructuring of ICDS Scheme
and it is implemented in mission mode. Outcome indicators under the ICDS
Mission has been developed and are as under:—
Indicators Current Status Target Means of
(End 12th Verification
Plan)
12 3 4
ICDS Core:
i. % of children 46.5% (NCAER, 90% AHS/Independent
weighed at birth 2009) Survey
within 24 hours.
ii. % of children 40.5% 75% NFHS/DLHS/AHS
initiated (DLHS-3)
breastfeeding
within one hour of
birth.
iii. % of children 46% (NFHS-3) 75% NFHS/DLHS/
exclusively AHS
breastfeeding till
6 months of age.

31
12 3 4
iv. % of children 57.1% (DLHS-3) 90% NFHS/DLHS/
9-23 months who AHS
have been given
complementary feeding
after 6 months in
addition to breastfeeding.
v. % of mothers 48.9% (NFHS-3) 100% NFHS/AHS/
receiving Independent
counselling on post survey.
weighing of their
children.
vi. % of mothers of NA 70%
0-3 yrs. children who
are using MCP card
and are aware of early
stimulation practices
as outlined in MCP Card.
vii. % of families NA 50% of Independent
using child those survey.
progress card for attending
tracking children in ICDS PSE.
3-6 years age
achieving age
appropriate
developmental
milestone.
Common with Health
i. % of children 12-23 20% (NFHS-3) 85% NFHS/DLHS/
months received AHS
full immunization.
ii. % of children 24.9% (NFHS-3) 75% NFHS/AHS
who received
Vitamin A dose in
last 6 months.
iii. % of children 34.2% (DLHS-3) 70% NFHS/DLHS/AHS
below 3 years with
diarrhoea treated
with ORS.

32
12 3 4
iv. % of pregnant 50.7% (NFHS-3) 80% NFHS/DLHS/AHS
women receiving
at least 3 or more
ANC checkups.
v.  % of pregnant 46.6% (DLHS-3) 80% NFHS/DLHS/AHS
women who
consumed at least
100 IFA tablets.
112. According to the reply of the Ministry:—
"National Informatics Centre (NIC) has been assigned a project to develop web
based Management information System on ICDS Scheme. The development of
web based MIS is underway. About 5.4 lakhs AWC has been assigned unique
code by the CDPOs and Supervisors and uploaded on to NIC server and assigning
the unique code to remaining AWCs are in process. Once the unique code is
assigned to all AWCs and training is imparted to all AWWs, supervisors and
CDPOs, the Web Based MIS will be operational."
113. On being asked whether the Ministry has assessed reasons for poor state
of affairs in field visits by supervisory staff, the Ministry stated:—
"Under the existing MIS on ICDS Scheme, field visits by supervisory staff under
ICDS Scheme i.e. CDPOs and Supervisors are not monitored at the Central level
and is done at micro level (block and district level). In order to improve the field
visits by supervisory staff to strengthen monitoring and supervision, MWCD
issued guidelines on 22.10.2010 for Monitoring and Supervision visits to ICDS
Blocks and AWCs by officials of State and Central Governments."

PART  II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
Universalisation of Scheme
The Integrated Child Development Services Scheme (ICDS) was launched by
the Government of India in the year 1975 with objectives of holistic development of
children (0-6 year) and pregnant and lactating mothers through a package of
6 services. From the initial launch in 33 blocks of the country, the scheme has been
expanded many times so as to reach the goal of universalisation of early childhood
services in the entire country. The Committee note that the Ministry of Women &
Child Development had decided in 1995 to universalize the Integrated Child
Development Services Scheme by covering all the 5239 Community Development
blocks and 684 identified major urban slums in the country by the end of the Eighth
Plan (1992-97). A writ petition was filed in the Supreme Court on which the Court
vide their interim orders dated 28 November, 2001, 29 April 2004, 07 October 2004
and 13 December 2006, had also directed the Government of India to universalize the
coverage of ICDS Scheme. Further, the Supreme Court directed the Government of
India in December, 2006 to sanction and operationalize a minimum of 14 lakh
Anganwadi Centres (AWCs) by December, 2008 in a phased and even manner. However,
as per the latest information received from the Ministry, operationalization of 10 out
of 7076 sanctioned projects and 33000 out of 13.75 lakh sanctioned AWCs/Mini-
AWCs were pending as on 8.10.2014 and the Ministry were targeting to operationalize
13,000 more AWCs by 31.3.2015.
(a) The Committee are disappointed to find that even after a Restructured and
Strengthened ICDS has been launched in 2012 with an allocation of
` 1,23,580 crore, the Ministry is not likely to achieve the target of covering
14 lakh habitations by AWCs in foreseeable future though the deadline set
by the Supreme Court was December, 2008. The Committee are of the view
that the Ministry should take urgent steps to operationalize all the pending
sanctioned AWCs/Mini-AWCs and endeavour to reach the target of covering
14 lakh habitations at the earliest. The Committee recommend that the
Ministry need to prescribe and strictly adhere to the timelines for setting up
these Anganwadis. They desire to be apprised of the targets achieved at the
action taken stage. Besides, as the Central Monitoring Unit (CMU) has
reportedly conducted Concurrent Independent Evaluation of ICDS in
100 Blocks of  high burden districts during 2013-14, the Committee would
like to be furnished with report of the same.
(b) The Committee note that the main reasons for non-operationalization of
AWCs reportedly are court cases, financial processes involved and delay in
recruitment of Anganwadi Workers (AWWs)/Anganwadi Helpers (A WHs).
33

34
The Committee recommend that:—
(i) As the ICDS is now being implemented in a Mission Mode, the Ministry
should take up the issue of expediting the financial processes with the
respective State Mission Steering Groups so that the Anganwadis can be
operationalised at the earliest.
(ii) As non availability of Anganwadi Workers and Anganwadi Helpers affects
the very functioning of the Anganwadis, the Ministry issue instructions
to the State Governments to take urgent steps to fill up these vacancies on
priority basis and apprise the Committee of the progress made in this
regard.
(c) The Committee are disappointed to note that the Ministry had no
information on the coverage of habitations under ICDS as the State
Governments were responsible for confirming whether all the habitations
had been covered under the ICDS. In this connection, the Committee note
that now the National Informatics Centre has been assigned the task of
developing web-based Management Information System and for which
providing unique codes to all AWCs is underway and feel that same should
have been envisaged much earlier in view of the nature and scope of
ICDS.The Committee hope that a robust MIS would be developed within a
reasonable timeframe so that both the Ministry and the State Governments
are able to timely upload/update all data relating to the coverage, sanction
and operationalization of the AWCs online. The Committee desire to be
apprised of the timeframe fixed for the database created under ICDS.
2. The Committee note that the Supreme Court order dated 13 December, 2006
stipulated, inter alia, identification of SC and ST hamlets/habitations for opening of
new Anganwadi Centres (A WCs) on a priority basis. Consequently, the Ministry, though,
issued sanctions for opening of additional AWCs to States/UTs with the conditions that
villages predominantly inhabited by population belonging to SC/ST and minority
community should be given priority and an A WC in a village, as far as feasible, should
be located in the areas inhabited by population from SC/ST and minority community but
the State Governments were to certify that all SC/ST/OBC and minority community
habitations had been saturated, Audit had recommended that the Ministry should conduct
a survey to have an assurance that all habitations, especially those inhabited by SC/ST/
OBC and Minority community population are covered under the Scheme. The Committee
observe that the Ministry kept waiting for the response of the States and that so far
19 States have reported compliance after 8 years of the Supreme Court order. The
Committee feel that the Ministry should have been pro-active in its approach, identified
the areas inhabited by SC/ST/OBC and minority community as per Census 2001/2011
and sought information from the State Governments about coverage of the identified
habitations under the Scheme. The Committee desire that the Ministry identify such
habitations in rest of the States and the respective State Governments may be asked to
formulate and send proposals for setting up of Anganwadi on Demand (AODs) in
habitations not yet covered under the Scheme.

35
3. The Committee further note that the Supreme Court stipulated that rural
communities should be entitled to an Anganwadi on Demand (AoD), not later than
three months from the date of demand in cases where a settlement has at least
40 children under six but no Anganwadi. The Ministry had, during third phase of
expansion of ICDS Scheme (October 2008), approved 20,000 additional AoDs. The
Committee are disappointed to note that only 2030 AODs were sanctioned for six
States by the Ministry in 2011-2012. The Committee also note that the delay in
sanction of AODs was due to the failure of State Governments to send their proposals
in the prescribed format as they mixed the proposals for AODs with the proposals for
setting up new A WCs under third phase of expansion. The Committee are of the view
that delay in setting up of AODs defeats the very purpose of the concept. The Committee
are of the view that the Supreme Court had suggested the concept of setting up of
AODs only to compensate the procedural delays but neither the Ministry nor the
State Governments could take timely action. The Committee feel that, instead of
entrusting the State Government entirely with the responsibility of sending the AOD
proposals, the Ministry could have involved the NGOs and SHGs active in the rural
areas for identifying and sending requests directly to the Ministry for setting up
AODs in consultation with the State Governments. The Committee are also of the
view that in addition to setting up the AWCs in urban slum dwellings, the reach of
AWCs need to be extended to cover areas in the vicinity of large factories and industrial
areas where substantial number of women workers are employed. The timings of
these AWCs may be made co-terminous with the timings of the factories/industries
in that area for the benefit of children of such workers and P&LMs among those as
well.
4. The Committee note that as the Scheme envisages an integrated delivery of
a multiplicity of services which are handled by different departments at different
levels constitution of Coordination Committees at the Central, State, District, Block
and Village levels is required to monitor, review the progress of the Scheme and
suggest/take appropriate corrective actions including coordination and convergence
with the departments/programmes. In this connection, they note that the Ministry
had issued guidelines on 31st March, 2011 to put in place a 5-tier monitoring and
review mechanism for ICDS at the Central level upto the AWC level. At the Central
level, a body named National Level Monitoring and Review Cell (NLMRC) was proposed
followed by State level, District level, block level and AWC level Committees. However,
convergence among various programmes/departments at the State and the lower
levels was found to be inadequate as the Committee note that the audit test check of
sample States revealed that the meetings of State level Coordination Committees
were infrequent or not held at all, no records related to the meetings were kept, joint
evaluation and field inspection were not carried out, minutes were not made available
to the audit, delay was seen in constitution of committees and low attendance of the
officials was found. The Committee are of the view that since proper guidelines have
already been issued for coordination between local bodies/different Departments/
Ministries, the Ministry take up the matter of above stated shortcomings with the
identified States and pursue them to issue directions to their officials in line with

36
those guidelines for effective coordination. The Committee note from the reply of the
Ministry that new guidelines on convergence have been shared with the States/UTs
and would like to be apprised of the progress made in implementing these guidelines
by the States. As these guidelines provide for 5-tier monitoring and review mechanism
at the central level and up to the A WC level, they are of the view that the details of the
meetings of each such committee including the National Level Monitoring & Review
Committee (NLMRC) and the members thereof, who were present during the meeting,
should be available online. The Committee feel that NLMRC, being the central
watchdog in the 5-tier mechanism, should be pro-active and in addition to its assigned
roles should also monitor the frequency of meetings of such committees at lower
levels and proper maintenance of records.
Compilation of Data
5. The Ministry of Women & Child Development maintains data of sanctioned
and operational projects and AWCs on the basis of sanctions issued to all the States/
UTs and periodical progress received from them. The States/UTs are also required to
furnish quarterly/annual Statements of Expenditure (SoE) giving inter-alia the details
of sanctioned and operational AWCs. The Committee note that the Audit found a
difference of 222 sanctioned projects and 7126 sanctioned AWCs in 12 States. Further,
the number of the operational projects and the AWCs as per the records of the
Ministry differed from the number of operational projects and the A WCs reported by
the States/UTs in the SoEs by 55 and 56,258 respectively. The Ministry took the stand
that in 2012, compilation of data on operational projects and A WCs by the States/UTs
was a time consuming process and most of the States/UTs submitted the Reports with
a delay which resulted in mismatch in figures. Further, the Ministry replied that the
data given in the monthly report of the monitoring unit of the Ministry is for a
particular month of Reort whereas the data reported by the State in the SoE/Utilization
Certificate is the average of a quarter and, therefore, the two sets of the are
incomparable. Ideally, the data should reflect stable and consistent data collection
processes across collection points and over time, and progress toward performance
targets should reflect real changes rather than variations in data collection approaches
or methods. The Committee are of the view that reliable data with the nodal Ministry
is the cornerstone of planning and allocation of funds for any scheme. Thus, they feel
that a monthly reconciliation statement should be prepared by the Ministry for ICDS.
The Committee have already recommended in preceding paragraphs that all such
data be uploaded online monthly by both the Ministry and the State Governments.
They would like the Ministry to submit the progress made so far in this direction.
Infrastructure
6. The Committee note that an Anganwadi Centre (AWC), being the focal point
for delivery of ICDS services accommodating upto 40 children during day-time,
requires basic infrastructure for which the States/UTs were to arrange for AWC
buildings, either through community support or by hiring suitable buildings on rent
or by tapping funds from other schemes, for construction of buildings. The Committee
note that the Ministry has issued guidelines for construction of AWCs in 2011 which

37
state that an AWC must have a separate sitting room for children/women, separate
kitchen, store for storing food items, child friendly toilets, separate space for children
to play (indoor and outdoor activities) and safe drinking water facilities. The Committee
note with utter dismay that 866 out of 2701 test-checked AWCs were at sites other
than their own buildings or rented premises such as primary schools and had to
function in open places when the schools changed their timings; some were
functioning in school verandahs, under trees and open places and a large number
were found to be functioning in dilapidated/incomplete buildings or kachcha structures.
Further, separate space for cooking, storing food items and indoor and outdoor
activities for children was not available in 40% to 65% of the test checked AWCs in
different States. The Committee feel that non-availability of quality infrastucture
affects the motivation on part of the parents to send their wards to the AWCs and also
exposes these children to the vagaries of the weather. The Committee, therefore, are
of the strong view the Ministry should closely monitor the construction of AWC
buildings taken up by the State Governments so as to ensure availability of good
quality buildings for the AWCs fulfilling the prescribed standards. They feel that it is
high time that all the AWCs functioning uner the trees, in open places, dilapidated
buildings and kachcha structures are shifted to pucca structures, which can either
be rented premises or make shift arrangements in the Government owned buildings
in the vicinity. The Committee have now been informed that the restructured ICDS
has a provision for construction of 2 lakh AWC buildings and upgradation of 2 lakh
A WC buildings during 12th Plan. The States have reportedly been given approval for
44709 new AWC buildings and upgradation of 42642 AWCs during 2013-14. The
Committee desire to know whether this target was achieved. The Committee also
desire that timelines be fixed for construction of owned buildings for all AWCs
and strictly followed up. Further the Committee are of the view that all AWC
buildings should have a display board providing information on the number of
beneficiaries, services being provided, medicines available etc. in local language for
better outreach.
7. The Committee note that uner the Scheme, list of basic equipment for
Anganwadi Centres (AWCs) like small mats or durries, first aid box, one closed
shelf, one or two racks, kitchen equipment like tumblers, plates and spoons, 2 or 3
vessels with lids etc., bathroom equipment like 2 buckets or vessels for storing water,
mugs, towels, disinfectant fluid etc. and indoor play equipment like counting frames,
dholaks, building blocks etc. have been prescribed and ` 7000 per AWC is provided
once in five years for purchase of these items. The Committee further note that the
Ministry issued instructions in May, 2009 for providing ` 1000 per annum per A WC
as flexi fund effective from the year 2009-10 to be operated by the AWW at her own
discretion. However, 53% of test checked AWCs did not receive the flexi funds
during the period 2009-11. The Committee are of the view that ` 7000 in 5 years is a
meagre amount to purchase all these items including furniture. The Committee feel
that since all these equipment are used by the children there are more chances of
wear and tear. Moreover, items of daily use like towels, need regular replacement.
The Committee are, therefore, of the view that instead of giving a fixed amount once in
five years, an yearly inspection need to be conducted to replace all unusable items.

38
The Committee also feel that the flexi fund of ` 1000 be also increased so as to enable
the AWWs to meet the fund requirements that arise between yearly inspections. The
Committee desire that the Ministry persuade the State Governments to urgently
release the flexi funds to the A WWs. The Committee may be apprised of the progress
made in this regard.
8. The Committee note that, as per the Ministry's instructions (2011), child
friendly toilets and drinking water facility are the basic minimum requirements for
the effective functioning of an AWC. However they were disappointed to learn that
52% of test checked AWCs did not have toilets and 32% test checked AWCs had no
drinking water. The Committee completely agree with the observation of the Audit
that the inadequate infrastructural support to AWCs, required for maintaining hygiene
and sanitation, adversely affected the quality of services available to beneficiaries
under the Scheme. The Committee are of the view that inculcating good sanitation
habits like using toilets and washing hands among children as well as providing
clean drinking water would improve the quality of life of the future generations in a
big way. Thus, the Committee are of the view that the Ministry should take up the
matter of providing child friendly toilets and drinking water facility to the children
with the State Governments on priority basis. The Committee also recommend that
the Ministry need to take up with State Governments to provide mobile toilets in
AWCs where no toilets are available.
9. Although preventing and reducing under nutrition is one of the primary
goals of ICDS, the Committee are sad to note that 26% of test checked AWCs did not
have functional baby weighing machines, 58% did not have adult weighing machines,
and utensils required for providing supplementary nutrition and medicine kits were
not available at several AWCs. From the information furnished to them on expenditure
reported by the States/UTs on PSE and medicine kits during 2012-2014, the Committee
noticed that out of 35 States/UTs, 15 States/UTs had furnished incomplete information.
As these equipment are directly related to delivery of the services envisaged in the
Scheme, ensuring there availability is imperative. The Committee note that the
Ministry is providing additional funds for the purchase of medicine kits and weighing
machines and thus feel that the Ministry may take up the issue with the State
Governments and explore the possibility of providing Child Development Project
Officers (CDPOs) with additional/annual funds and allowing them to purchase kits
of prescribed standards from those funds, when ever required. The Committee are of
the view that since utensils are necessary for cooking and serving food, in no case
their unavailability be allowed in any AWC and they be asked to buy them immediately
out of the flexi funds available with them. The Committee also concur with the Audit
suggestion that in addition to the release of funds for procurement of medicine kits to
States/UTs, the Ministry should monitor the progress on timely utilization of funds
and final supply of the kits procured for A WCs.
Staffing and Training
V acancies
10. Under the ICDS Scheme, Staff i.e. AWW/AWH is required to do a door to
door survey to count the number of targeted beneficiaries. However from the audit

39
report, the Committee note that 114368 posts were vacant out of 1374935 posts
sanctioned for AWWs, 3209 posts were vacant out of 9036 sanctioned posts for
CDPOs and 19831 out of 54166 in case of supervisors. On enquiry, the Ministry
stated that ICDS being a centrally sponsored scheme implemented across the country,
micro management at the Central level was not feasible. The Committee fail to
understand as to how the A WCs are functioning in absence of A WWs. The Committee
therefore recommend that the Ministry should persuade the State Governments to
fill up the vacancies particularly, those of AWWs as their non availability directly
affects the functioning of the AWC. The Committee further desire that vacancies for
other posts be also filled up urgently. They may be apprised of the target dates fixed
for the same as well as the latest vacancy position w.r.t. AWW/CDPOs/supervisors.
The Committee also note that the Ministry while restructuring the ICDS have
authorized the States to fill up the vacancies on adhoc/contract basis till these posts
are filled on regular basis and that the Ministry had been consistently impressing
upon the States to have a separate cadre for the ICDS staff but the response has not
been encouraging. The Committee are of the view that filling up the vacancies by
employing adhoc/contract workers for regular jobs is neither a healthy alternative
nor a solution and, therefore, the Ministry should expedite the process of regular
appointments. The Committee feel that the Ministry should again take up the issue of
separate ICDS cadre with DoPT and the State too since a dedicated cadre has the
potential to improve the delivery of services at all levels and will also give job security
and motivation to the A WWs/AWHs.
Honoraria and Incentives
The Committee find that AWWs/AWHs are given an honorarium at the rates
i.e. `  3000 for AWWs and ` 1500 for AWHs which have been revised only recently
i.e., July, 2013. Further the AWW/AWH Welfare Fund to bring them under social
security netowrk has not been created by a number of States and the awards meant to
acknowledge the exemplary services of AWW/AWH are also not given after the
2004-06 period as nominations for the same were awaited from many States. The
Committee are of the view that the Ministry should take up the issue with the State
Governments and persuade them to create fund for covering these workers under the
social security network and send their nominations for the deserving workers at the
earliest. The Committee are of the view that the AWWs and AWHs should be covered
under social security schemes irrespective of creation of fund and the Ministry
should take up the matter with the Ministry of Labour & Employment to cover these
workers/helpers under welfare schemes like Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojna (RSBY).
The Committee also feel that the revised rates of honorarium are still very low and
should be further increased.
The Committee note the observation of audit that against the total release of
` 1753 crore to 13 States during 2008-09 and 15 States during 2009-11 for meeting
the expenditure on salary of ICDS functionaries, the actual expenditure was ` 2853
crore which indicated unrealistic budgeting and consequent diversion of funds from

40
other critical components of the Scheme. The Committee note from the reply of the
Ministry that the expenditure on salary as reflected in the last SoE of the State/UT
was the basis earlier for arriving at the indicative requirement on salary but under
restructured ICDS in 12th Plan, specifically from the year 2014-15, the salary
projected in the APIP of the State/UT has been taken to assess the projected expenditure
on salaries. The Committee hope that this move would correct the anomaly between
assessment of demand and allocation of funds for each component of ICDS.
Training
As per the Ministry's instructions (April 2009), all States/UTs were required
to submit their annual State Training Action Plan (STRAP) and the Ministry was to
release funds to the States for training on the basis of STRAP, approved by it before
the commencement of the financial year. The Committee note with concern that the
States/UTs faltered in sending their STRAP before the commencement of the financial
year which led to delay in release of funds for training and revalidation of unspent
balance. The committee further note that the shortfall under various categories of
training ranged from 19% to 58% of the targets fixed under the STRAPs. The
Committee appreciate that in 2013, Ministry decided to undertake a number of
measures to provide training to the functionaries under restructured ICDS, e.g.
setting up of training cells, State Training Institutes in 10 States, revision of cause
modules upgradation of training facilities by using newer technology and methodology
etc. They desire to be apprised of the progress made so far. The Committee are of the
view that since training is an essential requirement for delivery of services, the
Ministry should ensure that the plans are sent by the State Governments timely, the
functionaries are trained regularly and funds marked for training are not diverted.
The Committee are of the view that the Ministry may coordinate with NIPCCD/such
specialised Institutes to develop a customized training course for AWWs to make
them better equipped to run an AWC. As the CMU has reportedly been assigned the
target of various activities which include capacity building of ICDS functionaries, the
Committee desire to be apprised of the same at action taken stage.
Supplementary Nutrition
11. The Committee note that by providing supplementary feeding, the scheme
attempts to bridge the protein-energy gap between the Recommended Dietary
Allowance (RDA) and Average Dietary Intake (ADI) of children and lactating mothers.
Every beneficiary under Supplementary Nutrition (SN) is to be provided such nutrition
for 300 days a year. Audit found that there were absence of growth charts, lack of
adequate training to AWWs, inadequate supervision and non availability of functional
weighing machines. 33% to 47% children were reportedly not weighed for
monitoring their growth during 2006-07 to 2010-11. A new WHO Growth chart has
now been provided to the AWCs. The Ministry is also stated to have taken steps like
involvement of community & PRIs, Annual Programme Implementation Plan (APIP)
linked released of funds, inclusion of procurement plan in the APIP etc. to reduce
such shortcomings. Still the Committee feel that central monitoring is crucial. The
Committee hope that the CMU would now ensure availability of required growth

41
charts/equipment in AWCs and adequate training to AWWs with a view to monitoring
growth standard of beneficiaries and the maintenance of necessary database, the
Committee recommend that:—
(i) The growth statistics based on the new WHO Growth chart, separately for
male and female infants/children, may be put up on the Display Board in the
AWCs and the Medical Officer visiting the AWC must verify the statistics.
(ii) The CDPO should, in addition to training programmes, organize regular
interactive sessions to help AWWs to sort out any practical issues.
12. The Committee further note that the latest financial norms for providing
SN are 
` 6 per day for children aged 6-72 months, ` 9 per day for severely malnourished
children and ` 7 per day for pregnant women and lactating mothers. The Committee
appreciate that the said norms have since been revised and observe that:—
(i) Since the nutritional requirements of a 6 months old child differs from a
6 years old child, therefore, prescribing the same amount for the whole
group might not be helpful in catering to the nutritional requirements of
different age groups, the Ministry need to take up the issue with the child
health experts and apprise the Committee of their opinion.
(ii) In case of malnourished children, the ICDS functionaries must be
appropriately trained to analyse the reasons for their malnourishment and
counsel the parents on the need for nutritious diet for overall growth of
children. Where poverty is the major reason for malnourished children,
steps may be taken to simultaneously cover the parents under other welfare
schemes of the Government of India.
(iii) The financial norms for providing SN be linked to the Cost Inflation Index
and revised twice a year.
13. As shortfall in expenditure on Supplementary Nutrition (SN) was found to
range between 15% to 36% of the requirements during the period 2006-11. The
average daily expenditure per beneficiary on SN as per the audit was 
` 1.52 to ` 2.01
against the norm of ` 2.06 during 2006-09 and ` 3.08 to ` 3.64 against the norm of
` 4.21 during 2009-11. The Committee further note that there was a gap of 33% to
45% between the number of eligible beneficiaries identified and those received SN
during 2006-07 to 2010-11. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that
the shortfall in expenditure on SN by States was due to longer time taken by some of
the States to implement the revised financial norms for SN and also delay in supply of
SN at the AWC due to various unavoidable reasons at the field level etc. The Committee
are not able to comprehend as to how the Ministry kept on releasing SN funds at new
rates, despite not getting confirmation from the States that the new rates have actually
been implemented. The Committee recommend that the Ministry take urgent steps to
ensure that all the States have implemented revised financial norms at the earliest.
The Committee may be apprised of the action taken by the Ministry in this regard.

42
14. The Committee note that there was disruption in many States in providing
SN at the AWCs due to non/short supply of foodgrains, delay in supply of SN, non-
lifting of wheat & rice provided under Wheat Based Nutrition Programme at subsidized
rates, delay in transportation of SN from CDPO godown to the AWC, non-availability
of funds to AWC for procurement of material and intermittent leave availed by AWWs.
The Committee further note that the Audit noted shortcomings in testing of food
items by the FNB, supplied for consumption of beneficiaries in 13 test checked
States, inadequate supervision by CFNEUs, distribution of sub-standard and infested
food and deficiencies in implementation of WBNP. The Committee recommend that
the Ministry take urgent steps to ensure that:—
(i) Requirement for foodgrains be sent and delivered in advance and timely
release of required funds to purchase the grains through web-based
monitoring;
(ii) Roping in women SHGs to provide food in the absence of AWWs, in the
presence of a Supervisor;
(iii) Regular inspection and making information about inspections available
on-line;
(iv) Ensuring community involvement/social audit in distribution of SN and
collecting samples for quality testing; and
(v) Spreading awareness about the facilities available under the Scheme.
Pre School Education (PSE)
15. The Committee note that ICDS guidelines (June 2000) stipulated State/UT
level procurement of PSE kits and distribution thereof to AWCs on yearly basis. The
Supreme Court had also directed in December 2006 to universalize the PSE along
with other services provided under PSE. Further, the Anganwadi Workers (AWWs)
are required to  ensure that all the children from the AWC joined the formal education
and to coordinate with local primay school so that the transition of the children to the
primary school could become a natural process. A WWs are also required to maintain
records for the transition. The SoE of 20 States available with the Ministry showed
significant under utilisation of funds on procurement of PSE kits during 2006-11.
PSE kits were not available at 41% to 51% of the test checked AWCs during the
period 2006-11. In six of the selected States, the data on beneficiaries of PSE who
joined mainstream education was not available and in 5 States there was a shortfall of
7%-30% in the number of children who actually joined the formal education during
2006-11. The Committee concur with the recommendation of the audit that in addition
to the release of funds for procurement of PSE kits to States/UTs, the Ministry should
monitor progress on timely utilization of funds and final supply of these kits to
AWCs. The Committee desire that the State Governments be instructed to immediately
provide PSE kits to each AWC as imparting PSE is an important component of the
ICDS. The Committee are of the view that to ensure that PSE is actually being imparted
in the AWCs, the Ministry may in coordination with Ministry of HRD, arrange to

43
send a teacher from the nearest Government School to visit the AWC to make the
assessment. The Committee feel that the CDPO should analyse the reasons for
shortfall in number of children joining primary school and persuade/counsel the
parents to make their child join the mainstream education.
IEC and Community Mobilisation
16. The Committee note that Information, Education and Communication (IEC)
and the Nutrition and Health Education (NHED) are two components of ICDS aimed at
sustained behaviour and attitudinal change of society for holistic development of
children. The main objective of IEC is to create awareness and build up image of
ICDS, stimulate demand for its services, affect and sustain behavioural and attitudinal
changes in child caring, nutrition and healthcare practices and elicit sustained
community participation. Audit found a shortfall of 40 to 100% on the expenditure
against the funds released for IEC in a number of test checked states. The Committee
agree with the recommendation of the Audit that IEC activities should be planned in
advance in accordance with the financial norms and the expenditure be monitored by
the Ministry to examine the reasons for shortfall. The Committee are of the view that
seminars/workshops, monthly meets, home visits screening of films/slideshows,
campaigns to community on Infant & Y oung Child Feeding (IYCF) and SN and other
components of the IEC & NHED aim to effectively deliver the benefits of the Scheme
to the maximum eligible population and therefore should be undertaken earnestly by
the Ministry and the State Governments. The Committee are of the view that a digital
handheld device may also be provided to the AWWs under the IEC equipment as this
will help them in getting and disseminating information, in augmenting the education
levels of both functionaries and the beneficiaries and effective communication. As
already recommended in a previous paragraph, the Committee are of the view that
every A WC should have Display Board to indicate the details of functionaries upto the
level of CDPO, the details of the beneficiaries, the services supposed to be given at an
AWC and the services being provided, list of equipment available at the AWC, events
proposed during the month and important dates for immunization, monthly check-
ups, visits of other functionaries and various IEC activities. All the displayed information
must be verified and initiated with date by the Supervisor during their routine visits
to the AWC. The Committee would also like to apprise of further progress in the
nationwide 'Campaign against malnutrition' launched in November, 2012 as on date.
Monitoring & Evaluation
17. ICDS envisages an inbuilt system of its monitoring through regular reports
and returns flowing upwards from AWC to Project Headquarters, District
Headquarters, State Headquarters and finally to the Ministry. The Committee note
that the Central Monitoring Unit (CMU) under the Scheme failed to efficiently carry
out assigned tasks, which included concurrent evaluation of the Scheme, monitoring
through the progress reports received from the States and impact assessment of the
services under the SN and the PSE, based on outcome indicators, such as nutritional
status of the children. The Audit also pointed out inadequate follow-up action on
internal monitoring and evaluation by the Ministry. According to the Ministry, in

44
order to improve the Monitoring and Supervision under ICDS, the Government has
since introduced 5 tier Monitoring and Supervision Committee at National, State,
District, Block and Anganwadi/Village level, visits by different ICDS functionaries,
MIS and web base MIS-ICDS to capture on-line data and analysis. The Commmittee
desire that the:—
(i) CMU be strengthened and the honorarium be raised to attract suitable
candidates.
(ii) The Ministry may clearly define roles and the domain of each agency to
ensure that overlapping of functions of various monitoring agencies do not
happen as the same causes some areas being totally ignored.
(iii) The supervisiors need to be sensitized about being thorough and robust in
his/her approach as they are the first tier of monitoring. The supervisor
should visit the AWCs and send the reports to the CDPO regularly. The
information regarding visits made by each supervisor should be put on display
board in CDPOs office. The steps taken by the AWCs after any inspection
should also be reviewed by the supervisor during her visits and reported to
CDPO.
(iv) The CDPO should also visit the AWCs regularly and surprise inspections
be carried out by the other officers of the Ministry.
(v) Periodically monitoring the action taken on shortcomings emerging out of
monitoring and evaluation reports must be mandatory.
(vi) As outcome indicators have been developed under the Scheme periodic
assessment to evaluate the achievement levies would lead to an efficient
implementation of ICDS.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. K.V. THOMAS,
22 April, 2015 Chairperson,
2 Vaisakha, 1937 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

Organisational and implementation structure of ICDS Scheme
Central Level
Ministry of Women and Child Development
Responsible for policy planning, allocation and release of
funds, and guiding and monitoring the implementation of the Scheme
ANNEXURE I
State level
Department of Social Welfare (or other designated department)
Headed by Principal Secretary who is assisted by Director (ICDS), it is
responsible for coordination and implementation of the scheme in the State
District level
District Programme Office: headed by a District
Programme Officer, responsible for coordination of the
Scheme in the district and its monitoring and supervision
Block level
ICDS Project, headed by a Child Development Project Officer (CDPO), has
overall responsibility of Scheme administration in the project area, coordination and
supervision, duties of drawing and disbursement officer, field visits to Anganwadi
Centres (AWCs) and periodical reporting to the State and Central Government. To
facilitate supervision each ICDS Project is divided into four-five sectors, each having
20-25 AWCs. Each sector has a Supervisor who reports to the CDPO
Village/habitation level
Anganwadi Centre (AWC), with an Anganwadi Worker (AWW) and an
Anganwadi Helper (AWH) organises supplementary nutrition feeding and
pre-school education for beneficiaries, monitors growth of children, assist health
staff in immunisation and carry out sample census of mother and children
National Institute of Public Cooperation
and Child Development
An autonomous body with focus on
training, research interventions and
monitoring and evaluation of the Scheme
Food and Nutrition Board (FNB)
Provides technical support and training
on nutrition and dietary habits and test
checks quality of supplementary nutrition
under the Scheme
45

ANNEXURE II
F.No. 16-8/2010-ME
Government of India
Ministry of Women and Child Development
(ICDS M & E UNIT)
Shastri Bhavan, New Delhi-110 001
Dated: 31 March, 2011
To
1. Chief Secretaries in all States/Principal Advisors to Administrators in all UTs
2. Secretaries dealing with ICDS Scheme-35 States/UTs
3. Directors dealing with ICDS Scheme-35 States/UTs
Subject: Guidelines for Constitution of Monitoring & Review Committees at different
levels to review progress in implementation of the ICDS Scheme-Regarding.
Sir/Madam,
The Government of India (GoI) has taken several measures for strengthening the
monitoring and supervision mechanism in the Integrated Child Development Services
(ICDS) Schemes for its better and effective implementation. The Scheme has a
Management Information System (MIS) through which Monthly Progress Reports
(MPRs) on key programme indicators are generated by each of the Anganwadi Workers
(AWWs) at the AWC level and by the Child Development Project Officers (CDPOs) at
the block/project level. The MIS in ICDS is under final stage of revision by the Ministry
of Women and Child Development (MWCD) for making it more results-focused and
also web-enabled.
2. In the past, guidelines on developing Community Based Monitoring
Mechanism (CBMM) were issued by GoI [ vide F.No. NI/No. 12-11/93 CD-I dated
20.1.1994] to ensure monitoring of the Scheme at the grass roots level by the community
themselves. The CBMM envisaged constitution of Bal Vikas Mahila Samitis at the
village, block and district levels.
3. Recently, the MWCD has issued guidelines [vide F.No. 16-3/2004-ME (Pt)
dated 22.10.2010] on monitoring and supervision visits to AWCs/projects by officials
from various levels and also involvement of PRIs in monitoring of AWC activities. All
these measures are directed towards strengthening the existing monitoring and
supervision mechanism under ICDS.
4. In the context of universalisation of ICDS with focus on improved quality in
delivery of services and also proposed strengthening and re-structuring of ICDS, it is
now proposed to put in place a 5-tier monitoring and review mechanism at the central
level and upto the AWC level. This is also proposed to rationalize and harmonize of
such mechanisms which are in vogue in several States/UTs with an objective of
strengthening the co-ordination and convergence with the line departments and also
monitoring and reviewing the progress made in the implementation of the Scheme.
46

47
5. Composition and key roles of such Committees at different levels are outlined
in the following sections. States/UTs may make adjustments and appropriate changes
in the designations of Officers/functionaries at various levels as per local conditions
and institutional structures.
I. NATIONAL LEVEL MONITORING & REVIEW COMMITTEE (NLMRC) ON ICDS
IA. Composition
(i) Secretary, Ministry of Women & Child Development Chairperson
(ii) P rincipal Advisor, WCD, Planning Commission Member
(iii) Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare Member
(iv) Secretary, Ministry of Human Resource Development Member
(v) Secretary, Deptt. of Food Member
(vi) Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development Member
(vii) Secretary, Ministry of Minority Affairs Member
(viii) Secretary, Deptt. of Drinking Water Supply & Sanitation Member
(ix) Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati Raj Member
(x) Secretaries from any 5 States from each region Member
(on rotation basis)
(xi) Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser, MWCD Member
(xii) Director, NIPCCD, New Delhi Member
(xiii) Director, National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad Member
(xiv) Joint Secretary (ICDS), MWCD Member
(xv) Director (ICDS), MWCD Member
Secretary
NOTE:
• Two Experts of child development/nutrition/ECE and representatives from
the Development Partners may be called to the meeting as Special Invitee.
• The Committee shall meet once in six months or as and when required at the
direction of the Chairperson.
IB. Roles
The National level Committee will monitor and review the following key issues
and recommend appropriate actions:—
i.  Overall progress made by the States/UTs in ICDS with regard to:—
• Universalization of ICDS-status of operationalization of projects/AWCs;
• Implementation of State Annual Programme Implementation Plans (APIPs);

48
• Nutritional status of children below 6 years-weighment, roll out of WHO
growth standards and joint mother and child protection cards; reduction
in proportion of underweight and severely undernourished children;
• Performance of pre-school education.
ii.  Convergence and coordination with other programmes:—
• Health/NRHM: Issues relating to micronutrient supplementation and
fortification, management of severely malnourished children, health related
service delivery at AWC or at VHNDs-immunization, antenatal check-ups of
pregnant women, supply of Vit-A, de-worming and IF A tablets, referral
services, health check-ups; Functioning of VHSC etc;
• Water  & Sanitation: Provision of potable water and sanitation facility at
AWCs through convergence with Total Sanitation Campaign and Rajiv
Gandhi National Drinking Water Mission;
• Sarva Siksha Abhiyan (SSA): Co-location of AWCs with primary schools,
integration of PSE in AWCs, support from SSA, etc.; and
• PRIs: Involvement of PRIs and community in overseeing and coordinating
the delivery of services at AWC.
iii. S tatus and number of State/UT-wise coverage of SC/ST and minority concerntrated
habitations;
iv. Manpower vacancies at the field level and States action plan thereon;
v. Status of State/UT-wise supply of essential items to AWCs-Medicine and PSE
kits, weighing scales, joint MCP card, WHO Growth monitoring charts, etc.;
vi. Leveraging funds for construction of AWC Buildings with NREGA, Multi-Sectoral
Development Programme (MSDP), BRGF, IADP, MPLADS, etc;
vii. Status of arrangement for supplementary nutrition; status of release and lifting of
foodgrains under the Wheat Based Nutrition Programme (WBNP);
viii. Identification of local/community level innovative practices which yielded results
and exploration of the possibility of scaling up of the same;
ix. Review of reports of the field visits undertaken by MWCD/Planning Commission
etc., along with assessment/evaluation reports on ICDS (if any) and suggesting
corrective actions; and
x . Financial management funds flow mechanism, utilization of funds, estimated
requirements etc.
II. STATE LEVEL MONITORING & REVIEW COMMITTEE (SLMRC) ON  ICDS
IIA. Composition
i. Chief Secretary Chairperson
ii. Secretary, Planning Member

49
iii. Secretary, Finance Member
iv. Secretary, Health & Family Welfare Member
v. Secretary, Rural Development Member
vi. Secretary, Panchayati Raj Institution Member
vii. Secretary, Drinking Water Supply & Sanitation Member
viii. Secretary, Education Member
ix. Secretary, Agriculture/Horticulture Member
x . Secretary, Food Member
xi. Secretary, WCD (in charge of ICDS) Member
xii. 5 Members of Parliament (MP)* Members
xiii. 5 Members of Legislative Assembly (MLAs)* Members
xiv. State Mission Director, National Rural Health Mission Member
xv. Regional Director, NIPCCD (from the region) Member
xvi. Food & Nutrition Board, State/Regional Office Member
xvii. Principal, Middle level Training Centre (MLTC)** Member
xviii. Principal, Anganwadi Worker Training Centre (AWTC)** Member
xix. Director, WCD (in charge of ICDS) Member-Secretary
* Members of Parliament and MLAs in the State/UT would be Members of the Committee on
rotational basis for one year and their selection shall be such as to give representation to as many
political parties as possible.
** On rotation basis in each year;
NOTE:
/circle6Experts/Representatives from the prominent Institutions and Development
Partners, who are working in the State with ICDS programme, may also be
invited as Special Invitees.
/circle6The Committee will meet every six months or earlier as and when required on
the notice of the Chairperson. The Chief Secretary will, however chair the
meeting once in six months.
IIB. Roles
The State level Committee will monitor and review the following issues and
recommend appropriate actions:—
i.  Overall progress with regard to:—
/circle6Universalization of ICDS-status of operationalisation of sanctioned projects/
AWCs, coverage of all habitations/hamlets in the State and factors coming
in their way;

50
/circle6Preparation and implementation of State Annual Programme
Implementation Plan (APIP) in ICDS;
/circle6Status of nutritional status of children below 6 years-weighment, roll out of
WHO growth standards and joint mother and child protection cards; district-
wise comparison of proportion of moderate and severely undernourished
children; Measures being taken for addressing them and progress thereon
on half yearly basis;
/circle6Performance of non-formal pre-school education provided at AWCs;
Methodology and participation of children in non-formal pre-school
education at AWCs; use of locally developed learning and play materials,
toy bank and other initiatives; and
/circle6Identification of low performing districts in ICDS and factors responsible
for it.
ii. Convergence with line departments/programmes:—
a. Health/NRHM: Status of full immunization at AWCs, provision of ante-natal
and health check-ups, referral services and supply of micronutrients (Vit-A,
IFA, de-worming tablet) to AWCs; Functioning of VHND, VHSC and
promotion of IYCF;
b. Water & Sanitation: Provision of potable water and sanitation facility at
AWCs through convergence with Total Sanitation Compaign and
Rajiv Gandhi National Drinking Water Mission or any other schemes of
State Govt;
c. Sarva Siksha Abhiyan (SSA):  Co-location of AWCs with primary schools,
integration of PSE in AWCs, support from SSA, etc.; and
d. PRIs:  Involvement of PRIs and community in overseeing and coordinating
the delivery of services at AWCs.
iii. Coverage in general and, specifically of SC/ST/Minority habitations/beneficiaries
against the surveyed population;
iv. Other issues relating to programme implementation and action thereon with respect
to:—
a. Regularity of functioning of AWCs-overall and specifically, those in SC/ST/
minority concentrated habitations;
b. Manpower vacancies at AWW/Supervisor/CDPO level and their training
status;
c. Fund flow and timely payment of honoraria to AWWs/AWHs;
d. Availability of  funds for POL, contingency etc. at district/block level and
flexi-fund at AWC level as per revised norms;

51
e. Disruption in supply of supplementary nutrition at AWCs as per revised
norms and reasons for it, such as method of delivery, engagement of SHGs
etc;
f. Arrangement for fortification of supplementary food and use of iodized salt
at AWCs;
g. Methodology and participation of children in non-formal pre-school
education at AWCs;
h. Procurement and supply/availability of essential items to AWCs-medicine
and PSE kits, weighing scales, joint MCP card, WHO Growth Charts, etc.;
i. Monitoring and supervision visits by officials at different levels as per norms;
j. Engagement of ICDS functionaries in non-ICDS activities and arrangements
to desist them from it; and
k. Any other matter as may be relevant for improved implementation.
v. Improving the AWC Infrastructure: Construction of AWC buildings by leveraging
funds from under different schemes/programmes, such as BRGF, MSDP, MPLADS
etc.
vi. Use of IEC in creating awareness about ICDS services/health and nutrition issues
and possibility of convergence with IEC activities under other schemes/
programmes.
III. DISTRICT LEVEL MONITORING & REVIEW COMMITTEE (DLMRC) ON ICDS
III  A. Composition
i. District Magistrate/Collector/Dy. Commissioner Chairperson
ii. Chief Executive Officer (CEO) V ice-Chairperson
iii. District Development Officer, Zilla Parishad Member
iv. Chief Medical Officer, Health & Family Welfare Member
v. District Planning Officer Member
vi District Social Welfare Officer Member
vii. District Agriculture/Horticulture Officers Members
viii. District Officer, Rural Development/MNREGA Member
ix. Executive Engineer, PHED Member
x . District Education Officer Member
xi. Member of Parliament (MP) in the District Member
xii. Members of Legislative Assembly (MLAs) Members
xiii. Principal, Middle level Training Centre (MLTC)* Member

52
xiv. Principals, AWTCs (Any 2)* Members
xv. Field Unit of Food & Nutrition Board Memebr
xvi. CDPOs (any 3)* Members
xvii. District-Programme Officer (ICDS) Member Secretary
* On rotation basis in each year.
NOTE: The Committee will meet at least once in a quarter or as and when required on
the notice of the Chairperson and will submit its review report to the Chief
Secretary/Secretary (WCD) clearly outlining actions taken at the district level
and support required from the State Government.
IIIB. Roles
The District level Committee will monitor and review block/project-wise progress
of implementation of the Scheme and suggest/take appropriate corrective actions with
regards to following issues:—
i.  Overall progress in implementaion with regard to:—
a. Status of operationalization of all sanctioned projects/AWCs, coverage of
all habitations/hamlets in the district, especially SC/ST and minority
concentrated and remote areas;
b. Coverage of beneficiaries: Block-wise analysis of registered vs. actual
beneficiaries for supplementary nutrition and pre-school education at AWCs
as against surveyed population;
c. Regularity in supply and quality of supplementary nutrition at AWCs:
provision of take home ration, morning snacks and hot cooked meals for
stipulated number of days in a month and block-wise comparision of feeding
efficiency;
d. Nutritional status of children 0-3 years and 3-6 years-weighment, roll out
of WHO growth standards and joint mother and child protection cards;
block-wise comparison of proportion of moderate and severely
undernourished children; Measures being taken for addressing them and
progress thereon on half yearly basis; and
e. Performance of non-formal pre-school provided at AWCs.
ii.  Coordination and convergence with line departments/programmes:—
a. Health/NRHM: Immunization of children at AWCs, ante-natal and health
check-ups, referral services and supply of micronutrients (Vit-A, IF A,
deworning tablet) to AWCs; Functioning of VHSC, VHND and promotion of
IYCF; joint visits of health and ICDS functionaries to AWCs;
b. Water & Sanitation:  Provision of potable water and sanitation facility at
AWCs;

53
c. Sarva Siksha Abhiyan (SSA): Co-location of AWCs with primary schools,
integration of PSE in AWCs, support from SSA, etc.; and
d. PRIs:  Involvement of PRIs and community in overseeing and coordinating
the delivery of services at AWCs.
iii. Other issues relating to programme implementation and actions thereon with
respect to:—
a. Regularity of functioning of AWCs—overall and  specifically, those in SC/
ST/minority concentrated habitations;
b. Manpower vacancies at AWW/Supervisor/CDPO level and training status
of functionaries;
c. Payment of honoraria to AWWs/AWHs and travelling allowances to
Supervisors;
d. AWC infrastructure: Construction of AWC buildings through convergence
with other schemes/programmes;
e. Supply of essential items to AWCs—medicine and PSE kits, weighing scales,
joint MCP card, WHO Growth Chart, etc.;
f. Availability of funds for POL, contingency etc. at district/block level and
flexi-fund at AWC level as per the revised norms;
g. Mobility of CDPOs/Supervisors-availability of vehicles and non
requisitioning of programme related vehicles;
h. Monitoring and supervision visits by CDPOs/Supervisors to AWCs as per
norms and submission of reports;
i. Method(s) of delivery of supplementary food at AWCs —engagement of
SHGs and use of iodized salt at AWCs and addition of leafy vegetables;
j. Methodology used and participation of children in non-formal pre-school
education at AWCs; use of locally developed learning and play materials,
toy bank and other initiatives;
k. Engagement of ICDS functionaries in non-ICDS activities and arrangements
to desist them from it;
l. Identification of low performing blocks in ICDS implementation and factors
responsible for it; and
m. Any other matter as may be relevant for improved implementation.
iv. Financial issues: Fund flow and status of component-wise allocation and
expenditures during the reported period and adherence to revised financial norms
prescribed by GoI.
v. Complaints/grievance redressal mechanism: Actions on the complaints received
from individuals, community, PRIs, etc. regarding ICDS services such as regularity

54
in AWC functioning, quality of supplementary nutrition, etc. and ICDS
functionaries.
vi. IEC: Preparation and undertaking of IEC action plan on issues like location of
AWCs, services available under ICDS, entitlement of beneficiaries, grievances
redressal mechanism, etc.;
NOTE: The following sources of information may be used for the review
meeting:—
a. Minutes and reports of the Block Level Monitoring Committees;
b. Analysis of Block Monthly Progress Reports (MPRs) and Block Annual
Status Reports (ASRs);
c. Reports of field visits by Members of the Committee, and other officials in the
district and any evaluation/assessment report; and
d. Reports from the public/media (if any).
IV . BLOCK LEVEL MONITORING COMMITTEE (BLMC) ON ICDS
IV A. Composition
i. Sub Divisional Magistrate (SDM) Chairperson
ii. Block Development Officer/TDO Vice-Chairperson
iii. Block representative of Health Member
(BMO/MO in-charge PHC/CHC)
iv. Block representative of Education Member
(Block Education Officer/Dy. Inspector of
School/in-charge of SSA)
v. Block Extension officers of Agriculture/Horticulture Member
vi. Representative of Block/Nagar/Taluka Panchayat Member
vii. Principal, Anganwadi Training Centre* Member
viii. Representatives, local NGOs (2) Members
ix. CDPO Convener
* if there is any.
NOTE:
/circle6The Committee will meet once in a quarter and will submit its report to the
District Committee with a copy to the State Directorate of ICDS.
/circle6Representation of level of officials from concerned departments at the block
level in the Block level Committee may be decided as may be deemed fit by the
State Govt.
/circle6Representatives of Animal Husbandry/Dairy/Fishery etc. may be invited as
required.

55
/circle62-3 Supervisors (ICDS) in the block may also be invited to the meeting on
rotation basis.
IV B. Roles
The Block level Committee will monitor and review the following issues and
suggest/take appropriate actions:
i. Overall progress in implementation with regard to:—
a. Coverage of all habitations/hamlets in the block, especially in SC/ST and
minority concentrated and remote areas;
b. Coverage of beneficiaries: Sector-wise analysis of registered Vs. actual
beneficiaries for supplementary nutrition and pre-school education at AWCs
as against surveyed population;
c. Quality of supplementary nutrition;
d. Nutritional status of children 0-3 years and 3-6 years—weighment, roll out
of WHO growth standards and joint mother and child protection cards;
sector-wise comparison of proportion of moderate and severely
undernourished children; Measures being taken for addressing them and
progress there on half yearly basis;
e. No. of AWCs providing take home ration, morning snaks and hot cooked
meals for more than 21 days in the reporting month; and
f. Number of AWCs which organized the monthly Village and Health Nutrition
Days (VHNDs) and details of activities undertaken during VHNDs.
ii.  Coordination and convergence with line departments/programmes:—
a. Health/NRHM:  Joint planning and implementation of timely immunization
of children at AWCs, ante-natal and health check-ups, referral services and
supply of micronutrients (Vit-A, IF A, de-worming tablet) to AWCs;
Functioning of VHND And VHSC and promotion of IYCF; planned visits of
ANM to AWCs;
b. Water & Sanitation: Provision of potable water and sanitation facility at
AWCs; and
c. PRIs:  Involvement of PRIs and community in overseeing and coordinating
the delivery of services at AWCs.
iii. Other issues relating to programme implementation and actions thereon with
respect to:—
a. Regularity of functioning of AWCs—overall, and specifically, those in SC/
ST minority concentrated habitations and submission of MPRs by AWWs;
b. Manpower vacancies at AWW/Supervisor/CDPO level and their training
status;

56
c. Payment of honoraria to AWWs/AWHs and travelling allowances to
Supervisors;
d. AWC infrastructure: Construction of AWC buildings through convergence
with other schemes/programmes;
e. Status of supply of all essential items to AWCs. (Medicine and PSE kits,
weighing scales, joint MCP card, WHO Growth Chart, etc);
f. Availability of funds for POL, contingency etc. at the block level and flexi-
fund at AWC level as per revised norms;
g. Home visits by AWWs during critical contact periods—counseling of
pregnant and lactating mothers and families of children under two on key
health and nutrition. issues;
h. Supportive supervision by the Supervisors; organization of sector level
review meetings; analysis of MPRs; etc. [To review frequency of supervisory
visits and reasons for lower than expected frequency]
i. Observance of Village Health & Nutrition Days (VHNDs)—participation of
ANM and PRI Members;
j. Method(s) of delivery of supplementary nutrition at AWCs—engagement of
SHGs and use of iodized salt at AWC;
k. Methodology and participation of children in non-formal pre-school
education at AWCs—use of locally developed learning and play materials,
toy bank and other initiatives;
l. Engagement of AWWs and Supervisors in non-ICDS activities and
arrangement to desist them from it;
m. Identification of low performing AWCs/Sectors in ICDS implementation
and factors responsible for it; and
n. Any other matter as may be relevant for improved implementation.
iv. Complaints/grievance redressal mechanism:  Actions taken on the complaints
received from individuals, community, PRIs etc. regarding ICDS services such as
regularity in AWC functioning, quality of supplementary nutrition, etc. and also
on dereliction of duties by Supervisors/AWWs;
NOTE: The following sources of information may be used for the review meeting:—
a. Minutes and reports of the AWC Level Monitoring Commitees;
b. Analysis of AWC Monthly Progress Reports (MPRS)/Annual Status Reports
(ASRs);
c. Reports of field visits to AWCs by Members of the Committee, and other
officials in the block/district; and
d. Reports from the public/media (if any).

57
V. ANGANWADI LEVEL MONITORING & SUPPORT COMMITTEE (ALMSC) ON
ICDS
V A. Composition
i. Gram Panchayat/ward member Chairperson
(preferably women member)
ii. Mahila Mandal  (2 Members on rotation) Members
iii. ASHA Member
Representatives of:
iv. Community Based Organization (2) Members
v. Community (Teachers/Retired Govt. Officials/
Parents of Children attending AWC) (3) Members
vi. Sakhi under SABLA Programme (if any) Member
vii. Anganwadi Worker Convener
NOTE:
/circle6The Committee will organize regular monthly meetings to discuss various
issues in the anganwadi area in the village or ward/slum and record minutes
of the meeting. A copy of the minutes may be sent to the Block level Committee
and CDPO.
/circle6ICDS Supervisor, ANM, LHV may be invited to the meeting as may be required.
VB. Roles
The Anganwadi level Committee will review and take/suggest actions to improve
delivery of services at the AWC. The Committee is authorized and expected to play the
following roles:—
i. Check regularity of functioning of AWC;
ii. Ensure coverage of all eligible beneficiaries as against the surveyed
population;
iii. Review status of supply of supplementary food to all beneficiaries for at least
21 days in a month;
iv. Review nutritional status of children 0-3 years and 3-6 years, weighment,
availability of WHO New Growth Charts and joint mother & child protection
card; and number of moderate and severely undernourished children and
steps taken;
v. Review functioning of non-formal PSE—activities per day, development/use
of local learning and play materials; organization of parents meet; etc.
vi. Ensure participation of AWWs at VHSC meetings;

58
vii. Ensure participation of at least one of the Members (other than AWW, ASHA
and ANM) on the monthly Village Health and Nutrition Day at each AWC and
to ensure that it is well-organized and well-attended, and that all due services
are rendered on that day;
viii. Review facilities available at the AWC in the light of established norms
(Infrastructure including clean water, functioning toilet, play area, PSE/
medicine kits, cooking utensils, etc.);
[The Committee may consider ways of locally strengthening the AWC
infrastructure mobilizing resources from the community/other schemes]
ix. Review receipt and utilization of consumables such as food supplements and
medicines as well as physical stocks;
/circle6Find reasons for any shortfalls from expected norms, or discrepancies in
stocks;
/circle6Document and report such shortfalls and discrepancies to the Block
Level Monitoring Committee and CDPO;
x . Attend to any local disputes related to the AWC or AWW, and resolve such
disputes amicably; flag unresolved disputes to the Gram Panchayat or Block
level Monitoring Committees;
xi. Interact with the AWW/ICDS Supervisor to understand reasons for any short
falls in services provided at the AWC, and find ways to locally strengthen
services or correct shortfalls; formally document and report unresolved issues
to the Block Level Monitoring Committee, with a copy to CDPO, MO/PHC
and Gram Panchayat as appropriate & concerned; and
xii. Any other matter as may be relevant for improving service delievery.
NOTE:
i. To ensure any/all of the above, the AWC level Committee Members are
expected to:—
/circle6Familiarize themselves with the objectives and spirit of the ICDS programme.
/circle6Familiarize themselves with the established norms and guidelines for ICDS
by obtaining a copy of such guidelines from the Block Level Monitoring
Committee; interact with Members of the Block Level Monitoring Committee,
or the Supervisor or CDPO, or with the LHV or MO/PHC to seek any
clarifications regarding these norms.
/circle6Visit the AWC periodically and interact with other members of the community
to enquire about the functioning of the AWC.
/circle6Convene a monthly meeting to transact its business, preferably soon after
the preparation of the AWC MPR, and maintain minutes recording the
attendance of Members, issues reviewed, findings, and action taken.
/circle6Send a copy of the minutes of the monthly meeting to the Block Level
Monitoring Committee.

59
ii. On any issue, while it is always preferable to have negotiated and unanimous
decisions, the Members present may take decisions based on guidelines and
norms Unresolved issues may be sent to higher level for direction.
iii. The Committee and its Members will conduct their business in a manner that
does not disturb the day-to-day activities of the A WW/AWC.
6. States/UTs are requested to take necessary actions in constituting the Monitoring
and Review Committees at different levels as suggested in para 5 above. An action taken
report on this may be sent to GoI by 30 June, 2011 along with a report on the impact of  the
above monitoring mechanism, for discussions in the meeting of the National Level
Monitoring and Review  Committee and/or review meeting with the State Secretaries.
Yours faithfully,
Sd/—
(Dr. Shreeranjan)
Joint Secretary to Government of India
Tel: 23387683
Copy:—
(i) Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
(ii) Secretary, Ministry of Human Resource Development
(iii) Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development
(iv) Secretary, Ministry of Minority Affairs
(v) Secretary, Department of Food
(vi) Secretary, Department of Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation
(vii) Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati Raj
(viii) Principal Advisor (WCD), Planning Commission
(ix) Director, NIPCCD, New Delhi
(x) Regional, Directors, NIPCCD (Guwahati, Bangalore, Indore  and Lucknow)
(xi) Director, National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad
(xii) All Directors/Dy. Secretaries dealing with ICDS Scheme, MWCD
(xiii) Joint Technical Advisor, Food and Nutrition Board, MWCD
(xiv) PS to MOS (I/C), MWCD
(xv) PPS to Secretary, MWCD
(xvi) PS to AS & FA (WCD)
(xvii) PS to JS (CD)/JS (WD)/JS(WW)/EA/SA
(xviii) US(CD-I)/US(CD-II)/US (Training)/AD(WB/ME)
(xix) Guard File/Sanction Folder
(xx) Technical Director, NIC, MWCD—with a request to upload in Ministry's
website (Child Development Section)
Sd/—
(Dr. Shreeranjan)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
ACDPO Assistant Child Development Project Officer
ADI Average Dietary Intake
ANC Ante Natal Care
ANM Auxiliary Nursing Midwife
AOD Anganwadi on Demand
APR Annual Progress Report
AREF Amylase Rich Energy Food
ASHA Accredited Social Health Activist
ATN Action Taken Note
AWC Anganwadi Centre
AWH Anganwadi Helper
AWTC Anganwadi Training Centre
AWW Anganwadi Worker
BPL Below Poverty Line
BRGF Backward Region Grant Fund
CDPO Child Development Project Officer
CFNEU Community Food and Nutrition Extension Unit
CHC Community Health Centre
CMR Child Mortality Rate
CMU Central Monitoring Unit
DDO District Development Officer
DHFWS District Health and Family Welfare Samiti
DPO District Programme Officer
DSWO District Social Welfare Officer
EFC Expenditure Finance Committee
FNB Food and Nutrition Board
GOI Government of India
HPR Half-yearly Progress Report
ICDS In tegrated Child Development Services
ICDS (G) ICDS (General)
IEC Information Education and Communication
60

61
IGMSY Indira Gandhi Matritva Sahyog Yojana
IMG Inter-Ministerial Group
IMR Infant Mortality Rate
LDC Lower Division Clerk
L H V Lady Health Visitor
M and E Monitoring and Evaluation
MCPC Mother and Child Protection Card
MDG Millennium Development Goals
MIS Management Information System
MLA Member of Legislative Assembly
MLTC Middle Level Training Centre
MNREGS Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
MO Medical Officer
MPLADS Member of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme
MPR Monthly Progress Report
MTC Malnutrition Treatment Centre
NABARD National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development
NCAER National Council for Applied Economic Research
N E North East
NFHS National Family Health Survey
NGO Non-Governmental Organisation
NHED Nutrition and Health Education
NICSI National Informatics Centre Services Inc.
NIPCCD National Institute of Public Co-Operation and Child Development
NPAC National Plan of Action for Children
NREP National Rural Employment Programme
NRHM National Rural Health Mission
PAO Pay and Accounts Office
PHC Primary Health Centre
PLA Personal Ledger Account
PNC Post Natal Care
PPSWR Probability Proportion to Size with Replacement

62
PRI Panchayati Raj Institution
PSE Pre-School Education
QCL Quality Control Laboratory
QPR Quartetly Progress Report
RDA Recommended Dietary Allowance
RIDF Rural Infrastructure Development Fund
R TE Ready to Eat
SC Sub Centre
SC Scheduled Castes
SHG Self Help Group
SLCC State level Co-ordination Committee
SN Supplementary Nutrition
SOE Statement of Expenditure
SRSWOR Simple Random Sampling without Replacement
ST Scheduled Tribes
STRAP S tate Training Action Plan
THR Take Home Ration
UC Utilisation Certificate
UDC Upper Division Clerk
UPS Uninterrupted Power Supply
UT Union Territory
V A T Value Added Tax
VHND Vil lage Health Nutrition Day
WBNP Wheat Based Nutrition Programme
WCD Women and Child Development
WHO World Health Organisation

APPENDIX  I
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2013-14)  HELD ON 24TH SEPTEMBER, 2013
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 24th September, 2013 from 1500 hrs to 1610
hrs in Committee Room 'A', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi—Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
12. Shri Anandrao Adsul
13. Shri Ramen Deka
14. Dr. M. Thambi Durai
15. Shri Jayaprakash Hegde
16. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
17. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
18. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
19. Shri Ashok Tanwar
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
11. Shri Ashwani Kumar
12. Dr. V . Maitreyan
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Shri A. K. Yadav — Under Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Ms. Shubha Kumar — Director-General (Report Central)
2. Shri Roy S. Mathrani — Director-General (Central Expenditure)
Representatives of the Ministry of Women and Child Development
1. Ms. Preeti Sudan — Additional Secretary
2. Dr. Shreeranjan — Joint Secretary (Parl.)
3. Smt. Sarita Mittal — Joint Secretary & FA
4. Ms. Sarda Ali Khan — Joint Secretary
63

64
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members, the Audit Officers and
the representatives of the Ministry of Women and Child Development to the sitting of
the Committee. The Chairman informed the Committee that on being requested and
satisfied with the circumstances, he had exempted the Secretary, Ministry of Women
and Child Development from personal appearance. Apprising that the meeting has
been convened to have a preliminary briefing on the subject “Integrated Child
Development Services (ICDS) Scheme" based on the C&AG Report No. 22 of  2012-13,
the Chairman impressed upon the witnesses not to disclose the contents of the
deliberations to any outsider especially the Press and Electronic Media. Thereafter, he
asked the Additional Secretary to give an overview of the ICDS Scheme and the
measures taken by the Ministry to overcome the shortcomings/deficiencies pointed
out by the Audit so as to make the Scheme more effective and useful.
3. The Additional Secretary and other Officers of the Ministry accordingly briefed
the Committee on various issues relating to ICDS Scheme. They also attended to the
queries of the Members on related aspects. As some queries required detailed and
statistical information, the Chairman asked the representatives of the Ministry to furnish
written reply to the PAC Secretariat as early as possible.
4. The Chairman thanked the representatives of the Ministry for appearing before
the Committee and furnishing the available information on the subject.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting was kept on record.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

APPENDIX II
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2014-15) HELD ON 8TH OCTOBER, 2014
The Committee sat on Wednesday the 8th October, 2014 from 1545 hrs. to
1645 hrs. in Room No. '62', Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. K.V . Thomas—Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nishikant Dubey
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
Rajya Sabha
5. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya
6. Shri Shantaram Naik
7. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Jayakumar T. — Additional Director
Representatives from the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Dy CAG (RC/LB)
2. Shri Balvider Singh — Dy CAG (CRA)
3. Ms. Subha Kumar — Director General (RC)
4. Shri S. Loomba — DGA
5. Shri T. Theethan — Director General
6. Shri Manish Kumar — Principal Director
7. Shri P. T iwary — Principal Director
Representatives of the Ministry of Women and Child Development
1. Shri V . S. Oberoi — Secretary
2. Ms. Preeti Sudan — Addl. Secretary
3. Ms. Manisha Prasad Panwar — Joint Secretary
4. Shri Vivek Joshi — JS & FA
5. Shri Gulshan Lal — Director, ICDS
65

66
2. At the outset, the Chairperson, PAC welcomed the Officers of the C&AG of
India and the representatives of the Ministry of Women and Child Development to the
sitting of the Committee. The Chairperson apprised that the meeting has been convened
to have oral evidence on the subject “Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS)
Scheme" based on the C&AG Report No. 22 of 2012-13. He observed that ICDS scheme
is into the 40th year of its existence and is an extremely significant programme
conceptualized for healthy growth of children. Recalling that the Supreme Court had
set a deadline for achieving universalisation of ICDS, he pointed out that the said goal
was not achieved. Thereafter, Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development
was requested to give an overview of the ICDS Scheme as well as the measures taken
by the Ministry to overcome the shortcomings/deficiencies pointed out by the Audit
in ICDS so as to make it more effective and useful.
3. The representatives of the Ministry then gave a power point presentation on
the Audit findings and response of the Ministry thereon. Thereafter, Secretary of the
Ministry attended to the queries of the members on ICDS coverage to habitations
having predominant SC, ST, OBC and minority population, pre-school education,
nutrition and health education, large number of vacancies for the posts of CDPOs
supervisors and Anganwadi workers, poor quality of foods served to beneficiaries
and lack of infrastructure at the AWCs etc. Further, the Committee desired to have
tabular information of the restructured scheme w.r.t. yearly allocation, percentage of
utilization, targets and achievement. As some queries required detailed and statistical
information, the Chairperson asked the representatives of the Ministry to furnish
written replies to the PAC Secretariat as early as possible.
4. The Chairperson thanked the representatives of the Ministry for appearing
before the Committee and furnishing the updated information on the subject.
The witnesses then withdrew.
5. ****** ****** ******
6. ****** ****** ******
7. The Chairperson thanked the Members for their cooperation.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.
*****Not related to this Report.

APPENDIX III
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2014-15) HELD ON 27TH MARCH, 2015
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 27th March, 2015 from 1130 hrs. to 1415 hrs.
in Room No. '53', Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. K.V. Thomas—Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
12. Shri S. S. Ahluwalia
13. Shri Nishikant Dubey
14. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
15. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
16. Shri Dushyant Singh
17. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
18. Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi
19. Dr. Kirit Somaiya
10. Dr. P. Venugopal
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Vijay Goel
12. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
13. Shri Shantaram Naik
14. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Jayakumar T. — Additional Director
3. Shri P. Haokip — Deputy Secretary
Representatives of the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Deputy C&AG (RC)
2. Shri Satish Loomba — Director-General (Central Expenditure)
3. Shri L.S. Singh — Principal Director (PAC)
4. Shri Atoorva Sinha — Director
5. Shri K. Mani — Director (O/o DGCE)
67

68
Representatives of the Ministry of Culture
1. Shri Ravindra Singh — Secretary
2. Shri K.K. Mittal — Additional Secretary
*** *** *** ***
The witnesses then withdrew.
5. The Committee thereafter took the following draft reports for consideration:—
(i) Draft report on ‘Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) Scheme’ based
on C&AG Report No. 22 of 2012-13.
(ii) Draft report on the subject ‘Railways Finances’ based on C&AG Report No.
12 of  2013.
(iii) Draft report on action taken by the Government on the observations/
recommendations contained in the Ninety-Fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)
on ‘Implementation of Agricultural Debt Waiver and Debt Relief Scheme,
2008’.
6. However, one of the Members desired that he had certain suggestions for the
draft report on Railways Finances which Hon'ble Chairperson may consider for
inclusion. Hon'ble Chairperson asked the Member to give his suggestion in writing
and assured for giving due consideration to the same.
7. After discussions, the Committee adopted the three draft reports with minor
modifications as suggested by the Members. The Committee then authorized the
Chairperson to finalize the reports in the light of factual verifications, if any, made by
the Audit and present them to Parliament on a convenient date.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record.
The Committee, then, adjourned.
***Not related to this Reports.
GMGIPMRND—1234LS(S3)—06-10-2015—810 Copies.