ELEVENTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2014-2015)
(SIXTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
TATKAL AND ADVANCE RESERV ATION SYSTEM
IN INDIAN RAILWAYS
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of  the
Committee contained in their Eightieth Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2014
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 18.12.2014
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
December, 2014/Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka)

PAC  No. 2042
Price:  `  32.00
© 2014  BY  LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager,
Government of India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2014-15)...................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................... (v)
CHAPTER I Report ........................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ........................................ 8
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations  which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received
from the Government..................................................... 16
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee and which require reiteration................. 19
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations  in  respect  of  which
the Government have furnished interim replies ............. 21
APPENDICES
I. Minutes  of  the 11th sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2014-15) held on 9th December, 2014....... 22
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government
on the Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts  Committee contained in their Eightieth Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) ............................................... 24

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2014-15)
Prof. K.V . Thomas — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
4. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey
6. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank”
9. Shri Neiphiu Rio
*10. Shri Dushyant Singh
11. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
†12. Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi
13. Dr. Kirit Somaiya
14. Shri Anurag Thakur
††15. Dr. P. Venugopal
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
17. Shri Vijay Goel
18. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya
19. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
20. Shri Shantaram Naik
21. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
22. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Jayakumar T. — Additional Director
3. Shri Amrish Kumar — Under Secretary
* Elected w.e.f. 3rd December, 2014 vice Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy who has been appointed as
Minister w.e.f. 9th November, 2014.
† Elected  w.e.f.  3rd December, 2014 vice Shri Jayant Sinha who has been appointed as Minister
w.e.f. 9th November, 2014.
†† Elected w.e.f. 3rd December, 2014 vice Dr. M. Thambidurai who has been chosen as Hon’ble
Deputy Speaker, Lok Sabha and has since resigned from the membership of the Committee.
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2014-15), having been authorized by
the Committee, do present this Eleventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Eightieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Tatkal and Advance
Reservation System in Indian Railways’ relating to Ministry of Railways.
2. The Eightieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on
30th April, 2013. Replies of the Government to the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 22nd April, 2014. The Public Accounts
Committee considered and adopted the Eleventh Report at their sitting held on
9th December, 2014. Minutes of the sitting are given at Appendix-I.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Eightieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given at
Appendix-II.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. K.V. THOMAS,
17 December, 2014 Chairperson,
26 Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

Server 3\e\REPORT 2014\4071LS
CHAPTER  I
REPORT
This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their Eightieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Tatkal and Advance Reservation
System in Indian Railways' based on Para 2.2 of C&AG Report No. 34 of 2010-11 Union
Government—Railways relating to the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board).
2. The Eightieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) was presented in the Lok Sabha
and Rajya Sabha on 30.04.2013. It contained nine Observations/Recommendations.
Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Railways in respect of all
the Observations/Recommendations and are broadly categorized as follows:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Recommendation Para Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 8 & 9
Total: 06
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the replies received from the Government:
Recommendation Para Nos. 3 and 7.
Total: 02
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which required reiteration:
Recommendation Para No. 6
Total: 01
Chapter:-IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government have
furnished interim replies:
Recommendation Para No.         -Nil- T otal: Nil
Chapter:-V

2
3. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed many
systemic and other deficiencies which adversely affect the smooth functioning, speed
and efficiency of Tatkal and Advance Reservation  System in Railways. The Committee
observed various technical, financial and resource constraints which hamper the
working of Railway reservation system. But, grave issues like serious malfunctioning,
corrupt practices and blatant flouting of rules by RTSAs bring a bad name to the
Indian railways and degrade its public image. The manipulation and corrupt practices
in Tatkal Ticket Bookings and slow server speed seriously affect the whole system of
reservation and causes great inconvenience to the public at large. It results in the loss
of credibility and transparency of the whole system of ticket reservation. Indian Railways
is the lifeline of long distance transport system in India which gives service to millions
of passengers every day. Any manipulation in reservation system, therefore not only
affects the journey but many other aspects of their lives too, directly or indirectly. The
scrutiny of the functioning of the "Tatkal and Advance Reservation System" revealed
that genuine users, for whom the scheme was intended, were not able to access the
facility with ease as it was susceptible to manipulation. Audit also revealed other
lapses in delivery of services such as booking of tickets before and after business
hours; delay in announcement of special/new trains, reservations with incomplete
names of passengers, etc.
4. The Action T aken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Railways on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Eightieth Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. In
the succeeding paragraphs, the Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the
Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations made in the original
Report which either need reiteration or merit comments.
A. Installation of new Generation advanced E-Ticketing System
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
5. The Committee had noted that Tatkal and Advance Reservation could also be
booked through IRCTC website. The test check of accessibility of IRCTC server revealed
that during login of IRCTC's website exactly at 08.00 hours on the day of Advance
Reservation Period, the system would hang seemingly due to insufficient capacity of
the server to meet the growing requirement of net users. Admitting that the system was
prone to malfunctioning, the representative of the Ministry had submitted that entire
PRS system and e-ticketing has been developed for Tatkal which will be rolled out
within one/two months as the last stage of work was going on. Since the use of
e-ticketing facility is catching up fast among passengers due to its inherent ease and
convenience, the Committee recommended that the capacity of the internet bandwidth
and IRCTC server should be upgraded by installing high capacity server so that the
system is able to cope up with the surge in online bookings. High capacity server
should be installed after conducting 'load testing' for easy access of users. Further, the
Committee expected that the new software which the Ministry proposes to roll out,
would have the latest features with fast search engine; blocking of in-active session,
etc.

3
6. The Ministry of Railways in its Action Taken Notes have stated as under:
"Recommendations of the Committee have been noted. The new Generation
e-ticketing system will have the capacity for booking 7 lakh tickets per day."
7. The Committee appreciate that Ministry of Railways have taken a sincere note
of its recommendation as regards installing higher capacity and efficient new generation
e-ticketing system capable of coping with higher customer load. The Ministry have
informed the Committee that the new generation e-ticketing system will have the
advanced capacity of booking 7 lakh tickets per day. But, further details and blueprint
or plan as regards implementation, installation of such an advanced e-ticketing system
have not been revealed. The Ministry remained completely silents in its reply about
the tentative time frame by which the said installation would be completed though in
their earlier reply it was informed that it would be rolled out in one/two months. The
Committee, would therefore like the Ministry to submit a detailed master plan or a
blueprint as to how it envisages to implement the new generation advanced e-ticketing
system, the additional resources, expenditure which may be involved and the tentative
timeline by which the same could be achieved. The Ministry should apprise the
Committee about the constraints and challenges, if any in achieving the target. The
Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should take appropriate and timebound
action on its recommendations.
8. The Committee are of the considered view that we should look at services like
Tatkal from the perspective of social equity as well. Tatkal schemes provide support to
people with urgent needs. By paying a premium, they are able to get confirmed tickets.
Now, by the recent Government decision half of these tatkal tickets are being
implemented as dynamic fare system, where it will be sold in premium. What is happening
is that those who can afford to pay premium as well as those who have access to
internet can get confirmed berths easily, whereas those who do not have cannot get
the ticket. This system is legitimizing inequity. It is high time that the Ministry of
Railways institutionalizes the concerns of poor. The Committee, therefore, would like
the Ministry to reduce the premium on tickets of Tatkal reservation to a minimum
essential level. Also, the Committee feel that it will be in greater public interest if the
percentage of advanced reservation is enhanced and that of Tatkal reservation reduced
to a feasible and sustainable level. It will also be appreciated if a certain quota restriction
is put on ticket reservation bookings by internet so as to provide a better equitable
opportunity for the poors, disadvantaged and deprived classes of society having no
access to internet, thus making them available the benefits of ticket reservation in a
more fair and just manner.
B. Verification of Identity of passengers travelling in Reserved Compartments
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
9. The Committee had noted that the computerized PRS software had been
modified to establish passenger identity so as to overcome proxy travel. While
welcoming the measures taken by the Railways to establish passengers' identification,
the Committee had recommended that carrying a proof of identity while travelling in
reserved accommodation in trains should be made mandatory for all passengers to

4
keep a check on passengers travelling on transferred tickets. The Committee, had
therefore, recommended that necessary instructions in this regard may be issued at
the earliest, the situation monitored regularly and the procedures updated for the
successful operation of the scheme and they be apprised within three months from the
date of presentation of their report.
10. The Ministry of Railways in its Action Taken Notes have stated as under:
"The carrying of proof of identity while travelling in all classes of reserved
accommodation has been made mandatory w.e.f. 01.12.2012. As per these
instructions, in case of reserved ticket (except Tatkal) any one of the passenger
has to produce any one of the prescribed proof of identity (in original) during
the journey failing which all the passengers are treated as travelling without
ticket. In case of Tatkal ticket, the passenger has to carry the same Identity
Proof in original, which is indicated on the ticket."
11. The Committee take due note that the Ministry have made carrying the
proof of identity mandatory while travelling in all classes of reserved accommodation
to check the incidents of proxy travelling. The Ministry must ensure that proper
awareness campaign is made so that the passengers are properly informed about the
list of Valid Identity Cards which are well accepted as proof of identity. The Committee,
would also like the Ministry to ensure that non-carrying of valid identity proof by
mistake by children, women, old persons and poor illiterate persons do not become a
point of undue harassment to them at the hands of railway officials. In such
circumstances, the TTE should exercise sufficient caution as well as diligence to
deal the situation with due regard to the rules.
C. Prosecution and licence cancellation of RTSAs involved in irregularities
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
12. The Committee had noted that Rail Travellers Service Agents (RTSAs) were
the license holder agents authorized by the Ministry of Railways to procure rail tickets
on behalf of passengers by charging nominal service charges from passengers fixed
by the Railways from time to time. The Audit had noticed involvement of RTSAs in
various irregularities as pointed out in the Audit Report. However, the representatives
of RTSAs who appeared before the Committee denied the Audit findings. The
contention was that they had been provided separate counters at the reservation
centers and their agents carry identity cards issued by the Ministry of Railways and
could be caught and their licenses cancelled in case they were found involved in
irregular activities. Notably, in the last five years, no case had been registered against
RTSAs except in Delhi where 9 cases were reported. The Committee had felt that the
RTSAs or their agents could not have continued doing their irregular activities without
active involvement/connivance of the officials manning the PRS. The Committee, had
therefore, desired the Railways to investigate all such cases where RTSAs were involved
in irregularities and take deterrent punitive action against those agents as well as
against the involved officials of the Railways.

5
13. The Ministry of Railways in its Action Taken Notes have stated as under:
"Whenever any RTSA is found involved in any irregularities with or without
the connivance of Railway officials, action is taken against the erring agents
as per provisions of authorisation of RTSA Rules, 1985. Disciplinary
proceedings are also initiated against Railway staff found involved in any
irregularity. Moreover, the transactions of RTSAs are monitored to reduce
the chances of irregularities committeed by them. Moreover, orders have
been passed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court to permit Ministry of Railways to
amend RTSA Rules, 1985 so as to allow RTSAs to book tickets through
internet only."
14. The Committee find the reply of the Ministry as regards action taken against
RTSAs for alleged irregularities as unconvincing and sketchy devoid of relevant
facts.The Ministry have not provided the details of prosecutions and licence
cancellation of RTSAs involved in alleged irregularities in ticket bookings. Again, no
details have been furnished with respect to the number of disciplinary proceedings
initiated against Railway staff and officers involved in irregularities. The Committee is
utterly shocked to observe that despite widespread media reports about irregularities
in ticket bookings by RTSAs, barely 9 cases were reported in last five years that too
from Delhi region. How can the Ministry expect the Committee to be convinced of the
fact that during last 5 years, no irregularity has been found against RTSAs in other
parts of the country. It puts a serious question mark over the enforcement machinery
of railways which is supposed to be vigilant and pro-active in matters in unearthing
the irregularities and taking punitive actions thereafter. The Committee, therefore,
reiterate that RTSAs or their agents could not have continued with their illegal activities
without active connivance of the officials manning PRS. The Committee, therefore,
strongly desire that the Ministry should furnish before it the details pertaining to
number of cases of prosecutions and licence cancellations initiated against RTSAs in
different Railway zones. Ministry may specifically mention in how many cases,
disciplinary proceedings were initiated against railway staff with details of the date of
initiation of the proceedings and present status. A zone wise list should be submitted
along with details of punitive action taken against erring RTSAs as well as Railway
officials. The Committee desire to have a detailed reply as to what system/machinery
the Ministry have in place to check such alleged irregularities.
D.  Disciplinary  action against erring officials conniving with RTSAs and flouting
norms in Kolkata High Court case
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
15. The Committee were informed that the scheme of giving licences to RTSAs
was framed in 1985. They were further informed by the representative of the RTSAs
that there were around 30 travel agents in Kolkata who on the basis of injunction of the
Kolkata High Court given 27 years back were still enjoying full status of RTSA and
operating from there. However, they did not pay any Licence Fee, security deposit/
guarantee and without having any liability. The Railways had reportedly given them a
'counter' also to operate. The Committee were perturbed to know that unauthorised

6
agents without paying any license fee guarantee or security deposit were operating as
Railway agents only on the basis of a stay order given almost three decades back by
the Hon'ble High Court of Calcutta. The Court's stay of operation of the Railways order
did not grant the travel agents the right to flout the terms and conditions that go with
continuing their functioning in the system. As mentioned earlier here too, the obvious
flouting of the terms and conditions by the said travel agents could not have been
continued without the connivance/negligence of the local Railway officials. The
Committee, had therefore, recommended thorough inquiry and initiation of appropriate
disciplinary proceedings against the erring officials. Also the Committee desire to be
apprised about the status of the case within three months from the date of presentation
of the Report to the Parliament including the action taken for review of the stay and
expeditious disposal of the case.
16. The Ministry of Railways in its Action Taken Notes stated as under:
"In pursuance of RTSA Rules, 1985 South Eastern Railway invited applications
from interested parties by issuing a Press Notification on 1.2.1986. Out of
339 applications received, 16 were selected and licensed under the said rules
to act as RTSA. Applicants whose cases were rejected went to Court and in
23 cases the Hon'ble Calcutta High Court issued an interim order in favour of
the applicants to continue their business on the authority of status-quo
orders issued time to time by the Hon'ble High Court without any interruption.
Though affidavits were filed by the Railway in all such cases, the cases did
not come up for final hearing. In one such case, the Court passed order
directing the Railway administration to reassess the number of RTSAs required
to be licensed, keeping in view the increase in train services and passengers
and to issue fresh notification. Till such time the applicants have been allowed
by the Hon'ble Court to continue its business of procuring and supplying of
Railway reserved tickets to its clients.
In the meantime, Zonal Railways were advised not to hold fresh selection of
RTSAs since the existing RTSA Scheme is under review whereby all RTSA
will be barred from entry into the PRS centres. However, efforts are being
made by Eastern and South Eastern Railways to enlist the pending cases for
final hearing and getting the interim orders vacated. Over Eastern Railway, all
except two of Railway advocates dealing with the respective cases have been
depannelled. The remaining two Railway advocates have been engaged for
analogous hearing of the cases by Eastern Railway."
17. While vetting the reply of the Railways the Audit had observed that:
"In case of RTSAs of South Eastern Railway involved in court cases, it was
observed that there are 24 court cases involving RTSAs, but in absence of
the list of the 23 RTSA mentioned in Railway's reply, proper verification is not
possible. As such, list of these 23 RTSA may be furnished. The Ministry in
reply to vetting comments have stated that the list of 23 RTSAs is being
forwarded to Audit."

7
18. The Committee were dismayed to note that 24 RTSAs, without any Licence
Fee, security deposit/guarantee and without any liability, are operating from the
Railway premises on the basis of injunction of the Kolkata High Court given 27 years
back. A giant Government Department like the Railways could not even enlist the
pending court cases and plead the case appropriately to ensure justice. The Committee,
therefore, desire details of the measures taken in chronological order to get the stay
vacated and the steps being taken presently to remedy the situation. The Ministry
may also clarify the reasons for delay in making amendment in RTSA Rules, 1985 as
per hon'ble Supreme Court judgement. The Committee are of the considered view
that such blatant flouting of norms may not be possible without connivance of local
railway officials. The Committee, therefore, recommends that an appropriate enquiry
should be conducted and disciplinary proceedings be initiated against the staff/
officials responsible. The Committee, would also like the Ministry to submit the
status report regarding details of inquiries conducted and disciplinary proceedings
launched and action taken against the railways officials responsible for the flouting
of norms.

CHAPTER   II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  WHICH  HAVE  BEEN  ACCEPTED
BY  GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
The Committee note that advance reservation system was introduced in Indian
Railways to facilitate passengers to book their tickets in advance. The scheme of
Tatkal reservation was introduced by the Railways in December, 1997 to provide
reservation facility to those passengers who could not plan their journey in advance.
This facility is available on payment of  premium charges on 'first-come-first-served'
basis. Advance reservation of tickets can be done from 08.00 hrs. to 20.00 hrs. and
Tatkal booking from 10.00 hrs. to 20.00 hrs. through Passenger Reservation System
(PRS) and Indian Railways Catering and Tourism Corporation (IRCTC) website/
agents. Audit scrutiny of the functioning of Tatkal and Advance Reservation System
revealed that genuine users, for whom the scheme was intended, were unable to avail
the facility with ease as it was susceptible to manipulation. Audit pointed out
irregularities in booking of tickets through PRS counters; booking of all Tatkal
quota within a few minutes of opening of reservation; irregular booking by Reservation
Clerk, connivance of railway agents and Booking Clerks; irregular booking through
internet and authorized railway agents. During examination of the subject, the
Committee wire informed that the scheme of Tatkal reservation has been revised with
effect from November, 2011 and major modifications have been made with a view to
minimize the chances of misuse of Tatkal scheme. These changes inter-alia include
production of self attested photo copy of proof of identity mentioned in the scheme;
reduction from two days to one day (excluding the day of journey) for booking of
Tatkal tickets; booking of only four passengers per PNR; denying access to the
authorised agents during the first two hours of the opening of booking both through
internet as well as across the computerized PRS counters. The Committee have also
been informed that with effect from 10th July, 2012 the timing of opening of reservation
of Tatkal tickets has been changed to 10.00 hours instead of 08.00 hours as per
earlier provision and web service agents have been permitted to book only one Tatkal
ticket per train per day on internet that too after 12.00 hours. While taking note of
the measures taken by the Ministry post audit scrutiny. The Committee would like to
be apprised about the implementation of these measures and desired impact thereof
within three months of the presentation of this report.
[Part-II, Sl. No. 1, Para No. 1 of 80th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
8

9
Action Taken
In addition to the measures indicated in the report of PAC, following measures
have been taken by the Railways to reduce the scope of misuse of Tatkal scheme:—
(i) Requisition forms of different colours have been provided by some Zonal
Railways for booking Tatkal tickets to ensure its easy identification.
(ii) Adequate number of Commercial/Vigilance & RPF/GRP are posted at major
reservation offices to keep a watch on the activities of touts/anti social
elements.
The measures enumerated in the report have been effectively implemented. The
impact of these measures is evident from the following:—
(i) An analysis of checks conducted at the reservation offices reveals that there
is a drastic drop in the number of cases of travelling on transferred tickets,
which has been reduced by 61%.
(ii) The steps taken by Indian Railways to curb m alpractices in Tatkal scheme
have to a larger extent been appreciated by the Rail users as reported by
Zonal Railways.
Audit vide their U.O.I. No. 347-Rly/TBA/Tatkal/12-137/2010 Vol. II
dated 31.03.2014 have vetted the Action Taken Note.
Sd/-
(V. V aidehi)
Exe. Director Finance (BC)
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2013-BC-PAC/XV/80 dated 22.04.2014]
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Committee note that Tatkal and advance Reservation could also be booked
through IRCTC's website. The test check of accessibility of IRCTC server revealed
that during login of IRCTC's website exactly at 08.00 hours on the day of Advance
Reservation Period, the system would hang seemingly due to insufficient capacity of
the server to meet the growing requirement of net users. Admitting that the system was
prone to malfunctioning, the representative of the Ministry submitted that entire PRS
system and e-ticketing has been developed for Tatkal which will be rolled out in one/
two months as the last stage work was going on. Since the use of e-ticketing facility is
catching up fast among passengers due to its inherent ease and convenience, the
Committee recommend that the capacity of the internet bandwidth and IRCTC server
should be upgraded by installing high capacity server so that the system is able to
cope up with the surge in online bookings. The high capacity server should be installed
after conducting 'load testing' for easy access of users. Further, the Committee hope
that the new software which the Ministry proposes to roll out, would have the latest
features with fast search engine; blocking of in-active session, etc.
[Part-II, Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2 of 80th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]

10
Action Taken
Recommendations of the Committee have been noted. The new Generation
e-ticketing system will have the capacity for booking 7 lakh tickets per day.
Audit vide their U.O.I. No. 347-RlY./TBA/Tatkal/12-137/2010 Vol. II
dated 31.03.2014 have vetted the Action Taken Note.
Sd/-
(V. V aidehi)
Exe. Director Finance (BC)
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2013-BC-PAC/XV/80 dated 22.04.2014]
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
Notably, as a commercial policy, Railways appoint Rail Travellers' Service Agents
(RTSAs) and Railway Tourist Agents for booking of tickets on payment of prescribed
charges. However, no separate quotas have been assigned to these agents and there
are separate counters at major stations for agents for booking tickets. Initially appointed
for three years, the licenses of these RTSAs are renewed subject to satisfaction of
local Railway administration. What has surprised the Committee is that though the
RTSAs are appointed by the Railways, yet there is no provision in the computerized
Passenger Reservation System (PRS) for identification of RTSA to keep the records/
transactions of bookings made by the agents. The representative of the Ministry
testified before the Committee that effective from July, 2012 authorized agents have
been denied access to Tatkal accommodation both through internet as well as across
the computerized PRS counters during the first two hours of opening of booking.
Further, web service agents are allowed to book only one Tatkal ticket on his ID per
train per day on internet after 1200 hours. The Committee are of the considered view
that the PRS need further orientation and therefore, recommend that the Ministry
should take immediate measures to deactivate multiple user IDs of agents so that they
are unable to manipulate the booking process. In order to keep a stringent check on the
activities of RTSAs and website agents, the feasibility of issuing digitized ID needs
examination to identify the tickets booked so that the scheme is not abused. Further,
inspection of transactions done by RTSAs'/website agents' should be done at regular
intervals to ensure that the licenses of only those RTSAs are renewed who comply
with the prescribed procedure.
[Part-II, Sl. No. 4, Para No. 4 of 80th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Indian Railway Catering & Tourism Corporation (IRCTC) has already taken a
large number of measures to reduce the chances of misuse of reservation system by
e-ticketing agents (including RTSAs who have been registered for selling e-tickets)
which are as under:—
(i) The agents of IRCTC are permitted to book only one Tatkal ticket per train per
day on the internet.

11
(ii) There have been reports of use of scripting software for pre-filling of online
reservation forms and there by booking tickets faster. Several checks have
been put on the website of IRCTC to prevent such activities. An IT-Anti
Fraud Squad has also been formed at Internet Ticketing Centre to detect
cases of fraud and fraudulent activity. In order to address this issue, the
following steps have been taken by IRCTC:—
a. "Captcha" has been put and strengthened for booking in the 'Plan My
Travel' to check fraudulent booking through automation software.
b. Only two tickets can be booked per IP address between 1000 hours and
1200 hours. IP address check has helped in preventing multiple bookings
from same office complex/internet cafe/machine, etc. This also helps in
facilitating bookings by genuine users and prevents bookings for
commercial gains.
c. Single session per user ID check has been implemented w.e.f.  26.5.2012.
With this step, a user on irctc.co.in will be able to open his account for
booking of e-tickets only once at a time. Multiple sessions with single
user ID cannot be opened simultaneously, thus enabling maximum users
to access website and reduce congestion.
d. On payments initiated before 1000 hours booking of Tatkal tickets through
the internet has been disallowed.
e. Agents of IRCTC are not permitted to book Tatkal, ARP opening as well
as normal tickets between 0800 hours and 1200 hours.
f. Quick Book Option has been disallowed between 0800 hours and
1200 hours. Cash Cards have been disallowed between 0800 hours and
1200 hours.
g. Individual users are permitted to book only two tickets between
1000 hours and 1200 hours.
h. For all customers who have booked tickets between 1000 hours &
1005 hours, telephonic enquiries are being made by IT Anti Fraud team
of IRCTC for cross checking validity of the booking and the travelling
passenger.
i. User IDs of Agents found to be involved in irregularities have been
deactivated by IRCTC.
j. The Security Aaudit, Process Audit and Functional Audit of e-ticketing
system has been conducted through STQC (Standardization, Testing
and Quality Certification), Department of Information Technology (DIT),
Government of India.
(iii) As regards RTSAs, Hon'ble Supreme Court has passed the orders to permit
Ministry of Railways to amend RTSA Rules, 1985 so as to allow RTSAs to
book tickets through internet only. Once this provision is implemented by
amending the existing Rules, they will be required to purchase a class 3

12
personal digital certificate from any Indian certifying authority for their
authorised user (only one authorised user will be permitted). The details of
which will be provided to them by IRCTC.
In case of violation of any condition of the proposed Rules, suitable action will
be taken against defaulting RTSAs and the action may include suspension/termination/
deactivation of ID.
In the RTSAs Rules, there is already a provision for inspection of the premises
and records of RTSAs by the competent authority or any officer authorised by him.
Audit vide their U.O.I. No. 347-Rly./TBA/Tatkal/12-137/2010 Vol. II
dated 31.03.2014 have vetted the Action Taken Note.
Sd/-
(V. V aidehi)
Exe. Director Finance (BC)
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2013-BC-PAC/XV/80 dated 22.04.2014]
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The Committee note that the computerized PRS software has been modified to
establish passenger identity so as to overcome proxy travel. While welcoming the
measures taken by the Railways to establish passengers' identification, the Committee
recommend that carrying a proof of identity while travelling in reserved accommodation
in trains should be made mandatory for all passengers to keep a check on passengers
travelling on transferred tickets. The Committee, therefore, recommend that necessary
instructions in this regard may be issued at the earliest, the situation monitored regularly
and the procedures updated for the successful operation of the scheme and they be
apprised within three months from the date of presentation of this report.
[Part-II, Sl. No. 5, Para No. 5 of 80th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The carrying of proof of identity while travelling in all classes of reserved
accommodation has been made mandatory w.e.f. 01.12.2012. As per these instructions,
in case of reserved ticket (except Tatkal) any one of the passenger has to produce any
one of the prescribed proof of identity (in original) during the journey failing which all
the passengers are treated as travelling without ticket. In case of Tatkal ticket, the
passenger has to carry the same Identity Proof in original, which is indicated on the
ticket.
Audit vide their U.O.I. No. 347-Rly./TBA/Tatkal/12-137/2010 Vol. II
dated 31.03.2014 have vetted the Action Taken Note.
Sd/-
(V. V aidehi)
Exe. Director Finance (BC)
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2013-BC-PAC/XV/80 dated 22.04.2014]

13
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The Committee were informed that the scheme of giving licences to RTSAs was
framed in 1985. They were further informed by the representatives of the RTSAs that
there were around 30 travel agents in Kolkata who on the basis of injunction of the
Kolkata High Court given 27 years back are still enjoying full status of RTSA and
operating from there. However, they do not pay any Licence Fee, security deposit/
guarantee and without having any liability. The Railways has reportedly given them a
'counter' also to operate. The Committee are perturbed to know that unauthorised
agents without paying any license fee, guarantee or security deposit are operating as
Railways agents only on the basis of a stay order given almost three decades back by
the Hon'ble High Court of Kolkata. The Court's stay of operation of the Railways order
does not grant the travel agents the right to flout the terms and conditions that go with
continuing their functioning in the system. As mentioned earlier here too, the obvious
flouting of the terms and conditions by the said travel agents could not have been
continued without the connivance/negligence of the local Railway officials. The
Committee, therefore, recommend through inquiry and initiation of appropriate
disciplinary proceedings against the erring officials. Also the Committee would like to
be apprised about the status of the case within three months from the date of
presentation of the Report to the Parliament including the action taken for review of
the stay and expeditious disposal of the case.
[Part-II, Sl. No. 8, Para No. 8 of 80th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
In pursuance of RTSA Rules, 1985, South Eastern Railway invited applications
from interested parties by issuing a Press Notification on 1.2.1986. Out of
339 applications received, 16 were selected and licensed under the said rules to act as
RTSA. Applicants whose cases were rejected went to Court and in 23 cases the Hon'ble
Kolkata High Court issued an interim order in favour of the applicants to continue their
business on the authority of status-quo orders issued time to time by the Hon'ble High
Court without any interruption.
Though affidavits were filed by the Railway in all such cases, the cases did not
come up for final hearing. In one such case, the Court passed order directing the
Railway administration to reassess the number of RTSAs required to be licensed,
keeping in view the increase in train services and passengers and to issue fresh
notification. Till such time the applicants have been allowed by the Hon'ble Court to
continue its business of procuring and supplying of Railway reserved tickets to its
clients.
In the meantime, Zonal Railways were advised not to hold fresh selection of
RTSAs since the existing RTSA Scheme is under review whereby all RTSA will be
barred from entry into the PRS centres.
However, efforts are being made by Eastern and South Eastern Railways to
enlist the pending cases for final hearing and getting the interim orders vacated. Over
Eastern Railway, all except two of Railway advocates dealing with the respective cases

14
have been depanelled. The remaining two Railway Advocates have been engaged for
analogous hearing of the cases by Eastern Railway.
Audit vide their U.O.I. No. 347-Rly./TBA/Tatkal/12-137/2010 Vol. II,
dated 31.03.2014 have vetted the Action Taken with following remarks:
"The Action T aken by the Railway Administration on the observations/
recommendations of the PAC may be treated as vetted. However, in case of
RTSAs of South Eastern Railway involved in court cases, it was observed
that there are 24 court cases involving RTSAs, but in absence of the list of the
23 RTSA mentioned in Railway's reply, proper verification is not possible. As
such, list of these 23 RTSA may be furnished."
Ministry's Comments
The list of 23 RTSA is being forwarded to Audit.
Sd/-
(V. V aidehi)
Exe. Director Finance (BC)
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2013-BC-PAC/XV/80, dated 22.04.2014]
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Committee observe that Railways have introduced a scheme wherein certain
Post Offices will be providing Railway Tickets through counters operated by the
Railway staff. This, in the considered view of the Committee, will strain the already
depleted financial resources of the Railways. It would also entail payment of salaries,
safeguarding the cash and transportation of cash, etc. The Committee would, therefore,
like the Railways to review the scheme and consider to sale the Railway tickets by the
counters operated by the staff of Postal Department on nominal commission basis,
being more sound financial proposition and a win-win situation for both of them.
Alternatively, the Railways may consider allotting terminals to RTSAs or other
agents who may issue tickets by charging nominal fees as may be fixed by the Railways.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken within three months of
the presentation of this Report.
[Part-II, Sl. No. 9, Para No. 9 of 80th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
At present, the facility of providing reserved tickets through the computerised
PRS terminals provided in Post Offices is available at around 241 locations. Under this
scheme, the Railways bear the expenditure for provision of hardware, software and the
cost of leased line. The cost for provision of infrastructure and manning of these
counters is being borne by Department of Posts.
As regards provision of computerised PRS terminals to RTSAs, the position has
already been clarified above in reply to para 7 above.

15
Audit vide their U.O.I. No. 347-Rly./TBA/Tatkal/12-137/2010 Vol. II,
dated 31.03.2014 have vetted the Action Taken Note.
Sd/-
(V. V aidehi)
Exe. Director Finance (BC)
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2013-BC-PAC/XV/80, dated 22.04.2014]

CHAPTER  III
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  WHICH  THE  COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES
RECEIVED FROM THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee are deeply concerned that running of special trains is announced
at a notice of shorter duration during festivals/rush seasons like Holi, Durga Pooja,
Diwali, Chhat, Eid, Christmas, summer vacations, etc. The delay in announcement of
special trains deprive general public an opportunity to plan their journey and get a
confirmed reservation. It also results in loss of revenue to Railways due to less
occupancy of such trains. According to the Ministry, summer special trains are
planned in advance and the time table of these special trains is also published. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that information regarding running of special/
new trains during festivals/rush seasons should be announced sufficiently in advance
and given wide publicity so that the Railways earn more revenue besides fulfilling the
Citizen's Charter on Passengers Services of Indian Railways.
[Part-II, Sl.No. 3, Para No. 3 of 80th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
For introduction of special trains during Summer Season and Diwali/Durga Pooja
initiatives have usually been taken to notify the same well in advance for facilitating
booking of train tickets by general public. However, during special events, requirement/
demand normally comes at short notice from various corners. Moreover, introduction
of such special trains largely depend upon availability of coaching stock, haulage
confirmation from concerned railways and other operational parameters and, therefore,
notification for special trains in many cases does not become practically possible to be
issued much in advance.
Audit vide their U.O.I. No. 347-Rly./TBAT/Tatkal/12-137/2010 Vol. II,
dated 31.03.2014 have vetted the Action Taken Note.
Sd.
(V. V aidehi)
Exe. Director Finance (BC)
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2013-BC-PAC/XV/80, dated 22.04.2014]
16

17
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
The Committee note that the Ministry of Railways conceptualized
"Computerized Ticket Service Provider Licence (CTSPL) Scheme". Under this
scheme 3 RTSAs in Mumbai given terminals on experimental basis in 2002. The
Scheme was, however, subsequently discontinued, ostensibly due to opposition from
the Federation/Trade Unions in the interest of ensuring positive industrial relations
despite the good return in terms of revenue the Scheme brought to the Railways. The
Committee note that the scheme was convenient to the public and beneficial to the
Railways as well. The CTSPL scheme was introduced around 10-12 years back when
not many people were using internet/mobile for buying tickets. Now, almost half of
the Rail tickets issued are booked through the internet. However, considering the
fact that half of the Railway Tickets booked even now are done manually or through
agents and that the reach of Computer with internet facility is largely confined to
urban middle and upper classes, the Committee recommend that the Railways
reconsider re-introduction of CTSPL scheme and provide terminals/IDs to RTSAs
particularly in smaller towns where booking facilities are lacking and the facility of
internet is not available to every family. Moreover, keeping in view the fact that almost
50% of the tickets are presently booked through internet, the Committee see no
reason for any opposition to such a move which would be beneficial to the people and
the Railways as well.
[Part-II, Sl. No. 7, Para No. 7 of 80th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
(i) The scheme of Computerized Ticket Service Provider Licencee (CTSPL) was
introduced in the year 2000 when there was no concept of internet ticketing.
(ii) The concept of internet ticketing was introduced in 2002 (i-ticket) and the
concept of e-ticketing was introduced in the year 2005. Thereafter, this scheme
has become very popular and now approximately 45% of the tickets booked
are e-tickets.
(iii) In the month of September, 2013, around 60% of the total reserved tickets
booked were through internet.
(iv) Approximately 1 lakh agents are already issuing reserved tickets through
computerised reservation system of Indian Railways through internet. Earlier
there was no concept of internet ticketing and hence, physical terminals were
provided to the RTSAs.
(v) Moreover, a large number of steps have been taken by the Railways which
include:—
* Proliferation of computerised PRS centers to approximately 2653 locations.
* For those locations in far-flung areas having less number of transactions,
computerised PRS-Cum-UTS terminals have been provided.

18
* The facility of issuing reserved tickets has also been provided in
approximately 241 Post Offices.
* SMS based ticketing has also been started which facilities booking of
e-tickets even through mobile phones which do not have internet facility.
Keeping in view the facts quoted above, it is clearly evident that in the present
scenario, there is no need to re-introduce the scheme of CTSPL.
Audit vide their U.O.I. No. 347-Rly./TBA/Tatkal/12-137/2010 Vol. II,
dated 31.03.2014 have vetted the Action Taken Note.
Sd./-
(V. V aidehi)
Exe. Director Finance (BC)
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2013-BC-PAC/XV/80 dated 22.04.2014]

CHAPTER  IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  IN  RESPECT  OF  WHICH  REPLIES
 OF  THE  GOVERNMENT  HAVE  NOT  BEEN  ACCEPTED  BY  THE
COMMITTEE  AND  WHICH  REQUIRE  REITERATION
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee note that Rail Travellers Service Agents (RTSAs) are the license
holder agents authorized by the Ministry of Railways to procure Rail tickets on
behalf of passengers by charging nominal service charges from passengers fixed by
the Railways from time to time. The Audit has noticed involvement of RTSAs in
various irregularities as pointed out in the Audit Report. However, the representatives
of RTSAs who appeared before the Committee denied the Audit findings. The
contention is that they have been provided separate counters at the reservation centers
and their agents carry identity cards issued by the Ministry of Railways and can be
caught and their licenses cancelled in case they are found involved in irregular
activities. Notably, in the last five years, no case has been registered against RTSAs
except in Delhi where 9 cases were reported. The Committee feel that the RTSAs or
their agents could not have continued doing their irregular activities without active
involvement/connivance of the officials manning the PRS. The Committee, therefore,
desire the Railways to investigate all such cases where RTSAs are involved in
irregularities and take deterrent punitive action against those agents as well as
against the involved officials of the Railways.
[Part-II,  Sl. No. 6, Para No. 6,  of  80th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Whenever any RTSA is found involved in any irregularities with or without the
connivance of Railways officials, action is taken against the erring agents as per
provisions of authorisation of RTSA Rules, 1985. Disciplinary proceedings are also
initiated against Railway staff found involved in any irregularity. Moreover, the
transactions of RTSAs are monitored to reduce the chances of irregularities committed
by them.
Moreover, orders have been passed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court to permit
Ministry of Railways to amend RTSA Rules, 1985 so as to allow RTSAs to book tickets
through internet only.
19

20
Audit vide their U.O.I. No. 347-Rly./ TBA/Tatkal/12-137/2010 Vol. II,
dated 31.03.2014 have vetted the Action Taken Note.
Sd.
(V. V aidehi)
Exe. Director Finance (BC)
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2013-BC-PAC/XV/80 dated 22.04.2014]

CHAPTER  V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  IN  RESPECT  OF  WHICH
GOVERNMENT  HAVE  FURNISHED  INTERIM REPLIES
—NIL—
NEW DELHI; PROF. K.V. THOMAS,
17 December, 2014 Chairperson,
26 Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
21

APPENDIX  I
MINUTES  OF  THE  ELEVENTH  SITTING  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE  (2014-15)  HELD  ON  9TH  DECEMBER, 2014
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 9th December, 2014 from 1500 hrs. to
1730  hrs. in Committee Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. K.V . Thomas — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
3. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank"
4. Shri  Neiphiu Rio
5. Shri Dushyant Singh
6. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
7. Shri Kirit Somaiya
Rajya Sabha
8. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya
9. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
S
ECRETARIA T
1.  Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2.  Smt. Anita B. Panda — Director
3.  Shri Jayakumar T. — Additional Director
Representatives from the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri P. Mukherjee — Dy. CAG
2. Shri S. Nandeolkar — Director General (Rlys.)
3. Shri L.S. Singh — Principal Director
4. Shri P. Tiwary — Principal Director
2.  At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the representatives
of the Office of the C&AG of India to the Committee. The Chairperson then apprised
the Members that the meeting has been convened to consider and adopt two Draft
Reports, and to take oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs
on the subject 'Disaster Preparedness in India' based on C&AG Report No. 5 of 2013.
22

23
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up the following Draft Reports for consideration:
(a) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Eightieth Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on "Tatkal and Advance Reservation System in
Indian Railways".
(b) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Eighty-second
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on "Sale and Distribution of Imported
Pulses".
4. After some discussions, the Committee adopted both the Draft Reports with
minor modifications.
5. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairperson to finalise the two Reports
adopted by them, in light of their suggestions and factual verifications received from
the Audit and present the same to the House on a date convenient to him.

APPENDIX II
(Vide Para 5 of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR EIGHTIETH REPORT
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations 9
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government
Para Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 8 and 9
Total: 6
Percentage: 66.66
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the reply of the Government
Para Nos. 3 and 7
Total: 2
Percentage: 22.22
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration
Para No. 6
Total: 1
Percentage: 11.11
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government have
furnished interim replies
—NIL—
Total: 0
Percentage: 0
GMGIPMRND—4071LS(S3)—24.02.2015.
24

PARLIAMENTARY PUBLICATIONS CAN ALSO BE OBTAINED FROM THE
FOLLOWING  AUTHORISED  AGENTS:—
Sl.No. Name of Agent Sl .No. Name of Agent
ANDHRA  PRADESH
1. M/s. Ashok Book Centre, Benz Circle,
Vasavya Nagar, Vijaywada-520 006
(AP).
BIHAR
2. M/s. Progressive Book Centre, Zila
School, Pani Tanki Chowk, Ramna,
Muzaffarpur-842 002 (Bihar).
DELHI
3. M/s. Jain Book Agency, C-9,
Prem  House, Connaught Place,
P .B. No. 1113, New Delhi-110 001.
4. M/s. Bookwell, 2/72, Sant Nirankari
Colony, Kingsway Camp,
Delhi-110 009.
5. M/s. Rajendra Book Agency,
IV-D-50, Lajpat Nagar, Old Double
Storey, New Delhi-110 024
(T. Nos. 26412362 & 26412131).
6. M/s. Central News Agency Pvt. Ltd.,
P-23, Connaught Circus,
New Delhi-110 001.
7. The Manager, M/s. Books India
Corporation, Publishers, Importers &
Exporters, L-27, Shastri Nagar,
Delhi-110 052.
8. M/s. Sangam Book Depot, LG-3,
Akarshan Bhawan, 23, Ansari Road,
Darya Ganj, New Delhi-110 002.
9. M/s. Biblia Impex Pvt. Ltd., 2/18,
Ansari Road, New Delhi-110 002
(T.No. 23262515).
10. M/s. Universal Book Traders, 80,
Gokhale Market, Opp. New Courts,
Delhi-110 054 (T. No. 23911966).
11. M/s. Seth & Co., Room No. 31D,
Block-B, Delhi High Court, Sher Shah
Road, New Delhi-110 003.
12. M/s. Dhanwantra Medical & Law
House, 592, Lajpat Rai Market,
Delhi-110 006 (T. No. 23866768).
13. M/s. Jayna Book Depot, Chowk
Chhapparwala, Bank Street, Karol
Bagh, New  Delhi-110 005.
14. M/s. Standard Book Co., 125,
Municipal Market, Connaught Place,
P .B. No. 708, New Delhi-110 001
(T. No. 23411919).
15. M/s. D.K. Agencies (P) Ltd.,
A/15-17, Mohan Garden,
Najafgarh  Road, New Delhi-110 059.
16. M/s. Vijay Book Service,  C-D/123/C,
Pitam Pura, New Delhi-110 034.
MADHYA  PRADESH
17. M/s. Suvidha Law House, 28, Malviya
Nagar, Roshanpura, Bhopal-462 003.
MAHARASHTRA
18. M/s. Usha Book Depot, 585/A,
Chitra Bazar, Khan House, P.B. No.
2621, Mumbai-400 002.
19. M/s. Jaina Book Agency (India),
649-A, Girgaum Road, Opp. 2nd
Dhobi Talao Lane, Mumbai-400 002.
PUDUCHERRY
20. Editor of Debates, Legislative
Assembly Department,
Puducherry-605 001.
TAMIL NADU
21. M/s. M.M. Subscription Agencies,
123, Third Street, Tatabad,
Coimbatore-641 012.
22. M/s. C. Sitaraman & Co., 73/37,
Royappettah High Road,
Chennai-600 014.
UTTAR  PRADESH
23. M/s. Law Publishers, Sardar Patel
Marg, P.B. No. 1077, Allahabad (UP).
24. M/s. Ram Advani Bookseller, Mayfair
Building, Hazrat Ganj,  GPO Box
No. 154, Lucknow-226 001.
PRINTED BY THE GENERAL MANAGER, GOVT. OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI.