 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY 
(DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE) 
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
NEW DELHInew LY  
 
REPORT 
8_ 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
  INEFFECTIVE MONITORING BY APEDA 
123 

 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
     
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
         
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
  
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY 
(DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE) 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on: ……………….. 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on: ……………….. 
 
 
L O K    S A B H A    S E C R E T A R I A T 
N E W  D E L H I  
 
December, 2018/          Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
INEFFECTIVE MONITORING BY APEDA 
PAC NO. 2162           

CONTENTS 
 
  PAGE 
NO. 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2018-19)       
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2017-18)       
INTRODUCTION  
 PART - I  
 CHAPTER - I 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I Introductory  
II Agriculture and Processed Food Products Export Development 
Authority (APEDA) and Spices Board (SB). 
 
III Background on ineffective monitoring by APEDA  
IV Note on Ineffective monitoring by APEDA  
V  Accounting for loss in the Project  
VI Response on the issue raised  
VII ASIDE Guidelines and TIES  
   
 PART - II  
 Observations/recommendations of the Committee  
 APPENDICES  
I. Minutes of the Ninth sitting of the Public Accounts Committee 
(2018-19) held on 11 July, 2018 
 
II.* Minutes of the Twentieth sitting of the  Public Accounts 
Committee (2018-19) held on 5 December, 2018 
 
 
 
*  To be appended at the time of Printing. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2018-19) 
 
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge   - Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria  
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra 
5.    Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar   
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
7. Smt. Riti Pathak 
8. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank” 
9. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
10. Shri Abhishek Singh 
11. Shri Gopal Shetty 
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya  
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
15. Dr. Ponnusamy  Venugopal 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
16. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda 
17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
18. Shri Shwait Malik 
19. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
21. Shri C.M.Ramesh 
22. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A.K. Singh       - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri T. JayaKumar - Director 
3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja     -            Deputy Secretary 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2017-18) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1 Ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon acceptance of his r esignation from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 22 
February, 2018.  
2 Elected w.e.f. 29 December, 2017 in lieu of vacancy caused due to retirement of Shri Shantaram Naik.   
3 ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 18 August, 2017 and 
re-elected w.e.f. 29 December, 2017. 
  
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge   - Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra 
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey 
6. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar   
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
8. Smt. Riti Pathak 
9. Shri Neiphiu Rioh1 
10. Shri Abhishek Singh 
11. Prof. Ram Shanker 
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi 
15. Dr. P. Venugopal 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
16. Shri Naresh Agrawal 
17. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
18. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
19. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan2 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy3 
21. Shri Ajay Sancheti 
22. Shri Bhupender Yadav 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (201 8-19), having been authorised by  
the Committee, do present this One Hundred and Twenty-third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 
'Ineffective Monitoring by APEDA'  based on Para No. 7.1 of C&AG Report No. 12 of 2017  
relating to the Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Department of Commerce).   
 
2. The C&AG Report No. 12 of 2017 was laid on the Table of the House on 21 July, 2017.  
 
3. The Public Accounts Committee (PAC) selected Para 7.1 of C&AG Report No. 12 of 
2017 for examination in 2017-18 and was further selected and examined by PAC in 2018-19.  
 
4. The Public Accounts Committee (2018 -19) took oral evidence of the representatives of 
Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Depa rtment of Commerce) on aforementioned para on 11 
July,2018 
 
5. The Public Accounts Committee (2018 -19) considered and adopted the One Hundred 
and Twenty-third Report on the afore-mentioned para from C&AG Report at their sitting held on 
5 December, 2018.  The Minutes of the sittings are appended to the Report.  
 
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part II of the Report. 
 
7. The Committee would like to expre ss their thanks to the representatives of the Ministry 
of Commerce and Industry (Department of Commerce)  for tendering evidence before them and 
furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in connection with the examination of the 
subject. 
  
8. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to 
them in the matter by the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                Mallikarjun Kharge 
13 December, 2018                                                                                            Chairperson                                                           
22 Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)                                                           Public Accounts Committe 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
PART I 
I  INTRODUCTORY 
 The Para No.  7.1 of C&AG Report No. 12 of 2017 on APEDA deals with 
“Ineffective monitoring by APEDA”  that resulted in  non-utilisation of grants for the 
intended purpose.  The Audit has pointed out that Agriculture and Processed Food 
Products Export Development Authority  (APEDA) sustained a loss of ` 1.77 crore 
towards interest payable on funds received from Ministry of Co mmerce & Industry 
(MoCI), as an identical clause for levy of interest was not inserted in the Memorandum 
of Understanding (MoU) signed with Spices Board (SB).  The Public Accounts 
Committee (201 8-19) understand that MoCI launched Assistance to States for 
Developing Export Infrastructure and Allied Activities ( ASIDE) Scheme in March, 2002 
with an objective to involve the States in the growth of export by providing incentive -
linked assistance to the State Governments and to create appropriate infrastructure for 
the development and growth of exports.   
II.  Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development 
Authority (APEDA) and Spices Board (SB): 
2. The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority 
(APEDA), under the MoCI,  was established by the Government of India under the 
Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Act passed by 
the Parliament in December, 1985.  APEDA is engaged in development of industries 
relating to scheduled products for exp ort, registration of persons as exporters, fixing of 
standards and specifications of scheduled products, improving packaging and its 
marketing apart from providing financial assistance to exporters under various schemes 
viz. transport assistance, market de velopment, infrastructure development, quality 
development etc . Spices Board  (SB) India , an autonomous body, constituted in 
February, 1987 under the Spices Board Act 1986 is one of the five Commodity Boards 
functioning under the MoCI and is responsible for  the export promotion of the 52 
scheduled spices and development of Cardamon (Small and Large). 

3. The Public Accounts Committee  (2018-19) while examining  Chapter VII , Para 
No. 7.1 of C&AG Report No. 12 of 2017 undertook oral evidence of the Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry during their sitting held on 11 July, 2018. 
III. Background on ineffective monitoring by APEDA  
4. As per Audit , Ministry of Commerce & Industry (MoCI) approved a proposal 
(August 2010) submitted by Spices Board (SB) for setting up Spices Park  in Guna, 
Madhya Pradesh under the scheme 'Assistance to States for Developing Export 
Infrastructure and Allied Activities (ASIDE)'. The total cost of the project was ` 45.19 
crore in which the contribution of Government of India was ` 19.00 crore. As per funding 
pattern issued by MoCI in May 2011, APEDA was to contribute ` 6.12 crore ( ` 3.06 
crore in two phases) towards construction of cold storage of 3000 MT capacity. The 
project was to be completed by 31 March, 2013. In compliance with the abo ve 
directions of MoCI, APEDA approved in its 71st meeting held on 24 -06-2011, financial 
assistance of ` 6.12 crore to be released to Spices Board for setting up of cold storage 
of 3000 MT (six modules –three modules in each phase and each module of size 675  
sqm having 500 MT capacity) at Spices Park, Guna, M.P. under the scheme for 
Infrastructure Development. The Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was executed 
between APEDA and SB on 5 January, 2012. 
5.   Consequently, APEDA released total amount of ` 5.79 crore to Spices B oard, i.e. 
first instalment of ` 3.06 crore in February 2012 and second instalment of ` 2.73 crore in 
March 2013 (including an amount of ` 0.29 crore towards processing fee). Spices Board 
informed APEDA (July, 2016) that a cold storage of 374 MT capacity has been created 
(instead of 3000 MT capacity envisaged as per approval). Considering pro -rata cost of 
the capacity so created as ` 0.80 crore only, APEDA requested (August and October 
2016) Spices Board t o refund the balance amount of ` 4.99 crore (i.e. total amount 
released by APEDA ` 5.79 crore less the pro -rata cost of ` 0.80 crore of cold storage 
constructed). Spices Board refunded (November 2016) the unutilised amount of ` 3.84 
crore to APEDA. 
 

6. Audit made following observations on the issue:  
(i) As per Para 2(b) of the MoU with SB, second instalment was to be released by 
APEDA in the financial year 2012 -13, only after obtaining Utilisation Certificate 
(UC) in the format GFR 19A, for first instalment of ` 3.06 crore. However, APEDA 
released the second installment of ` 2.73 crore (31 March 2013) against a UC 
received from Spices Board which certified that the grant received earlier has 
been utilised for the purpose of establishment of warehouse/cold storage . 
APEDA ignored the fact that the grant was approved only for cold storage and 
released second instalment against the above mentioned UC, in contravention of 
the provisions of Para 4 of the MoU which stipulated that the funds or facility shall 
not be diverted or utilised for the purpose other than for which it was sanctioned. 
APEDA also did not monitor effectively the progress of the project on monthly 
/quarterly basis. Moreover, a clause for furnishing of such periodical progress 
reports by SB was also not  included in the MoU. APEDA came to know only in 
August 2013, when it conducted physical verification of project, that the 
infrastructure created at project was not in accordance with the MoU as instead 
of constructing cold storage, warehouses were constructed at the project.  
(ii) A monitoring committee comprising representatives of Spices Board, APEDA, 
State Agriculture/Horticulture Department and APEDA Registered exporters was 
to be constituted in terms of Para 7 of MoU, to oversee the efficient function ing of 
the facility and to play advisory  role. Accordingly, Spices Board nominated their 
representative to the committee on 6 February  2012 itself, i.e. before release of 
1st installment of ` 3.06 crore by APEDA and, subsequently, constituted the 
committee in January 2013 wherein name of representative of APEDA was also 
given. First meeting of the Committee was also held on 28 February, 2013, 
however, APEDA was unaware of these developments till May 2013.  
(iii) While releasing (September 2010) 1 st installment of GoI contribution for the 
project, MoCI had directed to include necessary penal clause in the contract with 
the implementing agency, so that the project is not delayed. The same was, 
however, not included in MoU (January 2012) between APEDA and SB. APEDA, 

however did not insist for inclusion of such a clause in the MoU entered with SB, 
though, in some of MoUs entered by APEDA with other implementing agencies, 
during the same period, contained specific penalty clause. Thus in absence of a 
penal clause in MoU, there was no urgency on SB to get the project completed in 
a time bound manner.  
(iv) MoCI order for release of grant for creation of capital assets (February 2012 
and January 2013) clearly stated at Clause (xvii) that ‘in the event of APEDA 
failing to comply with terms and conditions of the sanction, it shall be liable to 
refund the whole or part of the grant with interest @ 10 per cent per annum 
thereon'.  APEDA, however, did not include an identical clause in the MoU signed 
with Spices Board. 
7. Thus, despite release of grant of ` 5.79 crore to Spices Board, the intended 
objective of constructing cold storage of 3000 MT capacity could not be achieved even 
after a delay of more than three years. Further, due to non-inclusion of a penal clause in 
MoU (so that project is not delayed), APEDA was unable to re cover penalty of ` 0.87 
crore (` 5.79 crore x 5 per cent x 3 years from April 2013) from SB. Management in its 
reply (September 2014) stated that APEDA followed the directions of MoCI and 
released the financial a ssistance (Grant) amounting to ` 5.79 crore to Spices Board. 
Management admitted that there were communication gaps in correspondence with 
Spices Board on constitution of the Monitoring Committee. Management further 
informed (November, 2016)  that Spices Boar d has refunded (November 2016) ` 3.84 
crore. 
 
8. The Management's reply was not acceptable to the Audit as APEDA did not 
adhere to Ministry’s directions (May 2011) for inserting a clause in MoU for payment of 
penalty to incentivise timely completion of project. The grant was diverted by SB for 
other purposes and remained unutilised for intended purpose for more than four years 
and the cold storage of 3000 MT capacity could not be constructed till November 2016. 
Further, APEDA has to pay int erest of ` 1.772 crore as per terms of the sanction of 
grant received from MoCI. However, in the absence of identical clause in the MoU with 

SB for levying interest @10 per cent on the unutilised grant, APEDA would not be able 
to recover the same from SB. Thus, ineffective monitoring by APEDA resulted in non -
utilisation of  grant of ` 5.79 crore for intended purpose.  Instead cold storage with  
reduced capacity was constructed after a delay of more than three years. Moreo ver, 
APEDA sustained a loss of ` 1.77 crore due to non -inclusion of a clause in the MoU for  
levying of interest @ 10 per cent per annum on the unutilised grant , even though  
refunded by the Spices Board. As per Audit, t he matter was reported t o the Ministry in 
December 2016 and their reply was awaited as of January 2017. 
 
IV. Note on ineffective Monitoring by APEDA 
 
9. The M inistry of Commerce and Industry (Department of Commerce)  in their 
Background Note on the subject submitted as under : 
 
“APEDA had received a letter no. 1/25/2009 -EP (Agri. V)/Plant -D dated 
10.05.2011 attaching a letter no. 13/33/2010 -States Cell dated 29.09.2010 which 
related to the project for setting up of Spice Park at Guna in Madhya Pradesh by 
Spices Board at a total co st of  ` 45.19 crore.  The project was supposed to be 
implemented in two phases with first phase at a cost of ` 28.51 crore and second 
phase of ` 16.68 crore.   
2. The DoC ’s letter of 10 th May 2011 also had an attachment letter no. 
1/25/2009-EP (Agri -V)/Plant-D dated 6 th May 2011 which was addressed to 
Spices Board and mentioned that beside the contribution from ASIDE, funding 
pattern would be as under: 
S. No. Funding Agency  Contribution in ` lakh Component 
1 Spices Board 500.00  
2 Govt. of Madhya 
Pradesh 
320.38 Approach Road 
3 Cold Storage 611.76  APEDA 
 
3. APEDA placed the proposal before the Technical Committee in its 
meeting held on 16 th June 2011 and in the 71 st meeting of the Authority held on 

24.06.2011 and the proposal wa s approved for assistance of ` 6.12 Crore.   As 
per the procedure an MoU was signed with Spices Board on 05.01.2012.  The 
terms of payment in the MoU was as under: 
2(a) ` 305.88 lakh as advance amount in the financial year 2011 -12 after signing 
of MoU.  Th e grant so received from APEDA would be maintained in a separate 
account by the agency. 
2(b) ` 305.88 lakh as grant amount in the financial year 2012 -13 against 
submission of running bills along with a UC in the format GFR19 -a from 
competent Government Authority or Chartered Accountant firm with complete 
details of payments against advance amount earlier released. 
4. Accordingly, APEDA relea sed the first instal ment of ` 305.88 lakhs on 
21.02.2012.   
5. APEDA wrote several letters to Spices Board viz lett er dated 30.04.2012, 
10.09.2012, 12.12.2012  and also letter dated 03.12.2012 from Chairman, 
APEDA to the Chief Secretary, Govt. of Madhya Pradesh for speedy 
implementation of the project.  APEDA also wrote to APMC, Madhya Pradesh on 
02.01.2013 forwarding details of this project.   
6. In March 2013, APEDA received the UC and running bills for an amount of 
` 273.08 lakhs for from Spices Board mentioning that assistance had  been 
utilized for the purpose of establishment of warehouses/cold storage for which it  
was sanctioned.  
7. Based on these bills and UC, APEDA had released the 2 nd instalment of `  
273.08 lakhs on 31.03.2013.   
8. However, later during a physical verification conducted by APEDA on 
14.08.2013 it was found that no cold storages were established by Spices Board 
and instead warehouses were built.  APEDA sought clarification from Spices 
Board on this deviation vide email dated 1 9.08.2013. APEDA made several 
correspondences to Spices Board for implementation of the project as per the 
clause 4 of the MoU which states that the funds or facility shall not be diverted or 
utilized for pu rpose other than for which it was  sanctioned.  Sp ices Board was 

advised to create the infrastructure as per MoU and provide a time schedule for 
completion of the project. 
9. In their reply of 25.11.2013, Spices Board mentioned that the deviation 
was not made purposefully but based on the request of stake holders.   The 
Board would initiate steps for establishing more cold storage s in a phased 
manner.  Initially Spices Board informed vide letter dated 17.09.2014 that they 
will initiate steps for construction of cold storage of 1000 MT for which tendering 
process was done.  
10. APEDA vide its lett er dated 13.01.2014, 24.04.2014 and  12.08.2014, 
sought the status of the project from Spices Board. 
11. Meanwhile, on 19.08.2014, Govt. audit party submitted Half Margin no. 44 
pointing out the discrepancies in the project implementation.   
12. Chairman, APEDA wrote to Spices Board on 3.9.2014 requesting for early 
implementation of the project.   APEDA ’s official also met representative of 
Spices Board on 3.9.2014 at their office in Cochin to discuss the implementation 
of the project wherein it was informed by Spices Board that the construction of 
cold storage could not be initiated as DoC did not approve  the 2 nd phase of the 
project.  During the discussion, Spices Board further informed APEDA that due to 
cost escalation they would be able to establish cold storage of 1000 MT capacity 
only. 
13. Based on the report of C&AG highlighting diversion of funds in the project, 
Chairman, APEDA wrote to Joint Secretary, DoC  on 8.10.2014 for his 
intervention in the matter and requested him to issue suitable direction s to the 
Spices Board fo r implementation of the project  as per MoU signed by them with 
APEDA.  
14. APEDA followed up  the issue  with Spices Board vide letters date d 
18.02.2015, 11.05.2015, 20.05.2015, 02.07.2015, 2 2.12.2015, 1.4.2016 and 
19.04.2016 
15. However, vide letter dated 24.05.2016 it was informed by the Spices 
Board that they had actually constructed a cold storage with a capacity of 374 
MT instead of 30 00 MTs incurring an expenditure of ` 179.60 lakhs.  In reply, 

APEDA wrote to Spices Board to refund the excess amount to APEDA 
immediately.  
16. Accordingly, Spices Board remitted an amount of ` 384.00 lakhs through 
RTGS on 9.11.2016.” 
 
V. Accounting for loss in the project 
  
10. During the course of evidence, Commerce Secretary submitted that : 
“ ****  ****  ****  ****  
   Coming to the main point which is the Para 7.1 of the Audit Report as it 
pertains to this particular project to the Spices Park at Guna , Madhya Pradesh. I 
would, at the outset, agree that there has been some lack of oversight over this 
project and we would like, on behalf of the Department, to assure the Committee 
that we are working now based on this input to strengthen the oversight and  the 
monitoring of the projects which are being funded by the Ministry.  
The second point that I would like to make is that the, if I may say, both 
the Spices Board and the APEDA are the organisations under the Ministry of 
Commerce funded through the Budge t of the Ministry of Commerce. Perhaps, it 
is a notional loss. However, we take note of the gravity of this lack of oversight 
and, particularly, in the subsequent scheme of the trade infrastructure scheme 
which we have brought which is a successive scheme.  We have made sure that 
we have put in rigorous monitoring and oversight provisions.” 
 
11. On this submission, when being asked  to clarify as to  how does the MoCI 
quantify it as zero loss, the Commerce Secretary stated as under:- 
“Sir, both these agencies receive budgetary grants from the same 
Department/Head. That is the only observation that I am making. If it had been 
taken from one grant by the Ministry of Commerce to another grant by the 
Ministry of Commerce, it would have been the notional loss in that sense.” 
 
 

 
VI. Response on the issue raised 
12. Against the queries such as ‘Why  APEDA did not monitor the progress of the 
project which resulted in building of warehouses instead of cold storage facility? Do you 
think that getting the amount refunded absolves the APEDA of its responsibility? ’, the 
MoCI in their post-evidence reply stated as under:- 
“This particular project was primarily a project funded under ASIDE Scheme of 
DoC and APEDA was advis ed only to earmark a fund of ` 6.12 crore to be 
disbursed in two phases.   However, APEDA did monitor the progress of the 
project. 
APEDA regularly wrote letters to Spices Board and held meetings to seek 
information on progress of the project. On being informed by the Spices Board 
that after holding number of meetings with the stakeholders, it was decided to 
establish two warehouses in the first phase and one cold storage of 1000 MT in 
the 2 nd phase with APEDA’s financial assistance, APEDA insisted on 
implementation of the project as per  the MoU Spices Board had signed up with 
APEDA. 
After Spices Board failed to utilize the funds received from APEDA for the 
intended purpose i.e. construction of cold storage, APEDA insisted on a refund 
and was able to recover an amount of  ` 3.84 Cr. APEDA is continuing its efforts 
to recover the remaining amount and interest from the Spices Board.” 
 
13. On the issue of monitoring, when asked that ‘ What action has been taken by the 
Ministry against the officials of both APEDA who did not monitor the progress of its own 
proposal and Spices Board who in contravention of DoC ’s letter dated 10.5.2011 built a 
warehouse?’, the MoCI in their post-evidence reply stated as under:- 
“As per the DPR both the warehouse and cold storage were to be established. 
However, during the stakeholders’ meeting held by the Spices Board, it came out 
that the average production of S eed Spices in Guna Region  is in the range of 
15000-20000 to nnes per year. Hence, after meeting both export and domestic 
demand, the carry over stock will be 15 -20% of the total production. The 

maximum estimated quantity available for storing would be 3000 -4000 ton nes 
per year, for which it was propos ed in the DPR to establish warehouse for more 
than 3000 ton nes.  Since the harvesting season is very short and limited to 
maximum of 45 days, the requirement of  storage of material for long duration 
would be very less. Hence, if the cold storage had been c onstructed initially, the 
utilization would have been very less. In view of these discussions, Spices Board 
decided to give priority to establish normal warehouses and to construct cold 
storages at a later stage,  in a phased manner, depending on the expans ion of 
production and successful running of the project. 
It is submitted that the decision to deviate from initial plans was taken in good 
faith to ensure optimal utilization of Government money.” 
 
14. On being asked ‘ What were the terms of MoU in respect of various stages of 
completion of the cold storage facility? Did not the MoU contain any clauses for physical 
inspection of the sites at various stages?’, the MoCI stated as under:- 
Since this particular project was overall being monitored under the ASIDE Scheme, 
the MoU between APEDA and Spices Board did not specifically contain any clause 
for physical inspection.  However, as per prevailing practice, APEDA conducted 
physical verification in this project as well”. 
 
15. On a query about  approval to built warehouses  that ‘ Did the Spices Board take 
the approval of DoC while building a warehouse instead of cold storage facility which 
according to Spices Board was done on the request of the stakeholders? If yes, did the 
Ministry inform the APEDA about the change? If no , did the Ministry take action against 
Spices Board?’, the MoCI furnished the following:- 
“  The provisions related to various stages of completion of the cold storage, as 
laid down in the MoU were: 
 
a. ` 305.88 lakhs as advance amount in the financial year 2011 -12 after signing of 
MoU.  The grant so received from APEDA would be maintained in a separate 
account by the Agency.  
b. ` 305.88 lakhs as grant amount in the financial year 2012 -13 against submission 
of running bills along with a Utilization Certificate (UC). 

“  Construction of warehouse was included in the DPR. However, Spices Board 
did decide to defer the construction of cold storage based on the stakeholder 
consultations.” 
 
16. On perusal of the background note, it appeared that Spices Board was  working 
on their own whims and fancies, first they built a warehouse instead of cold storage 
facility, then they committed to build a cold storage having capacity of 1000MT but 
finally built a cold storage having capacity of 374 MT instead of initially planned 3000MT 
and kept APEDA out of the loop. In this backdrop when asked ‘Why did not the DoC 
intervene and issue instructions to the Spices Board?’, the MoCI stated as under:- 
 
“It is submitted that the Spices Board prioritized the establishment of warehouse 
over that of cold storage as per the requirements of farming community. The cold 
storage facility has been constructed in Guna park in the second phase and is 
being utilized. While implementing the project, the Board considered suggestions 
of the stakeholders and made suitable changes in the project considering the 
objective of the project.” 
 
17. Further, a  monitoring committee as per para 7 of MOU was constituted in 
January 2013 wherein name of representative of APEDA was also given. First meeting 
of the Committee was also held on 28 February, 2013, however when asked as to ‘ Why 
was APEDA unaware of these developments till May 2013? ’, the MoCI submitted as 
under:- 
“As per para 7 of MoU, the role of this monitoring Committee was to oversee the 
efficient functioning of the facility and play advisory role.   Job of the Committee 
was to commence once the facility was set up.” 
 
18. On being asked, ‘Why was penal clause not inserted  in MOU with Spices Board, 
which was required for time bound completion of work entrusted to Spices Board? ’, the 
MoCI replied as under:- 

“Initially, the MoUs were not standardized.  There were no penalty and interest 
clauses in the MoUs  as there were hardly any cases of non implementation of 
sanctioned projects.  APEDA kept on improving the MoU clauses on the basis of 
experience it gathered from various projects and dealing with the State agencies.  
Subsequently a penalty clause was introduced in the MoU from the year 2012-13 
onwards on the advice of the CAG auditors. 
More so, since the project was overall being monitored under ASIDE Scheme 
and Spices Board being another organization under the same parent Ministry, 
the penalty clause specifically was not included in the MoU.” 
 
19. The MoCI’s order for release of grant for creation of capital assets (February 
2012 and January 2013) clearly stated at Clause (xv ii) that ‘in the event of APEDA 
failing to comply with terms and conditions of the sanction, it shall be liable to refund the 
whole or part of the grant with interest @ 10 % per annum thereon'. APEDA, however, 
did not include an identical clause in the MoU signed with Spices Board.  On being 
asked, ‘ What were the reasons for the same?’  The MoCI replied as under: 
“It appears that there was a perception that the interest @ 10% on the amount of 
untilized grants was applicable only to grants being received by APEDA from the 
administrative Ministry and not to the  downstream disbursements ma de by 
APEDA for individual projects.  However, later as per advice of CAG the interest 
clause were also included in the MoUs from the year 2014-15 onwards.” 
 
20. APEDA gave financial assistance of ` 1.79 crore to Spice Board for building a 
cold storage facility.  In this backdrop, on being asked ‘ Has the Spices Board refunded 
the remaining amount with interest?’ 
 “  APEDA has received the amount of ` 3.84 crore from Spice Board.  
Considering the fact that Spices Board constructed cold storage with the capacity 
of 374 MTs only, which is 10% of the planned project, APEDA has requested 
Spices Board vide letter dated 18/07/2018 to refund the entire amount of Rs. 
578.96  lakhs released by APEDA along with 10% interest per annum, as per 

clause 7 of the letter d ated 29th September 2010 issued from DOC, State cell , 
regarding setting up of Spices park at Guna, Madhya Pradesh.” 
 
21. Apparently, APEDA released the second installment by ignoring the Spices 
Board Utilization Certificate wherein it was mentioned that th e earlier grant has been 
utilized for the purpose of establishment of warehouse/ cold storage .  In this 
background, on being asked to comment, the MoCI replied as under: 
APEDA has not ignored the UC given by Spices Board as it clearly indicated in 
the UC that the funds were utilized for which it was sanctioned.  Hence, the 
2nd installment was released by APEDA.” ” 
 
22. On being asked ‘ What is the monitoring sy stem of APEDA for such projects and  
What are the details of monitoring done in this particular case? ’, the MoCI replied as 
under:- 
“The project proposal s are examined by  the Technical Committee and 
recommended for APEDA Authority if they are found viable. 
On approval of the project by the Authority an In -Principle Approval letter (IPA) is 
issued and subsequently, MoU is signed with the State agency. Mo U includes 
payment terms, clauses regarding timeframe for completion of the project, 
penalty for delay in implem entation and interest clauses, u pkeeping of assets so 
generated, force majeure etc. 
The advance instalment of Grant-in-aid is released against Bank Guarantee (BG) 
of equal amount which remains valid till the completion of the project.  The Bank 
Guarantee is invoked in certain cases when the agency fails to comply with the 
terms of MoU. 
The subsequent insta lments are released after receipt of Utiliz ation Certificate 
and running bills/invoices against the advance released by APEDA and 
satisfactory report of physical verification conducted by APEDA. 
 “The Spices Board submitted the following UC:  
 
“… a sum of ` 273.08 lakhs has been utilized for the purpose of establishment of 
warehouses/cold storage for which it was sanctioned…” 
 

Regular follow -ups with the agencies are made through letters, emails and 
telephonic communication and get the status of the project.  
Meetings are organized with State agencies and physical verification is organized 
through the field offices for seeking updated status.  The projects are also closely 
monitored by Regional Offices of APEDA by regular contacts  and meetings. 
Efforts are made to complete the project at the  earliest possible time however,  
the proje ct got delayed due to various unforeseen circumstances encountered 
with the state agencies during implementation phase. 
Further, in case of inordinate delay / slow progress of the project letters from 
Chairman APEDA are also sent to the HOD of State agency or Chief Secretary of 
concerned state for their intervention for speedy completion of the projects. 
 
23. When sought the details of reporting and reviewing system of ASIDE Scheme , 
the MoCI furnished the following information:- 
The Empowered Committee would periodically review the progress of the 
scheme and take steps to ensure achievements of the objectives of the 
Scheme.” 
 
VII. ASIDE Guidelines and TIES 
24. The ASIDE Guidelines (12 th FYP (2012 -17)  Para 13 stipulates for 
System of ‘Monitoring and Review’ with  provisions for submission of a quarterly report 
In general, half yearly review m eetings are conducted to monitor the progress of 
various common infrastructure projects assisted by APEDA at the level of 
Chairman.  Senior Officials of the State agencies are called for updating the 
status of the projects and give reasons for delays in the projects, if any, and likely 
timeframe for the completion of the projects.  
“As per scheme guidelines of ASIDE, each State/UT/Agency/Central Agency was 
required to upload a quarterly report in the prescribed format. This report was 
used to review the progress of utilization of the funds released, and also the 
basis for further release of funds by the Ministry. The annual utilization of funds 
was to be submitted on Form GFR 19. 

through website of DoC, review of the progress of utilization of funds released as also 
the basis for further release of funds by the Ministry, annual utilization of funds to be 
submitted on Form GFR 19, Empowered Committee (EC) to periodically review the 
progress of the Scheme, steps taken to ensure achievements of the objectives of the 
Scheme and appointment of a Nodal Officer/Agency by Central Government for 
review/inspection under the Scheme.  Similarly, Para 14 on ‘Evaluation’ has provision of 
Annual appraisal of all the ongoing projects at the end of the year by an independent 
agency. 
 
25. The Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Department of Commerce) has notified 
vide The Gazette of India dated 27 March, 2017 that the approval of Central 
Government for the scheme titled Trade Infrastructure (TIES) for 3 years from  2017-18 
to 2019-20.                                                  
************ 

PART II 
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
INTRODUCTION 
The Public Accounts Committee (2018 -19) examined Para No. 7.1 on 
“Ineffective monitoring by APEDA” of Report No.12 of 2017 of C&AG relating to 
the Ministry of Commerce and Industry (MoCI) - Department of Commerce (DoC).  
The subject under examination broadly deals with implementation of a project 
under ASIDE (Assistance to States for Development of Export Infrastructure and 
Allied Activities) Scheme of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry (M oCI) by 
APEDA (Agriculture and Processed Food Products Export Development 
Authority) through the Spices Board (SB).   
MoCI approved a proposal (August 2010) submitted by SB for setting up of 
Spices Park in Guna, Madhya Pradesh under the ASIDE  Scheme.  In pursuance to 
this, MoCI issued an order (May, 2011) under which APEDA was assigned to 
contribute `6.12 crore ( `3.06 crore  in two phases) towards a project for 
construction of cold storage of 3000 MT capacity.  The project was stipulated to 
be completed by 31 March, 2013. Accordingly, MoU (January, 2012) was executed 
between APEDA and SB.   In compliance with the directions of MoCI, APEDA 
released total amount of `5.79 crore to SB (1 st instalment of `3.06 crore in Feb, 
2012 and 2 nd instalment of `2.73 crore in March, 2013).  SB informed (July, 2016) 
APEDA that a cold storage of 374 MT capacity has been created.   Moreover, 
APEDA sustained a loss of ` 1.77 crore due to non-inclusion of a penal clause in 
the MoU with SB for levying interest @ 10 per cent per annum on the unutilized 
grant, even though the excess amount was refunded by the Spices Board except 
the interest after much follow ups.  APEDA failed to include the penal clause in 
the MoU with SB inspite of the fact that MoCI’s order for release  of grant to it 
(Feb. 2012 and Jan. 2013) clearly stated at a clause (XV II) that ‘in the event of 
APEDA failing to comply with terms and conditions of the sanction, it shall be 

liable to refund the whole or part of the grant with 10 percent interest per an num 
thereon’. 
The Committee’s examination of the subject and their observations 
emanating from of the issues relating to three main stakeholders (APEDA, SB and 
MoCI) with issue -wise recommendations are detailed  in the succeeding 
paragraphs. 
 
1. Non-inclusion of important clauses in MoU: 
The Committee take note of the omissions in the MoU on the part of APEDA 
viz., failure to include provisions for periodical follow -up of the project, penal 
clause for ensuring timely completion of the project and levying interest on 
unutilized grant.  The Committee observe that failure to include these provisions 
in MoU actually led to diversion of funds, non -completion of project and financial 
loss to APEDA.   
The Committee note that as per the terms of payment in the MoU, out of the 
total assistance of `6.12 crore, APEDA released (February, 2012) an advance 
amount of `3.06 crore for the FY 2011 -12.  For the remaining grant of `3.06 crore 
for the FY 2012 -13, Spices Board (SB) was required to submit running bills al ong 
with UC (Utilisation Certificate) to APEDA.  The SB furnished the UC and running 
bills for an amount of `273.08 lakh in March, 2013 mentioning that the fund had 
been utilized for the purpose of establishment of warehouse/cold storage for 
which it was sanctioned.  Based on this, APEDA released the 2 nd instalment on 31 
March, 2013. The Committee further note that (i) During physical verification of 
the project, APEDA came to know (August, 2013) that no cold storages were 
established by Spices Board and in stead warehouses were built; (ii) MoCI 
directed APEDA to include a penal clause in the contract so that the project is 
completed within the time frame.  However, APEDA failed to include the same in 
the MoU which resulted in APEDA being unable to recover th e penal interest of 
`87 lakh from SB; and (iii) MoCI’s order for release of grant for creation of capital 
assets clearly stated that ‘in the event of APEDA failing to comply with terms and 

conditions of the sanction, it shall be liable to refund the whole or part of the 
grant with interest @ 10 % per annum thereon’.  APEDA, however, did not include 
an identical clause in the MoU signed with SB and sustained a loss of `1.77 crore. 
  The Committee are shocked to note the non -serious attitude of APEDA in 
releasing second instalment of ` 2.73 crore in March 2013 to SB without 
physically verifying that whether the intended purpose i.e. construction of cold 
storage of 3000 MT had been undertaken or not.  They are further dismayed to 
note that inspite  of clear directions from the MoCI, APEDA failed to incorporate 
penal provisions in the MoU with SB resulting in non -payment of penal interest @ 
10% by SB for the balance unutilized amount of ` 4.99 crore.  The Committee 
desire that strict disciplinary act ion be taken against the officers responsible for 
the above lapses.  
          
2. Absence of monitoring mechanism: 
The Committee note that APEDA released second instalment to SB in 
contravention of the provisions of clause 4 of the MoU which stipulated tha t the 
funds or facility shall not be diverted or utilized for the purpose other than for 
which it was sanctioned.  The Committee are of the opinion that APEDA should 
have been careful in scrutiny of UC and more proactive in the way of monitoring 
the utilization of the funds by designating an officer to oversee the execution of 
the project.  The Committee are also of the view that absence of provisions for 
submission of periodical progress report by SB in the MoU gave them a free hand 
to utilize the funds at its disposal as per its whims and fancies.  Although  APEDA 
made repeated communications to the SB for submission of periodical progress 
reports, it proved futile.  The Committee are further appalled to note the casual 
response of APEDA that though the Mo U between APEDA and SB did not 
specifically contain any clause for physical inspection, as per prevailing practice 
APEDA conducted physical verification. The Committee are disappointed to note 
that ASIDE Scheme did not provide for physical inspection of th e project before 
releasing further instalment.  The Committee while noting that ASIDE Scheme 
provide for annual appraisal by an independent agency desire to be apprised of 

the details of yearly appraisals conducted by the independent agency in respect 
of t he project under ASIDE scheme since its inception.   The Committee also 
desire MoCI to scrutinize whether ASIDE guidelines were followed in execution of 
all the projects.  
 
3. Recovery of unutilized funds with penal interest @10 percent: 
The Committee note that in compliance with the directions of MoCI, APEDA 
approved in its 71 st meeting held on 24.06.2011, financial assistance of `6.12 
crore to SB for setting up of cold storage of 3000 MT.  For execution of the 
project, APEDA released total amount of `5.79 crore to SB.  Subsequently, SB 
informed APEDA (July, 2016) that a cold storage of 374 MT capacity, instead of 
the mandated 3000 MT had been set up.  Considering pro -rata cost of the storage 
capacity, so created, as `0.80 crore,  APEDA requested SB to refu nd the balance 
amount of `4.99 crore.  However, SB refunded (November, 2016) only `3.84 crore 
to APEDA.  APEDA was unable to recover penalty of `0.87 crore from SB and  
also sustained a loss of `1.77 crore due to non -inclusion of a clause in the MoU 
regarding levying of interest @10% per annum on the unutilized grant refunded 
by SB.  The Committee note with concern that APEDA overlooked the clear 
directions of MoCI on insertion of penal and interest clauses and therefore, 
suffered financial loss.  Though AP EDA had asked (18 July, 2018) SB to refund 
the entire amount of `578.96 lakh alongwith 10% interest per annum, it is clear 
that APEDA acted only after being pointed out by the Committee.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that APEDA should recover the entir e amount with 10% interest 
per annum for the delayed period and apprise them within two months of the 
presentation of this report.  
 
4. Incorrect utilization of funds/Deviation of project: 
 The Committee find that after release of first instalment of `305.88 lakh, 
APEDA wrote several letters to SB and other concerned authorities in Madhya 
Pradesh for speedy implementation of the project.  APEDA released the 2 nd 

instalment of `273.08 lakhs (on 31 March 2013) on receipt of UC and running bills 
from SB men tioning that the fund had been utilized for the purpose of 
establishment of warehouses/cold storage for which it was sanctioned.  However, 
during the physical verification conducted by APEDA (August 2013) it was found 
that no cold storages were established by SB and instead warehouses were built.  
APEDA sought clarification from SB on this deviation and also asked SB to create 
the infrastructure as per MoU.  The SB (May 2016) informed APEDA that they had 
only created a cold storage with a capacity of 374 MT  instead of 3000 MT for an 
expenditure of `179.60 lakh.  The Committee are appalled to note that SB not only 
diverted the funds for creation of warehouses but also kept APEDA/MoCI in the 
dark by constructing warehouses instead of cold storages. The Committ ee 
strongly condemn the arbitrary attitude of SB for violating the provisions of MoU, 
furnishing incorrect UC (March, 2013) and not responding to repeated 
communications of APEDA. It was only after much persuasion SB was able to 
create a cold storage of just 374 MT capacity.  It was nothing but a mere cover -up 
of the issue, after being pointed out by C&AG in September, 2014.  The creation 
of cold storage of just one -tenth of the intended capacity would definitely not 
serve the desired purpose as it would fail to meet the storage requirements of the 
local farmers.  The Committee note that SB failed to accede to the request of 
APEDA (18 July 2018) seeking refund of the entire amount of `578.96 lakhs along 
with 10% interest per annum.  The Committee, therefore, are of the view that MoCI 
should direct SB to furnish clear reasons for violating the provisions of MoU with 
APEDA and fix  responsibility for diversion of funds, wrong submission of UC, 
delayed execution of project with creation of truncated capacity of cold storage 
and for full refund sought by APEDA. 
5. Failure to monitor the project at Spices Park, Guna: 
The Committee find that despite the MoU between APEDA and SB to set up 
cold storage in Spices Park, Guna, MP, SB failed to create the desired cold 
storage capacity of 3000 MT, diverted the funds to construct warehouses instead 
of cold storages and caused loss to the Government exchequer.  The Committee 

are of the opinion that when SB deviated from MoU and constructed warehouses 
on pretext of stakeholder s interests, it should have sought clear directions from 
the MoCI and kept APEDA informed about the same.  The fact that after being 
flagged by C&AG (September, 2014), ADEPA had to seek intervention of MoCI 
(DoC) to direct the SB for implementation of the projects as per MoU speaks 
volumes about the whimsical attitude of MoCI in monitoring the project.  Further, 
the inaction of Monitoring Committee (MC) comprising the representatives of SB, 
APEDA and other stakeholders is deplorable.  The Committee are asto nished to 
note the reply of the Ministry that the role of MC was only to oversee the efficient 
functioning of the facility and play advisory role once the facility was set up. They 
are unhappy to note that the MoCI chose to be a mute spectator as the 
Government nominee on APEDA/SB Boards did not bring to the notice of MoCI 
about the diversion of funds/delays in the project.  Further, the Committee do not 
agree to the view of MoCI that the loss computed by C&AG is only a ‘notional 
loss’. Notably, the farmers  who would have been the actual beneficiary, had the 
project been completed as intended, are now deprived of the facility because of 
the casual approach of agencies involved.  The Committee are of the considered 
opinion that misuse, diversion or non -utilisation of public money should be 
viewed seriously and financial misappropriation cannot be hidden under the 
pretext of a mere ‘notional loss’.   The admission of MoCI for lack of oversight in 
monitoring the project, is enough for i t to act swiftly and take exemplary 
disciplinary action against officers responsible in Ministry as well as APEDA and 
SB, for failure to protect the taxpayers money.   
  
6. Implementation of Assistance to States for Development of 
Export Infrastructure and Allied Activities (ASIDE) Scheme: 
The Committee note that the Government of India launched ASIDE Scheme 
in March, 2002 with an objective to involve the States in the growth of export by 
providing incentive -linked assistance to the State Governments and to create 
appropriate infrastructure for the development and growth of exports.  In line with 
the objective of ASIDE, MoCI sanctioned a project for setting up of Spices Park, 
Guna, Madhya Pradesh.  The Committee note from Para 13 of ASIDE Guidelines 

(12th FYP (2012 -17)) on ‘Monitorin g and Review’ that though an in -built 
mechanism existed for the projects executed under ASIDE, the MoCI failed to 
bring the agencies on board for following the guidelines and successful 
implementation of project.  The Committee observe that, in the instant  case, 
financing agency was unaware of the delay, diversion of fund, non -utilisation of 
money for the intended purpose. The Committee are of the view that the Ministry 
should play the pivotal role by strengthening the monitoring mechanism wherein 
delay/diversion/cancellation of the sanctioned projects under the Scheme should 
be automatically taken -up for review by the Empowered Committee (EC) headed 
by Commerce Secretary.  As Audit is only a test check, the Committee desire that 
MoCI review all projects und er the Scheme and evaluate overall performance of 
the same.  The Committee further understand that as a successor to ASIDE 
Scheme, MoCI has launched TIES (Trade Infrastructure for Export Scheme) for 
three years from 2017 -18 to 2019 -20.  They, therefore, de sire the Ministry to fine 
tune the present Scheme by putting robust monitoring and review mechanism.   
 
 
NEW DELHI;                 MALLIKARJUN KHARGE 
13 December, 2018             CHAIRPERSON 
22 Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)     PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
 
-------- 
 