60

PERFORMANCE AUDIT OF DUAL |
FREIGHT POLICY  #£=s-FOR
TRANSPORTATION OF IRON ORE
TRAFFIC IN INDIAN RAILWAYS

MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS

, {RAILWAY BOARD)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

SIXTIETH REPORT

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

aan at

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC No. 2093

SIXTIETH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

PERFORMANCE AUDIT OF DUAL
FREIGHT POLICY . FOR

TRANSPORTATION OF IRON ORE
TRAFFIC IN INDIAN RAILWAYS

MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(RAILWAY BOARD)

Presented to Lok Sabha on: } he ben ala

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: Var en até

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

December 2016/ Agrahayana1938 (Saka}


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2016-17).........

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2015-16).........

INTRODUCTION, tyeeeceee ete ccegeveesceeeestresaeins नजर cee रन cen नल eee aneneeecns a
REPORT
PART -।
I. Introductory... .......- cececaeseee case seaenecsceeeseneetansesesaeeesaananceratass
H. Audit Review...
Ill. trregular Booking And Delivery OF ‘Iron Ore’ At Domestic Consumption
Rate And Results 08र्ण............."०००- बन हलनििनिनिनिनिन नितिन निनितिनिनि हनन धन
1५... Utilization Of iron Ore Not Consumed Domestically..
y. Allocation And Allotment Of Rakes For tron Ore
Transport जज cece sees sees >> >> sense cesaeeesateeeesanecae
Vi. tnternai Controls For Effective Implementation Of Policy, Monitoring
And Reporting. coectteeee
PART-II
Observation/Recommendations. .......ecccee cece ccesrecessecesateceeseeseeseeaeaseenees
APPENDICES
1. Minutes of the Fourteenth sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
(2015-16) held on 23.11.2015. जज
lL Minutes of the Fourth sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
(2016-17) held on 24.06.2016 aoe seer
MW.

Minutes of the Nineteenth Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
(2016-17) held on 04.12.2016 ec penegeseeeeseneeeeecesneeeseeenecreeaveen

3

10

15

26

34

37



COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

Prof. K.V. Thomas

MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri Nishikant Dubey
Prof. Richard Hay
Shri Gajanan Kirtikar

ONAARHN

Smt. Riti Pathak
9. Shri Neiphiu Rio

(2016-17)

Shiri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra

Shri Bhartruhari Mahiab

10. Shii Janardan Singh Sigriwal

41. Shri Abhishek Singh
12. Or. Kirit Somaiya

13... Shri Anurag Singh Thakur

14... Shri Shivkumar Udasi
15. Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA
46. Shri Naresh Agrawal

17. Shri Satyawrat Chaturvedi
48. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita

49. Shri Sharitaram Naik

20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy

21. Shri Ajay Sancheti

22. | Shri Bhupender Yadav*

Shri AK. Singh

Shri S.C. Chaudhary
Shri Tirthankar Das
Shri A.K. Yadav

PONS

Chairperson

SECRETARIAT

Additional Secretary
Joint Secretary
Additional Director
Deputy Secretary

* Elected w.e.f. 09.08.2016 vice Shei Vijay Goel, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f.

05.07.2016.

(४४)


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2015-16)

Prof. K.¥. Thomas - Chairperson

MEMBERS
LOK SABIIA
Shri $.S. Ahluwalia

Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura

Shri Nishikant Dubey

avs YP

Shri Gajanan Kirtikar

Shri Bhartrahari Mahtab

=

8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank"
9, Shri Neiphiu Rio

10. Shri Dushyant Singh

11. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal

12. De. हिला Somaiya

13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
14... Shri Shivkumar Udasi

15. Dr. 7, Venugopal

RATYA SABHA
16. Shri Naresh Agrawal
17. Shri Satyavral Chaturvedi
18. Shri Anil Madhav Dave
19. Shri Vijay Gocl
20, Shri Bhubancswar Kalita
21.  Sbri Shantaram Naik
22. Sti Sukhondu Sekhar Roy

(४)


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2016-17) having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Sixtieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Performance Audit of Dual Freight Policy for Transportation of lron Ore Traffic in
Indian Railways' based on C&AG Report No. 37 of 2044 (Performance Audit), Union
Government (Railways) relating to the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board}.

2. The above-mentioned Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
was laid-on the Table of the House on 080 May, 2015.

3. The Public Accounts Committee (2015-16) took up the subject for detailed
examination and report. The Committee held informal discussion with ‘the
representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) on the subject during their
study visit to Kolkata in 2015 and also took evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) at their silting held on 23% November, 2015, As
the examination of the subject could not be completed due to paucity of time, the Public
Accounts Committee (2016-17) re-selected the subject to continue the examination and
took further evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Railways at their silting
held on 24" June, 2016. On the basis of the oral evidence and the written replies
furnished by the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board), the Draft Report was prepared
and placed before the Committee for their consideration. The Committee considered
and adopted this‘Draft Report at their sitting held on 017 December, 2016. The Minutes
of the Sittings are appended to the Report. न

4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type and form Part- tl of
the Report. हे

5. The Committee thank their predecessor Committees for taking oral evidence and
obtaining information on the subject.

6. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Railways (Railway Board), CBI and SAIL for tendering evidence before them
and furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in connection with the
examination of the subject.

7. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India and the
PAC Secretariat in preparation of the Report,

NEW DELHI; है PROF, K.V. FROMAS
44 December,2016 मु Chairperson,
23 Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

(शी 2


॥, Introductory

‘Iron ore’ is an important commodity transported ‘by the IR, both in terms of -
volume of traffic and also in terns of freight earnings. ‘Iron ore’ is transported for
“ domestic consumption in the Country and also for n&raGmastic corisumption like sale /
export. So far as transport of ‘Iron ore’ for domestic consumption is concerned, IRis a
major transporter, the share during 2007- 2008 to 2011-12 ranged between 97 per cent -
and 79 per cent. However, of the total freight earnings ‘of IR, percentage of earnings
from transportation of ‘Iron ore’ for both domestic as weil as non-domestic consumption

was 17 per cent in 2008-09, which came down to 9 per cent in 2012-13.

2. | With the Primary objectives of lowering the cost of transport of ‘iran ore’ for
domestic producers and to keep freight charges for export of Iron ore in sync with its
rising international spot market prices and garner high freight revenues in the event of
increase in international price of Iron ore, IR Introduced (May 2008) the Dual Freight
Policy (077) under which, transportation of Iron ore' was categorized into two classes

‘on the: basis of end use viz. ‘domestic consumption’ and ‘other than domestic

- consuniption’. The former was assigned a lower Class4 and the latter a higher Class5 .
The above classes cover various types of Iron ore viz., lumps, fines, calibrated form,
pellets etc. The freight difference between the two assigned classes was on an average ;

more than three times.

3. The alfotment of rakes for Iron ore transportation is governed by an allotment
policy, assigning priority/preferences laid down by Railway Board and have a bearing on .
ihe implementation of the DFP. Manufacturers of Iron and Steel, Cement and Pellets
are the authorized customers eligible for benefit of booking ‘iron ore’ at loner domestic
rate as per the Rate Circulars issued by Railway Board subject to. laid down terms and

conditions.


I Audit Review _

4. The implementation of DFP for iron ore traffic was first highlighted in Audit
; Paragraph No. 2.5 of CAG’s Audit Report No. 32 of 2011-12 (Railways)that brought out
irregularities in booking of ‘tron ore’ traffic at domestic rate without ensuring receipt of
stipulated documents from the consignors at three loading points of Waltair Division of
‘East Coast Railway (ECoR) for the period from 22nd May 2008 10 31st March 2014.
Audit again examined implemeniation of DFP at 26 loading points and 10 unloading
, points over three Zonal Railways for the period from 22nd May 2008 to March 2012
highlighting irregularities in submission of required documents for availing benefit of
domestic freight rate besides availing of domestic rates by some manufacturing units
white used the iron ore for sale/export and availing of domestic rates by some.
manufacturing units in respect of iron ore already utilised for other than domestic
purpose like sale/export. In the Action Taken Notes furnished in October 2012 and
October 2014 by the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) in this regard stated that the
onus of conforming to the affirmed end use was on the consignor /consignee as
Railways. does not/ did not have any obvious in-built mechanism for ascertaining the
end-use fo which the Iron ore was ultimately put after its delivery had been taken by the
consignee. Further, the submission of specific documents prescribed by Railway was to
establish the bona fides of the party that it was transporting the ‘tron ore’ for ‘domestic
consumption’ and if the partly then exports the material, it is a clear case of fraud. In
view of.the significance of the issue, during the latest review Audit had covered all major
foading points and unloading points of all Railway Zones in order to examine the
enforcement of the rules framed for the dual freight policy and the aspect of rake

allotment for iron ore traffic.

5. Audit examined records of 83 major loading paints (out of 97 loading paints) of
seven Zonal Railways and of 180 unloading points {out of 198 unloading points) of 1 5
Zonal Railways. The Audit Report hightights the deficiencies in compliance with laid
down rules and procedures in booking and delivery of Iron ore at domestic rate by
concerned Railway officials that'resulted in a financial loss of expected Goods earnings
to the extent of % 29236.78 crore (freight evasion of F 12722.65 crore and non-

- 7 a =)


imposition of penalty to the tune of 11418.16 crore due to partial submission/non-
submission of documents/submission of invalid documents besides imposable penaliy
of 8095.97 crore for diversion for trading the iron ore transported at domestic rate).

6. Against this. backdrop, the Public Accounts Committee (2015-16) and (2016- 17)
_ Selected the subject for detailed examination and report, Inthe process of examination
of the subject, the Committee obtained background note and detailed written repties
from the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board). They also took oral evidence of the
Tepresentatives of the. Ministry and obtained post-evidence replies. Based on written
and oral depositions by the Ministry, the Committee examined the subject in detait and

discussed some important issues as enumerated in the succeeding paragraphs.

lil. Irregular booking and delivery of ‘Iron Gre’ at Domestic Consumption Rate
and results thereof -

7. The Duai Freight Policy (DFP) introduced in May 2008 entitled the manufacturers
of Iron and Steet to avail benefit of payment of freight at domestic consumption rate
subject to stipulations of the Policy. As per Rate Circulars issued by Railway Board for
implementing Dual Fréight Policy for Iron ore transport, for availing freight rate
applicable for domestic consumption, submission of Verified copies of six documents to
the Station Master/Chief Goods Supervisor of loading points along with the indent for
“every allotment of rake was made mandatory for Iron and Steel manufacturers,

8. The Conimittee desired to know the details of. the six documents requited for
availing freight rate applicable for domestic consumption. The. ministry in their reply

have stated as under:-

“To avail the lower rate applicable for iron ore meant for domestic consumption, a
prescribed set of documents which includes Industrial Entrepreneur
Memorandum (IEM} or certificate of Joint Plant Committee (Ministry of Steel)
indicating the licensed capacity of plant or MOU signed between Plant and its
Associate Ministry (for PSUs only), Consent for Operation (CFO) from Potlution
Control Board, Factory license, Certificate of registration under Contract Labor
Act, Central Excise registration certificate, Monthly Excise Return ete. are
required to be submited by the customer to designated Railway Authority to
establish the bonafide of the domestic’ manufacture unit, Sworn affidavit fram
consignor/consighee regarding declaration of end-use of iron is also required fo
be submitted and consignee is also required to furnish stamped indemnity bond
.


9.-

to indemnify the railway agairist mis-déctaration of export iron ore as domestic
iron ore for non- payment of distance based charge or any other misuse of rules
prescribed by Railways from time to time. For iron ore traffic booked to private
sidings, one tine submission of documents is necessary but in case of iron ore
traitic booked to other than private sidings, the certified copy of above documents
are required to be submitted for each rake independently. Consignor is also
required fo make -an endorsement in the forwarding note declaring that the
consignment is meant for domestic consumption within India.”

: Further, when asked to explain the purpose served by each of the requisite six

documents, the Ministry in their reply stated that white the sole objective was to keep

traders out of the purview of the domestic tariff rate, the exact purpose served by the

each of the stipulated documents towards the end of sole objective was presented in

Gontrol Board the
current financial year; or a copy of
the application addressed fo the
concerned PCB लि renewal of
CFO for the curent year duly
acknowledged by the PCB
together with a CFO for any of the
preceding years not more than
three years old,

status as a |
unit

Factory license for the current
financial year; or a capy of the
application addressed to the
Inspector of Factories of the
concerned State Government duly
acknowledged by the addressee

license for any of the preceding
years not more than three years

old,

‘for establishing its

together with a copy of the factory,

status as a running
unit

the following tabular form :-
| ; _Documents —_ 7 Purpose [1 ]
1 industrial entrepreneur | for recognizing a| One time for traffic
Memorandum (IEM) or certificate | domestic booked to private
‘| of Joint Plant Comrnittee (Ministry manufacturing unit | sidings
of Steel) indicating the licensed and
capacity of plant or MOU signed for booking of each
between Plant and its Associate rake if booked to
1 Ministry{for PSUs onty) _ other than private
2 Consent for Operation (CFO} fram | for establishing its | siding ~



Certificate of = under
Contract Labor Act or an affidavit
under oath. certifying that this
registration is not legally required
to be dane by the unit under the

_| provisions of Contract Labor Act, _

: establishing iis
status‘as a running
manufacturing unit

Central Excise registration
certificate ~~ --

for establishing its
status as a
domestic

manufacturing unit

‘Monthly Excise Return pertaining

fo the previous month or a
certificate from excise department
mentioning non-commencement of
production

for establishing
ther status as a
running. unit anc
also for confirming
that the iron ore is
put to use for
manufacturing.

quarterly |

As regards the end - use of E
iron ore, both the “consignor and
the consignee” were requited to
submit:

Sworn affidavits

te the effect that

the goods are
meant for
domestic

consumption = in
declared
rnanufacturing

unit” within

and will not be
exported out
under any
circumstances.
The company
undertakes to
advise the

concemed railway
authority in case
such iron ore is
intended to he
used wholly or
partially for export
urpases

India |"

One time for traffic
booked to private
sidings and — for
booking of each rake
if booked to other

.| than private siding

Indemnity Note by consignee :

indemnifying
Railways against
mis-declaration.

One time for traffic
booked to private }.
sidings and — far
booking of each rake
if booked to other

than private sidin



40. Since penalty is only a deterrent after benefit has already been derived by the
consignees, non-submission/ partial submission of documents, submission of false

finaccurate, misleading documents while availing freight meant for domestic

. consumption of Iron ore was to draw the following penalty: |

At

°

Failure to submit ary of the prescribed excise-telated documents by the one timers
would result in disqualification from eligibility of the onetime submission of
documents. In such case the manufacturer will be required fo submit all
documents at the time of registration of each indent at foading points in order to
avail freight rate for domestic consumption.

Partial submission /non-submission of documents or submission of inaccurate,
faise and misleading Indemnity Note will result in charging freight at Class 180
plus Distance Based Charge (consisting of lump sum amount plus a percentage
{as per distance slab) of Basic Freight Rate as per slab against the charging

‘freight at Class 180 only (as applicable for domestic consumption purpose) and

recovery of undercharge willbe made. हि

As per provisions of DFP if it is detected at any stage that the. endorsement
mentioned in the Forwarding Note and/or Affidavits were false, inaccurate or
misleading, a penalty for mis-declaration would be imposed at the rate of four
times of the freight chargeable. Such consignors and consignees would be
blacklisted for a period of three years.

However, Audit test-checked 90766 RR for non-submission, partial submission

and invalid submission of required documents and its findings are as under:

om

“Railway Authorities allowed booking of 2079 rakés over four, Zonal Railways

(SER, ECoR, SWR and SECR), in respect of 225 consignees, charging freight at
domestic rate even though none of the prescribed documents were submitted by
these consignees. The sald acceptance of indents without obtaining prescribed
documents .and booking rakes at domestic rates by Chief Goods
Supervisor/Chief Goods Clerk/ Sr. DCM, led to freight evasion of < 957.76 crore


(ii)

“Rate Circular. 7

during the period from May 2008 to September 2013 in terms of Railway Board’s .

in respect of 218 consignees, charging of freight at domestic consumption rate
was allowed by Railway authorities while booking 5083 rakes over five Zonal

Railways (SER, ECoR, SWR, WCR and WR) even though submission of

(iii)

documnents by these consignees was partial and ted to freight evasion of *
2309.06 crore diiring the period from May 2008 to September 2013. ,

the documents submitted by 49 consignees (either booking fron ore to their own
Sidings or other than their own Sidings) over four Zonal Railways (SER, ECoR,

~ SWR and WCR) had deficiencies. The deficiencies in the documents included

cases such as Monthly Excise Returns submitied for earlier period than that

- reguired, Consent of Operation (570) not cleared as the case is subjudice,

consignee name manually corrected étc, Audit observed that railway booked 190
rakes on the basis of these documents and allowed transportation at domestic

consumption rate, which resulted in freight evasion of % 108.42 crore.

42°

In view of serious lapses -in implementation of DFP--the: Committee asked the

Railways as to.whether any pre-emptive measures were in place to prevent such

misuse of the policy. The Ministry in their reply have stated as follows:-

“In any policy where there is dual pricing, there are possibilities that sonteone
could misuse the provisions, Therefore, the said documents including affidavits
etc. were prescribed fo prevent the same. Further, provisions of penalties were
aiso built in the policy. As per these instructions, if at any stage, it is detected that
the endorsement on forwarding note and/or the affidavit furnished was false,
inaccurate or misleading, penaity for mis-declaration shall be imposed as per
extant instructions. in addition such consignors will be blacklisted for a period of
three years for transport of iron ore from any terminal of Indian Railways and
Railways may also take recourse to further legal action. The railway staff checked

- the documents before giving the domestic rate.”

13.

in respanse to the query of the Committee as fo who detected the fraud being

committed under dual freight policy, the representatives of the Railways, submitted as

under:


44.

“it is pertinent to mention that Vigilance of South Eastern Railway had first
detected the case of mis-declaration where--customer transported the iron ore at
domestic rate after submitting all the relevant document but later exported the iron
ore instead of consuming in their domestic manufacturing unit. This was not the
case where extant guidelines were not implemented correctly but here customer.
committed fraud and thus evaded the freight. As this case involved multiple
aspects like evasion of custom and excise duties, the case was harided over to
CBI through Central Vigilance Commission, Monitoring-. and .checks were
intensified and a number of cases were detected. Demand and show cause
notices were issued against delinquent customers.”

However, during the evidence tendered before the Committee the representatives

of CB} made the following divergent submission to the claim of the Railways:

15.

“In GBI, the number of cases we have registered is only 17. The grant is very
large. These cases have been registered on the basis of our own source
information. Normally what happens is that the agency.which suffers the losses
should becomé a complainant in the criminal case. Then it is easier for us to prove
that wrongful loss.”

Keeping in view various shortcomings on part of the Railway administration, as

highlighted by audit, the Committee enquired about whether checks were prescribed, to

be exercised by the Zonal Railways/ Divisions / field units for ensuring that requisite

" documents were submitted by consignars and consignee before booking and delivery of

rakes. The Railways in their reply have stated that-

“It is a fact that in some cases, the some of the prescribed documents have not
been collected by the designated authority while boaking the iron ore traffic.
But these are not the cases of freight evasion. in these cases, prescribed
procedures have not been followed and thus there have been procedural lapse on .
the part of the Railway staff. The responsible staffs have been taken up under D &
A Rules, : :

For remaining cases where scrutiny of records revealed that the iron ore booked at
domestic rate was not consumed but exported, demand cum show cause notices
were served on the delinquent customers. They have challenged Railway's
demand notices and went to court. At present 23 cases are pending in Supreme

_ Court where the amount of penal freight involved is Rs.6730 cr.

On Eastern Railway, debit were raised in case of four firms for Rs. 24,69,023,
Rs.85,17,487, Rs. 24,96,340 and Rs.59,51,723 respectively but only Rs 24,69,023
has actually been recovered and other three firms went to Court of Law. On South
Eastern Railway, during 2008-13, total 414 inspections were conducted at the iron
ore loading/unloading points and 75 nos. of irregularities were detected and debit


to the tune of Rs.31.90 crores realized’ On South Western Railway, an amount of
Rs.1,21,84;565-had-been*eatlected from M/s Chougie & Co for the consignment”
booked during May/lune 2008 for non-submission of required documents, On East
Coast Railway, penalty amount of Rs. 51.80 cr from KIOCL and Rs. 13:11 er. fram
Essar Steel has been recovered.” हु

. 16... The Mini
involved in the demand-cum-show ८६७९ notices issued to various delinquent customers

try informed the Committee vide. wrilten replies that the total amount

js 6912.25. Out of the said amount only $141.09 crore have been recovered so far as

“the parties have challenged the demand-cum-show cause notices and the validity of dual
pricing of Iron Ore in different High Courts, which have since been transferred to the
Supreme Court of india and were scheduled for hearing on 29.06.2016 and 13.07.2016
as per last available information provided by the Railways.

17. However, during the evidence, the representatives of CBI had claimed that the
cases of fraud that they could compute and prove sufficiently and charge-sheeted in the
court to the tune of $305.60 crore only, which was the fraudulent aspect. In the remaining
. aspect, they found that there was a systematic failure with the Railways in exercising
effective monitoring and implementation of guidelines regarding submission of documents .
"and imposition of subsequent penalty for non-submission or partial submission.

18. The Committee enquired about the action taken against the concerned Railway
officials for lapses in scrutiny and monitoring of the requisite documents. The Ministry in
their written deposition submitted as follows- |

“Following an investigation by the Vigilance Depariment of South Eastern Railway,
the matter was handed over io the CBI for further investigation by the Ministry of
Railways after consulting Central vigitance commission. This was done as several
non-railway departments and individuals were suspected to be involved in freight
evasion. As per information made available by CBIACB/Kolkata so far to SER
Vigilance regarding CBI enquiry in the freight evasion scarn, out of 18 cases
registered by CBVACB/Kalkata, CBI has filed charge sheets in 10 cases, 03 cases
“have been clased and 05 cases are under investigation. Out of 10 cases where
charge sheets have been filed, information has been share by CBI with Zonal
railways vigilance in 9 cases’So far. Further, information regarding 2 other freight
evasion cases where investigation was canducted by CBI/ACB/Ranchi has also
been forwarded to zonal vigilance/SER. Out of these 2 cases, CBVACB/Ranchi
has filed charge sheet in 1. case and other case is being submitted: by them for

7 पु बल .


50

closure. As per advice of CBI, action has already been initiated against 64
Railway officials under Disciplinary and Appeal Rules". ---:.- 2 --+--. oon.

19. Audit had also found that Stee} Authority of India Limited (SAIL}, a Public Sector
Undertaking having its own captive mines as well sidings for loading and unloading of iron
ore did not submit any documents in respect of 1184 RRs and submitted partial

documents in respect of 7773 RRs at loading points and 1256 RRs at unloading points. कि
This attracted higher freight rate which the Railway Administration fait to realised, leading —

to under charge of freight to the tune of % 4838.80 crore. In respect of two RRs, an
amount of 5.45 crore was also chargeable towards penalty due to submission of
deficient Affidavit

20. The Committee during the oral evidence questioned the representatives of the
- SAIL regarding the critical findings of the audit. The representatives of SAIL made the
following deposition before the Committee:

“SAIL has captive iron ore mines. Whatever iron ore we ate producing entirely we
are consuming in the plants. Because of the willful default by not submitting the
documents SAIL did nat gain anything because the entire iron ore whatever has
been produced in the mines was consumed and there were dual policy for export
as well as domestic consumption. The entire iron ore is being consumed only in
the plants. | do agree that there was a mistake on the part of SAIL as documents
were not submitted. | apologize for that and 1 would like to report back on that
particular front, but there was no financial gain because we have never exported
these iron ore’ Therefore, the advantagé of loss to the Railways cannot be
‘accounted because we never exported iran ore, and 100 per cent iron ore that
we produced in the country is cansumed by the piant. Since we are the bulk ~
consumer of iron ore, therefore, documents are required to be submitted ones
and then every quarter the resubmission / rechecking -of documents are required
and we have done it. | think that whatever loses has becn reported, it appears
that there were some deficiencies in under-loading in the wagans. This loss
occurred because of that. However, let me clarify that the Railways charge for
the full wagon load. Suppose @ wagon has a carrying capacity of 65 tonnes, and
SAIL has loaded only 60 tonnes or 62 tonnes, even then the Railways charge the
full amount. Even on the lower amount of charges also, SAIL suffers and the
Railways do not suffer. Therefore, this amount of हैं 4,838 crares, | fail to
understand how it has appeared.”

IV. Utilization of lron Ore Not Consumed Domestiéatly

21. “As stipulated in the Rate Circulars domestic rate is applicable for iron ore used for |

production of Iron and Steel etc. at the specified manufacturing units. As such any
unauthorised diversion of it or unauthorized removal from the manufacturing units


11

detected subsequently by railway administration would have attracted penalty. This is

because the booking is done at domestic rate on the basis of the endorsement given in

the Forwarding Note and the assurance given in the Affidavit that the-iron ore

transported is meant for use at the manufacturing unit.

22. Audit fest checked revealed the following shortcomings: ..

°

The quantity shown as received in Excise Returns by the consignees was
less than the quantity transported by rail by 71.22 lakh MT in case of 67
iron and Stee! Manufacturing Units. This was an indicator that the
quantities booked and transported at freight rate applicable for domestic

" consumption was diverted for third party trading/export.

Out of 61 consignees, audit revealed that 48 consignees had failed to
submit prescribed documents - Monthly Excise Returns (7669 RRs) and
two legal documents viz. Indemnity Note (7918 RRs) and Affidavit (7988
RRs) while booking 8480 rakes. Though these 48 consignees failed to
submit required documents, they were allowed to transport Iron ore at
domestic consumption rates by concerned Railway Administration

. Consignee wise details are given in Statement C.

23. In view of aforesaid divergences in the end use of iron ore transported, the

Committee enquired about the steps taken by the Railway Administration to develop an

in-built mechanism for ascertaining and verifying the end use of the iron ore transported

at domestic consumption rate. The Ministry in their reply have submitted as follows:

“Scrutiny of. Excise documents revealing quantity of steel/pellets manufactured

against available iron ore stocks on hand and receipts during month have led to

detection of irregularities prompting further investigations. Different departments

such as Ports, central excise and customs, mining etc. are being consulted to

ascertain and verify the end use.. Through concerted efforts of Railway
Administration in association of above organizations, several cases of freight

evasion were unearthed

24. It was also enquired whether a system has been put in place for capturing data of

iron ore shown as receipt in the Excise Returns of the Iron and Steel manufacturing


12

companies and compare the same with loading data from CRIS, 50 39 to detect cases-
of diversion: The Railways in their reply have submitted as follows.

"The excise retums reflect total receipt of iron ore by the manufacturing units but,
do not reflect separately quantum received by road and rail. While there is a |
possibility for electronic data interchange between CBEC and Railways pertaining
to opening stocks of iron ore at units, quantum of iron ore receipts, goods
manufactured “and closing balance, -Unfortunately on account of the present Excise
Retums not reflecting quantum received by different modes (Rail, Road etc.), it has
not been possible to accurately assess the diversion. The matter of electronic data
interchange has already been brought to the notice of CBEC who have expressed
their inability to give information with regard to quantities received by different
modes as this is not being captured in the present excise format.”

25. On being asked to specify the action been taken 10 recover the losses and penalty
amount, the Ministry in their written reply have stated as follows:

“The cases where scrutiny of records revealed that the iron ore booked at domestic
rate was not consumed but exparted, demand cum show cause notices were served
on the delinquent customers. They have challenged Railway's demand notices and
went to court. At present 23 cases are pending in Supreme Court where the amount
of penal freight involved ts ₹ 6730 er.

On Eastern Railway, debit were raised in case of four firms for हैं 24,69,023
= 85,17,487, ₹ 21,96,340 and & 59,51,723 respectively but only = 24,69,023 has
actually been recovered and ather three firms went to Court of Law. On South
Eastern Railway, during 2008-13, total 414 inspections were conducted at the iron
ore loading/unloading points and 75 nos. of irregularities were detected and debit to
the tune of 31.90 crore realized. On South Western Railway, an amount of
%4,21,84,565 hac been collected from M/s Chougle & Co for the consignment
booked during May/June 2008 for non-submission of required documents. On East
Coast Railway, penalty amount of F 51.80 er from KIOCL and ₹ 13.11 cr. from Essar
Steel has been recovered.”

26. Audit scrutiny found that although Railway Board in July 2008 accepted’ a limit of
25 per cent.for the generation of iron ore fines, out of total quantity of Iron Ore booked ©
and transported by Rail at freight charged at domestic consumption rate to compensate
for fines generation in the process of crushing iron ore lump for getting the specified size
for use in furnace, Railway Board did not considér these suggestions while framing the
Rate Circular 36 of May 2009 and did not lay down any ceiling for residual/ eft over

quantity of iron ore fines. Further, this significant clause allowing the left over /residual
हु ]


iron ore fines for export out of the iron ore carried at domestic rate without any limit havin

" fifiandial repaictigsion was

13

fo" thé Rate ‘Circular without refering the issue to

appropriate technical authority. As a result the following discrepancies occurred:

(i}

{ii}

(ii)

(४)

27.

43 consignees in 15 Zonal Railways removed 38.16 lakhs MT of ‘iron are’ from the
factory premises out of the quantities booked. and transported at domestic
consumption rate by rail alone. Of these 43 consignecs, 23 consignees, rernoved
8.79 lakh MT of ‘Iron ore’, in excess of 25 per cent of receipt by: rail. The
percentage of removal was 90 fo 100 per cent in case of three consignees in

_ some years.

Further, the manufacturing units having Pellet or Sinter Plants are able to use the
generated fines in the blast furnace by converting the fines into pellet/sinter, As
‘such, removal of iron ore fines should not have been allowed to them. However, it
was not stipulated in the Rate Circular,

Removal of lump and fines from the factory premises could have been checked by
assigning separate commodity codes for iron ore fines and iron ore fumps
respectively. A separate commodity code. was, however, prescribed (July 2013)
belatedly for lump and fines. But the same was nat implemented fully.

_In FOIS data, unique identification code for each consignor is also essential for
” deriving correct information of bookings of Iron ore made by each consignee,

which was not dene.

Om being asked fo put forth the findings of the Railways in this regard, the Ministry

of Railways in their reply have stated that:

“The iron ore policy notified vide Rates Circular No.36 of 2009 provides for
dispatch.of left over stock of residual iron ore fines for export only. The outward
movement of residual iron ore fines from such units will be charged at Class 180
plus distance based charge. tn respect of removal of iron ore without use at the

- unit for domestic manufacturing of iron and steel and/or excessive removal _

coming to fight during scrutiny of Excise Returns, allotment of rakes to such

customers are withheld till such time as an investigation is concluded.”



14

28. In view of instances of removal of ‘Irori Ore’ by the consignees in excess of 25
per cent receipt by the Raitways,"as'stated above, the Railways were asked whether the
limit of 25% has since been revised. The Railways in their written reply have stated as
under:

“The provision for 25% additional allocations was introduced on 02.07.2008 with
‘a’view to compefisate for géneration of fines during the crushing process and this
was subject to verification of crushing arrangement and processes inside the
plant of customer's unit. This provision was introduced prior to the introduction of
dual freight policy for iron ore w.e.f. 01.06.2009. This provision has, however, nat
been brought into play and utilized for the purposes of additional allocation of
takes in actual practice. Some quantity of iron ore fines does get generated in
normal course of transportation and handling of iron ore lumps-and on being
‘rendered unusable at units not having sintering/pelletizing plants, such residual
fines can accumulate to sizeable volume over a period of time. Since the
determination of such arising of residual fines does not fall within the domain
competence of Railways, inputs of undertakings like MEKON and SAIL was duly
obtained and on receipt of their advice, a norm of 10% is being used as the
guiding principle for conducting checks against diversion of iron ore away from
the stated end-use for domestic manufacturing of iron and steel”

29. The Railway Board have further argued that as mixed rakes consisting of both iron

“ore lump and fines could be foaded from the mines and there was no difference in rates
for lumps and fines, it was net possible to strictly monitor loading of luraps and fines. As
regards Audit's suggestion that petiet and sinter plants should not be allowed ta remove
fines, the Railways have stated that the issue was contested by the parties as there are
_ defective pellets, leave aside fincas which were also recognized form in excise returns and
which. cannot be used in blast furnace in certain cases. As a transporter, Railways
prescribed the rates for transportation of different commodities. Restriction if any, were
levied. only.in public interest and operationat exigencies. Therefore restricting a particular
traffic for particular kind of industry did not seem to be in order. The onus of the
correctness of deciaration of end use was on the customer. Further, as stated by them,
the Railways did not/dees not have any obvious in-built mechanism for ascertaining’ the
end-use to which the fron ore was ultimately put after its delivery had been taken by the
consignee at the designated destination station.

श्र


15

30. However, the audit had contested both the views pointing that if Raliways had

identified nanufacturer by giving unique identification code to all consignees who were
not in a position to use iron ore fines due to absence of Pelletisation Plant /Sinter Plant
but were indenting rakes for carrying iron ore fines, this could have been the first step
towards verification of end use of iron ore transported .at domestic rate.
vere ‘Also the docurnents prescribed by the Railways’s(ich’as ERs contained information viz.
manufacturing capacity, quantity of iron ore received, used and removed from -
manufacturing units; essential to establish the applicability or otherwise of lower rate of
freight for domestic producers. Moreover, as stich, removal of Iron ore from
manufacturing units beyond permissible limit of 25 per cent was prima facie irregular
and it would have been appropriate for Railways fo impose penalty for irregular removal
(beyond permissible limit) of ‘ron ore’ है

Vv. Allocation and Allotment of Rakes for lron ore Transport

31, Since there is a shortage of rakes vis-a-vis demand, it is required that rake
allocation and allotment is done judiciously and in a manner that unscrupulous
cansignees are not able to mistise them, in the context of movement of iron ore.For the
purpose of allotment of rakes, the customers have been divided in four categories

a) Central Board of Trade (CBT) Category —-This Category covers customers like
Integrated Steel Plants with a production capacity of one Million Tonne Hot Metal
(Molten pig iron) and havitig their own private siding. For CBT Category,
- Railways are required to make all efforts to fulfil the programmed allotments of
rake .

b} Wagon Investment Scheme (WIS) category — This category covers customers .
who have joined fhe Wagon Investment Scheme. Railways are required to make
all efforts to load all the mandatory number of rakes which are contractually
agreed upon.

०) Priority C — Priority C category covers those consignees which have the Plant
with Steel producing capacity of 0.50 million tonne Le. requiring five rakes of ‘fron
ore’ per month. Railways are required 10 make all efforts to fulfil the programmed
allotments of rakes. While assessing rake requirement, the quantity of ‘Iron ore’
used for production at the manufacturing unit in the previous three months as
mentioned in Excise Returns (ERs) excluding the immediate preceding month of
the quarter under consideration is kept in view besides meetings held with the


32.

16

customers. The quarterly assessed ‘requirement is communicated to the

concerned. Authorities of the.Zonal Railway, so as to allot rakes accordingly.-

d) Priority D ~ This category covers all other manufacturers who do not fail uncer
any of the above mentioned three categories, The production by the customers .
belonging to this category would be less than 9.50 milion tonne and requirement
of wagon rakes, less than five per month. In this category, the customers are not
covered under ‘Programmed Traffic and henco; no assessment is done for them.

“Thus, neither ary rakes are specifically allocated in advance to them nor any

prior assurance given. Their requirement is met after Meeting the requirement of
other three categories. The consumers are assigned preference/priority in that
order. है

Audit scrutiny has revealed that the folowing deficiencies in the system:

Although the allotment of rakes to Priority D customers was considerable in size,

“there was no check of use of ‘iron ore’ by the censignees for the production of

tron and Steel at their manufacturing units before allocations/allotments of rakes.

Though Priority C customers got assured allocation of rakes consignees showed
an increasing preference: to be categorized under Priority D-rather than under

. Priority C. In SER, ten consignees got themselves delisted from Priority C and

jeined Priority D customers during March 2043 to March 2014, It is indicative of
the fact that for a customer it was easy to get adequate rakes under Priority D

without proving the use of ‘ron ore’ at manufacturing units.

From November 2010 onwards Railway Board allowed Priority C customers to

‘place indents under Priority D subject to submission of requisite documents.

This practice of accepting indents under both categories from same customers
was fraught with risk as a customer who is not able to get rakes allotted under
Priority C on the basis of data for use of ‘Iron ore’ can place indents under
Priority D and get rakes allotted under.that category, where there is no check of
quantity of ‘Iron ore’ used.

Allocation of rakes is dane on the basis of the consumption of previous quarter
by various customers. However, a test-check of allocation: alloiment of rakes
revealed that customers were allotted rakes in excess of actual requirement

oo


33.

”. 6ohsignéas™

7

based on the quantum of consumption during the previous quarter. Ail the

“found rémoving large quantities of iron ore from their

manufacturing units which could have been sold /exported. Three companies hac

also short reported to Excise Authorities the iron ore quantity booked at domestic

rate by rail which could have also been sold/exported.

In view of misuse of Priority D category of rake allotment the Railways were

asked, the rationale for non-assessment of requirement before allotment of rakes to

Priority D customers. The Railways in their reply have stated as under:

34,

“All allotment of fron ore rakes beth for Priority ‘C’ as well as Priority ‘D’ is made
through the computerized Rake Allotment System (RAS). However, for the

, purpose of making allocation programme for rakes, only requirement of CBT and
- other Priority ‘C’ customers having production of 6.5 miflion tonne per annum or a

minimum requirement of 5 rakes per month based on Excise certified peak
production in the previous quarter.are taker up by the office of Director, Raii
Movement, Kolkata. Accordingly, rake allocation prograrnme is generated
through RAS for the entire month in the beginning of month itself. The iron ore
traffic for domestic manufacturers having requirement of less than 5 rakes per

‘month and exports come under the purview of Priority 0" allocation

The materialization of allotment of this category being very.less as compared to
CBT and other Priofity ‘C' customers did not warrant separate advance
allocation. The inclusion of even smail customers who would be eligible only
under Priority 10 is under consideration for programming like Priority ‘C'.
At present submission of mandated documents including excise returns at the
time of placement-of indents by Priority ‘D' customers is followed as per policy
circular Rates Circular No.36 of 2009.”

- Audit findings, however, revealed that at loading points, after the receipt of indent

for allotment of takes, the allotment is made manually, except in Chakradharpur (CKP)
and Khurda Read (KUR) Division of SER and ECoR, where allotment is made through
computerised Rake Allotment System (RAS) on the basis of rakes allocated by EDRM,

Kolkata, or concerned Sr. DCM, based on indent received, availability of rakes, and

pliorities and satisfaction level prescribed for each category of customer and the ODR

policy prescribed by Railway Board besides loading capacity, unloading capacity and

route capacity.


18

35. Moreover, the allocation and allotment of rakes in respect of consignees of
Category CBT and Priority C customers in Chakradharpur and Khiirda Road Divisions ~~
"of SER and ECoR were also being made through manual intervention in RAS bypassing
the inbuitt logic set in the RAS. It was observed fronr the data provided by CRIS that out
of 66745 allotments made during the period from 1 April 2011 to 19 May 2014, 13060
(19.57 “per cent} allotment were. made through” manual intervention in RAS’ *
(Chakradharpur Division-21 per cent and Khurda Road Division 6.45 per cent). This
reflected that there exists a risk of extending undue bonefits io select customers
bypassing ail in-built checks in RAS such as Customer Rake Requirement, route
'. Capacity, priority, loading capacity of originating station, unloading capacity of
destination station etc.

36. In view of side stepping of the system of computerized Rake Allotment System

” by the Raifways, the Committee probed the status of implementation of computerized
Rake Allotment System in Indian Railways, The Railways in their written replies stated
‘as under:

“Computerized Rake Allotment system (RAS) was introduced w.e.f. 03.01.2014
over South Eastern Railway (Chakradharpur Division) and from Apri! 2011 over
East Coast Railway (Kaurda Division) which are the two major iron ore loading
Divisions on Indian Railways. The two Railways account for more than 83% of
the total iron ore loading on Indian Railways. Oui of the remaining 17%, SEC
_ Railway accounts for 6% which is entirely CBT loading for SAIL Bhilai Plant from
their captive. mines in Dalli Rajhara. The balance 11% loading is from SWR
(10%), SR (0.5%) and WCR (0.5%) which is required to be covered under RAS." .

37. During the evidence of the Committee, on being asked about the action
taken by the CBI in the matter, the representatives of CBI submitted as follows:

‘ From 2041 to 2014, CBI registered 17 number of regular cases, that is,
FIRs have been registered and investigated; out of which, charge-sheets have
been filed against the accused persons in 12 cases. In.one case, that is; Rashmi
Metaliks, which you are referving to, we are ready with the charge-sheet. It is
pending for the sanction for prosecution from the Railways. As soon as we
receive it, we will file the charge-sheet. So, practically, 13 cases have been
chatge-sheeted. Four cases have been closed for want of “prosecutable
evidence. There were 14 preliminary inquiries registered in the year 2013-14 and
all of them were closed for want of converting them into a regular case. At the
end of the investigation of these cases, we have recommended departmental


Vi.

38.

ag

action against 154 public servants of Railways to the Railways case-wise. They
will be-taking action at their end. So-far’as one employee, who was critical to the
allotment of rakes in the DRM Office, Kolkata, of the sank of Office
Superintendent, we have registered a case of disproportionate assets; 180 per
cent more than his tawfut income and it is presently under investigation. We-have:
filed the charge-sheet......0...." :

Internal Controls for effective implementation’ of Policy, Monitoring
and Reporting - .

Audit had observed that the internal control for implementation of DFP had

intrinsic deficiencies and some of the provisions were not incorporated /not enforced

made with due diligence. The deficiencies noticed.are as follows:

39.

1) Railway Board had prescribed six documents for submission at the time of
registration of each indent. Neither, the purpose and significance of their

“submission was made clear nor any guidelines were issued to make use of tne

eight mandatory documents including Affidavit and Forwarding Note submitted by.
the customers for verification of the end use of the Iron Ore.

’ 2) There were no instructions of the Railway Board to compare the quantum of

lron ore transported by Rait, with the monthly/yearly consumption of Iran oré for
domestic use, as reflected in the Excise Returns (ERs).

3) There was no advice to watch the removal of iron ore from manufacturing unit

- with the help of ERs. Railway Administration needs to lay down periodicity of

inspections by Commercial Inspectors while drawing and approving Inspection

‘Programme/ Schedule to facilitate complete coverage of alt loading/unloading

points in a given time frame.

It was also pointed out by the audit that Railway Administration needs to lay

* down periodicity of inspections by Commercial Inspectors while drawing and approving

Inspection Programme? Schedule to facilitate complete coverage of all

joading/unloading points in a given time frame. Norms laid down for inspection by 1185

in which all transactions including the iron ore traffic were to be covered were not strictly


20

followed and where inspections were uridertaken, issues regarding iron ore traffic were

highlighted only in few cases.

_ 40. -In this context the Ministry were asked whether norms of inspections to be
carried out by Commercial Inspectors were faid down by all Zonal Railways and the
mechanism being put in place to monitor the results of inspections carried out by
Commercial Inspectors and Travolfing Inspectors af Accounts (189) with any follow up
action taken thereon. The Ministry in their reply have stated as follows:.

“It may be mentioned that Railway Administration are independent functional
units as recognized by Railways Act of 1989. Railway Board prescribes broad
policy guidelines which need te be adhered by Zonal Railways by duly adapting -
to their local conditions. The power to make the conditions sttingent or to provide
exception has been duly recognized in the codes of procedure for Railway
working. Therefore, to jucge ali Zonal Railways with one parameter of inspection
schedule will not be logical. In Railway working the Commercial Inspectors and
TIAs are assigned sections and they are responsible for working of all stations
‘falling in those sections on day to day basis.” है

41... Further, the Ministry.during the oral evidences informed the Committee about the :
action taken by them to remove the deficiencies in their system of checks and balances
pointed by the audit and stated as under:~ - ह

“The Railways have made a major breakthrough is the manner in which it deal
with the Mines Department of the State Government, In early 2041, for the iron

"ore we had devised a methodology where each forwarding note was being
validated by the Mines Department of the concerned State Government. In the
manual farm it has been existing since then. The validation which is now being
done by the Mines Department does not only indicate the total quantity of iron
ore which they have allowed to be moved from a mine to a particular site. They
also indicate the final destination. it also carries a stamp that this iron ore is
“meant for export or is it meant for domestic consumption. Today it is a process in
which the consignor takes the forwarding note to the Mines Department and gets
it validated and then submits it to us. In no case, are the Railways allowing any
allotment of any rake which is not backed by a duly validated forwarding note.
Railways have gone a step forward in this and have come up with a seamless
software which is called IMMS, which is basically the Integrated Mines and
Minerals Software where the final testing has been done." पु


21

42. in response to the query of the Committee about the details of the Integrated _

~"" “Mines and Minerals ‘Sofiware, as devised by the Indian Railways, the Ministry in their

reply have stated that:

“The IMMS software is proprietary software of the Mines Department of the State
~ Government of Odisha. Linkages have been established between the i3MS.
Server with that “of FOIS: server of ‘Indian’ Railways Whéréby, the documents
issued by Mines Department viz. Transit Permits and RR issued by Indian
Railways are shared over the servers and can be seen and cross checked by
both sides. This not only eliminates cumbersome documents beirig exchanged
physically with the possibility of forging but also speeds: up and cuts down
unnecessary red-tapism in terms of obtaining stamps on very large number of
documents which are otherwise necessary to ascertain authenticity, The
integration between IMMS and FOIS has been achieved in the iron ore loading
sidings of Odisha. Similar develapment of software for the ather states is being
undertaken by the Ministry of Mines and as and when they are ready suitable
interfaces with FOIS will be established.” हु

43, Audit findings further revealed that no special training programme for
Commercial. Inspectors/ Chief Goods Supervisors/ Goods Clerks was conducted fo
familiarize them with the instructions/ procedure to be followed while booking of Jron Ore
traffic as prescribed by the Railway Board -through various cireulars, further Chief
Commercial Manager/ SER, in January 2014, requested the Principal, ZRTi, SINI to
incorporate a subject on the required checks on documents submitted for booking of
(ron Ore Traffic etc. in the training programme for Commerciat Clerks (Booking, Parcel -
and Goods). which was not done till Januaty 2015 and appropriate training programmes
were not conducted either for regular work relating to Traffic (Commercial) at loading /
unloading points or specifically for new policy guidetines issued in respect of Iron Ore
freight traffic. As a result, concerned staff failed to exercise adequate checks and
admitted invalid documents/ declaration/ affidavit for availing domestic rate and also
could not detect cases involving large scale removal of iron ore from manufacturing
units and short reporting of iron ore carried by Rail at domestic rate.

44, — |n view.of Audit findings, the Committee desired to know the reasons for lapses -
in the training of the concerned railway staff and the status of various training measure
proposed to be undertaken or already underway in the Railway to equip the staff with


22

requisite knowledge in scrutinizing the decuments/declarations/affidavits and detecting
cases of rémoval of iron 08 from manufacturing units or identifying cases of short :
reporting of iron ore carried by Rail at domestic rate. The Committee were informed as
under-

“The Zonal Railway Training Institutes (ZRTIs) are responsible for training of the _ _
staff of different” Zdnal Railways in the Commercial and Operational rules for
cariaye of goods. The rules for booking of goods by rail are common for all
except for need. of documentation in cases of dangerous goods, livestock and
iron-ore etc, Since iren-ore constitutes only 10% of the total loading over IR, a
separate course for iron-ore booking does not seems logical and it is taught as
part of general curriculum as the same arnount of caution is needed for booking
of alf goods for transportation by छा. However, course mudules on Iron ore
transported was added in ZRT! Commercial syllabus for Commercial Clerks on
SER."

45. Further, for improving the system of monitoring and control; Vigilance
Department of SER gave the following suggestions to the Operating and Commercial
departments in October 2012: (i} To allot each transporter in FOIS a unique identifier
and capture Excise Registration number of the consignee as a second unique identifier,
$6 as to enable Railways to use the data as and when required or when asked far by
other authorities. {ii) Collecting details of principal inputs such as iron ore lumps or iron
ore fines and their utilization in manufacturing activity through Monthly Excise Return
ER 6, (iii) To explore possibility of sharing electronic database of ER 6/ER 4 with
Central Excise Department. (iv) Periodical comparison of cumulative foading figures
from FOIS with 'certified’ plant capacity. (४) Submission of ER 6 along with ER 1 by the
consignees. (vi) Ensure -genuineness, legality and enforceabltity of loading documents.
(शा) Keep watch on heavy loaders especially who are loading iron ore fines, because
only a few iron and steel manufacturers have the capacity to make sinter or pellets out
of iron ore-fines, viii} Introduction of new commodity cede for iron ore fines and align
FOIS with the national system followed by Mining, Central Excise, and Customs
Departments. (ix) To get Ifon Ore Utiization Certificate (00010) from Central Excise
Department to watch the use of iron ore by cansignees for domestic purpose.


23

46. in view of the aforesaid suggestions, the Railways were asked to explain whether :
the feasibility of implementation of these suggestions were assessed by Railway Board है
and any decision taken in this regard. The Ministry in their reply have stated as under:

“The suggestion of vigilance regarding system improvement has been reviewed
-and has been incorporated-partly. Separate commodity .code-for Lumps and-fines
have been assigned. It may be mentioned that unique code exists in FOIS for
consignor consignee and commodity. The consignor and consignee code are
linked to place of loading in case of private siding for proper identification that is
required for day to day operations, Changing the togic and making the consignor
and consignee code uniform is not in the interest of railway working: It may be
mentioned that a customize report can be generated by FOIS as per the
parameters prescribed by railway board or concerned zonal railways. Therefore,
the system is equipped with required checks and balances. The remaining
suggestions are under consideration in reference to overall review of dual freight
policy of iron ore in view drastic drop in international iron ore price to $50 per ton
and a slump in demand of iron ore for export. After detailed deliberation, Dual
freight policy for iron ore has been discontinued w.e.f. 10.05.2016. Now all types
of iron ore / iron ore pellets, whether for domestic consumption or othenwise (iron
ore for export etc.), will be charged at Class-165. The guidelines contained in
‘Rates Circular No.36/2009 and corrigendur/addendum thereto stands
superseded.”

47. ‘Moreover, the Division bench of Kolkata High Court dated 24 Dec 2044 in the
case between SER and Rashmi Metaliks Limited opined that no mechanism has been
formulated to ascertain thé ultimate end use of iron ore after delivery. The Division
bench directed that at the time of booking of each consignment, the Railway
Administration wifl realize freight rate at class 180 along with DBC and wilt ultimately ©
decide the actual freight payable by the consignor/consignee on being satisfied about
the actual end use of the iran ore. For recording such satisfaction about end use of the
iron ore the railway authority may take inspection at the’ factory's site for ascertaining
_ the actual end use of such iron ore by the consignees. The above madality would be
applicable henceforth.so far as the appellant (Rashmi Metaliks Limited) is concerned.
The judgement further stated that if the consignee submitted a false, incorrect. and
misleading declaration on Affidavit under Para 3 of the Rate Circular about the end use .
of iron ore consignment, then the consignee will be liable to pay freight at class 180
along with DBC as well as penalty. As regards impasing penalty by way of blacklisting


24 -

the judgment opinéd that if at all, it can only be exercised after the adjudication of the
dispute in the pending suit is concluded before the Civil Court,

48. In view of. aforesaid opinion of the court of law, the Railways were asked to
explain what measures were taken by the Railway to implement aforesaid decision of
Kolkata High Court. The Ministry informed as under:

©

“Railway administration has started charging ail iron ore traffic booked by Rashmi
Metatiks at export rate pending verification of end use. The modalities for
verification and grant of refund are under defiberation,”

49... After weighing on the decision of the high court, the Committee enquired from the
Ministry if it were a better idea to charge, in the first instance, higher rates as applicable
to transport of iron ore for export and then re-appropriating for the amount utilised
domestically in view of failure of stipulated checks and balances of submission -of
requisite documents implemented by the Railways, The representatives of the Railway
Board during the evidence inter-afia stated as under:-

“This would have resulted in significant refund of amounts that the Railways
would have deposited on behalf of various transporters who were taking their
domestic iron ore and would have paid higher amounts and later on their refund
mechanism....... The position would have been a very complicated one in the
sense that domestic consumption requirement was substantially low than the
export. In the beginning during the year 2007-08, expart was 53 million tonnes
and domestic was 83 million tonnes. Even at that time it was 70 per cent more.
Subsequently the figures came sliding down. Today the figure is that export is
only two million tonnes and domestic is 115 million tonnes. So, this suggestion
would have made the work perhaps go up and if the bulk of the consumption is
for domestic purpose, charging them higher price initially and then fund! ing them,
then bulk of the transporters perhaps then would have been in a very difficult .
position.”

50, The Railway have contended in their written replies that they have benefited fram
Dual Freight Policy and mode the following submission to the Committee in this regard:

“indian Railways have significantly gained from the Dual Freight Policy which can
be seen from the Table below:


2S

Volume and earning from iron ore for export

Year Tonnage | lead “OC ENTKM ‘Earnings at Earnings, if मु
{inmill. | (in KM} (in mill. export rate booked at {in Rs. Cr}
Tonne} Ton-kin) (in Rs. Cr) domestic
. rates
a ~ . (in Rs. Cr} a
Ma [37 tar | | (sj (6) SP e(5-6)

‘| 2008-08 | 45.75 479 21914.25 | 5398.08 2720.29 2677.79
2009-10 | 43.64 572 | 24962.08 | 4452.75 3355.45 "1097.30
2010-42 [25.67 | 616 1512.72 | 5071.09 2088.48 | 2982.02
2011-12 | 9.67 654 6324.18 | 2585.44 856.40 [1729.01
2012-13 | 5.46 575 3139.50 | 1300.19 526.35, W738
2013-14 | 6.56 408 2676.48 1192.63 490.72 701.94
2014-45 | 248 | 549 1362.52 | 669.09 263.02 406.07
Total | 139.23 [के __ [76190.73 | 20669.24 __ | 10300.71 | 20368.54
Had the Indian Railway charged the export iron ore traffic at the freight rate
applicable to domestic iron ore traffic, Railways would -have lost approx.
Rs. 10,368 crore since 2008-09 on this account, in other wards, during 2008-09
0 2014-15, we have additionally earned about Rs.10,368 crore on account of

dual freight policy for iron ore traffic.

Domestic manufacturers of iron and stee! have been benefitted from this policy as
they have been able to enjoy the lower freight on. submission of requisite
documents as per prescribed guidelines. As freight are lower for them, the cost
of manufacturing of iron and steel have certainly became 1008.


26

PART II
~ --OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS ~

DEFICIENCIES IN INTERNAL CONTROL IN_IMPLEMENTATION OF DUAL
FREIGHT POLICY

1, The Dual Freight Policy (DFP) which was introduced in May 2008 entiticd
the manufacturers of Iron and Steel to avail benefit of payment of freight at

domestic consumption rate subject to stipulations of the Policy. Subsequently
manufacturers of Iron ore pellets and Cement were also included in that category
in July 2008 and June 2009 respectively. However, freight for transport of Iron ore
pellots for export as well as lron ore moved for pelletisation for export was to be
charged at rate other than domestic consumption rate. The primary objectives of
the DFP were to lower the cost of transport of Iron ore for domestic producers
and to. keep freight charges for export of iron ofe in sync with its rising
international spot market prices and garner high freight revenues in the event of
increase in international price of iron ore. The DFP in effect led to freight
difference between. the above two classes, which was on an average more than
three times and hence left the policy vulnerable to exploitation by the exporters of
iron ore to book freight at lower rates prescribed for domestic consumption by
_ camouflaging their end use by either non-submission of documents or
submission of falsefinaccurate documents. The failure of Railways to ensure
submission of complete and valid documents by Iron .& Sicel manufacturing
consignees during the period May 2008 to Septomber 2013 resulted in freight है
evasion of हैं 7883.85 crore. The Committee observe that there were deficiencies
in internal control mechanism of the Railways which failed to ensure veracity,
legality and enforceability of the documents submitted to claim concessional
tariff rates. They feel that the then Railway authorities should have ensured strict
compliance of the laid down provisions and enforcement of initial scrutiny and
’ check, at all the stages right from assessment of requirement of rakes, allotment
of rakes, acceptance of indents to foading and unloading, whose implementations
were found lacking. The Committee, therefore, desire the Railways to inform the

- Committee about the steps taken to ensure effective controt and monitoring of
.


2?

implémentation of Freight policy of Indian Railways. Since CBI is investigating
into several cases of DFP, the Committee desire that CBI should also investigate
. the entire gamut of circumstances leading to formulation of DFP which proved to

be. mine of corruption.

_ LOSSES SUFFERED BY THE RAILWAYS _

- 2. The Committee note that the deficiencies in Compliance with the laid down
rules.and procedure in booking and delivery of tron Ore at domestic rate by
concerned Railway officials resulted in financial loss to the tune of
% 29,236.78 crores. This includes freight evasion’ of हैं 12,722.65 crore,
non-imposition of penalty to the tune of हैं 11418.46 crore due to. partial
submission! non-submission/ submission of invalid documents, besides

. imposable penalty of % 5095.97 crore for diversion of trading the iron ore
transported at domestic rate. The Committee do not find rationale as to how a
policy which was introduced to enable the Railways to accentuate its freight
revenue has pushed the Railways to sustain fosses. The Committee have come to
understand that lack of enforcement of the institutional framework of the Dual
Freight Policy, its monitoring and implementation and laxity of the then Railway
administration have eventually led to freight evasion, non-levy of penalties for
willful non-compliance and under charge of freight. The Committee, therefore, are
of the opinion that the Ministry should have ensured strict compliance of laid
down provisions and enforcement of initial scrutiny and check at ali stages right
from assessment of requirement of rules, allotment of rakes, acceptance of
indents to Joading and unloading. The Committee at this stage not only caution
the Ministry to be careful in future with regard to implementation of any poticy and
also urge upon the Ministry to fix responsibility on the officials who deait with the
implementation of the policy at that point of time and were ‘responsible for the
losses incurred by the Railways. है


28

RECOVERY MADE BY THE RAILWAYS
3. Recovery of dues is yet another’ important aspect which needs to be
analysed, The Committee note that although the demand-cum-show cause notices
issued to various delinquent customers amounted to ₹ 6912.25 crore, only £141.09
crore has been recovered so far. However, CB] had claimed that the cases of
fraud that they could compute and breve sufficiently and charge-sheeted in the
court was fo the tune of Rs. 305.60 crore, which was the fraudulent aspect. In
their awn admission, the CBI further stated that in the remaining cases, there was
a systemic failure with the railways in exercising effective monitoring and
implementation of guidelines. The Committee are perplexed to note this anomaly
- and desire the Ministry to upcate the Committee with regard to exact amount
recovered so far and status of the cases which were pending court decisions.
They also desire the Ministry to clarity their viewpoint with regard to the claim
made by CBI with regard to cases of fraud so that the Committee can take a
decision in this regard without any further delay. The Committee would also like
to be apprised of the status of the case and action being taken by the Railways for
recovery of full amount in an expeditious manner.

FIRST DETECTION OF CASES OF FRAUD

4, The Committee are perturbed to note that while the representatives of the
, Railways have claimed that Vigilance of South Eastern Railway had first detected
fhe case of mis-declaration by. a customer who transported the iron ore at
domestic-rate after submitting alt the relevant documents but later exported the
iron ore instead of consuming in their domestic manufacturing units and then
handed 11050 cases over to CBI whereas the representatives of CBI have claimed
that they have registered cases, in total 17, on the basis of their own sourced
information and no complaint has been filed by the Railways in this regard, The
divergent views expressed by the Railways and the CBI points ‘towards some
cases of fraud yet to be exposed. Moreover, since the fraud took place in the
domain of the Railways, it. was prima facie responsibility of the Railways to have

detected the fraud following its faiiure to prevent the same. Thus, the Committee


29

strongly desire that the Railways may justify their statement with documentary
proofs of the matter being -referred to the CBI upon its detection in a timely
manner and may also apprise the Committee of the exact course of action as it
happened and the stage at which the CBI was involved and the extent to which
they were cooperated with. The Committee are surprised that whereas there was
"large scale irregularities the CBI invéstigatéd very few cases involving only
%305.60 crore whereas the loss suffered by exchequer was %29,236.78 crore as
. Audit scrutiny revealed. The Cammittee therefore, desire the CBI to go deeper into

the matter and enquire into other similar cases.

AMBIGUITIES IN RAILWAY GUIDELINES

5. As per clause 8 of Rate Circular No.36.of 2009, the manufacturing units were
allowed to remove left overfresidual iron ore fines for export out of the iron ore
carried at domesiic rate in the Plant premises. However, it was required to be done
only after verification of the crushing arrangements and process inside the Piants
premises of the consignees and there was a limit of 25 per cent of aggregated
quantity as per provisions already in place prior to the introduction of dual freight
policy of iron ore w.e.f. 01.06.2608. However, it’as been admiited by ihe Railways _
that this provision was not brought into play and utilized for the purposes of
additional allocation of rakes in actual practice. Rather, they had prescribed a norm
of 10% as the guiding principle for conducting checks against diversion of iron ore
away from the stated end-use for domestic manufacturing of iron and steel based
on inputs of undertakings like MEKON and SAIL who were considered by the
Railways as domain experts and circulated the instruction vide letter for guidance
to the ED/RM office for allotment of rakes rather than incorporating the same in RG
36/2009 which primarily. dealt with charging and booking procedure. Irrespective of
the limit of 10% or 25% for removal of left over/residual iron ore fines for export out
of the iron ore carried at domestic rate in the Plant premises, the actual removal by
23 consignees of fron ore transported by rail at domestic rate from their Plant
premises for sale or export was in excess of 25 per cent with aggregated quantity
of 8.79 lakh MT and it went up to 100 per cent in certain cases. Railway Board has


30

argued that as mixed rakes consisting of both fron ore lump and fines couid be |
loaded from the mines and there was.no difference in rates for lumps aid fiii¢s, it
was not possible to strictly monitor foading of lumps and fines. The Commitiee
observe that removal of lron Ore from manufacturing unit beyond permissible limit
was prima facie irregular and it would have been appropriate for Railways to
impose penalty for irregular removal of ‘Iron Ore’, However, the Committee express :
their displeasure over the ambiguity regarding percentage of removal of
leftoverfresidual iron ore fines which was created by the Railways whereby they
were nof clear instructions as to the limit of 25% or 10% since instructions
regarding beth were in place. The Commitiee fecl that the Railways should have |
clearly specified the limit in RC 36/2069 which primarily dealt with charging and
bocking procedure. Further, the Committee have been informed that the Railways
did hot have any in-built mechanism for ascertaining the end-use to which the iron
ore was ultimately put after its. delivery had been taken by the consignee at the
designated destination station. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Railways should have developed some mechanism which could have helped
identify manufacturer by giving unique identification code to all consignees who
are notin a position to use iron ore fines due to absence of Pelletisation Plant
{Sinter Plant but were indenting rakes for carrying iron ore fines, as a step towards
_ verification of end use of iron ore transported at domestic rate and avoid misuse of
provision for illegally exporting iron ore booked at domestic consumptior freight
rates, Tho further desire that while laying down Rate circulars, Railway Board
should frame detailed guidelines for Zonal Railways laying down clearly the
procedure to be followed to ensure complete check of essential documentation
establishing the nature of use of iron ore transported by Rail. In this regard, the
Committee also desire that instruction for companies between iron ore transported
and monthlyfyearly consumption for domestic use with the aid of Excise, Returns
should also be issued and insisted upon. This, the Committee feel will create
essential checks on the possible misuse of the extant provisions of rules of
procedure. हि


31

FAULTY RAKE ALLOTMENT-SYSTEM

6. The Committee find that allotment of rakes for [ron ore transportation is
governed by an allotment policy, assigning priority/preferences laid down by
Railway Board and have a bearing on the implementation of the DFP, The policy
“was designed to give priority to tie-dotmestic manufacturers of iron and Steel in
allotment of rakes for transporting iron orc to plants. However, it was observed
that the allotment of rakes was considerable in size to fast priority customer, Le.
Priority D, in respect of whom there was no check of use of ‘Iron ore’ by the
consignees for the production of iron and Steel at their manufacturing units before ;
aflocationsfallotments of rakes, Although Priority C customers got assured
allocation of rakes, consignees showed an increasing preference ta be categorized
under Priority D rather than under Priority C. The Committee are surprised to note
that in SER, ten consignees even got themselves delisted from Priority 0 and
joined Priority 0 customers during March 2013 to March 2014. The Comimiitee
understand that consignees do this because for a customer it was easy to get
adequate yakes under Priority D without proving the use of ‘Iron ore’ at
manufacturing units. This shows that the whole system of rake ‘allotment was
pliable to the diversion of iron ore for export purposes after availing benefit of
lower freight charged for domestic consumption purposes. Moreover, there were
; instances of manual intervention in allotment through Rake Allotment System
although the allotment was computerized, irrespective of the category without
complying with the parameters in the system. The Committee also observe that the
Railways had prescribed easy booking conditions under category BD which made
securing rakes under such category easier than that of other categories. Therefore,
the Committee is of the opinion that the Railways should have devised the
conditions for aliotment of rakes under category D in such a way that it would have
discouraged the consignees from booking rakes under Category 0 in preference’
over other categories thereby hiding their end usage of iron ore booked under
Railways for transport. The Committee are of the firm view that the system of rake
allotment in Railways is not fransparent and prone to corrupt practices. The

.


32

Committee, therefore, desire the Railways to review the system of rake allotment
‘and come out with a new policy with-a mechanism-to develop transparerit system
within a period of three months to prevent recurrence of such éventualities in
future. They also desiré the Railway Board to conduct and enquiry to ascertain
whether any nexus existed between the Railway officials and the cansignees and
fix responsibility, if any, on the officials found to be guilty:-“Action takerr in ‘this
regard may be informed to this Committee,

DEFFICIENCIES IN INTERNAL CONTROL DEFFICIENCIES IN INTERNAL CONTROL MECHANISM
7. A number of shortcomings have been found in internal controls, checks and

balances of the Railways which had soverely hampered the effective
implementation of the DFP. The officials responsible for checking the requisite
documents were not adequately trained to ensure complete compliance with the
submission of all documents. As a result they failed to exercise an effective check
while performing duties feacing to admission of invalid documents/declaration!
affidavit for availing domestic rate, non detection of cases of large scale removal of
iron ore from manufacturing units and short reporting of iron ore carried. by Rail at
domestic rate. This was pointed out by the Audit where some of the consignees
were cited as examples. The Committee also note that in the Court case between
SER and one of the consignees i.e, Rashmi Metaliks Limited, the Division Bench of
the Kolkata High Court directed that at the time of booking of each consignment,
the Railway Administration will realise freight rate.at class 180 along with DBC and
will. ultimately decide fhe actual freight payable by the consignor/consignee on
being satisfied about the actual end use of the iron ore. The Committee note that
Railway administration has started charging all iron ore traffic booked by Rashmi
Metaliks as per the court direction, yet the Commiftee desire the Railway
Administration to conduct an enquiry into the enc use by Rashmi Metaliks during
the entire period and identity the guilty officials. within a period of three months
and inform the Committee accordingly. The Committee also desire the Railways to
furnish all relevant details to CBI without any delay for further investigation into the
matter. Moreover another tool of monitoring and control in the form of Appreciation

Notes was found lacking as neither any specific format was fixed by the Railway
: “


33

Board for its submission nor its purpose was clearly spelt out to
Sénsitizeffaniiliarisé the concerned officials regarding its importance. Although the
system of physical inspection of booking terminals was itt place the same was not
implemented as Inspections by Commercial Inspectors and Travelling Inspectors
of Account were either never carried out or were inadequate as per guidelines. The
Committee feel that if the Railway Board would have undertaken periodic
inspections by Commercial Inspectors, such an eventuality would have been easily
averted and the discrepancy would have been detected early. They, therefore,
recommend that periodicity of inspection by Commercial inspectors should be Said
down to facilitate complete coverage of afl loading/unloading points in a given fime
frame, They further desire that the field level officials should also be trained for
effective implementation of the policy. Action taken in this regard may be
intimated to this Committee. ;

NEW DELHE; हु PROF. K.V. THOMAS
14 December,201§ पु Chairperson,
23 Agrahayana, 1932 (Saka) . Public Accounts Committee


_ ay- APPENDIX L-

MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC

ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2015-16) HELD ON 237 NOVEMBER, 237 NOVEMBER,

2015 oe aon

The Committee sat on Monday the 237 November, 2015 from 1500 hrs. to 1630

hrs. in Committee Room 'B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT

ProlK.V.Thomas. tte
MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri Nishikant Dubey
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwat

aor eon

Dr. Kirit Somaiya

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Satyaveat Chaturvedi -
Shri Bhubaneswar kalita

Shri Shantaram Naik
"Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy

8 छ | D

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT .

1. Shri A. K. Singh ~ Additional Secretary
Shri न. Jayakumar - Director
Shri Tirthankar Das - Additional Director

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND
AUDITOR GENERAL OF [NDIA ~

1. Shri P. Mukherjee - Additional Charge DAI (DCR)
2. Shri B. R. Mondat '- Principal Director (Railway Board)
3. She Manish Kumar - Principal Director (PAC)

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS

1. Shri Kundan Sinha - Member (T)
2, ShiS.C.Jethi ~ - Additional Member (Comm.}—*


_ BE.
2. At the outset, the Chairperson ‘PAC welcomed the Members of the Public
Accounts Committee (2015-16), representatives of the office of the C&AG of India and |
the Ministry of Railway (Railway 800) to the sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
convened to take oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Railways
(Railway Board} on the subject “Duat Freight -Policy for Transportation of tron Ore
Traffic in Indian Railways" based on the C&AG Report No. 14 of 2015

3. Thereafter, the Chairperson, PAC gave. a brief introduction of the subject, inter-
atia, the major Audit findings outlined below:: है

* Scrutiny by Audit reveals that the quantity shown as received in the ERs by the
61 consignees was less than the quantity transported by rail by 71.22 fakh MT,
which indicates that the quantities booked and fransported at domestic rate
were directed for third party trading. This quantity was not eligible for the
domestic rate and hence involves a penalty of Rs. 5,095.97 crore. Of these 61
consignees, 48 consignees failed to submit prescribed documents while है
booking the rakes.

¢ Non-submission/partial submission/submission of invalid documents in respect
of Steel Authority of India (SAIL) resulted in under charging of freight to the tune
of Rs, 4,838.80 crore.

+ Permission was granted by Railways Administration for delivery at the
unloading points of the consignments, . despite _non-subrnission/partiat
submission/submission of invalid documents, which resulted in freight evasion
af Rs, 4508.61 crore.

* Invali¢ documents for availing ‘the benefit to charge freight at domestic
consumption rate was submitted by 49 consignees. The booking of 190 rakes
resulted in freight evasion of Rs. 108.42 crore,

Thereafter, referring to the detailed review undertaken by the Audit which has
revealed critical gap and lack of enforcement of the institutional framework of the dual
freight policy, the Chairperson stated that the Railways have failed to exercise an
effective check white performing duties. ह


4, Thereafter, the representatives of aia Board briefed the Committee
about the genesis of the problem, and how Ralkways detected the same, The
representatives of the Raiway Board also stated that they have taken various steps in
this regard inter-alia mentioning about the ongoing CBI enquiry in the matter and also
about introduction of a software called Integrated Mines and Minerals Software (IMMS}

. to capture the TAN and TIN and all other relevant details of the consignors and

consignees.

5. Then, the members of the Committee asked questions. The representatives of
Railways responded to some of the questions. The witnesses promised that the reply
to questions which were nof readily available will be send in writing to the PAC
Secretariat later. The Chairman also directed the representatives of the Railway Board
fo give in writing the repties to all the queries raised by the Members within two weeks’

time.
6. The Committee also desired that since the matter pertains to various Perts and
involve the Excise and Custom officials, a meeting may be held with the Port
authorities as well as the CBEC to ascertain their views in connection with examination
of the subject “Dual Freight Policy for Transportation of iron Ore Traffic in Indian
Railways". ,

The witnesses, then, withdrew.

A copy of the verbatim proceedings has been kept on record.

_The Committee, then, adjourned.


LAE HA

—2q- APPEN 97 5५.9.

MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2016-17) HELD ON 24" June, 2016.

it

The Committee sat on Friday, the 24" June, 2016 from 1430 hrs to 4700 hrs in
Committee Room No. 'G-074', Parliament Library Building, New Dethi.

PRESENT

ProfK. ४. Thomage 00 08007 “हा SG hrairperSon= eesti रा मर

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA.
Shri Prem Singh Ghandumajra
Prof, Richard-tHlay
Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kictikar
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Smt. Riti Pathak :
Shri Neiphiu Rio
Shei Janardan Singh Sigriwat
Or. Kirit Somaiya”
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
छा. 7, Venugopal *

RAJYA SABHA

12. Shri Vijay Goet

43. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita

14. Shri Shantaram Naik

5... Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy

16. Shri Ajay Sancheti

f©Onowraw ७

a -४
=~ Oo

LOK SABHA.SECRETARIAT

1. Shri A. K. Singh - Additional Secretary
Shri T. Jayakumar + Director :
Shri A.K. Yadav - Deputy Secretary

, REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER Eee OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR
GENERAL OF INDIA

1, Mr. Prasenieet Mukherjee =~ - Dy. CAG (Commercial) - cum - Chairman,
. Audit Board .

-2. Ms. Pooja Sing Mondal - Principal Director (Railway Audit Board)


5६
3... Mr. Manish Kumar - Principal Director (PAC)
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS,

1. ShIVA.K. Mittal . Chairman, Railway Board
2. Shri Mohd. Jamshed - Member {Traffic}
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE STEEL EE RRS EN ATIVES OF THE STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LTD.

जग, ShtiPsKrSingh ५ - + 777 "+ Chairman, SAL
2. Shri Kalyan Maity ~ - Director (Raw Materials and Logistics}
3. Shri Raman ह ~ ED We (Oprns) ह
4, Shri JC Nathani ; - GM (0979)
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE CENTRAL “aire aie OF THE CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION OF INVESTIGATION

. Shri Rakesh Asthana - Additional Director, CBI, New Delhi

2. Shri Naveen Kumar Singh - DIG, HOB, ACB, Kolkata
2. At the outset, the Chairperson, PAC welcomed the members of the Public Accounts

Committee (2016-17), representatives of the Office of the C&AG of India, Ministry of
Railways (Railway Board), Central Bureau of investigation (CBI) and Steel Authority of
india Limited (SAIL) to the sitting of the Committee convened 10 take oral evidence of the
/ “representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board}, CBI and SAIL on the subject

‘Dual Freight Policy for Transportation of Iron Ore Traffic in indian Railways’ based on
_C&AG Report No. 14 of 2015

- 3. Thereafter, the Chairperson, PAC gave a brief introduction of the subject, infer-afia
mentioning the major Audit fi ndings as outlined below:- .

« Audit has scrutinized 90,766 railway receipts at the loading points and 1,20,088
receipts at unloading points out of which irregularities were noticed in 12,425 cases
at leading points and 15,889 cases at unloading points, involving a freight evasion

” of €7,883.85 crores and a penalty of € 11,412.72 crores.

* 71.22 lakh MT iron ore in case of 61 iron and steel manufacturing units which was
booked and transported at domestic consumption at freight rate have been diverted
for third party trading/export.

* There were no instructions of the Railway Board to compare the quantum of iron

: ~ .
ore transported by the Railways with the monthly-yearly consumption of iron ore for

domestic use as reflected in the ERs.


+ 3-८

- "७ - Even though Railway Board was-welkaware of the lapses in impterrientation of fhe >
policy, it has not issued any detailed guidelines to arrest the weaknesses brought
out. The Railway Board has conveniently abdicated its responsibilities by stating in
their reply dated 8 January 2015 that the issue was referred to Zonal Raliways and

- since a farge-number of -documents-were-fo-be collected and evaluated -it wauld
take time. oe

« The monitoring mechanism laid down in the form of appreciation (evaluation)
seports did not provide for suggestions for improvement in the policy.

« The staff deployed at various points to ensure compliance of documentary proof
and other pre-requisites were not adequately familiarized with the importance of the
safeguard mechanism, as a resutt, they failed to exercise an effective check while
performing the duties, leading to admission of invalid documents - declaration -
affidavit - for availing tariff at domestic rate.

न AS per the audit report, out of 61 consignees examined, 48 were found to have
failed to submit proper documents, however, only 8 patties were served notice

While highlighting the fact that 23 cases ‘elated to freight_evasion in case of
transportation of iron ore by rail are pending in various High Courts of Calcutta, Cuttack, ,
Karnataka and Ranchi, which involves an amount of Rs.6,912.25 crores, and are being |
“sought to be transferred to Supreme Court under transfer petition for speedier justice, the
Chairperson desired that the Chairman, Railway Board may bestow this personal attention
and make all-out efforis to protect the exchequer and ensure recovery of the total ‘amount,
if necessary, engaging learned Attorney General, after consuttation with-the Ministry of

Law and Justice.

4. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) briefed
the Committee about the justification for implementation of the policy, losses incurred by
the Railways due to submission of incomplete documents which also led to evasion of
” . payment of higher freight tates applicable to the iron ore meant for exports. They have
also briefed on how the lapses were first detected by the vigilance department of the South
‘Eastern Railways and later on after consultation with CVC the cases were transferred to
CBI,


40

5. Then the members sought clarification from the representatives of the Railway on (i)
lack of adequate internal’ control mechanism; (2) need for investigation of all cases in a
time-bound manner, a systematic failure and corruption in Railways etc. The
representatives of SAIL while briefing the Committee accepted that there were lapses on
the part of SAIL in non submission of requisite documents for transporting iron ore for
* domestic consumption by the steel plant; however, stated that the SAIL had neither gained
from such lapses. nor did it cause losses to the Railways, on account of evasion of
“payment of higher tariff rates which were applicable to exports, as it had consumed all the
tron ore domestically.
6. ‘Subsequently, the representatives of CBI briefod ithe Committee about the
investigation conducted by them in the matter wherein they had suo moto registered FIR in
17 regular cases and filed charge-sheet in 13 of the said cases, “Further, they had
_ fecommended departmental action against 145 employees of the .Railways. They had
further submitted that fraudutent losses on account of said 13 cases amounted to -
Rs, 305.60 crores and the remaining amount of losses was attributed fo failure within
Railways to secure submission of documents, non-levy of penalties and non collection of
levied penalties eic. है
re Chairman, Railway Board repked that action has been taken against 62 officials of
railways and under which 6 under major penalty, 41 under minor penalty, 15 under
administrative action and one case still under process. He further apprised the Committee
that around हैं 7000 crore was recovered from the evaders of freight policy.
8. The Chairperson , thanked the representatives of Ministry of Railways, Central
Bureau of Investigation (CBI) and Stee! Authority of India Limited (SAIL) for appearing
before the Committee and for furnishing information in connection with the examination of
the subject and also thanked the representatives of the office of C&AG of India for
providing assistance to the Committee in this regard. He also directed that other:
information, which was not readily available with them may be furnished in writing to the

Committee at the earliest.
The witnesses then withdrew,
A copy of the verbatiny' proceedings has been kept on record.

The Committee then adjourned.


Zo PN Aaa &

Aap APE ROK ~ SL
MINUTES .OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC.

ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2016-17) HELD ON 01 DECEMBER, 2016.

The Committee sat from 1015 hrs. to 1055 hrs. on 01" December, 2076 in
Room No. "51", Partiament House, New Dethi.

PRESENT
Prof. K. V. Thomas - हि — “ “Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
Shri Nishikant Dubey
Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwat_
_Dr. Kirit Somaiya

br. P. Venugopat

Smt. Riti Pathak

Shri Neiphiu Rio
0. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur —
41. Shri Shivkumar 0. Udasi

RAJYA SABHA

12. Shri Bhupender Yadav

43. Shri Shantaram Naik’
44. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
15, Shri Ajay Sancheti

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

4. Shi A. K. Singh - Additional Secretary

“2, Shri 5.0, Chaudhary “75 ० +- Joint Secretary

3. ShriT. Jayakumar a, - Director

"4. ShriTirthankarDas.- ~ - Additional Director

5. Smt, Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary ‘
6. Shri AK. Yadav ~ . “= Deputy Secretary


REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND ~
“AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA ह ता

Lo ‘Shri Nand Kishore - Deputy C&AG (DCR)

2. Shri Mukesh P. Singh - Director General of Audit
3. Shri Manish Kumar - - » Principal Director of Audit {PAC} ४- 7
4. Ms. Pooja Singh Mandal - Principal Director (Railways)

2, At the outset, the Chairperson, PAC welcomed the Members fo the Sitting of
the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft Reports for
consideration: हु ः

(0). रची report on ‘Performance Audit of Dual Freight Policy for
- Transportation of Jron Ore Traffic in Indian Railways" based on.
C&AG Report No.14 of 2015; and है

i} Draft report’ on Action Taken by the .Government on the:

: Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their
Thirtieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha}on "Global Estate Management
by the Ministry of External Affairs”, पु

3. The Chairperson invited Suggestions of the Members on the above mentioned

draft’ Reports. After discussing the draft Reports, the Committee adopted both the

Reports with some changes/modifications.

4. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize these Reports in the light
of verbal discussion and consequential changes arising out of the suggestions by the
Members factual verification by the Audit and present the same to Parfiament.

The officiats of the C&AG then withdrew.

5, It was’ also decided that Committee wilt undertake on the spot study visit to
Kotkata, Hyderabad/Visakhapatnam and Chennai from 18 to 21 January, 2018.

6. . The Committee also selected a new subject namely, ‘Review of Monetary
Policy’ in view of the recent deveiopments and decided to take evidence of the
Governor, RB! and representatives’ of the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Economic Affairs and Department of Financial Services) in January, 2017. *

The Committee then adjourned, ©