v

PERFORMANCE GF IMPORT ANE EXPORT
TRADE FACILITATION THROUGH CUSTOMS
PORTS

MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE-
CENTRAL BOARD OF EXCISE AND CUSTOMS)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

an

SEVENTY FIFTH REPORT

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC ie

SEVENTY-FIFTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

tice coroon | OF IMPORT AND EXPORT ome | |

FACILITATION THROUGH CUSTOMS PORTS

MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE- CENTRAL
BOARD OF EXCISE AND CUSTOMS}

Presented to Speaker, Lok Sabha on S12.

Presented to Lok Sabha on: IB Fe POE

‘ : . हु Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 182.27

a _ 4
RS

५ LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
: NEW DELHE -

April, 2017/ Vaisakha, 1939 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2018-47)

COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-Ill (DIRECT & INDIRECT TAXES)
OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2016-17)

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2017-18)

INTRODUCTION
REPORT
CHAPTER! Introductory .
CHAPTER! = Audit Review
CHAPTER Iil Transaction Cost of Trade Facilitation

CHAPTER tV
CHAPTER ९

Gains Through Trade Facilitation

६ Analysis and Report on Transaction Cost

Governance, Risk and Compliance

“Implementation of Trade Facilitation Measures = ~~

Key Performance Indicators

Delay in Allotment ‘of Berths by - Port Authorities
Resulted in Cost and Time Overrun fo the Shippers

Delay in Clearing the Goods by the !mporters at Ports
Delay in Rectification of Errors -in Import General
Manifests (IGM}

Delay in filing of BEs by imporfers
Examination of imported Goods by Customs -

Defay in implementing [nfrastructure Projects for free
movenient of cargo affecting facilitation

Non-completion of elevated four fane link road from
Chennai Port to. Maduravoyal

Non-completion of Chennai Ennore Port Road
Connectivity Project (Formerly Ennore Manali Road
Improvement Project (EMRIP) -

Lack of Rail infrastructure to move containers fo ICDs

u

>
a
m

{iti}
(४)

| (vii):

(ix)


APPENDICES

*{, -Minutes of the Sitfing of the Public Accounts Committee
(2046-17) held on 24° April, 2017 ‘ -

il. Minutes of the Sitting of the Sub-Committee-ti of Public
Accounts Committee (2016-17) held on 24" April, 2017

Il. Minutes of the Sitling of the Sub-Committee-Ilf of Public
Accounts Committee (2016-17) held on 260 October, 2016

IV. - Minutes of the Sifting of the Sub-Committec-Iil of Public
‘Accounts Committee (2016-17) held on’ 77 October, 2016

Y. Minutes of the Sitting bf the Sub-Committee-II! of Public
Accounts Committee (2016-17) held on 26" September,
2046

VI. Minutes of the Sitting of the Sub-Committee-Ilt of Public
Accounts Committee (2016-17) held on 28" September,
_ 2046
a

“to be appended at the fime of printing


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2045-17)

Prof. K.V. Thomas - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
3. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
4, Shri Nishikant Dubey
5. Prot, Richard Hay
6. ” Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Smt. Riti Pathak
9. Shri Neiphiu Rio‘
10. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
44. Shri Abhishek Singh
42. Or. Kirit Somaiya
13, Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
14. Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi
15. Dr. P Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA

46. | Shri Naresh Agrawat |
17. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
18.” Shri Bhupender Yadav
19, Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
20. Shri Shantaram Naik

24. Shri Sukhendv Sekhar Roy
22... Shri Ajay Sancheti

SECRETARIAT : हु
1. Shri AK. Singh - Additional Secretary
2. ShiS.C.Chaudhary = - Joint Secretary
3. Shii T. Jayakumar - Director
4. Smt. Bharfi$, Tuteja - Deputy Secretary
5.

Shri Deepankar Kamble - Committee Officer

* Blected wef 09.08.2016 vice Shei Vijay Goel, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f. 05.07.2016.

कप


Composition of Sub-0

Convenor: 4. ShriNishikant Dubey
Alternate Convenor; 2. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
Members: : 3. Shri Shivkumar 0. Udasi
4. Prof, Richard tlay
5. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
6. Shri Ajay Sancheti
f
रू


en gaasan

10.
44.
12.
13.
14.
15,

“46.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2017-48)

Shei Mallikarjun Kharge | - Chairperson

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Prem Singh Chandumajia
Shri Nishikant Dubey हु
जा Gajanan Chandrakant Kortikar
Shri Bhartruhari Mabtab

_ Smit. Riti Pathak
Shri Neiphiu Rio

~ Shri Abhishek Singh
Prof. Ram Shanker
Dr. Kirit Somaiya
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur

* Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi
Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Naresh Agrawal

Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Shri Shantaram Naik
Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy

"Shri Ajay Sancheti

_ Shri Bhupender Yadav

(vil)


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee, having been authorised by the
Commitice, do present this Seventy-fith Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on "PERFORMANCE
OF IMPORT AND EXPORT TRADE FACILITATION THROUGH CUSTOMS PORTS" based on
C&AG's Report No. 13 of 2015 relating 10 Ministry of Finance-Department of Revenue: Central
Board of Excise and Customs. है हु

2. The above-mentioned Report of the Comptealler & Auditor General of India was laid on
the Table of the House on 5™ May, 2015.

3. The Public Accounts Committee (2016-17) took up the subject for detaited examination
and report. A Sub-Committee under the convenorship of Shri Nishikant Dubey, M.P. and a
Member of PAC was allocated the subject for in-depth examination and report. The Sub-
Committee took evidence of ihe representatives of the Ministry of Finance-Depariment of
Revenue, Central Board of Excise and Customs (0850), Ministry af Commerce, Director
General,of Foreign Trade (DGFT), Ministry of Railways, Railway Board, Ministry of Shipping,
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, National Highways Authority of India (NHAI), Ministry
of Textiles, indian Ports Association {IPA}, Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust (NPT) and private
[86९ bodies’ such as Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCH,
Federation of indian Export Organisations (FIEO) and Associated Chambers of Gommerce and
industry of India (ASSOCHAA) on she subject at their sittings held on 20", 26" September,
2646 and 7", 2७ October,- 2016, Accordingly, a draft Report was prepared and the Sub-
Committee and thereafter the PAC (2016-17) considered and adopted the same at their
respective sittings held on 24" April, 2617. The minutes of the Sittings are appended to the
Report. हर

4. For facility ‘of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations of
the Committee have been printed in thick type and form Part- It of the Report.

5... The Committee thank the Sub-Committee for taking oral evidence and obtaining
information on the subject as well as finalizing and placing the draft Report before the Main
Committee.

6. The Commitiee would also like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Finance-Department of Revenue, Central Board of Excise and Customs (CBEC),
Ministry of Commerce, Director General of Foreign Trade (DGFT), Ministry of Railways, Railway
Board, Ministry of Shipping, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, National Highways
Authority of India (NHAI), Ministry of Textites, Indian Ports Association (IPA), Jawahatial Nehru
Port Trust (JNPT) and private trade bodies such as Federation of Indian Chambers of .
Commerce. arid Industry (FICC), Federation of indian Export Organisations (11६0) and
Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India (ASSOCHAY) for tendering evidence
before them and furnishing the requisite information to the Commiltee in connection with the
examination of the subject. . a oe

7. The Gommitlee place on record their appreciation of the assistance tendered to therm in
the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of india and the Committee
Secretariat in preparation of ihe Report.

- NEW DELH!; . PROF. K.V. THOMAS

24 April, 2017 Chairperson,

04 Vaisakha, 1939 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


REPORT
PART-

1... INTRODUCTORY

1. The Indian economy ig one of the fastest growing economies among the .

emerging markets. today. One important cause is the rapid growth in international trade.

However, in order to sustain the current pace of export growth in a highly competitive
oa global market, there is a need to reduce the associated 00915, Trade Facilitation is

aimed al ensuring the movemen! and clearance of goods across borders within the
shortest time at the minimum cost. Reduction in idle time in any segment of the trading
process would reduce iransaction costs and would facilitate trade in general and
enhance the price competitiveness of Indian goods in international market Delays not
only increase the cost of compliance but jeads to impediments to efficient trading across
borders like congestion at the ports. As a’measure of trade promotion, trade facilitation
has’ come to occupy a significant place in the multitaterat discussions on trade in the
recent past due to the importance given by the international community in liberatizing

trade.

जे 2... India has been part of the public discourse on trade facilitation since December
, 4998 when the World Trade Organization (WTO) Ministerial Conference was held in
Singapore. Over the years, Government of India had taken initiatives to liberalize trade
7 by simplifying and raiionalizing the procedural complexities. Several steps taken during
_ the last decades to facilitate frade are (i) simplification of rules and procedures, (9) IT
initiatives, like-the Indian Customs Electronic Data Interchange System (ICES)
launching of an elecironic commerce portal Indian’ Customs and Excise Gaieway
. {(ICEGATE), Risk Management System (RMS), GrapeNet, an internet based electronic
3... sOffware systems developed by Agriculture & Processed Food Producis Export
Development Authority (APEDA) Special Economic Zones (SEZ) online Director
General’ of Foreign Trade-Electronic Data Interchange (DGFT-EDN,. electronic bank
” redilisation certificate (e-BRC} and Port Community System (PCS)



3. India's performance in terms of ‘Trading Actoss Borders’ ts not encouraging anc
ftranks a disiant 126 out of 189 countries, according fo the World Bank Report for 2015. . ,
The number of documents requiréd to tmport and export, the time taken and cost io :
import and export has more or 1055 remained the same in the past 4 years in spile of the

IT initiatives and various facilitation measures introduced by the Government.

4. Further, trade facilitation gained currency with the agreernent by the member
countries ‘including india at ihe Bali Ministertal Conference of the WTO members in 7
December 2013 in culmination of the discussion initiated in WTO Singapore Ministerial
Conference ‘in December 1996 This necessitates India making binding commitmenis on
facilitating Customs and other border procedures .which includes arnong others,
publication and availability of information to members, providing for an advance ruling
mechanism, an appeal and/or review mechanism, regulating the fees and charges other
than duties, faster release and clearance of goods, border agency cooperation between
the members, ‘minimizing the incidence and complexity of import, export and transit
formalities and to decrease and simplify document requirements. ‘

5. Though india is already in the process of implementing several of these
measures, a review of the existing facifitation measures is necessary to straighten out
the short comings, for India to mest its obligations on trade facilitation. Effectively
implementing: these provisions and disciplines within an internationally agreed time
है frame may be much more challenging.

6... .The issties involved 180 direct bearing on the competitiveness of the Indian

producers, exporters and importers which impacted their product-coéting. Exports and
हि other subsequent obligation/net foreign exchange eamings had casual linkages

*..Comesponding to the duties forgone while availing the custom duty remission/exempiion

‘schemes of Government of India. Import facilitation affected market access and

domestic competition whereas Export facilitation affocted productivity, tax revenue,

- growth etc.



7. The framework for trade facilitation involves reduction in transaction cost anc
lime through:
: 1. integration of related stakeholders, regulators and infrastructure providers;
हे ॥. -.. online clearance of exports and imparts;
nF accreditation of entities;
WV. harmonization of tariff information; and
ov. risk based internal controls and audit

i AUDIT REVIEW

4
8. The Performance Audit covered the various measures initiated by the
Department of Commerce (DoC) and Department of Revenue (DoR} to streamline the

‘Customs procedures in reducing the latencies and costs associeted with trading across

‘borders and in implementing the various frade facilitation measures The main focus

and thrust was pn the implementation of the certain trade facilitation measures.

9. The Performance Audit examined the implementation of the trade facilitation
Measures communicated through Foreign Trade Policy, Circulars, Instructions, Public
Notice and Minutes of meetings efc. by the DoC/DoR. and by analyzing the data
gathered for the period 2010-11 fo 2013-14 from the various stake holders. A time
release study was ‘also conducted during the course of this Performance Audit by .
analyzing the overall fime taken al the various stages in Customs and ports in the

clearance of import and export consignments

10. The Pefformance Audit has been conducted to gain an assurance that

corresponding to the Foreign Trade Policy (FTP), 2009-14:

“a the various tmport and Export trade facilitation measures implemented by
the Board had yielded the intended resuits,

(i) the various stakeholders viz., Port, Airport, Customs Dept, 00९ Bank and
- other organization work in a co-ordinated manner towards enhancing —
trade facilitation; _

(ii) the mechanisms in place are effective in monitoring the implementation of
- the trade facilitation measures;



(iv) the Board's circidars/instructions have becn cffectively implemented and
whether the taracts set by the Board have been achieved; and

(vy) there exists appropriaie and effective mechanisrn for timely and effective
redressat of grievances relating to facililation.

11. Against this backdrop, the Public Accounts Committee (2015-16) selected the
subject as reporied in the C&AG's Report No. 13 of 2015 (Union Government
Department of Revenue-Indirect Taxes-Customs) for detailed examination and report.
Subsequently, the subject was referred to the Sub-Committee on Direct & Indirect
Taxes ie, Sub-Commiittee-Ilt dealing with subjects on taxation’ Subsequently, the
Committee obtained background note and requisite replies and some other clarifications
from the Ministries of Finance - Department of Revenue (MoF - DoR), Textiles (MoT),
Railways (MoR}, Shipping (MoS), Commerce & Industry - Depariment of Commerce
(MoC&i - DoC), Road Transport & Highway (MoRT&H); from public sector undertaking,
National Highway Authority of India {NHAI); and irade. bodies, Federation of indian
Export Organizations (FIEO), Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of india
(ASSOCHAM) and Federation of indian Chambers of Commerce and industry (FICCI.
However, due to paucity of time, the examination on the subject could not be completed
duriig 2015-16. The subject was carried forward to the successor Committee ie. PAC
(2016-17) and subsequently, again was referred to the Sub-Committee-til on Direct &
indirect Taxes examining subjects relating to taxation. The Committee took oral
evidence of the representatives of the MoF - DoR on 20.09.2016. The Committee also
took oral evidence of the representatives of the MoT, MoR, and MoS on 26.09.2016.
The Committee further took oral evidence of the representatives of the MoRT&H and
NHAI on 07.10.2046. Lastly, the Commiltee took oral evidence of the representatives of
the trade bodies like FIEO, ASSOCHAM and FICCI on 26.10.2016, From these oral
है evidences, the Committee obtained diverse information on the subject. Based an the
ह डर information gathered, the Committee proceeded with examination of the relevant issues
‘in detail as outlined in the -suscecding paragraphs,

fe



I TRANSACTION COST OF TRADE FACILITATION

A.. Gains Through Trade Facilitation

42. Due to poor facilitation the impact on the transaction cost has been estimated to
the tune of % 42,000 ciure (US$ 6-7 billion) according to the Strategic Ptan of

Department of Commerce (2026). Another report by the ‘Peterson Institute for

International Economics (PIIF 2013) estimate that significant trade facilitation could

increase global GDP by almost $1 trillion. This has been used in World Development

indicators which has been relied upon by Second Task Force on Transaction Costs

13. The Diroctor General Foreign trade (DGFT), in their written submission to the
Commitlee stated that poor infrastructure, high interest rates high cost of power, tack of
full autornation in Departments dealing with trade are few important reasons that
adversely impact trade. This has led to India’s low ranking (426/189) in “Trading Across
Border” parameter of “Doing Business” Report 2044 of the World Bank. However, no

current estimates are available on impact of poor trade facilitation on the transaction

cost. The target 18 fo decrease the transaction cost for imports and exports. The aim of

the Government is to be among the top 50 countries on the list complied each year by

the World Bank in its report on doing business.

14. The data as per "Doing Business Report 2016 (DB16)" of the World Bank for the

“Trading across borders” parameter.comparing India with the country at Rank 50 and

the country at Rank 4 is as follows:

= for Trading =a Border 3 ae : .
parameters in DB16 report _ (Rank 133) |. (Rank 50) {Rank 1)
.| Gost to expert: Border Compliance (US$) ~ 368. ~ “460 | 335
Cost to export: Documentary compliance | 104 गा जा 37
(७७$) हु

| Cost fo export: Border Compliance (US$) “556 583 “220

- | Cost:to export: Documentary Compliance aa | 80 | 37

USS)



45. From 118 above, the Government has fixed iime lirnits for various services for
DGFT ‘offices 38 specified in the Hand Book of Procedure 2015-20 prescribing the

following time lines for disposal of the requests:

S.No. | Category of Application ~ i Limit for
- in working days}
i IEC Number 2
“il Advance Authorisation whcre input-output norms are 3
notified or under paragraph 4.07 of HBP
"iii | Fixation of input output norms \ 120

ए |issuance of EPCG Authorisations ह “3
“TA Authorisations under Gem & Jewellery scheme f 3
| vi} Revalidation of Authorisation and extension of export | 3

obligation period by R.A

vib Acceptance 2ofBGuT हु हु 3
- “Vir | Redemplion/EODC of Advance Authorisation/DFIA [45
7 ix | Redemption of EPFG ‘Authorisation ‘and = of 30
2 |... | eenut
~ xT issuance /renewal of status certificate .. _ 3
7 | Amendment of any category of Authorisation a)
xi | Miscellaneous ह ~ हु | 0 :
Mii | Refund of OBK/TED under deemed expot 1: 30 |
xiv [= of Brand Rate for duty-drawback पर Doe 30
we _ “Sy [Schemes of Chapter3. a | 3

46. “When the Committee enguited as to what efforts have been made to -bring

improvement in trade facilitation procedures, viz. appeal procedures; fecs and charges

-formalifies in documentation; fornatities in automation; formalities in procedures; as well

5


as in governance and impariiality, the Deparment of Commerce replicd that its attached
offices like Directorate General of Foreign Trade (DGFT) function as a facilitator ot
exports and imporis. Focus is on good governance, which depends on efficient,

transparent and accountable delivery systems. The following are the major initiatives:

: . (i) Facility of Electronic tmporter Exporler Code (०-६९):
a“ Obtaining IEC is mandatory for doing exporlfimport froméo India. DGFT in
a February, 2015 has introduced facitity of issuing e-fEC for which an application

could be made online on DGFT website and Applicants can upload the
documents and pay the required fee through Credit card and Net banking. Such
applications are processed online by Regional Authority of DGFT which
issucs/emails a digitally signed ९-२५ within 2°working days of receiving an
applicafion. DGFT is cunently developing a system to automate the
complete process and issue JEC affer — online validation of applicant firm's
credentials through PAN data base of CBDT and DIN and CIN databases of
MICA. The time lag between filing of an IEC application and issuance of IEC will
be reduced 10 few minutes. The process would be online and automatic and wilt
benciit all new firms wiling to exportimport from India.

पु x.
पी). Reduction in the number of documents:

New FTP has brought about.reduction in the number of documents required for
export and import from 7 & 10 respectively to 3 each now. Documents required
for export of goods from India are Bill of Lding/Ainway Bill, Commercial
Invoice cum Packing List and Shipping Bill/Bill of Export, The mandatory
documents required for import of goods into India are Bill of Lading/Airway
Bill, Commerciat Invoice cum Packing List and Bill of Entry. The saving in ferms
of cost and time associated with t he dispensed documents would improve Ease
of Doing Business in India. पु

(iit) Facility of Onfine filing of documentsfapplications and Paperless trade
so in 24x7 environment: है है :

7” DGFT has put in place a robust EDI system for the purpose of export
गण . _ facilitation and good governance. Following are the major initiatives:

* - (a) Message Exchang Exchange with Community partners: ‘DGFT has set upa
me - secured EDI message exchange system for various documentation related

activities. including import and export authorizations established with other
administrative depariments,. namely, Customs, Banks and EPCs: This has
- Féduced the “physical interface of exporters and importers with the Government
Depariments and -is a. significant measures .in the direction of reduction of
‘transaction cost. The endeavor of DGFT has-been. io enlarge. the scope of
EDI io achieve higher level of integration with partner departments. Customs,



(9)

(०)

- (9)

(8)

Banks, Export Promotion Councils (EPCs) are major community pariners of

DGFT for message exchange. Details of messages being exchanged are as
foliows: ह

‘Message Exchange with Customs- (i). fmporter Exporter Code Number;
(i)Authorizations/Scripts for DFIA, AA, EPCG; (iii) Shipping Bills for Duty

Free import Authorisation (DFIA), Advance Authorisation (AA), Export ©

Promotion Capital Goods (EPCG), Merchandise Exports from India
(MEIS}

Message Exchange with eBiz (https:tiwww.ebiz.gov.in) () Application for
tmporter Exporter Code

(i Application for eJEC

Message Exchange with Banks {i} Application Fee (ji) Electronic Bank
Realisation Certificate (e-BRC} data

Message Exchange with EPCs- Registration cum Membership Certificate
(RCMC) data.

Ail the Regional Authorities (RA) of DGFT have been networked with high speed
interneta The applications are received and processed electronically.

DGFT has provided the facility of on line filing of applications for issuance of
Importer Exporter Code and various authorizations/scrips. Applicants can sign
applications with a digital signature and submit electronicaity to the concerned
Regional Authority of DGFT. ontine filing has minimized the physical interface. A
facility has been created to upload documents in Exporter/importer Profile and

there is no need to submit copies of permanent records/documents (e.g. IEC,

Manufacturing license, RCMC, PAN etc.) repeatedly with each application, once

“uploaded. However, certain documents like Certificates issued by Chariered

Accountants/Company Secretary/Cost Accountant etc. still have fo be filled in
physical form. .

. DGFT is one of the first digital signature enabled organisation of the Government

of India’(GO!), which has introduced a higher tevel of Encrypted 2048 bit digital
signature. -

Application fee can be paid online through debit/credit cards and electronic fund
transfer from 53 Banks. No exporters can not ‘only apply ontine for benefis
under various schemes under Foreign Trade Policy but also make payment of
fhe required application fee online, thus totally obviating the need to visit the

ffices. of DGFT or banks for submission of applications. This. facility would also
‘make the field offices of DGFT paperless fo a large extent and enable them to

“function i.24x7 environments, while saving extra expenditure on storage space
“It'would also ensure transfer of the fee amount into governmeni account on T+4
- Working day, avoiding undue delay in deposit of bank drafts. etc.


{f} Online system jor expediting issuance of authorizations for dual use items
(Special Chemicals, Organisms, materials, Equipment’s and Technologies [SCOMET])
has been developed, It will be made operational soon.

‘(g) 8 Complaint, Resolution System for Resolution of EDI related issues has been
set up. It is being actively used by exporters. There ts also an online system in place to
tesolve complaints received through public grievances portal of Depariment of
Administrative Reforms & Public Grievances.

(h)  The-e-BRC (Electronic Bank Realization Certificate) project: Etectronic Bank
Realisation Certificate (८3२९) system allows clectronic transmission of export related
Foreign Exchange Realisation information from the respective Banks fo the DGFT's
server. DGFT operalionalised eBRC project on June 5, 2012. The project has creaied
an integrated’ platiorm for-receipt, processing and subsequent use, of all Bank
Realisation related information including information sharing wilh Government
organisations, eBRC was made mandatory with effect from 17" August, 2042. So far
more than 1.4 crore eBRCs have been caputred by this system. DGFT has signed .
MoUs with 12 state governments for sharing of eBRC data to facilitate refund of VAT by
the state governments to exporters. Mou has also becn signed with Enforcement
Directorate. :

(i Viebile App: DGFT has developed a mobile application called "DGFT"
which allows exporters/importers to access the foreign trade policy and = other

“related documents in an easy-to-use searchable format. The trade community
would be able to check the status of transmission of various authorisations and
the shipping bills through the dynamic mobile app. The following infomation
can be accessed through the Mobile Apps:

Ministers Speech, Foreign Trade Policy, Foreign Trade Procedures, Foreign Trade
Policy Statement, Appendices and-ANF of FTP, Know ITC (HS) code for a product,
Know MEIS rate for a product, Application status, Check latest tweets, Download forms,
appendices etc. पु ह :

The Department of Revenue repliéd that Customs automation is an important part of
overall trade facilitation measures. As regards automation, ICES 1.5 is the core intemal

automation system of Customs Department intended 10 provide automated customs |
clearance systems. 5 outreach 8 constantly heing increased to bring maximum
number and remotest locations on the EDI Platform. At present 127 locations are
already on 501 platform. More sites are being planned to migrate to ICES. Mosi of the
- ‘activities related it.customs clearance have already been altomated and DoS has now
undertaken the task io enhance the ease of doing business by reducing manual
interface and reducing/replacing manual documentation by. online verification of
: message exchanges with other partner régulatory agencies. Facilities like integration


with 'SEZ online’, Plant Quarantine and FSSAI have already been iaunched. This will

ensure trade facilitation by reducing cost of compliance, expediting clearance and will

reduce interface with officers. Following measures have been taken to extend trade

facilitation, to keep the citizens informed and to provide effective and efficient services:

iti.

vi

vii.

x,

Remote ED| Servite_for filing documents (BE/SBAGM/EGM/CGM) -

Almost 1.5 crores Customs documents are filed through RES services per
annum. People do not need to go office for submissionffiting of
documents. They file all types of documents from anywhere in india for
any port at any time.

e-Payment Importer or exporter do not require fo visit to bank for
payment of any kind of Customs duty. They pay it from their premises and
that to for multiple transactions in one stroke. More than 98% of customs
duties are paid online through this gateway. 21 Banks are connected

through this gateway.

Real Time Document’s tracking system, 360 Degree view has been
provided to the trade and industry for all types of documenis processed at
Customs 501 System. It maintains Transparency and accountability.

Online Messaging: Different types of data related to customs clearances
are shared with ICD, Sea and Air Custodians through ICEGATE of
Customs EDIT System. .

Banks Connectivity: for customs 009 payment and export incentives
disbursement’ banks are connected through e-gateway and Safe File
Transfer Protocols.

Shipping Lines and Alnines: e-filing of facitity of IGM, EGM is provided.

Console Agents: Consoles are filed ontine by Console Agents. है

Query Reply; Query and reply are exchanged 01178 है

-Licesing Authority_connectivity: DGFT. receives SB data online and

fransmiis licenses online for processing and uses.

: Forex -Management: RB! EDPMS is connected through SFTP to share

export data and Foreign Exchange realisation related information.

Daily Reports and’ Customs duty. calculator. It provides relevant
information to the users. हु


xi, - 240 Helpdesk and application support, To provide effective uninierrupted
services, toll free and, e-mail services of help desk and application
supporis are provided round the clock. - है

xii, Connectivity with Several Govt. Agencies; Other Government agencics
like Ministry of Commerce, Ministry of Steel, Ministry of Shipping, Ministry
of Finance (DGOV and Pr. CCA) Ministry of Railway, Ministry of
Agriculture and FSSA! ७०. are connected online with: Customs EDI
System for data sharing and business process.

xiv. Customs SEZ integration; Customs SEZ integration has since been
completed. .

xv. RMS: Risk Management System facilitates customs clearances based on
risk parameters.

xvi Self Declaration: Customs provides self-Declaration syslem and facilitate

accredited clients based on several parameters. Post Clearance Audit
also facilitaies clearance of goods.

An Indian Customs Single Window Project has begun with the establishment of
an appropriate *adiinistrative structure in the form of an inter-ministerial Steering.
Group that is chaired by Mernber (Customs), CBEC, a Project Management Group in
CBEC and Project Management Units in thé Ministries. As an interim measure, the
Board has implemented van electronic online message exchange between the Food
Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) and the Department of Plant
Protection, Quarantine and Storage (2019) with the Customs with effect from 1.4.2015
at JNPT (Nhavasheva), ICD, Tughlakabad and ICD, Patparganj. it has been decided
that with effect from 1.4.2015 importers, exporters, customs brokers, shipping lines,
airlines or their agents ‘shall have the facility to use Digital Signature Certificate for fiting
‘Customs process documents viz. Bills of Entry, Shipping Bills, IGM (General
Declaration and Cargo Declaration), EGM (General Declaration), CGM through Remote
ED! System {RES). For the present, the facility of using digital signatures is optional for
all users by the ACP importers are required to mandatorily file Bills of Entry with digital
signature. wef. 15.2015. Department of Revenue has decided that in case an
‘importer/exporier submits a commercial invoice cum packing list that contain alt
necessary data fields/information otherwise contained separately in these document, 8
separate packing list would net be insisted upon 9५ Customs. However, the option to


do so is with ihe imporierfexporier. As a 16501 the documents ordinarily roquired by
the Customs stand reduced io only 3 viz. Bi} or Entry or Shipping Bill, commerciat
invoice cum packing list and Bill of Lading or Airway Bill. On the legal side (for appeal
- @tc), the Government has taken following measures for improvement in trade facilitation’ -
procedure.
(i) Keeping in view the spirit of National Litigation Policy, CBEC has issued |
instructions laying down threshold limit for fling Departmental Appeals as

Rs. 25 lakh, Rs. 10 fakh and Rs. 5 lakh before Supreme Court, High Court
and CESTAT respectively to reduce the number of appeals filed.

(ii) Scope of the Seitlement Commission and Authority ior Advance Rulings
हु has been further expanded. :

(ii) ~ Montary limit of the cases heard and disposed by Single Memebr Benches
of CESTAT has been enhanced from Rs. 10 lakhs fo Rs. 50

(iv) Establishemin of six Additional Benches of CESTAT has been approved
by the Government.

- (५) Field formaiions are sensitized from Time to time for regular monitoring of
litigation cases and also for taking various steps fo improve legal side of
inditect tax administration

17. In this connection, Department of Revenue submitted that several nieasures for

enhancing trade facilitation through simplified and automated procedures have been

taken by Dopartment of Revenue in the recent past. These initiatives will have positive

impact on reducing in cost of trade operations dwell time. While many measures are

being taken to streamline and automate procedures, reduce documentation and cargo

release time, the cast of trade operations also dependent upon charges imposed by
है othor regulatory agencies and stakeholders in the logistics chain suchas shipping lines
. port operators, custodians transporters etc.

18.- During oral evidence, the Revenue Secretary submitted as under:

"1 would like to briefly tell the Committee about the steps which | have
- already taken. In terms of five things, we have taken a lot of steps. First,
in terms of simplification of procedure, second, in terms of reduction of
documentation, the number of documents which are required for import

|.



and export. Third, in terms of automation, improving our automation,
fourth, in ferms of belier inter agency coordination because a lot of
agoncies are involved at the port and at the airport level. So, how to
achieve them? We have done a lot of things. Fifth, of course, is the focus
monitoring which is now taking place, not only at the level of port where
there is a customer facilitation committee but also at the country level
_ where | am heading one facilitation committec. Sir, if | give you some’
details of nine major steps we have taken in the last one year, the first and
the foremost is that from ‘st Aprit, 2016, we have launched something
called SWIFT Single Window Interface for Facilitating Trade. SWIFT is 8.
single gateway for all the importers and exporters. We have introduced
from 1st April, 2016 an integrated Single declaration which combines nine
different forms of six different agencies into one form. So, only one form
_has to be filed for import and export and ‘these nine agencies are customs,
-FSSAL, plant quarantine, animal quarantine, Drug Controller, Wildlife
Control Bureau and Textile Commissioner. These are the customer and
six other agencies. .So, this is something which we have done, We have
also introduced integrated risk management system. So, instoad of every
agency picking up their sample for testing, we have asked them to give
their risk parameters which are fed into the computer and we have a
sample based on that and custom have authorised in some cases. in
8076 cases, they are doing it themselves 10 also do the sample checking
of the things. So, that is something which we are doing. SWIFT has been
a major innovation. It has really been received very well.. The second
_ thing is that we have introduced fifing of all documents online with digitat
signature and as of now, 97 per cent of import and export documents are
_ filed online, only 3 per cent are coming manually now. Sir, in the Budget
last year, we introduced for accredited customers of our department
particularly importers. We have allowed them 15 days time for deferred
duty’ payment because when the cargo comes, immediately the
assessment etc fakes time and duty calculation takes time. Tilt the duty is

_ paid, the cargo is held up. So, we have said that such accredited clients

can pay it within 15 days. So, we have allowed them to clear the cargo
without the payment of duty. Then, the electronic delivery orders now are
being sent not only to"CFS station fo shipping lines, to the port authority.
So, we are having an elecironic exchange of communication. In 19 sea
. ports and 17 air cargo complexes, we have introduced a 24X7 custom
clearance, So, we are there 24X7 in 19 sea ports and 17 air cargo
compléxes. We have also signed that WTO facilitation agreement. It is a
multilateral agreement, We have signed that agreement and as per the
conditionality of that agreement, we have io give trade facilitation of a
_ ¢ertain value, ofa certain kind of a standard, so that standard we are
* trying fo match with now with WTO Standard. The Committee,.as |
“mentioned, custom clearance facilitation’ committee has been set up af
every sea port and airport in addition to one at the country level in which !
. call a-meeting of Commerce Ministry and all other Ministries. The

13


warehousing controls have been loosened because ihe werehousing is
where the exporters keep their goods till they are exported. Sa, there was
“a physical controt of warehouses, We had custom inspectors staying ‘in:
the warchouses and keeping a check. “Instead of that, we have moved on
a bond. They will give a bond and after giving a bond, we only do the
record base monitoring of the customs warehouses which are there. Sa,
Sir, because of ait these efforts which have taken place in the jast one
year, we have also got a very good result. The World Bank is publishing
something Logistic Performance Index and that is considered as a bench
mark for this matter. India has moved up. In 2014, we were at 54th
position and we have moved up 19 positions and come to 35th position
now in Logistic Performance Index. in terms of the customs, one of the
“items of Logistic Performance index is the performance of custom. In
tustom, we have moved up 27 positions. We were 65 in terms of custom
clearance as far as Logistic Performance Index is concerned. Now, we
are 38, which means we have moved up 27 places in two years from
2014-16. This report is published. for every two years. It has been a very
significant improvement in the processes of custom department since then
and we are ail trying our best inciuding the Commerce Ministry and other
miistres to facilitate the exporters and importers."

Ae
19. Supplementing the Revenue Secretary, the CBEC Chairperson submitted as

under:

~ . ' * Sir, a mention has been made about delay in import clearances and not
sufficient focus is being done on clearance of imports. if { may submit, we
are very closely: monitoring the import clearances because everything is
on the 5६01 where we are able to capture the timestamps of each single
process and we know exactly how much of time ts taken in clearance of
goods. AS has been observed, the process involves filing of the bill of

_ entries, assessment, then payment of duties and once duty is paid there:
- is, in some cases, examination of goods after which the goods are
removed. In the assessment we have a risk managemient system, which is

_ Currently in the region of 80 per cent,-which means that the declarations

- afe’set to be risk free. So, the assessment is aceepted in most of the
tases, as declared by the importer, after which he has to pay the duty. We
-find that there is a delay in filirig of the bill of entries despite the goods
having come; we find delay in the payment of duty; and.we-find-there is a

. _ delay in production of goods for examination in certain cases where the
> न न ‘examination has fo be done. .80, in this process, the fime taken by the
है Customs is a very, very small percentage. Currently, across the country,
“on-a National average, the time taken by the Customs, in this entire
process of around seven to eight days which is taken for clearance of-

- goods, is 24 hours. This is the time taken by the Customs in the entire

Ny



process of clearance of the goods. So, we are focused on this. We are
able to capture port-wise exactly the timestamps for clearance of goods. It
is there on the website and visible for everybody. You have also faised:-an
issue regarding refund. Refund is a matter of concern for us. SAD refunds
have beon’ observed by the C&AG in their report, We are closely
monitoring that. But, yes, there are some conceins, which we are tryiig to
address. You have mentioned about delay in export of containers because
of other agencies. Sir, again, like the Revenue Secretary has mentioned in
his introductory remarks, consequent to single window which is now for all
_ imports, we are alse moving fo a single window scheme for all exporis too.
It means that all agencies will be able fo give their clearance online which,
-will help in the speedy clearance of export containers. There was. ;
meéntion about the WTO Agreement, the border agency agreement. We

are focusing'a lot on coordinated border management. in fact, in several’ 7"

_ coasts the concept of integrated check-posts has come in where all the
agencies sit under one roof 0 ensure that speedy clearances are given.
We are also aware of the fact that we are surrounded by Jandtacked
countries. We have to give them freedom of transit. There are various
agreements under which we permit them freedom of transit. This is also
part of the WTO ATF. You have also mentioned about the imporiers not
particularly being happy- about visits being made by the officers fo the
premises. Sir, when we give them a clearance without any examination of
goods for these facilitated importers, there is a concept of.on sight post-
Clearance audit. This is an internationally accepted concept where we do
not do the examination of all the consignments or the documents at the
time to import itself but do so afterwards. This is done after due intimation
to the importer. So, he is aware of the fact that a visit will be made by the
audit team. He is aware of the fact that we will be looking at these
documents which is a pre-arranged sort of a meeting. So, there should not
be any cause for a grievance. Again, Sir, the hon. Member has mentioned
about the fact that LDCs are surrounding us and they take advantage
perhaps of freedom of transit of goods which is permitted. Sir, this is a
commitment which India has 10 give to all the landlocked countries. There
isan agreement of trade and transit through which these goods move
across the country.fo those respective countries. Wherever there are
cases of such misuse, we do take action. A mention has been made by
another: hon: Member about the improvement in speedy clearance of
containers. There has been an improvement in-it. We do ensure that we
monitor, as mentioned at the outset, each one of these transactions

-exactly how much: time ts taken. A mention was Made about defay in
allotment of berths. 1 may submit that this objection of Audit was with

_regard to delay in Cochin, where berth itself is allotted by the ‘port trust.
The Ministry had reacted to that. We come into the picture 4 littte later
afier the berths are allotted by the port. A mention was also made about
the need fo-attain intemational standards. We. have tried it and-we are
conscious about thé World Bank ranking which is .an indicator but some

ds


things have been done properly whereby we increased our rankings end
we will constanily stride to do that. Sir, ICEGATE has broken in the past.
The systems are stretched.. They are a bii obsolete. We are in the process
of revamping the entire infrastructure where we hope that delivery |
systems will be better. The number of documents which we handle both of
import and export are substantial. There is a load. But again | say that it is
closely monitored by my colleague, DG Systems to ensure that we
address to any such breakage as carly as we can."

20. The Secretary, Department of Commerce, during oral evidence, inter-alia
submitted that India submited its Instrument of Rectification on 22" April, 2016 0 WTO
for Ease of Doing Business according to the Trade Facilitation Agreement as adopted
by WTO. है

21. The DGFT, supplemented by stating inter-alia as under:

"there are 152 areas in category A as per the agreement, for which the
Government has given its commitment for improvement. These are issues
related fo publication of data, disclosure, simplification of procedures,
electronic payments, customs cooperation for which we have completed
our commitment, issues of single window which is under implementation
already but { think it has to be fine tuned and improved. There are.also
- issues relating to advance ruling, temporary goods, inquiry points, which
haan है are under category 8, For completion of the above, we need 5 years. This
~ will require changes in the taw and related procedures and rules. Law is

essentially being the Customs Act which would perhaps Tequire
amendment in certain areas." है

22. During the oral evidence held on 26.09.2016, the Shipping Secretary also
submited that: oe हि हि . ° 1

The key point here is that when we talk of ease of doing business, there are As
regards Ease of Doing Business, one fevel of coordination which fs the primary .
coordination that is done by the Customs Commissioner at the - local
headquarters where senior’ officers from the Ports, Railways and all other
“. agencies which are involved, custom stations and so ‘on, they are all
‘J represented. That is the first. level of coordination. Apart from that, there are two
Committees.. One is an Apex Level Committee which is headed by the
- Revenue Secretary here which again 006 at issues which are not resolved at
_ the level of thé Commissioner and the Cabinet Secretary has also formed a .
. Committee headed by the Commefce Secretary fo ensure that whatever
issues are there, they are in a time bound manner atiended to, The Shipping

1G



Ministry along with Rathways and others are all represented on these
Committees. The primary 108 there is of the Department of Revenue Realising
that - we must distribute the responsibititics we had asked two Joint Secretaries
one from our Ministry and one from the Revenue Ministry fo work out
individual responsibilities. FIO represents the exporters and we have actually
asked FIG to be the monitor for this process so that whatever commitments
are made, there is an outside monitor fo ook at what we are doing

B. Analysis and Report on Transaction Cost

23. Transaction cost in internafional trade comprised {i} non-neuiraliséd Taxes and
duties, (ii) differential cost of credit at Intergational and Domestic Rate, (iil) differentiat
cost of tariff at International and Domestic Rate and ground level transaction cost due to
delays and charges in Customs, Ports, issuance of license, Banks, refunds etc. Indirect
costs fo trade involved (a) additional costs incurred due to procedural delays, e.g. time
for customs clearance and cargo handling. These costs are related fo the market life of
products, (b) lack ‘of predictability in the application or interpretation of tegulations and

. formalities and (c) lost business opportunities.

24. _ Foreign Trade Policy (FTP) 2004-09 announced in August 2004 had two basic
objectives to double the percentage share of India’s trade in the next five years and to
generate employment. Towards achieving these objectives the major measurable faken
in FTP was to simplify procedural complexities and reduction of the transaction cost.

25. In March 2005, a survey was commissioned by DoG through ASSOCHAM to
’ study the impact of taxes and levies, infrastructure foreign trade policy, inverted duty
structure, sectoral policies and export telated procedures on trade. The survey found
- that the average aggregate impact felt by exporters was 43.24 per cent of the freight on
board (FOB) value of exports. A significant observation from the report was that the
fiscals impacted exporters the most out of the three key components of export process,
“With. incidence felt between 4.73-5.72 per cent ie, around 5.22 per cent of the FOB
value of exports. Infrastructure came second impacting the exporters, on an average In ;
the range of 3.80-4.80 per cent ie. around 4 30 percent of the FOB vatue of exports.

Export procedures affected exporters to the tune of 3.72 per cent of the FOB value of

no


exporis, The exporifmport data of. the products were reported by analyzing their
variance. Another study rolied upon by DoC of FIEO calculated the incidence of cost
disability to Indian exporiers varying from 19 to 22-per cent on FOB value of expors.
The report stated that there may be yarlations deperiding upon the product type,

manufacturing processes, labour involvement, geographical location etc.

26. When enquired about FIEO's - estimation of incidence of cost disability to
exporters and. ASSOCHAM's survey on the impact of taxes, infrastructure, FTP,

procedures etc., it was submitted that reply from MoC&| was awaited.
पु हि 4

27. During oral evidence, when enquired about the report given by FIEO and
whether it was a complaint or a suggestion to the Ministry, the Secretary, Department of
Commerce, inter-alia submitted as under:

* Actually Sir, our entire work is focused on interface with the exporters
andthe stakeholders. Whether we are going to negotiaie a trade
agreement whether we are going to interact with a group say it is agro-
processing sectors, we ate going into a stakeholder consultation on a
regular basis through DGFT. ॥ is institutionalize, they hold regular at
different locations the consultations, open: house, they have at the regional
level with their field officers as he said every week. 1 have a regular
system by which | go to different State Governments along with the State
- Government, we meet with the exporters. What are their Issues? What is
in the State Governments scope? What is in our scope? We: try te
respond. FIEO is a participant in each and every one of the stakeholder
consultations which we do so that the process of feeding back into policy,
improving our systems and streamlining is ‘institutionalized. The whole

- Foreign Trade Policy 2015 -2020 is based on the stakeholder consultation
and the reforms recommended by the exporters. We are asking too much
paper work, It takes very fong..if has come from the fact that there have
been complaints, there have been delays. So, we have tried to make end
fo end IT enabled access to all DGFT schemes and programmes.”

28. A task force on Transaction ‘Costs in Exporis’ was constituted in 2009 by MoC -
because FTP .(2009-14}, Outeome Budget of DoC continued to highlight transaction
cost as a maior concern and the World Development Indicators were not very
‘encouraging. lt was a survey based report and had not reflected on the performance of
the 2005 report: The committee had made 44 recommendations pertaining to seven ©

ois



ministries, out of which 32 recommendations were agreed upon. Out of the 32
recominendations, 27 recommendations were teporled to have been implemented in
the fask force report published in 2011, The transaction cost was estimated at 8 to 10
per cent of the value of exports. This amounted to approximately हैं 1,50,000 crore. ,
Strategic Plan (2020), DoC envisaged strategic initiative of reducing transaction cost
with suitable monitoring system put in place as a follow up of the recommendation of the
1" task force. The 27 Task force on ‘Reduction in Transaction Costs in Exports’ was
constituted in 2013 to examine and identify such difficulties that the exporters face and
- make actionable recommendation io reduce or eliminate them. The report was
published in July 2014. A major departure in the approach of the Second Task force
compared to the earlier task force was not fo attempt any monetization of the gain from
miligation of the issues highlighted in the Report. It was a feedback survey based
report. The report had stated 46 recommendations pertaining 19 nine ministries and
seven separate recommendations relating to Land Border crossing and certain other

miscellaneoustissues.

29. The Department of Commerce, in their written submission to the Committee
stated that a Task Force on Transaction Cost was constituted with a mandate to identify
and suggest ways to achieve significant improvement in efficiency of export processes,
provide recommendations to the Government and initiate a set of executable remedial
measures towards reducing latencies and costs associated with trading across borders.
The Task Force had a broad based composition with representatives of FICCI, FIEO &
Cll in addition to ‘Government officials. As per World Bank ‘Doing Business Report, the
magnitude of Transaction Cost ranges behween 7-10% of the total exports. This
Comprises of infrastructural as well as procedural inefficiencies. Accordingly, the
addressable transaction cost is estimated to be around US$ 6-7 billion. First Task Force
--on ‘Transaction Cost in Export identified 44 issues and submitted its report in January
2014. 33 (including 2-under implementation) issues were resolved. The Second .Task
Force on Transaction cost in Exports quoted from the Doing Business indicators by
World Bank was constituted in June 2013.and its report was published in July, 2014. In



addition in case of ‘paying taxes’ the ranking in 0819 has reduced irom 156 fo 157 and
in case ‘Trading Across Border ‘ the 0819 rank has remained the same at 133.

30. The Committee wanted to know that 21 out of 32 recommendations of the Task
Force on ‘Transaction Costs in Exports’ commissioned by MoC have been implemented
when Audit found that all the 32 recommendations were yct to be implemented. The
Committee desired to know when were these 32 recommendations implemented and
what were the reasons for delay in implementing the recommendations, the DGFT and
Ministry of Commerce and Industry informed that the Task Force on Transactions Costs
- in Exports had given 44 recommendations. At the time of the release of its report, 21
were implemented and two were to be implemented scon: The basis of showing
implanted status was also mentioned in the report of the Task Force under chapter
"Detailed write-up on the issues implemented” at pages 45 to 64. Since then a few
more recommendations were wither implemented or action initiated by the concemed
“Ministry/Department ‘for implementation. The remaining recornmendations were either
dropped or nat agreed by the concerned Ministry/Department for implementation.

31,. During oral evidence, the Committee noted that despite so many task forces had
been creaied for trade facilitation, losses were registered in exim trade and enquired
about bringing them down. The Secretary, Department of Commerce, submited as

under:

“Sir, recently, all these issues that we have been monitoring by the Committee to
facilitate trading across borders, we have substantially brought down the time
taken export number of hours and that data we can share with the hon.
Committee to see --that-what has’ been the improvements thraugh this process.
When | saverfully two days for an exporter in the export of his goods, lam saving
him time and | am saving his money. So, my effort has to always be to
continuously keep improving. Every task force adopts various benchmarks
and every parameters. All may not be exactly comparable. But my job Is to see
that | keep improving on what | have and that is what we are doing. If you see
the ranking in most of ihe global rankings, in the last year, in the logistic index,
we have gone up by about 16 ranks, in Ease of Doing Business, we have gone
up by 17 ranks. So, there is a change. | think that we will have to’ keep on
working on it. 1 cannot say that by so and so year, we will be at this tevel. [ do -
_ not know how the movement of other countries will be but we will. have to keep

Lo 7



bench marking ourselves against what we have achieved and io improve better
than that.”

32. . Audit observed that FTP 2009-14 was extended beyond its tenure. TTP 2014-48 .
may take into account the requirements of the trade facilitation measures adopted by

DoC and provide a framework to align ail trade related policies.

33. The MoC&l submitted that a view was faken to announce the Five-Year Foreign
Trade Policy after formation of the new government as fhe General elections of the Lok
Sabha were due from 7 April to 12 May 2014. To provide continuity in policy
environment, the FTP 2009-14 was extended till further orders vide notification no. 69
dated 197 Februaty 2014. Foreign Trade Policy 2015-20 contains a comprehensive

chapter on “Trade Facilitation & Ease of Doing Business Thus, the trade facilitation

measures have been adopted as policy matters in FTP. The reason given for extending
FTP 2009-14 beyond its tenure was io act as continuation fill the fime new policy was

ahnounced on 1* Aprit, 2015

IV... GOVERNANCE, RISK AND COMPLIANCE

34. Implementation of trade facilitation measures, inter-alia, provide for creation of
adequate capacity to implement TFA. Article 1-5 of the section 1 of the Agreement -
addresses transparency issues, Articles 6-11 is concemed with fees, charges and
formatities for import export and transit, and Articles 12 & 13 address institutional”
arrangements. Sectian Il of TFA which contains special and differential treatment
provisions for developing country like India. In order fo build an efficient trade facilitation
mechanism, DoC proposed a strategic plan, notified Foreign Trade Policy and prepared
a results framework to simplify trade procedures and reduce transaction costs. Task

forces on transaction cost were constituted to:-

1. Meet all stakeholders needs;

a. Covering the trading process end to end;

a


tl. Apply a single integrated System;
IV. Enable a holistic approach to governance; and

Vv. Have an assurance framework.

35. The Strategic plan envisaged a weighted strategic inittative to reduce transaction
cost with a suitable monitoring system. The following were to be internally audited,

monitored, evaluated and directed:

4. ; Outcome of the export promotion Scheme;

I Impact of the various trade agreements; ; ५

iil. Performance of the ICT for various information system viz. Customs,
DGFT, SEZ etc.;-

1४... Cost and impact of implementation of transaction cost reports; and

Vv. Internal audit of the procedures.

a

36. In order to achieve the objective of implementation of trade facilitating measures
to improve trade environment for accelerating growth of exports, twenty five percent
weight was attributed to reducé transaction costs with the success Indicator or outcome
limited to constitution of the task force on transaction cost. No specific performance
requirements from other depariments were envisaged. No specific evaluations,
monitoring or directional output was prescribed in fulfillment of the departmental
objectives. ~ : हु

4

37. Export promotion schemes were not audited by Directorate Géneral of Export
Promotion (OGEP), CBEC or Controller of Aid, Accounts and Audit, Department of
Economic affairs. CCA, DoC also had not conducted any internal audit. Inspection Unit
of OGFT had also not internally audited the same. However, DGFT has a post issue
audit wing where licences/brand ratos to the extent of 510 10 percent are audited.
_ Impact of various trade agreements have not been intemally audited or assessed since

: _ it was felt by DoC that exact impact of the trade agreements and their contribution

an



would emeige after these RTAs run their course of fult implementation. Internal audit of
_ none of the information systems had beon conducted by DoC or DoR viz. ICES 1.5
ICEGATE, SEZonline, DGFT (EDI), RMS, DGOV etc.

38.. DGFT, in January 2015, was of the opinion that study of the World Bank in their
Doing Business Report (Ease of Doing Business) served the purpose fo analyze the
"cost and impact of the, transaction cost studies. OGFT further ‘added thal the --
achievements depended on the -acceptance/preparedness of multiple
-Agencies/Depariments/Ministries to implement recommendations of the task force. DoR
highlighted that delay in clearances of imported/exported goods are mainly on account
of port congestion, jack.of timely response from other regulatory agencies who are siill

working in the manual mode.

x

39. The Department of Revenue, in their written submission, responded to the above
mentioned that CBEC has set up 8 Customs Clearance Facilitation Committee (CCFC)
at every major Customs seaport and airport, which is chaired by the Chief
Commissioner of Customs/Commissioner of Customs concerned. Its membership
: “includes the senior-most functionary of the Depariments/Agencics/Stakeholder at the
particular seaporV/airport namely, () Food Safety Standards Authority of India/Port
“Health Officer (PHO), (ii) Plant Quarantine Authorities, (iti) Animat Quarantine
Authorities, (iv) Drug Controller of India (0050), (v) Textile Committee, (vi) Port
Trust/Airport Authority of India/Custodians, (vi) Wild Life Authorities, (viii)
" Railways/CONCOR, x) Pollution Control Board and (0-7 any other
Dépariment/Agency/stakeholder to be co-opted on need basis. The CCFC is required to
nieet once a week or more frequently, if needed, as per the following mandate:

fi} ‘Ensuring and monitoring expeditious clearance of imported and export
goods in accordance with the timeline specified by the parent

Ministry/Department concerned,

a3


ii) - Identifying and resolving bottlenecks, if any, in the clearence procedure cf
५ yl

imported and export goods;

(iii) Initiating Time Release Studies for improvement in ihe clearance time of

‘imported and export goods;

(iv) Having intemal consultations to speed up the clearance process of
imported and export goods and recommending best practices thereto for
consideration of CBEC/Departments/Agencies concerned; and

(v) Resolving grievances of members of the trade and industry in regard to

clearance process of imported and export goods.

40. DGFT submitted that it has taken several trade facilitation measures as reflectéd
in the Foreign Trade Policy, 2015-20. Recommendations of Task Force on Transaction
Costs are being pertised with concerned Ministries/Departments/Agencies. DGFT has
also taken into account the Doing Business Report. All these initiatives are aimed at
reducing transaction cost and time associated with India’s export and import business.
No doubt it will improve the trading environment but Its pace depends only on the
; available infrastructure and. preparedness of ail stakeholders which may not be under
any particular control. Persuasion is the only way. However, ail efforts and regular
monitoring will be ensure to achieve the objective. DGFT conducts internal security
audit of its software before its commissioning and put into‘use for Message Exchange.
DGFT has already taken note of the view of Audit that an assurance framework needs
fo. be developed internally for concurrent audit of various information systerns,
Accordingly, action .has been initiated in DGFT for placing the system of concurrent

- audit.

“44. “The Chief Controlier of Accounts of 000 and the Principal Chief Controller of
- Accounts of DoR and its field formations have been largely conducting establishment”

audit and do not provide a control based assurance in line with their risk assessment.



Elekha, e-PAOQ and COMPACT have been deployed as ICT soluiions for mainiaining
revenue and: expenditure accounts. The PAO system suffered from several
‘inadequacies in classification tax accounting and reconciliafion between different -
information sets. It is- evident that inter-ministerial co-ordinations may have fo be
augmented fo bring multiple agencies together to accept the related task and prepare to
achieve them in fime bound manner. Specific cases of lapses in implementation of trade
facifitation measures have been mentioned on the process of imports, exports,
interpretation of extant provisions, internal controt and infrastructure etc. both in 501 and

manual environment.

42, ' The Depariment of Revenue stated that the issues relating to Chief Controller of
Accounts, the risk based audit has been started by the Office of the Principal CCA to
provide a control based assurance in the case of Duty Drawback Schemes of the
- 5850, Department of Revenue. Looking at the encouraging results, the same 5
proposed fo be extended under other schemes of CBEC, Department of Revenue

- during the present financial year reconciliation between different information sets, it ts
informed that Office of Principal CCA, CBEC is moving towards a Centralized
Accounting Portal for refiable and timely accounting and reconciliation.

Vv. IMPLEMENTATION OF TRADE FACILITATION MEASURES

A. Key Performance indicators

43: There is-a good scope tg improve efficiency in fees and charges and streamlining
procedures. India’s performance needs improvements in trade - infrastructure
‘efficiency. The improvement has to be in terms of cost to export a container, number of
documents needed for exporis/imports. Additional documents are required depending
upon claim of benefits for imports under the preferential agreements/FTA and for RBI

- 44." Dwell time is the measure of the time elapsed from the fime the cargo arrives In
the port to the time the goods leave the port premises after all permits and clearances
“have been obtained. It is an important indicator of ihe impact of trade facilitation

ae


measures. World Customs Organisation (WCO) prescribes this as an important
” indicator and Indian Customs has alsa adopted the related norms, Dwell time analysis
compiled from ine details furnished by the Department revealed that there was हे
downtrend in dwell time and the decrease was from 13.94 days during 2010-14 to 10.95
days during 2013-14. The decline was attributed to various ICT measures adopted by

CBEC/DGFT and rationalization of procedures.

45... Almost 65 per cent of the total time taken in imports is attributed to the filing of
BEs and payment of duly, while in exports filing of the EGM constituted nearly 90 per
cent of the total time taken. In overall logistic performance index, although India’s score
has improved over time, almost all indicators of logistic performance including customs
efficiency, fogistics quality and competence and trade and transport related
infrastructure can be improved. DoR stated that delay in clearance of imported/exported
.goods are mainly on account of port congestion, lack of timely response from other
Tegularity agegcies, many of whom stil work on manual mode etc. All regulatory
agencies have fo re - engineer their business processes which require legal, regulatory,
procedural and technical changes. DGFT stated that the achievements depends on the

acceptance/preparedness of rnultiple Agencies/Departments/Ministries.

46. DGFT stated that it has identified specific issues in its "Trading Across Border"
eport and requested Ministry of Shipping for implementation.. CBEC stated fhat the
recent trade facilitation measure taken include extending facility of 24x7 for customs
clearance at 18 sea ports for specified imports and specified exports and at 17 air cargo
* complexes for. specified imports and all exports. Customs procedures have -been
siraplified and automated. Paperless working in Customs is encouraged by introducing
digitat signature for filing of Customs documents. Issues of evacuation fitne and charges
‘paid by shipping lines have been taken up with Ministry of Shipping, issues related to
infrastructure/ warehouses at air cargo complexes have been taken up with Ministry of
L. Civil Aviation. Customs is monitoring the clearance time of imported and export goods
वि through dwell time analysis and ‘Time Release Study’ (TRS) of every stages of

clearance process.



47. CBEC has submitted that it has taken steps to recngineer the business
processes of the regulatory agencies so as to avojd port con! gestion by emphasizing the
need for adopting. risk based  inspectionfexamination by other regulatory
Agencies/Departments so that fotal dwell time may.be curtailed. The other regulatory . ह
agencies have also been requested fo provide Standard Operating Procedure and the
timelines for clearance of goods. Furthermore other Departrents/Agencies have been
requested to delegate power fo Customs to draw samples in order to reduce overall
time in clearance. The Single Window project would allow importers and exporters the
facility to lodge their clearance documents at a singic point only. Required permissions,
if any, from other regulatory agencies would be obtained online without the trader
having to approach these agencies. This would reduce interface with Governmental
agencies, dwell time and the cost of doing business. Vide Circular no 13/2015-
Customs, dated 13.04.2015, the CBEC has set up a Customs Clearance Facilitation
Committee (CCFC) at every major Customs seaport and airport. World Bank's biennial
report titled Legisties Perfomnance Index Report 2016 has accorded a significant
upward ranking placing india at 35th place and Indian Customs at 38th. The last report

in 2014 had ranked India at 54 and Indian Customs at 65.

48. Further, the Department stated that Indian Customs Single Window Project has
also begun with the establishment of an appropriate administrative structure in the form
of an inter-ministerial Steering Group that is chaired by Mernber (Customs), CBEC, a
Project Management Group in CBEC and Project Management Units in the Ministries.
As an interim measure, the Board has impleménied an electronic online message
exchange between the Food Safety and Standards Auihority of India (FSSAI) and the
Department of Plan Protection, Quarantine and Storage (7018) with the Customs with
effect from 1.4.2015 at JNPT (NhavaSheva), 100, Tughlakabad and ICD, Patpargany

_49. The Committee enquired as io what steps have been taken by CBEC/DGFT to
re-engineer the business processes of the regulaiory agencies so as to avoid port

congestion and lack of timely response from other regularity agencies, many of whom
stil work on manual mode etc and in the process ensure timely clearance of

imported/exported goods, the Department of Revenue replied that the implementation of

D-


ihe Single Window project has been entrusted to an Inter-Minisieria! Steering Group
under Member (Customs), CBEC, a Project Management Group (PMG) within the
CBEC, and Project Management Units (PMU) within ‘each Ministries/Departments
concerned. CBEC, Dfo Revenue has established a dedicated project team to co-
ordinate the implementation of the Single Window project. CBEC has also emphasized
_ the need for - adopting risk based inspectionfexamination by other regulafory
agenciesdepartments so that total dwell time may be curtailed. The other regulatory
agencies have also been requested to provide Standard Operating Procedure and the
timetines for clearance of goods. Furthermore other departments/agencies have been
requested to delegated power to.Customs to draw sarnples in order to reduce overall
time in clearance. The Single Window project would allow imporiers and exporters the
facility to lodge their clearance documents at a single point only. Required permissions,
if any, frorv other regulatory agencies would be obtained online without the trader
having fo approach these agencies. This would reduce interface with Governmental
agencies, 1५४६३ fime and the cost of doing business. The Single Window Scheme
envisages development of integrated declaration that meets requirernent of all
agencies, automatic identification of importfexport goods that require clearance by
other government agencies, integrated risk management, conveying decisions of other
agencies online to customs, e-payment of fee and charges at common portal and
enabling paperless processing. The Sirigle Window scheme will reduce dwell time and
cost of doing business by enabling paper tess working and making a commorr interface
of trade with the Government. This will also lead to better utilisation of resources and

enhanced transparency.
. o3

50 During oral evidence, the Revenue Secretary interalia submitied that cost of
import and expart is an important determinant, very important factor and if people have
to spend 8-10% of the total value of the import then it is not a good sign. He further
” submitted that during 2015 two separate sources had quoted the cost of import-export
and dué to the efforts taken by the Ministry there would have been a definite reduction

in the cost that people have to incur in order to import or export

a



51. Supplementing the Revenue Secretary, CBEC Chairperson submiticd that.

“Like the RS mentioned, we have not done any study per se on transaction cost.
Bul every time there is a reduction in tine which has been happening, it will
also result in reduction in cost. That reduction in time has been happening

8... Delay in Allotment of Berths by Port Authorities Resulted in Cost and Time ‘

- Overrun to the Shippers . : ,

52, Ports are handling different types of cargos like Bulk cargo and containerized
Cargo. The Port Authorliy decides and allots berth to vessels calling the port based on
the type of cargo along with preferred berth and thereafter, the vessel reaches the berth
from. anchorage. Ports adopt priority based berth allotment for the specified ships to
facilitate the trade and increase the business. It was observed that no standard
benchmark or norms have been prescribed for ships waiting to get berth at ports and
there are no standard norms or benchmarks prescribed for.comparing the time taken

during the various stages in the clearance of goods.

63. In Kochi, Kolkata and Munibai, the average fime taken for getting berth allotment
in the Port ranged from less than one day in 24 per cent, up to two days in 30 per cent
_and more than two days in 46 per cent of the fotal vessels called during the period
2010 - 11 to 2013 - 14, Nearly 50 per cent of the vessels which called the port are
allotted berth only after waiting period of more than 2 days in Chennai, the statistical
details provided in the Administrative Report of Chennai Port Trust for 2012 - 13
revealed that the ships had to wait for an average period ranging from 8 hours to 65

hours for getting berth in the port. Se ee

54. Detention of ships in anchorage for a longer duration involves cost and time
overrun io the shippers. The Second Task Force recommended introduction of

- Systematic Traffic Management system for all Indian Ports in 2014. Action required by

the Port community system was however not detailed. Implementation of. the. Task
Force recommendations was to be coordinated by DoC with the Shipping Minisiry

a


However, no timeline, measurable deliverabls or iarget was set by the coordinating

ministry or the implementing minisiry for impleriontation of the recommendations. -

55. DoC submitted that it has requested for implementation of the recommendations
of the report on ‘Second Task Force on the Transaction Costs in Exports’ and ‘Trading
Across Borders’ to all concerned authorities. M/o Shipping has alroady initiated actions
with port authorities and it is expected that a transparent berthing arrangernent/policy
will be devised and implemented soon. M/o Shipping is also in coordination with D/o
-Revenue for customs related issues. The time taken for berthing of ships is monitored

by Ministry of Shipping. — 4

56. The Ministry of Shipping submilted that Manual Form 13 &114 have been
eliminated w.ef. 23.02.2015 and software for web based eform 13 has been
developed, wherein the Customs authorizationfendorsement is obtained online while
accepting the centainers. The Ministry has also instructed to introduce Gate Automation
System/E-detivery orders latest by 31.03.2016. Out of 31 Shipping Lines, 30 Shipping

Lines have already implemented of E-Delivery order,

57. - The Committee wanted to know whether any study was conducted by MoS to
decongest major poris and’ io reduce detention period of ships at anchorage, the
Ministry of Shipping replied that it has formulated a perspective plan for development of
Maritime sector namely "Maritime Agenda 2010-2020", Significant initiatives such 85

construction of new berths and terminals, modernisation and mechanisation of berths.

deepening of channels and improving of Rail Road connectivity have taken under this
plan to decongest major poris and to reduce detention periods of ships. at anchorage. -

43 PPP projects at an estimated cost of % 36859.61 crore io enhance capacity by.

362.18 MTPA, 39 Non-PPP projects at an estimated cost of € 8240.49 crore io enhance
capacity by 166.26 MTPA and 9 captive projects at an estimated cost of ¥ 9340 1B
Crore fo enhance capacity by 80.10 MTPA, have been awarded from 2011-12 till date.
About 20 more projects are to be awarded in the current financiat year. Besides this, a


study 10 benchmark performance of major poris to comparable international ports, has

been undertaken and the report is expected to be available by December, 2015.

58. - During oral evidence, the Shipping Secretary interalia stated that one main
project of the Shipping Ministry which has a direct bearing on the work of the Ministry is
-the Sagarmata Project. There are four main pillars of this project out of which port
capacity or efficiency enhancement and port connectivity are the main. Many years ago
_ capacity utilization of major ports was nearly 90% and had a lot of congestion. But due
to increase in capacity of non-major ports, private sector ports and Government parts,
last year's capacity utilization was 63% which indicates that a Int goods can be loaded

and unloaded at the'ports.

B. Delay in Clearing the Goods by the Importers at Ports

59. No standard benchmark or norms have been prescribed for ships waiting to get
-berth at ports and time taken during the various stages in the clearance of goods. Upon
arrival of vessel in the allotted berth, the port operation starts based on the category of
carga. in respect of liquid’ bulk cargo, where the delivery is through pipe line, the dwell
time for unloading is only the time taken from Ship berth to Customs clearance order of
such cargo. In case of containerised cargo, the cargo is unloaded by Steamer Agents or
CFS Agents and moved to CFS within free retention period of three days. Beyond the
free period, the Port authorities charge demurrage on the importers for non - clearance
of the goods. ॥ JNPT, Mumbai and ACC, Chennai, nearly 40 per cent of the goods
were cleared by the importers beyond the free period of three days during 2010 11 to
2013 - 14. Delay on the part of the importers in clearing the goods added up to the cost
of goods as demurrage charges on the imports. The demurrage charges could have
been avoided by establishing more CFSs and warehousing space for keeping goods.
. Creation of more warehousing space at reasonable charges for importers/exporters is

:... One of the trade facilitation measures.

1
N

By


ce

‘60. The Department of Revenue submilied that alf the 12 Major Forts and 6 Non-
major Ports are part of Port Community System (PCS) The PCS systerm is integrated

with the Customs EDL Port authorities are using PCS effectively and around 11-12

‘lakhs messages are being exchanged eVery month. In establishing of new CFSs,

Customs provides inputs on the feasibility report. An Inter-Ministerial Committee (IMC)
under the Chairmanship of the Additional Secretary (Infrastructure), Ministry of
Commerce comprising representatives of various concerned Ministries/Departments
including Department of Revenue considers the proposals for setiing up of new CFSs at
different centers in the country and monitors their progress. A CFS is only a Customs

- Area located in the jurisdiction of a Commissioner of Customs exercising ‘control over a

specified Customs port, airport, LCSACD. Proposals-for setting up CFS are considered
and approved by the IMC. या

61. The Department further submitted that charging of reasonable rent, ihe same is

governed by nfany factors and Customs has no role or control on fixation of the same. ~

in the case of JNCH, a total No. of 33 CFSs under its jurisdiction are scattered over a

large aftea and are managed by both public and private agencies. The rent is totally ~

market driven based on factors like location of CFS from Port area, availability of
storage space, manpower and infrastructure available ai CFS, transportation cost
involved, cost of fand, Shipping charges, services provided by CFS, etc. Regulation 6(3)

‘of the Handling of Cargo in Customs Areas Regulations, 2009 states about the

‘Responsibilities of Customs Cargo Service provider and the schedule of charges for the
various services provided by him in Telation fo the imported goods or export goods in
the custoins area.’ However, fo ensure transparency towards charges being collected
by the CFSs from the Importers, CFSs have been directed to display their applicable

charges on Notice Boards and their Websites.

62. “in this connection, the Ministry of Shipping conducted a study to decongest major

" ports and to reduce detention period of ships at anchorage, and report submitted by

Boston’ Consultancy Group. Major Ports havo taken several steps fo expedite

clearances of cargo within the free time, such as 24x7 Customs clearances facility,

32.


girecior Port Delivery (DPD) facility, simplification of Customs docurnentation

procedures, converting manual documentation system info ontine sysiem cic.

63. During oral evidence, the MD, Indian Ports Association submitted as under:

"Similarly, we have a very sophisticated Vessel Traffic Management System.
Now, in all the ports we have installed il, We have also given instructions to all
the major ports to provide land and office space to all the regulatory agencies
within the port itself. So, the ports are doing it so that there isno delay on that
a account. Both the process improvement, actually, our Ministry had underlaken a
हु detailed, study fo improve the opétational efficiency, Around 116 _ initiatives
were identified and 60 have implemented. Rest are under implementation. A lot
of improvement has taken place in the last one and a half years because of this.
Nearly 50 metric tones of capacity has béen unlocked and around ® 400 crore to
% 500 crore ts the savings in the logistics costs for the trade because of this.
Another important thing what the ports have done, there was a manual form 11
cand 13, which ts required for the containers to enter the ports.. That has been
done away with andnow there is an electronic form. There is another
important initiative of customs where we are also cooperating with them is the
direct port delivery. Now, the import container, after it comes, it. goes to the CFS,
from there after the clearances, it is taken out. It takes around eight to eleven
days actually when it goes to the CFS. To cut down this time, what we have
done, we are promoting the direct port delivery from the port itself. They have
ACP {Accredited Client Programme). Those numbers they are increasing and for
those customers we are giving. Now, out dwell time in the port is only around 1.5
days." >

64. Supplementing the above, the Shipping Secretary interalia staied that that

numbers relating to direct delivery were increasing slowly. The Ministry was
- constantly requesting the Customs to increase ther. In most of the ports abroad,
there is a substantial portion for direct delivery which is very little in india.

_65. The MD, Indian Ports Association further added that:

SOF “Sir, actually, during the peak hours, there is a rate. dust to reduce the
congestion, what we have suggested is, beyond the peak hours, the rates

-will-be much less so that people actually prefer that. Then there is a

Loe - + problem of banks not working 24X7. The customs have actually taken if
ans : up with banks. So,.there is a constraint there." हि

29



C. Delay in Rectification of Errers in Import General Manifests (की

66. As per section 30 of the Custorns Act, 1962, !GM is required to be filed by ine
shipping agent giving the complete list of all cargo inclucling the cargo meant for other
~ ports. The Manifest can be filed in advance in anticipation of arrival of the ship so that
preparatory work for the clearance of the cargo can be started well in advance. The
iGMs are filed either from the service centre or ICEGATE. As the entire process for
cleerance of goods can be initiated only on the basis of eniries in the manifest, iting of

manifest on-time without errors is very critical for facilitating trade.

67. - Almost all import manifests were filed in advance during the period 2010 - 11 to
2013 - 14. However, 22 per cent of the IGMs were found to contain errors which
required amendments. The number of IGMs filed with errors which required corrections
to be incorporated ranged almost 50 per cent. Non - declaration of the destination port
was found to be the major reason necessitating amendments in the IGM. Error - free
manifests are essential jor processing the BEs and facilitate faster clearance of cargo.
Delay in rectifying the errors also contributed to the overall delay in the clearance of
import cargo. a : ~

68. - Department of Revenue submitted that reports had been received from field
formation which revealed the causes for efrors occurring in the IGM. The errors mainly
Telated to cargo details, container numbers, address of importers suppliers, name of the
consignee ete. Errors also had been reported on account of typing mistakes in relation
to mark and number of container. Excess/short landing of cargo atse ead to error in
- t

iGM and needs suitable amendment/ corrections.

69. -To remedy the errors occurring in filing of IGM, The Department has initiated
several measures including .penat provisions which have already becn initiated to
ensisre error free IGMs. Section 30 of the Customs Act, 1962 read with Levy of Fee
- (Customs Documents) Regulations,1970 allows the proper officer to permit IGM
amendment, if satisfied that there is no fraudulent intention, on payment of prescribed
fees. Amendments have been classified as major and minor amendments and the need
“for adjudication of such amendments have also been examined based on ‘the

31

बे


substantial revenue implication. All the relevant information is avaitable in the public
domain for ease of reference for the stake holders Eurther, the concerned stake
holders have been sensitized not to commit routine mistakes that lead fo amendments
of IGM. With greater attention towards accuracy of data, Shipping Agents can avoid the
mistakes in the IGM. In order fo reduce errors in Bills of Entries, detailed error codes
with description has been provided in the System for rectification of any error in filing
Customs Documents. It is envisaged that it would work as self learning system to

prevent future errors and make the documents error free over time.

79. Standard RES formats of all documents have been provided to the importers and
Customs Brokers filing error free Bills of Entry. Workshops have been conducted by the
Directorate of systems. Commissionerates and Directorate General of Valuation for
reducing errors of data. System allows online submission of amendments which the
Customs Officer has to approve after Entry inward, 150४ amendment procedure ts
statutory procegs as stipulated under Sec. 30 of Customs Act, 1952. Proviso (3) to
Section 30 Subsection (1) stipulates that “if the proper officer 18 satisfied that the import ©
- tnanifests or import report ts in any way incorrect or incomplete, and that there was 19
fraudulent intention, he may ‘permit it to be amended or supplemented”. Therefore
permitting online amendment of IGM is difficult. Documentary evidences are required fo
be produced by the Shipping Lines / Airlines for getting such amendment done. There
are amendment fee also prescribed under law amendments are carried out in EDI
system only after manual scrutiny of the grounds of amendments and approval is
granted by the proper officer on merits. Hence the amendments wilh proper scrutiny is

desirable.

D. _Defay in filing of BEs by importers है

m1. As per section 46 of the Customs Act 4962, the importer of any goods shall make
entry thereof by presenting the BE electronically except in cases where it is not feasible
to inake such entry electronically.-As per second proviso to sub - section 3 of section 45
of the Act, the BE may be presented even before the delivery of such manifest but
within 30 days of the expected arrival of the vessel/aircraft. Scrutiny of the data reveated
“that only 25:per cent of BEs are being filed within 24 hours whereas 50 per cent of the ;

Br


BEs are being filed only after three days of the filing of the manifest. Delay in obtaining
the necessary documents from Steamer Agenis, Suppliers etc. incorrect
documentation, insufficient funds ‘and errors in the filing of IGMs contributed to the
delay. Moreover, it was observed that BEs filed prior fo the entry of the vessel were low

at 14 per cent

72. The Department of Revenue submitted that The reasons for delay in filing of Bilt
of Entry after arrival of the Vessel / Cargo flight include inventory management, non-
availability of space in the manufacturing area, insufficient funds for payment at bank. fo
release the documents and also payment of duty, non-receipt of documents from bank,
inadvertent errors requiring amendments, non-receipt of documents by the importers,
re-negotiation due fo price fluctuation in international market rectification of errors
committed while filing of IGM ete. Cusioms have no control in above factors relating to
delay in filing of bill of entry by the imporiers. In various forums like Permanent Trade
Facilitation Cogmittee (PTFC} meeting and others, the trade was suitably sensitized /
advised for filing of BE in advance for saving time and transaction cost. As regards
amendments through ICEGATE and to adjust the excess duty paid due to short landing
‘of goods etc., development of such functionality depends on prioritization of other iT
aan Modules and systems constraints. Trade is regularly sensitized to file advance bills of
‘ entry to reduce dwell time and transaction cost. In every Trade Facilitation Meetings like
Permanent Trade Facilitation Committee (PTFC) or any other interactive meetings with”

‘Trade, the importers are being advised and encouraged fo file prior Bills of Entry, which

‘in turn results in reduction of dwell time.
- 4.
73. The Committee desired to know as to what steps the DoR had taken fo reach out

. to importers to file error free BEs, to reduce time delay, allow onliné atnéndments to the
a minior errors in BE, adjustment of excess duty paid due fo short landing, the Department
"replied that in order to reduce errors in Bills of Entries, detailed error codes with

description has been provided in the System for rectification of any error in filing
~ customs documents. It is envisaged that it would work as salf learning system to
prevent future ertors and make the documents error free over time. Standard RES
formats of all documents have becn provided to the inporters and Customs Brokers :

$6


filing error free Bills of Entry. Workshops have been conducted by the Directorate of
Systems, Commissionerates and Directorate’ General of Vattiation for reducing errors of

data.

74, Further, the Committee reiterated the fact that permitting minor amendments in.
IGM by the shipping linefagents online instead of going fo the service centre may
reduce the dwell time and wanted to know why the DoR was adverse fo this idea of
allowing. importers to amend the }GM ontine to which the DoR replied that system allows
online submission of amendments which the Cusiéms Officer has to approve after Entry
inward. IGM amendment procedure is statutory process as stipulated under Section 30
of Customs Act, 1962. Proviso (3) to Section 30 Subsection (1) stipulates that “if the
proper officer is satisfied that the import manifests or import report is in any way
incorrect or incomplete, and that there was no fraudulent intention, he may permit if to
be amended or supplemented”. Therefore, permitting online amendment of IGM is
difficult. Documentary evidences are required to be produced by the Shipping
Lines/Airlines for getting such amendment done. There are amendment fee atso
prescribed under law. Amendments are carried out in EDI system only after manual
scrutiny of the grounds of amendments and approval is granted by the proper officer on
merits. Hence; the amendments with proper scrutiny is desirable. However, to strike a
balance botween trade facilitation and compliance, feasibility of allowing minor

amendments online and consequent changes in ICES is being examined.

E. Examination of Imported Goods by Customs

75, All imported goods are required to be examined for verification of correctness of
description given in the BE by selecting a part of the consignment on random selection
basis. After introduction of RMS, physicat examination of imported goods will be done
on a percentage basis based on the risk parameters identified by the system by

segregating sensitive cargo from routine cargo.

76. It was observed that the examination of goods exceeding 24 hours was in the
range of 22 per cent. The examination of goods after payment of duty showed an
increasing trend. The percentage of examination of goods beyond 24 hours increased

77


38

fram 11.27 to 22.42 per cent and from 5.87 to 32.76 per cent respectively during the
period 2010-11 to 2013-14, the percentage of delay in examination was still very high
when compared to the average. Reasons altributed for this delay were shortage of
Customs Officers in the rank of Examiners/Preventive officers and non-availability of
Mobile Gamma ray Container scanners at Chennai and Cochin (Sea) Port. In 29 CFSs
operational in Chennai Sea customs, only 24 examiners/preventive officers were posted
for Import and Export examination. In Cochin Port, the reasons attributed for the delay

were:

(i) Inadequate co-ordination among different stakeholders like Customs brokers,
Steamer agents, CFS’s, Port authoritios etc.

(ii) Containers from the Port area could be moved to the CFS for customs
examination only after payment of all dues to the Steamer Agent/Shipping Agents
and after obtaining the Delivery Orders unlike in other Ports where the movement
to the CFS is done wilhout insisting for Delivery Orders.

(ii) As against the free period of 3 days allowed in other ports, in Cochin Customs the
demurrage-free time for clearance of containers from the port area was fixed at
seven days as a temporary measure consequent to shifting of Container
operations to ICTT, Vallarpadam as per Trade Facility No.4/2010.

(iv) This led to laxity on the part of importers/CHAs to expedite the clearance process.
Increase in free time does not facilitate fast movement of cargo which eventually
increases the overall dwell time. Even after four years of setting up of the ICTT, no
reduction in demurrage free time was made Sy the Port operator thereby
contributing to the increase in dwell time.\

77. it was pointed in Mumbai that the samples of the entire CFSs of Navasheva Port
are stored/dumped in one CFS causing health hazard and storage problems. It was also
observed that posting of a single Assistant Commissioner for a number of CFSs and
testing of imported textile/textile articles for its composition and hazardous dyes as per
the provisions of Customs circular dated 15 March 2004 contributed to delay in
clearances of import cargo. Similar situation was noted in the export clearances side

also.

78. The DoR submitted that At JNCH, the samples are being stored in a single CFS
for centralized monitoring. There is sufficient available space in the said CFS and
requisite precautions are being taken for storage and handling of the samples


39

Regarding posting of ACs/DCs in CFSs in increased numbers to avoid detay in
clearance, it is informed that post Cadre Restructuring in CBEC, erstwhile 2
Commissionerates (1 Import and 1 Export) have been reorganized in 6
Commissionerates (Nhava Sheva- General, | to ५) on geographical basis. At present,
33 CFSs are manned by 17 ACs/DCs in the CFSs fo avoid any delay in examination
and clearance of the impart and export goods on account of shortage of officers

79. Regarding testing of Textilo/Textile Articles for its composition and Hazardous
dyes, the testing is being done fully in accordance with prescribed guidelines. Further,
the test reports are valid for a period of 6 months in cases where the textile/textile
articles of the same specification/quality are imported and the importer, supplier and the
Country of Origin are the same. Textile Ministry replied that in order to facilitate ease of
doing business and reducing transaction cost and faster clearances of goods and have
requested OGFT to revise the guidelines for testing of imported textile material for
presence of hazardous dyes. In response to the ministry's efforts DGFT has issued
Notification No. 19/2015-2020 dated 04.09.2015 by which testing for a number of
countries where azo dyes are banned has been done away with and mandatory testing
for countries where azo dyes have not been banned has been restricted to 25% from

countries mainly where no legal restrictions is in force

80. Regarding high end Container Scanning at ports, JNCH is already in the process
of installation of more “State of the Art High Capacity Scanners” which will reduce the
time taken for scanning. The action for installation of scanners at ports is already going
on since 2004 and one mobile and one Fixed container scanner as a part of Pitot project
were installed during the year 2004 and 2006 in JNCH, Nhava Sheva. As per CNE
approval, three Mobile Gamma-ray Container Scanners have been installed in Tuticorin,
Chennai and Kandla during the year 2044 and 2015. These three Mobile Gamma Ray
scanners were commissioned at Tuticorin Customs in March, 2014, at Chennai
Customs in the month of June, 2014 and at Kandla in March, 2015. The four fixed X-ray
Container Scanners at Mumbai, Chennai, Tuticorin and Kandla, are being supplied by
Mis BEL, Bangalore out of which one AXIS (Fixed Scanner) has been installed at
Mumbai in July 2015 by M/s BEL. Installation of the system is completed and after


40

completion of SAT and training of Customs staff the system is now under trial period for
one month. The installation of rest three Fixed X-ray Container Scanner at Chennai,
Tuticorin and Kandia is in progress and likely to be installed by this Financial Year s per

commitment given by vendor.

81. For the installation of three Drive Through Container Scanner (Road) at JNPT,
Cochin and Mundra, the procurement and installation is under process. The Ministry
has also given in-principle approval for submission of propesal for installation of Drive
Through Container Scanner (Rail) at Gateway Port of Nhava Sheva and Mundra port.
The same is under examination and proposal along with suitable site after selection is
being carried out in consultation with Ministry of railways and concemed port authorities.
The installation of scanners has resulted in improvement in the Customs efficiency. This
has enabled the department to scan the containers without opening resulting in
enhancing the levet of facilitation, thereby speeding up the process of cargo clearance
resulting in substantial reduction of dwell time of cargo. This has also resulted in
detections of mis-declaration and concealment of goods etc. The scanners have god
deterrent effect. In JNPT, where two scanners have been installed, have detected 152
cases involving duty of Rs. 8.8 crores in 2012-13, 192 casos involving duty of Rs. 10.2
crores in 2013-14 and G4 cases involving duty of Rs. 2.24 crores in 2014-15 and in
current Financial year 7 cases involving duty of Rs. 0.14 crores till June, 2015. In order
to further improve the Customs efficiency the CBEC is taking steps for ED! connectivity
between ICES of Customs with DMS of container scanners for transmission of scanned
images and reports through [CEGATE on a real time basis so that examining officers
can have the access of scanned images and report while assessing the Bill of Entry
which will help in clearance of Containers faster. The Customs staff strength is being
augmented by selection/recruitmont as part of Cadre restructuring, the examination of
goods are done based upon Risk Assessment System in both imports and exports
which enables interdiction based upon the risk associated with consignment and not in
routine manner.

82. The Committee enquired about the steps taken te co-ordinate between different
stake holders to overcome the delay in examination of imported goads, the Department


ar

replied that Customs clearance Facilitation Committee (CCFC) set up by the Board
under the Chairmanship of Chief Commissioner is co-ordinating with the different
agencies and resolving the issues if any by providing a solution to reduce the dwell
time. In the meeting, various issues pertaining to these agencies are discussed and
resolved in light of problems faced by the trade. These agencies have also been
requested to integrate their systems with Customs EDI for online approval which will
enhance the speedy clearance and will reduce dwell time. AT the same time, online
approvals will enhance transparency and will reduce scope of any fraud. Further,
representatives of varios stake holders have been requested to explore imptementation
of cntine payment of their changes, developing Standard Operating Procedure and Risk
based selection of Consignments/Samples, Soard has directed that meetings of CCFC
should be held regularly.

83. During oral evidence, the Joint Secretary, Customs stated that:

“Sir, whichever cargo is perceived as risky is subjected to examination by
Customs. That means, as on today a national average of 20 per cent of the
cargo is stopped by Customs for examination. This examination would require
either test of the commodity which is imported or additional documentation
which needs to be provided by the importer or any other details which are
required where query is raised and sent to the importer. While answering this
query if there is a delay in the part of the importer, that delay is also built into
this time taken for examination by Customs."

84, Supplementing the above, the Revenue Secretary, during oral evidence, interalia
stated that about 70 to 80 per cent cargo is being facilitated which means that the
Customs were asking no questions but in remaining 30 per cent cases where statistics
said physical examination was done, the Customs do it based on some intelligence
reports because of tie-ups with other countries, When cargo is being loaded, then also it
is known that some contraband is in it and we stop it. Also, we have our own risk
parameter on which we stop the cargo. This is important as Effort is always to ensure
that whatever cargo is stopped, verification is 100% cargo facilitation would not be
possible. Our effort is always to ensure that whatever cargo we stop is done based on
sound principles of risk management or it is based on some advance information


received, not otherwise. On such scientific basis we ty ic Tacitiiate as much 4s cargo

without ever touching it. -

85. Providing further inputs, the CBEC Chairperson, during oral evidence submitted:

“Mere are the port-wise numbers for the month of August,-2016, the Jatest
figures. Nhava Sheva, which is our biggest port, the total time taken for the
clearance of the goods is eight days and nine hours between the time of entry
to the time of goods being given to the importer; fime taken by the importer for
filing the declaration is four days ‘and nine hours; time taken by the Customs for
assessinent after declaration is 19 hours; time taken by the importer for
payment of duty is 22 hours thereafter, thereafter the time taken from
payment of duty "० producing the documents where it was required is two
days; time taken from registration out of charge, the final handing over of the
goods is five hours by the Customs. So, totally it was eight days, nine hours, 18
minutes fo be precise.”

86. During the oral evidence held on 26.09.2016, the Shipping Secretary interaba
stated that the Shipping Ministry was providing equipments 10 the Customs and they
would use it on sisk basis. Efforts were on that each and every Department involved,
risk based system would be integrated so that 5-7% more X-ray wouldn't be needed.

Such a’system was being developed by the Customs.

87. During the oral evidence held on 26.10.2016, the Textiles Secretary submitied
that: . :

"The Ministry of Textiles has prepared the Standard Operating System (SOP) for

testing of articles containing Azo dyes and this has been furnished to CBEC. The

duration of testing has been reduced from 4 days to 2 days. We have also

introduced a system of applying online and naaking payment also for such testing

online. Earlier, this was also causing a lot of delays as the payments had to be

made in the Textile Committee office and that caused a lot of problem. Then,

. .. Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) software of Customs and Textile Committee

is being integrated so that online test reports can- be generated and

-  semmunicated to thé Customs on real time basis. Single Sign-On Identification,

Log-in User ID for Textile’ Committee to log onto ICEGATE --the portal . of

CBEC -- has been allotted to. 12 Textile Committee Laboratories. For

balance laboratories, the work is under progress and-we are hopeful that for the

: remaining ‘laboratories also we will be abic to get it, which will facilitate
=. . . testing, etc. quite a bit, Nine Textiles Committee Laboratories have. been

connected to EDI Software through VPN connectivity. This is a secure, encrypted

- data line between Textile Committee and ED! for fransmission of data. Job roles

42



have been assigned to Textile Committee laboratory by Customs in Mumbai,
Bangalore and Chennai. New textile labs are being established at two places,
_ namely, JNPT, Mumbai and Cochin Port. Ontine payment facility in Textile
Committce labs has also been introduced by the Textile Committee to facilitate

payment for testing, etc."

88.. When enquired about reduction of time in testing of samples, the Textiles
Secretary inieralia stated that it was going to happen within a month and the Ministry
was in dialogue with the Customs ‘authorities. the Customs authorities had promised

that within one month they would tie up with our labs.
e
89. Further, the Textiles Secretary submitted that:

"about unpacking the material for testing etc. that is basically done by the
Customs authority. We have also taken it up with them. It is something which
they will be able fo explain further as to why they need to do it, in certain cases

- they donot do but in certain cases they feel that it is necessary... Basically it
is the Customs authority wha will be able to explain this.

F. _Detay in implementing Infrastructure Projects for free movement of cargo
affecting facifitation

(1) Non-completion of elevated four lane link road from Chennai Port to
हि Maduravoyal

90. A-scheme for providing a 19 KM Elevated Corridor from the Southern Gate of
Chennai Port to Maduravoyal leading to the NH14 formulated in June 2007 was stopped

1 midway affecting facilitation of container movements

81. The Ministry of Shipping submitted that the work was awarded ‘during 2008-09 to
बह. NHAL However, ‘when physical progress of the work was 14.79 %, the work was
: stopped by the Port and Water Resources Depariment, Government of Tamilnadu.
NHAI approached Madras High Court against the stoppage. Hon'ble High Court ordered
tor sumption of work. Govt. of Tamilnadu Nadu has gane in appeal to Supreme Court
: “and the ‘case is pending there. Ministry of Shipping has been taking up this project with

1 the state Government on regular basis for early resurnption of work,

Wg



92, During oral evidence, held on 26.09.2016, ihe MD, indian Poris Association

submitted as under: ,
“That Is actually a flyover, Actually 15 per cent of the work was completed by
NHAL That was done through PPP mode. 15 per cent of the work was
completed. At that stage, the Tarnil Nadu Government actually raised objection
that some of the pillars ~~ are creating problem in the flow of water in the river
Cooum and then they had stopped. They have gone to the court. NHA! had gone
to court. The Tamit Nadu Government has also gane to court. The case is still
pending. In the meantime, they have agreed for the out of court settlement and

NHAI has been asked to give an’ altemate proposal. So, itis pending at that
fevel. This is also continuously being pursued with the Tamil Nadu Government

by NHA! and the Ministry of Shipping,”

93. Supplementing the above, the Shipping Secretary, interatia stated that that if the
State Governments cooperate then the projecis would be completed but fact of the
matter is that the State Government, in this project had its own view that is why it
approached the Supreme Court and NHAI approached the High Court. This underlines

the State Govetnment's cooperation.

94. + The NHA! Chairman, during oral evidence held. on 07.10.2016, interalia
submitted that this project was started on BOT toll mode on 14 September,.2010. The
cost.of the project was % 1815 crore and had all the clearances of the State
Government. When the State Government highlighted the point that the flood plain of
Kudankulam fiver would be affected, this claim wasn't correct. NHAI had gone fo the
High Court on the basis of this claim because the contract had been awarded,
resources were mobilized, work had started and then the Government changed and all
of a sudden work was stopped. How did this happen, we don't know. We went to the

_ High Court against this. NRAI won the case in the High Court. The State Government of

Yamil Nadu filed a SLP against us in the Supreme Court in March, 2014. The Supreme
Court gave a stay order on this. In this connection, three hearings were held. We were

° also informing the Government of india ‘on this issue. The Government was aware, the

vy Attorney General-was aware’ and: the main reason for this was that the Sate

Government did not sign the Stay Support Agreement and the Goverment of India

_ started the workin ‘good faith. But the support of the State Government was noeded.

yy 4

wy


(2) Non-completion of Chennai Ennore Port. Road Connectivity Project ~
(Formerly Ennore Manali Road Improvement Project (EMRIP)

95. Non-compietion of the project undertaker in January 2002 for strengthening of
the connecting roads from the Port has severely affected the movement of container
laden trucks from Chennai Port, which presently takes a minirnum of 24 hours to reach
a CFS just 10 kms away. The project was commenced in the year 2002 at an estimated
cost of = 150 crore which has been revised io 7 600 crore.

96. "The Ministry of Shipping submitted that 95% of the work has been completed.
Project affected families have opted for the Kanchipuram society land for the
tenements. Completion of auction platform in fishing harbor is expected by 30.09.2015
and thereafter fishing stalls will be relocated. The issue has been taken up with the
State Government many times as their cooperation is required in settlement of the
PAFs. The project is now expected fo be completed by 34.12.2045.

97. During the oral evidence held on 26.09.2016, the MD, IPA, submitied as under:

“This EMRIP road is being implemented by NHAI and the Ministry of Shipping
also given funds for that. 95 per cent of the road work is over. There are two
places where actually some houses are there which are fo be shifted. We have
taken up that-with the State Government and it is pending for that only, They
are also identifying some alternate accommodation fer them and continuously,
Ministry of Shipping and -NHAI, we are taking up with the Tamil Nadu
Government. Once they. shift those people, then the road will be completed .
aciually. There are two bottlenecks. They are of very short distance. Otherwise,
the entire road is over and a Jot of relief is there for container movement but once
the Staie Government gives the alternate housing for them because we have to ~
demolish those houses. Then that stretch can be completed."

” 98. “Supplementing the above, the NHAI Chairman, during oral evidence held on
1 07.10.2016 interalia stated that this project was staried in 2011 and is nearly complete.

Only 300 metre stretch, when completed, the road would become functional. But unless
the work doesn't get complete, the road cannot be functional. On road folf also cannot

be started:

WS


99. Further, when enquired about the State ‘Government's non-commitial. ie
rehabilitate ihe displaced persons and their refusal to telocate, the NHAF Chairman
intcralia submitted that for this many meetings were held at official jevel, Ministry level,
even the Minister of State held many meetings in this connection. Adviser fo the

Minister has also held many meetings.

400. The Committee wanted to know if such non-cooperation from the State
Government of Tamil Nadu to Government of India was also observed in other projects
at various other ports, the NHAI interaifa stated that there were other projects for ports

also and there was not any non-cooperation from the State Gévernment.

101. The ‘Committee enquired whether the Ministry was in a position or having any
kind of arrangement that for no responsiblity for whatever claim amount or the case
may be transferred to the State Government or simultaneously the Ministry could start
litigation with ‘the State Government for this, The Secretary, Road Transport and
Highways, interalia stated that it was very difficult to enter into a litigation with the State
Government because the other roads in Tamil Nadu would get affected by this. lf we try
and recover the money from amount due to Tamil Nadu, then their road- development
programme will get stalled. It is very difficult fo visualise. it. Today if the Government tells
us ३0 build roads, tommorrow we will get it signed. But tornorrow elections take place and
_there is.a change in regime. After that there is change in aititude, at that time contracts
have been fixed, work has progressed and you are in for it. So, it is a very tricky thing
We are trying to negotiate/talk to them. Let us see how we succeed, bul it is difficult to
take a generalist view and say that you take x, y, 2 action against the State
Governrhent. This is a federal country. We have-to get roads built in Yamii Nadu and all

other States. So, we have 0, kind of, go by persuasion.

{3} Lack of Rail infrastructure 10 move containers to ICDs

402. - Dethi Customs Commissioncrale reported that 14000 containers were waiting at
various ports viz. JNPT, Mundra and Pipavah for transshipment to ICD Tughlakabad as

on 157 July 2014 due to the following feasons:

46


{a) Congestion in Inc,

(b)  Nonavailablitity of racks;

(०) ह Limitations in toading of containers; and ह

{d) Availability of only a single line in the route from Pipavah port to 1CD .

Tughlakabad.

103. The Ministry of Railways submitted that evacuation of containers from port by rail
is a process’ involving complex interplay of activities involving a number of
"stakeholders. The role of clearing of containers from ports begins with Customs
clearance, which generally does nof take place on Sundays and holidays. Loading of
these “Customs cleared containers” on rakes belonging fo the container train operator
(CTO) is then done by the port operators. in JNPT, for example, Railways has been
suffering substantial erosion of its transportation capacity on account.of slow loading of
containers by the port operators and this has in recent fimes resulted in a substantial
increase in the pendency of containers at the ports. Rakes for carrying containers are
owned by the Container Train Operators and, as such, their augmentation is a
commercial decision of the respective CTOs. As regards on going schemes for
augmentation of transportation capacity, it is pointed out that the doubling of Madar-
Palanpur-Mehsana-Viramgam and Surendranagar-Pipavav sections is - being
progressed presently. In addition, Dedicated Freight Corridor is also being created by
Railways primarily with a view to caier to EXIM iraffic between northern hinterland and

the ports on the western coast of India.

104. During oral evidence held on 26.09.2016, the Railway Board Chairman

submitted as under:

Which is a common line between. the two roules that we have mentioned,
even presently the capacity utilisation is only 60 per cent. So, it is not the
constraint at the moment and in any case, we are having many doubling
proposals in that area available with us and this Ajmer route is getting doubled
which is already sanctioned for doubling and the work is going on. So, | do not
think there is going to be any constraint as far as Pipavav port is concerned in
times to come."

YY


105. Supplementing the Railwey Board Chairman, the Shipping Secretary interetia
submitted that the port was State Government's port but approximately 7-8 ports are in
Gujarat which handle cargo and its cargo growth saw a dip last year. In this connection
capacity enhancement of major.and non-major ports is to be done. DFCC will be
introduced in the year 2019 duo to which Pipava, Hazira and rest of the ports in Gujarat
which are connected by pipeline their connectivity would be enhanced so that DFCC
would also get enough cargo. | ,

106. In this connection, CMD, CONCOR interalia submitted that in. Pipava double
stacking was taking place. Every month more than 100 trains were being‘ double
tracked befween Pipava, Mundra and Rewari. In rest of the routes where 90 containers
ply, already 180 were plying and after DFCC is being donethe number would increase
to 460 per train. There is no problem now in Pipava but DFCC with Pipava would

become a feeder router which would strengthen it further.
ao :

#रूफ#++अज कक:

YQ



PART-H
OBSERVATIONS & RECOMMENDATIONS

4. - Introduction: The Committee note that the world trade has grown
tremendously in last few decades and india is one of the fastest growing markets
today. To sustain the current pace of.growth and fo keep up with other markets
in a highly competitive global market it is imperative to ensure smooth Taovement
and clearance of goods across border within. shortest time and minimum
associated. costs. The Commitice observe that trade facilitation fooks at how
procedures and controls governing the movement of goods across national
borders can be improved to reduce associated cost burdens and maximize
“efficiency while safeguarding legitimate regulatory objectives. The Commitiee
nofe that poor facilitation increases compliance! fransaction, costs which have
been estimated to around Rs. 100,000 crore a year. Effective trade facilitation
measures are. crucial for India to maintain its current pace of growth and
therefore, adequate regulatory framework, policy implementation, operational
issues and interna} controls are of paramount importance. However, the C&AG
Audit revealed ‘complex and arduous documentation process leading to
inordinate delays in the various stages of export and import clearances, delays in
allotment of berths by port authorifics and bottlenecks in reduction of transaction
costs, It was also found that delays in import clearances are of a higher order
than in the case of export clearances. Audit also highlighted shortfalis like
_incomplete facilitation process mapping, weak target setting, inadequate
monitoring mechanism, lack of infrastructure facilities, lack of feeder network
facilities, non-coordination between stakeholders to improve trading
infrastructure and non- existent electronic connectivity between all the regulatory
है agencies. The examination of the subject by the Committee brought out several
“shortcomings which have been dealt with in the succeeding paragraphs. The
‘Committee noted that Import and Export‘trade facilitation has many stakeholders
. and..therefore, called representatives of Ministry of Textiles, Department of
Commerce, DGFT, , Ministry of Shipping, Ministry of Road Transport and
_ Highways, Railway Board, FIEO and FICCI,

५१


The Committee note that trade facifitation gairied currency wth the
agreement by the member countrics including India at the Bali Ministerial
conference of the World Trade Organisation (WTO) members in December 2073 in.
culmination of the discussion initiated in WTO Singapore Ministerial Conference
in December 1996. The WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement came into force with
effect froni 21 February 2017 when fwo thirds of the member countries ratified the

. pact. The TFA has effectively created binding commitments on the members
including !ndia to facilitate customs and other border procedures , faster release
and clearance of goods, border agency cooperation befween members with
special and differential treatment for developing country members and least-
developed countries (LDCs) in terms of staging of implementaiion, but eventually
al! members have to implement the same commitments. Members have
“undertaken three categories of commitments viz., category A, B, 0. India notified
its Category 9 commitments in March 2016 which became enforceable on the
date of the TFA coming into force. Category 8 commitments were notified by
India in January, 2017 which include all provisions contained in Section 1 of the
Agreement, except those designated under Cafegory A and the dates for
implementation of Category B commitments is five years from the date of entry

into force of the Agreement i.e. by February 2022.

The Conimittee further note that Category A commiiments which are now
binding on India include provisions specified by India falling under twelve articles

of Section-| of TFA relating to publication and availability of information, |

opportunity to comment, information before enfry into force, and consultations;

advance rulings; procedures for appea! or review, other measures to enhance
impartiatity, non-discrimination and transparency; disciplines on fees and
charges imposed on or in connection with importation and exportation and

penalties; release and clearance of goods; border agency cooperation; movement

_ of goods intended for import under customs control; formalities connected with’

importation, exportation and transit; freedom of transit; customs cooperation, The

५0

ey


remaining provisions are to be implemented within five years. The Committec
further note that though, the TFA gives flexibility to the member countries to
implement the provisions at their own pace, ultimately the agreement is binding
on all the member countries. and can be challenged under WTO dispute
settiement mechanism. The Committee are of the view that meticulous and
impartial implementation of afl the provisions of the TFA by all the members
would boost world trade hugely. The Committee hope that Government has
implemented all.the Category A commitments notified in March, 2016 fully and are
geared up for implementing the Category B commitments within 5 years.

é

The Committee note that the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and -
Development (OECD) quantitative analysis for the group of lower-middle income
countries, which includes India, shows that the areas with the greatest impact on
increasing bilateral- trade flows and lowering frade costs are: formalities
(documents, procedures, automation), governance and impartiality, information
availability. The indicators involvement of the trade community, advance rulings
and appeal procedures also have a significant impact on. frade flows. These
indicators have a strong impact at the manufacturing trade level as well. The
Committee find that India has categorized many of the provisions related to the
above indicators under Category B which include publication of applied rates of
duties and taxes of any kind imposed on or in connection with importation or
exportation; availability of contact information on its enquiry point(s) on internet;
issuance of an advance ruling in a reasonable, time-bound manner fo the
applicant that has submitted a written request containing all necessary |
information; ensuring that, in a case where the decision on appeai or review is not
given either within set periods as specified in its laws or regulations or without
undue delay the petitioner has the right to either further appeal to or further
पु iew by ‘the administeative authority or the judicial authority or any other
- recourse to the judicial authority. The Committee are of the view- that the above |

will. require administrative, jegal, procedural changes and cooperation from all.the

Stakeholders and , therefore, the Government should bring out a comprehensive

‘Sy


policy with defined milestoncs for @ade fecllifaiion, urgerily, to adhere ie ine

binding commitments and the timelines.

2. impact of Trade Facitifation measures: The Committee highlight the
fact that world trade is around 40 trillion dollars, out of which India contributes
around one trillion dollar but ihe Strategic Plan of Department of Commerce

(DoC) estimates a huge impact on the transaction cost due.to poor facilitation, in
this connection, it was observed that the impact as a result of the measures taken
as specified in documents furnished by the Department is not reflected in the
“Doing Business Report 2016” under the category ‘Cost fo Documentary
Conipliance in both Imports and Exports’, The Committee desire to know if
DoC/DGFT have carried out any analysis of impact of these measures for
improvement in trade facilitation and reduction in transaction cost, The

हि Committee wish to be apprised of the mechanism adopted by the Department to

monitor the time limits specified in the Strategic Plan. Further, the Commitiec
note that despite constitution of committees and task forces by DoC in 2005, 2009
and 2013 concomitant with the Foreign Trade Policies (FTP) to address the issue
of high transaction cost in India and to suggest measures to reduce transaction
cost and time impacting the Country’s Foreign Trade fransactions, fhe outcomes
have not yielded desired returns. A task force on ‘Transaction Costs in Exports’
was constituted in 2009 by Ministry of Commerce (MoC) to look into various
issues affecting the competitiveness of Indian exports and to initiate a set of
executable remedial mieasures towards reducing the costs associated with
trading across borders. The commitice.had made 44 recommendations pertaining
to seven ministries, out of which 33 recommendations were. agreed upon. The
Second Task force on ‘Reduction in Transaction Costs in Exports’ was
constituted in 2013 te examine.and identify difficulties that the exporters face and

make ‘actionable recommendation to reduce or eliminate them. The committee

‘made 46 recommendations ‘pertaining to nine ministries and 7° separate

recommendations refating to Land Border crossing and other miscellaneous

: issiieS: The Committée note that the recommendations were yet to be

a


implemented by the related dcpartniciits fully and wish that the DoC/DGFT may
take up with other Ministries! Departments for urgently implementing the
recommendations. The Committee are of the considered view that there is a good
scope to improve éfficiency by streamlining procedures and -fcel that the
Country's performance needs improvement in the indicators of trade
infrastructure efficiency, Further, they note that in overall logistic performance
index, although India’s score has improved over time, it is a continuous exercise.
The Commitice desire that a DoC/ DGFT may carry out an analysis of the impact
of the measures taken by it for trade facilitation, ‘take stringent steps against
those’ who have not adhered to the timelines and prepare a pian for trade
facilitation for next five years for reducing transaction costs further. . The
Committee desire that the compliance costs of the measures initiated by fhe
Government may also be calculated to assess the costs vis-a-vis the benefits.

3. Governance, Risk and Compliance Risk and Compliance; The Committee observed specific
cases of lapses in implementation of trade facilitation measures in the process of
imports, exports, interpretation of extant provisions, internal contro! and
infrastructure etc, both in EDI and manual environment and are of the considered

view that ‘an assurance framework needs to be developed internally for
concurrent alidit of various information systems in DoC/DoR so that a holistic
database can be developed on the basis of specific rectifications! improvements.
The Committee also desire that a comprehensive audit of the implementation oF.
the all trade facilitation measures taken by the Government of India may be

undertaken.

Ae. Key Performance Indicators indicators: The Committee note with appreciation
_ that..there was downtrend in dweil time, decreasing from 13.94 days during
2010-11 to 10.95 days during 2043-14 and feel that this could be further improved

piementing the frade: facilitation measures initiated by CBEC more

effectiyely.. They also note that almost 65 per cent of the total fime taken in
imports is attributed to the filing of the BEs and payment of duty while in exports

‘SB


filing of the EGK constituted nearly 90 per cent of the total fime taken. The
Committee also note 22 per cent of the IGMis Were found to contain errors which
requircd corrections. Aiso, a major anomaly is non-declaration of the destination
port which is almost 50 per cenit of the IGMs filed. at major seafair ports. The
Committee observe. that there were délays in allotment of borths by Port -
Authorifies, in clearing the goods by the importers at Ports, in rectification of
errors in fmport General Manifests (IGM), in filing of BEs by the fmporters, non ©
mandatory filing of BEs through ICEGATE, manual registration of licenses with ©
the Custom houses and in furnishing reply to the queries raised by the
department, examination bytother Agencies, payment of dutylrefund and or
drawback, in filing of Export Gencral Manifests (EGM) and rectification of errors
etc. The Commitice arc of the considered view that efficiency at the ports need to
be improved by updating ICEGATE to minimize breakdowns, making e-filing of
BEs and EGMs mandatory, full use of 24x7 facility, pre clearance of
consignments,xby Custom authorities, opening running accounts of registered
traders, making ACP/AEO schemes user friendly and rectification of errors easier.
The Committes feel that permitting minor amendments in IGM by the shipping
line/shipping agents online instead of going to the service centre may reduce the
dwell time and if the need be provide for amendments fo the Customs Act, 1962
for their suitability in smooth handling of cargo at ports for faster facilitation. The
Cominittee also fcel that the Department may consider easing fhe procedures to
help importers by Jaunching a Mobile App for filing error free IGM/BE/EGM/SB,
uploading scanned documents, allowing rectification of minor errors adjustment

of excess duty paid due fo short landing etc. by opening a wallet.

5 Délay in Cloaring the Goods by the Importers at Ports: af Ports: The Committce
note with apprehension that in JNPT, Mumbai and ACC, Chennai, nearly 40 per
the goods were cleared by the importers beyond the free period of three
है day during 2010-11 to 2013-14 adding to the cost of goods as demurrage

charges on the imports. The Committee while opining that any delay on the part

* of the importers in clearing the goods should be deali with by imposing penalties

SY.



ae

are of the view that time frames be prescribed for clearing the goods by the

various. authorifices( Customs, FSSAI, Textiles Committee, plant animal

_ quarantine, Drug Controller, Wildlife Control Bureau eic.) and any procedurat

delays be only condoned by senior most officers.

6. 2899५ in Filing of BEs by Importers: The Committee observe that though a

facility for prior filing of BEs is available for faster clearance of goods, the same
was not being optimally utilized for various reasons such as delay in obtaining
the necessary documents from Steamer Agents Suppliers efc., incorrect
documentation, insufficient funds and errors in the filing of IGMs, The Committee
note that only 25 per cent of BEs are being fited within 24 hours whereas 50 per
cent of the BEs are being filed only after three days of the filing of the manifest.
Moreover, BEs filed prior to the éntry of the vessel was jow at 14 per cent and
note that presenily cancellation of a bill of entry filed in advance required the
importer to file a refund claim in respect of the duty paid. The Committee are of
the view that as recommended by them in preceding paragraphs the excess duty
paid under the first bill of entry fowards the duty payable may be credited to the
running account wailet which may be adjusted on the successive consignments
to encourage the importers to file the Bill of Entry in advance, Also, importers

- filing advance bill of entry are at a disadvantage as interest on any enhanced duty

due to procedural irregularities detected subsequently is calculated after two
days from the original date of assessment. The Committee while opining that:
intcrest should be calculated from fhe date of deposit of the enhanced duty paid
due fo procedural irregularities desire that such. eredit should -be given in the

running account.

पक Examination of imported goods by Customs: by Customs: As per Audit, the
‘examination of goods exceeding 24 hours was in the range of '22 per cent. The

examination of goods after payment of duty showed an increasing trend in

certain sea/air ports. However, in Mumbai, though the examination of goods over

Sy


56

24 hours showed a decreasing trend from nearly 93 per cent in 2019-11 to 73 per
cent in 2013-14, the percentage of delay in examination was still very high when
compared to the average. The Committee observe that the main reasons for the
delay occurred duc to shortage of Examiners/Preventive Officers and
non-availability of Mobile Gamma Ray Container scanners. Further, due to
shortage of manpower ,the 24X7 facility introduced by the CBEC has also not
been very successful. Also, the Ministry requires more officers for making
another facility viz. factory stuffing attractive. The Committee further observe that
with the coming into force of the TFA, the Ministry needs more officers to fulfill its
commitments e.g. those manning the enquiry points. The Committee desire that
the Government take steps such as cadre review and creation of vacancies and
immediate recruitments to augment the operational requirements of the Customs
at airfsea ports, procurement of Mobile Gamma Ray Container scanners and other
state of the art technology so as to help in coordinating fast clearances of
consignments and facilitate trade. The Committee atso desire that regular training
of customs officers and orientation programmes for officers who have been
posted from other wings may also be conducted.

8. Other Factors affecting facilitation: The Committee are dismayed to note

that lack of infrastructure facilities like port to road connectivity, rail
infrastructure to move containers to ICDs and non-coordination between all the
relevant stake holders for improving the infrastructure are adversely affecting the
trade facilitation measures initiated by the Government . The Committee while
acknowledging that the National Committee on Trade Facilitation (NCTF) has
been constituted with representatives from various Ministries/ Departments
desire that duplication of efforts should be looked into by the NCTF and the
procedures should be streamlined with no repetitions. The Committee are of the
strong opinion that integration of all procedures and coordination between all
involved should he ensured by the NCTF. The Committee further note that the
24X7 facility requires that the staff of afl the agencies involved are also available


57

round the clock. The Committee desire that the issue of providing officers of afl
agencies involved be also taken up by the NCTF. The Committee aiso desire that
the NCTF take up the issues relating to the courier industry which provides
solution to quick movement needs of the e-commerce and bring out
comprehensive guidelines for immediate release of consignments by the
customs. The Committee are dismayed te note the lackadaisical approach of
Department of Commerce and Ministry of Textiles in initiating? implementing
trade facilitation measures. The Committee desire the Cabinet Secretary to
convene meetings of the various Ministries/ Departments regularly besides the
meetings of the NCTF fo monitor their progress and contribution. The Committee
also desire that the Ministries/ Departments/ Agencies involved be pro-active in
their approach and put forward all their problems, suggestions in the mectings of
the NCTF and ensure their follow-up. The Committee desire that the minutes of
the meetings of the NCTF be furnished to the Committee for perusal.

The Committee while noting that the Single Window Interface for
Facilitating Trade has been implemented by the CBEC hope that the alf the
stakchoiders will work in tandem so that ail approvals and clearances are given
online without any manual interventions. The Committee aiso desire that
timeframes may be prescribed for all the agencies within which the approvals are
to be mandatorily given. The Committee are of the view that an integrated RMS is
essential for ali the agencies also fo accord approval within a given timeframe.
The Committee while noting that printouts of the online submissions still need to
be presented at the ports are of the view that all ports be instructed to accept
submissions on-line, The Committee also desire to be apprised whether the
CBEC has installed a feedback mechanism on the operations through SWIFT and
the action taken on the feedback received, The Committee also desire that to
minimize inconvenience ६0 the traders and to reduce transaction costs the
software should be adaptable to modifications needed due to any amendments in
the provisions or any feedback received. The Committee while noting that the
intimation of any amendments/ changes to the Act/ Rulesf Procedures/ Duties

reaches the ports after a huge delay desire that the notifications may 96


intimated fo all the ports on real timc basis, The Committse aisa feel thei

.Gustoms and Excise portals be also integrated for factory stuffing pormissions,

adjusting dufies etc.

The Committee white noting that the Directorate of Revenue Intelligence
(DRI) mandated to deal with the work relating fo the collection and study of
information on smuggling activities and the deployment of all anti-smuggling
resources at the all India level under the Central Board of Excise and Customs
are of the view that DRI is also a trade facilitator as initiating measures to prevent
iliegal trade eventually facilitates trade. The Commitice are, therefore, of the view
that fool-proof procedures be evolved to enhance efficiency of intelligence
gathering and application along with a uniform investigation protocol. The
Committee are of the view that tlie DRI should make usc of the lafest technology

and scientific methods for detentions/ seizures,

Further, with manifold increase in trading across borders, the Committee
observe that the number of disputes and litigations are also set to rise. The
Committee are of-the view that the Ministry should have a robust mechanism for
settlement of disputes to minimize litigations. The Commitee opine that the
Ministry may think of a separate trade dispute resolution mechanism for
expediting the settlement of trade disputes in a time bound manner.

The Committee note that the lack of last mile connectivity has adversely
affected India's trade facilitation efforts and the projects facing delay include the
Chennai-Ennore- port connectivity project, and the elevated four-lane link road
from Chennai to Maduravoyal. Other issues hampering logistics include tack of

rai? infrastructure fo move containers to injand container depots (for reasons

1 such as fine congestion, limitations in loading of containers ), and lack of feeder

network at the international container transshipment terminal. The | Committee
are also dismayed to note the lack of transparency and reasonableness in the
various charges levied by the shipping lines and their agents in export-import
(छत) trade. oo -

oa


The Commitice while noting that Sagar Mala project is a initiative to
modernize the existing Ports into modern world class Ports and integrate the
development of the Ports, the Industrial clusters and hinterland and efficient.
evacuation systems through road, rail, inland and coastal waicrways resulting in

Ports becoming the drivers of economic activity in coastal areas arc of the

opinion that alt related projecis should be fime bound and since most of the
projects under the project are to be based on PPP mode, the interests of the
Government should be secured. The Committee-hope that timely execution of the

- Sagar Mala project will improve logistical efficiency, thereby reducing

‘transaction costs.

The Committee are of fhe considered opinion that freight and other
charges across all the modes of transport should be rationalized to reduce
transaction costs. The Committee observe that shipping lines collect terminal
handling charges of the port authority which is much higher than the actual
charges of the port authorities. Also, the Committee understand that fhese

_ shipping lines impose arbitrary freight charges making exports unviable in some

cases. The Committee are of the view that a regulator may be appointed for
controlling operations of shipping lines. Similarly, the Committee opine that
-Railway freight charges should also not be increased to subsidize other

1 segmenis as these hikes make Indian products non-competitive in the world

market. Further, the Committee desire effective measures may be taken urgently

_ for easing of congestion, improvements in loading capacity and availability of

feeder networks.

The Committee while noting from the submission. of Ministry of Textiles

‘that only in 12 locations they have got single sign up facility, VPN has been

given in nine locations and issuing receipts of samples through the system has

. started in four Jocations desire that the whoje process be made on-line at all the

~ Jocations at the earfiest.

-In view of the delays in executing Chennai-Ennore Port Connectivity

- .Project and Four Lane Elevated Link Road from Chennai to Maduravoyal due to

fa


ences with the State Government of Tamil Nadu, the Committee are of the

considered opinion that an agreement MoU with State Gevernment be invariably

mede before faking up such projects to avoid disputes at later stages.

NEW DELHI;

24 April, 2017
04 Vaisakha, 1939 (Saka)

*
$ a
Haar phic tice os
>
PROF. K.V. THOMAS
Chairperson,
Public Accounts Committee
y

bo