DISASTER PREPAREDNESS IN INDIA

[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in
- their Twenty-Fifth Report (16th Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2017-18)

HUNDRED-SECOND REPORT

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

102


PAC NO. 2135
HUNDRED SECOND REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2017-18) .

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

DISASTER PREPAREDNESS IN INDIA

[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their Twenty-Fifth Report (16th Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS

Presented to Lok Sabha on:

Laid in Rajya Sabha on:

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

March, 2018/ Chaitra, 1940 (Saka)


' CONTENTS

PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (iii)
COMMITTEE (2017-18)
INTRODUCTION (iv)
CHAPTER | रि७ए० oes ececsleesssessessessessesescsseesecssesssees 4

CHAPTER II* Observations/Recommendations which have been
. accepted by the Government ...... ... ............ -----

CHAPTER III* Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
replies received from the Government ................

CHAPTER IV* _— Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
Feiteration ............ ...... ...--- ०-० जज न १००

CHAPTER ५६ Observations/Recommendations 11 respect of
which the Government have furnished interim
16189 oe eee eee जज >> हनन ५५5

APPENDICES*

| Minutes .of the 22nd" Sitting of Public Accounts
Committee (2017-18) held on 23 March, 2018.

ll. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their Twenty-
Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

* Not appended to the cyclostyled copy of the Report


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2017-18)
s - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. || Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay प्र
3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria -
4, Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
[5. Shri Nishikant Dubey
[6.__] Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
[7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
[ [8. | रा iti ~
[9. |]
[10. |
11.
12.
iz
14. Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi
15. Dr. P. Venugopal
RAJYA SABHA
16._ | Shri Naresh Agrawal
17, || Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
18. ॥ Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
19._][ Shri Mohd. Ali Khan’
20. ॥ Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy’
21. 1 Shri Ajay Sancheti
22. || Shri Bhupender Yadav
SECRETARIAT
11. |[ Shri AK. Singh - Additional Secretary
| Shri TJ. ayaKumar  - Director
3. Shri A.K. Yadav - Deputy Secretary

* Ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon acceptance of his resignation from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 22
February, 2018:

1 Elected w.e.f. 29 December, 2017 in lieu of vacancy caused due to retirement of Shri Shantaram Naik.

+ ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 18 August, 2017 and
re-elected w.e.f. 29 December, 2017.


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2017-18) having been
authorised. by the Committee, do present this Hundred-Second Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha) on action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Twenty-Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Disaster preparedness in India’.

2. The Twenty-Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 10
December, 2015. Replies of the Government to the Observations/ Recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 22 January, 2018. The Public Accounts
Committee considered and adopted the Hundred-Second Report at their sitting held on
23 March, 2018 Minutes of the sittings are given at Apperidix-I.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the C&AG of India.

5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in Twenty-Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given at
Appendix-ll.

NEW DELHI; MALLIKARJUN KHARGE
27 March, 2018 Chairperson
06 Chaitra, 1940 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee



CHAPTER -।

REPORT

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their
Twenty Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)-on “Disaster Preparedness In India” based on
the C&AG Report No. 5 of 2013 (Performance Audit) Union Government. relating to the
Ministry of Home Affairs

2. The Twenty-Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in
Rajya Sabha on 100 December, 2015. . It contained 22 Observations/ Recommendations.
Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/ Recommendations have been
received from the Ministry of Home Affairs over an year's delay from the date of presentation
of its original Report and categorized as under:

(i) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee which have been accepted
by the Government

Paragraph Nos. 1, 3-5, 7-16, and 18-22 Total:19
Chapter- Il

(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the replies received from the Government:

Paragraph Nos. 2, 6 and 17 Total: 03
Chapter- Ill

(ill), | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which requires reiteration:
“=NIL- Total: Nil

: Chapter- IV

(iv) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:

- NIL - : Total: NIL
. Chapter- V
3. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Home Affairs on the observation/

recommendations of the Committee contained in their Twenty-Fifth Report (16th Lok Sabha)
have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. In the succeeding
paragraphs, the Committee have dealt with the Action Taken by the Government on some of


their Observations/Recommendations made in the 25th Report which need comments of the
Committee.

I Freparation of Disaster Management Plans by Ministries/Departments of Disaster Management Plans b Ministries/Departments
[Recommendation Para No. 3] हे

4. The Committee had noted that National Executive Committee (NEC) was to prepare
National Plan for disaster management of the Country and circulate the same to Ministries/
Departments/ States so that they can draw their own plans in accordance with it, However,
neither NEC nor MHA prepared National Plan till 2013 when it was sent to the National
Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) for further necessary action. The Committee had
understood the difficulties/problems in formation of a National Plan for a country with very
diverse geo-climatic conditions. Moreover, a number of Ministries/ Departments and other
agencies/Governments were involved. Still the’Committee felt that the NEC took a very long
time of 7 years ie. from 2006 to 2013 to finalise the Plan. Quite evidently, the inadequate
number of meetings held by NEC due to lack of adequate secretarial support was one of the
factors responsible for this delay. The Committee had noted that in the meantime, NDMA
issued guidelines, in 2007, for preparation of State. Disaster Management Plans. The NDMA
had issued 17 guidelines on various types of disasters and related issues till October 2012.
Till 2014, twenty States had shared their plans with NDMA. The Government had also
provided Grants-in-aid ranging between Rs.8-10 lakh to the States for finalisation of their
plans. The Committee, however, find that avoidable delays took place in finalisation of
National as well as States' Plans for management of disasters. The Committee were of the
firm view that delays had taken place because the NEC and NDMA had délayed the
finalisation of Guidelines and National Plan for disaster management. As due to several
natural and man-made causes, an alarming rise in disasters was witnessed in the country,
the Committee had desired the Ministry of Home Affairs that it must take up the matter
urgently with the remaining State Governments/ Ministries/ Departments/ agencies, who had
not drafted or finalised their State Disaster Management Plans and get needful done. The
Ministry should inform the latest position in this regard to the Committee within three months
from the date of Presentation of this report to the Parliament. The Committee had also
desired to be informed of the status of National Plan for disaster management, which was
statedly pending for NDMA approval.


5.

The Ministry of Home Affairs in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:

" State Disaster Management Plan Disaster Management Plan:

Till date 28. states and 6 UTs have prepared State Disaster Management Plans
(SDMPs), which have been shared with the NDMA. State of Telangana, being a new
State, is in the process of preparing its SDMP. UT of Chandigarh has prepared its draft
DMP and will share it with NDMA shortly.

National Disaster Management Plan (NDMP) Disaster Management Plan (NDMP

The National Executive Committee (NEC) in its 15th Meeting held on 21.10.2013
under the chairmanship of Home Secretary finalized the draft NDMP and the same
was forwarded to NDMA for their approval. The draft NDMP after wider consultation
was restructured and revised. The draft NDMP is being further revisited in the NDMA
as per the Sendai Framework of Action declared in March, 2015, after the 3rd World
Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction in Sendai. After revision of the draft NDMP, it
was submitted for obtaining approval of Hon'ble Prime Minister in his capacity as
Chairman, NDMA. Accordingly, Hon'ble Prime Minister had approved and released
the National Disaster Management Plan on 01 -06.2016. है

Freparation_of Disaster Management Plans(DMPs) by Ministries/ Departments ० of Disaster Management Plans(DMPs' by Ministries/_ Departments of

Government of India:

(a) For assistance of the Ministries/ Departments of the Government of India in
preparation of their DMP, NDMA formulated and circulated a ‘Suggested Structure for
Disaster Management Plan-Departments/ Ministries in the Government of India’. हि

(b) As on 22.01.2016, Ministries/ Departments of (i) Railways, (ii) Petroleum &
Natural Gas, (iii) Heavy Industry and (iv) Steel have prepared their DM Plan. |

The NDMA and the Ministry of Home Affairs are constantly pursuing the matter with
other Ministries/Departments to formulate their Disaster Management Plans in
accordance with the NDMA guidelines. Their further queries in this regard were
addressed during the National Executive Committee meeting held on 15.2.2016.

The latest Status of the preparation of Disaster Management Plans by
Ministries/Departments of Govt. of India is as under:-

(9)... Following Departments/Ministries have Prepared their DM Plans:

(i) Departments of Animal Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries,
(ii) Ministry of Railways, हे

(iii) Ministry of Women & Child Development,

(iv) Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas,

(v) Ministry of Power,

(vi) Ministry of Steel,


(vii) Ministry of Mines,
(शा) Department of Heavy Industries and
(ix) Department of School Education and Literacy

(b) DM Plan of Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries has been
approved. हु है

(0... Comments of NDMA have been sent on the DMP of following

Ministries/Departments

(i) Ministry of Railways,

(ii) Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas,

(ili) Ministry of Power,

(iv) Ministry of Steel दि

(५). शागंआा9 of Mines \

(vi) Ministry of Heavy Industries

(d) DM Plan of Ministry of (i) Women & Child Development and (i) Department of
School Education and Literacy is under examination. :

(e) 80.0. letter dated 30th August, 2016 has been sent by the Home Secretary to
the Secretaries of all the Ministries/Departments of the Government of India reminding
them to comply with the mandatory requirement of preparation, review and updation of
the DMP.”
6. The Committee find that in response to their recommendation 28 States and 6
UTs have prepared State Disaster Management Plans (SDMPs) and shared the same
with NDMA. State of Telangana, being a new State is in the process of preparing its
SDMP. UT of Chandigarh has also Prepared its draft DMP. As regards National
Disaster Management Plan (NDMP) it has been released by Hon'ble Prime Minister on
01.06.2016. However, the DMP of only one Department ie. Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries has been approved till submission of ATNs by MHA.
DMPs of eighth Ministries/Departments have either been Prepared, returned to
Ministries/Departments with comments of NDMA or under examination of NDMA.
Though MHA has reminded in August 2016 to all the Ministries/Departments of Govt. of -
India to comply with the mandatory requirement of Preparation, review and updation of
the DMPs, the status is very bleak. It seems that the Ministries/Department are not as
responsive as they should have been. The Ministry of Home Affairs have not given
any “assurance regarding the timelines for finalization of DMPs by the
Ministries/Departments. The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry of Home Affairs
to set a target date and pursue with the Ministries/Departments of Government of India
to finalise their DMPs at the earliest, The Committee would also like to be apprised of
the steps taken by the Ministry in this regard.


I Flood control and Inter-Linking of Rivers [I control and Inter-Linking of Rivers [Recommendation Para No. 13]

7. The Committee had noted that the total flood affected area in the country is vast i.e.
456.40 lakh hectares of land. An average of 72.25 lakh hectare of land is affected annually
by floods of which 37.89 lakh hectare is cropped area. Thus, floods cause loss of livelihood of
lakhs of farmers in the country, thereby making a dent in the economy. The Ministry of Water
Resources (MoWR) was to prepare a detailéd action plan for management of floods as per
NDMA guidelines on which MoWR has taken action. However, according to MOWR there are
many additional activities indicated in these guidelines including safety issues of large dams,
flood forecasting etc. which are not presently carried out by the organisations of MoWR
/States/local administrations. The Committee were informed that such activities require major
overhaul including re-structuring and strengthening of the organisations besides huge
financial requirements in consultation with Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance.
Time lines indicated in the guidelines need to.be finalised in consultation with all the linked
agencies which include States, NRSC, IMD, GSI, MHA etc. The Committee had noted that 14
States had responded to establishing a Dam Safety Organisation (DSO). The Audit had also
revealed that only eight States had prepared Emergency Action Plans (EAP) for 192 (4.06%)
large dams as against 4728 large dams in 29 States as of September 2011, as highly skilled
manpower and extensive field survey for the same, which require coordination with other
departments also, needs a lot of time. This has resulted in 96 % of large dams rendering
huge area and property vulnerable to cascading effects of dam failure. Also, while there are
4728 reservoirs and barrages in the country, the Central Water Commission (CWC) provided
inflow forecasts to only 28 reservoirs and barrages as only 28 requests were received by
CWC for such forecasts. An IIPA study report given to MoWR in 2009, had highlighted
various deficiencies in the scheme of things which included non-functional telemetry stations
and absence of dedicated communication facilities in flood forecasting stations. As per the
Ministry, under the Flood Management Programme (FMP), it was able to implement 252
works out of 420 works and, as against target of 2.18 mha, could protect 1.96 mha of flood.
- affected area from the flood. The short fall of only 0.19 mha. was due to late approval of the
scheme and slow execution by State Government -due to lesser working period. The
Committee, had inter-alia desired that the MHA must coordinate with MoWR to (i) encourage
the States and ensure that all the concerned States establish their Dam Safety Organisation
and prepare Emergency Action Plans for large dams so that in case of any adverse situation
or emergency, immediate and: corrective steps are taken for safety of people from the


Cascading effects of floods; (ii) Ensure that deficiencies pointed out by IIPA in their study in
forecasting of floods are rectified and consult and Coordinate with the States to expand their
plan for inflow forecast network to additional reservoirs in the country; (iii) Implement and
execute more works under the Flood Management Programme to save people, livestock and
Property from the impact of the flood; (iv) As floods are a grave perennial problem for States
like Assam, Bihar, U.P. etc., the Committee were convinced that a well-coordinated strategy
was required to tackle floods as National emergency, particularly in monsoon months, and
merely the non-mandatory Guidelines of NDMA were inadequate to handle preparedness
and mitigation efforts concerning floods. The Committee had, therefore, recommended that
the MHA, MoWR, Department: of Space, IMD, Dam Owning Companies and all concerned
State Governments must come together to assess and minimize the damage caused by
floods. As some of the neighboring countries are also Suspected to engage in building dams
on rivers flowing through the Indian Sub-Continent, which impact the flood plains adversely in
India, the Committee had desired that the matter needed greater attention from the PMO and
the MEA to protect the country from any potential man-made floods caused by such activities;
and (v) the Ministry of Water Resource/ Irrigation Departments should also take necessary
steps to manage the flood water by d iverting it to water deficit States through implementation
of schemes for "Inter-linking of rivers" and creating network of canals.

8. The Ministry of Water Resources in their action taken notes have inter-alia stated as
‘under:

"() Central Water Commission provides guiding and advisory role in matters
concerning Dam Safety and has accordingly prepared ‘Guidelines for Development
and Implementation of Emergency Action Plan (EAP) for Dams' and circulated to
States for its implementation by Dam owning authorities. EAPs are project specific
and are to be prepared by Dam owners i.e. most State Govt/PSUs, keeping in view
EAP Guidelines. CWC had formulated a Dam Safety 8॥-2010 making EAPs
mandatory for existing as _ well as new dams within five years of its enactment. The bill
was resubmitted in 2014 which also could not materialise due to change in
Government.at centre. After incorporating the bifurcation of Andhra Pradesh into
Andhra Pradesh and Teleangana and consultation with Ministry. of Law, the draft Dam
SafetyBill 2016 has been prepared covering whole of India.. As States having more
than 20 dams needs to establish a DSO, 16 States are having full fledged Dam
Safety Cell/Organisation. Through persuation, EAP for 321 Dams have been
prepared by 13 States/Dam owning agency and for 122 Dams are in various
stages of preparation by 5 States. CWC and Ministry of WRRD&GR_ has
continuously impressed upon the States for implementation of the flood plain
zoning approach to avoid encroachment of flood plains/water bodies.


(ii) The work on the Flood Forecasting Network has been initiated and it was expected
to be completed by March, 2017. ;

(iii) CWC performs the Flood Forecasting and Warning job on flood prone interstate
river basins in the country. It issues the forecast to the users such as various Civil and
Engineering Departments of the State and Central Governments including, Railway,
Defence, Revenues Authorities, Public Sector Undertakings besides National Disaster
Management Cell in the Ministry of Home Affairs, who are responsible for taking timely
flood fighting measures, rescue operations including shifting of flood affected people to
-safer places etc. है

Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation has
developed bilateral arrangements with neighbouring countries on data sharing and
project planning/implementation with flood mitigation as one of the objectives.

(iv) The Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation is
working on its flagship programme ‘Inter Linking of River" Project through National
Water Development Agency (NWDA) in consultation with State Governments.

Large dams and canal system are proposed to be constructed to store and transfer
flood waters of the surplus rivers in Interbasin Water Transfer proposals. NWDA has
identified 30 such Interbasin Water Transfer links (16 under Peninsular Component
and 14 under Himalayan Component). For transferring surplus waters of Mahanadi
and Godavari, dams are proposed to be constructed at Manibhadra on Mahanadi and
Inchampalli and Polavaram on Godavari rivers. Similarly dams on Manas and
Sankosh in Brahmaputra basin (in Bhutan) and Kosi, Gandak, Ghagra and Sarda in
Ganga basin (in Nepal) are proposed for storing and transferring water in. In addition,
there is incidental flood control benefit from existing dams namely Nagarjunasagar,
Almatti, Srisailam, etc. are also considered in Interbasin Water Transfer proposals.
The main purpose for construction of these dams where no specific flood storage is
envisaged is for increasing irrigation area."
9. The Committee find that guidelines issued by Central Water Commission (CWC)
for development and implementation of Emergency Action Plan (EAP) for Dams to all
States/ Dam Owning Agencies are in the process of implementation. Sixteen States
have Dam Safety Cell/Organisation. Karnataka, Punjab and Rajasthan are being
pursued for establishment of Dam Safety Organisation. CWC, Ministry: of Water
Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation has continuously impressed
upon the States for implementation of the flood plain zoning approach to avoid
encroachment of Flood Plains/Water Bodies through a model bill circulated by
Government. The work on the Flood Forecasting Networks and rectification of
deficiencies by IIPA are being initiated and it-was expected to be completed by March
2017. The Government of India has established system for flood forecasting and flood

management through various agencies of Central and State Governments which


Coordinate and take necessary steps before and after the flood situation. Ministry of
Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation has developed bilateral
arrangements with neighboring countries on data sharing and project
planning/implementation with flood mitigation as one of the objectives. However,
despite all efforts the annual floods from rivers flowing in to our country from
neighboring countries is a regular phenomena. The Committee, therefore, desire that
greater role of PMO/MEA is required to prevent loss to crops and Property caused
every year by floods from rivers flowing in to our country from the neighboring
countries. The Committee exhort the Ministry to accelerate the pace of
implementation of ‘Inter-Linking of Rivers' Project and set a timeline as presently most
of the works under project have neither been taken up nor finalised.

il Expanding the laboratory network to manage Biological Disaster the laboratory network to manage Biological Disaster
[Recommendation Para No. 18]

10. “The core function for preparedness for biological disaster is disease surveillance which
is undertaken through Integrated -Disease Surveillance Project (IDSP) run. by the National
Centre for Disease Control (NCDC). The Committee note that under IDSP, surveillance units
have been established in all States/Districts and linked through an IT network established
with the help of NIC and ISRO. Satellite connectivity will be available once the migration from
existing satellite to GSAT-12 is done by ISRO. About 90% of the districts report weekly
surveillance data through the portal. The Committee also note that the draft Public Health
(Prevention, Control and Management of Epidemics, Bio Terrorism -and Disasters) Bill is
under finalisation by the MOH&FW. As regards strengthening of districts laboratories for
diagnosis of epidemic prone diseases, 42 labs have become functional and 300 labs were
proposed to be set up under 12th Plan. Additionally, in 17 States, 85 Medical Colleges labs
have been linked to adjoining districts so far and 190 Medical Colleges are proposed to be
linked in 12th Plan in the State referral lab network. Under the scheme of Indian Council of
Medical Research for ‘Establishment of a network of labs for managing Epidemics and
Natural Calamities', a three tier network of 160 labs is proposed to be set up. The Committee
are happy to note that a reasonable progress has been made in surveillance and in setting up
of laboratories. However, the pace of setting up of laboratories needs to be accelerated in

view of the density of population in the country which makes it a potential hub for faster
, spread of diseases. The Committee had, therefore, desired the Ministry to step up their
efforts to set up labs in the remaining districts. The Committee sought to be informed of


status of the Public Health Bill which was said to be at the drafting stage. The Committee
had recommended to set up surveillance at national entry level point and strengthening
laboratory infrastructure in the country to prevent spread of diseases in the Country through
these points.

11. The Ministry, Health and Family Welfare (Department of Health and Family Welfare)
while furnishing the action taken notes has stated as under:

"Under the scheme of Department of Health Research for the ‘Establishment of a
Network of Laboratories to Managing Endemic and Natural Calamities', 10
regional laboratories, 30 State level laboratories and 120 Medical College laboratories
are to be established with an estimated outlay of Rs.646.83 crores, In this regard
Department of Health Research had approved setting up of 82 Viral Research and
Diagnostic Laboratories (VRDL) (5 regional level, 15 State level and 62 Medical
college level) out of which funds have been released to 43 VRDLs across the country.

Under Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme (IDSP), [as on Feb.
2016] 111 district hospital laboratories have been made functional for
strengthening diagnosis of epidemic prone diseases in 22 States referral laboratory
network has been established by utilizing 99 existing functional laboratories in the
" Medical Colleges and various other major centres in the States and linking them with
adjoining districts for providing diagnostic services.

The Public Health Bill has been drafted. Further consultation with
stakeholders is to be undertaken.

Existing 21 Points of Entries (PoEs) have been strengthened.
Establishment of addition to 30 Health Units at PoEs (21 Airports, 2 ports and 7
ground crossings) has been approved. Each Point of Entry has been linked with a
health facility. In additiona to the existing quarantine facility at Delhi and Mumbai
International Airports, new quarantine facility has been established at Kochi
Airport and existing facility at Kolkata Airport is being renovated. Development of
new quarantine facility at 7 other International Airport is in progress."

12. The Committee note that under the scheme of Department of Health Research
for the ‘Establishment of a Network of Laboratories for Managing Endemic and Natural
Calamities', 10 regional laboratories, 30 State level laboratories and 120 Medical
College laboratoies are to be established with an estimated outlay of Rs.646.83 crores.
Department of Health Research had approved setting up of 82 Viral Research and
Diagnostic Laboratories (VRDL) (5 regional level, 15 State level and 62 Medical college
level) out of which funds have been released to 43 VRDLs across the country.Under
integrated Disease Surveillance Programme (IDSP), [fas on Feb. 2016] 111 district


10

hospital laboratories have been made functional for strengthening diagnosis of
epidemic prone diseases in 22 States, referral laboratory network has been
established by utilizing 99 existing functional laboratories in the Medical Colleges and
various other major centres in the States and linked them with adjoining districts for
Providing diagnostic services. Further, the Public Health Bill has been drafted.
Further consultation with stakeholders is to be undertaken. Existing 21 Points of
Entries (PoEs) have been strengthened. Establishment of addition to 30 Health units
at PoEs (21 Airports, 2 ports and 7 ground crossings) has been approved. Each point
of Entry has been linked with a health facility. In addition to the existing quarantine
facility at Delhi and Mumbai International Airports, new quarantine facility has been
established at Kochi Airport and existing facility at Kolkata Airport is being renovated.
Development of new quarantine facility at 7 other International Airport is in progress.
The Committee, however, are not happy with the poor Progress made in finalisation of
the Public Health Bill. In 2015, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare had informed
the Committee that the Public Health (Prevention, Control and Management of
Epidemics, bio-terrorism and disasters) Bill was under finalisation. Now, after a lapse
of more than two years the Ministry have stated that the Bill has been drafted and first
consultation with stakeholders is to be undertaken. This show the non-chalant
attitude of the Ministry to bring a suitable law to prevent/control epidemics, bio-
terrorism and disasters in the country. The Committee are unable to understand the
cause of such an inordinate delay in finalisation of a Bill of urgent public importance.
The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare to earnestly
complete the consultation process and expeditiously finalise the proposed legislation.
They would also like to be apprised of the possible time period to be taken to
introduce the Bill in Parliament.