1 
 
126  
 
 
PRADHAN MANTRI GRAM SADAK YOJANA  
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Ninety-Second Report (16th Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEETNH LOK SABHA 
 
 
               
                      
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  


2 
 
PAC NO.  2165 
 
 
O N E  H U N D E R D  A N D  T W E N T Y  
S I X T H  R E P O R T 
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(201 8-19) 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Ninety-second Report (16th Lok Sabha)] 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
 
 
                                         
                                                                            
Presented to Lok Sabha on:  ………….…… 
 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   ………………. 
 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
December, 2018 /Agrahayana, 1939 (Saka)  
 
PRADHAN MANTRI GRAM SADAK YOJANA  
 
 
 

3 
 
CONTENTS 
  PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2018-19)      (iii) 
 
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………... …………………….. 
  
(iv) 
CHAPTER I              
  
Report ………………………………………………. 1 
C H A P T E R  
I I *  
Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government …………………….. 
 
CHAPTER III* Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
replies received from the Government ..………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV* Observations/Recommendations in respec t of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration ……………………………………………. 
 
 
CHAPTER V* Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which the Government have furnished interim 
replies ………………………………………………… 
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES*  
 
I 
 
Minutes of the 21 st sitting of the Public Accounts 
Committee (2018 -19) held on   
14th December, 2018. 
 
 
II Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public 
Accounts Committee contained in their  Ninety-
second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
   
 
________________________________________________________________  
*Not appended to the cyclostyled copy of the Report 
  

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge   - Chairperson 
 
 M E M B E R S  
 
L O K  S A B H A  
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria  
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra 
5.    Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar   
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
7. Smt. Riti Pathak 
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank” 
9. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
10. Shri Abhishek Singh 
11. Shri Gopal Shetty 
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya  
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
15. Dr. Ponnusamy  Venugopal 
 
 
 
R A J Y A  S A B H A  
 
16. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda 
17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
18. Shri Shwait Malik 
19. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
21. Shri C.M. Ramesh 
 
22. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A.K. Singh  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Director 
3. Smt. Anju Kukreja  - Under Secretary 

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chair person, Public Accounts Committee  (2018-19), having been 
authorised by the Committee, do present this  One Hundred and Twenty Sixth  Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in thei r Ninety -second 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on “Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana" based on 
C&AG Report No. 23 of 2016 relating to Ministry of Rural Development. 
 
2. The Ninety-second Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on  
28th March, 2018. Replies of the Government to all the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report were received.  The Public Accounts Committee considered 
and adopted the One Hundred and Twenty Sixth Report at their sitting held on  
14th December, 2018.  Minutes of the sitting are given at Appendix I. 
 
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and  
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of  the 
Report. 
 
4. The Committee place on record their app reciation of the assistance rendered to  
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/  
Recommendations contained in the Ninety-second Report (16th Lok Sabha) is  given at 
Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NEW DELHI;                                                           MALLIKARJUN KHARGE 
    December, 2018                                                                               Chairperson, 
   Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)                                       Public Accounts Committee 

6 
 
 
REPORT 
PART – I 
 
 This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations and Recommendations contained in their Ninety-
second Report (16th Lok Sabha) on the subject "Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana" 
based on C&AG Report No. 23 of 2016 related to Ministry of Rural Development. 
 
2. The Ninety-second Report (16th Lok Sabha) which was presented to Lok 
Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 28th March, 2018, contained 23 
Observations/Recommendations.  Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations 
and Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Rural Development and 
are broadly categorized as under: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
  Para Nos. 1-23 
           
          Total:     23       
          Chapter - II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
 
  Para Nos. -NIL-  
           
          Total:    NIL      
          Chapter – III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
 
  Para Nos. NIL 
           
          Total:     NIL 
          Chapter - IV 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies: 
 
  Para Nos. NIL 
           
          Total:    NIL 
          Chapter -V 

7 
 
 
3. During the course of examination of the subject, the Committee found several 
irregularities in monitoring and implementation of Pradhan mantra Gram Sa dak Yojana.  
It was found that some States deviated from the prescribed procedures while preparing 
District Rural Road Plan and Core Network.  Consequently, eligible habitations were 
either left out or wrongly shown as connected.  Some of the road works we re taken 
beyond Core Network.  Involvement of elected public representatives in planning 
process was also found lacking.  Geographical information system data base for rural 
roads was not created. Project proposals were cleared beyond the permissible 
indicative fund allocation. As regards the programme implementation, the Committee 
found that the execution of road work suffered badly due to non -organisation of transect 
walk which led to dropping and abandonment of works because of land disputes, non -
availability of required land and works were shown completed without providing 
complete connectivity to the targeted habitations.  Instances of providing multiple 
connectivity to habitations in violation of guidelines were also observed. Maintenance 
funds were neither adequately provided nor fully utilised.  Roads constructed under the 
programme were not properly maintained. Further in case of fund management of 
PMGSY, the Committee observed that funds released to States for implementation of 
the programme were co nsiderably reduced during 2012 -15 due to unutilized balance 
with the States.  There were instances of non/short delayed release of programme 
funds. In certain States, Programme funds were diverted and utilized on inadmissible 
items. Figures of release and expenditure under the Programme maintained by the 
Ministry did not match with those maintained by the State Governments. The Committee 
also found that quality and monitoring control mechanisms were deficient in all the tiers 
of PMGSY. Field laboratories we re either not set up or inadequately equipped at work 
execution sites.  Inspections of roads at prescribed stages were not undertaken. Joint 
inspections with elected Public representatives were not undertaken.  Performance 
Evaluation Committee meetings to evaluate the performance of the National Quality 
Monitors were not held at prescribed intervals. State Level Standing Committee 
meetings to monitor progress of ongoing works, quality control, budgeting of 
maintenance fund etc. were not held regularly. In r egard to Online Management, 

8 
 
Monitoring and Accounting System (OMMAS), the Committee observed that even after 
more than 13 years, States were in the process of updating the data.  Fund Processing 
and Analysis of Rate for Rural Roads (ARRR) modules were not implemented. 
Similarly, absence of application controls led to invalid data entry.  MIS reports 
generated through the system were inaccurate and unreliable.  The Committee had 
accordingly given their Observations/Recommendations in the 92 nd Report (16 th Lok 
Sabha).  The Gist of some important Observations/Recommendations are contained in 
the succeeding Paragraphs: 
 
(a) While Observing that even though guidelines were issued twice within a week of 
2015 no other concrete action was taken by the Ministry of Rural Development to 
ensure that those guidelines were actually implemented in letter and spirit, the 
Committee, had urged upon the Ministry to take effective steps in constantly 
monitoring to ensure that guidelines issued are scrupulously followed and 
implemented by the States; 
(b) Upon noticing that the Ministry have again failed to fulfill its own commitment to 
ensure the C -DAC to complete the GIS Database Management System in all 
States by February, 2018, the Committee had desired that, PMGSY being one of 
the pre stigious schemes of Central Government aimed at creating all weather 
roads in rural areas of the country, the Cabinet Secretary may take the lead in 
ensuring scientific, transparent and timely implementation of the programme. 
(c) The Committee had serious concern over the manner in which the Ministry 
released funds without satisfying themselves that the CNCPL and CUPL are 
properly verified by the State Technical Agencies on the basis of the prescribed 
guidelines. The Committee were of the considered view th at proper connectivity 
of all weather roads in rural areas being the foundation of PMGSY, any flaw in 
the system will gravely vitiate its very objective. They had, therefore, desired the 
Ministry of Rural Development to deal the issue with more seriousness  and take 
appropriate corrective measures to clean up the system. The Committee 
exhorted that all cases of irregularities should be thoroughly investigated and 

9 
 
responsibility of the erring officials fixed for the lapses. The Ministry should also 
consider withholding of financial assistance to the defaulting States. 
(d) The Committee had desired the Ministry to keep constant vigil over the States to 
ensure proper synchronisation of available excess funds and fixation of targets 
for better achievement of the obje ctives. They had also desired to be apprised of 
the present position of the targets set for completion of work in all the States, 
achievement made so far, States lagging behind in achievement of targets and 
action taken thereagainst. 
(e) While expressing their  concern over non -conducting of transect walk the 
Committee, had,  desired the Ministry of Rural Development to look into this vital 
area and take effective steps to ensure that transect walks are organised by the 
States as prescribed in the guidelines, fa iling which, penalty should be imposed 
on States for abandoning the works mid -way due to non -conducting of transect 
walk. Quarterly Reports from the States should be obtained in order to regularly 
monitor the transect walk organised by them. The Committee had also desired to 
be apprised of the impact of including women Panchayati Raj Institution 
members and representatives of women Self Help Groups in the transect walk. 
(f) The Committee had expected the Ministry to hold regular review meetings with 
the States to finish pending works. In this regard, guidelines may be suitably 
amended by prescribing periodical review meetings, imposition of strict penalty 
etc. so as to have purposeful monitoring and control over the pending projects. 
The Committee had also desired to be apprised of the conclusive action taken by 
the Ministry to prevent dropping/abandonment of works midway thereby saving 
valuable money of the exchequer. 
(g) The Committee, had felt that the Ministry should suitably take up the matter with 
the State Gov ernments for ensuring to prevent delays/irregularities in tendering 
process in future besides apprising States to take stringent action against the 
officials responsible for such omissions. 
(h) The Committee had deplored the Ministry and concerned State Govern ments in 
wasting public money due to improper planning and for not making serious 
attempts to provide complete connectivity to the targetted habitations. 

10 
 
(i) The Committee were of the considered view that accurate identification of 
habitations is necessary for  achieving intended benefits of the programme and 
any flaws in this process particularly multiple connectivity which would vitiate its 
objective.  
(j) The Committee had urged upon the Ministry to investigate in coordination with 
State Governments all such case s of short release/non -utilisation of funds and 
ask them to fix responsibility against the officials for omissions. They had also 
recommended that in future penalty should be imposed on the defaulting States 
who fail to release/utilise funds for maintenanc e. Ministry should also consider 
withholding of Grants to State Governments upon noticing such irregularities. 
(k) The Committee had also desired that the Ministry should take all possible 
measures to ensure that sufficient release of funds to the States in time and all 
cases of financial irregularities probed into and appropriate action taken against 
the erring officials. 
(l) Since diversion of funds from intended purposes reflects poor fund management 
besides reducing the fund availability for the desired purposes, the Committee 
had recommended that in future the Ministry should ensure that suitable penal 
actions are taken to check diversion of funds and steps like withholding of funds 
to such States should be done. 
(m) Since quality control is a vital component of PMGSY to maintain quality of roads, 
the Committee had desired that Ministry should exercise quality control at three 
stages viz. firstly at the stage prior to construction, secondly during the 
construction phase and thirdly quality checks by the field engineers after 
completion of each stage of construction so that the roads get longer life and do 
not get damaged immediately after the construction. 
(n) The Committee while welcoming the steps taken by the Ministry for streamlining 
the process of inspections, recommend that the Ministry should ensure that the 
inspections are carried out as per the specifications mentio ned in the guidelines 
and any aberration noticed in this regard should be dealt with sternly. 
(o) The Committee had desired the Ministry to ensure proper monitoring of the 
conduct of social audit by citizen volunteers regularly. Further, in order to achieve 

11 
 
the goals of social Audit, the Ministry should also ensure that volunteers are 
aware of their rights to participate in the ongoing process of social audit, their 
entitlements and obligations under the scheme. The Committee had also urged 
the Ministry to repl icate the modalities of social audit of the MGNREGS be 
incorporated in the guidelines of PMGSY with immediate effect. 
 
4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Rural Development on each 
of the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contai ned in their Ninety -
Second Report have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report.  The 
Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government , on some of their 
Observations/Recommendations which either need reiteration or merit comments 
 
A. Clearance of works in excess of allocation of funds 
 (Recommendation Para No. 7) 
 
5. Upon noticing that the Ministry cleared proposals valued much more than the 
indicative allocations, the Committee had desired to know as to whether any analysis of 
present level of fund requirement of States, expenditure incurred by them and funds 
remained unutilized therewith was done by the Ministry to keep constant vigil over the 
states to ensure proper synchronization of available excess funds and fixation of targets 
for better achievement of the objective.  They had also desired to be apprised of the 
present position of the targets set for completion of work in all the States, achievement 
made so far, States lagging behind in achievement of targets and action taken 
thereagainst.   
 
6. In their Action Taken Note on the aforesaid recommendation Ministry of Rural 
Development submitted as under: 
"The Ministry gauges the funds requirement at many levels. The preliminary 
scrutiny is done while discussing any project proposal for granting clearance at 
Pre-Empowered Committee and Empowered Committee levels. While fixing the 
annual allocation, the unspent balance, absorption as well as execution capacity 
and balance quantum of works are weighed in on State to State basis. During the 
process of fund release, detailed scrutiny is done to ensure that there is no 

12 
 
misuse of funds.  Proposals sent by the States are examined for level of 
expenditure, unspent balance, releases of stat e share of earlier central releases, 
and audited accounts. Against a target of connecting 1,78,184 habitations, 
1,43,560 habitations have been connected under the scheme and 16,310 
habitations connected by the states out of their own their own resources (9 0% of 
eligible).  Most of the remaining habitations remaining to be sanctioned have 
either been sanctioned by the State Government or are not feasible. Most of the 
works are in an advanced stage of completion and the final black topping will 
now commence a fter the end of the rains and rapid progress is expected to 
ensure achievement by March, 2019.  The Ministry is constantly reviewing works 
of the laggard States through Performance Review Committees, Regional 
Review Meetings, Empowered Committee, Pre -Empowered Committees, Video 
Conferences, regular visits of the Ministry officials to these States besides daily 
Monitoring through other electronic and IT means.” 
 
 
 
7. In their 92 nd Report, the Committee had desired the Ministry of Rural 
Development to apprise th em of the present position of the targets set for 
completion of work in regard to construction of PMGSY roads in all the States.  
This included achievement made so far, states lagging behind in achievement of 
targets and action taken thereagainst.  In thei r Action Taken Notes the Ministry 
have stated that against a target of connecting 1,78,184 habitations, 1,43,560 
habitations have been connected by the States out of their own resources. 
However, the Ministry have not furnished the quantified comparative data in 
regard to the target dates of completion of works and the projects pending thus 
far.  Accordingly, the Committee are not able to understand the actual position of 
fixation of targets, outcome and the achievements made thereagainst.  Further, in 
regard to the details of the States lagging behind in achievement of targets and 
action taken thereagainst, the Committee have been informed that the Ministry is 
constantly reviewing works of the laggard States through various Committees, 
video conferences, regular visits of the Ministry officials to these States.   They 
have also informed that daily Monitoring through other electronic and IT means is 
being undertaken, nevertheless the Ministry have not pr ovided the details of  the 
States that have been lagging behind and the action has been initiated/ taken by 
the Ministry against such defaulting States.  At this stage, the Committee can 
only reiterate their earlier recommendation and accordingly desire to b e apprised 

13 
 
of complete details on the aforesaid  issues.  They also recommend that 
possibility be looked into for fixing responsibility against the concerned officials 
of the Ministry as well as States, which are lagging behind in the achievement of 
targets.  
 
B. Transect Walks not organized 
 (Recommendation Para No. 8) 
 
8. The Committee was constrained to observe that in 17 States (Andhra Pradesh, 
Assam, Bihar, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu &  Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, 
Madhya Pradesh, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Tripura, Uttar 
Pradesh and West Bengal), transect walk was either not organized or required 
certificate/documents were not found attached with DPRs.   Failure to implement this 
significant procedure at the time of project preparation led to dropping or abandoning of 
works mid-way due to land disputes, non-availability of required land and other reasons.  
While expressing their concern  over this the Co mmittee had desired the Ministry of 
Rural Development to look into this vital area and take effective steps to ensure that 
transect walks are organized by the States as prescribed in the guidelines, failing which, 
penalty should be imposed on States for ab andoning the works mid -way due to non -
conducting of transect walk.  Quarterly Reports from the States should be obtained in 
order to regularly monitor the transect walk organized by them.  The Committee had 
also desired to be apprised of the impact of incl uding Women Panchayati Raj Institution 
members and representatives of Women Self Help Groups in the transect walk. 
 
9. In their Action Taken Notes on the above said recommendation, the Ministry of 
Rural Development stated as follows: 
“As per Guidelines, the PIUs are required to undertake ‘Transect Walk’ to 
determine the most suitable alignment for the proposed road.  The transect walk 
shall be organized by the Assistant Engineer at the time of preparation of DPRs. 
The Panchayat Pradhan, local Patwari, the JE,  Women PRI members and 
representatives of Women Self Help Group (SHGs) would participate in the 
transect walk. The Ministry has issued advisory to the States to ensure that this 
procedure is followed (28.4.2011).  Further, during the sample scrutiny of DPR s 
by NRIDA, this aspect is being ensured by verifying the transect walk photos 

14 
 
uploaded by the States on OMMAS, attendance, summary of discussions, 
approval of Gram Panchayat and the certificate furnished by the States, in 
relevant DPRs. Also, all the Stat es are providing the Photographs along the 
alignment at every 100 m interval with summary of observations for engineering 
design of proposed road. Though, some roads were taken up assuming that 
forest clearance would be granted, however, they had to be dro pped eventually 
due to forest clearance not being granted for the case. No study has been 
undertaken so far to evaluate the impact of women on the transect walk and its 
consequent decisions. The Ministry will consider this while commissioning 
studies on various aspects of PMGSY in the future.” 
 
10. The Committee observe that the Ministry of Rural Development have taken 
several steps to ensure that transect walks are organized by the States as 
prescribed in the guidelines  by them.  However, the Committee are disconcerted 
to note that no study has been undertaken to evaluate the 
outcome/impact/contribution of including W omen Panchayati Raj Institutions 
Members and representatives of the Wome n Self -Help Groups in the transect 
walk.  Th e Committee are concerned to note that since Ministry had amended 
their own guidelines in September 2014 direc ting all the States to include Women 
PRI Members and S elf Help Groups in the transect walk, no study has been 
undertaken by them to evaluate th eir impact in the transect walk even after lapse 
of four years of issuing such guidelines.  This shows the lackadaisical approach 
of the Ministry on this aspect.  Having regard to the mounting need for 
streamlining the procedure of transect walk, the Committe e desire that the study 
on the impact of Member of WPRI Members and WSH Groups  on the transect 
walk be undertaken at the earliest so  that their contribution be evaluated which 
will eventually help in proper implementation of the scheme.    
  
 
C. Multiple Connectivity of Habitations  
 (Recommendation Para No. 13) 
 
11.  Upon noticing that in nine States (Arunachal Pradesh, Gujarat, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Nagaland, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and West 
Bengal), 36 habitations were provided with more than one connectivity.  Out of this, 31 

15 
 
habitations were provided multiple connectivity at a cost of Rs 29.49 crore, the 
Committee, had desired to know as to whether any enquiry of these 36 cases by SQM 
was done, if so, what were their findings and suggest ions to overcome such instances 
in future.  Whether any responsibility has been fixed against the erring officials.  The 
Committee had also desired to know if the cost of the multiple connectivity has been 
borne by the State Governments concerned.  The Com mittee were of the considered 
view that accurate identification of habitations is necessary for achieving intended 
benefits of the programme and any flaws in this process particularly multiple 
connectivity which would vitiate its objective.  Thus, they had  desired that the Ministry 
should evolve a suitable mechanism to avoid such instances in future. 
 
12.  In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Rural Development stated as under: 
“All the States reported that the unconnected habitations in their CN and updated 
the data on OMMAS. This was reconciled by the States and in 2013, revised 
approval of Cabinet was obtained on reconciled number of habitations. In many 
cases, States have constructed roads along Non -CN alignments from their own 
funds, as the roads under PMGSY are being taken up as per CUCPL/CNCPL. 
Thus, such cases are not to be treated as multiple connectivity under PMGSY as 
only one connectivity was been provided under PMGSY.  Further, in a case of 
Rajasthan where multiple connectivity was cleared d ue to the revenue villages 
being mapped on core network instead of habitations in the beginning, the 
Ministry has taken a very strong view and partial amount has been recouped 
from the state at the time of release of funds.  In the absence of a comprehensive 
list of the said roads, specific reply could not be given for the 36 cases enquired 
upon.” 
 
13.  The Committee are constrained to observe that the comprehensive list of 
road could not be provided to them for the 36 cases of habitations having 
multiple conne ctivity as pointed out .  In the absence of such a list, it is very 
difficult to draw any inference on the progress of connectivity or even to point out 
the areas which are wanting for improvement.  Further, the reply of the Ministry is 
also silent on the o riginal recommendation of the Committee wherein they had 
desired to make an enquiry of these cases by the State Quality Monitors ( SQM).  
Moreover, t he Ministry have not provided any reply on the issue of cost of the 
multiple connectivity, specifically whether they were borne by the State 

16 
 
Governments concerned or through any other sources.   The Ministry have also 
not apprised about the mechanism evolved by them to avoid such instances in 
future.  The Committe e are distraught at  the Ministry having furnishing such a 
vague reply on this important aspect of multiple connectivity.  Thus, while 
deploring the casual approach of the Ministry in dealing with this issue, the 
Committee desire that a comprehensive reply containing all the aforesaid issues 
be furnished to them within six weeks of the presentation of this Report to 
Parliament.   
 
D. Shortfall in inspections by SQMs  
 (Recommendation Para No. 19) 
 
14.  The Committee had observed that State Quality Monitors (SQMs) carried out 
inspections for 51521 road works during 2010 -15 in States.  Out of these, 1671 road 
works (3.24 per cent) were not inspected even once. 26691 roads works (51.81 per 
cent) were inspected only once.  From the detailed scrutiny, the Committee find that in 
Andhra Pradesh 48 road works were not inspected whereas seven road works were 
inspected 10 to 18 times.  In Assam, 124 road works were not inspected whereas four 
road works were inspect ed 10 to 13 times.  In Gujarat, 47 road works were not 
inspected whereas 21 road works were inspected 10 to 26 times.  In Madhya Pradesh, 
nine road works inspected 10 to 16 times, whereas 193 road works were never 
inspected.  In Maharashtra, 77 road works were not inspected whereas five road works 
were inspected 10 to 11 times.  It is therefore, evident that SQMs did not carry out the 
prescribed inspections uniformly.  According to Ministry, in some States, short fall has 
been reported due to various reason s including that of shortage of technical personnel.  
In order to address this issue, the States have been advised by the Ministry to engage 
independent agencies for State Quality Monitor inspections to increase the number of 
SQMs and use the mobile application developed by NRRDA for such inspections.  
Further, NRRDA has set annual/monthly targets for each State for SQM inspection and 
the progress of the same is also monitored by NRRDA on monthly basis and the matter 
is taken up with the States laggin g in achieving the target.  The Committee while 

17 
 
welcoming these steps taken by the Ministry for Streamlining the process of inspections, 
had recommended that the Ministry should ensure that the inspections are carried out 
as per the specifications mentione d in the guidelines and any aberration noticed in this 
regard should be dealt with sternly.  Penal measures should be taken against the States 
in the aforesaid cases pointed out by Audit. 
 
15.  In response to the aforesaid Audit observations, the Ministry of R ural 
Development stated as under: 
 
“As regard to shortfall of SQM inspection for each work, this aspect is now being 
very closely monitored both at the State and Ministry/NRIDA level. Various MIS 
reports have been developed to monitor these aspects in OMMA S. Consequent 
to this, the category of ongoing works having zero SQM inspections have 
significantly reduced. Such aberrant SQM inspections are accounted while fixing 
the annual SQM inspection targets for each State. The State -wise achievement 
vis-à-vis., t he targets set for SQM inspection is closely monitored on monthly 
basis and the matter is taken up with the State lagging in achieving the targets. 
Thrust has been given to augment SQM capacity which in turn has resulted in 
increase in number of SQM inspec tions during successive years. This is evident 
from the table below indicating the number of SQM inspections carried out during 
last few years: 
 
Year 
SQM inspections carried 
out 
2014-15 34558 
2015-16 34586 
2016-17 31660 
2017-18 40124 
2018-19  
( up to 26th Oct,2018 ) 
18640 
  
In addition to the above, a roster app for deputing NQM and SQMs for 
inspections has been developed by C -DAC.  The app is being tested and would 
be in operation in a month’s time.” 
 
16.  From the Action Taken Notes, the Committee observe that thrust had been 
given by the Ministry t o augment State Quality Monitor s (SQMs) Capacity which 

18 
 
in turn had resulted in increase in number of SQM inspections during successive 
years.  However, from the details furnished in this regard for the pa st five years 
i.e. from 2014-15 to 2018-19, the Committee find that the number of SQMs carried 
out during these years has increased except the year 2016 -17 where it has shown 
a marginal decline.  To the utter dismay of the Committee, t he Ministry have not 
apprised the m about the targets fixed for SQMs in these years and the 
achievements made thereagainst.  The Committee would like to be apprised of 
such details within two months alongwith the SQMs carried out upto December, 
2018.  They would also like to be informed of the contents of recommendations of 
the SQMs, which in the opinion of the Committee, will help in making this PMGSY 
effective.  Further, while welcoming the steps taken to develop a roaster app for 
deputing NQM and SQM s for inspections, the Committee would desire to be 
apprised of the present position of testing and operationalisation of such an app.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  NEW DELHI;                                                             MALLIKARJUN KHARGE 
    December, 2018                                                                               Chairperson, 
   Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)                                       Public Accounts Committee 
  

19 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
CONTAINED IN THEIR NINETY-SECOND REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations  23 
 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee  Total : 23  
which have been accepted by the Government:  Percentage: 100% 
 Para Nos. 1 to 23  
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the    Total : 0  
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of   Percentage: 0 
 the reply of the Government: 
 
 Para Nos.  -Nil 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of   Total : 0 
which replies of the Government have not been   Percentage: 0 
 accepted by the Committee and which require  
 reiteration: 
  
 Para Nos.  -Nil 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of   Total : 0 
which the Government have furnished interim replies:  Percentage: 0 
  
 Para Nos.    -Nil 
 
 