ULTRA MEGA POWER PROJECTS UNDER SPECIAL
PURPOSE VEHICLES

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Seventeenth Report (16" Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF POWER
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2017-18)

NINETY-FIRST REPORT

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO.2125

NINETY-FIRST REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2017-18)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

ULTRA MEGA POWER PROJECTS UNDER
SPECIAL PURPOSE VEHICLES

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Seventeenth Report (16" Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF POWER

सत्यमेद:

Presented to Lok Sabha on: 9७) जज | 2o\8

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: ०७ a2\ Ao\&

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

March, 2018 /Chaitra, 1939-40 (Saka)


CONTENTS

PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2017-18) (iti)

INTRODUCTION (iv)
CHAPTER | oe) .............................................. 1-13

CHAPTER Il Observations/Recommendations which have ye Yo
been accepted by the Government
CHAPTER Ill Observations/Recommendations which the 50°
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the replies received from the Government

CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of S\
which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration

CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of $2- S4
which the Government have furnished interim
replies

APPENDICES

1 के Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2017-18) held on
15.03.2018

iH Analysis of the Action Taken by the
Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their
Seventeenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

a nlof oppo oy (५ Pepe


COMPOSITION OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2017-18)
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge - Chairperson

MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
Shri Nishikant Dubey

Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Smt. Riti Pathak

Vacant" :

10. Shri Abhishek Singh

11. Prof. Ram Shanker

12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya

13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur

14... Shri Shivkumar 0. Udasi

15... Dr. P. Venugopal

६ 9० ५ 92 छा #+ ०० [७

RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Naresh Agrawal

17... Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
18. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
19... Shri Mohd. Ali Khant

20. — Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy*
21... Shri Ajay Sancheti

22. Shri Bhupender Yadav

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh - Additional Secretary
2. Shri T. Jayakumar - Director
3. Shri Paolienlal Haokip - Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Ashikho Alemo - Sr. Executive Assistant

* Shri Neiphiu Rioh Ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon acceptance of his
resignation from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 22 February, 2018.

1 Elected w.ef. 29 December, 2017 in lieu of vacancy caused due to retirement of Shri Shantaram
Naik.

* ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 18
August, 2017 and re-elected w.e.f. 29 December, 2017.


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2017-18), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Ninety-First Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the Observation/ Recommendations
contained in the 17" Report (16" Lok Sabha) on ‘Ultra Mega Power Projects Under
Special Purpose Vehicles’, relating to the Ministry of Power.

2. The Seventeenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha
on 29.04.2015. Replies of the Government to all the observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report were received. The Public Accounts
Committee considered and adopted the Ninety-First Report at their sitting held on 15
March, 2018. Minutes of the sitting are given at Appendix-I

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part II of the Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventeenth Report (167 Lok
Sabha) is given at Appendix-ll

NEW DELHI; MALLIKARJUN KHARGE
24 March, 2018 Chairperson,
& Chaitra, 1939-40 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


1

REPORT
PART -i

INTRODUCTORY

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by
the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Seventeenth Report (16" Lok Sabha) on "Ultra Mega Power
Projects Under Special Purpose Vehicles" C&AG Report No. 6 of 2012-13,
Union Government (Performance Audit) relating to the Ministries of Power and Coal.

2. The Seventeenth Report (16 Lok Sabha), which was presented to Lok
Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 29" April, 2015 contained 17 Observations and
Recommendations. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations and
Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Power and are broadly
categorized as under:

(i) | Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:

Para Nos. 1-2 and 4-17 « Total: 16
Chapter - Il
(ii) | Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:

Para Nos. Nil Total: Nil
Chapter - Ill
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:

Para Nos. Nil Total: Nil
- Chapter - IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:

ParaNo. 3 Total: 1
Chapter - ४


2

3. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee revealed glaring
lapses/deficiencies in the Bid Process Management, Bid Evaluation, granting
permission for diversion of surplus coal as well as undue financial benefit to
Reliance Power Limited, the project developer of Sasan UMPP. The Committee ha

accordingly given the observations/recommendations in their Seventeenth Report.

4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Power in respect of all
Observations and Recommendations of the Committee have been reproduced in the
relevant Chapters of this Report. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken
by the Government on the Observations and Recommendations made in the
Original Report which either need reiteration or merit comments.

(Recommendation Para No.2)
STATUS OF CASES PENDING AGAINST Mis. E&Y

5. In their 17" Report, the Committee were seriously concerned to note the
manner in which the Ministry of Power proceeded with the appointment of Bid
Process Management Consultant in respect of Sasan, Mundra, Krishnapatnam and
Tilaiya UMPPs. The lowest bids of ICRA of Rs. 54.50 lakh and Rs. 44.50 lakh for the
consultancy assignments of Sasan and Mundra UMPPs respectively were ignored
though the bidder was declared technically qualified by the Bid Evaluation
Committee and was at the top position both in the financial score and the combined
score. The work was instead awarded to E&Y at higher rates of Rs. 1.28 Crore each
on the ground that they had more experience and were managing bid process of
Anpara Power Project in Bangladesh. This was done pursuant to the Bid Evaluation
Committee’s recommendation that Ultra Mega Power Project being a prestigious
assignment and as there was large variation in the technical rating and price quoted
by the consultancy firms, the first three highest ranked firms viz. ICRA, E&Y and
CRISIL may be called for making presentation to the High Level Committee. The
Committee found that it was contrary to the bid conditions which stipulated that the


3

fop 5 bidders were to be called for negotiations mainly for the purpose of price
reduction to match the lowest price quoted and the bidder who got the highest score
as per the combined technical and financial weightage formula was to be awarded
the work. There was no provision in the laid down procedure for further screening
like presentation and comparative evaluation during the negotiation process once
the ranking based on combined technical and financial score of bidders had been
done. Subsequently, the High Level Committee constituted by the Ministry and
which had representation by SBI, CEA, IDBI, IDFC and PFC rejected ICRA and
selected E&Y by representation by observing that ICRA had only limited experience
in bid process management since they had assisted in evaluation of RFQ bids of
only 100 MW hydro electric plants in Uttarakhand and was having retired
professionals. The reasoning of the HLC was not tenable as having declared ICRA
as technically qualified, it was not proper to go into the relative merits of the bidders
since the selection process specified at the time of Invitation of bids did not envisage
it. Moreover, the retired professionals came through ICRA and not as individual
experts and as per the tender documents there was no specific bar on having retired’
professionals being engaged by ICRA for the assignment, as also admitted by the
Ministry. Thus, the High Level Committee’s action of disregarding ICRA’s bid was
erroneous. The Committee also found that the work of evaluation of bids for Anpara
Project was not completed by E&Y on the date of bid submission for Sasan and
Mundra consultancy work. Since the bid criteria allowed consideration of
successfully completed assignments as relevant past experience, it was not fair to
conclude that E&Y had the past experience of Anpara project required to secure
qualification. The Committee further noted that the other areas of experience
claimed by E&Y mainly related to bid documents whereas in the case of UMPPs, the
significances of bid evaluation experience was more than bid documentation
experience. As such, the evidence on record did not suggest that E&Y had relevant
experience more than that of ICRA in managing the bid process of projects. The
subsequent developments, viz. the failure on the part of E&Y (the consultant) to


4

point out the shortcomings/deficiencies in the technical experience claimed by
Reliance Power Ltd and the PFC’s decision to debar E&Y for a period of three years
w.e.f. 19th July, 2011 for their failure to perform in one of the assignments i.e. Sasan
UMPP, raise serious doubts about the award of the consultancy assignment to E&Y
besides reinforcing the Committee’s apprehension that the appointment of E&Y was
not made in a transparent manner. In yet another instance of irregularity, the
Committee found that the lowest price of = 54 lakh for Krishnapatnam UMPP was
quoted by Feedback but in contravention of the bid conditions, E&Y, which emerged
as the highest ranked bidder, was not asked to match their price with the price
quoted by Feedback. The Ministry's submission that though there was no
requirement in the tender document to match the price of the lowest quoted bidder,
the HLC got the price reduced, failed to impress the Committee as E&Y was asked
to match the price of € 60 lakh quoted by the second lowest bidder. Worse, bids for
consultancy work for Tilaiya UMPP were not called for but the work was awarded to
E&Y at a cost of = 60 lakh based on the contention that Tilaiya UMPP was on fast
track. The Ministry claimed that the assignment for Tilaiya UMPP was awarded at
the same cost and terms and conditions as the Odisha UMPP and scope of work for
both the assignments was same, they being pit-head based UMPPs. In view of the
fact that bids for different project may turn out to be different due to time factor and
market conditions even if the projects are of similar nature, the Committee were
opined that the Ministry ought to have taken matching action to ensure appointment
of bid consultant for Tilaiya UMPP through a proper tendering process instead of
resorting to flimsy excuses. All the above cited facts led the Committee to conclude
that undue favours were extended to E&Y by flouting the bidding conditions and
undermining transparency and accountability. The Committee, therefore,
recommended that the entire process followed for the appointment of E&Y as
consultant for four UMPPs be thoroughly investigated by an appropriate agency to
unearth possible manipulations and fix responsibility. The Committee also desired


5

that robust checks and balances be put in place so as to ensure transparency and

accountability in any such appointment of consultants in future.
6. The Ministry of Power in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:-

“PAC recommendations were forwarded to CBI vide Ministry of Power
letter dated 25.06.2015. Para 3 of the letter states "CBI has already initiated a
preliminary enquiry No.PE 2(E) 2012 and Ministry of Power has provided
various documents in response to CBI letters dated 28.1.2013, 18.2.2013,
04.06.2013, 07.10.2013 and 17.04.2014. In view of the PAC recommendation,
CBI may seek additional information/documents, if required." A copy of the
letter is at Annex-1.

A committee was constituted by MoP vide letter No C-13011/12/2007-
V&S dated 31.12.2008 under Mr. P.S. Bami, ex-CMD, NTPC to investigate
the alleged manipulation in the award of Sasan UMPP. On _ the
recommendations of the committee, the Consultant E&Y has been debarred
by PFC for any future assignment for a period of three years from 19.07.2011.

E&Y challenged the decision of PFC in the Hon’ble High Court of Delhi.
The Hon'ble High Court vide its order dated 22.7.2011 has stayed the
operation of PFC’s letter of debarment with the clarification that such stay
would however not entitle the petitioner (i.e. E&Y) to deal with PFC. MoP
issued show cause notice to M/s. E&Y on 9.9.11 seeking its reply, if any,
within 15 days as to why M/s. E&Y may not be debarred for any future
assignments of all PSUs/Organizations under the administrative control of
MoP. M/s E&Y filed a petition in Delhi High Court against the show cause
notice dated 9.9.11 of this Ministry and obtained a stay in the matter. Both the
above matters are being heard together. Last hearing was held on
27.08.2015. Next hearing is to be held on 14.01.2016.


6

PFC has also withheld payment of Rs. 51,20,000/- out of हैं 1,28,00,000/
and also sent a demand for returning Rs. 76,80,000 paid to them under the
contract for Sasan UMPP. E&Y went for arbitration against PFC’s action. The

matter is presently under arbitration.

Further, PFC/PFCCL has started e-tendering process as per directions
of Gol to ensure transparency, speedy, non-discriminatory, competitive price
discovery, accountability and security in tender process.”

7. The Committee note with satisfaction that the Ministry had caused
CBI to look into the irregularities relating to the appointment of Ernst &
Young as consultant for four UMPPs and the constitution of a committee to
investigate alleged manipulation in allocation of Sasan UMPP. The
Committee desire to be apprised of the latest status of the investigations in
the matter. The Committee also note that PFC had also withheld payment of
Rs.51,20,000/- out of Rs.1,28,00,000/ and also sent a demand for returning
Rs. 76,80,000 paid to them under the contract for Sasan UMPP and M/s.
E&Y went for arbitration against PFC’s action. The Committee desire to be
apprised of the latest developments in the matter.

(Recommendation Para No.4)
STATUS OF REVISION OF SBDs FOR UMPPs

8. In their 17" Report, the Committee were informed that all the bidders had
prior information that the Statutory Auditor's certificate would be required to be
submitted alongwith the bid documents. The Statutory Auditors were appointed by
the Companies themselves and there was obviously no assurance that there would
be suppression or distortion of facts and manipulation of the bid documents. The
Committee further observe that the bid documents for RFQs, RPFs, etc. are
prepared not by the Ministry alone but with the help of outside people and also in
consultation with a number of stakeholders. Under the circumstances, the


7

Committee viewed that onus lies with the Ministry to tie up all the loose ends in the
bid preparation and submission process with special emphasis on verifying the
veracity of the certificate of the Statutory Auditors who were appointed by the
Companies/bidders themselves. As assured by the Secretary, MoP in evidence, the
Committee trusted that the Ministry would impose certain strict conditions on the
bidders about the method and format in which bidding should be done so as to
ensure a foolproof system of bid management.

9. The Ministry of Power in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:-

“The requirement of networth of the bidders for qualification was
enhanced to 15% of the Estimated Project Cost in the Model Bidding
Documents notified by MoP in September 2013.

An Expert Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri Pratyush Sinha
has been constituted to recommend the revised Standard Bidding Documents
(SBDs) applicable to UMPPs/Case-2. The draft 5805 (RfQ, RFP, PPA) and
Guidelines formulated by Expert Committee have been placed on the website
of Ministry of Power for seeking the stakeholders’ comments. SBDs for
UMPPs based on captive domestic coal blocks are under approval in MoP
which would be notified after due approval. SBDs for UMPPs based on
imported coal is under finalization by the committee. In line with the
recommendation of the PAC, the Expert Committee has recommended for
SBDs based on domestic captive coal that the technical experience required
for qualification is as follows:

- The projects considered for qualification should be from power or
core sector(coal mining, telecom, ports, airports, railways, metro
rail, highways and bridges, industrial parks/ estates, logistic
parks, pipelines, irrigation, water supply, sewerage and real
estate development)


8

- Aggregate of revenue/ capex/ construction payment in these
projects of not less than Estirnated Project Cost (EPC) if projects
solely of power sector and 1.5 times of EPC in other cases and
the capital cost of each project should be more than 5% of
Estimated Project Cost. Further, atleast 1/10th of the experience
should be from power sector.”

10. The Committee note that since 2006 so many Expert Committee have
been constituted to recommend the revision of the Standard Bidding
Documents (SBDs) applicable to UMPPs/Case-2 and the draft SBDs (RFQ,
RFP, PPA) and Guidelines formulated by Expert Committee have been placed
on the website of Ministry of Power for seeking the stakeholders’ comments.
The Ministry have also stated that SBDs for UMPPs based on captive
domestic coal blocks are under approval in the Ministry which would be
notified after due approval and SBDs for UMPPs based on imported coal are
under finalization by the committee. The Committee desire that the revised
SBDs for both captive domestic coal blocks and imported coal be finalized at
the earliest.

(Recommendation Para No.10)

SPECIFICATION OF LAND REQUIREMENT FOR DIFFERENT TYPES OF

ee eee nee eee भपफिभफैहतप पा

UMPPS AT THE PROJECT INCEPTION STAGE

11. In their 17" Report, the Committee noted with regret that the Central
Electricity Authority could not finalize norms regarding land requirements for thermal
power plants especially of the larger ones in sync with the process of UMPPs which
started in 2005. Action in this regard was initiated only in April 2007 and the
requisite norms were finalized in December 2007 when the land for Mundra and
Krishnapatnam UMPPs had already been agreed upon. When compared to the new
norms, the land agreed for the two UMPPs was in excess by a whopping margin of


9

1538 acres in the case of Mundra and 1096 acres in the case of Krishnapatnam.
The Committee were informed that the matier was deliberated by the EGoM in their
meeting held in May 2008 wherein it was decided that since the land requirement
had already been worked out in respect of these projects, it was now upto the
project developers themselves to take a view on the excess land so agreed upon.
However, the EGoM decided that land requirement for yet to be awarded UMPPs be
worked out by CEA based on its norms. Unfortunately, the decision of the EGoM
based on deficient feedback leaves enough scope for the project developers to
probably utilize the excess land in a manner other than the purpose approved by
EGoM. Besides, excess land of the magnitude of 2634 acres is too large to be
ignored and left at the mercy of private project developers. Needless to say,
permitting excess land to the project developers was obtained based on deficient
feedback given to the EGoM. Since land was acquired by the project developers for
tariff based bidding projects, the Committee impressed upon the Ministry to put in
place robust checks and balances to prevent utilization of such land for any other
purpose including creating merchant power capacity by the developers failing which
excess land allotted to the Project Developers be taken back from them wherever
warranted. The Committee also urged the Ministry/CEA to work out precisely the
land requirement for the yet to be awarded UMPPs as per the new norms prescribed
by the CEA in December 2007 so as to ensure rationale allotment of land and its
utilization for the avowed objective.

12. The Ministry of Power in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:

“Deliberating the land requirement for coal based thermal power
stations, especially for the proposed UMPPs in the MoP, it was observed
that comparatively larger area was being used for setting up coal based
thermal power stations in our country whereas the land requirement in
other countries was reported to be much less. Accordingly, CEA
constituted a committee comprising of members from CEA, NTPC, BHEL,


10

Desein & TATA Consulting Engineers on 47 April, 2007 to work out the
iand requirement for coal based thermal power stations of different
capacities both for pit head stations based on indigenous coal and coastal
stations based on imported coal. The Committee submitted its report in
December 2007.

Land is increasingly becoming a scarce resource and availability of
land is posing a big challenge for future as well as currently planned
thermal power plants. Further problems have been compounded due to
demand from other competing sectors and certain objections on the part of
local population. A need was felt to review the earlier CEA report of
December, 2007 on land requirement of thermal power stations. The
committee consisting of representatives from CEA, NTPC, BHEL, Desein
& TATA Consulting Engineers and L&T, Sargent & Lundy was revived in
October, 2009 to suggest further optimization of land. The committee after
detailed deliberations has recommended reduction in land for various
categories of thermal power stations in September, 2010. The stipulations
contained in MoE&F’s notification dated 3.11.2009 for land requirement for
ash dyke area have also been duly considered for optimization of land
requirement in this review report.

Comparative land requirement as per CEA norms 2007 and 2010

are as below:

891. | Type of UMPP Land requirement as | Present land

No. per CEA norms 2007 | requirement as per
(in Acres) CEA norms 2010 (in

Acres

1. Pit Head (6X660MW) | 3280 2420

2. Pit Head (5X800 MW) | 2770 2440

3. Coastal (6X660 MW) | 1580 1220

4. Coastal (52800 MW) |1530 1230



41

MoP has given its concurrence to go ahead with the reduced
requirement of land recommended by the committee. Accordingly, iand
requirement norms as per CEA 2010 recommendations are being followed
for proposed UMPPs. However, precise land requirement for each UMPPs
yet to be awarded can be worked out after finalization of site location and
other formalities.”

13. The Ministry of Power submitted that while examining the land
requirement for coal based thermal power stations for the proposed UMPPs, it
was observed that comparatively larger area was being used for setting up the
power stations in our country whereas land requirement in other countries
was reported to be much less. Accordingly a committee was constituted in
2007 to work out the land requirement for coal based thermal power stations
of different capacities for both pit head stations based on indigenous coal and
coastal stations based on imported coal. In 2009, another committee reviewed
the earlier report of 2007 to suggest further optimization of land. In 2010, after
detailed deliberations the committee recommended reduction in requirement
of land for various categories of thermal power stations. The Committee also
note that the Ministry of Power have concurred with the reduced requirement
of land as recommended by the committee and land requirement norms as per
Central Electricity Authority (CEA) 2010 recommendations are being followed
for proposed UMPPs. The Committee further note that precise land
requirement for each UMPPs are yet to be awarded and can be worked out
after finalisation of site location and other formalities. The Committee are
unable to comprehend as to why the Ministry have to wait for the finalization
of site location and other formalities to determine and allocate the precise
land requirement for each proposed UMPPs since the CEA 2010 norms have
already specified the requirement of land for different type of UMPPs with
different production capacity.


12

The Committee, therefore recommend that precise land required by each
UNIPPs be determined and allocated based on the production capacity and
type of UMPP as per the CEA 2010 norms immediately. The Committee further
recommend that requirement of land for a UMPP be determined during the
inception stage of the project and ensure that no excess land is awarded to
the UMPPs.

(Recommendation Para No. 15)

14. In their 17" Report the Committee noted that Kerandari B & C coal blocks for
Tilaiya UMPP (also awarded to RPL) were allocated with the same conditions for
usage/disposal of surplus coal as applicable to Sasan UMPP. The Committee found
that against the requirement of only 16 million tonne per annum for Tilaiya UMPP,
production from the coal blocks allotted for the project would be 40 million tonne per
annum thus leaving a surplus of 24 million tonne per annum. In March 2011, RPL
sought permission to use the surplus coal from the Tilaiya coal blocks to meet the
demands for its other power projects. In April 2012, the EGoM, however, decided
that the application of RPL for use of surplus coal from the coal blocks allotted to
Tilaiya Project be processed under the yet to be formulated new Policy on surplus
coal. The Committee felt that permission given to RPL to use surplus coal from
Sasan in Chitrangi Project was not an appropriate decision. However, while urging
for the early finalization of the new policy on surplus coal, the Committee trusted that
the policy would address all the concerns of allocation of coal blocks for UMPPs
including the need for proper assessment of the actual production capacity of coal
mines as per the latest technology and allocation of the precise coal blocks
afterwards to the successful bidder with explicit prohibition of diversion of surplus
coal. A suitable monitoring mechanism with mandated responsibility centres be

introduced to enforce the conditions stipulated by the new policy in the offing.

15. 116 Ministry of Power in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:


13

“MoC has observed that mining plans of Kerandari B & C coal blocks
was approved for 40 MTPA whereas actual requirement of Tilaiya UMPP is 16
MTPA. MoC requested CMPDIL on 25.6.2015 to explore separation of
Kerandari B&C coal blocks by making assessment of its coal reserves and

coal production capacity.

In the meanwhile, Jharkhand Integrated Power Limited (JIPL), a
subsidiary of RPL has issued notice of termination of Power Purchase
Agreement (PPA) on 28.4.2015. The Government of Jharkhand has to take
final decision on the termination notice. Further action on the issue of coal
requirement for Tilaiya UMPP would be taken by MoP/MoC after a final
decision is taken by Govt. of Jharkhand.”

16. The Committee are constrained to note that inspite of their
recommendation to expedite finalising the new policy on surplus coal is yet to
be put in place as a result the glaring shortcomings of extant policy continues
to plague the system. The Committee therefore, reiterate their
recommendation for early finalization of new policy on surplus coal and desire
that proper assessment of the actual production capacity of coal mines be
made by the Ministry and thereafter the allocation of precise coal blocks is
made to successful bidders as per actual requirement with stringent

monitoring to prevent diversion of coal.

NEW DELHI; MALLIKARJUN KHARGE
2+ March, 2018 Chairperson,
£ Chaitra, 1939-40 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee