WATER POLLUTION IN INIA

MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FOREST

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2014-15)

EIGHTH REPORT

"SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA,

LOK SABHA SEGRETARIAT
oNEW.DELMJ. 7°,

ard



EIGHTH REPORT

(2014-48)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA}

WATER POLLUTION IN INDIA

MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FOREST

arab’

Presented to Lok Sabha on: 0 ४१2४! 4
Laid in Rajya 98008 on7 \ bet BAL

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
_ NEW DELHFE.

Decembor, 2044 / Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka)

PAC, NO. 2039



CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC AGGOUNTS CONMITTCE (2014-16)

INTRODUG TORY

i LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK
i POLICY FRAMEWORK | 7

‘)INSTTUTIONAL ONAL _._ARRANGEMENTS "~~ FOR MANAGING aS
WATER POELUTION IN INDIA हि

Ve zr)
Vi
झा. so
uk!) RLANNING: FOR “CONTROL “OF POLWUTION ””
RIVERS, LAKES AND GROUND WATER
Te TMPLEMENTATION GF PROGRAMMES FOR CONTROL OF POLLUTION
OF RIVERS, LAKES AND GROUND WATER
XE. MONITORING GF PROGRAMMES FOR CONTROL OF POLLUTION OF RIVER:
LAKES ANO GROUND WATER
“xa,”  PRESULTS OF PROGRAMMES FOR CONTROL
नि * OF POLLUTION IN INDIA
RT RESOURCES AND UTILISATION OF FUNDS f 163}
YW PUBLIC AWARENESS, COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT AND PARTICIPATION hig
ett oe : PART.- i _ Ln
* OBSERVATIONSIRECOMMENDATIONS 7a
_ * —~KUREXURES
TF IMPLEMERTATION ASPECTS OF PROJECTS UNOER THE NATIONAL LAKE =
CONSERVATION PLAN (LCP! AS ENUMERATED INTHE ROAD MAP FOR
"MANAGEMENT OF WATER POLLUTION IN INDIA' BROUGHT OUT BY MINISTRY
OF ENVIRONMENT AND FOREST IN MARCH, 2012.
है GIST OF IMPORTANT SUGGESTIONSMEWS RECEIVED FROM THE PUBLIC 23
IN RESPONSE TO PAC COMMUNIQUE DATED 30.08.2012 PUBLISHED Ri 30
LEADING 09165 ALL OVER THE COUNTRY (ENGLISHIHINOIREGIONAL
LANGUAGES} ON PREVENTION OF WATER POLLUTION’ ;
“iil 7") DETAILED NOTE ON THE MEASURES INS IHTUTED BY THE DEPARTAIENT OF at
SCHOGL EDUCATION AND LITERACY 10 SENSITIZE THE S2UBENTS ABOUT
-| ENVIRONMENT ISSUES INCLUOING THE NEED FOR PREVENTING WATER
| POLLUTION
- APPENQICES 7 - जा
कु TIBE OF ACRONYMS AND TECHNICAL TERMS USED IN THE REPO 236
} ER” MINUTES OF THE FIRST SHTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS एजाशा TEE 242
. | (2012-19) HELO ON 47.07.2072 है
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITING OF ME PUBLIC ACCOUNTS Gommitme |. 248
(2014-35) HEED ON 25.14.2014 a

‘eat appended wih the cyclaslyled Report.



COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2014-15)

Prof. K.V. Thomas - Chairperson
MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri S.S. Ahluwalia

Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura
Shri. Nishikant Dubey

Shri Gajanan Kirtikar

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank"
Shri Neiphiu Rio

Shri Dushyant Singh

Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi

Dr. Kirit Somaiya

Shri Anurag Thakur

Dr. P. Venugopat

SEN AN AWN

aaa on
es 2

as
RS

RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
47. Shvi Vijay Goel

18. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya
19. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
20... Shi Shantaram Naik

21... Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
22. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K, Singh © - _ Joint Secretary
2. Smt-Anita. 8. Panda - _ Director

3.° Ms. Miranda Ingudam - Under Secretary

* Blected wic-f 3" December, 2014 vice Shri Rajiv I'rotap Redy who kas 08३४ appointed as Minister w.c-f. 90 November, 2014.

1 Blected w.c.f ३४ December, 2014 vice Shri Jayant Sinha who has ben appointed as Ministér w.e.£. 9" November, 2014,

* Blocted w.e.f. 3 December, 2014 vice Dr. M. Thawibiduraé who has been chosen as Llon'ble Depuly Speaker, Lok Sabha and has
since resigned from the membership of the Committee. . a

4)



IA mR w YL

९०

“10

11.
12.
13,

“14.

15.

16.
17,

1[8,

19
120,
2i.

22.

UHL CONEMITTER
(2613-14) .

_ De. Murli Manohar Joshi - Chairman

Shri Anandrao Adsul

Dr, Baliram

Shri Ramen Deka

Shri Sandeep Dikshit

Dr. M. ‘Thambi Durai

Shui T-K.S. Elangovan

Shui Jayaprakash Hegde

Di, Sanjay Jaiswal: *
Shri Bharteuhart Maktab
Shri Abhijit Mukherjee

Shri Sanjay Brijkishorfal Nirupam

Shri Ashok Tanwar

Shii Ajay Maken

Stui Dharmendra Yadav

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
Shri Prakash Javadokar
Shri Ashwani Kumar

Shri Sufish Chandra Misra
Dr. V. Maitreyan

Si NK. Singh

Smut. Ambika Soni

Electert w.o.f. 14” August, 2013 vica Dr. Gila Vyas appointed as Minister of Housing, Urban
Development & Poverty Ateviatlon wet, 17" June, 2013.

1 Elected wet. 3% Seplember, 2013 vice Dr, ५, Maileyan ceasad to be a Member upon his
retkement as a Member of Rajya Sabha w.e.t 24” July, 2013

+ Elected w.eg, 2” Seplemhar, 2013 vice Or. EM. Stdarsana Nalchlappan appoliled as Minister
of State for Commerce and Industry wet. 17" June, 2013

५५)



16.

17.
18,
19.
20.

” 21.

UBLIG ACCOUNTS COMMIT’

" Shui Shiipad Yesso Naik

{2012-43}

De, Minti Manohar Joshi - Chairman

LOK SABHA
Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
Dr. Balizam
श्र Sandeep Dikshit
Di. M. Vhambidurai
Shri T.K.S. Klangovan
Shri Anant Kumar Hogde
Sbri Bhartrahari Mahtab
Shii Sanjay Nirupam

Shri Abhijil Mukherjee

* Shri Ashok Tanwar

Shri Takam Sanjoy
Dr. Girija Vyas
Shri Dhanmendra Yadav
RAJYA SABHA
Shui Prasanta Chatterjee |
Shri Prakash Javadekar
Shii Satish Chandrs Misra

" Shui Sukhendu Sekhar Roy

Shri JID. Seelam
Shri NK. Singh
Prof, Saif-ud-Din Soz

* Elected w.e.f 8" December, 2012 vice Shri Sarvay Salhyanarayana appointed 23 Mister 00
28” October, 2072.
T Eleciad wet 6” Deceniber, 2012 vice Dr. Shashi Tiaroor appointed as Minister on
28” October, 2012,

७2



+

Mialster ९८.७. 12" July, 2011

(४)

ates et

(2011-12) ~ है
Dy. Muli Manohar Joshi Chairman
LOK SABHA
2. Shi Anandtao Vithobs Adsul
4. Dx. Baliram
4. Slni Sandeep Dikshii
5, 81 Anant Kumar Hegde
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Shripad ४९६३० Naik
8. * रु Shii Sanjay Nirnpain
9. Shti Jagdambika, Pal
10. एफ Kavurn Sambastva Rao
{1. Shri Adhi Sankar
12, Kunwar Rewafi Raman Singh
13, ShriK. Sudhakavan
14... % 1४, ‘Thambidurai
15. Dr. छांची॥ Vyas
“16. Shvi ‘Varig Anwar
17. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
18. Shvi Naresh Gujral
19. Shri Prakash Javadekar ,
20. Shui Satish Chandra Misra
21, *Shri LD. Seelam
22. Prof, Salfud-Din Sox”
Bleed ४०३ 29° August 2011 vide the vacancy occurred vice Smt. Jayanti Natarajan eppoisied

i
es



: . INTRODUCTION

1, the Chainaan, Public Accounts Convniltee (2014-15) naving been authorised
by the Committes, do present this Eighth Report (Sixieontht Lok Sabha) on ‘Water
Pollution in India’ based on C&AG Report No. 21 of 2044-42, Union Government for
the yoar ended March 2012 related ic the Ministcy of Enviroment and Forest. हैं

2. The above-mentioned Report of the Comptroller and Auditor Ganerat of india

was laid on the Table of the House on 46" Decensber, 2011.

3 The Public Accounts Cammitice (2011-42) took up the subject for detaited
examination and reporl, The Commillee took evidence of the Teprasentatives of the
Ministry of Environment and Forest on the subject at thek silting held on 17" July, 2012.
As the examination of the subject coutd not be completed due to paucity of time, the
Public Accounts Comvniltes (2012-12) and 2013-14 re-selected Ihe subject lo confinue
the examinalion. However, due to dissolution of the Fifteenth Lok Sabha, the draft
Report could not be considered for adoption by the Public Accounts Committea (2013-
14). Accordingly a Draft Report was prepared and placed before the Committee (2014-
15) Tor thair consideration, The Commiltas considered and adopted this Orait Report at
their siting held on 25" November, 2014, The Minutes of the Stitings are appended fo
the Repart. .

4. For facility of teference and convenience, the Observalions and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type and form Part I of
the Repuit.

5. The Committee thank their predecessor Committee for taking oral evidence and

obtaining information on the subject.

_ 9... The Commiltee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Environment and Forest for tendering evidence before them and furnishing
the requisite Infomation to the Committee ark! to the general poblic for submitting
inemorandum/suggestions In connection with the examination of ihe subject.

7. The Cominktes’ place on lecord their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
“them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of lttdla.

- NEW DELHI; PROF. K.V, THOMAS
Dacember, 2014 . Chairperson,

Agrahayana 1936 (Saka) : Public Accounts Committee,

(७४)



-[-

REPORT
CHAPTER - |
INTROBDUGTORY

1. INTRODUCTION
4.1. Water Is the basis nf af fife. is diielameitat for human existence, ecological
“batance and for the very future of our planet. The National Water Polley declares walter a
scarce national ‘rasource fundamental to life, livelihuod, food sectirity and sustainable
dayatopment. Safe drinking water is a 03510 need and @ fight for every human being.
Clean, safé and adequate fresh water fs vital to the survivat of ali organisnis and the
7 smooth functloning of key systems, entities and economies: Water based eco-systems
. provide a diversity of sarvicos vital for htuntans well-being and poverty alleviation and the
dativery of trash water is a particulary imiporlant service both directly and indiractly, While
water palution acid contamination weakens or destroys natural eco-system that suppoits
human heatlh,-food production and bio-divarsity, polluted water caf lead to serous
oblems with diseases and death of humans, animais, plant and vegetation,

1.2, India is a signatory lo the ॥०+20 United ‘Nations Conference on Sustainable
Coveloprnent relating to water and sanilation, held in Ria de Janciro, Brazil from 20-22 7
, Sune, 2012. The Rio Conference gave recognition that water Is at the 60४ of sustainabié
development and therefore, roiterated the Importance of integrating water in sustainable
devalopmant. Tha Conference conmitled to the progressive realisation of access to safo
and -affordable drinking water’ and bagle sanitation for all as necessary for poverty
eradication, the improvement of women ‘and to protect human hoalih and to.significantty

- ॥ल्‍ [7006 the implementation of integrated water resource managenient at all levels as

appropriate. Commitments regarding the human right to safe drinking water and
sanitation, lo bo progressively reallsed for our poputalian with full respect for national
govercignly was feaifitmed while highlighting the commitment to Ihe 2005-2015
jhternational Decade for’ Action, “Water for Life.". The Supreme Court of Indla In its
Judgment dated’ 23,8.1996 inthe case of Vellore Citizens Welfare Farum vs. Union of
india and Ofhars also took cagnisance of "Sustainable Development’ as the answer to
ingei tne needs of the present without compromising the abifity of future generations to

: 7 meet thelr awn needs and upheld ‘Yhe Precautionary Principle’ dnd The Polluter Pays’

principle as essential features of Sustainable Development and Interpreted’ toat these



Pe

ptineipies ace part of the onviranmental law of the Country. - tndia's participation ta एगीए'

GN Cerferences on Human Environment held at Stockholm ta June 1972 and tat on .

Environment and Development Rio De Janeiro in June 1992 resultect In the enactment of
tho National Groan Tribunal Act, 2010 providing for establishment of a National Green
‘Tebunal fer efective and expeditious disposal of cases relating fo environmental
protection. Section 20 of the Act iid clearly stiputates that the princtptes of sustainable

development, the precautionary principle and the poltuter pays prinsipte are te he applied ~

while passing any order or decision of award,

1.3. Various aspects of the Issue of waler pollution, alveil, llmited to the pollution hh

” River Ganga had engaged the altentlén of the earlier PACs (2000-2001, 2001-2002,

2002-03 and 2093-04} wherein oral evidences of वर्ण only the rapresentatives of the
Ministry of Environment god Forests (MoGF} but alse from the State Governments of

_ Uttranchal, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal were taken In connection wth Ihe

examination of subject ‘Ganga Aclion- Plan’ (GAP) and the 620 Report of PAC (2003-
2004}, 13th Lok Sabha-cantained a number ‘of findings including State spacific ones
tegarding the slow pace of developing infrastructure to control pollution in Ganga River.
‘The Committee had then deplored the tnefficiency and lack of foresight on the gart of the
implementing agencies of GAP | and Il and had observed then that unless urgent

- Measures were instiluted to aécelerate tha pace of work on confrof of pollulion, the

situation would deteriorate further causing irreparable loss 10 the ehtire Ganga river
systen. Slressing the need.to generate additional resources by way of intraducing user
charges; ‘beneficiaries pay' and ‘polluters pay’ principle along with other cotiactlve fine
system, .ate., tha Commitise had also emphasised on tha core issue of the need for

-efficient and co-ordinated working of different depariments/agencies working for the

contro! of poliution, The Committee also found that the implementation af GAP, had been
more of plecemeal solution for tackling a complex problem and failed to treat (he river
eco-system éntirely. पु -

4.4. The ‘Committee had then, further: observed What for such 3 mass orlented

pragramms as GAP, a criclal aspect fike public partleipation which could have 08७1 4
deciding-factor in the successful implementation of he GAP had not been given adequate
attention. The Cominiltee recommended energetic mass awareness effarts to ealablish a

“pattern of co-aperative ‘relationstelp between the Governinent NGOs, V.0s and

Assaciations and also appropriate measures for initiating @ public awareness campalgn

थे eRe



2s

with the hrelp of faw enforcing agencies and community leaders to inculcate a sctentific
temper in the people so that people do not become a complisive partner in poffuting a
river they revere as ‘holy’. The Committee was, however, not satisfied with the Action
‘Yaken theraon by the (oEF as contained in the 26" Report of PAG {2005-06}, (ATK an
62™ Report on GAP). They had deplored tha casuai attitude of the Ministry towards such

8 vexed issue as community participation and involvement of the Public. The Committes _

had also observed that no amount of additional resource wii rejuvenate tha GAP until te
system stops toforating the officials who do'not perform. Ametiaration in governance

“through improved performance’ and accoyntablilty throngh public parlicipation was the हि

basic thrust of the Committee's recommendations. .

U, AUDIT REVIEW
4.5. The present enquiry of tne Cammitics is based af the C&AG's Report No, 21 of
201{-42 (Union Government -- Scientific Departments) on the ‘Performance Audit of

‘Water Pollution India? which was 80 In Parllament on हि Oocember, 2011. The .

Compirotier and Auditor General of india conducted a comprehensive Performance Audit
of Walter Pollution In Indla during 2010-11 after their Stakeholders’ Conference on
Enylronment Audit hekt in July, 2009 flagged water pollution as the most important
emvironmenta! issua and perhaps remains to be India's fargest environmental problent.
The audit sought to exarnine.the broad contours of policy, programmes, Institutions and
initiatives laken by Ministry of Environment & Forests (MoEF) to address the Issue anc
also (0 examine availabiity of data regarding water pollution, assessment of risks to
heaity and environment; aad sustainabilily of the measures undertaker to address waler
pollution. The audit examination extending to 140 projects across 24 polluted stretches of
fivets, 22 lakes and 116 blocks across 25 Stales of India revoatod among others that

-wator pollution has not béen adequately addressed in the existing Legistative and Policy

fame work. Audit also. pointed aut that water pollution in the 14 major, 55 minor and
several hundred आओ rivers of the Country सीवान a serious concern for want of

effective legislative and paliey framework, While india has the Water (Prevenfur and

Contrat of Pollution) Act, 1974 in place, the lav does not addrass‘the Issue of restoralion
of the poiluted water badies. It afsq does not define stricter flnanctat and aor-financiat

penaives (6 envitonmentat offenders. As por the-extant penalty pravisions, the maximum ,

fine is miffed [७ % 10,000 for cases relating to watér pollution and हैं. 1,00,000 for

environmental pollution. This lacuna coupled with @ highly tolerant inspection regime of



OLR The main audit objectives were to ascertain whether :

ad

fhe 57085 (Slate Pollution Control Baardsy ensures that the costs of deffance, non-
adherence and violations are lower than the costs of compliance. Gverall planning and

” monitoring of pragrammes te contral potuliott of rivers and lakes in [edia have nol lad he

desired results pointing to weak internal contrats exisling al all levels of Government. for
instance, 82% of the projects undertaken under Natidnal River Gonservation Programme”
(NRGP} ware completed after the scheduled date of comptation and 28 projects costing
= 261.27 crore were consfricfed but not uliized: as yet The data on the results of river
cleaning programmas baing implemenied since 1985 ate also not very encouraging with
most of the tivets continued lo be ‘plagued by high levels af organic patlution and iow lavet
of oxygen availablity, for aquatic organisms; and most lakes in india found to be under
Urreat fram nutrient overloading and eventual choking up from the weeds proliferating the
nuident rch water. Audit findings also pointed to inadequate funds as well as Inefficient

and uneconomic utttizalion of avaitable funds.

1:6." At the Centre, the Audit methodology was guided by the Stakeholders Gonference
on Environment Audit held in July, 2009 and line Internationat Conference on Environment
Audit on Conceras about Walec Pollution hald in March, 2040 and suggestions received
from the general public regarding water pollution problems faced by them, An enlcy
Conference with MoEF was held 51 30 Judy, 2010 wherein, Hie audit objectives, scope of

audit, audit ciiteria and audit methodology were discussed. Exit conference on 6 June,

2014 was held with MoEF where audit findings were discussed,

« Inventory of water sources has been prepared and whether the overall status of
qualily of waler in rivers, lakes and groundwater has been adequately assessed in
India; है | हि

* Risks of-patiuted water to health of living organisms and the impact an environment
have been adequately assassed; _ पर ‘

1 Adequate pollcles, legislations and programmes have 7000. formulated and
affective institutions been put into glace for pottutlon preventton, eatment and |
restoration of polluted water in fivars, lakes and ground water;

. Programmes for pollution prevention, treatment dnd rastorafion of polluted water in

- sivers, lakes and’ ground water have Qeen planned, implamented and ‘monitored

officienily and effectively;



S&

» Funds wero utilised if an efficient and economié manner to further the aim of
reduction of water patiutlon; |

+. Adequate mechanisms have been put in place by the gavernment to sustain

”  indasuras to fackle water pollution; ated .

+ Programmes for the control of patluten had succeeded in reducing pollution fevels हु

ln giound water and surface water and restoring water quahty.

1.8. हा] ciitetia of the ‘evaluation of performance were derived from the Waler
(Prevention and Controt of Pollution) Act, 1974: Agenda 21 Qocument of the Werld
Commission on Suslainabie Develapment. of tha United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development, held in Rio in June 1992; Guidelines for implementatian
and monitoring of National River Gonsarvation Plan and National Lake Conservation
Pian,’ National Water Policy, 2002; National Environment Poliay, 2006; bnplementatlon
Giidalines for integrated Water Resources Management; and specifically Integrated
River Basin Management aiid integrated Lake Bagin’ Management; and Guidelines of
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP).

4,9, The main findings of the Aucit Report are as under +
G Legislative and Potley framework ;
हि + Water poflation has not been adequately addressed in any policy ia India,
bath at tio Central and ie State fevel. .
« Absence of a specttic water pollulion policy incorporating prevention of
ह 09॥७॥णा, treatment of polluted water and ecological restoration of polluted
water badies revealed inadequate government efforts In thesa areas. ,

(li) “Planning for control of pollution of rivers, lakes and ground water a
Audit pointed out that averalt planning for the control of pottutlon on part of MoE
and the Slates fatls short of an ideal situaiton having repercussions on implementation of
programmes for control of polfution and their oulcomes. Such shortcomings include :
“a incompfete inventorisation. of riversflakes and Keystone ‘species associate with
कहा.



{iii)

Non-identification of existing pofiufion fevels in rivers and lakes ‘in femms af
dlotagical indlcators.

Non-idenlification and quanificalior of contaminants in rivers, lakes and ground
water,

Nen-tdentification and quantilication of human activities that impact water quality.

Non-assessment af [he sisks of polluted water to health and environment.

Noi-edopticn of the basin level approach for control of palfution.

Non-development of water qualify goals and carrespancling parameters for each
tiveritake with resuttant failure to enforce these,

Implementation of programnies for control of pollution of rlvers, lakes and
ground watar

Programmes to controt pollution of sivers and lakes in India have not had the

desired results.

Current programmes for control of pollution of rivers, lakes and ground water were

Insufficlent. -

7 Inslitutional set-up to manage programmas for control of pollution in rivers, lakes

atid ground water was inadequate.

Inclusion of rivers and lakes into National River Conservation Pian. and Natlunal
Lake Conservation Plan, respectively, was flawed,

Unsatisfactory performance of projects undertaken under NRCP with only 82 per
cont of the projects campieted after the scheduled date of completion and 28
projects costing € 251.27 croro constructed but not utilised. Statas implementing
lhe projects taced problems in land acquisition, getting requisite permissions,
espacially forest clearances, (echnical problems, problems from contractors, etc.



(lv)

« NiGP as a programme had, been Ineffective fy achieving the objective of
conservation and restoration of takas in fndia. Oaly fwo af the sainpled 22 projects
had been completed and the rast were either continuing Seyund the safetioned
date of completion or had baen abandoned. Prublems [ike resistance from focals
aver propased construction of SYPs tetc., dispule. over site, inability to -arvest
sewage fdw, non-availability of land etc., contributed to non-completion of. the
projects. :

} * Monitoring of programmes for control of pollution of rivers, lakes and |
ground wator

Monfloring of programmes vas inadequate vhich paints to weak intemal controls

existing at all levels of governrnent,

« Inadequate inspecttan and monitoring of projects being imptemented under NRCP
and NLCP at alt three levels, i.e., local level, State level and Central level.

नि Paucity of network for racking pollution of rivers, lakes and ground waler due to

11 4
1.10. Against the above backdrop, tha PAG (2011-12) selected the sublect for detaited

exal

inadequate number of monitoring stations, lack of real- tina, monitoring of water
quatity and Inadequate disseminaton of tha data on water quaiily.

EXAMINATION BY PAC

iminalion and report, Howayer, ea the subject could not ba taken up for examination

during the tanure of the Conwnittee, k was cartled forward and taken up by the PAC
(2012-13) as the unfliished work cf its predecessor. The Committee obtained

bacl

kground material and detailed wren reply from the MoEF (Ministry of Environment

and Forests) and aise took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministly on
47.07.2012. and sought Post Evideiice Repties from them on vatious aspects of the
subject pertaining lo multifarious Ministries/Départments/Agencies involved, है

1.14. Keeping in view the topicality of the subject, and also शा view of the magnitude and

enormity of the Issue, the Committee called for suggestions from the public by way of



g-
Memoranda on the subject of ‘Prevention of Water Potkition in India A PAC
communique was published on 31,8.2012 in 30 leading dailies 21 over the County in
English, Hisci and ofher vernacular fanquages calling for suggestions or ‘Prevention of
Water Polition' and a 106४ of 118 Mamteranda (64 english ahd’ 54 in Hindi} were received
from the public. Suggestions highlighted In thesa public views Includes inter-afia taking
help of Reglonal Research Laboralories (RRL} for linding out the exact nature of pollution;
Adequate funds arrangements for seting up treatment plant through Pubiio Private
Paitnerships (PPP), Suict mandatory benchinarks for Sawage disposal and enforcement
af monitoring thereof; Higher pendities for polluters; Cormmunity Participation; Awareness
campaigns involving media, schuols, farmers, villagers wilh special emphasis on ladios;
Cifizens Duty Charter/Candtict Rules for conservation of environment; Self Help Grogs;
Prevention by addressiig the 3 Ps ~ Pallutants, Procasses and People; Citizens’ Police
and Sacial Audit, Stinging Water te the Concurrent List; Encouraging more use of
organic farming; Reguiar waler purity testing; Conteat of Population growths for पाक of
water pottutlon; Augmentation of Capacity of Sewage Treatment Plants; Strengthening of
existing Monitoring System; Stringant Polluter Pays Approach; independent Environment
Impact Assessment; Informal Regulation and People's Partclpation; Strict enforcement of

“water Potiution Control Laws; Use of GtS and Remote Sensing based Decistan Support -
Systems; Exploring different models of partnership for managing poltution; Regular

training and confinuous capacity building of all stakeholders involved, Involvement of

‘Panchayats; Lifestyle change for less water pollution, Proviston for 89 Toilets In trains; .

etc. 7 : - .
The suggestions/views - received from fhe Public have been summarised and
brought out in Annexure - [i of this Reparl.

4.12. Recogrtising tha overriding need for heightening public awareness and community
involvement towards finding a sustainable solution to the nation's most important
environmental issue, the Carimitfee alse obtained a detaited note on the measures

- instituted by the Minisity of Huntan Resauca Dovelopment (Department of” School

Education and Literacy) ‘to sensitise the impressionable minds of: students on

- environmental issues Including the need. for prevention of water poltufion. The

Department, theroupon, furnished a detailed note bringing cut the meastiras iheoiparated
by the NCERT and the CBSE in thelr various curriculum for requisite sensitization of
students. These include inferaia incorporation of various topics especially related to

Water Polkition and its prevention in the -téxtbocks and other curricudar materlat



3.

developed by the Nationa! Council of Educational Research & Training (NCERT) for the

Upper Primary, Seeandary and the Higher Secondary Stages to sensitize impressionable

_ ininds of students; encouraging satling up of Fea Clubs in Schools vide 5855 Circular
No. 16 dated 12.06:2001; directions to all affliated schools of CBSE t impart”
Environ nent Education inlegratod in different subjexts in aif classes (rom 1-X through the

activity raode to sensitize sluderils fo global warming and athor environment related
adncemns; directives sent to Schools from time to time to impart education to students
about environmental protectton issues; CASE Teachers’ Manual on Enviranmantal
Education from Classes | f VIII on Climate Change and Global Warming covering topics
on Water Gyela in Nature, Purifying Waler by Solar Energy. Haw Plants Modify the
Environment and Green House Effect; CBSE Training Manual For Clase LX covering topic
on Watar Conservalion, Section on Eco Clubs in the quarterly Journal CENBOSEC

7 published by the Board sensitizing Schools about Water Management; Organization of
Naticnal Urban Water Awards (NUWA) in the year 2010; Science Exhibitions and other

Water Conservation activities.

The aforesaid detailed note received from the Mlalstry of Hurnan’ Resources
Oevelonmenl (Depariment of School Education & Literacy) atong with ite enclosures is
reproduced in Annexure - IIL of tis Report

4.43. As (he examination of the subject could not be eancluded during the banure of PAC
(2012-43), it was cartied forward and faken up by te PAC (2013-14) as the unfinished
work of ils predecessor. The examination of the written and oral informationftestimony by
the Commitice is contained in the succeeding paragraphs. .



+10-

CHAPTER — Hi
CONSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK

“24, India is the first Countey, whieh has ntade provisions for the protection and

improvement of environment in Its Constituion. in the 42nd amendment to’ the-
Canstiluéon In 1976, provistons to this affect were incorporated In the Constitution of India
with effect from 301 January, 1977. The Oirestive Principles of State Policy contained In
Article 48.4 enjoins upon the State to make endeavour for protection and improvement of
The environment and for safeguarding the forest and wild ॥8' ० te country.
Article. 51-A(Q) of Ihe Constllution provides thatit shall be the duly of every citizen of india

“no protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers and wild

life and fo have.compassion for living creatures’. ',

2.2. The subject water" fs placed in the Constitution in Entry 17 of List ft (State List) of
Schedule .VIL However, the caveat is Enfry 66 of List | (Union List), which says,
"Regulations and davelapment of interstate rivers and fiver valleys ta the extent to whleh
such regulation afd development under Ihe control of the Union is declared by Parllament

by Law to ba expedient in the public interest.” However, the Centre has made litle use of |
_ this pawer.

2.3. ‘the 73rd amendment added the Eleventh Schedule (ticle 2436} to the

Constitution of india which provides that subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the

Legislature of a State may, dy law, endow the Panchayats with such powers and authority

as may be necessary fo enable them te function as instituttens of self-government and
guch faw may contain provisions fer the devolution of powers and responsibilities upon
Panchayats ai the appropriate level, subject to such conditions a3 may ‘be specified
therein, with respect to - -.. हर mh,

fa) _ the preparation of plans for economic development and social justice:

{b} . the Implementation of schemes for economic develapment and social jueitce as |

inay, be antrustad ta them including those in relation to tha maiters {iste in ihe
Eleventh Schedute.



-If-

2.4. Further, the 1th Schedule to the Constiiufion ists Minor ligation, Water
Management, Watorahed Davelopment and Drinking water as subjects retaling to water
that have beet entrusted to the Panchayats. हु

2.8. Sinifarly, the 74th amendieril to the Canstitutlon added the bweltth schedule °

{Article 24300) fo Ihe Constitidion which pravkles that subjact ta the prdavisions of this
Constitution, the Legistature of a State may, by law, endow -+

(a) ‘The Municipailttes with such powers and aulhority as may be necessary to enable
tham to function as institutions of self-government and such law may contain provisions

for the devolution of powers and responsibilities: upon Municipalities, sublect to such

conditions as may specified therein, with respect to + +

(6)... 78 preparation of plans for econuinic develdpment and sociat fuslice;

(i) the performance of functions and Ihe implementation of schemes as may be

entrusted fo them including these in retation to the matters fisted in the
. Twelfth Schedute: हि

{o} The Committees with such powers and authority as may be Necessary to enable
Ihem lo vary out the respensibiliies confecred upon them including those In relation to
the matters ilsted in the 10010 Schedule.
2.6. The TwelRty Schedule (Ists water supply for domestic, industrial and commercial
purpesas, public health, sanitation, conservancy and 3016 waste’ management, urban
forestry, protdction of the environment and promotion of ecological aspects; ‘stan
improvement and upgradation as subjects pertaining ta onvironmant having relevance fo
water pollution that have been entrusted to he Munleipaiities.

2.7. With respect to constitutional provisions, the Secretary, MoEF submitted during the”
"oral evidence’ as under :

- "Now, if you kindly look at 73 and the 74 Antendments of the Constitution, it has
very cleazly transferred the subject of sanitation fo tha local aulhariiies. This has
créated confusion at the ground level where Ihe Pallution Control Boards say very
-cléarly that water act and air act are all to do with industry and it has not said
anything about what actlon we can take against local authoritlés.... fhere is no
mention of penalties, restoration cost, atc. So, they use only 334 which is the
concernad saction of Wafer Act by which they.close the industry. If the Industry

. comes (७ satite fevel, they take some: samples and than they open the industry.
This is “all That they do. Now, lotal authorities say they fave ne expertise,
wherewithal, resources (9 cary on trealing and connecting door-to-dace, They are
not being able to get any sewerage chargés. - Of course, some cities have started



12.

but much more has ta be done, So, this dichotemy |s going on at the fiekd level

and there $ lot of passing of buck. fr this situation, it ls absolutely essential that

there is completaly close coordinatian at the Cenire for which | requested the

* Planning Committee to start the balf ruling based on this Road Map."

28. On being asked ta datait the exact lacunae in the vatlous Acts pertaining to the
issue of water, the MoEF in their writen reply submitted that ‘allhough water is a Stale
subject, guidelines for the preparation of Water Quality Management Platt have been
circulated! to all the States. However, none of the States have prepared Water Quality
Management Plan Ulf date, as & was not inandgatory for State te fotlow.the central directive
on the subject.‘

2.9. Responding te a pointed quary, the MoEF calegorically stated that Water may be
made a central subject in tha Constitution for canirot and regulation and to solve a variety
of problems witch relates to interdependent activitias amanating at the State level.

2.10. The Prime Mintster himself in his inaugural speach during the 'Indla Water Week’ in
Apiil, 2012 observed that a problem that hindered Setter Water Resource Management
was the fragmented and inadequate Institukonal and iegal structure for water and that

store was an urgent need for reforms. By virus of Adicle 246 tead with Entry 17, List IL,

States hava exctusive jurisdiction over water that are focated within their territories. It is
arguably this slalus of water in the Constitullan that constrains the highest in the
exécuiive and the judiciary despite their“ pronouncements 4nd ‘cornmitment to resoive
prablems related to water. inv the tight of the above, the MoEF was asked to furnish their
views as {0 the inadequacy of the present instiiufional and legal siruclure and whether a
Constitutional amendment would indeed pave (18 way for beltar coordination of nol only
overall Water Resources Management of the Country but afso for implementation of water
potlution control programmes. I reply thereto, the Ministry stated that the present
arrangement with respect fo Instilutlonal and legal errangernent for water pollution control
in the Cauntry has been working satisfactarily. However, constituBanal amendments nay
be made to bring Water under the Concurrent List of the Constlution fo improve water
sector in a hoistte manner, as at present it is a State subject except-for inter State rivers.

2.11. On a spacific quary of the Committee as to जाया a Consttitional amendment
will be naeded, tha Seerctary, MoEF submitted during oral evidence that : का ह

"t is realty & huge task. But, | think the tirte has corte for_us la take it
extremely seriously because we will not have water in many parts of the
31. 04,» : हि 7 :



-13-

212. the Tenth Report (15th Lok Sabha} of the Departmentally Related Parliamentary

Standing Committee on Water Resources, Lok Sabha on “Augmentation of Depleted

Ground Water Level, Sustainable Ocvetopment, Conservation, Management, Use of
Ground. Water and Prevention of Walter Pollution peesented 6 the Pasiament a
30.8.2011 vide para 32-af their regonmendattons sessed on the need to ७016 a naltorial
consensus 10 bring wator sithar in the Union List ar in the Gonouiteat Uist. The

- Committee had usged the Government to inifiafe staps ‘in fight earnest fo strive to build

national consensus on this aspect after due consultalion with tho Stale Governments so
that a comprehensive national plan of action is evolved far waler ¢otervation,
developinent, exploitation and aquitabla disfributlon in the farger and tong lerm Aationat
interest. The Committee's 12th Report (18th Lok Sabha} presented to Parliament on

+ 27.3.2042 on the Actlon Taken by the Goverriment on this particular recommendation

reproducad tha Action Taken Note fumished by the Ministyy of Water Resources which
stated that the Cabinet Sacrotariat constituted a Committee on Altocation of National

- Resources (CANR) under the Chaiemanship of Shad Ashok Chawla which submitted lis

reparl on 317 May, 2011 which infer-aifa recommended as follows :

“The Committee sees an urgent need lo have a comprehensive national
legisiation on water. This can be done either Ihrough bringing water under
Ihe Conourrant List and then framing the appropriate legisiation; or by
obtaining congerisus from a majority of the States that such a ‘framework
law’ is necessary and desirable as a Unton enactment. The legal options in
this regard need tu be examined by the Ministry of Water Resources, The
national legislation should cfarify a common position on 9 nuniber of issues,
8.8., need to consider all watcr resources as conjunctive, unified whole;
water as a common property resource; principles of ailecations and pricing
-and so on. The framework legisfatian should recognize that pollution also
loads to cenjunelive use of water, which makes the resources unusable for
other purposes." The recommendations of CANR have been referred to &
Group of Ministers, It [s further stated that Ministry of Water Resources has
‘established Natlotial Water Mission Sacrotariat ta achieya goals &
Strategiee identified under Natlonal Water Mission, Two of the five goals of
the Nallona! Water Mission were: promotion of citizen and State actions for
water conservation, augmentation arid preservation; and focused altentien
fo vulnerable areas intctuding over exploited ares,”

2.13, The National Weter Policy, 2012 adopted hy the National Water Resources

Council on 28 December, 2012 states that: ” .
"Evan while it Is recognised that Slates have the right to frame suitable

policies, jaws and regulations on water there is a feft need [0 evolve a braad -

ovar-arching natlonat legal framework of genera! principles en water to faad
(he way for essentiat legislation on water governance In every State of the
Union and devotution of necessary authority to the lower ters of government
to deal with the local water situation." sO

H
i
i
;
i
i
i
i
i
i
|
i
i
i
है|



otd-

CHAPTER — Hl "न

LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK .

1... LACUNAE IN THE LEGA) FRAMEWORK

3.4. The goal of compitance ta environmental laws was fo assure the average cilzen
that natural values were protected, thal spscific violaters were identified and, that they
complied with legal provisions in order to safeguard human heatth and environment and
to deler future violations. Audil pointed out that the legal and institutional frameworks for
water quality protection must evolve from the present fractured and often unenforceable
guidelines to 4 comprehensive approach to pollution preveliton and source water
protection

” 3.2. Audit poiited out that at the ‘Centre, Water (Prevention and Contral of Polution)

Aci was enacted in 1974 under Article 252 of tha Constitution which provides power to the
Parliament to legislate for two or more Slates by consent and adoption of suck legislalian
by any other State. The Act provides for prevenlion and control of water potlution and for
maintaining of restoring of wholesomeness of water in tha Country. To achieve this
objective, Ihe Act provided for establishing Boards at the Contral and Stale fevel for the

“prevention and contra of water pollution and conferred. aid assigned powers and

functions relating this lo these Boards. ॥ lays dowe 4 system of consent whereby no
industy or operator process or any eatment and disposal syslem can be established
without the previous consent of the State Soard, Similarly, no industry or process can
discharge sewage oF frade effiient into a steam or well or Sewer of land In excess of the
standards, Contravention of the provisions of this Act was punlshable in monetary as well

‘ as non-<nonetary terms. As per the provisions of sectlons 25/26 of the Water Act, 1974,

no industry or operator process or any treatment and disnosal system can be establlsiied
withoul fhe previous consent of tha State Bnard and no. industry or process can discharge
sewage or trade efftuertt info 4 straam or well or sewer or land in excess of the standards
and without the consent of the Board. Whosoever contravenes the provisions of sections

- 35 or 26.0f the Water Acl shall be punishable with fmprisonment for a term which shall dat

be less than. one and half years but which may extend to six years with fire under
secs 43/44 of the Water Act. Accordingly, action was ihiliated: from: time (9 time
against the defaulter municipaiifiesfindusiries by the concerned SPCB. The Goard can



“AS-

also issue directions for clasure-and discannaction af electicityjvates/any othor sorvice in
ase of persistent defiance by any polluting industry, operation and process under section
33-A of the Water Act and section 8 of the EPA Acts.

3.3. The Water (Pravention and Controt of Polkition) Cass Act, 1977 provides for the
levy of cass on use of water ty various usars of wale: ie. industry and local authorities.
1185 cess is meant to augtent the funds cequired by the Slate Pottutlon Boards for their
effective functioning in discharge of duties under the Water (Prevention and Gontcat of
Pollution) Act, $974, The cass Is collectad by tha State Government concerned and paid
to the Control Government. The proceeds are credited.to the Consolidaled Fund of India,
The Centrat Government, after dué appropriation made by Parllament by Law, disburses

such sums of money as Il may think fit to the Centraf Board and the Stale Baars, having

tagard to the amount of cess collected by the State Government concerned.

3.4. Auslt Qindings pointed out that the Water (Prevention and Contrat of Polluitian) Act
foresees ख balance of strategies io ensure comptianca: education and assistance;
monitoziig and inspections; communication and outreach. However, it falls shart in the
“vital aspect of develuping fair कप differentiated responses to non-compliance and there
289 1008 evidence of the design of enfarcament programmes to deter iiegat conduct by
creating negative consequences. Audit further pointed out that in Ihe States, out of 25
States test checkad, tha Water Act, 1974 was adopted by alt the 25 States and States
Pollution Control Board/Cornmitlee were feamed ॥ ail these States .

3.5. हैं Audit findings also polnted out hat the MoEF had not framed any tagislation which

specifically identifies pollution as an environmental offence and restoration of waler -
. bodies as a priority aeflon. Gri beirig queried by Ihe Committee, Ministry submitted that

Ihere was no proposal under thelr consideration fos framing additional legislation in this

regard,

3.6. The Road Map fur Management of Water Pofiution fn Indiat brought out dy ‘the
MOEF, for thé implementation of recommendatlons/abseryalians made in thé Audit Report
“elaborately brings out the existing legistation for pravention and contrat of pollution from

point and non-poini.soufces, Tha Rood Map also envisages att ariendtnént to the’

Environment (Protection} Act of 1986 prapesing to address varlous important Issues In
environmental management viz. hike in penalties for contravention of ils provisions; a civil



“Af -

administrative adjudication system to ensure fast-vacking of the imposition of penalties on
anviconmesal offendacs; provision for furnishing sultable bank guarantees for sfiecitic

~ performance and for restoration of the damaged environment; estabtishment of a National
Enevonmantat Appraisal and Monitoring Autboity (MAGMA) to carry out environaiental

appraisals and enonitoring af compliance conditions

3.7. On belng asked as lo whether any attenipt has been made to undertake a

comprehensive raview to oxamlng the adequacy or relevancy of the extant provisions in
the existing legal framework vis-a-s the pregant enormous challenge being faced in the
contrat of water polation In शत, tha MoEF submitted that the matier of reviewing the
provisions of vatlous.acts and mules pertaininy to Water pultution has been carded out by

Central Potlutian Control Board (CPCB) In house in 2009 as well as in the regular

conference with the Chairmen and Member Secretaries of the State Pollulion Control
Boards and Pollution Contral Cammillees. The information was alsa collected from
various State Pollution Control Boards and conpiled. Il was further submitted that
suitable constitutional amendments are required lo bs made to bring Welter under

conourrent fist of the Constitution to Improve water sector in a holistic manner, as at

present itis a State subject except for inter State rivers.

: 3.8. The Mot was asked to highlighl the levet of compliance to the existing legal

framework and alse indicate the area which require mora teeth In enforcement thereof.
The Ministry submitted thet the level of compliance with respect 0 the provisions of the
Water (Prevention and Control of PoRution) Pollution Act, 1974 has been salisfactory 30
far. However, ta make it more result oriented and In line with the aspirations of the
people, State Governments may constitute Vigilance Committees consisting of
enlightened Citizens, Farmers, Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs), Academicians
and Common man (users of water, living and surviving only on the river water resource)
to monitor the use of river and water and to keep an eagle's eye on poliaters: as well as.

users of river water, Tha.Stale Government tiay adopt more fransparent ways to Open up-

the mechanism ‘of inspection, prosecution and closure of sources ‘of pottution, The
monitoring mechanism may be “evolved ‘to oversee tuplementation of rules and
regulations pertaining to water pollution, Sujlable mechanism may he worked out jointly
by State as.well 38 Central Gevernment to monitor interstate Movemant of water polluflon
with respect to bulle discharge of poltulants In to the river. it May also be usefid.to
constitute flying sepiads 10 morifor hot spots, the paltuted river stretches and lakes, ate,



“Ae

especially, upstreamof drinking water intake points, (0 ensure that polluters do not spol
fhe walee quality, Technolagical assistance may be required to set up floating watch
towers In sensitive areas wilh respect to. water quallly, fos telter, contnucus- and

reproducible results, The assistance of local fisherman and farmers may be taken for :

monitoring river water quality by using indigenous methads and techniques like using 2

हि floating aquarium to monitor river water quatity. LB was further submitted that the 900७

control laws as lhey exist today follow the crininat justice system that was more time
consuming being fuk of technicalities. There was therefore a need to bring in economia

instrumonts as a means of pollution contol. This, combined with command and contral,

results in more efficient Iriplementalion of laws and better control of pollution.

3.9. On heing categorically asked to’state whether, there was any proposat fo amend
any of lhe provisions existing in the extant Acts/Rules, eto, and fo indicale the status or
the fimefarne within which these amendments wauld be effected, the MOEF stated that
at present there was 00 proposaf pending with the Ministry for amendment of Acts/Rules
etc, नि

3.10. On being asked to respond lo the observation of audit ihat water poltution has not

baen adequately addressed in the fegislalive and 00109 framework, the MoEF stated as

under

“The Water being State subject, major responsibility for providing sewerage.
facilites rests with the State Governments. The Minlsiry fs only
supplementing efforts of te State Governmonts for providing adequate
sewerage facilities In the cites and towns which are discharging untreated
oF partially troaled sewage into the rivers.

I, NEED FOR RESTRICTION FOR DRAINAGE OF SEWERS INTO -

*RIVERS AND WATER BODIES

3.11. The Committee pointed out that in 1932, a British Commission ardered that 4
Sewer drain in Varanasi ve diverted into the Ganga River and ever since this provision
- look effect, sewers are belng drained into rivers. On further being asked as to whether
there had been ary amendment ta this provision of the 1932 Order, the MoEF submitted
that the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act 1974 takes are of this, under
section 25 (0, which provides for, “to lake permission to discharge sewage etc, in the
civer after tealment and to comply with prescribed discharge Standards." Gn further being



नह

asked a$ to whether there was any other rWeftegutaion/order which restdet the drainage
of sewers info rivers or attier water badies, tha MoEF ceptied in the affirmative and stated
that tite same séqtign 26{c} of the Water Act, 1974 fakes'care af the requirement

3.12, The Commitlee sought a detailed note ortho necd for a Cential Act which clearly
stipulates 08 separation of rivers and sawers, considering 08 fact that sewaga drainage
was ane of the most polluting source for rivers. The MoEF thereupon furnished the -
following note: है °

“Water is considered as nalurat resource, available in plenty and distrinuted all over
the Cauntry hut when subjected to variety of use it gets contaminated and renders.
it unkt for drinking, bathing, and industrial use due fo presence of variely of
pollutants which finally results in to shrinking avallabllity of usable quality and
quantity. Over the years this has become regular trend due to increased Use of

: fresh water for industial use, domestic use, for inigation and pawar generation.
Ths fresh water get contaminated and thus availability of fresh waler become mare
scarce. During rainy season, tha surface water storage gets cleaned of pollutants,
ground water storage gets replenished but tie trend has continued unabated.
However, accumulation of heavy motats and pesticides In fisk and soil may lead to
heaith prablems like mini-mata disease of Japan, The population growih and
industriatizatlon will further accentuato the problem of shortage of frash waler
availability in (he country. The National Water Policy has identified the main
conéems which includes inter alia following: है

i. Large parts of Indla have already bacome water 3॥88980. Rapld growth in
dernand for water dus to peputation growth, urbanization and changing
lifestyle pose serious challenges to waler security,” .

fi. There is wide temporal and spztiai variation In availability of water, which
anay Increase substantially with passage of time; a

if. Growing pollution of wator sources, especially through industial effluents, is
affecting the avaltabillty of safe water besides causing environmental and
health hazards, In many parls of the country, tarde stretches of rivers are
both heavily potluted and devoid of flows fo support aquatic ecology, cultural

. needs and aesthelics; .

10. Access to water for sanitation and hygiane is an even more sertous problem.
है Inadequate sanitation and lack of sewage treatment are polluling he water
sources} artd to o "
y¥. The, lack of adequate trained personnel for sclentific planning, utilizing

modern techniques and analytical capabilities incorporating Information
- technology constrains good water managertent".

3,43. Consideritg above concerns raised in the National Water Policy 2012, the note
further stessed that the severest impact on water resources which has put whole
clvikzation lnto danger was: contamination of fresh water due to uncontrolled discharge of
treated, untreated and partially treated industrlal effluents by industrias and sewage
discharged from ५8४83 and towns. According to @ recent report of CPCB, against an



-19-

estimaicd sewage ganaration ai about 36254 mid from the Class cilies and Class-
fowns of the country, the available teafmant capacity is for 11787 rhld sewage. As per
this report, nearly 39 % sewage treatraent plants do not canfarm to the affluent discharge
elandards prescribed under the Envicontnent (Protection) Rules far discharge fnto

: 5 :
_ Streamg. The major reasons for non compliance of standards include poor aperation and

maintenance of plants die to inadequata resource mobilization by the State/ Urban Local
Bodies, lack of tachnical man power and ron availabilily of regular power supply. The

* agiicuitural runoff, excessive use of fertilizer and pesticides and non point sourcos of

pollutian has: further compounded the problera of pokutton of surface waters as they
provide unlimited supply of autriants for fueling the growth of water hyacinth and ather
waeds in the rivers, lakes and ponds.

3,14. On the aspect of a separate Cantrat Act for separation of rivars and sewers, MoEF
submitted .that if existing instltulons are strengthened for effective enforcement, a
separate central act may no! be required, However, slrengthening SPCBs need ta be
looked Info on aspects like Organisational Structure: SPCBs are Isolated without any
decision making role ॥ development planning: tack of autonomy and accountability:
Environment Management Procedures: Lack of Integrated planning procedures, Lack of
publicy Community participation Command and Control approach, Human Resolirees;
Inadequate staff, lack of Irained profeasionais, lack of training opportunities, lack of

‘autonomy and accountability; Financlal Issues: Inadequate’ budgetary support, lack of

economic incentives for compliance, economic Instiwnents not used for eavircnment
planning; E-governance: Training, Hardware & Software, Rules and procedures

“jl. - INADEQUATE PENALTY PROVISIONS AND HIGHLY TOLERANT

INSPECTION REGIME,

3.16. Audit scrutiny’ brought out the penalty provisions under various Acts relating 10
contro} and prevention of water pollution as indicated in table 3.16.

. Tabta 3,16 ; Penalty, Provisions for Watet Pollution

Name of (३
Aci

The Water | The Water {Prevention
(Prevention ad Control of

The Environment
| (Protection) Act, 4286

Provision and Control of Pollution) Gess Act,
Pollution} Ack, 1974 | 1977 .
Provision [Failure to comply; | Fadure to comply witht
relating to - | with. : provisions o¢ for provisions or for “|

poral rovisions or for" | conteavention of Ihe contravention of the



-20-

r contravention of ihe | provisions of ihe act —_| pravisions of the act
pravisians of the act | and and the ules, arders
and the rutes, the rules, orders and | and directions shail, in
orders. directions shall, ip respect of each such
and directions shall, | respectof each such | failure or
क्र faikwe or conttayentian, bc
respect of wach contravention, —~ i punishable with

such failure or * be punishable with
contravention, be i
punishable with

ag for | tmpsisonment which | « Imprisonment _ for :

a@ term which may |... may exlend to six term which may extend
extend to . three months to fivetseven years
months six} * Fine which may + Fina which may extend
years extend to T ane to € one lakh,
+ Fine which may] thousand continucd fature of
extend to हैं 1014 Or with both: contravention, with
thousand and tn additional fine which
case of the failure may extend fo = fivo
continues, — with thousand far every day
an additisnal fine during = which such
which may} - failure or contravention
extend to 2 five . continues after = the
thousand for conviction far the first
evory day during such fale’ or
which such failure contravention.
continues after + Orwith bath.

the conviction for
the first. such >
__falture,

3.16, The maximum penaily prescribed under the Water (Prevention and Control of
Pollution) Cass Act, 1977 is only 7 one thousand, while the same undor the Water
(Prevention and Contrai of Pollution) Act, 1974 15 7 10 thousand. The maximum penalty
under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 is one lakh. However, in (he'case of water
pollution, the fine or penaliy prescribed under the Waler {Prevention and Cantrol af

. Pollution} Act, 1974 would be applicable as per sub section 2 of section 24 of the

Environnent Protestion Act, 1986, Thus, the maxmum -ponaltyéfine ls linited to F 10

thousand for water poliuten, It was atso observed in Audit that powers relating lo filing of-

cases of violations were exercised by the 57083, While CPCB canducts random checks
of Industries or othe: stake holders contributitg to water pollution and cases of viviatiatis
were reported to the respective SPCBs for theix action and casos of serloys violations
were dealt with for notice of closure or closure Under section 5 of the Environment
Protection Act, 19885, Audit further pointed out that the CPCBAMOEF did not compile any



a.

lnformatian on cases of violations relating to water poltution filed hy the SPCBs and
amount of penallyfine caalized. The laformation relating to the gases, where the closure
noticas or final Gestwe were ordered by CPCR was alse awailed. in ahsence of

information on Hie extent of vlolalians of provisions of Acts relating {0 water palfution in :

various States, I was nol clear how the effectiveness of finplementation of these Acts
were analyzed and monitored by the CPCBYMOEF. Thus, CPCG/MOEF was not aware of
how the provisions, particulatly provision of the Isvy of panaily under the Water

"(Prevention ard 00% of Pallution} Cass Act, 1977 and the Water {Prevention and

Conirol of Pollution} Act, 1974 wera being anforced, extent of Violations compared to tatat

users and extent of enforcement ste - Audit painted out that the low quantum of penalty of

% 10 thousand 99 also Ihe failure of the State in enfercing the provisions of the Act strictly
to secure prevention and conta! of water pollution, has led to the situation where the cost

_ of non compliance became significantly fower than the cost of compliance with “the

provisions of rules and orders under the Acts. Thus, Ihere was need (0 strictly enforce the
provisions of the Acts , while reviewing the quantum of penalty as also the wide 03991
prevailing under the varlous Acls which ranged fram € 10 thousand to 7 one jakh
prescribed its Environment Protection Act, 1986.

3.17. While tha responsibility of management and development.of ground water rests
with 07५४8, the prevention of water pallulion comes under the purview of MOEF and
though the Act envisages both monetary and non-monetary penalles, ultimately, a highly
tolerant Inspection regime, of the SPCBs ensures that the costs of defiance, nen-
adherence and violations were lower than the costs of compliance. MoEF stated is its
reply that it had enacted legislations lke Water (Prevention and Contral of Pollution) Act

and the Environment Protection, Act for coritrol of water poliution In India. The Ministry .

further submitted that as per sections 25/26 of the Water Act, 1974, no industry or
operator process ७ any tealment and disposal system can be established (which was

likely to discharge sewage or effluents) without fhe previous consent of the State Board *

and no industry or. process can discharge sewage or trade effluent nlc 2 stream wel,
sewer or tarid in excess of the standards and without the consent of the Board

3.48. Ona specific query as to whelfier the maximum fine of हैं 10,000/- for cases relating
to water pollution was felt (0 be adequate In the ‘presenf set up, the Ministry afireed that
the maximum fing of % 10,000/- was nat adequate and there. was need lo review the
ahtount of fine imposed, It was evident that ever since 1974 when the Waler Act was



22s

* enacted, the quantum of penalty has remained staiie at ई 10,000, The Comenitles sought

to know, whether in 38 years the Ministry had not felt the need for undertaking a review:
The MoEF in their wettten reply stated that although fudictary has not fallowed the couse

of imposing fine for violation of patkiion contra} laws and है fon alowed'the polliters to a
install requisite pollution contra| equipments in tina bound mannar. Howaver, panalty may है

be enhanced fromm minimus % 10,000 fo ₹ 1,00,000 for vialation of Provisions of the Wator
Act, 4974 and the Environment (Protectlon} Act, 1986 wilhiout amending Use provision for
imprisanment. This additional penafly may be levied from the polluter at the time of filing
uf case in the court of lawirrespactive of outcome of tha casa,

3.18 On deing asked about the dme fame when tndla would be free from Vater

Pollution, the Secretary, MoEF deposed :

"| think it is a great opportunity fer our Ministry te be abla te discuss perhaps.
india’s largest environmental problem. | would also like to thank O&AG [er taking
40 much trouble Iar going Into depths of the issues both on the policy as also on
fhe implementation front front qualily and quantity aspects of water pollution which
Is extremely important, | am very grateful to them for having flagged it in the end of
2011 in this report on ‘Water Pollution in India’, After the report came, we
Immediately read it and formed an expert Committos to lock inlo the tepart and
Gnd out how to convert it inte an implementation programme." :

3.20. The Committee further sought 10 know how these recommendations have been
taken cars of and how the MoEF sought to remedy them. The Secretary, MoEF during
evidence elaborately submitted as under.

"६ 8 a Road Map which means that it is an implementation plan of tha 028७
observalions, To the extent thal it can be implemented within the extsting legat

‘framéwork and constiutlonal structure, this Road Map came to us in March, 2072. -

We have baan discussing as to how we can move forward. | have had two
meetinys with Dr. Kasturt Rangan and others of the Planning Commission. We
feel that sinca water polution is an inter-Slale and inter-mintsteriat issue - ॥ Is inter-
ministertal al (he Centre and Inter-State because of the fact that water is a Stata
subject - this is absolutely essential that a lead coordinating agency actually putts
की these forces together. This was also twice discussed with Dr. Kasturi Rangan
over the last six months while this ceport was belng prepared, What we have
requested him and his officials ty Ihe Planing Gommission 8 thal they should
make a bady within the Planning Commission. If will review this matter with us and
with the Ministry of छाए Development, Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Water
Resources, Cental Ground Water Baards and NGRBA plus the Stales concemed.
As noted In the C&AG report, we have identified critical stretches of the river in
States. There are 150 of thm. We have identifiad the real major issues. We
know that how 10 seive them; every technology is avallabie and procedures are in
place. Of course, resources are a problem but there is 8136 the PPP madel which
has been developed to a great extent. K has also been teconunended by the
C&AG. . So, we know that what te do but tha probleni is how we do it, We have



33-

addressed this issue of water pollution only from our side, You will ba surprised lo
know that from: 25 per cant to 30 per cent water pollution is industzial. H you tatk [0
our Gantral Pollution Contra! Board or Slate Paltution Contal Boarts, then thay will
_ say that they will oaly fook after the industial palluden; they will close Ihe Industey
for poliutes and they will apen the Industry if it comes to slop that procéss. That is
alt. They cannot move against the lecal authorilies whe ase in-charge of the
domestic polltion, commercial vollution amt agricultural poltulion which is nen-
point in nature. It covers 70 per cant of Iha pollution 1090 on water Ia tadia.”

3.24, He lucthar supplemented as under: *

“At least, today we fave this Road Map which can be used, provided you have no
objection to it. This can ba used as a main agenda.” हु

3.22, Wilh portieutar reference to the pena! provisians existing in the various Acts, the
Committe sought the data for the fast 3 years of the actual number of cases filed
partaining to waier pollution, the amount of penalligs fevied and recovered, the number of
conviciions made, the number of pending cases and other relevant information in the
matter. Tha MoEF thereupon stated Ihat the inventorisation of grossly potfuling industries
was carried oul in consultation with Stale Pollution Control Boards (SPC8s) and Polution
Control Comunitiess (PCCs). There were 1055 grossly pattuting industries in Ihe Cauntry
which generates 9982 MLD effluent. These industries were belng inspected through
Environmental Surveitiance Squad (ESS) of CPCB inrough random aumber selection
pracess. The detalls of inspections carried out under varlous provisions of the Water Act,
4974 viz. Unde? sections 6, 18(1)(b) as well as the details of cases fited in the Courts
SiateSector wise ducing fhe last three years (2009-2012) Is reproduced in fables
3.22() lo 3.2204). * है “

Table 3.22ti)-; Inspections by CPCB undar ESS Programme, Programme,

|. | Curent year | 2009-10 | 2040-41 nn

(TI July 2042)
Andhta Pradesh [. 2
[Arunachal Pradesh
ue Assam

Bihar हु
Chhattisgarh
Dadra& Nagar
Havoli-_



Gujarat

Karnataka
“}Kerala
Madhya Pradesh

Tamlt Nadu

Tripura

Uttar Pradesh

Uttarakhand

;Wast Bengal

Dethi है

| Total

Grand Total

Na. of Court Cases filed during fast during fast three years

Table 3.2 218
As on Date Total cases filed under Water Act
38.08:2665 6347
30-05-2070 7 ह seas
3 . _ 8729



25-

zane —

30-06-2042

= 5

les during 1891 ॥५४४ years.

= ला 19
“3s. To ~ 19 ~
54 ——}— “or” हि
| 418 I "498
Table 3.22{iv] : Directians under Section § issued : S issued Stale wise during last three years
State 2009-10 2010-11 2841-42 Total
- Only | Watert Only | Wated Only | Watert
Air | Waters [| Alr | Waters Air] Afr | Watert
Alr Air
‘Andhra Pradesh 7 on Eee cer) 7
‘Arunachal | | "|
‘Pradesh —
Assam “ - = 4 4 a [2 |
Bihar हु | — “y2 2
Chhattisgarh fi L—| / “6 6 |] q “| ce
DD & ONH = 4 जि
Gujarat P| : |
Himachal 4 : =
Pradesh
Haryana 2 4
Tharkhand ° 2
| Kerala 4
Karnataka 7
Madhya 4
'} Pradesh
-\Maharashtta आह 1 ,



-26-

1... जल बा ° ~ Z
2 pe jo . 1 शा | 3
Uttarakhand] 4 ह 3 8
a ह -—t 2 हु 3 7 पा
Sikkim __ 8 “po, a a
Tamilnadu है ~~ | En | ho a
Uttar ae है 3 2v a 60
‘\WesiBengal | OT 5 a io"
Rajasthan ~ 2A 2: (|s |
Tota 2 [ir 73 [6 [% 195 |
Table 3.22{vj : Dirocti 5.22) 3 Diroctions under Section 8 issued Sector wise curing last threo, last thraa years,
State - 2008-10 स्का !! 201142 [Total
™ Only Water! Only | Wator? Ouly | Watert ~
Air | Water+ Watert Air | Air | Wator+
ह ह Air
CETP ™ 3 12
Chemical हा 46 .
. Brewery jz | 3
|Distilery | — हु (5. | व | [34 |
[Fertilizer | | रास | | 2 .
Pulp & paper 7 11 4a
Petrochemical T 4
pharmaceuticals |. — _ = —
Sugar - z le
Thermal power | | —
plant Fe
Tannery [fe | 4
Cement 20 | ‘ca
Tron.& steel बा | ~ |
Dye & dye. 41 | 1
| inteemediates

_ | Riywood

’| Safi drinks



=

Engineering जि लि प
Texto / 7:

Dairy

fees:
~ |
= == : : =e: = ae

Slaughter house

Refinery

Table 3.22(५0 + Directions ul: uls 191)9) Issued State wise during last t issued State wise during last thres years

[fotai | 10

जा 2009-40 [ aot 2011-12" "| Total
. Only | Waterf Only | Water! Only | WaterF |

Aly | Water Aic | Water+ Air | Watert |
है Air का Alr
we - 1 12 = 2 Ta V2 a
sam 4 ae 7 [ =
Cheitisgare [4 [2 | | | iG
Gujarat i — 3 हैं
Haryana i | 4 | - 9 |
Sharkhand jz | — = 2 ~T2 7
[Kerala | - 1 1 | - | 1 3
Karnataka 1 = 7 2 fa
MP, 1 cs Cl Gee
Maharashtra _ 2 | : — = 7 [9 |
Meghalaya pa {|
Orissa है jt P| ¢
Uttarakhand rs + =
Punjab 3 : [| 1
Sikkim = ft |
Tamiinado q mr)
एफ. .- एस B जा खा
WB. 4 1: 1 fi
Rajasthan 7 ह 2 [5 -|

2

ke Le
The fF |e | | Tia



j
i
i
+
i
H
i

- | Cement

Alr

| Oniy Water |
Watert

Oniy a ‘Watort”
Alr | Watert Air

| Distillery

Fertilizer

। Foam making

Pulp & papor
Petrochemical

Pharmaceuticals

Sugar

Thermat = power
plant

| Tannery

Iron & steef

Dye #
intermediates

dye

3.23. The Committee was informed that, Ministry is considering ratsing the limit of Rnef

penally from the present fevel. On being asked as to whether the Ministry-have data on
finef: panaity levied under these Acts for last 10, years, i{ was informed that the
Fine/Penally was imposad and levied by the courls in the Country and the Ministry has no

data on fies collecled by various courts.

ES SI



-29-

3.24. Ona further specific query as to whether the present panaity and fine provisions
were ‘boing enforved effectively, the MoEF replied that the present penally and fine
provisions were being ehforced by courts. है

3.25. On being asked as to whether there’ has been airy study undertaken for enhancing
penaitiasiine, the MoEF stated that there was no proposal te enhance the penalty and
fine stipulated fn various acts for violation of the Water (Prevention and Controt of
Pollution} Act etc. and no study has 0886 conducted in this regaed.

3.26. On beifig.asked ds to the prescribed system of laking punitive action agalnst the
defautting units that discharge harmiuf effluents info tha rivers, the MoEF sfated that

punitive action against the defaulting units that discharge harmful effluents and do not.

meet discharge standards are taken by respective State Pollution Gontral Board & Central
Polkition Control Soard through inspections, surprise checks and issues show cause

notice and / or closure notice,

3.27. The Committee further sought to know whether there was any proposal to endow

tegal entity status for common effluent freatment plants to facititate investments and
enable enforcement of standards. In reply thereto, the MoEF stated that the smale scale
industries located In clusters or industrial eStates/ Industrial areas form an Association
and_gét ll registered under the Secleties Act for availing Central Government Stale

-finaricial grant for the construction of Gommon Effluent Treatment Plant (CETP}. The

Banks (00, provide soft term loans to such registered socletiag for construction af CETP.
The Society so formed, run the CETP and operate and maintain ॥ on “no profit no oss
baais.* The members of Ihe Society share the cast of the Operation & Maintenance (0%
ff). Each member pays an amount vehich was proportionate to Ihe volume of waste waler

_or palliilion toad contibuted to CETP for freatment. The Association so registered under
- the Sacialies Act was llable to be prosecuted under the Water (Preverwion and Control of
‘ Pattution) Act, 1974 for nom cumptiance of dischargdd standards. The CETP Company

was also required fo obtain environmental clearance under Environment Impact

* Assessment (EIA} Notificalion af 2006,

- 3.28. On being asked te elaborate the reforms that wera urgently required (0 be put in -

especially to face tha enormous challenge of water pollution in India, the MoEF slatett



-आ-

that lhe 1४05 whicl were urgently required relate to handling of enormous quantity of
sewage ant industtial effluents. These were the fw major cause of problem of poiutian
of fivera and lakes in the country. With the ‘avaiable resaurces, है. was not passihle te
provide teatient capacity for sewage as well as indusbial cffluonts. The sewage
treatment capacity was being augmented in tnefto cities and alsa (1281 lowis which 868
directly discharging untreated or pariially treated sewage into rivers. However, with ever
growing population and propertionate increase in sewage generation, it will not be
possible for the State lo provide 100 %.sewage collactian and featment facility in each
and every town in the country. The cost of installation of sewage collection and treatment
facilities was not-one time expenditiwe but such faciliies are required to be matntatned In
top operating condilion to enable treatment at optimum efficiency which entails recurring
expenditure. The sreatment facilities require trained manpower for proper opération and
maintenance, There was acute shortage of fralned manpower in this area. The trealmeat
of industrial effluents in large and medium industres was taken care of by industrles
themseives. However, lo lake cara of regular maintenance and upgradation of tachnotogy
with respect to ‘changing me and prescribed discharge norms they were required to
install better fechnology and also ungrade it at regular interval, The Industries find ft

difficult, at fines, to comply with changing regulatory requirement, unless financial .

assistance & extended 10 them. In this regard it may be suggested that separate banking
facitily may be created’ for unhindered credit Bow for énvifonment related projects which

wii ansure protection of environment and conservation of ivérs, fakes, vetlands ete.

3.29. The Ministry further submitted that Government af India started funding common
effluent trealment plants with the financial assistance made available by the World Bank,

“Several CETPs ‘wore installed for smalt scale industrles located in clusters, Industdal

ateas and industrial States. An exclusive financiai institution may be envisaged (0 cater
to the ever increasing demand of funds for funding sewerage and industiial pollution
control related projects, The credit flow for conservation projects will ensuré private
participation and. planned oxactiion of sewerage related projects in ail fowns and alles
itrespective of their size and location. The time targeted action plan for each river basin
may be imptemented only If unintercupted credit flow is made available. This will hefp not

“only conservation of zivers but also O & M-of facilities, development of water resources
- did public private participation. At praseht, relurn on Investment was not so allractive so

as to attract private funds or foreign equily. The situalion may be changed by. emptoying

two seis of actlons, one, finaricial fixcentive and (wo, legislative supports. The invastment



3k

on sewerage facility may also be made attractive if Goverment provides land for
installation of sewage treatment faclily, initial funds required for © & Mt of sewerage.
facitifies, Tax holidays for say 10 years, and lax beneflis for Investment on sewerage
facies, markol supported by legal framework te ulilize treated’ sewage, industrial
efauants, sludge, biogas, atc, .

3,20. It was also submitted thal. some major pfoposals for refarms viz. private
particlpation for facing tte challenga of providing facility far sewage collectlan and its

treatment in each and -every city and tows, funds for sewerage facility from State

Goverriment? Central Government in every town/city Municipalky by law for mandatory
reuse of trealed sewage for toilets, {rigation etc for whieh duat plumbing may be made in
the housing sactor; and at the National level, a designated single agency to deal with
sanitation sector. ह

3.31. It was further submitted wnat the SPCBs and PCCs do not have adequate
wherewithal to monitor al sources of pollution in the StateAJTs-and for nen compliance

“yah discharge standards, to take fega? action against polluter and follow it up to its logical
conclusion. The sewage management and Industdaf pollution cantral was being carted *

out as per the foflowing:

: + Local bodtesWWaler &- Sewerage boards/Public heallh Engineering
departmenis: Install water and sewerage infrastructure for “water
distribution, sewage collection and treatment. Most of the STPs do not
functlon properly largely due poor financial conditens and inadequate
rained manpower. .

+ “Industrial podution controk: Individual industries provide pattulion abatement
measures and obtain pecmisston under the Water Act 1974 for discharge.In
to water bodies. The 97088 in turn monitor their performance and not

compliance with discharge standards attract penal action under the Water’

Act, 1974. In case of SSI units, common effluent tealment plant is installed
for industrial aroas/EStates and: clusters ef industries with the tinanclat

assistance fcom Central and Slate Govis. The 57088 alse monitor their-.

performance and non compfiance with discharge standards attract penal
action under the Water Act, 1974; and” पु



32-

+ The State Polkillon Control Beards anc Poltutlon Cantrot Committees fa UTs

Fegulate discharge of treated sewage and incdustdal ९00 in the surface

water badies as per the provisions of the Water Act 1974.

3.32. The Committee were informed that adequate safeguards have been provided

"under the Water Act, 1974 as well as the Envirotenett (Protection) Act, 1988 for

preventian, art control of waler poffution. The exsting regutations have been amended
from timo to time to accommodate new situations. [n this cannection, the Corntnittes

asked lhe MoEF to justify the faiture to abate poliutions of waler bodios assertion was that

the extant legislative and regulatory framework was adequate for prevention and control
of Water pollution, The Ministry thereupon replied that there were 2 large number of
stakeholders viz. Ministry of Power, Ministry af Agricultura, Ministry of Water Resources,

_ Ministry of Urban Development, Ministry of Chemicals & Fertiliser, Animal Husbandry

Department, Municipaiities, tigation Department and Department of Fisherles
Development and edordinated efforts were required from each stakeholder. Besides,

_ Pollution load was increasing in geometric progression whereas ireatment capacity was
increasing Ir arithmetic progression due (० limited resources made available to handle the ©
pollution load genérated.

3.33, The Committeo further sought to know whether the Shoricoming was at the
enforcement level then, ‘Tha MoEF agreed that there was nead for organizational
strengthening and capacity bullding to Improve the level of enforcement. Capaelty building
and organizalionat strengthening ace ongoing activities of the Ministry but State
Goverment should alse chip in efforts to maintain Ine optimum level of efficiency and the
State Pollution Control Goards should moniter sources of pollution in the States
supplemented by adequate and psampt action agalnst polluters. 118 large industries were
required to install automatic monitoring stations; small industries cannot afford to monitor

* ources of pollution Individually whereas Common Effluent Treatment Alanis do install
automatic monitoring stations. However, 008 to funds constraints It was not possible to

install automatic water quality monitoring equipments on @ach water steam. The State

Pollution Control Soard has water quatity monitoring programme under which regular’.

monitoring of water Steam was carried out But duc fo limited rasaurces available,
frequency of monitoring was very law (often ence a month).

3.34. The MoEF- further submitted that the State Government need fo provide adequate _
manpower and resources, arrange for thelr training, provide weil equipped laboratory with ~



-33-

17286 monitofing sampling equipments, devise and develop new programmes aritt
~ -methadelo
devel

dayetoprnerit needs. The industries 190 are facing the problem of scarcity of tained

manpower which results in improper (0 & M of polfution abatement infrastructice. Al
times, due to lack of coordination amongst various organizations, pollution of surface
water and grotind water goes on unabated. The small towns, where theré are no
atrangements for coflection and. proper disposat of salid Waste, generally dump it in the
river, resuitlag Into polfution of river. Often, human settlemetits are allowad lo develop on
the bank of rivers which causes pollution of river. The 10091 bodies, Water supply and
drainage department, Nagar Nigam, Municipality, City Oavelopment Autharily, City
Improyament Trust, Housing Board, Slum Improvement Department, etc work af crass
purposes. There ig a plethora of mules and seguiaiions which hamper not oaly
development but alsa encourage mushrooming of sfums, filtering of 9000 waste and
dumping it in rivers or drains.

3.35. K was also ‘submitted that the city development plait was never adhered to by the

. locat authorities te accommodate changing needs of people and growing oven. There wos _

no interface between conitmon mae and Government Agancies which led lo mismatch at
limos with respact to planning of activities for city/town dovelupnient. The involvement of
people in’ maintenance uf city’ town sanitation, safid waste management, river front
development, education of people, ete, are not one time activity but ongoing programme

which should be taken care of at city town level. The State agancies, often do not have”

adequate resources af their dispasal to carry 0७ basie functions rélated to Masa
Awareness Pragranimes, sanitation, elc., In addilian to above, real time monitoring of
sources of pollution and prompl actian against polluters was also’ equally Important but

inordinate delay in शाह court cases’ and taking it to logical end also an important ~

impediment in the whole process for prevention and control of poltutlon, Howsver,
Central Pollution Control Board, State pattution Control Board and Pollution Control
Committees have inteduced several amendments and modifications ‘in the. way
inspections were being cartted out by their tea 10 ake it more effective and result
.  Ofiented. The joint Inspection by a team of Selentists and Engineers from doth Central
हि Polkution: Control Board and Slafe Pottution Control Seard /Patlutian Cantral Committees,
sharing of daia and inspection report, surprise inspection of indusities, ate. are same of

the measures initiated by the MoRF through the Centteal Pollution Contra Board.

for prevention and contro! of pollution ia the Stae..A proper man power —
pment proyramme shat bo put le place to lake care of their training and.



34.

CHAPTER «LV

“POLICY FRAMEWORK

44 Strong policy framewark is an esscntial first step in effectively regutating water
quatity. Audit scrutiny pointed aut that although the cancerns related (0 wafer pollution
have been adequately addressed iti National Water Policy and National Environment
policy in India, bom at the central and the State level, provisions for goreration of
resaurces for prevention of pollutian, featmert of paliuied water and ecological
restoration of paftited water bodies are not adequate, Audit findings also painted out that
lack of a comprehensive approach has often led-to costly and ineffective water policies.
Good and enforceable regulations must follow creation of an overall water quality policy:

4.2. हैं The Natonal Water Policy was adopted in 1987 and was reviewed and updated by
the Ministry of Water Resources in 2002. This policy airned at meeting the challenges that
have emerged 16 the development and management of Water resources including water
poltition. The satient features of Nationa! Water Policy relating to water pollution
envisages Inter-alla regular quality maniluring of 0001 surface water and ground water lor
a phased programme for improvements in water quality; treatment of effluents to
acceptabla favels and standards before discharging them into natural streams;
Maintenance of atinimum flow in the perennial streams. far ecolagy and -social
considerations; principle of ‘polluter pays’, necessary fagistation for preservation of
existing water bodies for pravention of encroachment and deterioration of water quality;
for maintenance of water resource schemes under non-pian budget, and generally
Institulional arrangements aged for improvements In existing strategies, innavation of new

fachniques on strong sclanca and technology base for ellmination of pottulion of surface - है

+ and ground water resources to 18078 water quality, and importance of Science and
technology and training in water resaurces development and management with emphasis
on water quafity, recycling and re-usa af water,

4.3. The 2006 policy date wilh water quality pointing out that improvement in existing

strategies and innovations were needed to eliminate pollution of surfaca and groud

water resources and aisa states that resources should be conserved and avaitability

augmented by maximising retention, climinaling gollultoa and minimising losses, This, _

addressing water pollution was ane of the thrust areas of the National Water Palicy and



5

the Environment Policy. In June 2011, ०६६ stated that the National Environment Potley
declared by MoEF In 2006 briefly described the key environmental challenges curreally
and prospectively facing the country, the objectives of environment policy, tae normative

prineiptes uitderlying policy action, strategic thames. fur Intervention, broad indications of
the legislativa and institutional developmant needed to-accomptish the strategic themes
and mechaaisms for Implementation and ceview.

44, The National Environment Folicy outlines a significant nuniber of new and
continuing initlativas for enhancing environmental conservation: A formal, pariodic high
level review of implementation of the different elements of the National Environment

. Policy was essential at least once a year. The findings of the review should be publicly

dlselosad, 30 that stakaholders ace assured of the settousness of tie Government in

* ensuring Implementation of the Policy, Howaver, audit pointed oul that no such review

has tuken place, Audit findings Kuther pointed atit that the National Water Policy, 2002
aiso envisagad that within a time bound manner, say a period of fwo years, States would
frame and adapt State Water Policy. With respect lo State water paticy formulations, it
was observed that 18 States have framed water policy and in the remaining seven States.

_ water pollcy was yet to be finalised, Only Kerala focmulated a separate policy ta deal wilh

water pollution. Further water policy of mest of the Statos also does not yive adequate
emphasis on prevention and conirot of water pollulion. The policy of the Slate
Government of Kerala addresses poilutlon isaues by stating that “There shall ba specific
plan of action for implementing focation’ specific sewerage in alt urban areas and
appropriate sanitation system in ali rural areas Appropriate sanitation sub pollcy and

action plan shall be formulated and implemented, Tho potential for recycling and reuse of

water shali be recognized anc all water users shall be dicacted to adapt measure lo
recycle for Incremental reduction in water extraction.” -

45, eked wich States other than the State Governenent of Kerala has formulated a

separate pollcy for water. pollution, the MoEF replied that Maharastra and Goa havo
notified water policy. Chattisgarh has formulated and nolified ground water policy for ils
development and control. There was a néed for other States also to formulate e dear
policy on water pullutlon takirig into account prevention and cantrol of water pollution as
wall as ecological rastoration of degeaded water badies,



36. se

46. The MOEF further submited thal sustainability was key to success of such
programs and Slales. are heing encouraged 6 adopt effective and user- friendly |
technology, sustainable model of revenue generation. Urban Local Godles (ULBs) were
alse belny involved since conecptualization of a project as they were the custodian of

. assels.

47. The Ministry of MoLF has-also prepared new quidelines for preparation af delailed
project reports (DPRs) under‘ NRCP/NGRBA for funding of sewerage projects. The
guidstines envisage that DPR» should have detailed. plan for reuse and cecycling of

treated sewage. Without such a plan, DPR would not be considered for funding sewerage

projects. Project implementing agencies! ULBs are also encouraged Io aval! several other’
good practices including use of Biogas for power goneratlon. the digested sludge
generated may be used as 301 conditioner. Also lreated effiuent may be used for
ittigation, etc. . °

48, Ona further query as to whether in the recent past, the matler was taken up by the
Ministry with these States the MoEF replied that to give a fresh impetus fo the fiver
conservation progranime in the country, the ‘National Ganga River Basin Authority” has
been ‘set Up of 20.2.2009, as an empowered planning, financing, manitoring and
coordinating body fo ensure effective abatement of pollution aad conservation of the ever
‘Ganga by adopting Rollstic approach, wilh the river basin as the unit of planning. It was
{wither submiltad Ihat the 88995 ara also taken up with the State Governmenit at highest
level Le, at Chief Secretary / Administcators of UTs and Chief Ministers fevel and also witl
the project Implementing agencies, the urban focal bodies, eto, which are the ulllmate
custodian of the assets created far thelr proper operation and maintenance.

49. The Commiltee asked tha MoEF to elaborate whether any formal, periodle higl

lavel reviews of iiaplementation of Iie -differont clements of tha National Enviroriment .

Policy was being proposed by MoEF. In reply thereto, the Mo&F stated that they have
sanctioned sewerage schernes to various State Gavernments and these schemes were
peslodically reviewed by the Pegject Director, an Additional Secretary rank officer In the
GOI, for compliance with respect to approved 0118 schedule and cost of the project. Tha
Scientists also visit the project sites and raview the pragress of the project with the officer
concerned from the Implementing agency anc the State Government. The shortcomings
are then communicated (@ the Stato Government as well as the project implémenting



3.

agency. The accumulated experienco gained over the years and also the observations 06
he international funding agencias has led to review af the guidelinés prepared for OPR
preparation. The periodic roview of projects had also enabled involvement of Ut As,
Implementing agencies aud the State Government along with Inc NRGO by sigaing
memorandum of agreement, evaluation of proposals by oulside agencies, third party
Inspections, ete. The revised guidelines provided for preparation af City Sanitation pian,
feasibilily report, ela, before any scheme was posed to the NRCO for funding. The
proposed project for funding shauld he selacted for preparation of dolailad project report
{DPR} after proparation. of city sanitation plan, prioritization of various projecis,
preparation of feasibility reports and sclectlon of appropriate lechnotogy, etc.”

"4.40, fn the contoxl of water policy, Ihe Secretary MoEF submitted during evidence that
_ Water Policy from the Genial Government side was originally issued fr 2002 hy the

Ministry of Water Resources and updated in 2012, The Water Policy included the quality
of water, quantity of water and oco-flows at the national level, He further supptemented
that the MoEF was doing जाए quality monitoring of 1700 stations and eco-flows was
something on which they have nothing to’say. On further heing asked as fo who decides

about the eco-flow, the Secretary rapfied that il was the Ministry of Water Resources. Ik -

was further submitted that the Ministry of Water Resources and MoEF weta Mambers of
this Waler Qualily Assess ment Authority.

4.11. The Committee were informed that State Goverment of Korala, Maharashlva, Goa
and Chattisgarh have formulated and notified ground water policy for its development and
contral and there is a need for other States also fo formulate 2 clear poliay on water
pollution taking inlo account, prevention and contol of water pollution as well as
ecalogical restoration of degraded water badies. The WVinistry of Environment and

Forasts acts a8 a catalyst for achieving desired outputs as enshrined in the Environment ,

Policy and guides the States to forniulate transparent methodologies, procedures, and
strategies with adequato public patliclpation and well supported by rules and regulations
for water pollution control in the county. ॥ was fwther sobimitted that the State
Governments have already formulated water policies, Some of them have also included

+ water pollution as part of Water Policy of the Slate. Howaver, there was need fo reorient

development policy. of the State and align it with the Water Policy for water Pollution

2 cantral, -



|

-38-

4.42. On being asked about the stens teken for emulation of successful water poticy .
models, the MoEF submitted fhat the Ministry af Water Resources had circulated 4 Mode! |
Bilt ७ the Slalos and Unlon Territories to enable them to anact suitable iegislaton for
* regulation and contal of ground wale: development and aanagettent. Al present [4
States have enactex! tha ground water bill based on Mode! Bill anc another 16 Slates, हि
havo laken initiative for enactment of madef bill. The Cantral Ground Water Board,
Ministy of Wailer Resources Is pursuing with (he respective state Governments fur early
anactment of the Grotind Water BIH based on the Mode! Git,

4.13, The names of the States which have enacted the model leglslafian for reguiation
and control of graund water are given below

{I} Table 4.134

fodel Bill for Requiation and Control of Ground Water enacted ang Imolemented

States/UTs Sh No. ॥ States/UTs

Andhva Pradesh a | Lakshadweep
1 हु अर | 9, | Puducherry
Chandigash 10. Tamil Nacty
i Dadra & Nagar Havel ra tales ee
| [e | [oe sd 12. Saenmu & Kashmir
[5 | है Himachal Pradesh | [19. | Karnataka
ia Kerata _ . | 44. Assam

(StNo,  [STATESUTs
Maharashtra
| Guat

alti
dhaskhand

Meghalaya -
| Madhya Pradesh
| Oflssa Uttaranchal =
Rajasthan Andaman & Nicobar हु
Uttar Pradestr §,| Chhattisgarh ee 4
Darna & Diu Punjab |

७०७ Net » "गान TSR peta theta oe



39+

4.14, On tha suggestions made by the MoEF for the Natianal Policy on Vater, the
Seoratary MoEF deposed as under: है

Fram our side on the water pollution quality sida, wo have suggested some things
We hava atso suggested ‘ceftain maasures in regard to bomendoits extraction,

* which ts happening 90 the major rivers mainly for agricullure and irrigation, which
[ 1र्ण meterad and whieh |s not measured and nef is It controtted by the State
Governments... The concentrations of pottution increase in the water. Every bil of
surface water gels puiluled because of fack of dikition rather thar excessive
pollution.” Another very major aspect, which has (० bo insisted ugon, Is that the
eco-flows are maintained.”

4.15. He further-supplementad : :
"Our Kerala Water Policy is an excellent document. That has been partly copied
but il has also been localised. Maharashtra and Goa have alsa thelr State level
Water Policy. Water being a Slate subject, @ Natlanat Water Policy Is belng
prepared by the Ministry of Water Resources and State policies are prepared,
which are much localised and much more retated to thelr local canditions. So, this
Kerala madel Is actually taken party by Maharashtra aad Goa. Chhattisgarh has.
also developed a State level policy but that is mostly for ground walter being 8
jaadiecked State.” . :

4.16, The Secretary also’ highlighted the desalination project undertaken by the
Government of Tamil Nadu. This project could be extended to ‘all the Coastal States for
supply and meeting the damand of potable water, Tamit Nadu Govemment is planniag
to cover the whole of Chennai with this project. Moreover, with the use of raverse osmosis

“technology. the price of converting one litte of wafer has drastically come down; thereby
making है. affordable.

4.17. The Road Map of tha MoEF lists the folowing recommendations an Pollcy
framework ; : हे
« Anamendment to the Environment (Protection) Act of 198 is propased (0 address
various Important issues in environmental management, such as hike in panatties
for contravention of its provisions, 3 civil administrative adjudication system to
_ensura fast-tracking of the imposition of penallies on environmental offenders,
provision for furnishing suttabie bank guarantees for specific performance, and for
restoration of the damaged environment is also proposed to establish a National
Environmental Appraiat nd Monitoring Authority (RAEMA) (० cary out
environmental appraisals and monitoring of compliance conditions. This may be
expadited, ‘ है ते



-40-

Mostly insacticktas and pasticides are used in agriculture activity. Tae enfarcoment
af pollution contro! laws for such acfivilies leading to diffused pollutian is difficult
This can be better tackled through judicious use of pesticides and Insecticides in
agriculture, The National Envitotime Policy also recommends to take explicit
account of groundwatec pollution in pricing policies of agricultural Inputs, especially
pestcides, and dissemination of agronomy practices; Encourage Integrated Pest
Management (IPM} and use of blodegradable pesticides. Ministry of Agricultue
may continue the ongoing programme of Integrated Pest Management (सिंधी) and

5 Farmars Fiold School {FFS) under {PM ina bigger way 10 address the issue.

Stale Government may ensure to check the encroachment of the 1000 plains. *

The National Environment Policy is Intended to be a gitide to action: in regutatory -

teferm, progranines and prajects for environmental conservation. The agencies of
the Central, State, and Local Govamments, therefore, need to take approprlate
steps for raview and enaclment of legisialion in a fime baund inanner,

Bureau of Waler Efficiency (AWE} under the Mintsiry of Water Resources is being
set Up of the lines of the Bureau of Eneray Efficiency, set up by the Minlstcy of
Power. The bureau will stipulate Ihat machines consuming water sport a waler
efficiency label just as energy efficiency labels are put up on air-conditionars. The
government may give incentives to farmers or Industiafists if they fotlow goad

-Waler-efficiant methods. .

&nhance capacities for spatial planning among the Stato aad Local Governments,
with adaquate participation by tecal communities, lo enstire clustering of poliuting

_ industies to facilitate seating up af common effluent keatnent plants, to be

operated था cust recovery basis. Ensura that legal entity status ts available for
common effluent treatment plants ta facilitate investments, and enable
enforcement of standards. . |

Take explich aceatint of groundwater potution in priclag policles. of agricultural

inputs, especially pesticides, and dissemination of agronomy practices. Ericaurage

Integrated Pest Managemént (IPM) and use of biodegradable pesticides, ©

Conservalion of water bodies and ta Issues retated (0 their encroachment fall _

within the domain of the respective Stafe- Governments, However, administratlve
requirements contained In the National Lake Conservation Progranime (NLCP)

guidelines cai! upon’ tha project proponents (0 take nécassary steps far declaring

‘the lake boundary thraugh a Government order, to ensure removal of



“ibe

efitmachrrents In the lake submergence areaflake ogundary; to consider for
nolifying the "Establishment of a Bio-consetvation Zane’ acound the water body for
dctter salequard of lake surrounelings front the growing potttlan potential and the”
encroachments हु

° For effective use of water resources, - Ministry of Ayticullure should
stondardizesdefine the fancusa for different craps in aach region. Good practices in
water usage should be replicated. Yo check the contaminalton of nineti front the
agticuttural fields, a clear cut policy aeeds to be evolved by Ministiy of Agriculture
for use of pastickdes, In this regard use of bio-fertitizers and bia-pesticides should
be ancouraged. .

«Integrated water resources manegement (9 conserve water, minimiza wastage and
ensure more equitabie distribution bath across and within States should be
encouraged. Through regulatory mechanisrns wth differential entitlements and
pricing, considerable shara of the water seeds of urban areas can be met through
recycling of waste water.

» Water requirements of coastal cities with inadequate altemative sources of water
can be met through adapfian of new and appropriaie technologies such a6 low
tamporature desalination technologies that allow for the use of ocean water,

4.18. The National Water Policy, 2012 was adopfed by the National Wafer Resources
Gounct! on 28 December, 2012, The objective of the Policy is 10 take cognizance of the
existing situation, io propose a framework for creation of a system of laws and Insitutions
and for a plan of actlon with a unified nallonal perspective. On Ihe aspect of Water
Framework Law:.the National Policy: states that even while It is recognised that States
have the dght to frame suitable 0008४, laws and regulations on waler, there Is a felt
need to evolve a broad over arching. national legal framework of general praciples on

water to lead the way far essential legislation on. water governance in every State of the

Union and devolution af nacessary authailly to the lower tiers of Government to deal with
the locat water situation. The policy takes inte recegnition the present. critical scenarto In
the managemant af water resources and infer-alfa highlights large parts of Ihe Cauntry
temaining water stressed due ta rapid growth in demand for water due to population
growl, uibantisation and changing llfeslyfe pasing serious challenges {o water securily;
inadequate water governance and mismanagement, ekewed avaitabitty of water with

wide temporat and spatia! variations; unsustainable and over-expleitatian of Groundwater;

implamantation of water related projects though muiti-discptinary, In a fragmented



4.

manner leaving a “dent on optimum utilisation of existing institutiens, environment
sustainability. and holistic hanefit to Ihe people growing pollution of water sources through
industdal effluents as well as inadoquate sanitation and tack of Sewage freatmedt
affecting avajablilly of safewater besides causing envenmental and health hazarts
wastaga and inefficient use of water due to low public consciousness about the overall
scarcily and economic value of water; lack of trained personnal for scientific planning,
Ulifiding modem techniques and analytical capabilities incorporating infarmation
technology constraining good water managemenl, absence of a holistic and later:
disciplinary approach to water-related problems; decision making without edequate
consuttation with stakeholders aften resulting in poor and unrelighle sarvica characterised
by inequilles of various Kinds, ele. The policy recognises the need for comprehensive
legistatlon for opthrium development of Inter-State rivers and river valleys to: facilitate
infer-Stats coordination ensuring scientific. planning of land and water Tesources taking
basin/sub-hasin es uni with unified perspactives of wafer in all its forms Gncluding
precipitation, soit-molsture, ground and surface water} arid ensuring holistic and balanced
develaprient of both the catchment and the command areas. Such legistalion needs, Inter
alia, to doal with and enable establishment of basin’ authorities with appropiate powers to
एच, manage and régulate utilization of water resource in Iho basins. As regards
{institutional arrangements, the Policy states that there should be a forum at Ne nationat
lavel to deliberate upon issues relating to water and evolve consensus. ¢0-operation and
reconciliation amongst party States. A simifar mechanism sfould be established within
each Stats (0 amicably resolve differences in compeling demands for watar amongét
different users of water, as also between different paits of the State. Inlegrated Water
Resources Management (KWRM} taking river basln/sub-hasin. as a unit, should be the
main principle for planning, develapmant and management of water resources, The
departments/organisations af Centre/State Gaverninents fave! should be restructured and
made mutti-disclplinary accordingly. On the Implementation aspect of the National Water

Policy, the policy stated that National Water Board should prepare a plan of acon based ~

on the National Water Policy, aa approved by tha National Water Resources Council, and
to regularly monitor its kmplenientalidn. The State Water Poficles may need to ba
drafted‘evisad inv accordance ‘with this policy keeping in mind the bas'c concerns and
principles as atso 2 unified national perspective,

tee rete



a

CHAPTER - ¥

INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS POR MANAGING
हु WATUR POLLUTION IN INDEA

5.1, Auuit Report pointed out that at the Cenie, the variaus agencies responsible for
poticy-maklng, implementation and Monitoring were a3.under :

Yable 5.1: Insttutiona! Arrangements for Managi

19 Water Pollution Control Pr

E ~“implamentation Monitoring
© Fort | ‘paliution: |e =F Rivarilaxe ५. For Riveriiake Pollution: |
Ministry of Poltution: National NRODICPCB
Environment & Forests River Cansarvation Far ground water pollution :
” (MaEF), Centeat Directorate cows :
Poltutlont Control Board fa For Ground water: Waters Quality Assessment
(CPCB) MaEF, MoWR Authority

« For Ground water”.
pollution: Ministry of
Environment & Forests
(MoE), Ministry of
Water Resources

- (MoWR) Central
Ground Water Board
(00798)

5.2. In the States, spectlic progranimas for «ver or lake pollutian control, abatément or
restoration ‘of quality through. NRCP/NLGP ara executed through different State
Government Qeparinantsa. These vary from Stafe to State. 11 most States, the
responsibility of contrat of water pollution was assigned to State Potlution Contra! Boards
and not specifically to Slate Goverment Departments. ,

6.3. Audit findings pointed out that CPCB and SPCBs were autonomous of each other. _

While CPCB was under the adrtinistrafive control of Ihe MoEF and responsible for averait
policy, planning and coordination, tha SPCBs were under their respective State

Governments and were expected to work under the overall poligy framework of CPCB, |

MoEF and responsible for implementation of provisions of variaus environmental Acts. -



dah

refating to Water pollution al the ground level. This dichotomy of contrat finds its source in
the Waler (Prevention and Controf of Pollution) Act, 1974, which further entrusts the
5708 with the qiltical functions of compilanee fo and enforcement af polluting conteal
related activities, whereas CPCB was given an advisory and coordination role. 80685

were no! empowered fo generate adeqniato financial resources of their own to eifectively—

discharge their mandate and waro dependent on Central Government and State
Government for grants even for expenditure an normal mentoring of poitution leaves.
Thus, while the outputs of the actions of (1208 and SPCBs were co-telated, Here was No
functional co-refation’balween them at the input stage. This dichotomy of control’ causes 8
situation whereby there was 00 single ageticy (9 take charge of the issuo of control of
water patlulion on a natlon-wide basis. ‘

6.4, The Secretary, MoEF conceded Ihat there was want of, requisite cooperation
between the Union and States. He alsa referred to the problem between sanitation ard
industrial pollution, He further deposed :

laws. The segond problem 5 that who will pay."

5.5. He further supplemented on (15 Issue:

ule pyain point | want to Underline hare Is that thare & need for 8 coordinaling
body (७ start puting In these moasures and using this book {Road Map} as lhe first
agenda. After that, this curt be prioritised and made into छत modules.

5,8. The Comniiltee were informed that a Working Group was constituted during tho
68” Conference of Chairmen and Member Secretaries of SPCBs / PCCs on
"Strengthening of Informetion Technology in CPCB f 57085 / PCCs and Water 0४55

_ which reviewed the implernentation of Water Cess Act and Inler-alia. recommended

enhancement of Cess rales, online measurement of water low to be installed by all
Industrial units and Incentives should be given in the form of rebatos, if the units practices
cleaner technatagy and sound environmental management system, Imposilion of Penalty
to be doubled, if tha industria! unit exceeds the stipulaled 398०0 consumption of water,
On being asked, the MoEF submitted that the Cental Pollution Contol Board had
submitted Working Group Report on “Revision of Water Cess* to enhance tha rate of
waler cass to the MoEF, which was curranlly under exarnination.

stitutions are working in silos. They are nol ceoperaling hecause of these two ©



-f5-

5.7. Qn the punilive penalties for vlolaan of provisions: of the Wator Act, he MoEF
submitted that the relevant provisions in the Act provide that if any amount of cess
payable by any persan cafylng on any spocitiod indusiry of ‘any local authary under
secllurt 3 of the Water (Pravention and Contrat of Pallution) Act, 1977 sas nol paid to the
State Govertiment within the date specified in the order of assessment made undar
section 6 , It shalf be deemed to be in arrears and the authority prescrtved In this behalf
Inay, after such enquiry as if deems fit _ iinpose on such person or, as the case may be ,
locat authority, क penally aol exceeding the amount of cess in arrears, pravidect that fime |

is given to such person of authorily of being heard. Whoever furnishes wrong or false

roturns under this Act shail be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six
amanths of wilh fine which may extend to ane thousand rupees or with both.

68, The Committee further sought lo know the current level af preparedness of
indusina! units in terms of cleaner technalogy and sound environmental management
system for avaifing the proposed incentives and rebates as per the aforesaid draft report
of the Ministry of Environment and Forests was under examination in the Ministry,
Hawever, action plan (0 use cleaner lechnologies of reductlan hy waste has been under
impismentation in some sectors viz. Pulp & Paper, Distiflary, Sugar Chemical and CETP
& STP; insfallation of Chemicat Recovery Unit in agre based industry; Introduction of
Biological Treatment Plant in waste paper based indusiry, Improved pulp washing

* system; Reuse and Recycle of troated effluent; Introduction of anaerobic treatment

followed by Reverse Osmosis process for recovary of water (permeate) and disposal‘of
waste water (rejects); Instaltation of Mult] Effect Evaporator and/or usa of bio-corapasting
Jor dispasat of rejects; Disposal of treated effluent on land for Irrigation and introduction of

Zoro Liquid Discharge were some of the iniliatives faken in tals regard.

6.9. On the aspect of online measurement of water flow by all industrial units, the

” Committee was apprised that the online measucemant of water can be ensured by a

coinprehensive ‘setup to install depth sensors in the channel with a Closed Clreuit TV
(CCTV) and transmission of measurement Ihrough dedicated telecommynitalian system
(७ Slate Potkition Control Boards/Poilution Cantot Commiltees and Central Paftution
Contra! Board for Instant checking and sertiny, Such 4 measurement system shail ba
maintained by. a dedicated talned persomel in State Pollution Control Boards/Politition
Conwel Committees and Central Pchutian Controf Beard or through outsourcing,



-464

510. The Committee wore informed that the possibility to inspect all the large and
medium cate industries and the sources of pollution was once a year, The Ministry
adotied that the samne is aot adequate to assess the compilance of prescribed
stanclards. There was.a need fo strengllien SPCBs in terms of manpower and laboratory

setup for Improvement in poriodiaily of Inspection. On being asked as to whether the
constraittts faced by SPCBs in terns of manpower and laboratory sel up have boar
ideutifed, the Committee were apprised that the Conwnittee/nstitutlon on manpower
issue was constituted by Central Pollution Control Board and the raporl on thal wes
availabic. हैं है

5.11. On the question of Ideal periodicity of Inspectlon far industrial potutiaa so as to
enable adequate assessnient of complaints of presoribad standards, the MoEF submitted
that the Industrial efftuents should be monitored raguiarly ang instantly through confine
‘monitoring mechanism. The petodicity of inspection hy respect of grossly polluting units
should be as frequent as possible whereas in case of moderately or non polluting units
should ba inspected at least evary three aionths.

5.12. CPCB was envisaged to be a technical and regulatory body. However, now CPCB

has also become a furd-sanctioning authority. Further, CPCB has no contral over the —

functioning of SPCBs, Given the serious and Inter-staie nature of water pollutian and the
weak lavels of existing detatrence, Ihe Commitles sought to know whether The MoEF
envisages setting up of 9 separate regulatory body which sets standards, enforces tho
standards set and takes recourse te remedies in the event of violations of the standards.
‘The Ministry thereupon submitted that the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) was
not 8 fund sanctioning authority. Mast of their 70960 was utilized for monitaring ot Air
quatily, water quality and inspection of industries, etc. Thay only selinburse the
expenditure {fixed rate baals, capital + 0 & M) incurred by the- monitoring agency like
8768 and: others institutions, for 0 & M of monitoring stations. The Cantral Poltfutlart
Control Roald also carries out several field Investigations jélnity, with State Poliutian

Control Boards/Pollution Central Gommifttees for which expenditira is again reanbursed

fo the State Pollution Controt Baards/Palkution Control Committees. The Central Patiution
Control Board had been performing iho work assignad to it under various Acts for
prevention and conteal of water pollufion and.n such proposal for setting up of a separate
reguistory body, was wnder consideration of the Ministry at this staga.



7

5.13, On being asked as fo whether the MoEF had ever considered entrusting the
monitoring-of water quality fo reputed third parly agenoies like ItTs fo indapendantly

_ trortitor & process which was not being done in a salisfactory manaer by CPCB/SPCBS,
- The Conunittee were apprised that tha monitoring of wale quality can be sirsngthanedt

vith adequate funding, adequate manpower and adequate infrastructural factlilies to fulfil
the requirements of comprohensive assessment. The third party agensias [६9 NTs may
not have ragular-manpower lo undertake such type of monttoring activities and to cover
the ontize nalion’s aquatic resources. :

5.14. The Ministry was asked to expfain their stand on the observation made by audit
that the CPCB/MoEF did nol compile any information on cases af violations relating to
waler pollution Med by SPCBs and the amount of tine realized. The Miitstry thereupon
tepited that the Information on poftuting sources including industries {s compiled under the
activities of Environmental Survelliance Squad and directions are issued to defautters,
There were 1085 Grossly Polluting Industries and the total effiuent generation was of the
order’ of 9982 MLO. .

-5.15, The Committee sought to “know whether the existing system of inspection by

SPCBs was adequate or requirad to be strengthened, the MoEF replied that under the
Water (Prevenlion and Contral af Palluton) Act, 1974, State Potton Control Board at
State level had bean entrusted with the responstbilily of prevention and control of water
pollution. The control of patlution was governod by Consent management in respect of

-industies through State Polfution Control Boards. With respect to pollution of surface

water and groundwater by municipal sewage and solid waste, urban water bodies ware
belng persuaded to collect and treat he municipal wastewater before disposal and to.
develop sanitary landfill sites for Municipal solid waste. The staffing for inspection and

follow up actions was highly inadequate. The passibility to inspect all the large and”

medium scale Industries and the sources of pollution was once & year which was not

- adequate lo assess the compllance of prescribed standards, There was need to
sirangthen SPCBs fy terms of manpower and laboratory setup for improvement in

periodicily of inspection.

5.15. Ona, pointed query as to whether the Ministry was satisfied with the institutional *

arrangements with regard {a review of water pollution at the Centre and in the States, the
MOEF submilted in their written reply that the State Pollution Control Baards and Pollution



“43.

Control Committees in the Unton Tertitorias had been constituted under the, Water

.{Pravention, and Control of Poltution) Act, 1974 ta implement the files aired regulations _.

pertaining to prevention 6 control of water pottutian in the State. The एंक्ष tal Pollution
Boast had been constiluied ‘uader the same Act ta plan and execute aationwide
programme fur environment protection ‘in the ‘Country with Ihe help of 82685 and
Pollution Gonteat Committees. Adequate safeguards had been provided under the Waiter
Act, 1974 as well as the Envirorment (Protection) Act, 1986 for prevention and control ef
water polfution. The existing fegulations had- been amended from time to fine to
accommodate new situations. हैं

95.17. The Cammittce sought to know the manner in which the Ministry exercises theit
power aver various agenclas. including SPCBs, which were under the respective State
Government, The MoEF replied that under the provisions of Envisanment (Protection)
Act, 1986 powers have been delegated to the State Govt. as well as the 0768 te direct
any agency, institutions, industries, ele. for taking nacessary steps for protection of
envicanment inciucing closura of manufacturing process of Industries, Institutions etc. The
CPCB had boen empowered ta issue directions under the existing provisions of the Water
Act, 1974 to the SPCBs and pollution coniral committee to take specific action against
industries or institutions éte, for protection of environment.



i
| न
Crs SS RRR SE ST NF te TT a ea 5» 5


-49-

CHAPTER 5 VE

WATER QUALITY ASSESSMENT AUTHORITY (४४७४७)

6.1 The Water Quatily Assessment Authority (WOAA) was sat up al the central level

in May, 2001 for oxercising powers urider the Environment Protection Act, 1986, Tho
Authority is equigeed to Issue directions for protection and consarvation of the

environment anc preventing, conlolling and abaling poliuton and to direct agencies हु

{governmten Jocal bédies/non-governnrental) in the 126 of water patlution. The Autharity
is mandated to direct agencies to standardize water quality monitoring methods, ensure
proper treatment of waste water to resfore the quallly of surface and Ground waters, lake
up R&D activity related to watar quality management and proniote recycling and reuse of
treated wastewater. However, Audit fiadings painted out that tii date, WQAA had Issued
only Uniform tonitoring Protocol (UMP} in 2005 for uniform procedure for sampling.
analysis, data storage and rapering amongst the agencies operating Water Quality
Monitoring networks ॥ the country. A Task Force for development of Water Quality Data

Information System; ce-ardination In caffection, use and dissernination of dala; review of —

Water Quality Monitoring network for optimising network for the Country and for
accreditation of water quailty laharatories in the Country had been set up. It had not,
however, taken any action towards promoting recycling/re-Use of sewage/trade effluents,
drawing up action plans for qualily improvements in water badies, schomes for cestiiction

1 of water abstraction, reviewing the status of Aatlonal’ water. resources, Identifying

hotspots, etc. , हि . ot

6.2 Water Quatlly Review Committees were constituted In somo Ststes with an-

abjective to improve cvordinatian amongat the Centrat and State agencles ta
revlew/assess schames launchedéto be launched, to improve quatity of water resources,
review water quality data analysis and interpretation in order fo Identify pratiem areas
develop action plans for improving quality on a sustainable basis, identify hot spots for
surveillance monitoring. However, audit findings patnted out that such Commitees were
aclive and met regularly only in two States viz, Maharashtra and Himachal Pradesh.
Audit also’ pointed out that since 2001, anty Seven meetings of Water Quality
Assessment Authority had taken plate. हु



8.3

Ste

On being asked to respond to these observations made by Audit, the MaEF

submitted that ;

6a

65

submission was made:

“Under the Nulionat Water Quality Monitoring Programme carried out by Central
Poitution Contral Bourd/Stute Potlution Canvol Boards, water quality monitoring is

‘being proseally casted out at (708 locations in” te main stroan of tivers, .
- tributaries, lakes, tanks, poids. .graundwater, creaks, canals etc. in addition

Groundwater quatily monitoring is being carried out at 15,000 stations mosity in
rural areas by Cantal Ground Water Board. The yater bodies not mesting the
desirad water quatity criteria are identified as polluted river strstchesfwatex bodies,
40 1iver stretchas not meeting the desired crilerla Were identified during 1988-89.
The polluted stretches Increased to 37 during tha year 1992 covering all ihe major
river basins. With the rapid growth in urbanization, industdatization, increase it
population, subsequent expansion of manitoring network and coverage of more
number of rivers for regular monitoring, the number of polluted water hadies.
ldentified in 2010 {Increased to 190. The polluted river stretches were Intensively
surveyed by Cantral Pollution Gantot Boards (5009) and Stale Pollution Controt
Boards {SPCSs) to Identify the sources of pollution such as Urban Centres and
Industral Units. The deviation of waler quatity from tha desired water quelity
celteria in fhe data generated by GPCB for the rivor Ganga formed the basis for
faunching Ganga Aclion Plan (GAP) and gradually extended to other polluted
tlyers through Natlonal River Conservation Plan (NRGP}."

As regards Water Quality Management Plan, (twas further submitted that
“WOQAA is pursuing with State Governments to prepare water quality management

~ plan for each and every state, Necessary guidelines ware circulated to all State

Govemments for preparation of walet quality management plan, Apart from this,

-the following information systems and websites have been launched to

disseminate the data collected thrauglh vacious organizations of Ministry of Water
Resources." . : .

‘On the aspect of Nationa! Lake Conservation Plan {NLCP), the foltowing

-"The Mbisky is implementing the scheme of Nattonal Lake Conservation Plan
(NLCP) since June, 2007 for conservation and ‘management of polluted and
degraded lakes in urban anc semi-urban areas of the Country where degradation
is primarily on account of discharge of waste water into the lake, through an
integrated ecosystem approach, The companants/acfivities covered under NLCP
are aimed al achleving treatment/rejuvenation of polluted/degraded lakes. in order
to Kentify polluted and degraded lakes acrass the country, a study was cartied out
at-the instance of Planning Commission. A list of 62 lakes acrosa the Country
requiring conservation was prepared under ihe shady. The Stale Govermmants
wera asked to review this fist and to prioritize the lakes In their States for
stubmission of proposals under NLCP. Proposals for lakes conservation ore
considered for sanction subjact to their admissibility 35 per NLGP guidelines,
paititlon sfakis, pricritizallon and availablity of funds undor the Pad. Some States

namely -Chnalisgath, Himachal Pradesh, Bihar, Manipur, Agsam डॉट, had-
furnished priority list but either not submitted any proposal for consideration undes 1
NLCP, or the same not faund mesting NLCP guidelines. States namely Jammu.

and Kashinir, Kerala, Uttarakhand, West Gengal, Tripura and Nagatarid have sent
the only one proposat gach, which were examined and approved by the
competent authority for funding under NLCP.* * : ना



-51-

- 66 On a pointed query regarting meetings of the एस Quallly Assessment

Authority, Chaired by Secretary, Ministry of Eredronment and Forests, It was submitled

that the last (97) meeting of the WQAA was held on 307 May, 2042. 1 was further

submitted that the Authorily is required lo meet twice in a. yeat and furnish report of .its

2 activities to Ihe Ministry of Environment and Forests once ta three months.

6.7 On the powers of the WOAA, the Secretary, MOEF testified
हु “Water Quatity Assessment Authorily is acluafy not really an authority in the

sense that it.has not bean empowered to issue directions. If any direction is _

Issued, | is Issued Linder the Environment Protection Act which even we can do of

_ Which even CPCB can do or a Slate Boaid or 8 District Collector can do. This
authorily is nothing but a mix of lhrea or four Departments, namely, Central
Ground Water fioard, Water Resources Ministry, Ministry of Environment and
Forests and 0108. They meet and discuss future plans especially of problems
areas like Ganga. This time we inet. After | came hee, we net once. It is at feast
to exchange notes but it has not met for a long time. This is the firstlivhe we met in
last one year. But the only thing 15 It ts convened by the Ministry of Water
Resources. They are the convenars. We are just a member of thal, So, we are not
the convenors of thai.

6.8 Asked to explain the contradiction between the meelings required to be held
anaually and the actual meetings held, Ihe Secretary, MoEF submitted during oral
evidence as under :

“This Is what it Is supposed to do but it has not done so. But this year onwards we
have started and | am quite sure we will be able to push through hecause actually
untess we have @ particular teain or a subject to work on, it beconias Very, very
general discussion on water and problems of quality and quantity. So, we have
taken up Ganga specifically.” हि

-6.9 On the delberations made during the last meeting of ४४063, anoliter

raprasentative of the Ministry submkted during oral evidence

“Recantly, in May 2012, we had this meeting of Wafer Quality Assessmeiit
Authority under the chairmanship of Secretary. There are members from the
Ministry as well as exparts from indian Counc for Water Resources and various
other Departments. Yes, the meetings: have been held at longer intervals.
This is an authority which is mandated to underlake the uniform monitoring
protocol for the nver water quality. It is the prerequisite to do fhe comparisons at
various levels, The monitoring protacol has been finalized. That wit be unifermiy
applicable to varlous civer stretches. We will be undertaking some research
proposals, which are impacting the water quality. So, that Is one af the major
agenda items, which this authority would undertake. We will see whether we need
- to have more experts on. this profocol assessment authority to aiake Hl more
-techaical and scientific Insofar as the research work of. this is concamed, So, we
छाई working on 4 paper an this and we will be having this discussed in this Water
Quatity Authority meeting to be chalred scon by the Secretary."



° «SR
610 As regards strengthening of Water Quality Monitoring Neiwork, the sinisty
submitted thet Rie number af-manitorng stations increased from 1019 fo 2500 ducing 11”

* Plan. Notwork will be expanded to 5000 during 12" Plait, ॥ funtis are allocated. Monitoring

of micco-pollutants will be strengtnened with quality assuranea. The Planning Commissidn
has fixed the largets for slangihsning of monitaring notworks and 6. achieve the
numbers by the end of 117 plan a& 2500, by the and of 12" plan aa 5000 and aa

“ optimum network for tho: size of the Country 88 10000 monitoring focations. Tha

strengthening programmes were inftiated to fulfil the targals and accordingly financial

requireinents ware propesed. The sfrangihening programinie to achieve tha targets ‘will
nal be achieved if required funds are not allocated,

6.44 The Ministry further supplemented thaf the Government had 10100 rules for
conservation and management of wellands that restict harmful activities such as
construction, dumping of untreated waste, and indpstrialization, to prevent darnage to
these sensitive ecosystems wilh high blodiversity values. The Wetlands (Conservation
and Management) Rules, 2010, wers aimed at ensuring batter conservalian and
prevening degradation of wetlands, Under the rules, wetlands have been classified for
better management and easier identification. Welland regulatory authorities and
appraisal Committees wera set up at the Central, State and District levels to ensure
proper implementation of the 1089. हि

8.12 The Committee was informed that the Water Quality Assessment Authority
{WOAA) was basically consftated wilh a mandate to make the water qualily manitorlng
as a uniform practice. The Cornmittee theraupon sought to know wheltier the WOAA
had been able te live up 10 ils martate as an aulliatky for water quality monitoring, the
MoEF replied that Water Quality Assessment Authority (WQAA), since its inception has-
caféted out a number of activities on water qualily manitortig. Expert Group and Task -
Force were constituted to recommend the uniform procedure far sampling, analysis, data
storage and reporting amongst the different governmsntal agencies operating wetar
quality nionitoring networks, Based on the recommendations of Expert Group and Task

Force, a Uniform Pratocot on Water Quallly Monltoring (UPWOM) was prepared under |

aegis of WOAA and was nofified Inrough a Gazette Notification on Uniform Protocal on
Water Quality Monitoring in June 2005, If waa elrculated fo all the Stales_and concerned

_ Central agencies for Implenientation. WOAA provided a common platiomn for- these

organizations to come together, discuss, decide and share the data and experience on

- the water quailly Issues in the country. Slate Governmants. wore directed by WOAA to.



~33-

constitute Water Quality Review Committees {WORC) lo attend to various relaied issues
with the water quality at the State feval. In pursuance af the decisions of the 6" meeting
of WOAA, Ihe WORCS were reconstituted fo make them more effective. Til date, 17

States have re-constituted Water Cuatity Review Committees in their States.

6.43 With respect lo the constraints boing faced in tho functioning of the WOAA, Tha
Mott replied tat Water being @ State subject, Water Quality Assessment Authosity
(४४०४७) is unable to Issue effective directives. Further, the Wates Qualily Review
Cammilices ro-constituted in 17 States at tha State level ware not able fo function and
inplement the Terms of Conditions (TOR’s) assigned to them.

8.44 Ona poinied query on the apparent incongrully as fo how a quarterly Report was
to be furnished when tho Authority is stipulated to meet onty twice a year, the MoEF
submitted iat the provision of submilliig quarterly reports to MoEF were replaced by
annual raports vide the notification dated 27" May 2005. Moreover, Secretary, Ministry
of Environment & Forests was the Chairman of Water Quality Assessment Aaithority
(WOAA), the activities of WOAA were discussed in the Meetings of WQAA as an Agenda
itera and as such Secretary, MOEF was weil aware of the activities of WOAA. Secretary,
MoEF issues directives from lime to time regarding actions to be taken in the meetings

Reelé.

6.15 Asked whether the present stipulation of trequency of Meeting of WQAA was

adequate for the discharge of its mandafad functions, the MoEE replied in the a(tirmatlve.

"6.16 On being asked about the legal slatus of WQAA as an Authority to discuss and

coordinate important water paltution related projects, the MoEF feplled that Water Quatily
Assessment Authority (WQAA) had been constituted by the Central Gevarnment in
exercise of ihe powers corferred by sub-section (4) arid (3) of section 3 of the
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. As per the Gazette Notification Ordar Issued by

| - MOoEF vide 8,0, 583 (&) dated 29th May, 2001 published In the Gazette af India

(Extraordinary) dated 22% June, 2001, the Authority shall exercise the powers uncer
sectlon 5 of the Environment (Proiectisn) Act, 1986 for issuing directions and for laking
measures wilh respect fo matters referred to in clause x), (xl) Odi) and (सा) of sub-

Scctian 2 of section 3 of the Act

sv tewent



54. -

6.17 Askexl whether there waa any proposal to enhance the powers of this Authority to
atevate it to that of a regulatory Authority which can central and direct the anultifarious
Centrat anc State Ministries and Agencies involved with the issue of controt of Water
Pollution, the MoEF submitted that it pursuance of the decision taken in the 9” meating

- of Wafer Guality Assessment Authority, a sub-cammitles had been constituted under the

Chairmanstiip of Advisor, National River Conservatian Authority; Ministry of Environment
and Forests to look into the genesis, re-evaluation of Its pawers, iis mandate, and
achievements and suggest appropriate changes/course af action to make the Authority
more effective and relevant. —_

6,18 About the cole, functions and impact of the WOAA, the representallye of the MoEF
daposed as under :

“Water Quality Assessinent Authority vill become nnore effective by institutional
strengthening of water quality coll of Ministry of Water Resources whick was
providing secratariat services (0 WOAA aid enhanced adininistrative control over
State Water Qualily Review Conumittees (WORCs}. WOAA was vigorously
pursuing to bring Slate Governments on board for Implementation of Terms of
Reference (TOR’s) of WORCs. The specific remedial measures and steps intet
alia consists of constitution of Expert Group and Task Force to recommend the
uniform procedure (er sampling, analysis, data storage and reporting amongst the
. different governmental agencies operating water quality monitoring NELWOIKS,
preparation of a Uniform Protocol on Water Quality Monitoring (UPWQM} under
the aegis of WOAA and notfcalion through 8 Gazelte Hotification on Uniform
Protecof on Water Quality Monitoring ॥ June 2005 and canduct of a National
Warkshop far preparation of guidelines. on Water Quality Management Plan
{WQMP} by CPCB, The Guidelines were ufrculated to ail the States and UTs for
implementation. Water Quallty Review Gommitlees were re-consliluted In 1?

States. One af the TOR’s of Water Quatily Review Coramiltees (WQRCs} was है

under preparalion of WOMP's for their respective States; Working Group orn
“Minimum Flows In rivers constitalion by WQAA which submilled Its report during
2007. A Committee on Legal and Institutional aspects of the implementation of
Working Group's recomimentatians on Minimura Flows was consittuted which
submillled ॥ repart during 2009. After delailed discussion on lhese two reparts In
8" WOAA meeting, a Sub-commitice was constituted to review the Group’s
recommendations of 2007.- The sub-committee has’ suvmitted is report,
preparalion of a 7७७७ on ‘Water Quality Hol spots in rivers of India’ by CIC, The
88 cfitlcally polluted Industial Clusters idenlited by CPCB and the
recommendations of GPCR were circulated. to Stata Governments by WQAA.
CGWB feport on ‘Water Quality In Shallow Aquifers’ under the aagis of WOAA
were ciccufaled ta all the Siates; etc.

+ 6.49 On a pointed query as to whether WQAA will be able to fake charge of Wafer

Poillullon Issuas nationwide, as 8 single agency and ensure that national atandards ere
developed, propagated and maintained, with better coordination across the Sfates-and
lessans loamt teing exchanged across tlie Nation, tha MoEF submitted that Water

Qualily Assessment “Authority (WQAAy has tins to time lssued diractivas to State



_ 53:

Governments to reconstitute the Water Qualily Reviow Committess (WORC) to
coordinate works assigned ta ther as per the TOR’s. WORCs in 17 States had beon re-
constituted as on 61.03.2013. WOAA was vigorously purstting to being Stale -
Governments on board for sapteientation of TOR's of WORCS.

6.20 The Corumitteo ware informed that WOAA was pursuing with State Governments
to prepare Water Quality Management Plan for each and every state. Mecessaty
guidelines were circulated to afl Slate Governments for preparation of watar quality
jnanagement plan. On a pointed query as to whial slage was this preparalion of Water
Quality Management Plan across the States, the MoEF replied that guidetines for the
preparation of Water Quality Management Pian have been circulated to ali the States.
Howaver, none of the States had prepared Water Quality Management Plan as of
01.03.2043. . न

6.21 On strengthening the waler quality monitering nalwark, the Road Map of the
MoBF brought out the fact that the CPCB has been monitoring wator. qualily at 1429
statlons within the available resources, These stations covers 293 rivers, 94 lekes, 9
tanks, 41 ponds, 15 creeke/ sea water. There are 64 parameters which are analysed its
tivec! lakef ground water sampfes taken fron rivers, lakes, ponds, creeks ete, These
parameters wore monitored on different intervals. The station specific parameter was
selected on the tasis af source in the vicinily of monitoring station. Hawever, for inclusion ©
of new parameter, toxicily study was carried out fo single out new parameter and further
study was carried out In the ‘tab to study its loxicity befare taking it up for regular
monitoring. The water quality data was published and circulated. Towns and cities were
included under NRCP for abatement of pollution of rivers on the basis of proposal
received from the State Governments and approved under NRCP on the basis of funds
available under the Pian from Ume lo lime. Currently, automatic water quality monitoring
stations were being installed on river Ganga and River Yamuna to furtiar stengthian the
manval moniigring carried out on river Ganga and Yamung. The data so abtained are
published ragularly by 0768. The date analysis for a particular monitoring statlon would

4 indicate tends if parameters are varying with respect to time, no change in data provides

basefine status vf the ground water quality and station located near 50066 of pollution

indicates impact of activities ont line yround water,

1 8.22. Iwas further poinied out that addifionally, NRCO was also Interacting with various

organizations in the Couniry for sélting “up more water. qualily monitoring stéRons



1
FT
1
[

-56-

including of CPC8, 82005, and academic institutions to measure water qualily of river
stretches where it has taken up pollufien abatement schemes, So far the major
moniloring thrust has béen in the Gongellc basin. Wilh schemes being taken up on other
rivers, tho: monituring programme of the Mirectorale has 0801 exter 1086 to other tivers.
Yhe objective of the monitoring programme was to establish the water quality tt the dvers
afore Ihe schemos are taken up शाप then compare il with thé quallly as Lisle)
implementation of scheme progresses It order to check the efficacy af the actions faken.

~ The locations are usually closely spaced dowustreain of ciffies ant wastewalor oulfalls.

The locations aay he classified as surveillance lype for pollution monitodng. The water.
was analyzed mainly for potution related parameters, BOD, DO and coliforms. Al some
places analysis for heavy metals was also included.

6.23 Objactives of Water Quality Monitoring fisted in the Road Map inter-alio included :

. Te continously monitor the water qualily of the stretches of rivers, where
NRCB programmes ato being Implemented 10 assess the effectiveness of
pollution control efforts and draw water quatity trond over a periad of time. _

. To evaitiate proper functioning of poltution contrat systems installed under
the River Action Plan :

. Yo assess the improvement in water quality as 4 result of * the
implementation of the River Action Plan.

. To assess pollution loads in terms of ftnportant pollutants, entering in to lhe
rlvey by continuous monkoring of majar draite on tegular hasis.

. To assess micro pollutants load In the river water and sediment through”

their seasonal manitoring.
* To agsess water qualily of tha river comprehensively in lems of important
water quality parameters (42 parameters) once a year. ‘

6.24 On strengthening the Water Quailly Monitoring Network, the Road Map of MoEF
fuilhér states thal the scope and coverage of waler quality manitoring needs lo be
enhancad 91 terms of a number of monttering stations, ifs autornallon and parameters

- and in pursuance to this, made the following recommendation pertalning to Water Qualily

Monitaring Programmes :

. A report on the status of pollution of all majorfminer Rivers and their
toutarles and lakesvetlands may be compiled by CPCB, This may be
updated 2५०५ 2 years. This wil foim the basis for inklaling action for the
abatement of pollution of water bodies, in the country,



जा

४०७0 has formulated a set of Standardized Service Level Benchmarks
- (SLBMs} for Urban Water Suppty and Sanitation (UWSS) as ger
international Best Praclices. The SLEMs have been cirulaied fo tha States
Ii September 2008 for adoption in inirastructurc development projects. As

_ faras passible, projects seeking Cental Assistance shail be appraised with
respect to these benchmarks. : ;

"Central Ground Water Authorit y may ¢compife 2 report on the status of
pollution of ground water sources In the country,
The guidelines, contained In the Uniform Protocal on WOM Order, 2005
should be followed in salecting the locations for drawing samples,
For (he water qualily monitoring programmes to be affective, 3 minimum
10% of project lunds need to be altocaled for this activity. -
Biological indicators reflect Ihe effect of pollution on the waler bodies.
However, causa of poltulian is difficult to be. establiched wilh biological
Indicators. For better sowce idenlificalion, specialized parameters like
heavy metals, pesticldes, etc. may also be included in the montioring

. program wherever required.



GHAPTER VII
NEED FOR A NATIONAL LEVEL LEAD COGRDINATING AGENCY

7.4. Audit findings pointed aut that while. the outputs of the actions of CPCB and
SPC8s were co-related, there was 00 functional co-refation between them at the put
stage. This dichotoniy of canilrol causes a situation whereby there was no single agocicy
to fake charge of the issue of contrat of water poffution ona nation-wide basis.

. 22. The Committas were informed thal consideriag the inter-state aad inter Ministerial

nature of the issue of walter pollution, a proposal has been made fo the Planning
Commission for constitulon of a body within the Commission itself as a lead coordinating
agency for enforcement of the Road’ Map draw up for implemantation of the
recommendations made in the Audit Report. On being asked as 10 what was the current
status of constitution of this lead coordinating agency, the MoEF stated that the maltlar of
co-ordinating agency was just at conceptual stage and it needed 10 ba discussed with

* various stake holders lo arriva at consensus before व concrete praposal was formulated.

7.3. Tha Commities sought to know whether this proposed lead coordinating agency
be able lo address the Issue of functional non-co-relation amongst the CPCB and SPCBs
and dichotoniy of contrat as pointed out by Audit, The MoEF, thereupon, submitted that

“the issues related to Water Pollution in the Country are discussed at central level with the

State Polkition Control Boards and Pollution Control Committees ia a Conference of
Chairmen and Meniber Secretaes of Central and the Slate Potlution Control Boards. A
common strategy was evolved and worked on it Jointly by ail stake holders, The

conference of Chairmen and Member Secretaries of the Central and the State Polfuton

Control Boards met at reguiar intervais at Delhi or at any State venue and discuss
problems facing the nation regarding water pollution, policy and mules and Regulations,
ate. The inputs and outputs were thus related te action planned.

7.4. On the observation of the Commntitee that Sometimes there is a inap but there &
nq road, the Secretary, MoEF deposed during évidence as under,

“The point ts Its possible if onsa or twice lhey have the mesiing at tho cenlral
level and then break It up Into six or seven States where tiie- same. group will be
represented at the Stats tevat and they will review.. There are only two things
which the State Gavernments will have [0 agree to. Thatis another reason, why it
is.not working. One is, the greblem between sanitation and ‘industial palhation.
That maans instilutions are workkig in silos. They are not coaperating because of
those two laws. The second problem is that who will pay. - .



45

+59-

Elaborating- an the seed for-genoration of fevenue for mesting trealmant of

sewerage cast for control of water pollution, he supplemented as under :

7.8.

“Now PP}? model has been used very well for the raads and infrastruckie sector
where ‘the revenue is absoluloly yuaranteed because you can actually शशि and
fou can actually know exactly what ls the minifnurm mimber ef yehides passing
by. That is the only reason it is working. In the case of water pollafiogy, itis a cost
which io added to the meter for water supply. Nobady roally wants lu add that and
sewerage cost, They say that you do not treat properli,, we will nat pay. So, this
is the reason why privale sector is nat coming forward to take this. Qpesation
costs of sewage treatment planis cannot ever be met only by sewerage chargos
because in such a case the sewerages charges will go up vory high This Is the
reason why some lével of subsidy wit! be required If yau want Ihe private seclor
enterprise to come and ralse resources fo 100 per cent cover the network." ~

Citing the new holistic end basic approach of the current Ganga Project, ho further

deposed that

“13
testified as under

7.8.

“In Ure Gatiga case, you mentioned abaut earker Ganga project mot having worked
simply bacause wa paid for orily treatment. We did not pay for collection. Today's
Ganga project will work because we have taken a holistic and basin approach
where each hause-ta-house connection wé are paying for on a 70:30 basis. They
are paying 30 per cent and we are paying 70 per cant plus we are giving operation
and maintenance 100 per cont coverage for five years.”. Of course, since we are
doing that there is no incentlve for the State Governments [० siowly slart charging

Itis because unlass they staré charging and put a little subsidy no private parson is
coming forward to reaintaln these resources, But one thing fs that Ithas come (0
the knowledge of the State Governments that it is a very important lhing and now
we have 10 talk very 90189."

Emphasising on ‘the imperative need for a lead co-ordinating body, he further

4

"The main point | want to undertine here is Ihat there is need for a coordinating

boxly fa start pulling in these measures and using his book (Read Map} as the first

agenda. After that, fhis can be piloritised and made into smaller modules

On # pointed query of the Committee as to why they have failed on the aspect of

co-ordination, the Secretary of MoEF deposad during evidence that :

“It is because we have reached a slage where we may nol be able ta quickly do
this coordination, What you are saying Is carrect. in the case of power, telecom,
coal éte., we have perhaps nat reached a stage where we need 16 urgently 1006 at

- somothing and coordinate at this fevel. There is not much of coordination involved

there. There, it Is a question of price fixing or deciding poticy on hove te distribute
of allocate natura! resources. This case is very different. In this case, we only
have knowledge. We just do aot know whe will do what and how to coardinate on
a daily basis. Our manitosing Is afsd completely in silos. We do monitoring only for
industrial pollution at 1,700 places im fhe country. CGWB fs monitoring 15,000
walls in the Counky and giving data. That is the ently work we are doing. We need
someone to coordinate this whale thing and start taking action."



+61

GHAPTER - Wi
SEWAGE TREATMENT

at: Audit scsutiay reveated thal the Country's 14 major, 55 eninor and several small
fivers recelve thiffions of litres of sewage, Indusilat and agricultural wasles. The most

polluting source for rivers Is the clly sewage and industrial waste discharge. Presantly, 7
only abeul 16 percent of the waste water genarafed is toated; the rest is dischacyed as 1

is inte the water bodies. In this context, fio Committees have been Informed that Water,
belng' a State subject, major résponsibilly for sewerage factililes rests with the State
Governments and the MoEF was only supplementing their efforts. It has further been
submitted that sewage generation by 2025 was estimated ‘fo be about 4100 mid.
Considering lhe available capacity and the capacity of aboul 700 mid being consvucted,
Inckullng under JNNURM, the gap was expected (0 be around 2200 inid oy 2025,

8.2 In the abova ‘context, tho MoEF was asked as to how they plan to auginent the
efforts of the State Governinents/Urban local bodies who has the pdmary responsibilty of
creation of civic Infrastructure facilities. for treatment of wastewater including safe
disposal, The Ministry theraupon submitted in their written 19.09 that the constllutional

. amendment has empoviered them 19 raise funds for creation of infrastucturat faciities.
“The need of the tinie was for State Government ta prepare a fong term plan far crealion
“of sewerage Infrastructural facitiies. The State Governtnant may have lo evolve a

revolutionary design now for taking cafo of providing adequate civic infrastructure
fecilities. for not only treatment of wastewater including its safe disposal but also
collection and proper disposal of salld waste, unclalned bodies, afimal carcasses,
religious offerings, etc which are dumped at times In river causing savero pollution and
unhygienic conditions. Tha privale sactor investment was inevitable who utay parlicigfate
# conducive environment coupled with incentives were put I place to attract them. Under

-World Bank funded Mission for Clean Ganga, efforts are being made te-enlist proposals -

for funding under PPP model.afso. On the above lines, State Govt are (० be advised to

pracesd at the sarliest,

83. 01 being enquired as io-whetter the Planning Commission has so far conta out -

with any time bound siratagy to bridge the gap between required sewage treatment
capacily and available lreatment capacity in the country, the Mo€F staled [hat the Issue
of inadequacy of clic infrastructural facitities can only be tacklact aver a period of fine in
@ phased manner, tt requires praper planning, allocation of adequate resources and



le:

capacily af institutions to introduce new and efficient infrastutcture in ime. The Planning
Cominission has been making adequate alfocation uf funds for supplementing the efforts
of the Slate Governments for croating civic infrastructurat facilities in the States.

8.4 Kooplng in vlew the huge requirement of funds os estimated by lhe High Powarad

Expert Committee (HPEC} on Urhan infrastructure and Services, the Cornmittee sought
ta know how the funds requirement were going ta be mei. Tho MoEF thereupon

submitted that the funds requirement may be met by crealiig an exclusive financial
institution tike-National Bank for Agilculture and Rural Development (NABARD) for
creating civic iafrastructue in towns and cilies in which Centrat Governntont, State
‘Government, ULBs and public have equity participation. Externaf assistance from bilateral

and mutitateral agencies through 8 1४ of equily and debt may alsa be included. Funds

May also be mobilised from private sector, banks, financiaf institulions etc. The Central

. Government and State Governments may canlibuts finds for.crealing iafrastuctura and

it may de allocated to the projects by Contra Government on the recommendations of the

_ expert*organizatian 168 Central Pottuiion Contral Boards State Pollution Controt Board.

These projects may be executed by creating ‘separate organization like National
Highways Authority of India, DMRC, U.P. Bridge Corporation, etc or efsa private
participation may oe invited.

8.5 Ona pointed query as to whether any action plan has been formulated to enhance
the capacities of municlpaillies for recovery of user charges for water and sewerage
systains, the MoEF stated Ihat the mechanisrn te collect user charges for sewerage and
water facllity has alraady been put ir place in States. However, colfectian of data may

only indicate actual realization and shortfall with respect to target for further improving the,

collection and enhanéing the capacities of municipalities for recovery. It was further
submitted that the Ministry af Urban Development may have to [oak in to it.

8.6. , Asked whother India has any comprehensive policy for sanitation, the Mhtistry
submilfed that it has published the Nafonal Urban Sanitation Policy (NUSP} in 2008.

_ However, sanitation being a State- subject, the NUSP is a model pallcy for the States to

prepare their own sanitation strategies. = -

87 On being asked as to whether efforts taken in this directlon under varicus Central

Schemes. lke Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (NAURM), Urban -

lafrastructure Davetopment Scheme in Smell and Medium Towne {JIDSSM) and States



नर

Schemes were being dovetailed to the River Conservallan Programine {a address tha
Issue of the huge gap in sewage ‘treatment capacity in 2 holistic manner, tha Ministry
stated that if examines in detalis, proposals for sewaraga and sewage treatment projects
duly considering other Ministries projects, uncer NRCP ६७, For example, in Hyderahad,
the sewage treatment plants were approved under National River Consarvalion Pla
{NRCP} whereds seweraga network was approved under JNNURM . , WIG.

83 On the fesue of sewage treatment, the Comnilttee was Infortned of twa main
problem areas. First was the apparent tack of coordination with institutions warking in
isolation and the second was the difficulty in recovery of cost of investment in this sector.
it was submillted that some fevel of subsidy will be required to moltvate Private sector.

enterprises to invest in the creation of sewage infrastructure as revenue generation ~
"cannot be guaranteed unlike in other sectors lika roads where the Public Private

Partnership (PPP) model was working succasstully.

89 In this context, he Committee sought to know whether this problem of lack of
Coardination would be addressed by the envisaged lead coordinating agency being
proposed withia the Planning Commission, the Ministry stated that the 1686 coordinating
agency being proposed within the Planning Commission will moniter whether decision
making was made expeditiously. * :

8.10 On being asked a3 to whether any serious proposal has been made, for
introduction of some level of subsidy for motivating Ihe private sector enterprises to set up
PPP madels for creaton of sewage infrastructure, the MoEF stated that undér World

Bank funded Mission for Clean Ganga, efforts were being made to enlist proposals under”
PPP model for developing sewerage infrastructure. The Stale Governinéits tf -

participatiny States have 680 been exptoring the possiifity to execute projects on ‘Public
Private Partnership (PPP}" model.

8.4114 On the issue of low lavels of treatment of Sewage generated, the Committee have

bean informed that the low lovels of tecatment of sewage are primarily due to Inadequate
arcangement for collection of sewage. To enhance collection of sewage, Minlstry has
been cansidering funding of sewerage schemes with sewage collaction right from the
fiouses rather than interception and diversion. This will ensure 100% collection of sewage
क्षात treatment The new guidelines prepared by the Mintstry in 2010 for the preparation of
OPR has also envisaged preparatian of City Sanitation Ptan which wil acdrass tha
problem of low tevel treatment of sewage.



-63+

8.12 tr this context, Ihe Commities sought to Know whether tha Mintslry proposes to
outscures such sewage collection works Through Public Private Partnership modols,
“which may ensure. more effective collection and treatment, the MoEF. seiterated their

oarfier reply that-umder Warld Sank funded Mission for Clean Ganga, efforts are being -

made to enlist proposals under “Public Privato Martuership (PPP) model for developing
sewerage Infrastructure which would include sewage collection and treatment, both,

8.43. On beirig asked as 10 whether there was any concept d€ collecting fees/charyes for
collection and disposal of sowages 6010 the generated sources, the Mo&EF stated that the
mechanism to collect user charges for sewerage facility had already bean put In glace in
States and State GovernmenvULB etc. ware collecting sewerage charges. Further, on
the modalities Involved, the MoEF stated thal the user charges are callected by
ULBs/muntetpal authoriies/Sewerege Boards along with water bill or property tax, ele.

8.14 The recent reporl of the WHO paints fo 638 milton indians not having access [0
toilets, as compared to 58 millllon (the second highest) In Indanesis and 50 million in
China, India seems 10 be the fader where it should not ba. The Report of the CAG in
para 4.2 confirms the situation that even large cities like Bangaldre which is the IT hub of
India is able to treat only 40% of the sewage being generated. In Hyderabad, the
percentage of Weatnent is at 43% and in the national capital Delhi, it is at 62%. The

. Commitige sought to knaw as {o what serious Thought has been given t deal with the

situation thal pats india in such a poor ight. The MoGF thercupon merely replied Ihat the
sewage yenefated in Bangalore Is collected and mare than 50 % Is treated in sewage
treatment plants having total reatment capacity of about 721 mid. In Hyderabad ०
sewage generated'ts cotfecled and 100% is tested and traatmont capacity of $92 mid

has been provided. -Additionaf tveatment capacity is being created to treat sewage |

generated from nelghboring municipatities also, In Dethi, 3800 mid sewage is generaled
and 63 % ‘of the installed capacily of 2460 mid Is teated. On a pointed query as fo
whether MoEF/ GPC8 were regularly manitaring STPs built undar.NRGP and how does
the MoEF satisly itself that effluents from STPs mest the criteria laid dawn by CPCB, it
was stated that CPCB inspected 162 STPs during 2011-12 and findings were made with

Tespect to Generai. Standards for Discharge of Environmental Pollutants bite inland -
surface, pubtic Sowers, land for irrigation, marine coastal armas undar Schedule-VI of the

Enviconment (Protectlon} Rules, 1986 viz. 49 numbers af STPs are exceeding Bio
Chemical Oxygen demand (BOD} standards, out of which {2 Sewage Treatnent Pants

- are ॥ Uttar Pradesh, 14 STPs In Haryana, 06 in Punjab, 04 STPs of Madhya Pradesh
-and 03 (each) in Tamil Madu and West Bengal With respect to Chemical Oxygen _



roa

नह

Demand (000), 07 31095 are violating the General standards of discharge, aut of which
06 are in Haryana; and 30 StPs are non-operalicnal and 09 STPs are under
construction.

815 Under JNNURM, MaUD was alse sanclioning’ schentes for the teatment of

‘sewage water In cities. On a polnted query as to how MoE intend (6 dovetall its
> programme under NRCO with JNMURM 60 ensure that there veis.no duplisalian, the

1४०६६ stated that the Ministry, undar new guidelines for Dotailad Project Roport
preparation has mengoned thal schemes sanctioned under JNNURM or any ober
central programme shautd be praperly dovetailed. This Ministry of Urban Oevelopment
also examines in detail, proposals for sewerage and sewage freaiment projects duly
considering other Mihisties Projects, urder NRCP atc. For example, in Hyderabad, the
sewage lreatment plants were approved under Nalionat River Gonservailon Plan whereas
sewerage natwork was approved under JNURM -UIG,

8.46 On boing asked (० state whether MoUD compiles data on coverage and’
adequacy of sanitation faclities (iicluding proper disposal of sewage) slate wise and -
district wise, it was stated that the State wise data on avaltabitily and type of tatine
within the premises has been collected and compiled by the office of the Registrar
General and Census Commissioner, Govt. of India and furnished in Census of India,”

.. 2011.

8.17 On the staps being taken by 14000 to address the issue of Water Pollution जांच" ५
its various schemes (Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission and Urban
infrastructure Development Scheme for Smali and Medium Towns, cle) tho Ministry
submitted that In order to Improve (he situation in water supply and santation, Gavt of
India launched JNNURM in 2005 with a view to provide financial assistance to the State
‘Govts for creating urhan infrastructure facilities including sewerage ané municipal sofd
waste imartagement for all the llles In the Country with a reform oriented agenda
JNNRUM had tvo.components narnely, Urban Infrastructure and Governance (UIG) and
Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme for Small and Medium Towns(Ut0SSM).
Under UIG component, 67 missin cilies having population more (han 1 million and
State Capital were eligible and remaining towns were eltgible for funding under
UIDSSMT, -

8.18 It was further submitted that ihe Ministry of Urbatt Development also administers
the following programmes . हु 7 ot



65s

° Pilat scheens for Urban Inirastuctire and Salallito towas around soven
mega cles (UIDSSY), the’ objectives of which wera to develop urban

infcastructure facitities such as water supply, sawerage, drainage and sofd ~

waste management ets, at satelite fowns/ counter magnets around seven
mega cities हि

] -10 % छा sum scheme for Beneat of North Eastern Region including
sikkim undor which projects were sanctoned for improvement of urban
infrastructure services.

e+ ADB assisted North Eastern Region Urban ‘Developmant Programme
{NERUDP), under which financial assistance was provided for improvernent
of urban infrastruclures and basic services in five capitat cities of North
Eastem States.

> ° Under Accelerated Urban Water Supply Pragramme (AUWSP) now
subsumed under UIDSSMT, a total of 1244 water supply schemes had
been sanctioned at an astimated cast of & 182287.64 lakh for the lowns
having population legs than 20,600 as per 1991/2001 census.

« Central Sector Scheme of Salid Waste Management and Drainage Scheme

for 10 selected IAF airfield lowns unser which solld wasta management and
drainage facilites were provided in 10 selected towns viz., Ambala, Sirsa,
Adaipur, Jodhpur, Dindigul, Gwalior, Pune, Hindan, Bareilly and Tejpur
having airfelds of Indlan Air farce.

8.19 On being furlher asked as to how many projects have been funded by MoUD 10
address the issua of Water Pollution under its various schemes during 2007-12, the
MoEF submitted that under 10 Sub-Mission of JNNURM, 157 projects on water supply
have $o far been approved for various mission cifias with approved cost of हैं
2048589.03 takh and ACA commitmeni of € 1008819.48 lakh. Out of this, an amount of
% 68311460 tak has been released for utilization so far, 45 projects. have heen
reported physically compleled and the remaining projects ara at vaiious stages of
implementation. Projects which address the Issue of water pollution are presently under
execution by the project States under the NERUDP wero given as below: है

Table 8,19 : Projects under the NERUDP funded by MoUD

ia iy Sate f Seater aa
A का a Tranche-| {2009-

14)
Kohima Sofid 16.85
(Nagaland) Waste
Shillong 9980 2.05
Meghalaya) Waste

8.20 On a specific query as to whether MoUD consulted MoEF ¢ 0708 hefore
sanctioning slich prajecis for control of Water Pollution, the Ministry subnuted. that tha
‘Gavernment of India has constituted Central Sanctioning .and Monitoring Committee



-46-

(CSMC} under the Chaitmanship of Sacratary (10) with members from various
Ministries including Ministry of Environment and Forests for approval and Sancfioning of

" the projects under JNNRUM, MoEF was consutled for the dveralt NERUDP Scheme

and the MoEF was reprosented ia ths National Steering Commitlae. हा each profeet

sanctioned under ihe Schome, censultation with the appropriate Polkition Controt

Authority was done as required

8.21 On a pointed query-as to haw MoUO was moniloring the implementatlan of
projects funded by if, the Ministry submitted that as per the INNRUM, Slate Goviy
ULBs were responsible for implementation. of tha Projects. Ministry also. monitors
implementation of approved projects through vasious mechanisms such aa Quarterly
Progress Roport (QPR}, field visit छठ, Independent Review and Manitodng Agency
(IRMA), Projecl inptementation Unit (PIU) at ULS level and Projact Monitoring Unit
{PMU} have been appolnted by the State Goveramonts to ensure the quality आए timely
execution of the projects. The Centrat Government Provide [nds for PIU, PMU and

IRMA through JNNURM, For projects sanctloned under NERUOP, an Invesiinent’

Programme Coordinator Call (1700) has been craated in tha MoUD with suitable staff
for overall management and monitoring of projects in. five programme Slatos. Tha [PCC
is supported by Programme Management and Moniloring Consultaats (PMMC) - a team
of experts in various related fields - lo assist in project management and monitoring. A

. National Steering Committee (1480) has boon formed to manitor pragress of execution

and pravide guidance for effective Implementation which meets quartesly. Under the
project a dedicated State Investment Programmé Management and Implementation Unit

(SIPMIV) comprising of experienced officers and experts fas heen created In the urban

development depariment of each State. Fhey wore supported by a team of Consultants
for efficient execution of the project. On a query as lo Whelher there has been any
improvement in the status of water quality of Water Bodias i the towns, where MoUD

had sanctloned its projects, i was submitted that the quality of water in waler hodles.in हा

and around towns was being monitored by the Central Poliution Controt Board (CPCB).

1 8.22 On baing asked as to whether MoUD consider water-harvesting essential in viow

of water shortage! watér poflution and what ware the plans to improve water harvesting

in the Country, it was stated that 019 Ministry of Urban Development has forwarded the ,
guidelines for Roof Top Rain Waler harvestiny to all the Stale Governmenis Including *
Central Public Works Dopariment with a request to adapt. Roof Top Rain Water

harvesting ff alf Government puildings. in September, 2060, the Ministry of Urban
Development Had issued a -gazeite. notification’ dated 287 July 2001 whereby



-Gi-

modification! addition to the buildings byelaws of 1983 had been made in Mational
Capital Teritory of Delhi, According to the Notification, it has become mandatory ta
adapt water haivesting through storing of water runoff including rainwate? ia all new
builings on plot of 100 square mele area in and atound Deli Further, roof top-fain
water havesting for recharge of ground water was one of the reforns ‘under the
UJNNRUN,. Tho 67 mission cilias and other cities seeking funds urider the progtamme
are required lo implement tho refarin for rooftop water harvesting in thelr Jurisdiction:

6.23 The Road Map brought out by tho MoEF to manage water polfutton in India
identifed the substantial gap between wastewater ganeration and treatment capacity, A
time dourd aclion plan needs fe be evolved to bridge the gap and to ensure that slate of
art sewage [reatment facilities are established to tackle’ 100% sewage kealment. This
needs to be reflected i the priorlties of State Governmien/ULBs. Planning Commission
should therefore be requested ta undertake an exercise in consuftatlan with the Nlnisfry
of Finance fo evolve a time bound actlon plan with the Involvement of States, UL8s,
Ministty of Urban Development, MoEF etc so that the requisite treatment infrastructure
cait be built. The issue of ensuing optirsum utilization af these assets and tho refacns
Tequired for their sustenance should also be addressed under thts exercise. Oelays in
award and implementation of projects needs to ba cut down through Improvement in

_ :rgject implementation, by dodieated entities, streamfning the procedure and
. empowering ihe organisations. Yith respect fo indusidal effiuents, it is the raspansibillty

of the Industles to comply with the presefibed standards for the discharge of the
affluent, This naads to 08 stiictiy enforced by the State Pailution Control Beard (8९089).
For industrial 94100) control, sléicter enforcement of environmental noms is requifed.
॥ this regard CPCB and SPCBs reed fo he adequately strengthened,

824 The Road Map stated “that action was therefore required on two fronts “viz,

- Capacity building of SPCBs and CPCS - under. world bank assistance a programme In

this regard is being’ prepared by the CP division of the Mihisiry which may be fast
tracked; [nstitullonal reforms in 99085 ~ instifufional reforms in the SPCB aré required

through necessary, amendments in the Water (Prevention and Céntrel of Poilutloa) -

Rules, 1975 so that the pawers. dalagated to SPCOBs under the’ environmental faws are
offectively used; weil qualified porsonne! are appointed as member secrelaries and
chaltpersons and stability of tenures of member secreterigs and chairperons to be
ensured. 1६ further stafed enviranmentat violations need 10 be suitably panalized and the
panaities should be large enougit ta have a deferrent impact, Necessary amendnients to
the EP Act shoidd, therefore; ba carried out in a time bound manner. Unsysiematic use



i

AB.

of water bas a bearing on the availablity of water. River should have snough dilution
potential. in ordar to take care of the effiuents dischacged after teatment and to sustain
Kis self cleansing process. A policy, therefore, needs fo he framed by MoWR for ratlonat
use of wales ln the Country by the State Governments and ULBs. Rational charges for

use of waler in agricullure, Industeial and domesti¢ purpose nead lo ७० worked out and”

implemented by appaintment of empowered, ‘Independent regulators. The project of
"Web Enabled Water Resources Information System! launched ‘by owe for, Water
Resource assessment and monltoriig, should bo expedited. Apart from polation of
rivers from industrial and municipat sewage there is @ significant contribution from tha
॥छोर्णा rom the agricultural fiaids, This can be checked by comprehensive measures,
related fo use of fertiizers and pesticides, A claar cut policy therefore needs to be
avalved by Ministry of Agricutture In tnis regard.

8.28 The Road Map further made the following recommendations on Municipat
Sewage System. -

ढ़ The primary responsibility for croation of civic infagtructure facilities for
tealment of wastewater including Its safe disposal Res with the State
Governments Urban Local Badies {ULBs).  Gantral Gavernrnent is
supplementing the effaris of the State Governmentsf ULBs for creation of
* these facilities through central schomes, A lime bound action plan,
Iherofore, needs to he prepared under the aegis of the Planning
Commission to bridge the gap between requirad sewage tealment
capacity and available treatment capacity In the Country.

* "A totat urban sanitation programme needs to be launched by Government
Of hula (० achieve 100% sanitation In the urban areas of the country.

* Keeping in view the huge requirement of funds as estimated by the High
Powered Expert Committee (HPEC) on Urban Infrastructure and Services
constituted by the Ministry of Urban Developinent, the amaunt (9 be
aiiocated by Government of India Under JNNURM needs to be stepped up
for creation of sawerage and sewage treatnent Infrastructure,

. The river water qualily is monitored © maintain hesf designated use of,

: rivera in tha Country. Any deterioration in water quaiity leads to change in
designated best use of river strotch warranting immediate attention and
action हर : To

+ ° The water bodies not meeting te desired water quality criteria are
a” identified aa poliuted river siretchesAvater bodies. CPCB has sludled
potential pollution sources anc relevant sub-bagin-wisa characteristics,

They have been undertaken with the oblective of formulating action plan lo

restore and malntain the diver waler quality at such 1000 a3 is neaded to

Sustalh. he designated-best-use of the different stretches of the river.



-69-

+ Comprehonsive astien plan for the abatement of pollution of these

stretches should be prepared synclwonizing with ihe ongoing programmes
Projects may be prepaed by the State Government for tha abatetrient of
potiution in the stretch. .

Attonipt may be made (0 develap and iraptement public-private parfnership

nrodels for seifing up and operating effluent and sewage treatment ptants
Once tie models के valicated, progressively use public rascurees,
inckiding external assistance, to catalyze such partaerships.

Enhance the capacities of municipalities for recovery of user charges for
waler and sewerage systems.

Prepare and implement actlon plans for major ciiles for addressing water
pollution, comprising regulatory systems relying on appropiate

* combination of fiats and Incentive based instruments,

Projects Implemented through public agencies as welt as public-private
parinerships for Weatment, reuse and recycling of wastewater from
tnunicipal and industrial sources may be encouraged.

Promate R&Q In developinant of low cast technologies for sewage
treatment at diffarant scatas to yield mulliple benefits.

For holistic approach apart from trunk sewers, branch & lateral sewers
and hause connections up to the property fina should alse be Included in
projects to make lie cily fully sewered.

City Santtation Pian (CSP)/Sewerage Mastér Plan shall be the basis for
Planning and formulating projects, Therefore, preparation of thage plans,
wherever it 00851 exist, wil be the first step. However, CSP shall Se
Prepared on the 08915 of Cily Davefopmrent Plan (CDP), if so drawn and
fltalized for the city.

SMP should Include complete details of generation af sewage in the city,
Its collection, conveyance including pumping requirements, Road Map fo
achieve 100% treafinant [0 dasired fevels and recycling aspects keeping

, itt vlew the river waker quafity.

it may be ensured that the new project are formutaled and implemented
with public consultafier and there is Synergy with the MoUD
programmes namely; Jawahartal Nehru National Urban renewal Mission

+ QGNNURM), Urban lnfrastructurat Development Scheme In Small &

Medium Towas (UIOSSNIT).

itis necessary to formulate an effective public education, awareness anc
participation programme as part of OPR so as to make them socially
Inclusive. An expert agency with right kind of background and
experience may be engaged to larmutate Public Participation strategy.



industrial Effluant

’ Action may be iniffated against the defauiter Municipatitiesfiadusties by the
i : 9९088 concerned. The Boards may atso Issue directions for closure &
° disconnection of sinctricily/water? othor saivicns in aase of persistent
defiance by any poitutng Industry, Under sectlon 33-A at the Water Act attd
seetion 5 of tho EP Act. .

8.26 On (he aspect of Sewage treatment, the Secretary, MoEF deposed:

together, not industries, just fle towns and cilies ate producing 28,250 million
Ries a day of domestic sewage which includes commercial as also agricultural
tun off. Now, the treatment capacity availahte in que Country today is 11,788. So it
fs about one-third treatwent capacily fs available and out, of this treatment
capacity about 30-40 per cent is not working optimally and that is because of
mechanical failures and also management failures. Why | am mentioning this is
because it is a management failure. Mechanical failure can bé repaired 0५३
management faiture is impossible to repair. That fs where we again get into a
problem whether it should bo privately managed or it should be completely
Government managed, tt fs because any confusion in between is becoming an -
issue. So, wherever wo have sean that tha sewage treatment plants are working
- and where methand is being recovered and electricity is’ being generated from the
SeWwege. There are some places tike Hyderabad where it is happening पक्ष:
Where they are running the treatment plant with methane from the sewage.
Similaily, tits 18 Nappening in J&K also. They have started. So, from that Ganga
Action Pian some cities along the Ganges where the sewage action plants ave not
- working becatise industrial pollution cannot be lreated by these plants. This has to
he solved again through a rigorous coordination of a-body which is dealing with
financing and resource conto! for both Centre and States for which | have
submitted to this hon. Canrmittee that It should be the Planning Commission. We
are wiling ६७ service the Pianning Commissian right up. from Ike Centro 9,009
- State level,” .

|
i
| " "On the whofe taday the latest 2010 picture is that class | and class It fown
i
I
1

8.27 Ot @ pointed: query on sewage managentent, the Secretary, MoEF submitted
during oral evidence : _

-"A sewer line, by tha way, going inte the river Is under a Central Act, Itis made by”
the State at that time and States alse have the puwer to make Acts on water. It is:
because the water is a State subject, We do not make laws on water and water
management. We do not make jaws on water at all. It 1४ done by the Ministry of
Wator Rescurces at Cente. Even the sewerage is nat with us. Sewerage
management, sewerage Yeatment plants, everylting is with the Urban

* Development Departments and in the States with the local authotitiss, Thal is the
reason that ght from the beghming § have béen saying that we must have a
central coordinating body. ! suggested for the Planning Commissicn for the simple
reason that Planning Commlssion has “got expertise, ft fs alsa in charge of

. Fesaurce allocation. Stafes givo. it lot of importance, Whenever the Planning
Commission's meetings are held, the highest fevel of representation happens
there. So, keeping ‘all this in view, | felt that Planning Commissicn is a batter

oplian," . -



"115

3.28 Ona query whether the Ministry was taking any consctous step to create a senso
of urgency of the issue such as by way of initiating a Cabinet Note, etc. it was stated that
the concept needed fo be discussed with afl stake holders before initiating a concrete
proposal,

: 8,29' On the aspect of practical problents faced in recaverlng the cost of collection and
treatment of sewage and solid waste from the public, which are major pollutants.oF
wated, the Secretary, MoEF deposed during evidence as follows: .

- “Sir, as't said, operatlonally wa wif nol be able to meet the lofal cost because of है

the technologies being used for different (४728 of treatment, Therefore, under this
model what we have suggested in tho NGRBA is that we ga for fiver feont
development and we give them other revenue tools,”

8.30 On the supply of poflution free potable water requiring a lown free from the
-malaise of human excreta and other types of sewerage flowing into the fivers or treating
them, the Secretary further testified during his oral evidence Ihat:

"Sir, there are examples already In India where they afe using a slab system
_ which is cansumption based system. Anybody who is using mofe than so many
kilo ॥/25 3 day immediately comes into fhe higher bracket In such a case what is
happening Is that the poor paople either who are enereachers or who arc not
- metered, they are covered.’

*8.31 Ona further painted query as to whether metering of use of water has bean done
in Dethi, he cepiied in the negative and slaled during ००! evidence that to the edent of
highsr consumptloa, It will crass subsidise the paarer layers, which was still posstbie,

832 On the Commitiee's view that a strang will on the part of the political leadershfp in
the Country was needed for enforcing the cost recovery (rom the citizens, tha Secretary
candidly submitted during his oral evidence that oltierwisg, it would be impossible to
carry on as ॥१6५ do not have the resources. ;

8,33 He further supplemented ax under

“Thera is 8 proposal, therefore, that now collection, fo'the extent that the rich’

people in the city pay fo that extent, ta caltect and the rest of the money would
have to be arranged for the private developer frora outside, frorn other sources. It

és one model anc if is working in only few cities. It is not acuepted everywhere and.

we are trying te upgrade it as parl of NGRBA discussion."
8.34 Ona specific query on pollution of river Famil Nadu, the Secretary, MoEF testified
as under during his oral evidence



Ue

"Ficstly, ia Tamil Naca we have identified nine places, We are moallaiing these
fine places very regularly. In these tlvers anc withla these rivers, we have get
certain catchments; micre catchments which we are monitoring on a regular basis,
For each area, there are varlous actions taken. We have an industrial problera
So, both the High Court of Choanai anc we got together, industries are being
closad one by one, and they are belng opened deoendiag tipoa their pefounance.
IL is “Zero” discharge. What we are trying to co with the industry is this, The

. Cauvery River and its tibularles including Noyal River in Tamil Nacki are niet

allowed 10 discharge any liquid. {n other wards, multiple effective evaporators on.

@ coremar basis are heing encouraged by our Ministry for the Industiial clusters.

Thes@.are working very well. So, for thesa 43 industéally polluted dusters which
we have identified and in ather less polluled clusters atso, we have introduced this
concept of evaporation where such waters which cannol be treatad, which has got
very high inarganic and salt content are evaporated, and the solids are passed on

and kept ja @ fined laucfill called 1507, that is, Treatment Storage Disposal’

Facitities. So, this is a new development in the last fow or five years.”

8.35 On being asked as to whether the polluting contents are being examined for their
‘poisonous and toxic effects, the Secretary, MOEF deposed during his oral evidence as

under :

"Yes, Sir, These come under our list of hazardous substances and hazardous
wastes. Now, 8038 indusides and clusters which are using producing these
wastes in a Inixed form with sewago, such wastes are fo ba segregated at the
industry level, and after segregation, Instead of sending It to the STP or Ihe
Cornmon affuent treabnent, which is net effective, itis driad up completely,"

"8.38 On further baing asked as to whether these hazardous wastes were dumped or
stored elsewhere after drying up, the Secretary in his testimony replied ia Ihe afimative

“and stated that ॥ was done for highly loxic or reaclivo wastas.

8.37

Eiaborating on the sufficient precaution taken white dumping ‘these hazardous

wastes, the Secretary stated that:

8.38.

“Before we put it into the lined landfill, we de neutralization and we do sterilization,
. aad then only we pul in a proper packet form. 0006 these toxic elersents ara put,
these ure atso properly fined oells in tha ground, lined calls with fre Leachate
Treatment Plant. There are 23 such plants which are there in the country now. At
feast the large Industrial estates are ali covered and nothing is going out. After
evaporation, the solid residues - | am. talking about the solid toxic and Hazardous
Tesidues > are belng properly managed.* : . .

He further went on to explain the storing process : ve

“Thsy are lined land cells. We call it teach’. Now, this Teach” comes out. Of
course, after five or six-yoars, too old material under the ground teaches. This
seepage goes Into the Leachate Treata\enl Plant under the ground. After that,
that 15 sampled." है हैं :



sey आर

"TB.

8.39 Ona specilic query as io whether the flaat product is properly certified for its non-

toxic and non hazardous natues, the, Secretary, MoEF reptied In the affirmative and:
. Stated that i

3 done by the faboratary in Bach of the Trealment ‘Storage Dispasal
Facifiy (18017):



oe

2
कु
1



Th.

CHAPTER - ५

PLANNING FOR CONTROL GF POLLUTION OF
RIVERS, LAKES AND GROUND WATER =. *

L ABSENGE OF INVENTORY OF WATER BOREIS AND KEYSTONE
SPHCIES ASSOCIATED एव THEM

9.1... Inventorlsation of riversfakas and the species associated with them, foons.a key
step In planning the controt of golfution In aquatic resources, the absence of which

2 réllects deficiencies in the planning ‘process. Audit Repart pointed out dismal

compilanca by the States In terms of enumeration’ [dentification/quantitcalion of
indicators and the absence of a comprehensive Inventory of rivers & lakes. The Ministry
of Environment & Farests has not been able to adept a wide-ranging approach towards
identifying polition levels Indifferent water bodies because of its focus on chentical
indicalars and lack of attention to biolagicat indicators. The risk assessment procedures
of MoEF/CPCE and the States were daticient as they failed to carry out comprehensive

” identification and quantification of human activities which Impact water quality and Ine

different sources which affect waler quality, No ageacy in the Country has assessed the
‘sks of polluted water in tiversfakes/ground water to health and environment The
enforcament of standards of water quality is, therefore, bound to meet with limitad
success given that MoEF had not adupted the basinlevet approach for contrat of

" polkition of rivers and lakes aiid also not daveloped:.water quality goals and

corresponding parameters for each river/lake. As such, overall planning for the contyat of
pollution on part of MoEF and the States was Inadequate which would have concomitant
repercussions on implementation of peagrammes for confrot of pollution and their
outcames. - है ह .

9.2. A prerequisite of efficient protection of water resources against poliution Is the
preparatfon of a comprehensive and detailéd plan of pratection which takes into
consideration alt point and diffuse sowvees of paljution, pollution processes and
movernents, consequences and alt possible structurat and admtystratlve measises of
protection against pollution. In order 0 make comprehensive and workable’ plans to
tackle water pollutictt, ft is necessary to establish databases on the avallabiitty of al
types of hydrolagic data at the national level and to identify surface and ground water
Tesources arid potential sources of water supply and prepare national profiles. Audit

findings pointed aut that at the Centre, detailed inventory of rivers and lakes had not ,

teen made by ४०६, MoEF siated that no survey tu identify all rivers and takes was



|
|
|

-15-

done and no identification and classification of vers and takes as majorfminar rivors
and fakes had been done- by iL Since asseosment of ground water resources itn the
Country was not in Ihe mandata of MoEF, the satne has reportedly not heen douie, Audit
obsexved that the Ministry of Wator Resources operates a Ground. Water fnformatian
system which naps, among other things, hydrological boundarles, anc tise, drainage
and water level. In the States, with respect to inventory: of rlvers, lakes and groutid
woter resources and Identification of keystone species, audit scrutiny showed that only
elght States had prepared an exhaustive fist of rivers running in thelr States, and only
four States had carried out 2 survey to identify the fakes in thetr States and 14 States
had carried out district-wise assess¢nrent of ground water resaurces,

9,3, ‘Audit furiher observed thal in the absence of an inventory for rivers and fakes,
MoEF, which is the nodat Ministey for patlution related issues in india, would not have
adequate knowedge and infarmailon for a complete understanding of qualily and
quantity of water resources which Is the key part of the platform for setting objectives for
water pollufion prevention and control and implomenting responses fo it. The abserive
of such data base will further hamper the water 00107 management by the States.

9.4. ‘Audit findings pointed out iat al Ine Centre, Mo&F has not identified keystone
species which is so critical te ant ecosystem that its removal could poleatially destroy the

“entire system associaled with each dyer and lake for major, fiver systems and lakes in
-- India. This has been dons only in. the caso of Ganga River Where (५97 dolphin was

identified as a keystone species. Such identilcation is imperative as it would not only act
ag Indleator of the health of the ecu-system out would also help MoEF to design
prograrames to protect species threatened by water pollution and in the States only
Himachal Pradesh had identifed keystone spscies associated wilh some of the rivers
running in thelr States, [n June 2011, MoEF stated that identification of keystone
species was tocation-spacific and need-based and that it had notified the Gangetic River
Oolphin as the national aquatic aninal. Howéver, the reply was sient about preparalion
of inventory of keystone species tor other major river systems and lakes in india.

9.5. As ger the allocation of Business Rules, MoEF is tasked with tha conservation of
lakes and wetlands as also the managoment and abatement of pottution of divers. In the
absence of 9 complota inventorisaicn: of water bodies, the Committee sought t know
how does MoEF intend to fulfill their mandate as por the Allocation of Business Rules.
1869 MoEF thereupon merely replied that the Ministery through Centrat Pollution Corttrol
Board (CPCB} has been preventing and contealling palletion of lakes and rivers by



6+
enforcing tho provisions of the Water (Prevantian and Controt of Pollution) Act 1974 and

the Environment (Protaction} Act, 1986.

-9.6. The Commniitee sought to know what action was oeing faken/ proposed by MaRF
to address the issue of preparation and consolidation of inventory of all water bodies in

~ the Country and whether ‘any timelines have been chalked out. Tha MoEF sitbmitted

that the inventory of watet-bodies is published by Govt. of India in respect of major,
medium and minor rivers and thelr tributaries. The monitoring network is largely
dealgnad an the major median and minor rivers and thelr trlbularies.“{n respect of
streams aad divers not mapped by irrigation departinents and survey of India, need
based information is collected from 1054 authorities and monitoring locations are
established in campltance of the crilerla for satting up of monitoring locations. There was
9 requiremant for contprehensive Inventarisation, of wator 90485 in the Country and the
efforts made by National Remote Sensing Centre (Formerly NRSA) will be reviewed and
information oblaincd to fulfill the requirement of iwentorisation of water bodies.

9.7, In this context, the Committee sought te know whether requisite data on water
bodies have been made available by the NRSC In this regard. Tha MoEF replied that
Central Potlution Control Board (CPCB) was in comimunicalion with Matlonal Remote
Sensing Centre (NRSC) (० process the data and the same shall be updated through
NRSC,” ;
9.8. With’ linmense potential of the Satelite Remote Sensing data for such
applications as inventorlsatlon of water bodies, the Commitiee fait the need for more
concerted efforts to use stish cost-effective tachnologies by way of proper linkages and
coordination wilh the NRSC. The MoEF theretyion responded that the Central Pollution
Control Bard (CPCB) will design tong lerm programme with Nationat Remote Sensing
Contre (NRSC) to harness the potential of Remote Sensing.

9.9. Ona pointed query as to what institutional arrangement was. being made for
supply of such Remole Sensing Oata, the MoEF stated that National Remate Sensing
Centre (NRSC) being a Govemment Department under Deptt. of Space, coordinated
study will ba commissioned hy MoEF far procurement of Remote Sensing Oata.

9.40. On further being asked as to whather adequately skilled and trained technical
staffs were available to process and collate such Remote Sensing data, the “MoEF



TT.

stated that the process of collecting and collating the Remote Sensing data may be anit
sourced to avercome shortage of man power.

हि 9.10 The 007४र/088 painted out that ihera was a wove fawards, institutionalising of
Remote Sensing Satellite Applications in various Ministri@s/Oapartments in view of Its

1 imracnse potential as cost effective means in the thanagoment of naluraf resuurces, On
being asked as to whether any positive move has been made by MoEF in this ragard, il
was siibmilted that National Remote Sensing Centre (41९50) waa béing contacted for
pracirement of Rentote Sensing data and procurement shall be worked out thraugh
MaU mode, . ‘ हु

9.12. The Road Map brought out that the endeavour of MoEF for a comprehensive
inventory of ail rivers, fakes and ground water sources in Indla, under the National Water
Quality Monitoring Programme carrled out by Central Pollution Gontrol Board/State
Pollution 00160 Boards, water quatity monitoring was being presently carried out at
1700 tocations in the main stream of rivers, Wibutaties, lakes, tanks, ponds, creeks,
_ canals etc, in addition, Groundwater quality monitoring was being carried out at 15,000

stations mostly In rural areas by Central Ground Water Board. The water bodios net हु

” eating the desired water quality criteria are identified as poliuted river stretches¢water
bodies. 10 (iver stretches nol aiseling the desired criferia were Identified during 1983-
88. The polluted stretches Increased to 37 during the year 1992 covering all the major
‘vet basins. With the rapid growth In urbanization, industrialization, increase in
population, subsequent expansion of monitoring nelwork and coveraye of more number
of tivers. for regular monitoring, the number of. polluted water bodies identified in 2010

increased to 150. The polluted river stretches were intensively surveyed by Central .

Poliulion Contrat Boards (CPCB) and State Pollution Controt Boards (SPC8s) te ideality
” itie sourcas of pollufiar such as Urban-Centres and Industrial Units. The deviation of
water quality from the desired water qualify criterta In the dala generated by CPCB for
the river Ganga formed the basis for launching Ganga Action Pian (GAP) and gradually
extended to other polluted rivers throuyl National River Conservatios Plan (NRCP}, ‘The
Road Map. further, stated that WOQAA has issued necessary guidetines to all State
Governments for preparation of Water Guatity Management Plan. Besides the Ministry
of Water Resources has Jaunched a wals based Ground Water Information System
(GIS) on 22nd October, .2010 for data dissemination ६9 all Stakehekiers and and
users, The india-WRIS project, a joint venture of Indlan Space Research Organisation

{ISRO} and Centeat Water Commission with the vision fo take wales jasources dala :

avaflalve in standard GIS form to user-communily by catiecting all such data avatiahle



18

through various sourcas, as well as the WQAA-website wherein Information related (0
pollution of bath surface and ground water 50088 are, made available farms the data
base on water pallulisn.

I. IDENTIFICATION OF EXISTING POLLUTION LEVELS IN TERMS OF -
CHEMICAL AND BIOLOGICAL INDICATORS

9.13. Chemleat indicators fike GOD, GOD, faccal coliforn’ and total coliform are
Waditional methods of water quality which provide an indicatlan of organic pollution. -
Howover, dito to comptexily of affkients naw entedng the water hadies ead the inablity
to develop analytical methods for cach and avery pollutant, use of biological indicaters

+ assuunes Importance, Biological Monitoring goes beyond the conventional measures of + -

water quafity to address questions of ecosystem function and Integrity and gives a
complete picture af the extent of poliulian of rivers, lakes and groundwater in India,

9.44. Audit findings polnted out that at ‘the Centre, identification of chomicat indicators ~
of water pollution Ike faecal coliform, total coliform, dissolved oxygen ad biochemical
oxygen demand in rivers and lakes was done by MoEF under the Natlonal Alver
Conservation Programme and by CPCB under the Monitoring of Indian Nalional Aquatic
Resources (MINARs) programme. CPCB had also Identified chemicai indicators of
pollution of ground water in the Country like arsenic, nitrate, tron, fluoride and salinity,

“Identification of indicators of pollution by industries which emit céntarninants had bean

done by 07८8 by means of indicators fiko anions, other inorganic iona and micro
pallutants. However, atidlt pointed out that these were tested only once a year. This
asstimes significance in terms of the high levels of Indusirial poftutants which were beng
discharged into rivers, lakes and ground water in India. ‘Audit also observed that CPC8
had Identified biofogtcal Indicators -(uenthic macroinvertsbrates) for some rivors in India
such as Yaniuna, Nannada, Krishna, Cauvery, Tungabhadra, Gomi, Kosi, Mahanadi
and Brahmani. However, such identification wai not done for each river in India due to
insufficient infrastructure facilities. Further, biological indicators had not besn idantified |
for any lake in India by MOEF/CPCB. MoEF slated In its teply of dune 2011 that it had
Carsied out slucies relating to biological Indicators and alse Identified some Iknitations of
such indicators. It was stated that though bialogical indicators rafiect the effect of
poltullon on the water bodies, trey can only supplement bul not replace the chemical
indicators ः



|
|

-79-

9.15, Ona pointed query as to why was it that keystone species have bean identified
only in the case of River Ganga, the MoEF stated that identification of keystone Species
was focation specific and need based, The Miaisizy hact notified the Garyotic River
Dolphin as the National Aquatic Animal and an Action Plan for conservation of Gangetic
Dolphin hac boon prepated for implementation. Blo-indicators tr various’ stretches af
river Ganga, starting with ‘Mahasaer the cold water fist in the upper reaches of Ganga,

Turtles in the stretch from Narora In U.P. to Kanpur, Dolphins from Alfaitabad to 2

Rajmahat In Sinar and generat fisheries including Hifsa in the lower stretch of Ganga has
been Wdentifiad. The 0१08 had observed thal the 'keystonas (ecology) species cart only
be identified and recorded when adsquale flows were maintaltied in the river which was
not the reality In present conditions. The natural flow in rivers and streams had reduced
drastically due (0 diversion of water for irrigation {rom all the reservotrs in the country.
Thus, there was lille fresh-water flow of flow generated due to discharge of sewage and
industrial effuanta, In such situations, the keystone spocies cannat be identified,

9.16. On keing asked fo stale the reasons for biclogical indicators not being identified

by tho Centre for most rivers aid none of the fakes as pointed out in Ihe Audit Report,
ihe MoEF stated that CPCB identilled biological indicators during the development and
testing of bio. mohilorlng methad on 39 rivers and fributaries af River Yamuna Basin,

| . Rivers of Assam, Meghalay components, Nagaland, Manipur, Sikkim, Mizoram,

. Ullarakhand, Karnataka and Kerala (on-going). CPCB had alse: identified biolagical
indicators for few major tivers in india stich as Rives Yamuna, River Nameda, River
Cauvery, River Tungbhadea, River Gomti, River Kosi, River Mahanadt and River
Brahmani. It was Ruther submitfed that due to insufficient infrastructure facikties in

CPCB and SPCB, the biological indicators could not be developed for each river in India .

and there was’ need to augment the natural flow in fivers and streams which had
reduced drastically due le diversion of water for various purposes {ncluding irrigation, as
4 fesuit of which Ihe aqualic ecosystem was gefting impacted for undertaking reatlstc
assessment of bio-Indicators. हि .

9.17. On the issue of ideniification of keystone species associated with each (ver and |

Jake in India,.the Road Map stated that, identification of keystone species is locallon
speciic.and nood based. The Ministry of Environment and Forests has notified the
Gangetic River ‘Dolphin as the National Aquatic Anime. An Actlon Plan for conservation
of Gangetic Daiphin has been prepared for implementation. MoEF tas Idenfified bio-
indicators In various stretches of fiver Ganga, stating with ‘Mahaseer the-cold water
‘fish In the ‘upper reaches of Ganga, Turtles In the strefch from Narora in U.P. to Kanpur,



-80-
Dolphins from Allahatad to Ralmahal in Bihar and general sherles including Hllsa 18
the lowor stretch of Ganga.

9.18. On the issue of developing Biological Indicatars, the Road Map statad that CPCB
has carried cut various studies on Diologicat Indicators and published the various
Newsletters on Bio-napping of Rivers. A Case stisely of Assam state August 2006; Hio- *
monitoring of Wolland in wildlife Habitats of india Part-1 - Bird Sanctuarias July 2003;
Slo-monitoting of Wetland in India Part-ll — Bird Sdnetearies January 2006; Bio.
Monitoring af rivers — A case study of Meghalaya state- August 2004; Sie-monitoring of
water quatily in problem areas -- Aprit 2001.

9.19, Based on the above experiance CPCB has found that thara aro some inherent
imitations to bialagtcat monitoring of water bodies in tie county, viz.,

‘ Biological monitoring cannot be cartied out during July te, November
months due to floods

. It needs highly specialized taxonomists for identification of spacies In the
है thers

* Biological Monitoring cannot be dona in highly polluted stretches, since
those places are devold of iffe or invested with monoculture due lo
eutrophication.

- __ Rivers do nat have adequate continuous How lo harbar an ecosystent’
. Thé rivers are not propery cannalised

9.20, ॥ further stated that biological indicators reflect the effect of pollution on the water
bodies. Biological indicators for non-polluted stretch should be Ihe same for poliuled
stretch. However, biologicat ‘indicator ean only supplement bul cannot replace the
chernicat indicalors which are the real Indicators’ : -

B21. On he issue of identification of biological indicators associated with each iver
and fake ‘in the country, the Committee was informed that due’ to insufficient °

infraskucture facilities In CPCB and SPCBs, the biological Indicators could not be

developed for each river in india, There was 1891-10 augmént the natural flow त rivers
and streams whick has raduced drastically dua to diversion of water for varlous
purposes inciuding Irrigation. As @ result the aquatic ecosystem was cling impacted for
undertaking realistle assessment of Dlodndicators, In thls context; the Committee



-fi-

sought to know what constraints were being faced In augmenting infrastructural facitities
of the CPCB and SPCB. The MoEF septied thereon that thore was nead to upgrade

existing litftastructure of laboratarles ateng with provisions of adequate manpower and -

budget for uridertaking tha stieies, At the State teyel, the Pollution Contral Goamds/
Committees have 1010 adtononty, to oreate posts, recruit scientists and énginwers etc.
Moreover, they have to seek approval of State Government in advance which was often
not fortheuniiig.,

9.22. On the Jssue of argmenting the natural flow in rivers and stream so as fo enable
& fedtistic assessment of bie-indicalors, the MoEF subntitted that thera was urgent need
fo augment the natural flow in sivers and streams which had reduced drastically dué to
diversion of water far Irrigatlon from all the rasarvoirs in the Country. As a result the
aquafic 1ठाव and fauna were unable to move in rivers and streanis. Thus, there was
need for fish tadders in alf the réserveirs, barrages and dams for 189 movernent of
aquafic life. ह

9.23. On the need to inctease efforts tawards effective water conservation sa that
diversion of water for varlous purposes which was impinging on the natural flow in rivers
and stream were minimized, the MoEF submitted Urat there was need for taking vadous
steps in water conservation it agrleullural practices and recycling of used water along

__ with harvesting of raln water. twas fusther submitted that diversion of entire Tow of the

tiversistreams should be slopped and policy framework on adequate natural flow of
water for aquatic life needs lo be enforced. _ :

9.24, The Gammittes have futher been informed that it was imperative to first reach

- sama normal standard fevel of physico-chemical characteristics end allow the particular

aystem to regenerate into Its pristine from, before fixing bio-indicators as It may ‘be a

dangerous and’ misguiding option to go only by: these Indicators in the prasent stata of

heavy polfution in the water. In this context, the Committee sought to know about the
‘aforesaid normat: standard level of physico- chemical characteristics, The MoEF
thereupon: stated that the normal standard fevel af physic chemical characteristics of

water indicates that ft is tasteless, odourloss and colorless liquid which only contains

normal constituents of terrain है 198 passed through and that thera was total absence of

foreign matter which was not normal part of water.

9.25. The Commiltes further sought to know whether any forseeable fimeline for
regeneration of polluted water bodies inta its pristine forn can de forecasted: going by



* $n

the present rate of implementation of water pollution control activities.” The Mo&F
thereupon replied that the Planning Commission has set target le clean all polluted river
alratches by the yaar, 2017,

9:26. Glen the fact that biological indicalurs go bayond the conventional measures of
waler quality te address questions of ecosystern function anc give ६ complete pictce of
the axent of polkilion of rivers, fakes aad ground water in India, the Audit has
recommended that MoEF/GPCS and most Slates need to intensify their efforts in
identiiicalian of biological Indicators. The Committee sought the comments of Mo&F on
this aspect and whether they were taking any sarious step towards stich KlenGficalion as
a suppleraent to the chamical indicators of water pallufion, The MoEF submitted that ths
identification of biological Indicators in aquatic resources are required for malntaining
ecolegy. However, 408 lo Insufficient infrastauctural faciites In Centra? Pattution Control
Board & State Poilution Control Board and absence of adequate flows in the riverine
system, indicator species for each aqualic system could nat be demarcated. The

bislogleat Indicators especially segion specific fishes have (0 be demarcated 06960 जा -

the studies carried out by various organizations involved In fistieries research including
Central Fisfieties Research {nstitule, Directorate of cold water Iisherias, Estuarine
fisheries research, etc. There was need to Sponsor comprehensive sludies to review the
research activities already caritad out by various organizaitons rather than duplicating

, the _elforis. The biolagical indicators have the capability to detect low level
concentrations of combination of patlitants assessed as toxicity which was not

measurable through chemlcat tesling.

9.27. On the issue of eco-flaws of water, the Committee hava been informed that it
should be insisted that such eco-flaws are maintalned. In this vurttaxt, the Committee
further. sought to know how eco-flows were ntalntalned. The MoEF siated ihat nature
has formed rivers and their uninterrupted flows ara roaintained by the catchment area
which naturally stores water in 500 aid grean covers of earth and releases water in the
river slowly and gradually. The ecological flows varies from season (0 season in time
and space. The eco Hows could be maintained by utilizing the diver water In a
sustainable manner. ‘The dams constructed across Ihe rlver 99 [कक States for
brigation or power generation need to felease atleast minimum water required for

maintaining the ecological flow In tha rivers. However, due to scarcity of water and
excessive use for varlous compeling uses, the requirement of fresh waler falls short of

actual available to nraintain eco flaws in the rivers.



LO -§3-

9.28, On a painted query as fo whether there were existing coitditions in water bodies

‘adequate for such maintenance of ecn-faws of wafer, the MoEF stated that the water

holding struckwres --Barrages/dams need to release water during lean season as the
flows duting सात season are ecological flows and the water bodles have capacity to
बाण ftows, -

9.29. Qn tie staps nccded’ te be augmented fo maintata, adequate ace-flows of water,
the MoEF stated thal political as well as administrative decisions were vequlred to
allocate water for ecology as a stekoholder so that the water bodies have aquatic fife
thal needs adequate flow for theie sustenaace.

: 9.30. On a pointed query as to whethér there were any existing regulation in this

regard, the Mo&F stated that as such, there wee 10 segulation at present. Ministry of
Water Resources constituted a Conumittee to work cut methodology without giving
weightage to aquatic [ie as 9 parameter and suggested only a percenlage sharo of °
dependable flew based on overseas research for these Counties which is impractical In
India,

9.31. On the issue of identificalion of bic-indivators, the Secrotary MoEF submitted

during evidence as under,

We have physico-chemical standards of मी water bodies, natural at also
Manmade. But we do not have bic-indicatoss, say, for tha Gangetic. Dolphin or the
Godavarl crocodile.”

9.32. About the evolved species of fish in locai water bodies and the risk to health, he
witness testified: :

"80 Ihe prablem is that wher hese water bodies are not even meeting fhe

physico-chemical characteristics in terms of industrial, domostic, agricutural
pesticide pollution, there are evolved species which ate available which. will
Misguide us completely In terms of remedial action. Now, ona is what is known. as
metal eating carp, There is a catp, which means Rafw fish. This fish is normally
aaten by overybody, but if you eat ihis one you are going fo be infected. ॥ is an
evaived species of carp which can be used for beafment of water. ft ean eat haavy
melais Ike mercury and other things and so If you eat it, then you will also have
the same metal insida your-body. This Is the kind of bio-tKBeators today in our
fakas and rivers which fs very dangerous and we cannot go by this. So, this Is

_ inperalive for us fo first reach some fevel of physico-chemical characteristics
which are of some qormal standards and then allow the particular system to
-fegenerate into Its pristiric एिए and then only go for fixing blo indicators. This is
another submisslar: wanted to make on the C&AG report."



है

UL, IDENTIFIGATION AND QUANTIFICATION OF CONTAMINANTS!
HUMAN ACTIVITIES THAT IMPACT WATER QUALITY. हु

9.33. Awlde range of human and natural peocesses. affact the biological, chemleal, and

_physleat characteristics of wales and thus impact watcr quality. Contaminants and
asgessment of tisky of pulkiled water ta environment and health can. harm auuatle

acosystems ard make water unsuitable for homan tse. Audit findings pointed out at the

Centre, identltication aad quantification of contaminants like aulvients, erosion and

sedimentation, wafer fomporatire, acidificatton, salinity, pathogenic organisms (bacteria,
protozoa and viruses), human produced chemicals and other toxins, intracuced species
atid other biological disruptions ete., ad not been done in respect of any river ० lake In
India by MoEF, CPCB or by MoWR. Identification and quantification of podution levels in
ground water in terras of arsenic, nitrate, iron, Horde and salinity-in ground water for
each of the Stafes in 018 has been dane by CGWB. However, no identification arid

chemicals and other toxins in ground water, tn June 2011, MoEF stated thal CPCB had
undertaken comprehensive skxlieafinventories of pollution sources and: their effect in
fiver basins ike Ganga, Brahmaputra, Brahmini, Sabarmatl, etc., and published a
documant on assessment of industial pollution which ‘provided tha pollution load from”

+ major industies. MoEF alse stated that controt of agricultural pollution was dificult and

Mintstry” of Agriculture needs to devise suitable policy in this segart CPCB had

” conducted studies on pollution sources and their effects between 1980 to 1995. The
Studies did not caver ail rivers ancl थी sources of pollutants. ”

- quantification has been done regarding presence of nutdents, human produced 7

0.34, Numerous human activities including -agricutture, industry, mining, disposal of’

huma: waste, popylalien growth; ushantsation, climate change, etc. impact waler
quality. Agriculturo can cause nutrlent and pesticide contamination and increased
salnity and nutrient enrichment has became ane of the most widespread water quality
problems of Ihe planet. Audit findings at the Centre MoEFICPCB/MoWR have not
carted out assessment an¢é quantilicatian of the effect of activilles which affect the
quality of water in rivers and lakes frorn an activily-based perspective, such as mining or
agriculture, or Industral sector, The water quatity monitoring was presently carded aut
by CPCB's 1700 monitoring stations including 490 locations for ground water on the
basig of 28 parameters consisting of physico-chemtcat and bacteriotogical parameters,
Further, GGWB had carried cut only a few speciat studies regarding the effect of human
activifies on ground water fike agriculkure and uncontroled disposai of human waste or
the quality of ground तंग, Audit further 00691 out that no studies have been cared



}
|
|
|
|

ज5-

out by MaEFICPCA to probe the effecis of industrial sctivitias.fike paper mifs,
pharmaceutical industry, chemicat plants, distilleries, larmeries, olf refineries, sugar
factories and mining.’ While in the States with respect to assessment and quantification
of the effect of activities which affect the quality of water in rivers and fakes, audit
scrutiny revealéd frat with tegad 10 quality of water in divers, effect of agriculture had
hoen assessed only by six States; effects of Industial activilles had been assessed only
by 12 States; effects of mining had been analysed by only lwo States: effects on the.

water system infrastructure trid been assessed only by throo States; in respect of the -

affects of uncontrotted disposat of human waste had been assessed by only four Slates;
in respect of tho quality of water in 6089; the effect of agricullure had been assessed by
four States; effects of industrial activities had been assassad by six States; effects of
unconttallad disposal of human waste had been assessed only by bwo States; qualily of
ground waler, Effects of agricutture had been assessed only by seven States in respect
of effects of industrial activities had heen assessed only by nine States, effects of
uncontrolled disposal ef human waste on qualily of water in tha ground water had bean
assessed only by four Slatgs, effect of mining on the quaiily of ground water had not
been assessed by any State,

8.35. Polluted waler in rivers, lakes and ground walter poses risks to environment 8$

well as health of people exposed fo the polluted water. With respect fo assessment of

. risks, audit sctutiny revealed that at the Cenlre, MoEF. had. not identified wetlands

associated with each riverflaka and no identifications of risks lo these wetlatuls due to
potluton’ of rive? waterflake water had baer cared out by MoEF/CPCB, Further,
MoFEFICPCB had not identified the major aquatic apecies, birds, plants and animals
facing risks due to poilutlon of rivers and lakes. As such, MoEF/OPC8 was unaware of
the risks being faced by the environment as 2 result of pollution of rivers and lakes.

9,36, पा observed that risks to human health from water bome diseases and water
based diseases as a result of pollution of rivers and fakes had not been assesaed by
MoEFICPCB and in 2009, Ministey of Health and Famity Welfare reported that 1.14 erore
cases of acule dlarcheat diseases occurred in India. While in ‘ihe States, risks te
wetlands from poitutlon of rivers and lakes have been assessed by only two States,
none of the States in India have Identifled the malor aquatic species, bids, plants and
aninals facing risks duc to poltutton of rivers; risks to human health from water-bame

_ diseases and water-based diseases as.a 16501 of polfulion of rivars had been assessed

by only saver States; risks to human health from arsenic, zinc, iron, mercury, copper,

chromium,” cadmium, ledd, persistent organic pollutatits {ike dioxins, furans: and”

SPN ales we



So

palychlodhated bipftenyls as a result of pollution of graund water had been assessed? hy
only two States.

- 9.37. Audit therefore concluded thai both Union and State governments hove failed to
condiict comprehensive assesstnent of risks tg environment and health, Such studies की -

tisk assessment woukt have enabled them (6 Put in place preventive measures to
lessen the deleterious dinpacts of watnr pollution on hurnan health as well as the fragile

freshwater ecosystem,

9.38, Tha Road Map brought out by MoEF delails the comprehensive assessment to

identify and quantify ite contaminants (chemicals, nutrients, pesticides ete. ) present fa

each fiver and lake In’ India, i has been stated that CPCB has undertaken.
comprehensive studiasfinventorias of pollution sources and thelr effect in various river
basins and published various documents, The stuilies include inventory of polental
polkifion sources and retevant sub-basin-wise characteristics, They have been
undertaken with the objective of formulating action plan te restore and maltlain the river
water quafity at such level’as is needed to sustain the designated-bestise of different
stretches of rivers. On the basis of such basin-laventory study, waler quality raonitoring
network 13 faid down, Regarding Industral pollution, CPCB has published sees of
industry specifle comprehensive documants for Large Pulp and Paper industry; Sugar

५ Industry, Oil refineries, Tanneries, et, Sasides, CPCB also published a document on
1 ‘Assessment of Indugtial Pollution’ which provides the pollution toad Irom major

indastries. . . हा

9.39. It was further stated that Water Quality (Monitoring Program of the Ministry was
limited In scape and coverage, given tha rasources made available. ॥ was proposed in
future to revamp tha river water quality monitoring particularly in river Ganga. This will,
howaver, be subject ७ the availability of adequate fesources. Mostly Insecticides and
pesticides are used in agricultural activity. The enforcoment of pollution controt 1805 for

such aciyities leading to diffused pollution is difficutt. This can be better tackled through 7
.Judlcious ५४७ of pesticides and insecticides In agriculture. The National Environment

Policy @lso recommends taking explick account of grayndwater pattution in pricing
policies of agricutlural inputs, especially pesticides, dissemination of agronomy practices

encourage Integrated Pest Management (IPM) and use af biodegradable pasticides.

Govetnment of India, Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agriculture & Cooperation
(080) was implementing various programmes for promotion. of judicious anf balance
use of chemicat fertilizers, Insecticides/pesticidas for increasing agricultural productian



Era

and preverition of wafer poffution In the Courtry such 35: () National Project on
Qiganle Facming (NPOF} jinplemented from October 2004 {o facilitate, encdurage.
promote development of organie agriculture and promote production and usa of bio.
pesticides, bis-cortliol agents .cie. as affernative inputs in orgaric faring;

- i} Natlonat Project on Management of Soll Health & Fer Bity (NPMSH&E} to promote

soit test based balanced and judicious. use af chamical fertilizers in eonjunctian vith
organic manures dike Fann Yard Manure (FYM}, vermi compost and green manure to
maintal) soi health and: fertility: and fii) Modernization af Pest Managenient Approach

ainda by adopting. Inlegrated Pest Management (2५) as a cardinal principle and main

Plank of plant protection strategy in overall crop praduction programme which are being

implemented through 34 Central Intograted Post Management Centres in 28 Slates and

one UT, ,

9.40. The Road Map also states that the entire impact of human activities like
industries, agricufture, mining, urbanisation ete, has been assassad by CPCB under
Basin Sub Basin inventory for sewage generation, callectlon, treatment ard disposal
and separate documents are produced from Eme to time. ‘This has helped MoEF to
workout targats lo reguiata pollution causing activity, Ganga Action Plan is ona such
example which was devised based upon the Basin Study for River Ganga. Other
example is the action Initiated against the grossly patluling industites. As regards risks to

_ heaith and environment dua [0 pollution of rivers, lakes and ground water In India, if was

stated thal riak essosoment was taken jnto account whilo dovalopirig the water quality
objective, critetia and standards. Central 20161 Control Board develuped cartatrr
critella on the basis of vaifous research works In and outside the Country and
accordingly, tha following designated best use cancepts were developed.

- Drinking water source without conventional Ineatment but after disinfection
Oukdoor bathing {organised}.
Ouinklng water source after conventional treatment and disinfection
Propagation of witd fife and fisharies
irrigation, Industrial cating, controlled waste disposal “

eee ee

“9.41, While the first threo addresses tisk to the humaa.beings, and the: fourth was

congerned with risk to fisherles, birds, wild Efe ete. Exceeding these criteria wilh high

frequency and high magnitude was the risk associated with aquatic eco system, since -

Risk was defined Fraquency x Magnitude. The encroachment to flood plains also affects
the aquatic eco system which harbors the flora and fauna, uitiniately leading to entire
food chain, - Diseases caused as-a result of cantamination of water are well known and



-BR-.

such fncidents aro als) wel docunented. Necessary precautions are taken by
Municlpatities’ PHED and other suelt departments lo prevent ocarrencs of such
lncidents. Timely remedial actions are also initiated by the concerned departuents to
05070 such incidents.

9.42. AS regards groundwater it was stated that it comes under the mandale of COWB

uider Ministyy of Waler Resources for which Cential Ground Water Atthority was |

forniad in January 1997 to fagularizo indiscriminate boring: ond: withdrawal of ground
waler in the County and 10 issue ndcessary regulatory directions witli a view fo

preserve and pratect tha ground water. Ministry of Water Resources was carrying aut -

different specialised studies, In this regard, faliowing reporls were prepared during the
last yaar concerning water pollution and mitigation; () Report on Ground Water Pollution
‘Hot Spots' prepared.by Central Ground Water Board under the directives of WOAA,

baged on the data collected once a year (Aprilfviay) through a network of 15640 ~

observation wells located all over tha country. The chemical parameters like TOS,
Chiorida, Fluoride, tron, Arsenic and .Nitvate ete, the ral constituents defining Ihe
qualify of grourkl water in unconfined aquifers are monflored. Presence of these

- parameters In ground water beyond lhe permissible iimit in the absence of altemate

source has been considered as ground water quality hotspots; (1) Appreach Paper on
Ground Water Quallty issues in Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep Islands; and (iii)
Mifigation and Remedy of Grountwaler Arsenic Menace in India- 2 Vision Document
The vision document contains information about the knowledgebase, understanditg and
technolagical opportunities avaliable, slate-of affairs of arsenic contamination in India
and-different corrective measures taken and expertence shortcamings. It also brings oul
4 critical appraisal of gaps, identifies aceas requiring future initiatives, 2 comprehensive
plan of actlon envisaging Road Map, financial requirement and the method as to how
the misston can be coordinated and accomplished,

W. DEVELOPMENT OF WATER QUALITY GOALS, CORRESPONDING
PARAMETERS FOR EACH RIVER/LAKE AND THEIR ENFORCEMENT

6.43. Water quality goals are the minimum acceptable standard of quailly of surface
water and ground water which are enforceable by water paliution coittrof agencies via
action ०० to be taken against agencies that violgte such standards, Rasin approact
promotes the coordinated devclopment and management of water, iand and -related
resources of the whole river basin to maximize the resultant economte and saciaf
welfare it an equilable manner véthout compramising the sustainablfity af vital



-89-
ecosystems. Audil scrutiny obsarved. that MoEF had failed in cavelopment of water
qualify yoals arid corresponding parameters for Gach fiver and fake and had nat

" established enforceable water quality standards that profect human and coosysiom
* Roalth, It Rad only ‘developed water quality critera for five actMtles and gene at

standards under Cavironrnent Protection Act, 1986 far wastewater discharge 10 a-water
body, land aud sea. The Environment (Protection} Act (EPA) introduced in 1986 sought
to fake steps for the protection of environment and preventiod of hazards 10 human
beings, sthor living creatures, plats and properly. Section 15 the Act taid dows that

“wiiuever fails to comply wilh or contravenas any of the pravisions of this Act, or the -

tules made of orders or directions issued (here unter. shall in respec! of each such
failure or contravention, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to five years or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupeas, or both, and in case the
faflure or contiavention continues, with addilional fine which may extend fo fiva thousand
hupees for every day during which such falture or contravention continues afer the
conviction for lha first such failure or contravention.” हि ;

9.44. Audit findings further pointed out that MoEF/GPC8 have set oo water quality
goals for the Country and not set any standards for agricultural practicas and runoff
pollutant levels for rivers and fakes. YWith respect to ground iwater, it was observed thet
standards for agricultural practices and runoff pollutant levals for ground water had not

- been set by either MoEF or COWB. CGYWB stated that it was outside ifs purview. No

monitoriag of pollution caused by agricultural practices and runoff pollutant levels were
baing done by MoEF/CPCA/CGWE. While MoEF stated that Information was available
with Ministey of Agriculture and -Departments like Indian Counc of Agriculturat’
Research, CGWB stated it was autside its purview. Enforceable water quality standards
that protect human and ecosystem health have not been set by MoEF. CGWB stated
thal it was outside its purview,

-9.45. Thé Comumittes sought to know whether MoEF/GPGS intend to conduct any’ *

comprehensive study ७ identify wetlands associated with each riverlake and identify
risks to thase wetlands dua to pollution of river waterake water, The MoEF subaitled
In their written reply that CPCB had established monitoring neiwark an fivers, lakes,
fank, ponds, creeks/sea water, canals, deaina and groundwater te assass the lavel of

- pollution in thase water badles, The wellands Identified under Ramsar convention were

so far nol considered for- establishing wafer quality network. The strengthening of
monitoring network was underway and during 420 Plan, wettands nolifed under Ramsar
sorivention would 98 considered for establishing water quafity monitoring network,

thee



-9-

PUB was also moniloring water quality of 407 takes # India and the water quality bs
compared to desired water quality criteria, Water quality of lakas axceeding criletia were
identified as polluted. CPCB was monitoring coliform group of bacteria which ware
covering the bacterial population responsible for water boiue diseases, The findings at
imuntoring ward disseminated to afl the Govt. Departments. The pollution of
ilverfiakefgraundwater with respect to specific paranteters affecting hunian health was

observed by GPCB in ambient environment and monftoring locations exceeding the -

daslred limits were idantified. The respective agency developing water fesources for
potable uses Were requirdd (० take appropriate measuves befor tapping the source for
Its specific use.

9.46. On being asked as to whether MoEF/ CPC8 inlend to conduct any

comprehensive study fo idantify the major aquatic species, birds, plants-and animals
facing risks dea to pollution of rivers and lakes, the MoEF replied that CPCB had
established monitoring network on Hvars, fakes, tank, ponds, creeks/sea water, canals,
drains and groundwater to assess Ine lovel of pollution in these water bodies. Hawever,
at present there Is no proposal under conskteralion of the Government for conducting
comprehensive study 10 identify lhe major aquatic species, birds, plants and animals
taclng fisks du e to polluftoa of rivers and lakes. है हु

9:47, On the Audit observation pertaining to non-development of the standards for
agricutlurat practices, MoEF categorically submitted that GPOB had hot devalaped the
standards for agricuttaral practices. Mirlsiry of Agriculture (MOA) and concerned Dispit.
ace Introclucing best management practices so that water quality was not affected due to
runoff, CPCB is concerned with recipient water bodies: and in that context
communicated to MOA for awareness of farming commimitiss to use optimunt water,
fertilizers and pesticides. Central Pollution: Control Board had developed water quality
criterla under Water (Prevention and Control of Poliutton} Act, 1974 and MOEF had
notified Gonerat Standards under Environment Protection Act, 1986 .for indusiriat
efftuent discharge to a water body, land and sea The water quality monitaring of aquatic
resources was caified out in accordance to the protocol notified by Ministry of

Envirdnment and Forests, which was representing various dctlvities responsible for |

water quality degradalion and various parameters were accountable for ०18 or mare
activity indicated. हैं

9.48. The Committee sought to know. whether tha MoEF has taken up the matter with
Ministry of Agriculure to encourage Integrated Pest Management (IPI) and use of bio?



St : -

fertifizers/ biadegradatle pesticides, the Ministry submitted that mostly Insecticides and
pesticides were used in agricultural activily, The ‘eaforemnent of poflulion corral laws for
such actvilies leading to diffused pollution was difficult, This can be beter tackled
through judicious use of pesticides and Insectickies in agrculture. The National
Environment Policy also recamnmended taking expticit acrount of groundwater ‘pollution
in pricing policies of agricultural inputs, ospacially pasticidas, and dissemination of
agrononyy practices, encourage Integrated Post Management (IPM) and, use .of
biodegradable pesticldes, may canlinue ॥8 ongoing programme of Integrafed Pest
Managemant (IPM} and Farmers Fiald School (FFS} under 1PM being fmplemented by

"lhe Ministry of Agriculture in a bigger way to address tha issua.

9.49, The Committee sought to knaw whether the MoLF had taken up the matter with

Ministry of Agricultura to devise appropriate programmes and frame suitable polleles in
this regard, Ihe MoEF submitted that to increase the crop productivity and minimize the
Use of hazardous chetical pesticides and insocticides, Government of {ndia, Ministry of
Agriculture, Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, had launched 8 scheme entitled
हि and Modernization of Pest Management Approach in india" since 1991-
92 by adopting Integrated Pest Management (IPM) as cardinal principie and main ptank
of plant protection strategy in overall crap praduction programme. Under the ambit of
programnie, the Govt, of india had established 31 Central Integrated Pest Management
Centers in 28 States and one UT, The mandate of these Genters was pes¥disease
monitoring, production and release of bio- control agents/bio-pesticides, conservation of
blo-controt agents and Human Resource Development in IPM by imparting training to
Agriculkwe # horticulture Extension Officers and farmers at Grass Root Level by
organizing Farmars Field Schools {FESS} In farmers’ llelds.

9.50. On a pointed query of 83 why olher kinds of poltution, like industrial poifution were |

not consklered as source of pollution of rivers, the MoEF stated that the Canteat
Pollution Conirot Board (0९९७) and the State Pollution Controt Boards (82683) were
canstituted under the Water (Prevention and Control Pollution) Act, 1974 to prevent and

* controf pollution of surface water due to all kinds of pattution which includes |ndustilal

pollution, The CPCB and SPCBs plan and execute progranimes for prevention and
contro} of surface water dué (0 industdal pollution by regulating effluents dlscharged In to
the surface water. The industrial sauroas of pofution were monitored regularly with a
view to check compliance with respect fo the effluonis discharge standards, The
industries which do not comply with the prescribed effluent discharge standards are

See ETE RTT न पक कक न

mer



92.

prosecuted under the Water (Prevention and Cantrof Poltutian} Act 1974 or the

Envircament (Protection) Act 1986.

9.51. The CPCP has identified 1395 grassly poltuting industries for [0 action which
were discharging 800 toad of 100 kaday of more. These industiles are monitored by
the CPGB for contret of polluter. ‘The scheme of Iistatlation of Conunass Effuents
Treatment Plant was flinded by Iho Ministry to contro! jiofiution fromy clusters of small
seale industries. in this regard, financiaf assistance te tho tune of 50 % of project एक
barne by the Ministry.

VV. WAYER REGULATORS

9.82, On the issue of tremendous extraction of water for agriculturs and krigation, the
Seaetary deposed during lis oral evidence as under :

"We have ulso suggested certain measures in regard to trentendous extractan,”

which is happening on the major Civers mainly for agricutture and irdgation, which
is not metered and which fs not measured ard nor Is it contealled by lhe State
Governments, Sq, what happens ls this. No matter what the level of pailution is.
The concentrations of pollution increase in the water, Every pit of surface water
gets pofluted bacause of lack of diiutlon rather than excessive poffullon.

Another very major aspect, which has to be insisted upon, is that the eco-flows are
maintained.” : :

7 9.53, Gna pointed quory of (he Committee on aspact of regulalion of wafer supply ang

Its distribution for use in yarlous sectors, the Secretary réspondad during evidence as
under :

"Sir. under the Water Act, where Ine consents are given by the State Pollution
Control Board to Industry, They mantion haw much of ground water can be
extracted by this industry per day, per month, per year. That is for 8 category
indusiry. The States do that. For A catagory industry, we do fhat. When we issus
our consents that is tha condition on छाए the permit is being given, in that wa
mention very clearly as lo how much waler they cam use from the ground and how
much water thay can use from the surface.”

9.54. On the aspect of regulation of ground water extraction, he supplemented as
under:

“Sir, about the ground water, the Slafe Water Ground Water Board is supposed to
do It.“



93.

9.55. On the drawal of heavy amount of water by multi nationals and industries
manufacturing colt drinks, eto, the Secretary candidly agredd during his orat evidence
that: हैं

1. “Of course, there is ote issue. After the 13" Finance Commission had suggested
that water regulators are established hy 8801 Stata, we are not very sure how
many wil be set up. Beskles, thete is one thing, When our inspectors go from
the State Pollution Control 8990 or fram the CPCB, the: y check the wafer meler
fom where the water is extracted, be It yeound or be it surface. So, the inciistry

« alsa has a data logger. From the industry, it is not so, difficult fer us lo know how

much water they are using. We cat penalise thern if they are using excess to
their mit पु हु

38.56. On the Issue of diversion of water meant for agriculture for industrial use, the
Secretary submitted during oral evidence, :

“Yes, Sir, That Is tue. They also temper with the meter and alt that. We know,
Sir. Tha major point, we hava not coverad, is the fact Ihat minus indusky, thore is
fo reguiation. ॥ 13 because from the Ministry of Environment, we cannot segulate

the farmers for iarga scale extraction far irrigation. That 9 a very important ~

Problem, which wilt have to be solved by the Keigation Oepattrnant

9.57. On the issue of water regulators to monitor the extraction of waler fom water
bodies resulting in consequent concentration of. potiution, the Committee have been
Informed that the 13" Finance Commission had suggested that water regulators be

“> established in every Stale, In this cantext, the Committes sought the presant status of

salling up of water ragulators. The MoEF thereupon.stated that as such there was, na
singis water regulator for the whole country, Out depending upon requirement, State
Qepartinent of Irrigation do regulate quantity of water supplied to farmers for Itrigailon,
drinking etc. Also, total selease of water for variety of uses from multi-purpose Dams
wes regulated by Public Health Engineering Department, variaus Boards canstituted for
power generation and Irrigation etc.

- 9,58. In the fate of large scale extracilon of water faking place for agricukurat uses, the

MoEF was asked whether tho neod to monitor auch extraction was felt especially in view
of Ils impact on pollution of water, Ihe MoEF merely. stated thal the Ministry-of Water

Resources may regulate quantity of water required by farmers and prapare guidelines
for its effictent uso. हु

29.39. On being asked as to what the Ministry has done/proposed to do regarding this

aspect, MoEF stated that Water being a State subject, It need fo be discussed with all



“Me

staké holders before a decision was taken. Suitable corstituflonal amendments may
also be made to béing Wafer under Concurrent list of Ie constitution te irnprove water

-sactor in a holistc mannar, as at present if was a State subject except for inter State

rivers.

9.60. It had beer ceported that China is planning to divert 200 hilian cuble meters
(BOM) of water from the Brahmaputra river to faed its Yellow river. The Committes
sought the comments in thie regard aid also to indicate whether there were adequale
regutalory méchanisms fo datecl and prayent such धुल seale diversions of water,
which will have serious implications on tho nation. MolF stated that at present there
was 19 central regulator tor large scale water dlyersion for varlety of uses. The existing

_ _meckanisrn functioning at Stale level has enore or leas detlvered as per Ihe aspiraitans

of the peaple, The increasing population and-rapid industrlalisation will put fresh demand

on axisting resources. As the availability of fresh water decreases with time, the

shortage of fresh water will further go down due to water pollution. However, to prevent.
inter State probloms and regional imbatarice, a central requiator is required. Inter linking

of rivers will add nety dimension fo this issue.

Vi, POLLUTION FROM AGRICULTURAL SOURGES

9.61. As pollution from agricultural sources is ona of the biggest non-point source of

हु pollution, the Audit had recommended that MaEF in conjunction with Ministry of Agriculture

needs te develop standards of palfutanls like nitrogen, phosphorus etc,,. which arise from
agricuilural practices, use of pesticides and ferthizers, besides establishing enfarceable
waler quality standards for rivers, lakes and ground water that wauid help protect human
and ecosystem heaith. In response to this, the Ministry in their Road Map had stated that as
pottution छ 0 be controlled at the generator stage, MoEF has notified standards for
discharge of pollution in the water colsesfand/sewers ofc. besides guidelines have been
made lor use of foriilizers/pesticides etc., to fnintmize their impact on the environment. (n
Its context, the Committea sought to know how were these -notifled standards and
guidelines goiiy to be enforced. 118 MoEF thereupon submitted that, the Standards for
discharge of treated industrial effluanf and sewage were. aotified under Environment
Protection}, Act and the provision of Water (Prevention aid Control Pollution) Act, 1974

were being used by the State Pollution Contra! Roards for enforcement. | owever, in casa of

agriculture related sources of pollution, being non paint sources, role of MoA in educating
the farmers was neaded. Under Oepartrnent af Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC)'s Cantral
Sactor Scheme “Mass Media Suppoet to Agricultural



-95-

Extension", Ooordarshan and All india Radio were belng utitizad to make the farmers

“ aWate about modem farm technoldgies and researches related to agriculine and allied

ateas, For telacasting success slodes, innovations and for popularization change-
setting technolegy anct farming practices through the Saturday stot of Gaordarshan’s

National Channel, OAG was producing fiims, which conscinusly project inter-atia positive.

aspects in aypicuttu’e In Mia. A“Tocused Advertisement Campaign was launched
through print as well as efectranic media lo creale awareness about tie aysislance

, available under yasious schemes of the Department of Agricuthré &. Cooperation. The.

advertisements Were released through national as well as ragional newspapers, The
audio-video spots were being broadeastlelscast through AIR, Daordarshan and Private
Channels operalion at National & Reglonal Level. Under thls campaign, one of the
Audia-Video spots produced was on “Judicious Use of Fertilizers” and the same was
being telecasted through Doordarshan and Pivate channels fo” create awareness
among the farmers abaut Ihe benefit of using ferliizers judiclously, for cultlvaiton-as wall
as abatement of poltution of tivers, lakes ete,

9.62. The Ministry further submitted that in addition, Ministry of Agricullure was
imparting awareness to the fatming communities for judicious use of agriculture
chemicats in their crops through various human resource development pragranimnes (2
days, 6 days, 30 days Season Long Training Program (SLTP) and Farmer Field Schoats

+: (89) - 14 weeks - once a day in ons village} under Integrated Pest Management

(GPM). The Scheme was being implemented County-wide through 31 Central
inlageatad Past Management Centres (CiPMs) located in 28 States and 1 Union
Terntory. Since 1994, up ti] Match 2012, the Diractorate of Plant Protection, Quarantine
and Storage (PPO&S), under Department of Agricuiture & Cooperation (DAC}, had
organized 13991 Nos. Of Farmers Field Schools (FFSs) wherein 57962
Agriculture/Horticultare Extension Officers and 4,20,720 farmers had been trained_on

latest Integrated Pest Management (IPM) technology in various crops. So far, 1871 |

master trainers have been trained in 51 SLTPs in different crops like Rice, Catton,
Vegetables, Groundnut, Mustard, Soyabean, GraméTur, Chillles aad Sugarcane. Also

Integrated Pest Management (IPM) package of practinss for pestsidiseases
‘management in 77 imajor crops had been developed in collaboralion with Stale

Departments of Agricuiture/Horteulture/trdian Caurtesl of Agricultural Research (ICAR}

Institutions/State Agriculture Universities (SAUs) which had been elrcvlated fo all
States/UTS acd had been posted on Directorate of Plant Profectinn, Quarantine &



-96-

Storage's {DPPQ&S)'s Website eav.dacnetnic.inppin for use by the extension

functionaries and the farmers.

9.53. ‘On a pointed query of the Committee as to who will ensure that strict actherence
fo these stundardsiguidetines were mace, tho MoEF stated that the standards in the
form of quidelinas may ba enforced through existing Mectranism which incluctes block
level officer (BDO), Patwario ete, whe may advise the farmers ragarding envirorenant
friendly practices with respect (0 water, fertilizers and pasticides applicalion and also
social sorvice activist, NGOs elc may help in implementation and spread of guidefines.

_ However, the impact of guidelines on water qualily “may be monitored by Gentral

Pollulion Controt Board and State Pollution Control Board.

9.64, Qn the aspect of penalties/ines, if any, In case of deviations and whether they

will have the desired deterrent effect, the Ministry actritted that fram notliled standards
at thls stage when standards in the form of guidelines are ta be enforced for farm
practices, penalties and fines may not be proposed. However, aiter considering the lang
term compliance, it may be included at a later stage.

9.85. On the steps being taker proposed by MoA to control water pollution caused by
runoff from agrlcullure like fertlizer runoff and chemical pesticide cunotf, the MoEF
submitied ihal besides the steps initiated by Ministry of Agriculture for mass awareness

"and farmers schools, efforts were made for enhancing production of bio-conlral agents

and bio-pasticides. At preseil, there were 351 bio-control laboratories functioning In
Indja for production of biocontrol agents and bio-pesticides set up by different agencies
viz. Central Government, State Governments, ICAR, SAUs, Depariment of: Bio-
Technofoay (NAT), NGO's kand Private entepreneurs. Grant in aid of 2 1772 lakh and
₹ 44,15 lakhs was provided te States apd Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs),
respectively for setting up of bid-control laboratorics in different States and UTs
Besides, ₹ 393.73 fakhs has been grantod for radent pest management in North Eastern
States. .

9.68. On categorically been asked’to stale as ts whather there were any guidelines to
ensure that these agricultural wastes were suitably treated before being allowed to he

discharged into the rivers and lakes, the WMoEF replied that no stich guidalines exist to :
censure (haf agricuftural wasies were sultably treated before being allowed t be

discharged into Ihe rivers and lakes. However, the functionaries of central and stafe



“932

governments impart vatnlng to fatmers in judicious use of pestickies, witch ied (o
increased tse af bio- pesticides and reduced use of chemlcat pesticides.

9.67. On being asked as ta whether MoA, had commissioned any study on the haunfal
offects of use of fertilizers & posticidea and to provide the resulls of the study arid
recommendations to the Committee, the MOEF stated that a wit petition (cht), No.213 of
io . 201t was filed in Hon'ble Supreme 0001 requesting (96 atia for ban of Endosulfan.
1 "वा Supreme Court passed an ad interim ordar an 13,5.2011 banning production sale
and use of Endosvifan in the Country til further orders, The Court appolnled 4 Jaint
Committee headed by the Director General of Indian Council of Medical Research
(CMR) and the Commissioner {Agricuture} to conduct a sciantifie sludy ‘on the question
whether the usa of Endosulofan would cause eny serious health hazard to human
beings and would cause environmental pollution, Accordingly, ICMR conducting study
on the effects of pesticides Inctuding Endosulfan on human health and reference te
‘different exposuras (inhalafion, intaka via food and drinking water ele.) Objectivas of the
study wae - (a) to evaluate the health status of the population at high risk te pésticides
expesure (including Endosulfany; and (b) to estimate pesticide fevels in biotogicat fluids,
. such as blaed and/ar urins,

9.68. On the regulations for tha use of synthetic pesticides and fertilizers, the MoEF
i _, Submitted that the Insecticides 80, 1968 and the InsecUvides Rules, 1971 were ७४४७9
: implemented to regulate the use of synthetic pesticides.
9.69. On the steps being taken by MoA to develap alternative sources of fartifizers,
inseclicidés and pesticides, which have less harmful effects on quality of water bocausa
of agricultural runoff, the MoEF submited that under the promotton of IPM component of
“the scheme of “Strengthening and Modernization of Pest Management approach In
india’, various alternatives liko the usa of bia-pasticides including microbial, botanical
pesticides and bio-controf agents is being promoted 15 reduce the harmful effects of
chemical pesticltes and to avoid water pollution. Further, the scheme “National Profect
on Management of Soil Health & Fertility” (NPMSH&F) had been taken up from 2008-09
10 promote balanced and judicious use of fertilizers in conjunction with organic manure
छा ' soll test basis. One of the important components was Integfated Nutrlent
- Management (NM) in which use’ of Organic Manures/ Soll Amendments was being --
promoted in a big way. Government was providing support to States to encourage
Hl organic farming through vavtous schemes lke National Project on Organic Farming
i हि “> {NPOF}, Rashtlya Krishi Vikas Yojana (५९), National Horticutture’ Mission (NHM)

WN Ne BIAS



-98-

atd Harticullgre Mission for Nort-east and Himalayan States (HMNET|S}. Financiat
assistance was provided undor these schemes for astablishment of organic input
production units, adoption of organic farming, certification elc. One of the important
objectives. of "National Project on Organic Farming’ .was to encourage production and
“use of organic and blolagical sources of nutrients like bie fertilizers, organle sranure,
compost for susiained soil healliy and fertility and improving sol organic carbon and ta
promote production and use of bio-pesticites, bio-controf agents els, as allernallye
inputs fn a¢ganic farming.

9.70. On being asked as to whether any २७0 projects have been sponsored by the
Mod in connaction with redusing Ihe adverse effect of agrfeuttual runoff an water quality

_ a3 well-as public health of cilizens, the MoEF submitfed that a project entitled

“Monitoring of Pesticide residue at National Level" had been spansored in collaboration
with ICAR for the stucly of pesticide residue'in food products, soit and irrigated water, ©
9.71. As tegards, release of funds on projects for promoting the use organic fertifizers/
blo-fertilizers! biodegradable pesicldes in agriculture to reduce adverse affects of
synthetic ferlliizers and pesticides on quality of water and public healil the MoEE
submitted that the following allocations made to such schemes cfuting. the last three
years and the current year:

Tabi¢ 9.71 ; Allocations made for Organic and Bio Fortilisers/Blodagradapie Pesticides idee

Tin Crore

= ofthe Scheme SS : 2009-10 | 2046-14

2011-42
(RE) [13
RE)

(RE} (RE)

Strengthening and Modemization of Pest} 7@44 26.44
Management approach in India

“27.99 135.00

Fertility

National Project on Management of Soit Heulltt & {42.74 ial सर {Riso 30.00
National Project on Organio Farming अझ. [189 [i791 [21.6607 |

9,72, On the |$$४8 of implementation of any scheme or programme to encourage
fntograted Pest Management {IPM} Goverment of India, btnisty of Agriculture,

Department of Agricullure and Cooperation (OAC) launched a scheme “Skehathehing |

and Modernization of Pest Management Appreach in India” since 4991-92 by adopting
Intagsated Pest Management (IPM) as cardinal piincipie and mata. plan of plant
protection strategy in overall crop producfian programme. Under the ambit of this IPM



-99- ot

pragranune atid the Goveermont had established 34 Central IPM Centres ॥ 28 States

आह दाह UT.

9.73. On a pointed query as lo whelher Ministry of Agriculture plan ‘fo sot up any
standards for agriculfurat practices. .arkt runotl pollutant levels for Waler bodies, the
MOEF stated that Ite Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS} cansidered Integrated Pest
Management (IPM) as a good agelcutiite practica, *

"9.74, On a pointed query as fo whether the Ministry of Chenilcats and Fertiliser

commissioned any skidy on the harmful effects of use of chermicals and fertiitzers the

“Ministry rapiled in the negalive and stated that the Department of Chemicals &

Potochamicals has not commissioned any study on the harmful effacts of use of
chamicals, हि

9.75. On the query as lo whather the Ministry of Chemicals and Ferttisar have
regulations on ihe ban of synthetic pesticides and ferlilizers etc. to prevent or regufate
their usage, it was stated that the Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals do not
administer any act imposing ban on raguiating their use of synthatic pesticides. The use
of pestickies was reguialed as per tho provisions of the Insecticides Act, 1968 which
was adininistered through Department of Agricullural and Cooperation.

1 9.76. On staps being taken by Ministry of Chemicais and Fertliser to develop

alternative sources of feriilizors and chemicals, which have less harmful effects on
quality of water because of agricultaral runoff, tha Ministry caplied in the negative.

977. Further, nn the aspect of whether any R&D projects had bean sponsored by the

Ministry of Chomicals and Fertilisers in connection vith reducing the adverse effect of

“agricutural funoff on water “quality as welt as’ public health of cliizens. The

Ministryreptied in the negative and steted that tho Department of Chemicals &
Petrochemicals had not sponsored any R&O project in connection with reducing the

“adverse effects of agricultural पर्ची on water quality as well as public health of citizens.

9.78. On belng asked as to whether MoCF has.tinidertaken any projects for promoting -

the. use of arganis fertilizers’ bio-fertiiizers/ blodegractabie pesticides in agriculture Io
teduce adverse effects of synthetic fartilizers & pesticides on quality of water and public
health, the detalls of funding of such projects by MeCF under such schemef programme
during 2007-12 Ihe Ministsy submitied. that the Government of India through Departmen



-100- .

ot Chemicals & Petrochemicals implemented Project Neem emphasizing
the Development and production of Neem product as environment friendly pesticides
during 2004-2011. The phase af the project was taken up during 2004-05 with
financial assistance of UNOP/UNIDO with the abjective to promote production,
procassity and use of Neeni bused products, theroby alding waste kind development,
generating rural employment (especially for women) and providing farmers ath &co-
{riendlyfbiodegradable pésticktes. The phase-Il of the project was taken up during 2006-
44 with Government of India suppart with Varlous ‘stakeholders including Agricultura?
Universllies, various crop osganizations, Neem Foundation etc. To provide the scientific
basis for wider acceptance of the simple low east tochnology of Neem based pesticides
for use in difforent crops अग्रणी are’ uncer tho threat of parsislent residues of highly
hazardous toxic chemicals, The project was aimed at enhancing shelf Ife and
toxicological screening criteria to establish 4 scientific basis of quality control of Neem
based pesticides on commercial basis. During phase-If of the project, an amoguitt of
z 5.87 crore was actually released to differant participating organizations. The project
has since been closed.

“VIL BASIN LEVEL APPROACH FOR CONTROL. OF POLLUTION

9.79, Tha basin approach is recognized as a comprehensive basis for managing water
vasources more sustainably and will lead to soctal, econamlc and environmental

"benefits. With respect to planning fur control of polldtion al the basin level, audit

observed lhat MotF established a long-term vision for only Ganga river basin as against
the 24 major river basins existing in India. For the river Ganga, the National Ganga
River Basin Authorly (NGRBA) was constiluled fn February 2009. However, only
government jevel stakeholders namely, Ministers of Urban Development, Water
Resources, Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission and Minister of State for

Environment were involved In consutlatians while selfing up NGRBA. MoEF had taken

vary limitocl actton an integration of policies, decislons and casis across sectoral
interesls relating to pollution such as industry, agriculture, uiban development,
aavigation, fisherles managemont and conservation, including through poverty eduction
strategies." Further, il did not engage in strategic decision-making at the river basin
scale which guided actions at stdi-basin or local fevels. No involvement of private
sectorcivil society in investment decisions in the planning process was found, With
respect to lakes, no-planning was found fo have been done according (० the basin
approach. in June 2011, MoEF stated that tha need for a river basin approact for



«hal

conservation had been already recagnigad by the Cental ‘Government and National
Ganga River Basin Authority (NGRBA} had been उस up as an empowered planalng,
financing, meénitoring and “cocrdinating authority for the Ganga River with aew

institutional structures, [६ further statad that the objective was ta have the iver basin as

the unil of planning, to shift fram town-centric to river-basin: approacti ant lo fave 2
comprehensive response covering water quality and flow, sustainable access,

. enviranment management, pravertian and controt of potlation in the form of a national

mission. While, audit acknowledges Ihe fact that the basin approach had boon adopled
for conservation of river Ganga, it stated that the MloEF must new start planning sintlar
basin approaches for all fhe rlver basins in India, starting with the ones whieh are the -

* mast polluted lika River Yamuna,

9.80. A holislic approach in preparing pollution abatement projects is now being
adopled for River Ganga. A comprehensive basin management plan 18 being prepared
by a consortium of seven {ITs, (nslead of standalone STPs, 1&D etc, an integrated
approach including sewer network is being adopied. Slums and individual houses
‘having na space for household installation of tollets shatt also be covered through
comfnunity toilets, The new approach will ensure full coverage of the city and thereby
transportation of entira sewage to STPs for optimal treatment and utilisation. Based on”
‘the experience of implementalion, this river basin appraach wilt also be adopted for the

. other nvers in the Country. However, (his will also depend on provision of .the
_commensurate level of budgetary resources. The MoEF has cirdulated revised

guidelines for the preparation of DPR in December, 2010. Tha intercaption and divelsion
scheme for sewage colleciton and treatment has been modified to cover laying of
sewers in whole clly arid dovelalling of schemes sanctioned under JNNUNRM of MoU
etc. The MaEF will conlinua to monitor water quality through CPC8, Creation of

‘ sewerage network, satting up of STPs etc. ate collective and cooperative efforts
“involving various Central and State agancles which are key stakeholders in the process.

9.81. Notwithstanding the recent iniffalive of Ihe NGRBA, it was tather distressing that
the adage of ‘holiest river has rather becama a myth today for River Ganga, a6 it is
reported to be one amongst the five most polluted rivers of the world, with formidable
pollution pressures ang [treats fo its bio-diversity, and environmental sustainability. The
River alongwith ifs fributafies is the lifetine for 40% of the poputation of tha Countly and
with efforts to cleanse the river mecting with limited success even after the Ganga
Agtton Plan, heightened concerns of rlsing pollution level remains one of the buming
issuss of the nation today. The PAC (2003-2004) had examined the Ganga Action Plan



-102-

(GAP) and. thelr recommendationsiohservations contained in thei 62" Report

presented to the Houses on 05,02.2004 aro of relevance even today Indicating that not
mich has changed ia the ground 1९५० || terms of poilution contect, The Committae had

thea recommended cteation of factiiies Eke Sewage Traatment Plants, Industrial

Effluent Treatment Pants (E%Ps),,to tackle palfufian from municipal sewage walch
accounted for about 75%-of tha tiver poltution as Well as lollet complexes, eleckic
crematoria, improvement of batting qhals, tiver kont developments, ate,. :

9.82. Onthe aspect of cost recovely Of operation casts of sewage traalment plants for
the Ganga River, the Secratary deposed during oral evidence as under :

"In the Ganga case,-you mentioned about earlier Ganga project 100 having

worked simply because we paid for only treatment. We did not pay for collection.
Today's Ganga project will. work bacausa we have faken a 1058८ end basin

» approach where sach house-to-house coanectlon we, are paying for an a 70:36
02565. They are paying 30 per cent and wa are paying 70 per cent plus we ars
giving operation and maintenance 100 per cent coverage for five years. Of
course, 1008 we are doing that there is no incentive for the State Governments lo
slowly start charging. It Is because unless they start charging aad put a litte
subsidy no private person is coming forward to mainlain these resources. But
ane thing is that it hag come to the knowledge of the State Goveroments thatit is
a very important thing and now we have fo talk very seriously.”

रु On five practical difficuifies of cost recovery for sewerage from the common man,
the Secretary candidly admilted that:

“under (his modet what we have suggested In (18 NGRBA 18 that we go fof ‘fiver
front development and we give them other revenue 10015."

9.84. On problems being faced pertalning to coortlaation particularly in the Ganga
Project, the Secretary testified during oral evidence as under

“| would say that this authority is very useful to discuss certain problems of
“coordination. In Ganga, for example, we have lost more than nine months in
Cotlection of data from the Ministry of Water Resources, There are seven IITs, who
are woking on (he basin plan. To get data fram the Ministry has not boar

possilfe,. So, this is one of tha raagons that | convened this meéting. This is to -

discuss this and to stari having a closer relationship with the Ministry of Water
" Resources to get this data. Then, we aro supposed to get data in respect of soft,
which is 119 rerbed soil, of the Ganges from (he authority. This authorily fs
_ Supposed te collect this data, They are not giving this data to anatner Ministry
because of the security reason. How secutty is connected to the soit of the
Ganga, 9 am not vary sure, They are 00 giving it to us.... Ihe discussion was
definitely. for al the stations they have for both soil sampling and water
sampling... the point about lhis authority, therefore, is Hrat by liself itis not useful.
But, है is exiremely useful. as a statutory 000५ [0 discuss and coordinate ‘in



+103-

important projects. Withoul this coordination we could not have done the project
the way we are doing. Of course, | request [he Mission Director to give mora
details of it, We nave to create an aulhorily. That is the palnt he was also making
to have a regulatory authority or an authority which can control every Ministry aad
every State Government's Ircigation, Water and Ground Water Deparments,"

9,85, On the proposal to coltact maongy for cosl recovary for sewage treatmont, the

Secrotary deposed ué under during his testimony :

“There Js a praposal, therefore, Ihat now cofféction, to the extent that the rich
people in the city pay to that extent, 10 coliect and tho rest of the money would
have to be arranged for the private developer from outside, from other sotifces. It
is one model and itis working in anly faw cities, [Lis net accepted everywhere and
we are lrying ७ upgrade il as part of NGRBA discussion,"

9.88. The Road Map talks about thrust on ‘Innovative River Froat Devotopment
Projects. The Commiltee have also’ been informed that under the NGRBA, other
revenue toals for river front development are being considered. On being asked to sfate
whether any capacily addilion has taken place on these fronts and to specify the main
thrusts in this regard and indicato as to how Ihoy will be more successful in abating
pollution of the river compared to the ches tat were already in existence the MoEF
stated Uhat the main thrust was to achleve Zero Liquid Discharge (7110) condition for
Sugar & Oistilleties, Pulp & Paper and other industries discharging into River Ganga and_
to achieve tha target, major activities under taken by Central Pollution Cozfcul Board

- Interalia included taking up adequacy assessment of Potiutlon’ Control Measures taken

by Oistileries to finalize the ground level status of ZLD condition in Disliltery sector. This
wif be achieved by using spent wash for compost making used as fertilizer, biogas
generation and as source of power generalion co-processitig of distillery spent wash In
cement kiln or through incineration in slope botler to do away requirement of treatment
for spent wash and resultant ash for using as soil conditioner and preparation of a
charler ‘for palluficn prevention and contol in respact ta Pulp and paper Industies- viz.
inkeduction of Biological Treatment Plant ih waste paper based industry; ienproved pulp
washing system; reuse and fecycie of beated effiuent; Installation of Chemical
Recovery Unit in agro hased industry.

"9.87. it has been reported that the National Environmentat Engineering Research
Instilule (NEER!} endorsed claims of fhe Ganga Rives's ‘unique self purification qualities’
and have recommended that exclusive environmental guidelines should be considered
to prasarve thé nature's miracia, It has been claimed that Ganga's sediments have

uranium and thorium, which produce radiation in high degrees and that, Ihrough



-1G4-

microbes called bacteriophage, kills the harmil bacteria and 9898 down coliform

- fevels,, in this context ihe Committee sought © know whiether the Ministry was seriously

giving a consideration fo such claims which if found true can have immense potential in
supplementing. efforts in cleansing the river. Thé MGEF thereupon teptied erat under the
National Ganga River Basln prograiune, Ministry of Enviroxwnent and Forest has
entrusted Central Pollution Control Board (March, 201%) to itapferment fhe project

“Pollution inyentorization, Assessment & Surveillauce (PIAS) on Ganga River Basia’ for.

performance of activitles such as inventorization of Grossly Poltuting Industries. (GP!)

discharging inte the main ster of River Ganga and its (butaries namely R. Ramgangak
” R. Kali East. A total of 764 industdes had so far bean identified which wera discharging ©

into tha’ rivers; identification of a thtaf number of 113 drains fox the purpose of delatted
moniterifig during this financial year, it was estimated that 3,200 MLD of waste water
was discharged inte tho rivers by Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, sihar and West Bengal,
monitoring of a total number of 46 Sewage Treatment Plants (STP) out of which 37 were
in W.8.,.5 in Bihar and 4 In U.P. Out of these 46 STPs monitored, 33 were found in

operation and rest 13 ware non-functional; and perfomance evaluation of 3 Common’

Eftivent Treatment Planls (CETP) out of which 2 are in U.P. and 1 in W.B.; and taking of
appropriate action on lhe basis of inspection of CPCB of 126 Industries on river Ganga

and its tributaries Kali-Cast and Ramganga duing August, 2011 to July, 2012.

_ 9.88. The Ministry further supplemented that action plan fo use cleaner technologies oF

reduction in waste in Pulp and Paper; Distklery; Sugar; Chemical; CETP and STP
thereafter various processes in existence In the Ministry. Further, on critically polluted
stretchés, reasons and sources of pollution and action taken or proposed; the Ministry
identified Polluted stretches in Rivers Ganga; Ramganga; Kali East end stated that
reasons of Pollution and mixing of partlally treated and untreated wasle water by
industdes and discharge of untreated domestic waste waler, agriculture runoff carrying
fertilizers and pesticides lnflucx fron polluted graund water, unscientific disposat.of said
waste on the banks of the river, non avaltablily of ecological flow in the rivers and
unorganized mass bathing. ° : a हैं

३.89, Tha Action Plan of the Ministry also inchided steps to check unauthorized mining

of sand, limestone, efc. AS regards instifudonat strengthening ‘and capacity building, the
MoEF submitted thal a detailed praject report entitled “Strengthening of Environmental
Regulators “for the total estimated cost‘of २ 71.66 craves for the 95 87085 falling in the
Ganga river catchment area and CPC8 was under consideration with the Ministry and
the: project covers the Goods; Training and Coxsuilancy for. institutional strengthening.



aE गए

+ EBS.

Besides, creation of NGRBA call in CPC8 with effoctive from Oesember, 2010 in order
te prepare detafled project reports ard execution of tre sanctioned projects; Initiative for

coramiity monitorlag under a detailed project report enititted “Real Time Moxitoring-

System for River Ganga “for the total astimafed cost of 2 85.40 croras which was under

cuiisideraiion! with the Ministry. Wheteas out of the estimated project cast, a sum of हैं

3.36 crores‘had been earmarked for community monitoring proposed to he undertaken
with public participation involving nan-gavernment organization, local institutions and
socta! activisls; and initiative to control Palkiffion from Agricultural Sources in accordance

with envisaged Road Map for Mahagetment of water goltution in India trough 6७1 at -

the generator stage, by way of notification of standards for discharge of poliutian in the
waler courses fiand/sewers etc, besides guidalines for usa of fertilizers / pesticides eto.
to minimize their impact on Ihe environment have been taken up.

9.90. The Caramittes have now been informed that the Natlonal Ganga River Basin
authority (NGRBA} has bean constituted in February, 2009 as an ainpowered authority

for conservation of the river Ganga by adapting a holistic approach with river basin as
the unll of planning. The authority has decided that under ‘Miasion Clean Ganga’, It yl
bs ensured that by yéar 2020, no untreated municipal sewage and Indusirla! effluents
flow into Ganga. ln this context, tha Commitles saught to know. whether the
recommendations/observations made by the PAG in their GAP Report (827, 43" LS)

- have been given due consideration by the NORBA, the MoEF Submilled int thelr reply

that Ine naad for revamping the river conservalion program was widely recognized in
view of tho shortcomings i the spproach followed in Ganga Action Plan (GAP), was
felt necessary that 8 new hallstic approach based on river basin as the unit of planning
and institutional redesign may be adapted. The Govemment of India created the

National Ganga River Basin Authority (NGR8A) with the objectives of fa) ensuring

effeclive abatement of pollution and conservation of the river Ganga by adapting a river

“basin appfoach to promote inter-sectorat co-ordination for comprehenstve-plaaning and
management; and (0) maintaining minimum ecological flows fn the cver Ganga with the”

aim of ensuring water qualty and enviraninentally sustainable development.

9.91. Ona pointed query a3 to whether there was any demonstrable achievements of

_ the NGRBA in Rs first three years of existence; the MoEI submitted In thetr written ceply:

that building on fessoné from the past, the vision of the Matianal Ganga River Gasin
Authozty (NGRBA} Prog’an: marks a significant departure from the previous efforts, with
adoption of a comprehensive, basin-evel, and multi-sectoral approack, with support for
investments it wastewater, indysttial poflution, solid waste and river front midnageréni,



“106

and offors to address non-point source polhition and ecological flows in contrast to a

“ town-centeic and “end-of-the-pipe” wastewater treatmient focus of the previous efforts

The consortium of seven premiere technical institutions {lidian fnstitufe - of
Yechnatogies} was engaged in preparing“ dynamic, basinevel management plans.

- While the pfocess of dovoloping a basin-levet approach (0 planning of the Gangs clean- :
‘ip had, been Inifiated,.the early Invesbnents of the NGRBA Pragram (whicti include the

investments supported by Ihe World Bank assisted NGRB project) had beeirfimited to
Interventions which were in obvious priority locallons गाए wich can make a positive
demonstation impact in tems of sustainable opetatlons and water quality
improvements. Since. the inception of the NGRBA, 53 schemes in 43 towns of the 5
basi Slates for an estimaled cost of ¥ 2698.47 crores had bean sanctiondd wider Ihe

NGRRA Programme, out of which % 496.72 ccores had been released, as of Junc, 2012, .

for implementation of Ine projects, Besides, institutional development was recognized as

a cilticat need, given the multi-sectoral and multi-tier agenda of river management. The -

NGRBA Program aims to dévetop strong and dedicated operational-level institutlons for
planning, managing art implementing Ihe program with single-polnt accountabilily.
Additionally, given the otilical role of thé ULBs, and serous capacity gaps at fe focal
jevel at present, important reforms to empowering these was being introduced. To

_achleve these goats, the Nalionaf Mission for. Clean Ganga (NMCG) at National level
and tho State Programme Management Groups (8299) at the State level in,
* Uttarakhand, Utlar Pradesh, Bihar ant West Bengal had been set up as the teglstered

Sovleties, while a dedicated Cell in the UD Department of Jharkhand hed been created
to implement Iho programme. Upgradation of the knowledge-base for the Ganga
system fo ensure that planning and investments were based on adequate and sound
information was being planacd which will form tho basis of a comprehensive, and

_ fevatnped .communications programme te engage varlous stakeholders. A project
_ proposal for setting up “Ganga Knowledge Centre (GKC) had been prepared by the

NIMCG in-house and under procass for submission before the Empowered Steering
Committee of the NGRA for approval. Moreover, Public particfpatian through strategic

- and broad-based communications and community perticipation components had been

emphasized. The aim was lo build, support, manage expectations and sustain public

* pressuras to complement regulatory enforcement ahd. invesiatent oulcomes. City level
Monitering Comniittees (CMCs) headed. by the District Magistrate. and Celtector .

concerned were being formed for every project towts to achieve such goats,



5१075

9.92. Ona pointed query as lo whether it give 8 promising hope that the Missiot Clean

Ganga as envisaged to be achieved by 2020 would he accomplished the MaEF stated

that they wore Irying thair best to’ achieve the NGRBA's objectives. Howayar, full
cooperation atl efforts of Stats Governments were required to achieve the objective of

Ae Unlreated incustial effluent of dui nestic waste water going ito River Ganga by the
year, 2020)

9.93. On catogorically been asked to hightight concrete convincing plans of action
ttirough which the Authority secks ta acconiplish their Missicr, the MoCF submitted In
their writen reply that an 8 (eight) years perspective, considering scope of intrasteucture
invesiments for abatement of poltution of rivar Ganga had been drawn up estimated to
cost about र₹ 26,000 croras. The Cabinet Committee or Economie Affairs (CCEA) had
already’ approved World Bank assisted NGRBA Project for € 7000 crores for
implementation over a petiod of 8 years. (n additton, funds from the Government's own
resources were also made available through budgetary allocation for aif the on. going
NGRBA projects. The total outlay for Annual Plan 2012-43 for ₹ 612.5 crores had been
approved

9.84. On baing asked to furnish the updated detaits of expenditure incurred under the

" NGRBA programmes for abatomant and control of water pollution ef (एस Ganga sinco
the inception of the NGRBA, the following data was fumished by the MoEF :

है Table 9.94 : Detalts of Expentilture incurred under NGRBA Progiammes

“Yoar — ~~ Bmaunt allocated 7

1 Budget Estimates | Revised Estimate’ |

500.00 600.060
500.00 ; 216.61 | 192.84 |
12-13 642.00 j 193.50 | 491.62
4. fap to 385,00 300.44 हु 294.03 =
December 2013). oat _ ho

As of Oecember, 2013, the total expanditure incurred under NGRBA Prograrames
since Its Inception stands at% 1178.06 crores,

(TARE ATTS el



|
!
t
|
|
1

*106-

9.95. On being asked to stale as fo how planning for contrat of pollution by Nafonal
Gangs River Basin Authority (NGRBA) was any different from the process followed fight

10% for other rivers; the Mott’ stated that under the Naflonal Ganga River Basta.

Authority (NGRBA) ihe basin had beon considered as a whole for planning the pollitién

contret activities whereas In tho_axisting system town was considered as a unit for

planning the pollution control activities. Under NGRBA, PPP model was being

~ onsklered for funding -of Sewerage schemos whereas under, National River

Conservation Pian (NRCP}, State Implomenting Agencles ware assigned the job of
execitting the sewerage projects, The new guidelines had been prepared for the
preparation of detailed project roport which entaited preparatlun of City Sanitation Pian,
preparation of feasibitity report for identification of suitable option of fectntolagy for
sewerage scheme and’ prlortization of schemes proposed for funding by the Slate
Government. In addition fo above, the water qualily manitoring under the NGRBA
programmie had been planned for ‘autamaitc raal lime Monitoring’ system fa the main-
slem of river Ganga wherein data generated in 15 mintites interval were proposed for
quality control maritorng on regular basis whereas rest of the rivers in the Countey, the
water quality system was being mosty manually monkored.

“9.98. On the frequency have meeGngs of Chief Ministers of Ganga Basin rivers taken
the MoEF submitted that the State Ganga River Conservation Authorily (90२68) / State
River Consarvation Authorlty (SRCA) headed by the Chief Ministars of the Ganga Basin
Slates of Ultar Pradesh & West Bengal met (४४०8 while Rihar SGRCA met once since
setting Up such authorities in 2009 and 2010. Thera was no meeting of SGRCA under
the Chaiimanship of the Chief Ministers held in tho basin Stale of Ultarakhand apd
Jharkhand so far,

9.97. On the issue of whether any plan of acton, culling across Minisiies, have been
drawo up, the MoEF slated that the inter-Minlsterlal Group constituted on 15/6/2012 by
the NGRBA has met thrice on 26" July, 14" August and 50 September, 2042 to
consider basic issues segarding environmental flows, Further, the Basin Management

“Plan ‘being prepared by the HT Consartium. wit highlight inter-miristeial Issues for

preparing a plan cutting across the Minisirfes, New projects were being now sanctioned
based on a coordinated 860०1 for each niunicipal town with the appraisal of the
Empowered Steering Commitice, which had representation from the Ministyy of Urban
Cevalopment, Minisiry of Water Resources; Planning Commissicn ets, ;



-1)9-

9.98. On being asked as to whether the Ministry proposes te establish leng-torm vision
for other river basins in the country, the MoEF in iheir written reply stated that the need
for a river basin approach for conservation was already recognized by the Centeat
Goverment. The Government therefore, conslituted a ‘National Ganga River Basin
Autharity' (NGRBA) as an eripowered planning, finaticing, monitoring and coardinaling
authority for the Ganga River wih new Institutlonal structures. The objective was ta have
the rivar basin as the unit of planning, a shift from town cantic to ‘iver basin appmach-

and to have 8 comipretensive response covering water qquality and flow, sustainable

access, environment mmanagemen, prevention and cOMoe oF pollution in ihe foun of &

: national mission. A holistic approach In preparing potlution abatement projécts was now

being adopled for fiver Ganga. A comprehensive basin management plan was being
prepared by a consortium of sever ॥75. instead of slardalone. STPs, |&0 etc, an
integrated approach including sewer network was being adopted.Stums and Individual
houses having no space for housahold installation of toilets shall also he covered

> through convnunity folleis. The new approach will engure full coverage’ of the cily and

thereby transportation of enlire sewage to STPs for optimal frealment aad utilization.

‘Based on the experience of implementation, this river basi approach will also be

adopted for the other rivers in the country. However, this wilf also depand on provision of
the commensurate levet of budgetary Tesources. The MoEF had circulated revised

ह guidafines for the preparation of DPR In December, 2010. The interception and diversion
" acheme for sowage calledtion and treatment had heen ‘modified to cover laying of

sewers In whole cily and dovetailing of schemes sanctioned under JNNUNRM of MotID
etc. The MoEF continue to monitor water quality through CPCB. However, creation of
sewerage naiwork, setting up of STPs efc. involved collective and cooperative efforts
invelving various cantrat and Slata agencies which are key staksholders in the process.
ft was further stated that the experience of Ganga was proposed to be ullilized for
conservation of al other rivers in the Country.



>116-

GHAPTER X

IMPLEMENTATION OF PROGRAMMES FOR CONTROI OF POLLUTION
OF RIVERS, LAKES AND GROUND WATER

1, NATIONAL RIVER CONSERVATION PLAN

10.1. Audil Repert pointed out that at ihe Centre, with respect to programmes for source
profuction, treatment and restoration of tivers, the National River Conservation Plan
{NRCP} was implemonted since December 4996 as an extansiai of the GAP Phase to
ather rivers af tho Country, under which works taken up include wiz. Interception and
Oiversian works : 10 capture the raw sewage Rowing into the rivers through open drains
and divert them for treatment;-Sewage Treatment plants : For treating the diverted
sewage; ‘Low Cost Sanitation works : lo prevent open defacatian on riverbanks; Electric
Cremataria : To conserve the use of wood-and help in ensuring proper cremation of ©
Bodies brought lo the burning ghats; River Front Developrnent Works : Improvement of
bathing ghals; Public awareness : Througf media and other oufreach programmes +

* Human Resources Developrient | Gapacily building, taining and research ft the area of

fiver conservation; Prevention of pollution fram paint sources : Sewerage and sewage _
treatment for the entire lake's catchment area; In-situ measures of lake cleaning :
Desilling; deweeding, bio remedialion-aeration, biomanipulation, nutrient seduction,

_- constructed wetland approach; Catchment area treatment Afforestation, stora water

drainage, silt traps etc; Lake front aco-development ; Slengthening of bund, lake
fencing, shorcline development etc; Public awareness : Ouleach programmes: with.
citizens of different age groups and Human Resources Development : Capacity building,
{raining and research in the area af lake conservation.

40.2 Audit further polnted out that the process of Inclusion of sivers into NRCP is
Initiated by te CPCB with identification of polluted river stretches, which are sent (0 the

_ States. The States thereupan oither prepare Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) for projects
~ such ag 1&D, STP, LCS for contro! of pollution of river stretches identified as palited by_

CPCB and sénd.them to NRL of altarnately States send OPRs for rivers not in CPCB
{ist but found pottuled by the Stale as per NRCD criteria. Finally, NRCD approves OPR ar
send it back 10 States for revision. -

40.3 Audit findings also polnted out that at the Cente assessment of pollution of rivers
from differnt sources was not comprefiansive and although CPCB has created in list of -
the sources of pollutlon, MaEF has nok created programmes to prevent eftivants entering -



A,

“ihe vers, NRCD projects deal only with slretches where paliution has already occurrad

Further, NRCP focussed on sewage and crematoria as the sources of Pollution of rivers
and other Kinds af pollution like industrial potkilian were nat considered which had an
squal, if not, adverse जल on health and environment... Audit further pointact ont that in
the States, dismal Implementation of NRCP programmes reveals itself with only 4 stales
conducting survey lo quantify pollullon caused by sewage te alt the tivers by all the
towns/cities on banks of rivers ficwing in State; only 2 States raaking some attenpis to
quantify pollution caused by indusbies and agticuilural run-off flowing into its rivers; only 8
States had sent lst of polluted rivers in the State, based on assessment of amount of
pollution to MoEF for industries under NRCP; and af the 20 States in which dvers have
been included in NROP, tho Slate Governments in only 3 States have: planned to address
the complete reductlan of poifution of the river,

10.4 Audit further pointed out (hat inciuston of rivers under NRCP was not based on
their pollution levels and whils polluted river were nat selected under NRCP, others which
Were less polluted were obsorved to have baen selected for pollulion control. Moreover,
the State wise selection of tivers In NRCP was asymmetrical, Audit findings further
observed instances where polluted rivers were not selected under NRCP and others,

” which were less polluted, selected for pollution conlrol, The State-wise sefectian of rivers

ee

in NRCP was asyinmettical. For example, 69 projects for Madhya Pradesh and 83 for
Tarntl Nadu were approved under NRCP. By comparison, only 69 were approved for
Maharashtra, Gujacat and Andhra Pradesh put together; despite tie fact thal Ihe latter
group had more number of poliuled rivers, डा
10.5 inadequacies in the performance of projects.undertaken undar NRCP reveals itself
in the absence of technicat evaluation of DPRs with OPRs being appraised In house by
MoE€F and not sent to a specialist task force/panel of scientists from reputed Insiitute for
evaluation which would have ensured expert feed hack. Moreaver, no timeline was fixed
for preparation and submission of DFRs by the states to MoEF and for approval of OPRs
by MoEF. Secondly, inadequacies in the performance of sewage Trealment Plants
(STPa], which were the primary focus of projects selected under NRCO with Inadequate
capacily ulllizaticn, neglected siudga handing facitifias with mast of them aut af order,
unquantlited staff for O&M of STPs which were contracted out resulting in a huge 889
between total generalion of sewage and treated sewage. CPCB had evaluated the
performance of 84.of the 176 STPs built under NRCP in 2007, Acentding to this
evaluation, the performance uf 44 STPs was poor or very poor, eight were rated good,
while the performance of the balance 30 was sullsfactory.



-112-

40.6 Audit findings further pointed out that at the level of the States, implementation of
the projects was very unsatisfactory, Projects were delayed beyond the scheduted
completion dates and inany of them were not completed despite a lapse of five years
after thoy were sanctioned, Audit further pointed at thal out of the complicted projects, 02
per cent of the projects under NRCP were completed afler the scheduled date: of
completion and 28 projects casting € 254.27 crore were constructed but nat uttized.
States implementing the projects faced problems in land acquisition, getting requisite
permissions, especialy forest clearances, technical problems, problams fra contractors

ela hryplementation was especially poor iY States like Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, .

Jharkhand, Haryana, Delhi, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha,
Punjab, Sikkim, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. The extent of delays in implemontation
of projects as potted out by audit revealed delays of more than 5 years and above In as
many as t7 projects under NRGD; delays of 3-5 yoars In 26 profects; datays of 2-3 years
in 6 projects; delays of 1-2 years in 14 projects; and delay of 1 mont? year ia 26
projects, .

INORDINATE DELAY IN WMPLEMENTATION OF NRCD PROJECTS

10.7 Audit lest chacked 140 projects across 19 Slates and 47 towns situated on banks
af 24 rivers for detailed scfutlny. Table 10, page 42 of Audit-Report reveals the extent of
delay in completion of projects gocs ७७७6 5 years and above In tha case of 17 such
. projects pertaining to water pollution, The axtent af delay” for more than 5 years in many
such projects indicates poor level of monitoring of Ihese projacts. The Committee sought
to know whether the Ministry consolidated an unbretia agqeney for betler coordination and
accountabitity in implementation of these projects, The MoEF, thereupon submilted hat
the Ministry trad not constituted an umbrelfa agency but taken several ateps to prevent
delay in execution of project such as signing of Tripaitite Memorandum of Agreement
(MoA) after sanction of the profect with the State Government and the Implementing
agency through which (he fund was routed, inter-alia, incorperating the expected

quicomos from the project, proposed cemponents and the time fine to reduce delay fn”

execution of project; ensurance of Land acquisition pefore releasing Ihe funds far the
scheme to prevent dalay; submission of the physical and financial progress reports of the
project was by the implementing aganay on a monthly basis In the prescribed forntat at

National River Conservation Directorate (NRCD), MefF. The Utlizalion Certificates in.

raspect of lhe funds utilized for expenditure on the project and the unspent amount at the
~ ond of the period was submittéd by the implementing agency था a quarterly basis; for



5419--

review of implementation of the NRCP projects; constituten of a Steering Committee
undor the chaimianship of Sacretary (Environment & Forests). The officers of the NRCD,
MOoEF visit Ihe piuject sites on regular basis for monitoring and raview of progress of

implementation of the projects Under the NRCP. Review meefitigs were alse held by the

sonior oflicers of MoEF with the State Government officials from tme te time.

10.8 NLCP as a programme has been ineffective in achieving the objective of
tonservation and restoration of lakes in India. Only Wwe of tho lost checked 22 projects
had been completed and ihe rest were eilher continulng beyond the sanctioned dale of
completion or had heen abandoned. Problems tike fesistance from locals over proposed
constniction of STPs sic, dispute over site, inability lo arrest sewage flow, ton-
availability of land &tc,, haye contributed to. non-completion of the projects. As a result,
water quality parameters of onty three lakes namely Sharanabasaveshwara, Nalnital fake
and Kotakers take has been restored to the designatad criteria, while thase parameters fh
respect of olber-lakes like Banjara, Oal, Bellandur, Vel? Akkulam, Shivputi, Pawai,
Rankala, Mansagar, Pichola, Pushkar, Kadatkana!, 19 Lakes, Bindusagar, Durgabadi ,
Dirisagar_ and Laxminarayanbari, Mansf Gang and Rabindra Sarovar could: not he
testored to the designated criteria. Bio-conservation zones have not bean notified around
the lake to prevent encroachment of fake shoreline. As such, audit concluded that
pragiamnies to contfol pollution of rivers and lakes in India have not bees implemented
adequately.

10.9 On being asked whether MoEF propose fo add industrial poltution etc. in the
projects sanctioned under NRCP, MoEF repited that since CPCB, a scientific organization
has already been created under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974

1 fo deal with tho indusirial poliution, no stich proposal was currently under consideration of

the Ministry for inclusion of projects for industrial poltution confrol under NRCP.

10.410 The Committee sought to know whelher the Ministry nad reviewed the existing -

system of selaction of projacts in the light of the observation made by Audit, the MoEF
\hereupon replied that the projects for abatement of palkution df 1४96 have been selected
by NRCO on the 0595 of quality of river waler of the river stretch. The project proposals

“_ submitted oy Ihe Slate ‘Governments, contain Inforoalion on details of waste water
‘generated in the town/city, tho extent of treatment capacity avadable and details of
‘Industrial pailutian. The projects are appraised by Independent appraisal institutians. fn

this regard, detaiad guidelines for the preparation of DP Rs -under NRCP hitherto followed
have bow been revised. Under the revised guidelines, preparation of Metailed Project



“tl

Report for pollution abatement works of sewerage schemes is a thao stop process,
namely, preparation af City Sanitation Pian (CSP), Feasibility Report (FR) followed by the
Nefaiied Project Repart (DPR). CSP shoukl he prepared on the basts af available daia
(Primary. f Secondary Mata) that has deen generated by fhe concerned’ agencies,
Feasibility Report wil identify the problem of paliviion, develop and evaluate the various
options and select the best that is cost elfective and sustainable and produces the
intended: outcome. The OPRs Of non-seweraga schomes can be prepared straight afler

the preparation. of CSP. For preparing the DPR, additional data may he generated by

undertaking suitable survey and investigation.

10.11 Fhe Committee also sought to know what action Ras baea taken? proposed by
MoEF to ansure that State-wlse selection of projecta under NRCP was more
reprosertalive, the MoEF-in their writlan reply submitted that the Ministry was
supplementing the warks of Stale Governments in implementing the programme for
abatement of pollution in various fiver stretches under the National River Conservation
Plan and the funding of such projects presently was in the ratio of 70:30 In the stretches
identified hy GPCB. The sefectcn of projects depand an the propasats to be recrived
from Slate Government, availability of funds, commitment from implementing agency
(State Goverment) to contribute 30% of Ihe cost etc. Further, MoEF hes revised
guidelines for the preparation of DPR which fakes care of collection of ait relevant data
required for the pollution abatement schemes and fo address ail Tastes that may impede
project Implementation. Tha project proposals subniltted by--State Governments were

“helg examined by the NRCO Scientists, However, presently the projects were’ being

appraised by independent appraisal Institullons. After getting the appraisal report, the
projects were being’ taken for approval before the competent authorily. After approval of
the project, Implementation af the projsct including lendering, execution of warks ete was-
done by the State Implementing Agency. Gast and time overrtins in projects were due to
2 variety of raasons which include lack of inter-agency coordination at field tevel delays
in acquisition of land for STPs & Pumping stations, contractual problems, Court cases.

+ ete’ While Issuing ‘sanctions: to the prajacts, a condition was made that cost averran, it

any, will be borne by the Stata Gavernments/ UL8s concerned.

40.12 The Ministry also furnistred out the salient Features of tha revised Guldetines वे"

under: : :

i, City Sanitation Plant (CSP) shall ba the basis for planning and formulating projects,
Therefore, preparation of city sanitation plans, wherever it doesn't axist, will be the



-Wi-

first step. Flowever, CSP shall be preparad on the basis of City Geyalopment Plan
| (COP), if se érawa arid finalized for the city, | . हैं
i . i, Holistic approach and provision of Integrated sewer netwark Up. lo house-property
. fing in place of drain interceyition anc diversion. This will ensure fii! coverage of
the fown and thecchy ftarisportation of entire sewago to treafment plants for
optinat utllization. a

- . os se i
Rovatailing with projects under JNNURM/VIDSSM1/ State Plan Is compelsory.
This wi! ensure.optimal utilization of rasnaress on priority basis.

i ‘ Wy, Design, Bulld & Qperate (DBO) meadet for officient operation and maintenance (O
& M) of River Conservation schames.

\, हि “v. Signing of ldpartite MoA among Government of India, State Goverment and ULS
ts mandatory. This will bind these three fiers of Gayernmant to ensure fulfilment of
respective commitments in ferms ‘af release of funds, timely completion of

~ projects, ensuring house connection to sewer ard operation & maintenance of

assets, etc,

OM Dedicated Celt in Stales for implamentation of projects. This wilt ensure fulitime
deployment of adequate number of skilled technica! personnel by the States which
is critical for proper supervision, quality control, adherence to completton schedule
and project cost coniral. 7

“vil. ‘Appraisal of ‘project proposala by “indepondent Institution/Experts. This will
है ebhance quality af OPR In addtiioy to cost optimization. Any short comings in the
+ planning and designing of the project will aiso be addressed through such

appraisal

vi. Third Party Inspection (TPI) for {implementation of projocts is-required. This will
strengthen State Gaverment agencies In maintaining the desirett quality of work,
Generally, States are nat in a position.lo deploy adacuiate technical parsonnel fot
round the ‘clock supervision’ of works.and hence this wif be an affestiva ©

~ mechanism to ensure progress and quality of works. . ,

Sete Tae ey oe A EERE



-1L6.

Emphasis था recycting and reuse of lroated sewage. Agricultural arnt industrial | -

dennavd on fresh water is very high. On the other hand, drawing of kesh water

_ ffom rivers for these purposes.may also contribute to pollution as dilution reduces.
Therefore, there should’be an endeavas to maxinilze the use of trated sewage

- i"

xii.

10.13

i Stakeholder consultation af the stage of formutation and implementation of

Degroe of-teaiment Inked to availability of fresh water inriver. Instead of uniform
level of ttéabnent,-the approach of varying level to ha followed as water quality is
directly linked with avaitability of fresh water in'a particular stretch of river.

Adapfion of innovative and best technology optlons for lreatnenl of sewage.
Technology seleation is critcat to technical and financlal sustattiability of assets
created, Detailed and carefil exercise may be undertakan for selection of the best
option on a case to case basis. For this, fife cycle study of technalagy options

‘along with detailed analysis in sespect of performanve will be mandatary at FR

stage.

DPR preparation to be preceded by Feasiblily Repart (FR). This wil! focus en
option exploration and selection of locations for major infrastructure. This will also
help reduce uncertainty in tand acquisition and pre-emptively resolve other lacat
issues, thus contributing is timely exéoution of project. ह

॥ ४४७७ also submitted that some of the State Governments have not submited any

proposais. coe *
The Road Map further added the faflawing parameters tc the revised guidelines :

First 5 years O.& M cost to Se in-builf in the project cast. This will ensure
unhindered ©°&.M of asseis which is necessary for achieving the rivet
cleaning objectives. Next 10 years O & M cost to be also worked out with
revenue generation plan. Tha O & M responsibility beyond Sth year will rest
with the State Gevernment/ ULB.”

the projecl. This is to ensure active involvement of various stakeholders
and the éivil society to ganerate suppart and eacatrage ownership.

Use of digital maps, other ‘Information - cormurieation technolagy’ (ICT}

tools and software for project planing and design. In order 10 improve

sclentific and engineering design and pienning, goad quality maps and
- computer aided design ara necessary : oO



Bite

jv. Coverage of schemes for management of Municipal 5011 Waste affecting
(ver water quality. Different {ypes of solids and solid waste also contribute
to river gotlution signilicantty. Therefore, this actvity will be taken up
selectively under the program.

Vv. + Priorlty [0 undertake River Conservailon Projects for Cilyf Vows polluting,
- fiver stretches (danlified by CPCB. The fist of polfuted stretches published
by CPGB from time to tine ii primarily be the basis for selecting rivers

and fawns to-be Included under the program. *

vi. Adoption. of jnnevatlvé and best technology options for treatment - of

. sewagt. Technology selection is critical to technical ard financial
sustainability of assels created. Detailed and careful exercise may be
undertaken for selection of the best option on a case te case basis. For
this, life cycle study of fechnotogy options along with detailed analysis in
respect of performance will be mandatory at FR stage.

vii. DPR prsparation to be praceded by Feasibilily Repart (FR). This will focus -

on option exploration ard sefaction of tocalions for ‘major infrastructure.
This will also help reduce uncerlalnty in land acquisition and pre-emptively
resolve other local issues, (hus contributing to timoly execution of project

viii. la addition, the following gaod practices will be promoted under the revised
. guidelines: .
i Incorporation of Rain water harvesting In community sanitation schemes.
kK, Promotion of solar energy far community sanitation schemes,
xi. Improved sanitation scheme based on higher usar charges whero
> applicable हे .
> xt “Up gradation of existing community sanitation and sewerageinfestructure.
xd, Theust on innovative River Front Development (REO) Projects. ,
xiv. Introduction of "river festival" and "river runs" Under tha public participation,

Information, Education & Communication! (2९) activities.

ow. Design parameters: of STP fo be considered based on ‘actual measurement
a and analysis,

40.14 The CPCB Report pointed out that capacity Uilisation was inadequate Ht aiso

staled that sludge removal was the most negleclad area with most of the sitidge handling

facilities being out of order. The Report observed that the task of operating tho STPs was

glvan to contractors who were deputing unqualified staff for the task, which was ते factor

in te poor performance of the’ STPs. With cegard to performance ‘of projects undartaken

ander NRCP, it was observed that the pevfornance of sewage treatment-plants was



~fi8-

extremely poor wilh the natlonal capital eating जाए 62 percent of the sewage generated,
Bangalore only a miniscule 10 percant and in Hyderabad, 43 percent. Only Ahmedabad
has the capaclly to teat the ontire quantity of sewage generated in the city. The
Cormnittee sought the viows of the Ministry tn this rogard. The Ministry thereupon stated
that they are only supplementing the efforts of the State Governments tn providing
adequata sowerage faciitties in tovms and cities [0 the State. To crisure that the assets
created are operated and maintained properly, a tripartite agreement was entored Into
with the focal badias, Stato Government and the NRCO, Besides the project colt, five
years O & M cost is also in-built in the project coal for proper aparation ant maintenance
of the assels created. A separate clause was also included in the tender document
stating that the project executing agency would operate and maintain (he assets creaied.
The Ministry had been cagularly reviewing Ihe O & M of assets created so that desired
reauits are achieved for conservation of tivers,

10.15 Audit scrutiny pointed out that no programmes have been introduced for tackling
agricultural non-palit source pollution of rivers and lakes by measures like promating thé
use of organlc manure, banning use of synthetic pasticides and fertilizers, integrated pest
management, हु हु

10.16 While it was an undisputed fact that the responsipitity for creating infrastructuce for
collection, traatment aid disposal of sewage rests with the States, as per Section 16(श 0)
of ihe Water (Prevention and Contra! of Poltulion) Act, #974, it was the Tesponsibility of
CPCB to collect, compile and publish data relating to water pollution and devise
measures for its effactive prevention and control. Further, there was no comprehensive
database on the pollution toad entering water bodies across tha country. Also, data on
sewage generation published hy CPCB in December 2009 pertains only (0 Class | and il

towns while the rural hinterland remains unrepresented. Similarly, the data on Cammon

Effluent Treatment Plant { CETP) pertains [0 78 CETPs relating to the period 2002-2005.

ti, NATIONAL LAKE CONSERVATION PLAN (NLCP)

10.17 Audit Report pointed that the NLCP implemented since 2001 for the conservation
and management of pulluted and degraded lakes In urban and somi-urban areas of the

~ Couniry where degradation was primarily ort account of discharge of waste water into

lakes. Activites covered under NCCP 0006 inter alia Preventlon of pottution from point
sourvas © Sewerage and sewage treafment for tha entire lake's catchment area; In-situ
measures of lake cleaning : Desilling, deweeding, blo remadiafign-aeration, blo-



“119.

maniputation, nultent reduction, constructed wetland approach; Catchment area
Weatment ; Afforestation, storm walter drainage, silt kaps, ete; Lake frant eco-
develapment : Sengthenlag of bund, lake fenclag, shoreline development etc; Public.
awareness : Outreach programmes with citizens of different age groups; “Human
Resources Developmant : Capasity huilding, training and research in the area of lake
conservatluin है है ह ह

10.18 The process of inclusion of lakes under NLCP is inltiated by CPCE 60 Identification

‘ of polluted takes after which, list of potluted’ 1857 868 sent (0 the States. The States

either prepare 02२8 for projects to control poftution ef the identified jakes to NRCD o¢
alternatively the States send ‘DPRa for lakes not included in CPCB: fist but found polluted

by the State as per the NRCO criteria. Finally NRCO approves or sends it back to States —

for raviaw,

10.19 Auclit serutiny further ravealed that quantification of pollution of alf the lakes in

tennis of sewage, small/mediunlarge Industries, dislilleries, mines, tanneries, paper and ;

pulp industries, sugar factories, agricultural runoff, pesticidessinsectleides was not done
by MoEF/CPCB, in the absence of which target to deduce polkition caused by thase
sources would be rendered disabled. As regards, the process of inclusion of lakes under

.NLCP, audit findings reveaied that the consolidated priority Rst fumished by MoEF to
. audit in respact of all the States/UT's revealed (hat only 12 States/UTs had prioritized thelr

lakes which indicated the low priority attached by the States {o this vital activity.

40.20 Enqulred about the action fakan/ proposed by MoEF to ensure that all Stafos/UTs
submit their prlority fist te MoEF in time, Ihe MofF Stated that lhe Ministy was

implementing tha scheme of Natlonal Lake Conservation Pian (NLCP) since June, 2001-
7 for conservation and management of polluted and stegraded lakes in urban and semi-
* | urban areas of the Country where degradation was primarily on account of discharge of
waste water into the lake, through an lntegraled ecosystem approach’ The -
_componentsfactivitias covered under =NUGP were ‘aimed at. aghleving

treatmentrejuvenation of pollutedidegraded lakes. In order to. identify polluted and
dagraded lakes across the Counlry, a study was cared out by the Minlstry in

November, 2003 et the instance of Planning Cormmission, A list of 62 lakes across the

Courtry requiring Conservation was prepared under the study. The State Governments
ware asked to review this list and to privrilize the lakes in thelr States for submission of

“proposals: under NLCP, Propasats for lakes conservation were considered for sanction

subject to their admissibility as por NLCP guidelines, pollution status, prioritization and



-£20-

availabity of funds under {he Plan. Some States namely Chhattisgarh, Fimachal’
Pradesh, Bihar, Manipur, Assam, ete, had furished priorily list but elhes rot submitted
any proposaf for considesation urkter NLCP or thé same did nol meet NLCP guidelines,

Staies namely Jammu ant ‘Kashnti, Kerala, Utlaranchal, West Bengal, Tripura and ~
_Nagatand has sent one proposal each. Thess were examined ancl approved by the

competent authority for funding under NLCP. The Ministry had subsequently revised and

- published NUCP Guidelines id May, 2008, in consultation witty the expers,- Stato

Governments/LDAs/concorned lAs and offer stakeholders, it was staled that the States

fave since 9687 proactive and more concerned about tha fake consarvatfon in their.

jurisdiction.

10.21 The Cornmiltes were informed that proposals for consideration under NLCP from
soine Stalas did aot maat the requirement to the guidelines. In such 4 situation, the
Ministry was asked about the follow up action. The MoEF submilted in their written ceply
Ihat the Ministry was implementing the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of National Lake
Conservation Pian (LCP) far canservation and management of potted and degraded
fakes in urban and somi-urban areas of the country, on 70:30 funding pattera thraugh an

- intagrated scosysten approach. Guldelines for implementation of National Lake

Conservation Pian (NLCP) scheme were publishad in April, 2008, and are available in
public domain at Ministry's website www.envfor.nic.in. That broadiy contalns objectives,
activities covered, selection criteria, administrative requirements, etc. Proposals for lake
conservation are considered for sanction subject to thetr admisshilily as per National

Lake Conservaltun Plan (NLCP) guidelines, pollution status, prioritization and avaltabllity

of funds under the Plan, The State Governmants wore required lo Kdenlify and priortize
veater 90085 in the Stale, based on different. ctitevia contained in the guidelines, Tha
proposats received from) the State Governments were first exarnined ‘inhouse for their

dmisslbilily. if not meeting the guidelines, the proposals were referred back to the Slate
Governments for necessary clafifications/revisions. In the process of examirialion of
proposals; restructuring/modifications were also suggested based on the site visils
undertaken, It was further submitted that the Ministry had also recently introduced Ine
provisions of examination’ evaluation of the OPRs through an independent consulting

Insttute, whose coraments are alsa sought on the proposals received (000 the States,

0.22 On a specific query as fo whother tie Ministry considered including the lakes

. facing encroachment and resultant liting up in the scope of lhe NECP and also whether |
_ the Slates were being encauraged to declara bia-consérvation zones around te lakes to

prevent encroachment of the shoreline, the MoEF stated that the Ministry under their



2

ongoing schome of NLCP, had published guadéetines for NUCP in June 2008, As per ihese
Guidelines, he administrative requirements for addrossing the encroachment issuas ware
as under:

(3) The State Governmanttocal Administration is to lake necessary steps for
dectaring the fake boundary through a Goverament Order. The fake
boundary 18 to be decided! in relation to Wie lake submergence area al its
fall tarkk level.

{b} 118 focal administration? lacal-body is to take all necessary steps to ensure
removal af ancroachments if any in the lake submergence araaiake
boundary. A commitment to this effect is to be furrsished by the concerned
* State authorlfies for consideration of Ihe proposal.

{e) 189 project proponents to consider for notifying the ‘Establishment of aBio-
conservation Zone’ around the water body for better safeguard of tha lake
Surroundings from ihe growing pollution potentiat and the encroachments.

10.23 Audit pointed out that inclusion of rivers and lakes into NRCP and NLCP was
Iherefore, flawed as MoEF/CPCBY States did nat conduct a comprehensive suryay to
assess pollution tevels th fiversfakes all across the Country. The tetal amount of

; pollutants being discharged into alf the rivers of India from sources like industies, mining,

lanneties, distilleries, alc., was also not worked aut before initiation of NRGP/ILCP:
Selection of tivers/takes under NRCP/NLCP was not based on poilution 9४३ of the
dverfake and NRCPANLCP was nol planned by MoEF lo address the reduction of entire
paliution of selected rivers and lakes.

10:24 As regards the porformancs of projects undertaken under NLCP, inadequate
inspection af projects by the MoEF left them totally unaware of the difficulties faced during
implementation. They also fost opportunity to make mid-course correctlons with most
projects being monitored only once during the implementation periad, “Acuit also pointed
to delays In inplementation ‘of projects with delay of more than 6 years observed in
projects carried out in 4 lakes; delay of 3-5 years In 10 lakes; delay of 2-3 years in 1 lake;
delay of 1-2 years in 2 lakes and delay of one mont - 1 year in 2 lakes. हु



i
j
H
i

+A%2-

10.25 The impletnenation aspects pertaining 10 the National Lake Conservation Pian

_ (NLGP) 85 enumerated in tha Road Map of MoEF is brought out in Annexure - I to Uris

Report.

+ 40.26 On the issue of review of extsting system of selection of projects fur abatement of

potlution of river, the Comittee have been informed that under the revised guidelines
preparation of Qetalled Project Repart for pollution abatement works af sewerage
schemes is a thea stop process, namely, ‘preparation of City Sanitation Plan (CSP),
Feasibility Report (FR) followed by the Detailed Project Repart (DPR). CSP should he
prepared onthe basis of available data (Primary / Secondary Data) that fias been
generated by the concemed agencies. Feasibiity Report will identify the prabiem of
poflution, develop and evaluate the various options and select the best that Is cost
effective and sustainable and produces tha intended outcome. The DPRs of’ non-
sewerage schemes can be prepared straight after the preparation of GSP. For preparing
the BPR, adaitonat data may be generated by undertaking suitable sunvoy and

inyestigalion. in this context, the Committee saught to know whether these available data -

That has been generated by concerned agencies and used as inputs for preparation af
City Sanitation Plan (087) were found to be reliable, realistic and based on the actual
ground favel testing the MoGF replied that thé City Sanitation Pian was preparad with the
help of local level data either available with the local district tevel authorily or generated
1५ carrying ok monitoring In the project area, The populafion data, water consumption
data and sowage flow data were available with the implementing agency. However,
sewage quality data, levels of surface (with respect fa Mean Sea Level-} and gradient
data ele were to be genoraled by actual fleki monitoring. The data gencrated by
implementing agency were rellable as fong as they are ablained by carrying out field
studies. However, data callected from other agencies could: be verified by viewing the
facords. . .

10.27 On being eskad as to how do tie MOEF ensure the reltability of such dafa, the

Ministry stated that the State level agenci: maintain block and ward wise data for’
. poptilation and update at regular Intervals as per existing rules. However, water supply

dala was malntamed by the public hoalth engineering department ar water supply boards
etc. Gerierally 80% of water consumption was faken as sewage generated. Additioaaily,
ground water consumptian was worked out on the basis of number of such wells ad

water yield frenv them, This was dona by Central Ground Water Authority, As such, _
impact of quallty af data was seen only after completion of scheme,



|
1
|:
|
1

[2
10.28 On tha query as to how these data were coflected, Ihe MaEF slafed that the State
level. agencies mainfain block and ward wise data for paptalion and update at regular
Intervals as per existing rules. Hlowever, water supply data was maintained by the public
health engineering départment or waler supply beards, cic. Generally, 80% ef water

. cansumption was-takan as sewage generated. Additionally, ground water consumption
” was worked ०७४ on the basis of number of such wells and water yield from fherh. This was

done by Centrat Ground Water Autharily.

10.28 On baing asked as to whether there was any stipulated procedure for coflection of

Pfimary and secondary ‘data the MoEF replied that there was a ‘standard procedure for

collection of थी printary and secondary data, the institutions delegaled the autharity under

the existing local 1088 and regulations follow standard procedure for collection of primary

dats like population, water consumption ete. However, the secondary data was generated |

by the project impfemantiag agency by actually monitoring at project site by fallowing
standard procedure like sewage flow, paltistion load and sewage charactorislics ote.

10.20 The Committee further 90101 fo know how the evaluation of vafious options was
done for preparation of Feasibility Report, the’ MoEF thereupon replied that fhe
evaluaiion of various options was done for proparation of Feasibility Report on the hasis
of field data or performance. data already available with the project implementing agency

- for various functionaf treatment technologies and the technologies suggested by the

National River Conservalion Directorate.

10.31 On a specific query ass to’ the lype of paramoters that are chosen for the cost
effective and sustainable options for producing the intended outcome, the Ministry septiod
that considering the cost effective and stsstainable technology selected, cost of Operation

and maintenance, skilled’ unskillad manpower required, power consumption, land -

required, flexibility of technology for upgradation ete were the parameters on the basis of
which final selection of tachnology was done. हि

हु

"10.32 On being asked aa to wliether additional data were actually collected after”
- undertaking sullabfe survey and investigation, the MoEF replied that Sawerage projects’ ”

and datailed project reports (DPRs} thereof may be prepared after finalizing the tand for

setting’ up infrastcictire such as sewage treatment plants and pumping stations, (0 avoid 1

delays in project implementation. However, additional data like soil characteristics fiks
porosity, pH, bearing ‘capacity, grauind water table, proximity te population centres ote.
were examined, . 4



-U2d-

10.33 The Committee have further been informed tha. as per the rovised guidelines,
projects under MRCP are being appraised by independent Appraisal institutions. After:
getting ihe anpratsal report, the projects are being taken for approval befare the
competent anthorily, After approval of the project, implementation of the project includizig
tendering, exccution of works etc., is dane by Ire State tmpfementing Agency. Cost and
4ime overruns in profects are dua to a variety of reasons which include; tack of inter
agency coordination at field love! delays by acquisition of land for 91178 & Purhping
stations, contractual problems, court cases, ४०, In this context, ihe Commiltee.
spectitcally queried as 10 how thé Ministry ptan to improve upon the various reasons
idenlifed for cost and time overrun of those projects; the MoEF staled that the naw
guidelines prepared In Deromber 2010 wil help furlhar reducs time and cost ovarresn
which will be feviewad when such cases come up for approval, दि

10.34 The Committee sought the details as to whether revised guidelines stipufate third
party inspection for implementation of projects and if so, whether in actuat practice such

- third party Inspectlons are carried ‘out, the MoEF thereupon replied that

"NRCD has dacided to carry ut the impact avaluation of the NRCP and NLCP
projects in the country. The Country was divided into 3 regions namely Region ~ I,
Region ~ i, Region - ॥. Mfe SMEC India Pvt Umited had been engaged to

conduct studies for region ~ 8 ‘and M/s Wilbersmith Associates Pvt Ltd. were -

engaged to conduct studies for Region -| and Region ~ iL"

A. REGION It BY M/S SMEC INDIA PYT LIMITED:
oa
Regian Il (East and Central India) consists of Slates of Bihar (Ganga-Patna),
- Jharkhand (Suwarnarekha-Jamshedpur}, Madhya Pradesh (khan-ladore and
Kshipta-Ujjain), Orissa (Mahanadi-Cutiak and Coatal area-Jagannata Pur]) and
West Bengal (Ganga- Badreshwar, Champadani & Maheshtala and Lake Mirik ~
. Darjeating). Site visit far Region -Il were made during tie periad February to June
2010 and supplementary visits were undertaker in Mareh-April 2011 हैं

It has been reported in the interim Repart thal apart from Interception & Léversiant

works followad by Sewage Treatment Plants, which covistltyted major oart, atfier -

projects carried out kt this region under NRCP were Law Cost Sanitation (LCS),
Eloctria/tmproved Cramatoria (EC}, River Front Developihente (RFD) as swatl. as



-125-

constriction of Washerdten’s’ Patforn, Afforestation and Salld Waste Oisposal,
Apart from thoga, Public Awareness Campaigns fowaed an important activity.

For evaluation purposes, the activities ware divided into 3 phasos i) Planning {ore
construction}, fi} Construction and iil) post consluction. Evaluation of cach phase
was followed by appropriate recommendations.

‘During evaluation it was founct that fost of the projects were carnpleted within the
given tne frame or within व reasonabic fime beyand it However in cartain cases
8.9. laying of drainage systeni.In Jagannathpui was hampered due to high

~ groundwater tabla and STP at Champadani could not be commissioned due publle

agitation following a mishap at the site. Apart frorn this saveral facililies, especially

Electric ‘Crematorla were found not’ working satistactarity for various reasons *
~ elaborated in the Interint Report.

While specific recommendations, iike repairs of structures, providing waterfetectric
facilities, sepalrs of equiprnents etc are given in the report, soma of tha general
recoramendations made ln the Interim: Report are as follows:

+ thas been noticed that DPRs lack in severat details, tt should be discussed
Substantlal numbers of housés are tof connected to sewerage systam due to

reluctance of owners. It is recommended that tn afl the areas covered by
seweraga schamss, it should be marxtatory for house dwners to connect the

: ° with various stake halders befare finalization,
»
|

houses to the facility.

temporary measures to take care of wastewater collection, treatment and

disposal systemn fil the sowcrage nefwork up to house-property line and STPs .

are constructed. ‘

“4. The DPRs prepared were not of desired quatily. It Is therefore cecommentied
nat the: project. proposals should @ ‘appraised by independent

instituliarvExperts.

* 1&D works should not be regarded as permanent solution. “These are only ‘



~126-

There has beer ॥0 instance where treated offtuent is being put to .any
recyclefreuse. Treated wastawater can be a valuable resoures if put to proper
reuse ,

Waste Stabilization Ponds (SPs) are gout alternative for small towns. For
larga towns, area required Is very large and causes several O&M problems.

For O&M of sewerage ari 81728, ULBs are slill dependent on State
departments like PHED for technical Kriowhow as well as financtal assistance.
ULBs Nia State should develop thelr own talned manpower,

in low cost sanitation schemes there was a common comptalnt abaut limited
water avallabilily as well as tack of power supply,

States should set a speciat agency (dedicated Cell), which shall look after ail
the urban rasiructuring projects under financial assistance from Central/State
Governments. This agency shalt oversea that focal bodies foliow the
guideines in preparing DPR. The agency shail then carry out tendering
process and award of lhe works.

Bultd, Operate and Transfer (BOT) atodel may be follawad fo ensure effictent
operation and maintenance of River Conservation schemes,

REGION | &॥ BY M73 WILBER SMITH ASSOCIATES PVT LTD:

As part of the consullancy assignment fer Evaluation of Schemes

Implemented Under NRCP & NEGP, schetnes tinplemented in 11 fowns in 5
States falling in Region ! comprising of Dethi, Haryana, Panjab, Ulfarpradesh
and URarakhand and 40 towns in 6 States falling in Region [fl comprising

Gujarat, Maharashtra, Goa, Andhra Pradesh, Karataka and Tamilnadu were

evaluated by M/S Withur Smith Associates Private Limited. The anafysis and
findings of the study are summarized below.

The requiramont of a technical arm for scrutiny & approval and evaluation &
monitoring together with regional presence of the organization ave sirangly
felt, | ह॒



it,

vi

127

The program consisted of main camponants such as Intorecption& Diversian,
Sewage Treatment Plants, limproved Crematofia, River Front Development

and Low Cast Sanitation, Onsite inspection of the executed compdnenis |
reveaicd that most of the completed camponents Ware working salisfactorily.

Ta some isdlated cases it was observed that interception atid Diversion works

proved inadequate owing (0 design arid operatlonai defects. Simllarty, ..
“providing crematoria’ have nat helped much i achieving its intended

objective. Low cosl sanitation systems wese successful only whera thera-

existed a. proper O&M snechanisni Involving & dedicated “operator. Sewage

Treatment Plants, (he heart of the program, was largely successful. However,
selection of appropriate technatogy far lraaiment of sawage would give better
results. There should be matrix based criteria for selacting lechnology far
STP.

The NRCP program, as of now, is own based bul it needs to be extended to
whoie river basin so that total pollution load generated in the basin can also
be tackled for river conservation,

a. The procurement process under the program needs to.be seamined. At
present there is no standard procurement practics established for the
program. ॥ is suggested to dovolop standard procurement documents
and mandatory procurement guidelines spectfic 10 the program.

Oass of created. assets Is the weakest Hak In the pragram: Involvement of the

Locat Body and creation of a revolving fund at nafional level are suggested to

iniprove the scenario.

Steps are needed to protect and maintain the river stretches already cleaned
under the programme. Increased involvement of the State Pollution Controt
Goards with special penal provisions within the existing regulatory frame work:

are suggested towards this.

In the case of lake development, controlled aeration and bio-maniputation to
enhance top dawn contrat “of phytopfankten by selective removal of
planktvorous fish-may be adopted. 1६ is recommended to avaid re-growth of
“ planktivorous ‘fist and to gtimufate the growth of potentially piscivorous
. porch. The lake depth shalf be maintained .by periodically desiffing and



~124-

permanent solutton to 8५४0 the growth of water hyacinth in lakes may ba
given Impoctance, ._ है

vit. The success of the progiant prominently 195 in developing a participatory
approach, iniparting taining and capacity building to all these lnvetved: in
-implamentation, operation and maintenance."

10.35 On a specific query as to how was it ensured that adoption of Innovative and bast
technology options for traatment of sewage was done on par with international standards
the MoEF stated that all kinds of sewage technologios were goad'except that they have
unique requirements for land and power, coupled with the reuse potential and the value
thereof, such as for return to water bodies, agriculture, industrial and other specific uses,
it was furlher submitted that the Getailed Project Reports remain technolagy neutral but
cleafly mention liiaitations and requirements regarding law, power availahility, effuent
standards and reuse potential. This Ministry had also Issued an advisory on sewage
treatment technologles options,

10.36 The Committee was informed that some of the State Governments had not
submitted arly proposal for selection of projects under NRCP. On being asked as to how
il was engured that State Governments submit such proposals in fime and algo 10 state

‘fiow is the coordination made. The MoEF stated thereupon that it was the prerogative of

the State Government to approach one of the several agencles currently funding
sewerage schemes lika Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (UUNNURM},
Urhan Infrastructuro Development Scheme for Small and Medium Towns (UIDSSM) and
National River Conservation Directorale, eto, R-was further submitted that the State
Governments were requested regularly to send proposals for sewerage projects for
towns/ clties which discharge directly In the river and the river had deen identified by the
Central Pollution Control Board as polluted, This was also followed up by meetny the
senior officers in State Governments, है .

10.37 The Committee was informed that in order {a ensure that Ihe assets created for
implementing Programs under NRCO are operated and malntained properly, a bipartite

‘agreement.is antored infs with the local bodics, Stale Governments and the NRCD.
Asked whether these Iripartite agreement were adhered to in practice, the Ministry replied - -
that they form the basis for handing over of sewezage projacts to the Urban Local 89995,

etc..wite take care of their Operation and Malntanance.

ne लए छा जय 2 अभिनिनननननननननीना-धध।ख।भपपप:एझभएझ/श-/-;-5



145.

10.38 [h case of deviations from such agreements by any party, 09 MoGF clarifias that
the State Goverment was requested (० review such cases to take appropriate decision.

_ 10.39 On further being asked as to whether roam for review of these agreements was.

given ‘to all lhe parties to incorporate changes as and wham faquirad. The MafF stated
that the agreement traci beer finalized in the Ministry aad 8 copy was psovitd to the
State Governinenl, Implementing agency and ULBAacal body which formed past of the
revised guidslinas for DPR preparation. .

10.40 The Committee was also infarmed that the ULBs were advised to generate |

sevenue by sale of sludge, generating power using blogas, els. to unsure proper
functioning of STPs, Sa as to reduce Operation and Maintenance (0 & M) cdst of
sewerage projects. है

10.44 The Conwilltee were further informed that the adequate manpower was" provided
for Operation ant Mainteriance (0 & M) of assets created as part of agreement entered.

_In this connection, the MoEF was asked to state whether the manpower provided was

qualified and adequately fraited for their jabs and how the assessment was done. The
MOoEF (hereupon stated Ihat Operation snd Maintenance (O & M) of sewerage assals
created was lhe responsibility of Urban Locat Bodies. Currently, Operation &

.. Maintenance (0 & i) was being outsourced by ULAs for proper maintenance of assets.

Although, there was a condition stipulated in the Adminisirative approval and Expenditure
sanclloned by the Ministry that wained tanpower will be deployed to operate and
maintain the assats,

10.42 On the issue of performance of STPs, tre Cominittae was informed that the NRCD
sclenlists visit the SIPs 4s and wher required to check the O &M of assats created, The
Adininistrative approval Issued by the National River, Conservation Directorate (NRED}
stipulates a condition that the NRCD officers will visit the scheme for nspection and
monitoring who should be given all coaperation during inspection. Any abnormality!

. deviation found’ during inspection are brought to the knowledge of the projedt”
" implementing autharily, State Govarnment and Project Director of the National River

Conservation Directorate (NRCD}-for fucthar necessary corractive action,

10.43 The Committee were Informed tral CPCB had inspected 146 STPs (4307 MLD}
and the actual utilized capacities of these STPs was found to be $037.42 MLD which was
69%-of the idsiatied capacity, On heing asked the reasons for undarutilization of installed



-138-

capacity of these 3185, the MoFF replied that as per latest information, Contat Pollution
Control Board has inspected 152 Sewage Treatment Plants (4716 MED) {under Naffonal
River Conservation Diroctoraté component) anci the actual utilzed capactties af these
STPs are found to be-3126.42 1७३) which was 65%, of the installed capacity. Out of 162
STPs, 08 STPs (4-West Gengal, 2-Tamit Nadu, 2-Andliva Pradesh) which were not
funded under any Mo&F scheme wore alsa Inspected. Main reasons for under utilization
‘of installed capacity of these STPs included absence of Sewerage conveyance systent;
interruptect power supply; unskilled manpower, and inregutar operation & maintenance.

40.44 The Cornmitlee were informed that no time line can be fixed for inereasing levels of
teeaiment of sewage because upgradation of STP capacity was an ongoing process due
to Increase in paputafion loading to generation of mors sewage as and when more areas
gel developed and taken over by the municipal authority. The Committee felt that at toost
a tentative time line can be drawn up after taking into consideralion these factors. The
MoEF thereupon replied that the capacity addition far treatment of additional sewage
generated was to be decided by the State Goverment depending upon thele prlority and
budget allocation. .

40.46 The Committee has been informed that disbursement of funds tinder NRCP which

was earlier made difecly to tha State Governments, have now been made to the
implementing agencies in the States to facilitate fimety implemertation. The State
Governments are required (0 release their corresponding share of funds tn the projects
promptly a2 soon as central releases are made, Release of funds 15 linked fo rataase of
matching shate by the State Gavernment, subnitssian af physical and financial progress
reports, timely submission of Uiiltsation Certificates, canstitulion of Project Review —

Cammittees, proper Operation & Maintenance of assets.

40.46 On being asked as fo vehether there was any alipulation of time {mit for release of
funds by State Governments and what action was taken In case of inordinate delays in
release of (unds.with consequential delay In lnplementation of projeols, the MoEF stated
that the State Government share far the sdactioned projact was provided In their budget
and released soar after sanction of Central Goverment share. As par Cabinet
Secretariat instructions, inordinate delay in vornpleting (he praject will entail investigation
and fixing of responsiblity on dfficet in the Slate Govemment far taklag, appropriate action

against him,



- -13f-

10.47 On a specific query as to whether any monitoring mechanism exists for ensuring
that the terris of Mamarandum of Associations (MoAs) are adhered to by भी the parties,
the MoEF stated Ut there was a provision of State Manitoring Committee and alsa
Gentrat Monitoring by oflicers of the Ministry हि

40.48 On being asked as lo whather any action was taken in case of deviations of tha

ferns of -MoAs, Ihe MofP staled hat the Memorandum of Agrsoment (MOA) was signed

only when alt paitles agreed to ablde Ly the conditions stipulated in the MoA. However, in

- case of sefous violation, there-was a proviston In the Administrative approvat that assets

of the project under implementation may be taken ovar by Central Govt. The expendiure
Incurred by the Central Government may also be recovered and deducted front the grants
given to the State by the Planning Commission. 5

lf. [PERFORMANCE OF PROGRAMMES FOR CONTROL OF POLLUTION
OF GROUND WATER

10.49 Audit scruliny pointed out that neither MoEF nor the States have introduced any
Programmsas to prevent palkition of ground water. They have also not adcrassed the ~
concerns of pollution from agricuttural sources, Although accountability structures at the
centrat tevel have been established for management of pollution of rivers and lakes, the
situation is more complicated with respect to groundwater with no centeal agency taking
‘complate responsibilly for ground water pollution. Also; the control activities which ensure
accountability of technical and financial aspects of the projects are weak, 3
10-50 Audit further polnted out that at the Centrat fevel, MoEF does not Implement any
Programme for ireatment and resioralion of ground water. No State had introduced any
specific prograrrimes for the restorafion and treatment of ground water. Only two States

_ Wz. Tamil Nadu and Rajasthan have iniffated prograiames which addréssea the issue of

polluted- ground water, bul these are reskicted lo a few specific cases. The Schemes
operated by MoWR focus an exploration, monitoring of ha ground water regime through

हि 15640 ground water monitoring wells located ali over the Cauntry. This data is used for ~

assessment of ground-water regiine. Sintiierly, 0008 seeks to reguiate withdrawat of ;
ground water and idenlify critical and overegplelted areas. - However, none of is
programmos or studios specifically addresse’s the issue of pollution of ground water:

10.51 On the Issue of Ground Water Poflution, the Cortiniltes have been informed lat a
Vision Document on ‘Mitigation and Remedy of Groundwater Arsenic Menace-tif fndia’



cnet the rpm sa ae NT न +

-{32.

have been brought out which contains information about the knovwerdgobase,
understanding and technological opportunilles available, state-of affairs of arsenic
conlamination in india and differant corrective ‘measures takea and shortcomings
experiance. It also frings out a critical appraisal-of gaps, identifies arcas sequiting future
initiatives, a comprehensive plat of action cnvisaging Read Map, financtel requirement
and the method as to haw he mission can be coordinated andl accomplished.

40.52 On daing asked as to when was this vision document preparad, the MoEF stated
that the document fitied "Mifgation and Remedy of Groundwater Arscnic Menace in India
A Vision Document was Published in June 2010 by National Institute of Hydratogy,

Roorkee.

10.53 The Conimittee sought to know whether steps have been inifiated in terms of this
vislar’ document fo fight the menace of arsenl¢ poisoning which was affecting Ihe lives of
many of out population, The MoEF theretipon replied Ihat Water supply Was provided by
State GovernmentsAJLBs and they have to meet the requirements of the Indian Standard
for ucinktng water, |S: 10500 published by 0४8 Bureau of Indian Standards Necessary
treatment arrangements have lo be made hy States/ULBs for arsenic removal from
drinking waler as per standard or betler source water may have to be lapped to mast the
drinking water standards. The vision document was prepared to compile an up-to-date
stale-ot-affairs on Arsenic contamination in groundwater in tndla Including appraisal on
knowledgebase, understanding, and technological opportunities developed in the subject
‘matter both national and international level, success and fallure stories etc. Arid also ta
identify’ research and field implementation gaps and probable actionable paints for
demonstrating of sustainable mitigation and remedial measure to the problem. The

contents of the document had been contributed by select experts on the subject matter,

After publishing this decument in June 2010, Nafionat Institute of Hydrotogy, Roorkee ant
Contral Ground Water Board, New Delhi had jointly organized a one day Dialogue
Iniéatian maet on “Mitigation and Remedy of Groundwater Arsenic Menace in India’ in
June, 2011 at New Delhi in which, senior officials of Water Resources Departnents of
differant arsenic affected Sjates, Public Health Engineering Departments Cantrat

Governinent Ministries and Departments, expert Organizations/lnstitutions/Universittes,

individual, Industries and MGOs fad been invited to fake part in the meet.

10,54 The. Ministry further submitted that the following recommendations ware made
froin the deliberalions of the aforesald Dialogue Initiation Wiast held a June, 2014 at Mew

” Baltit:



“133-

i ft was broadly agreed to have mare extensivesintense brainstorming by
experts followed by drawing of oroposed plan of actions in the following

areasfietris;- न ५

ay ° Holisticiomprehensive asséSsment of Arsenic related tinpacts art
” the adopfed solutions; .

b} Current needs of Research & Development interventions in
différent areas:

c} Gaps in Sensitization aad Awareness generation at various
levels;

d)' Review of adrainistrative/poticy/operatianal framework for
coping up and adapting to Arsenic probion.

“iL Further recommendad to constitute.a “Core Committee” drawing specialized
experts from varlous sicearns/professions belonging to diffrent academiciresearch
organizations, concerned Government departments and other agencies and also
working independently to work on abdve stated and other relevant Issues for
finalizing a suitable framework of activities including modatities of operation.

i, -” The “Core Committee” stall be formulated in consultation with tha Ministry
of Water Resources, Government of India with specific Teams of Conditions’.

iv, ह The “Core Committes* shalt submil its report to the Ministyy of Water
Resources, Government of India who will take ४० the matter with the appropriate
Ministry/Department for consideration and further follow up.

10.55 The Vision Document on ‘Mitigation and Remedy of Groundwater Arsenic Menace

*. tn india’ brought out by the Naffonat Inslitule of Hydrotagy, Roorkee, CGWB, New Dethy In -

June 2010 brings out the alarming critical “state that indiscriminate expiaitatisn of
groundwater resowcas in many places In the County with .fise in deloriorated
groundwater quality impinging not anly scarcity of fresh groundwater resources but also
contamination of ground water. The relevant portion of the Decurmant pertaining fo the

critical dangers of the widespread problem of arsenic groundwater pallution, the key
challenges, available options and the Road Map towards envisaged milestunes are
* reproduced betow.- : : : .



» 7H

10.56 Occurrence. of Arsenic in groundwater, in axceys to the permissible limit of 50 g/t. 7

in the Ganges-Brahmapuira fkvial plains in India covering seven states namely, West-
Rengal, Jharkhand, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh ia flood plain of Ganga River; Assam_and

Manipur in food plain of Brahainaputra- and iphat fivers and Rajnandgaon village if.
Chhalilsgarlr state, ls ona sueh farge scale groundwater quality disastei, descibed -

intermationally as the World biggest vatural groundwater calaraity 10 the mankind after
Bangladesh. A framework of activities with an estimated financtal target of हैं 2090 croros
for a perlod of five years has bean envisaged fo resolve arsenic menace exposed itt
seven States in india. it is believed, earnestly, that likely results from these elaborated
scientific tasks wil! help building the stratagy te mitigate and reniove groundwater arsenic
menace in India. हैं है

40.67 It has baen estimated that i Ganga-Meghna- Brahmaputra plain (including
Bangladesh) alone, around 100 million people are at tisk from groundwater arsenic
contamination above WHO guideline. People in newly arsenic identified states could be In
more danger, as many are not aware of their arsenic contamination in hand \ube-vells
and unknowingly continue drinking arsenic contaminated groundwater. (1 arsenic

_ contaminated areas atten arsenic contaminated groundwater is used for agricxtturat

ittigation ceauiting In excessive amount of available arsenic in the crops in that area. It
has been reported thal secertd to the ingestion of arsenic, after the direct consumption as

- drinking arsenic contaminated water, is through. food chain, partictlarly Use of

conlaminatad fice followed by vegetables, This eventually indicates that the effects of this
occultance are far-reaching; and the sooner suslainable solutions to resolve the problem,
(essar_ Would be its future environmental, health, -socioeconomic and socto-cuttural
hazards. ;

10.68 Even after spending huge amounCof monsy for providing arsenic safe water to tha
villagers fom contaminated hand tube-wels and ather sources, the overall result
suggests requirement of more concentrated and focused efforts, in planning ard
management to copa up with such gigantic calamity, Attempts made 59 far to combat the
menace of groundwater arsenic contamination, like, to Identify the causes, to provide
arsenic froe ditnking wafer to people dependent ox groundwater supply, fo reduce the

” arsenic related social and socio-economic problems and to develop: cost effective

fachnolugy for eradication of arsenic contamination have proven inadequate, fragmented
and less responsive, as evident from the 99 in number of arsenic affected areas with
every new survey. There is, therefore, a 1954 for adapting holistle approach to-resolve
solution considering managernent of sciance-sociely-resources togather, but not merely



हज ह5-
heating fhe pain “externally. Proper watershed management, possibilily of tapping of
freshwater aquifer हिषजाए to proper aquifer nlanagement, i-situ remediation of the
prablem and acoromical utilization of all avaitabic altamative safe sources of wate need
10 be explored. Ta combat the arsenle cilsis ‘need for awarendss and aducation of the
Villagers towards the dangers of arsenic toxicity and finportance of Using arsenic safe
water. This can 019 be achleved by active community participation and whote-healed
support fron gavernmenit and arsenic reseaichers,

10.59 A good portion of 500 mition people, fivitig का the 5 69749 sq kin of the Ganga
Meghna-Srahmaputra belt, live in danger of drinking arsente contaminated waler. Around
30 % of this populace is consiltuted of ifliterata inhabitants who tive below the poverty
line. Affected populace are those who are economically backward and jack in nuttitious
food. Women are affected the most compared to men. Further, kfants and children aro
adversely affected than the adults, An arsenic patient loses his strength and carmot work

» outdoors, but his family incurs more expenses than before bocause of his finess. Many of

them herrow tnoney fram the local moneylender who charges them a high rate of intarast,
ia. $-10% monthly compound interest. Often villagers lose all (helr earihly possessions
including the roof over their heads, Iryitig te pay the moneylender back, Saclety too, urns
an arsenic patient into an outcast. The arsenle problem, thus, has a major effect on the
socioeconomic structure. Peopte often mistake symptoms of arsente poisoning for laprasy
or other contagfaus skin diseases, and thus mariage, emptoyrnent, and even tha
simplest social interaction become impossible for the victim, Thus, an arsente patent
often becomos depressed and sometimes even Iries to commit suicide: Simitasly, certain
atea of Punjab Is known as cancer belt diua to contaminated ground water.

ALTERNATE APPROACH FOR ENSURING SUPPLY GF ARSENIC-FREE WATER

10.60 Wutershed is considered to be the basic unit of fand-water managament practices. ;
From hydrological polit of view, watershed possesses ail characteristics generally
required for conservation and development of weler resources. Surface water Is arsertic-
free, und it is more so when rainwater Is barvested as aurfaco storage. Harnessing,

developing and appropriate management of surface svater; on a watershed basis, in

arsenic affected areas and {heir tsages in irrigation anct other domestic purposes, can bs हि
4, potential alternative, CGonfunctive use of surface water (either from watershed
development of from ofher saurcas) and in-sitt groundwater can be another potentiat
afternative. A technicat feasibility study, considering risk, cost-and beneftt of each

alternative, wauld form an important lasik. | - “



-136-

40.61 Whatever technological gptions that are adopted, the success and effectiveness of
that task cannot be achieved unless end-users and beneficiaries of the schemes are
debugged om concen and rasponsibitity. Na strategic planning of availability of safe
aad wise use of water can be sustained by delinking user comnrunity and their effective
particigation fh the management of traditional and new resources Ofvlouslf, tor the
success of the program, peuple’s awareness, regarding importance of water, its know-
how oa ‘dos and don'ts aad sightful uses, tieed to be tagged as 6 mandatury task,

Remaval of as from arsenic-contaminated water by -sultable fiiration techniques, (0
ensure supply of arsenic-free water, appears to bo a vlable practicat solution for potable
water if tie related probletns, sucit as sludge disposal and operation & maintenance, are
cesolved effectively, But Ihe agricullural requirement is much mare than potabls water.

Supply of treated groundwater ta meet agricullural requirement by ex-situ arsenic removal
technologies would nat be a sustalivable option or approach. Without adequate int buill
maintenance arrangemeals apparently the performance of alt the devices would suffer,
Proper training and mabilizatton of the user community in the operation and maintenance
aspect would be an essential lask before any future installation of ARP programme can
ba envisaged. ‘Thus, future emphasis should be oriented around in-silu remediation at the
source-aquifer lavel and also chemicat fixation of the con{amitant af the source shout be

properly explored through proper calibrated and configured studies and experimentations. .

_ 10,62 The primary task of providing Ansenic safe water to millions of peoplo needs to
_ address the critical concerns viz. Water quality monitoring through District & Block level

Capacly 8uildiig; Identification of Arsenic conlatninated as well as safe sources: hoth

ह public & private; Provision of alternate sources of Arsenic free safe diinking water: Village

specific GIS Database and Action Plan and sharing the same with all stakeholders;
Establishing a transparent system of Information sharing by ail stakeholders; Health

- Education and Awareness Generatlon, Health Risk Assessment and estimation of

disease burden; Provision of Medical Relief for the critically affected people, Training of
Medical Practoners th Govt, as well as outside the same; Long term change in
agrjoulture and Irrigation practice and Reshicting the use of Groundwater. tn addressing
the key-concerns and developing a Malanai Plan of Action, for providing Arsenic safe
water fo the communtity, the 1st key-stop is to estabiish 4 National Slandard for Arsenic in
Drinking Water«The present quidoline value of Arsenic in gr ‘oundwater éf WHO is 10ppb,
many Countries are Stil adhering to the standard of 50 ppb of Arsenic.



-A37-

IDENTIFICATION OF CONTAMINATED SOURCES AND CREATION OF DISTRICT,
BLOCK AND VILLAGE LEVEL DATABASES: KEY CHALLENGES

10.63 tn West) Bengal, all publ tube welts 1३५९ been tested through 8 nef work of rurat

faboratorios, Near about 150,000 water samoles have beery at lalyzed in the-bluck Isvel - -
laboratories, And GIS Datahase has kean created at the district, block and habltation *
level. However, the most ctalletging task, whicti is yet to be accamplished, is the tasting है

of near about 500,000 private sources. Adding to the menace, the Kiontification of

_ contaminated public tube wells remains incomplete fn other staies. like’ Bihar, UP,
Jharktiand, Chhatlisgarh, Aseam ete, Though organizations, like 5058, Jadavpur
University, Sriram tnstitute and quile a few others have done remarkable work, the basic
lask of identifying ‘all arsenic contaminated: sources, public as well as private, remains
largely incomplete. lf we consider the tube wWeils' use for irrigating and vegetable piants, in
the arsenic aifected districts, Ihe task bacomes more difficult and complex.

FIELD TESTING KIT VIS-A-VIS NETWORK OF LABORATORY

40.64 The magnitude of the tasks involved mises the quastion of use of fleld Kits vis-a-vis
cteation of network of blockWillago level laboratories. In West Bengal, considering the risk
of false positive and false negulive data, by the use of field test kits, the Arsenic Task
_ Force opted for creation of a network of rural laboratories, at the rate of one laboratory for
. every three blocks, through Public Private Partnership. As a maiter of facl, the Arsenic
qrisis it West Bengal has been a blessing in disguise, in the sense that & has resufted In
development of institullon and capacity, at the block and village lave] Panchayatiraj
" erganizations, for water qualily monitoring and surveillance. It.must, however, be noted
thak though the above system has been successfidl In monitoring public sources, the oly
question remaihs on the monitoring of wator quality of the private sourcas. Howaver, the
precision and dependability of the same Is always open to question. The challenge ist
produce field test kits, which are robust, reliahte, cheap and simple enough to be used by
felatively Woskllled users in the villages of India. {t is alsa imperative to say tat these fleld
kits and'supplies should be readily avaliable for the sural Markets.



-¥35.

PROVISION OF ARSENIC SAFE WATER TO THE COMMUNITY: THE KE
GHALLENGE OF SUSTAINABH ITY

10.66: In West Bengal, the Mastor Plan-envisages supply of arsenic safe water, to all ihe
” affected habitations, through a system of piped water supply, which would be. fed from

treatment plants after appropriate freatinents, 40% of the vilages would be supplied from
aga water lreatment plants, drawing water from large perennia rivers like the Ganga.
They would supply water through kilometers of water distribution system afler appropriate
traaiment for bacteriotogica! purification, 60% of the vilages would be served by mini-
piped water supply network, which would 98 fed from large diameter {ube wells aftor
removing arsenic by using appropriate technotegy. This is the most ambitious long lerm
mitigatory pragramme underfakan by any State Govl. for the arsenic affected mural
community, The implementation of the master plan ts. expected to be completed by 2011.
But the progress of work Indicates delay in project execution, The more vilal question that
remains to be answered is that, whether such a capital intensive approach could be
sustainable in the long run. Effectad operation and maintenance of the system, “trough
people's participation in cost sharing and maintenance, could go ब long way In ensuring
sustainability. The success of West Benga experienco 0000 set a model for nation wido

1 ‘aplication. However, to make a community based scheme. sustainable, the Govt. effort

needs to be supplemented, These efforts can be community based approaches through
the implementation of decentralized small scale community maintained curat water supply
projects, based on traditional surface water sources, that are largely supported by rain
water harvesting. There are millions of traditional surface water sources like ponds and
dighis in states, ike West Bengal, Bihar, UP, Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Aagam ete, which
could be rekivenated, consorved and utiized

10.68 Existing Knowledge Gans covers inadequacies in the assessment of Health Impact
; Scientific Health Risk Assessment and Rational Estimation of Olsease Burden; Arsonic
Gontamination in Agriculture: A Threat to Water - Soil Crop - Animal - Human

Continuum, Critical Needs for Researctt and Capacity Building: Teclnatogy Options:

Crlilcal Constraints. and liniting factors; Key Factors Impeding the Pragress of Mitigatory
Programmes in the Arsenic Affected States; and Establishing 4 Transparent Systern of
Information sharing by all Stakeholders.

40.67 The Vision Document provides a Road Map. fer achieving Envisaged Targets and
Important Milestones. Milestones are lhe events, which are exvisaged as future course of
actions.to achieve the targeted goals, The fargated goals In’ this case are: (8) to make



138.

arsenic Comamlinated aquifers comdhicive. ta preserve grovndwaler quality and proditce
arsenic free groundwater to meet uctitking xnd irrigation demands, (9) to find sustainable
techniques and technologies for decontamination of aquifers from arsenic and for the
removal of arsenic from contaminated water, (0) to scale up senps for unveiling alfernate

sources of waler lo meet tie demand of potable water in the arsonic affected and
wilnerable areas, (d) lo eradicate heallh hazards, afiglnating fruit ingestion of arsenic .

contaminated watar, and (8) to make 500७५ responsive to inconsclous usages of water.

The milestones to achieve these envisaged tasks ara as follows;

- ॥) Emerging R & DB Activities - lo prepare database, improvise and translate

understanding of causes, geochemistry, genesis, aggravation, mobdliization and
dissolution processes of arsenic in groundwater for different hydro-geotogical setlings to
derive methods for in-silu ramady for decontaminaling aquifers from arsanic; to devise
cast effective, eco-friendly and socially aceepted arsenic remtaval devices! to investigate
faasibility of alternate sustainable water management (SW & GW} strategies to meet
demand of water in tho arsenic affected and vulnerable areas, to assess impact of
arsenle In food chaln and related heatth hazards, to ascertain health impact of arsenic
contaminated groundwater, etc. है

(li) Ensuring Arsenic 1799 Water- activities and plan of actions to provide arsenic free

_ dlaking Water (0 lhe peopte In affected and vuinerable areas,

(il) Capacity Bulking and Social Cmpowerment - aclivities to promote public
awareness, capacity dullding and social empowerment about Iraportlance of water and Ils
effective usages, health related issues, -iheffects of using contaminated water. ete,
Revisit (0 revise’ Nailunal Standard for Arsenic in drinking water: to consider
revision of the Natlonat Standard for Aesenic in dtinking water In the tight of the WHO's
Prasent guidelines,



TH.

CHAPTER - Xi

MGNITORING OF PROGRAMMES FOR CONTROL OF POLLUTION oF
RIVERS, LAKES ANB GROUND WATER |

41.1 Audit. findings pointed out thal inspection and monitoring of projects “belng
frapiemented Under NRCP arid NLCP was inadequate at all thres levels, 1.8., Incal level,
State level and Central level. Rt was observed that the data for ‘monitoring the echemes as
available in MaEF provides a user-(endly rneans of understanding the. currerit status of
the relevant policy “and was reasonably cost effective ‘to operate. However, ६ dié not
describe In detail the steges ०८ events used for rating progress (wtien this method was

used). It also did not provide a cationate haw future performance targets were being setin
ihe Ministy. There was poor monitoring of network to track pollution of water In rivers -

and takos, failure fo update and sevise water quality parameters, absence of database,
poor dissemination of data, ete, In turn, poor internal controls teveal the low level of

“wansparency in Ihe activities of the Ministry and their impact on its overall accountabifily.

Tha targeted impact of schemes oF prograins can be achieved oly with the proper and
effective implamentation, For the monitoring to be elfective, ats organization develops the
system Which covers tho micro monitoring af the ground level of Implementation fe. at the
Implementing agency level. On the ather hand, maare manitoring at the apex level will

_ ensure that such monitoring system was working effectively. Audit findings also pointed to
paucity of network for tracking pollution of vers, lakes and ground water. Audit scrutiny

fuither pointed lack of classification af locations as baseline, trend and flux talons) lack
Of real-time monitoring af water Poltution; Lack of assessment of trophic stafus of rivers

-and assessinent of ecologicalslological indices of riversilakes; tack of revision and

updating parameters of wafer quality; poor quality of data on waler; lack of regular
inspection of the projects by MoEF; and non-avaltahillly of completion reports of projects.

_ Trophic status Is @ measure of biological productivity of lakesitivers, which simply Is a

measure of how many plants and animals are in the [ske/tiver. Thus, itis an indicator of

- health of a river,

11.2 Audit (bier pointed out that the monitoring of projects under NRCPINLCP at
Gentrat Level viz, National River Conservation Authority headed by Prime Minister for six
monthly raview of progress had the last meeting thy June, 2003; Moriiloring Gommittes
headed by Member, Planning Caramission with quarterly review of progress had fast
meeting in Aprit 2002; Standing Committee haaded by Union Minister, Environment and
Forests for quarterly review of progress had the lest meeting in March, 2003; and



-4६-

Steering Committes headed by Secretary, MoEF for qe lartarly review of pracess had last

_fecethng in December, 2007. ftareover, the four Committees do not exist in a hierarchy

and operate Independently of each other and thore was no functional‘connect amongst
them and as slick ne evidence of sharing of their findings and recommendations amangst
these Committees were found by Aucit. [a te Stalos, while the periodicity of review

varied from State te State, nionitoring of projects under NRCPINLGP were cone by High .

Powered Commitios headed hy Chief Minister of the State, Stale Steering Committee
peaded by Chief Secretary of the state, Inter Departmental Cornmiltee headed by the
Chief Secretary with Principal Secretaries of the Departments concerned; Review by
Nodal Implementing Agency; Divisional Project” Monttoring Cell (DPMC} and Lake

“Specific Consideration Cammittee.

11.3 The Committae sought to know the reasons [or frequent meelings of these
Committees and whether thesa Cormnittees sfil! exists, The MoEF did not give any
galegoricat reply but merely stated शव alt these Committces stil exist and meetings are
held as and when required. ॥ was further submitted thet meetings would ba organized
soon and coordination would be ensured.

114 Audit ecrutiny revealed that ouf of 140 river projects test checked, MOEF
submitted information only in respect of 98 projects. OF hese, 25 per cent of the projects

* wera nat inspected by MoEF even once during implementation. 00 of 105 projects

completed, MOEF submitted information in respect of 77 projects. MoEF had nat
Inspected 43 per cent of these projects ater completion. हि
11.5 In this context, the Committee sought te know what steps wers being takerv
proposed by MoEF 19 enhance the scope and-coverage of the Water Quality Monitaring
Programme in terms of the number of monitoring stations, their focalion, autometion and
updation of thelr parameters. The MoEF theraupet replied that as tequired under the

1 provisions contained In the Water Act, 1974, 8708 along with SPCBs was monitodng
- water quality of surface and grand. water bodies under the National Water Quality

{Monitoring Programme (GEMS/MINARSIYAP). Water quality was monitored for
assessment: of wholesomeness of water for various beneficial uses. Thal present

- monitoring network comprises of 2000 locations in 27 Slates and 6 Union Tertitories:

Spread over the country, witich covers 383 rivers (£085 locations), 127 lakes, 9 tanks, 38
ponds, 40 creaks/seawater, 17 canals, 34 drains and $95 waits. The water quality data

1. was published “and circulated. Automate water “quality monilocing stations were



-142-

proposed to he instafled on river Ganga to further sfrengther the manyal monitoring
cartied out on river Ganga. The data sa oblained are published rogulafly ७५ CPC8. Fhe
dats analysis for a particular monitoring slation would indicate treris if paramefers were

varying wile respect (0 (06, no change ln data provides baseline status-of fhe ground ,

water quality anv station located near source of pollution indicates impact of activities oni
the ground water. Additionally, water quality monitoring stations ware also Sel up under
NRCP through different universifies and acadenuc. Institutions for assessing the impact of
various pollulion abatement schemes on water quatity of these river stretches. So far, the
major monitoring thrust had been in the Gangetic basin. With schemes being teken up on
other rivers, the monitoring programme of fhe Directorate had 98७1 extended ta other
tivers, The objective of the monitoring progratime was to establish the water quality in
Ina rivers before the schemes Were-taken up and then compare it wiih the quality as the
_ Implementation of schame progresses in order to check the efficacy of the actions laken
The focatlons are usually closely spaced downstream of cles and wastewater autlalis
The lacations may be classitied as Baseline end Impact stations for pollution monitoring.
The water was analyzed mainty for 9 core parameters with pollution retatedt parameters,
such as BOD, DO and coliforms. Sile specific maasurement of heavy metals is also
included. Water quality moritoring stations and theit locations had been selected from
time to time as the River Conservation Programme covered more and more towns and
cities. Since 2005, a Uniform Protocol of WOM had been nolified which details on
~” sampling locations, frequency, parameters and analytical lecliniques. The same was
currently In force, . हि . :
11.6 Asked how the MoGF ensures that CPCB regularly collects, stores and
diesominates the Water Quality, Monitoring data through Its website or by electronic: mail
to various users on demand, the MOEF replied that automatic water qualily monttarlag
stations were being ingtaied on tiver Ganga and river Yamuna to further sirengthen.the
manual monitoring on both the rivers. The data so obtained is published avery year by
CPCB and also available on thoir website which can be assessed by any individual. The
Ministey fad funded Conleally Sponsored project and established “envis centres" in the
” Country including. CPCB which ‘disseminate information related to all aspects) of
environmontal pottutlon Inckiding water quality data, ete, to the public and other users.

41.7 ‘The sanction orders issued by the Ministry sfiputate that a Monitoring Committes

would be constituted [0 monitor the progress of the projec! scheme. The monitoring :

Committee have been constifuled by varlous State Governments for -moritoring the



-i43-.

ongoing projects? schemes. At the inttlatlve of this Mitistey, City -Level Monitoring
Comtniltees {CUIACs} have also been constituled for regular monitering of angoing
projectschemes. Itt the अर of experience gained in tha implementation of GAP and:
NRCP, it was now recognized Oat effevlive civil society J public participation can only
bring abaut‘tul succoss of the programme. As per the revised guidelines, it was
necessaly fo fornulate an effective public education, awareness and partlclpatton .
Programme as part of DPR 50 83- 0 make the projacts socially acceptable, An expert

+ agency with right kin! of background and experience niay be engaged to formulate Publia

Patticipation strafegy. ‘Two types of outcomes were expecled trom this activity. The first
one Was public patticipalion and through it agreement on complex issues {ke house
connections, water conservation at nousehotd levels, proper collection of garbage so that
it doss not choke sewersidrains, sharing increased burden of aM cost, proper layout of
sewerage systems and location of STPs, diffusing canilicts, ff any. on progsamme
components ef¢. This can be bes! achieved through consuttalion at various stages of
projsct forimdation. and Implementation. The 38000 one was increasing public
understanding abaut the programmes through awareness. -This Should be achieved:
through workshops, seminars, sfret plays, city mins and riverside walks. Active
involvement of students and teachers community in schools and collagas can greatly help
ih achieving the objectives. Public can also play 018 role of a watchdog in suposvising
project implementation and operation and maintenance which would help improve Ihe

~ quality of the programme. Emphasis may ba placed on_ increasing public participation

under NGRBA, Apart from hithg expert agencies for this purpose, arrangements to

1 involve Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan have been pul fo place, which should 99:
integrated with this component. Under the NLCP scheme also, pubile awareness and

public participation had been one of the integral components of all the sanctioned ह
projects. The projects under execution were being monitored by the officers of the
MinisIry at regular interval and observations are communicated to the implementing
agency’ Staté Governtnent for appropriate action, On the’ basis of past experfence,
Ministry had taken several steps to prevent ihne and cost ‘overrun. Tho Memorandum of
understanding and (ripartite agreement was signed betweert the Implementing agency,

_ Slate Nodal agency and [060 body to avoid time and cost escalation. The DPR was

approved only when State Govertwnents has indicated that land was available, The
projects ware designed on the basis of data coflected and apprapriation cowaction factor हि
was applied. tlowever, due to variety. of inforasaan reasons, full uiltzation of installed
capacity was not passtbie. Qne of the ceasons of under uitization of capacity of STP was
inadequate collection of sewage from city due to incomplete coverage with sewers. This



-1da-

had since been addressed in new guidelines prepared by NRCD. Accurdingly, whale city
will be covered for sewerage projects rather than only interception & diversion of sewage

from selected fow drains. The orobieta of pofluGen in rivers would have haen worse Inthe

absence of the poltition abatement works taker up -undac the river conservation

"programme, Based on independant manitaring undartaken by reputed institutions “on

some of the major fivars vader NRCP, the water quality in terms of BOM (Bio-chomical
Oxygen Demand) values has improved at mast locations as compared lo water quatily
before taking up of poitutton abatement schemes. The major reasons behind conthued
poilution of fivers are gaps in tho teafment capacity, increasing population leading t&
demand on fresh water, improper O&M of assets created, industrial pollution, contribution
Of non point sources, ote. In the new project to be sanctioned, conditions relating to
oniine monitoring ६९ Ire discharge paint of tho streams and fiver confluence are inctuded
In the approval. This Information would be uplaaded on a dedicated wabstle for the
project. हि हु

41,8 Ona pointed query as te the current status of inspection of tho projects, the MoEF
stated that it was propesed to give more thrust lo the monitoring of ongoing and

conipieted projects,

11.9 Audit scrutiny reveated wnat CPCB/CGWE do not carry out real-time motoring of

” water pollution in rivers, takes and ground water and such poor monitoring of netwark to

track potluuicn, failure to update and revise water quality parameters, absence of
dalabase, poor dissemination of data, etc. refiects poor Internat controls.

11.10 Asked whether MoGF had initialed any real time monitoring of water pollution so
that red flags ara raised immediately when pollution Ievels rise alarmingly for timely
Intervention, the Ministry staled that Central Pollution Control. Board has initiated the
process for installation and communication of Te Real Tima Water Quality Monloring

- Stations (8 In Ganga and 2 in Yamuna) which were the remotely cartrolted stations and

likely to start functioning shortly

11.11 About the steps Initiated for improving both the quantity as well 83 quality of data *
- base and its dissemination with respect to water pollution monitoring data, thé MoEF

slaled that tha Central Potution Control Board had initiated the process for development

_of web basad Geographizal Information System (915) to disseminate the data and tt was

likely to be operational by the and of 2013,



नई

1442 The Corminittes sought to know whether any steps had been taken 10 strengthen
the manitaring network by converting alf tianitofing locations with stations and
reclassifying as baseline, rend and flux stations-.tor achleving better quality data In
accordance with the Audit recommendation: The MoFF taplied that Water Quality

. monitoring station having Blo chemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) 1055 than 3 mg/l are
. baéeline stations, Stations falling belween the BOO level of 3. & 6 mngfl ate Trend stations.

Bio chemical Oxygen Demand (300) exceeding to 6 mg/l are classified as kmpact
‘statloits.

7 11.43 Setting up of monitoring stations and real-time monitoring of water quality, the

Ministry stated that MaEF through Central Pollution Control Board wilt establish Reat
Time Monitoring Stations on polluted river’ stratchos after giving equipments on 0
monitoring stations, The wark of real time monttoring in polluted river stretches will begin
front financial year 2013-14,

11.44 On betng asked as fo whether MoEF have plans fe set up separate basoline
stations, flux sfalions and trend stattons, the Minlsty replied in he negative and stated
Ihat at present, there was ne such plan to set up séparate stations,

11.15 On the question of organizing regular meelings of Natlonat River Conservation
Authorily (headed by the Prine Minister), Steering Commlites (Headed by the Secretary,
MOEF) Standing Committee (Headed by the Unlon Minister, Environment & Forasts) and
Monitoring commities (Headed by the Member, Planning Commission), it was subniitied
that the National Ganga River Basin Authority had been constituted in February 2009 and
aftetnpt would be mado to convene meetings mare frequently,

11.16 The Camniittes further sought to know, how was if ensured that water samples are
collected from designated spats. since MoEF caly has monitoring Jocations and aol

monkering stallons, The MoEF reptied that all the monitoring locations are geo"

fefarenced and laridmarks are follovied for collcetion of water samples.

11.17 River quality monitecing ‘taports in tad la seport only averages-of various parameters
like Tatal Californ (TC), Oissoived Oxygen (00) and Faccal Coliform (FC), atc. which is

1 misleading as averages tend to cameuflage tise in TC/FC or drop In DO dnd levels of.
| “river pollution will be mare accurately reflected If absoltite vatues are given for a particular



146.

month. The Comniites sought to know whother the MokE intend to provide absnluta
values as average valties do not reflect the tue pletura of pollution fevel ta the tiver. The
MoEF thereupon stated that the waler sample was collected only ance a month at a
particular statian and analysed. For 12 months, only 12 observations were available fora
particutar parametor at the same stafier, The report, therefora, quoles only maxivien ,
minimum ard mean value for particular parainieter at a particular station. Totat nurnbar of
observations might be 858 than 42 in a month dus to variety of feasons, But ail vahies
are quoted as Minimum, Maxintunt and Mean for that month, There were aboul 20,000
observations in a yoar and publication of such huge data wil tnake the reports bulky. The
water body being dynamic, qualily of water changes wlth tima and place of monitering,
due to limitation of resourcas available, it was aiso aot possible to collect sample every

- day and analyse it for parameters and raport all values for all 30 days, The Data was

processed statistically to reduce the volume and prevent confusion while interpreting their
significanco. Therefore, the present methadatagy of reparting the water quailty data was
satisfactory.



ना

CHAPTER - Xil

- RESULTS OF PROGRAMMES. FOR CONTROL
OF POLLUTION IN INDIA

42.1 Audit findings reveal that thera is no nation wide impact-assessment relating ty the

pallution of ground water. Tiough fiver cleaning and contrat of poltition progestnimes for
pofluted rivers are being implemented since 1988, The fhrust of (३७७४ programmes has

” Geen to stop sewage from polluting our elvers, The programmies have also tiied fo stop

non-point sources of pallutlor through constuction of low cost sanitation, electric
crematoria, etc., however, (he data on’ the success of these programmes are not very

» encouraging. With the Exception of Ganga in certain stretches, aif tre other rivers lest

checked in Auditi.e., Yamura, Gomt, Godavari, Musi, Cawery, Sooum, Mahananda,
Khan, Kshiora, Vaigai, Chambal, Rani -Chu, Mandovi, Sabarmali, Subernarekha,
Bhadra/Tungabhadra, Vennar, Pamba, Betwa, Krishna, Sutlaj, ste, conlinue lo be
plagtied by high levels of organic pollution, tow tevel of oxygen availabilty fer aquatic
organisms and bacteria, protozoa and viruses which have faecal-origin and which causo

llnesses. These rivers are the lifeline of india and its States and peapie depend on them ©

nat just for water but also for livelitoad. With respect to lakes acrass India, many of them

. have disappeared due ta drying up of their catchment areas which have been reclakned

for uses ke uthanisation. Most lakes in india are under threat from nutdent ovedsading

-which is causing their eutrophicaflon and their eventuat choking up fram the weeds

proliferating in the nulrlent-rich water, Implementation of NLGP in conserving these lakes
haa had né discemible effect. Lakes support not only humans for livelihood xe tourtsm
arid fisting but alse support very diverse biodiversily which is disappearing from the
levels of ‘potiation ater our lakes. All the fakes lest checked by in Audit namely
Pichola, -Pushkar, Dbnsagar, Banjara, Kotekere, Seflandur, Veli Aklulam, Shivpurl,
Powai, Rankala, Twin fakes, Bindusagar, Mansagar, -Mansiganga, Rabindra Sarovar,
Mik, Kedafkanal ake, Daf lake, Laxmninarayanbari lake, Dixgabarl Lake, ‘Natal fake,
2७., not only suppert livelihoad bul are unique eco-systems supporting a wealth of

हि

12:2 , Audit Report slated that the assessment of results is an inporlant step Its reaching
a conclusion about efficacy of any programme. It is undertaken to ensure thal projects,



-$d8-

programunes and policies ‘ace econmmically viable, socially equitable and cavironmentally
stable and delivering the Intended results,

12.3. Audi fulhier observed that proy alkene for prevention and cleansing up of major
rivees था Incka have been in operation for more than two decades naw and Uisrefore ft is

* important to assess the results of such progranunes. Audit pointed-out that while MoE F
claimed that Ganga River Water quatity data from 1986 to 2609 Indicated improvernent in

water quality between Kannauj and Varanasl, CPCB stated that the natural flow In rivers
and seams had reduced dgasticaty due to diversion of waler for iniyatlon from all
reservoirs in the County and there is litte fresh water flaw or flow generated due to
discharge of sewage and industial effluents. R also stated that lhe improvement in
various environmental components could not be quantified,

42:4 DO is a relative measure of tho amount of oxygen that is, dissolved or carried ia the

‘watar bady. Adequate dissolved axyyen fs needed and necessary for good water quailty.
This is Important fo lhe sustainably of a particular ecosystem, insufficient oxygen in
lakes and rivere, tends to suppress the presence of aerobic organisms such as fish.
Deoxygenatton increases the relative populatton of anaerobic organisms such as plants
and some bacteria, resulting in fish ४1 and other adverse events. IF water 3 too warm,
tere may not bo enough ‘oxygen in i. When there are too many bacteria or aquatic

. animal in the area, they may overpopulate, using 00 in great amounts, Oxygen levels

also can get ¢educed fhrough over fertilzation’of wafer plants by run-off from fad fields
containing phosphates and aitrates (the ingredients in fertifizers). Under these conditions,
the numbers and size of water plants incraase. Then, If the weather becomes cloudy for
several days, respiring plants will use much of the availabla DO. When these plants die,
they become food far bacteria, which in turn multiply and use targa amounts of oxygen.
As evident from the Chart 12 4, the lavel Of Dissoived Oxygen was precartously low in
the Sabarmati at Ahmedabad, Yamuna at Delhl, Musi ‘al Hyderabad, Yariuna at
Ghaziabad, Adyar at Chennai and Gort at Lucknow. BOD is a chemical procedure tor
determining the uptake rale of dissolved oxygen by the biological organisms in a bady of
water and is widely used as an indication of the quality of water. It can be used as an
indicator of the éfficlency of sewage Irealment plants. Similar ly, 89 can be Sean from the
Chart 12,401), tha lovels of 850 In some ‘major towns ४85 at alarming levels. Total
Coliform (TC}: Coliforms organisms Tike focat bacterla-ara an indicator of water quality.
Colifarm bactetia may not cause disease, but can be indicators of pathogenic organisms

५ that cause diseases, The falter could cause intestinal Infections, dysentery, hepatitis, ~



“1a
typhoid fever, cholera ard other iiitesses. Colifornr bacteria ars organisms inat ana
present 10 the environment eit in the feces of all warnt-bloaded ailmals and humans.
Coliform bacteria vill not likely cause illness. However, their presence. in drinking waler
indicates that disease causing argani

{pathagens) could be in.the water system
These can 91४० occur due to soil, veyetsiion, sadirncnt, insects onfering the water, and

. thais presence inicales tlivt the source is, or recenily has been compromised by surface
water, The Chart 12.40] shows the actual 1010 MPMM100mt against ners. ॥ may be पु .

” seen that alt the Gharts below indicate a particutary dismat position willy regard w breach बा
of norms in terms of the three criteria- 800, DO and TC in Ike case of Yamuna at H
Ghaziabad/Delhi, Gomi at Lucknow and Sabarmati 4t Ahmedabad. ॥ the vase of Musi at ‘
Hyderabad, for which data on 800 and 00 was available, Ihe poltutton levels was far हु
beyond the norms. - - :

Chart 12.46) : Showing Actual 00 in mg Against Norms *

a 3०३४
0 0010
चार Hyderabad
Yauounal 60४३७ गए.
Adyar? Chenaat
Gamtlf Lucknow
Gotwulfdanded
Mahananda/ Stiqu
Sutlelf Badtiaes
Suiteif Jallandhar
Godavadf Nashik
Rani Ghu/ Gangrete
Saoga/ Kenpur
Chsatbsl kocr
Godavwif Rejamwadry
Shideaf thadravati
Tungriharka/ Davanag ave
Sangaf Srinagar
 Gangaf Havidvear
Gangaf Ureariaahi
Gamal Msbikesh
+ Ratmesyd Teuchicanaatt
Subernecethaf Jamshedpur
“Mabarcalié Cuecick
Gadavait{ tamagundan

ः in mga
telow

Reims

1 0700 in ma
above | |
arms

Noes ioe
QO : Smg/l

53730 Patns



~150-

Chart 12,416) : Showing Actual 800 In mg/t Against Nanns

lt ns

] Ryeralad
© Sabasscifthmadahad

Adyar /Chenrai
sAahaaaaday आाडण्य
Yarmynad Gharhtend
Godsvaftianded
fanenagoat

Gomtif Lucenow
Eshlocaf अं
Gadnvatt/ stagu

Sota talndhar
hambal/ tomy

छ139/3/ 8038/8०40
‘Songaf Keane

Sudej? Wwabtans
Godsuarl/ damagiciase

Tangibhadie/ Qavanneee

Ganga/ Patan
Baal Ceu/ Gangcan

Ganta/ Haridwar

Cawery/ Teorhlreppail
Madanaedy Custrck

. Gangof Bishites
© Gadavall/ Aafamundey
1“ Sangod Sagar
Subamarekhaf jansheipar
Gangaf Uartssht

$nao a
met
batuw
oeHTS-

BOD in
m/l
ahve

nonas



‘ Chart 42:4)N} Showing Actual TC In MPNH00 ml Against Norms हर

रु x ,. shewene, " aa] 7 7 1.
F केले ेलेलम oa tc कं दि

=: या] ््ि

Suilaif Jallundor YB

Ganga/Xsnpur Tek Tease हे है
‘Sutteif Lusznng alow rarms :

| =
=H 17600

Ganeaf Paina +}

Sadoematifannedibad Hi

. &03#03/ Bracieavats 4
Maha madi (00७३८
Tungabhicha/ Orvanagare i

: Cramball kara

पु ५ ९३48 एं damagundam 4
#आखए३/ Pantha
Ganga/ Haddwar

* Godavad? tajamundry

. Gangal Rishikesh [|
. Ganga Séinagar ||

g

| 1 Nien tae FS
7500
map LOO ma

Gadavneltastte || ३३७

Ginga/ 0७०९उच्चे४ H-3¢ i .

Agak Ghuf Gangtok

- के 50000... त््फ़्ण 150000 2000७



-£52-

12.5 Audit fiadings on parameters of quality of water In fest checked ¢iver sketches alt

over the Country ladieated that despite inore than 26 years ‘of imptementatiod af ©

programme, to cantrot paltitinn af rivets, waler वां aur fivers rerains crilically polluted.
The levels uf BOD, DO and TC are indicators of fiigh Icvets of “argaitiie poltution को our

” rivers, the inability of our rivers fo sustait aquatte ॥8 due to presence of pollutants and

high levels of disease causing, faecal-related bacteria, viruses and protozoa which cause

-iknoss; all of which point ‘fo failure of the afforts of tho government to contraf palfution in

our divers through NRCP. Water quality challenges have been exacerbated vy extraction
of water for diffefent uses telnforcing Ihe need for adopting basin approach for
management of water.

128 Audit polnted out that though NLCP had been in operation for more than 16 years,
MoEFICPCB had not assessed whether.there was measuradle improvement in chentical
parameters of lakes during implementalian/completion of tho project. Though the Mo&F

. Stated thaf water Is 4 State subject and pollution prevention and conseevation of water
‘hodles Including lakes remain the domain of State Gavernnients and NRCD in MoEF is

ony supplementing the efforts of State Gavernments in conservalion of fakes through
centrally sponsored achieme of NUGP, adit pointed out that being the primary funding

| agency and being mandated for prevention of patiution MsEF needs to take greater

responsibilty for the projects funded by ft.

12.7 Audit findings further pointed out that despite increasing poliulion of ground water
sources and the presence of contaminants ॥९९ arsenic, altrale, fluoride, satinity, etc, no
programmes at the Central level and the Slate jevel vers being implemented for'control
of pollution and restoration of ground water. Hence no Impact assessment was possible
In‘the absence of programmes. ता



“ps3.
CHAPTER - Xt

RESOURCES AND UTILISATION OF FUNDS:

43.4 Tha financlal resources for canttol and prevention of water polution come frum
Government budgetary support and Watex Cress collected under the provistens of the
Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess Act, 1977. The Centra! Governmant
pays the Central Poltution Control Board and the State Pollullon Control Goards such

_amaunt of money as i may think हिं for being ulilised under the Water (Pravention and

Contrdt of Pollution) Act, 1974 fram the procesds of Water Cass collacted after dactucting
the expenses on cillection. MoEF, being ‘the nodal Ministry, is responsible for protection
of environment including envitonmental threats arising from Water pollution, Funds are
transferred directly from the Central Governmant (MoEF) to implementing agencies af
Slate Government such as municipalities, Jai Boards, Sewerage Boards, Lake
Development Agencies, ete for impfernentation at the ground levet instead of belng routed
through State Government as was doné prior fo June, 2003. Audit further pointed out that
funds available for coutrof and prevention of -waler ‘pollution and restoration of
wholesomeness of water wara nat adequate for the Country as a whole. Audit serutiny
70160 out that rascurces generaled from water cess for controt ang prevention of Water
Pollution were very meager, averaged lo % 3,28 crores per State/UT per year during the
last five years. This miniscule amount of aliocation was barely sufficient for monitoring of
poliutiott level. The Water cass rato wos revised (wo times during the last 34. yeaes in
4992 and 2003 and is currently set notanally with extramely low rate structure payable by
various users al the rale ranging from two paisa to Rfteen palsa एक kilolters and
dafauiters tiable lo pay 8 higher rate of (४७ paise to thinly paisa per kiloliter. The total
Water Cass of ₹ 853.44 crore collected during tast five years (2005-2010) constituted
40.75 per cent of lotal expendilure of MOEF. The disbursements to CPCB and SPCBs,
amounted to € 820.85 crore,

{3.2 85 regards expenditure on contrat and prevention of water pollution, audit findings
poitited thal 26 10 36 per cent of MoEF budget was spent on control and prevention of

_ waier poltution during the last five years (2005-2010), Out of a lutal expenditure of

4517.33 'crare on control and prevention of water pollution, % 1897.18, crore ware penton
programmes of NRCPINLCP and T 820.65 crore were given as grants to SPC@ and

_ 0९08. The funding pattern of NRCPINLCP Programmes-is 70:30 between Central and

State Governnients.



lsd. |
13.3 The audit pointed ont thal since Ganga Action Plan fl stastad in 1993, the scope af
NRCD was widened inte National River Conservation Progranumo. A total of 1079
projects wortk ९ 4724.24 crore were sanctioned by MoEF and F304 (91 crore released
up fo March 2040 fas NRCP. For Ni PSB penfects worth है. 8BS.98 crore. were
satictioned by MoEF against which flinds of %'327.89 crora were released upto March

“2010.

13.4 On the utilisation of funds released under NRCP,’ audit observed that out of 20
States, total expenditure in respect af 1D States was fess than the amount releasad by
NRCD. The lotal expériditure of these 10 States was € 540.14 crore out of F 652.11 crore.
This indleated that the progress of expenditure was Siow and surplus out of NRCO tuinds
amounting to % 441.97 crore in addition to 30 per ceat share’ of State was lylag in Interest
earning accounts of banks as per the farms af sanction and release of MOEF. _ Further,

Out of ₹3841,91 crore released to 20 States, 87 per cent of total release amounting to -

2660.01 crore was given to eight States. In the remaining States, auit observed that
tolal expendilure in respect of seven States was Jess than the combined total of funds

“released by NRCD and State shate. Only two States ie. Goa and Punjab had spent

funds equal ar more than total of funds released by NRCD and State share. NRCO could
nat furnish the information in respact of funds felsased for test checked projects

separately as funds were released directly to implementing agancias for clusters of”

project and not profect-wise.

13.6 As ragards utilisalion of funds reteased under NUCP, audit pointed out that out of
883.96 crose of sanctioned projects to 14 States, 58 per cent of folal sanctioned projects
amounting to %613.73 crore were sanctioned to only two States namely Jammu and
Kashmir, and Rajasthan. Although NLCP complied Information on approved cost of
projects and funds released, it did nat compile information relating to project-wise
expenditure and total expenditure on all projects based an UCs received tom States.

- Therefore, total expenditure on ali projects with total release of funds could not be हि
- compared. Audit findings alsa pointed! aut that in absence of effective monitoring of use of

funds, NRCD also could nog verify diversion of funds, inefficient utilisalion of funds, Failure

. of Stales to contribute their matching share, balance lying unspent from conipleted
* projects, interest income earaed and credited to the account of implementing agency, but .
not disclosed In UCs for adjustment in further release, ek&., as in the case of NRCP. -

Further, NRCO nelther devised any effective system to exercise diligent financial



-135-

manayément nor ensued furnishing of all relevant information by the fraplemanting
agency for effective control on utilisation of funds, हु

13.0. Audit concluded that funds available for contra! and prevention of water pollution
and restoratian al wholosomeness of water were nol acaquate for ike County asa
whole. Thdre wore instances of poor flaancial management like diversion of funds, non
diselostne of accrued interest; falture 19 contribute matching grants, cosf escalations and
overtuns which were not fo be shared by २००; funds rot utifisect; funds lying Idle and
parked in bank accounts; unapont balances not refunded, ate., in the implementation of
the projects, The quality of ulfization certlficates was poor, Further, due to tardy
implementation, the govemment had to spend more funds on these projects than
originally sanctioned. : ;

13.7 In thls Connection, the Road Map at MoGF contains the following
recommendations on Financial Aspects : है

+ While issuing sanctions to the projects, a condition Is made that cost overrun, if
any, will 06 borne by the Stata Governments/ ULBs conceined, The Gof's tiabitty

la the project is thus fimited te the initially committed share at the lime of sanction ~~

of projects. This condition is included also fn the Momorandum of Agreement with
the State Governments/ULBs. This condition shoutd be scrupulously followed and
it ls ensured that no cost overrun is borne by the Gol except In the cases where

revisions of scope in works/ schemes are Involved, पु

« Many maasures have been taken from time {a time for effective utilisation of funds
and speedy implementation of lhe projects. Earlier, disbursement of funds under
NRCP was being made diractly fo the State Gavernments. However, delays were
noted in general in fund transfers by the States to the Stats Implementing
Agencios implementing the peojects. To facifitate timoly implementation, Central

Government had started disbursing funds directly (0 the implementing agencies in ;
the States. The State Governments are requiied to celease their corresponding
shara of funds in the projects promplly as soon 85 cantral refeases are made.

« Several new measures have been initiated for ‘effective utilisation of funds and
improved implementation of project. These include public constitaticn in project
formifation बाते implementation, sigaing of tipartte MoAs with States and urban
lacal badias (ULBs)},-appraisal af projects by independant institutions, Third Party



-136-

on,
5:72
Sanh

“ay

inspection {TPis} for raview anc monitor performance of the projects funded under

H : the NREP & NGRBA.on the basis of detailed on-site raview, examination of .

; documents tvougl the entire flfe-cycle stages of the projecis namely pre-
odnstruction, constructlan, commissioning & iat ran and post-constructian , The
MoAs havo" saveral important commitments on the part of Stalp
GoverangnisfULBs wirere release of funds is linked to release of matching share

__ by the State Governniént, submission af physical and Snanclat pragress reparts,
finely submission of Uttisation Certificates, constitution of Project Review
Committees, proper Operation & Maintenances ‘of assals. Stalo Governments
should strletly ‘full? the commilrtenls made to the Central Govt. for speeding
itaplementation of sanctloned projects.

*

I
|
i
i
i



“AST

GHAPTER - XIV

PUBLIC AWARENESS, COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT AND
~ PARTICIPATION

14.1 Ausf polnted out that programmes for aatement of pottulion of water is mostly
contractor driven with discussians being limited generally to state governments and local
bodies with no meaningful involvement of-tke people and the community, Considering
the enormity of the problem of water pollution in india and its adverse implications for the
nation and tho overriding need for heightening pubic awarensse, Minisky was asked to
highlight thelr actlon plan to create mass awareness and education-oa this issue (6 all

sections of the population wilh special emphasis on’ students, farmers, efc. The MoEF |

thereupon stated that the National Ganga River asin Authority (NGRBA} Framework
has a Gommunicatton’and Public Qutreach Program (CPOP) involving every stakeholder
including Students and Youth. The Conynunicatlon and Public Qufreach Plans age in
furtherance of Ihe objectives of the NGRBA Program lo ensure effective abatemoat of
pollution and conservation of river Ganga through stralegle communication and enhanced
public participation and ‘outreach. The commuiication plan has a three ler approach-
First Ger at the National favel, i.e., at NMCG level; Second tier at Ind State level, Le., at
SPMGs level and Third tier at the Executing Agencies 1०५३ {Including tha work site)
7 Kesping in view the wide range of opinions, concerns, and sénsitivities with regard to
Ganga and importance of pubile participation, the NGRBA framework concentrates an the
fallowing core areas at communications and public outreach:

(@) . Mass communication campaig campaigns: ‘These campaigns will’ focus 00 pollition
contro! messages, {especially ‘Dos & Don'ts’ of human interactions wilh the river) and
Sensitization of the general public, This wilt naed to take in traditional material (television
fikns, radio spots, print materials, etc} as wel as Innovalive information dtssemination
media like the use of local folk media, 25 well as persuasion/ outreach? activities through
NGOs, schools and colleges, temples and fairs ote.

(9)... Support for voluntary public. participation, articipation: The special space the Ganga
accupies in the cultural and feligious psyche Of ‘the people in India provides a

tremendous opportunity for tapping tbls reverence and hamessing it Into a people's ~
movement, Mobilising the masses ‘él not only generate a continuing demand for ale’ *

up and conservation activities but wil aiso enhance wide parlicipation in the planntag,



~158-

design, implementation and, especially, monituring of activities proposed under the
Program, Community moblfisation wall thus form an essential part of the Communication
Strategy. हु हु

01५७ Disclosure, such as: ‘ : -

(गो

i Right to Information (RTI corapliance.

मं... Websites at NMOG and SPMGs fevels.
i]. . Public Information Cefls at tne Execulive Agencies 10५8). हु
iv. Information Goards/Watls at the level of the individual works at site.

(@) Community participation, such as:

i. * Provistons far conferences, workshops, seminars at the, national,

* 7 state and ULB's fevel to being stakeholders together for discussion, dialogue
and information dissemination
fi, . Participation of cammunity and citizens groups via ULB-level
- Citizens’ Monitoring Commulttees for monitoring, feedback and sociat audits.

Since the World Bank assisted NGRSA Project does not cover the rural areas as
of now, lhe rural and farmers issues are belng taken care of in the Ganga River Basin
Management Pian which has a communications component and Is being prepared by the
IWF Gonsortlum. ह

44.2 The Commitiee were informed that Public Awareness and Padtcipation is a must
for creating sacial actlon for tho river cleaning and boautifi¢ation programme. It is
proposed to thvolve the existing volunteers of Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangthan (1९8)
under the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sparts for varlous activities refaling to this. Yn this
context, tha Corunitiee sought to know as to why the Ministry was nat focusing on

-largatod awareness campaigns on specla! groups such as ‘farmers' whose active co-
operetion may go 4 long way In feducing pollution fram agricuitural sources such as -

pesticides and fertilizers which conlibute fo pollution of water to a large extent. The

- MOoEF thereupon stated that under Deparirnent of Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC)'s

Contrat Sector Scheme “Mass Media Support to Agricutural Extension’, Doordarshan

“and Al {india Radio are being utized to make the farmers aware about modem farm ॥

technologies and researches rélated-to agriculture and allied areas. A 30 mite
programme was being telecast 5-6 days a week through National, 18 Regional Kendras
and 180 High PawerfLow Power Transmitters of Doordarshan, Similarly, $6 Reval FM
Radio Stations of All India Radio ara being utilized to broadoast 30 minutes of pragranime

for farmers 6 days a week. For tlecasting success Slarles, innovations and for.

है popularization change-setfing ॥६०॥००३४ and farming practices through Ure Saturday stot



“159+

‘of Deordarshan’s National Channel, DAC is producing films, which consciausly project
inter-alla positive aspects in agriculture in India. A “Focused Advertisement Campalgn’
was taunched through print as viell as electtonic metia to’nreate awareness about the

assistance available, under various Schemes of the Deparment of Agrculture &

Cooperation, -The advertisements were raloased throug! national as well a3 rogionat
newspayiers. The audio-video spots are being broadcasttelecast throtigh AIR,
Doordarshan and Private Channels uperating at national & regional Level. Under this
campaign, one of fhe Audio-Video 5905 prouced was on “Judicous Use of Fertlizers”
and the sara Is belng lelecast through Doordarshan and private channels operating at,
national 2४2 during the news, and poguiar entertainment programnies on prime time
pands to create awareness, among the farmers about the benefit of: using fertilizers
fudiciously, cultivation as well as poltution. Advertisement was published In all leading
national ang regiorial newspapers on “Use of Pesticides” to create awareness amang tha
farmers. In addition, Ministry of Agricullure is imparting awareness to the facmning
communtties for judicious use of agrleuttural chemicals in thair crops through varlous
human resource davolopment plogrammmes {2 days, 5 days, 30 Jays Seasan Long.
Training Program (SLTP) and Farmers Fiald Schools (FFSs) - 14 weeks - ance a day in
one village) under Integrated Pest Managenient (iPM). The Scheme is being
implemented country-wide thraugh 31 Central Integrated Pest Management Centres
(CIPMs) located in 28 States ard 4 Union ‘teriitory, Since 1994, up fll March 2012, the

- Dlrectorate of Plant Protection, Quarantine & Storage’ (77088), under DAC, has

organized 13991 FFSs whereln 57962 Agriculture/Horticullure Extension Officers and
4,20,720 farmers have been trained an latest IPM technology in various crops. Over 232
lakh ha, has been covered under pest monitaring and 43,543 million bio-controt agents
have been released for cantrol of different pests and diséases, So far, 1874 master
trainers have been trained in 91 SLTPs in different crops like Rice, Catton, Vagetables,
Groundnut, Mustard, Soybean, GraméTur, Ciilllles and Sugarcane. Also [Ph package of
practices for pesis/diseases raanagement tn प्र major crops have been developed in
collaboration with State Departments of “Agriculturefttos fieutture/indlan Conncit of
Agricultural Research (ICAR) Insfiktions/State Agricullure Unlversitias (SAUs} which

_ have been circulated to all States/UTs and have been posted on Directorate of PPO&S'S

Website swvw.cuenet.nie.injppin for use by the’ extension (uneffonaries and the farmers. At
presont, there ate 351 bio-contra! (abormiaries functioning tn India far ‘ptaducticn of bio-
control agents & bio-pesticldas. Theso labs have been set up by different agencies viz.
Central Govemment, State Governments, ICAR, SAUs, Ospartment of Bio-Technolagy

(DBT), NGOs and Private entrepreneurs, Grant in ald of हैं 1772 takh and © 64.15 lakhs.



+160-

was provided fo States and Non-Governmental Cxganizallons (NGOs -tespectively for
selling Up Of hlo-contal Isboratories in different States and 015, Besides, 353.73 lakho
has been granted for rodent pest ntanagement in Narth Eastern States

14.3 The Committee sought to know whether any affective sirdtegy for public education,
awareness and parlicipation programme has been dravm up to seek atlequate
invelvement of the civil saulely. The Ministry thereupon stated that they fad heen funding
environmental awareness prograrimes invalving civit sactety and furnished the folowing
details

. "National Environment Awareness Campaign (NEAC): The NEAC was
launched in mid 1986 by the Nilnistry with Ihe objective of creating
environniental awareness at the national level. In ‘this campaign, nominal
financial assistance ‘was provided to the NGOs, Schools, colleges,
universities research institutes, women and youth organizations, army
units, government departments, 80. fram all aver the Country far
conducttig ewarcness ralsing and action oriented activities, Thirty four
regional resource Agencies appointed by tha Ministry were Involved in
conducting, supervising and monitering the National Environment
Awareness Campaign activites. As of now about 14000 participating

. agencies comprising of NGO schoofs are engaged in National Environment
Awareness Campaign.

« Other Awareness Programme: Under this program, financial assistance is
provided to a recogitlzed academic/research Institution or a government
department goverament \indertaking with at least three years of
experience of working in snvironmental relaled flelds, Also the proponent
55010 be'a registared voluntaryé professional organization’ Trust’ NGO with
at least three years experiance in environment yalated fields and registered
under the relevant provisions for a.minimum-of three years and raising
" auditing accounts. Agiditlonaily, funds wers also provided to professionals,
scientists, environmentalists, other graups af the society te share
knowledge and experience an varlous aspects of environment,

: « Walional Mission for Glean Ganga (NMICG) under National Ganga
River Basin Authority (NGRBA) :The knowledge base fey the Ganga
system was being ungraded to ensure that planning and lnvestments are

» * + based on adequate and sound Information. It wilt afso form the basis of 2

RE oh CEES



AGEs

compreiensive, and revampad, comriunicaltions pragramme fe engage
yatlous stakeholders. A project proposal for satting up ‘Ganga Knowmedge
Cane (GKC) had Been prepared. by the NMCG in-house _and under the
process for submission before the, Frpowered Steering Committee of the
NGRBA for approval, Public ‘participation: whl be through strategic and
broad-based comraunications and community participation components.

the aim was to build supporf, manage expectations and sustaln pysitic’ _

prassuro to complement reguiatory enforcement aad Investment autcomes.
City level Monitoring Committees {CMCs) healed by the District Magistrate
& Collector concarned were being formed for avery project towns to
achleve suth goals: .

14.4 The PAC (2003-04) in thelr Ganga Action Plan (GAP} Repott (6271 3" Lok 39018) ‘

had fecommanded awareness drive and laking Inte confidence locat
NGOs/representatlvesireligious seers especialy with respect to throwing of dead
podiesihalf bunt bodigsfconduct of Jal Samadhles contributing to worst pollution ॥ rivers
especially of river ‘Ganga’, On being asked about this espect of public lavolyemant, the
MoE stated that building on lessons from the Ganga Action Plan, the vision of the

NGRBA Program ntarks a significant departure from the previous efforts, by adding pubtic |

outreach and community participation as an bnpostan{ component particulasly for

+. occasions like Kumbh Malas.

148 On the ‘issue of curbing (he practices of dumping human exarsta, Caushala
Gischarges, cow, dung, half burnt bodies, dead badies, animal carcasses, etc., with
consequential pollution In the river, the PAC (2003-04) in their GAP Report had then
exhorted the MoEF to come out with a concrete plan for an awareness campaign, sven

with Ihe help of law enforciag agencies and religious seers to inculcate a scientifia lamper -

“in tha paople along’ with religious point of view so thal, people do net become 38
compulsive pattner In polluting the river they (8४४७ as ‘holy’. ‘The Conwnlttee in their
_ Action Taken Report deplored the careless attitude of the Government for having treated
a vexed question of raising mass awarensss carnpaign against throwing non-cremated

dead bodies Ist the holy river as a simple law and order problem which wai fo be handied-

ty the Superindentent of Police and had desited that the Ministry should assign dus
prioflty te such an important and far reaching issue concerning certalt conventional and
feligious efiafs, Subsequently, the MoGF in their Action Taken Slatement दांव In
Parliament on 14.03.2008 had stated that local seers and public representaives ace

“being persuaded Itt the State of Uftarancita: to create @ consensus on stopping Jai”



+162-

Samadhies and burning of dead hadies on the hanks of Ganges and Kharkaati but so far
the goal was yel to be fully realized. i was also stated that in view of the erratic pawer
जज in UP and Bihar and general reluctance. to accept the etectric crematorium, it has
been decided to promote. improved wood based crematorium. In this context) the
Conunitlee sought fo know whather adequate- number of wood based creniatorid had
been made available for use of Ihe people, the .MoEE reptied that the State Governments
assessed the need ta install adequate number of wood based crematavia for cilies! lawns
and submitted praposals accordingly fo the Ministry for feeding of projects which were
approved: Construction of Grematoria under NGRBA programme has algo been glyen
due priority as part of the 'River Front Management! sub-project, Construction of Blectrio.
Crematorium in West Bengal has also been sanettanad under the HGRBA project.

14.6 Asked how far the promotion of the use af those crematoria for cremation of deal
bedies had been successfuf, the MoEF submitled ihat they fund construction of improved
wood based crematoria to reduce consumption of wood and resuttant destauction of
forests. However, due 40 lack af awareness and lack of information about the need to
conserve wood and adverse impact of green house gases on environment, acceptability
af the inproved wood based crematoria was very low.

44.7 On a further query as ta whether it has resulted in any quantifiable decrease in the

.” horrendous practice of throwing of dead 90493 into the river, the MoEF stated that they
have not conducted any sludy to know die number of bodles throws In river over the ©
. yeas. , . : न

44.8 Asked whattier the Ministry manitor disposal of bodies in sivers and wheiher any

_ teflable statistics in [his regard were being maintained, the Ministry ¢eptled fi the

negative. . a

14.9 Declared biologically dead in the 19503, the recovery work of the River Thames in
Britain rosulled in robounding its biodiversity and fi hories and ifs been reportad that
while bestowing the warld’s largest environmental award, the International Theiss River
Prize, 2040 - the consideration for which focused among ofhers on’ the Innovative projects
put in place which included ‘working with (0009, which has helped to reduce polfution
from nutifents and pestickies'

"44.10 The. Oepactment related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and

Technolagy, Environment and Forests. in thair 112th Report on Demands for Grante.



a

163+

(2603-2064) of the MoEF presented to tha Houses on 02.05.2003 had also raferrod to the
successful cleansing of the Thames River. In this context, the Gammiltee sought to kraw
whether the Ministry has ever studied? identified the thrust of the sticcess factors which
led ta the déansing of tHe River Thames in Britain for any possible replication therenf in
the endeavours towards affective countor poliufion measures, ‘The MaFF thereupon
reptied that the Delhi Government fhrough Delhi Jai Board (028) had studied the sirategy
adopted by tho Thames Water Awhorlly for cleaning the river and adopted ‘some of the
elements ९ inlerception of sewage and induskiat effluent and their diversion for
treatrient, and upgradation of existing sawage treatment plants, etc. The Central
Potution Control Beard (CPCS) too worked with the Scienlsts, Thames Water Authority
on fiver Ganga for conducting some stidy similar to the ong successfully conducted an
aver Thames. |

44.11 Keeping In view the demonstrated success of ‘working with larmers’ in. the
cleansing of fiver Thames, the Commmittes enquired whether the Ministry have identified
Yarmers' as a special focus in their Public Participation, Information, Educafion and
Communication (IEC) activites statedly being taken up, which may have a great potential
in praducing effective results in containing pollution from agricuitural sources. The WoEF
thereupon replied that under the Department of Agriculture & Cooperation (DACY’

Central Sector Scheme “Mass Medla Support to Agricultural Extension’, Oourdarshan
and All India Radio are being utilized to make the farmers aware about modern farm
technologles and researches related to agriculture and allied areas.

14.12 ‘The Committee were ‘also informed that Minisuy of Agriculture and concemed
Departments ‘ara introducing best management practices sa that water quality Is nol
affected dus lo agricultural run off. CPCB is concemed with recipient water bodies and In
that’ context communicated to Ministry of Agriculture for awareness of fasming
communtiles ia use opiimum water, fertilizers. and pesticides. The MoEF further sfated
the Ministry of Agriculture may continue the farmers field school (FFS) and the Integrated
Pest Management (208) In 8 bigger way to address the issue.

14.15 On a furtker query as to whether any study was.being undertaken fo assess the
effectiveness of such awareness drive and whether it has yielded any demonstrable
results, the MoEF stated Ihat evaluation of Central Sector Schesne “Streagthening and

Modernization of Pest Management Approach in India” was conducted by Natlonal-

Prockuativily Council (NPC}, Chandigarh during 2009. The NPC has inter-alia suggestod



integrated Pest

हम मे

(Vianagemont (IPM) as a holistic appreach tor pest masiagement/crop

health management. Tho bonefils which accrued under tha schems are 88 under:

a}

b)

Field based JPM training to ७७ through FTSs empowered them with

knowledge on Agro Eco-System (AESA) which enabled them to monitor
crop pest silustion and helped to raise health of crops, witht 109 input

6091 on pest managemont;

JEM plogianwtie eacousaged good agricutturat practices by farmers’

* including abservance of waiting period thereby ensuring 1000 satety with
: reference to pastcides rasidtas, for domestic and export markets:

q

d

¢

IPM programme helped in prasérvation of eco system and environment
by reducing poltution In sof, water and alr, due to limited use of
chemical pestcldes,

The Component-lmplementation of PM programme helped in assisting
State Departnenfs of Agriculturo/Horticultira in pest and’ disease
monitoring and issuing timely warning to farmers, enabling them to plat
in-advance actions raquired for pest management;

ieiprovement in capacity building and’ decision making abilily of
extention functionaries, personrel from NGOs, iCrishi Vigyan Keridras
{KVKs), Stale Agricultuce Universities (SAUs), pesticide deaters, etc.

14.14 If was farthor submitted that at the national level, oeneficlal impact of [PM has

been observed though thé following indicatocs:-

i)

‘the IPM strategy has celluced dependence on chemical pesticides
for pest management Reduction én pestickle use’ has ‘been
observed to an extent of 52% to-100% in Rice, 29.96% ta 55% in
catten in deittonstrafion fields conducled by the Central integrated
Pest. Management Centres (CIPMCs) localed In 28 States and 1 UF:

; “Uso of bio pasticidssfneem based pesticides increased from 123 MT

- during 1994-95 ty 8000 MT dulay 201 1-12)



+165-

iil) Qver all consumption of chemical pesticide in the Country has
raduced fron 75,033 MT (tech. Grade} during 1999-91 to 50,983
AMY (1.0.) durlng 2041-12, ह
44.15 Querled whether In actoal, practica, tho FFSs are functional with adequate
infrastructure 300 manpower, the MoEF stated that IPM i$ a companent of Deparlment of

Agriculture and Cooperation’s (DAC's) Scheme “Strengthening & Modernization of Pest °

Management Appraach in India" under which FFSs are boing impternented through 31

Central IPM Gentes located In 28 States and 4 UT,

14.16 About the number of such schools af over the country, the MoEF replied the
Directorate of Plant Prateation, Quarantine & Storage (UPPQ&S) is organizing neatty 700
FFSs annually in 28 States and 1 UT. In addition, State Governments have also bean
organizing such schools. it was further submitted that these Schools were run by the
DPPQKS Ubrough fs Central Integrated Pesl Management Centres (CIPMCs}. They are
manned by the technical staff of CIPMCs who are Government officials. Though no
teacher was appointed fo run FFSS and farmers are involved In each of the FFSs and
aifendance is nearly 100%. हैं

4447 Asked about the adequacy of monitoring mechanism ta ensure praper functioning

-_of such schools, the MoEF replied in the affirmative and stated (hat the activities of FFSs

run by CIPMs are monitored by the DPPQ&S, Faridabad.

14.18 The Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Sclenca and
Tachnolagy, Environment and Forasis in their 412th Report on Dentands tor Grants
(2003-2004) af the Mo&F presented to Parliament on 62.05.2003 had also recommended
that the thirteen prohibitive actions contalned in the Bramhanda Purna of the Hindu
Mythology to maintala the 0५71 of the Ganges can be Incorporated by the Ministry in
Their norms for prohibtting activities to Koop the river clean. Para 39 of the aforesaid
Report is teproduced below ४ ;

“Our rivers have been revered throughout ages, Our tradition invested divinity with
our rivers. Pages of our mythologies show as to how norms ware prescribed to
, keap tha water of the’ Ganges clean, The Commiltee observed that the
Bramhanda Puria prohibited thirteen actions to malntaln the pisity of the Ganges.
- Soma of thasa are (i) defecations (il) ablutions {ili) discharge of waste water (पं
throwing of used floral offerings (v} rubbing of filth (९) body shampooing {vii}
Folicking i) acceptance of donations [nla the rivers (ix) obseantty (x) discarding
or cleaning of garments (xi) beating and swimming across,. The Cornmiltee



-166-

recommends that many of these can be incorporated by the Ministry In their nanns
for prohibiting activities to keep the Ganges clean."

14.19 In this context, MoEF was asked to stale whether ‘any serious consideration has

beon giver to the recommendations towards making a reference of the Bramhanda Puma *
which may have inuense potential fa dissuading people ‘from faduighig # rétigious,
* practices leading’ ta considerable poltition of the river; the Ministry replied that National

Mission Clean Ganga (NMCG} has taken this as an important reference and it is part of
the NMCG's communications and public outreach campaign for during Kumbi mela.

$4.20 On the steps belng taken’ propased by MoEF te disseminate the information

regarding industiess factories polluling water bodies, amangst general public, the MoEF
stated that Cenitrat Pollutien Control Board (CPCB) was conducting various studies for
assessment and contol of pollution caused by industrial sources, The assessment
faports, action taken report, directions isstied fo industries under Ihe Water (Prevention
and Control of Potiution) Act 4974 and Environment Protection} Act, 1986 was posted
on the website of Central Pollution Control Board (0708) and State Pollution Controt
Boards (90089) for dissemination and information of generat public.

14.21 On a polnted query as te whether fhe data on such polluting industries/ factories

” would be avaltabla in public domain, tha MoEF stated that Centrat Pollution Cantrot Board

(७768) has been cunducting various studies for assessment and control of pollution
caused by industidal saurcas. The assessment reports, action taken report, directtons
issued to indusitles under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act 1974 and
Enviroriment (Protection) Act 1988 is posted on fhe website of Ihe Cential Pollution
Controf Board and 818 State Pollution Conirof Boards for dissemination,

44.22 The Read -Map brought oul by the MoEF lor ‘Management of Water Poiltution In

india’ specifically mentions consultations at the stage of formulation and_implementation’

of projects to ensure uutiye jnyolvement of various slakeholders and the ivi society te
generale support and encourage ownership. Tha Road Map recognises lhat effective

civil Society / pliblic participation can only bring about full success of the pragramme, As ,

per the tevised guidetines, It Is necessary to formulate an effective public education,
awareness and participajion programme ‘as part of DPR so as lo make the pidjacts
socially acceptable. An expert agency wilh righl kind of backgrourid and experience’ ntay
be angaysd to formulate Public Participation strategy. Two. types of outcomes are
expected fram this activity, “The first one Is public participation and through it agreement

en complex 19५88 like halise’ connections, water cofservaticn at hauscheld’ levels, ...



2167-

propes callsction of garbage 30 thal it does not choke sewers/drains, sharing increased -
burden of O&M cost, proper layaul of sewerage systems and location of STPs, diffusing >

ronfliets, if any, on programme components, ofc. ‘This cart be dest achieved through
consuttution at various stages of project formulation and Imnplementalion. The second ane
is Iereasing pubtic’ understanding aboul the programmes through awareness, This

should 98 achieved through workshops, seminars, straet plays, city 109 and tverside *

walks. Active involvement of students and teachers conrnunily in schools and colleges
can gfeally tefp In achieving the objectives. Public can also play the cofe of a watchdog In
supervising project implementation and operation arid maintenance which would help
Improve the qualily of the programme. Emphasis may be placed on increasing public

_ Patticipafion under NGRBA. Apart from firing expert agencies for this purpose,

- arrangements to involve Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan have. been put in place, which

should be integrated vith this component,

44.23 The Departinerit Related Parliamentary Standing Committee dn Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests In their 224th Report on -Demands far Grants
(2012-13) presented 10 the Parliament on 18,5.2042 in Para 11.4 observed that 8 hugs
investment incurred Under various schemes/projects, pollution -tavel in both the tivers i.e.
the Ganga and the Yamuna continues to Inetease unabated, with the condition. of

- Yarouna, vietually turned into 9 ‘Nala! to carry sewage faifing inlo il free vatlous drains

- and water quality of the Ganga having not shown any significant Improvement either and

continues to be a major concern for the erviroamentatist, as well 85, Ahe coranion man.

14.24 Significance of rivers and water hodies in Indkin scriptures

The Indian scriptures. attach great importance to the rivers and water bodies, The rivers
occupy an exalted pasition elevaiing them to diviwty. A hynin In the ‘Rig Veda’ reads:
"सरस्वती ay सिन्धुरूमिभिर्महों महीरवसा Fy यक्षिणीः| चर
देवीराभो wae GEARY घृत॒वत्पयों गधुगन्नो अर्चत {Nadya Sukta 10.75)
"The River Hym of the Rig Veda invokes twenty-one tivers of tha.
> [तब peninsula to fall inthe sacred oblalons as the protectars of .

-fumankind. The seets descilbe the rivers as mothers, thelr
Insplrations and the bastowers of yater filed with, ‘butter and honey! *.



-168-

- There ave hymns in the Atharva Veda in praise of streams. For example:

arnt मच्छाध्वणिजागियों अध्यरीयतामूत
peter पथ 164.1)
"As mothers always bring happiness to their chitdiren, in the same
* mares, |
The streams, nourishérs of mankind, flow Incessantly, adding’ milk
and honey to their waters all the way"

अपूर्या उप सूर्य याभिवा yek ae
हि ता वो हिन्चन्त्तध्नरम। 11.4.2}
. "May these steams of water Which are contiguous fo the Sun (In the

sense that water Is cared away by rays) and those waters with ©
which the Sun is associated, be propitious fo our sacred work and

worship.

ar न्तरंप्रतमप्सु GT |

अपाजु् प्रशस्तिशिरश्वा Teer बाजियों गायों woer वाजिनीः।॥(.4.4)
"0 leamed persons, may you Know faat there is ambrosia in the
waters; there 9 healing balm in them, and there are medicinal herbs;
know this, and by thelr proper ‘usa become vigorous {ike harsas and
kine."

omar fF sor मयोभुवस्ता- न 'ऊर्ण दधातन।

महे रणाय wens | LS.)

~ginee, waters, you are the source of happiness, grant to. us energy”

giving food, and an insight to enjoy your divine splendour
* ततश्मा अरं गमाम वो यरय क्षयाय Fear
आपो ज॑नक्था च नः (॥1.5.3)
"May we, O waters; quickly come to you for food, shelter and
procreant strength which you are always pleased 10 bestow upon us",
ईशाना क्र्याणां क्षयत्त्रीश्वर्षणीदाम्‌।
set याचामिं Fara] 41.5.4)

"0 waters,’ soversigns of precious xeasures, and granters of ©

habitations men, | solic of you medicine {for the cure of my
~ jnfitmitis: Z 7

. शं॑ नो देवीरभिष्टप आपो a पीतये।
न, af योरभि weg नः1/(1.6.1) -



189.

“May the divine waters be propitious te us, for the पिता of
desires, and for our drinking. Let them shower on us joy and
fearlessness”. है रा :

any} सोभों अब्रवीदन्तविश्वानि भेषज़ा।
; afd थे विश्वक्षणुवरगं1॥1.6.2)
"Wise men 18५७ acclaimed that within the waters dwelt all balms that हु
heat, . पु . _
The waters contain all the healing herbs, and also the fire, the

- * benefactor of the universe”.

_ आए: eat भेषज वरूष तच्ये३ मम |
ज्योक्च सूर्य दृशे।!(.8.3)
“Wales, 0006 to perfection all disease-dispetling medicaments for the
up-keep of my body, so that] may live lang to see the bright sun”.

. श॑ न om) IRAE शमु सन्त्यमूष्या:।
श॑ कः wafer ome wg थाः. कुम्म आभृताः शिवा नः weg वार्षिकीः |॥1.6.4) .
“May (he waters of desert be for our well-being; also for well-being the
waters of the low lands. May the waters dug out from earth be for our
well-being, alse be Danoficial for us tiay-giving to us”.

शिवेन मा MNT पश्यतापः शिवया wale स्पृशत्त वचे में।
चूवश्वुतः aA AT: पावकास्ता न ऑपः शै॑ स्थोना भवन्तु ॥॥.33.4)
"0 elemental waters, may you behold me with an auspicious glance;

may you touch my skin with your body. Dripping luster, glittering here ,

and {hat are purifying, may those elemental waters be gracious and
Pleasing to us".
; ये किमयः पर्वतेषु वनेष्योषधीएु Tear: |
. ये spre at माविविशु: सर्व तद्धन्मि जनिम किमीणामू॥(ी,31.5)
हि "The worms, that are found in the hilly 1७६/009, in the forests, Inside the
atinals and in waters, and that have entered our bodies, | hereby
destroy thelr ४५४३ generation®. . .

Sar आप: प्र॑ RRP यक्षमनाशनीः | ,
serge भर भ्ीदश्यमृतेन सहाम्िया (1. 12.9)
"| bring here these waters, free from wasteful disease .(consurnption}
and ‘destroyers of the wasteful diseaée. | enter these. houses with tha.
_ never-dying fire” re

. Tho Yajurveda alse. refers to the biesattgs of potable Water :



3

-170-

watt देवीरभीष्टय आपो भवन्तु पीतये,
* sea Brera], न: (36/12)
*May this divine water ba the bastowor of uitteiata bliss and may it be
potable, May it shower happiness on us हु

44.25 Another later composition, the strotra:Ratnaval" also celebrates ‘blessed waters’ of

" the tlver Ganga.

sat गंगें तय पद -पैकजस,

सुरासुर बन्दित विव्यकृफा, |
मुद्तिम्‌ a भुग्तिम्‌ a ददाशि नित्यम्‌,

भावानुसारेण सदा नराणाम्‌ ||

. *O Ganga, | bow to your totus fest, the gods and the demons worship
your divine marvfestation;
Etematly, Yoo are provider of liberation and satiety according t the -~
desire (‘bhava’) of human heings:

14:26 The Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and

Technology, Environment and Forests in thetr 1 120 Report, lald tn Padiament on 2 tay,

2003, observes:

"छत rivers have been fevered throughout ages. Our tradition invested
divinity with our rivers, Pages of our mythologies show as lo how 7015 |
were prescribed to keep the water of the Ganges clean. The Committee |,
observed that the Bramheda Puraa prohibited thirteen actions to x
maintain the purity of the Ganges. Some of these are @ defecations (9)
ablulions fii) discharge of waste water (iv) throwing of used floral
Gfferings (४) rubbing of filth (vf) body shampecing {vii} froticking {viii}
acceptance of donations inte the sivers (06 obscanity (x) discarding or
cleaning of garments (xf) beating and swinning across".



“UM

(CHAPTER - X¥

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMEMPATIONS

1. Need for introspection and recognizing water asa finite and, vulnerable
resourca: The Commitfes vole that water remains the basis of all lifo.
Undouhtodly, access to safe, clear and adequate fresh water is vital to the
survival of all organisis and the smoath functioning of key systeme, entilies and

econainles, Prevention of Water pollution has heen a matter af deep ‘concern with -

ihe Comittee. Tha Cominitiee in thelr 62nd Report had emphasised fnter-alia,
on Institution of urget measures to accelerate the pace of work on control of
pollution and concurred with the ‘heneficiarios pay’ and ‘poliuters pay’ principles.
The Gommitiee are deeply dismayed to note that despite their wide ranging
recommendations mada earlier, water pollution has raached alarming proportion

In most of the rivers/water bodes, The Stakeholders' Conference on Environment ~

Audit held in July, 2009 flagged wator polfution as the most important
environmental issue. The C&AG conducted a comprehensive Porformance Audit
of Water Pollution in India during 2070-41, Audit examined 140 projects across
24 polluted stretches of rivers, 22 lakes and 116 blocks across 25 states of India.
The Audit findings reveal certain very disquisting aspects which jnter-alfa include
inadoquacles ti fhe Legislatlve, 2016५ and hisiitutional framawork; gross
daticlencles in the planning for confrol of pollution of ‘rivers, lakes’ and
groundwater with incomplete Inventorisation of fiversflakes and keystone
specias associated with hem and non-ldentificatian of existing pollation levels,
quantification of contaminants, ete; unsatisfactory performance and shortfalls In
ihe Imptementation af programmes such as National River Conservation
Programm (NRCP} and National Lake Congervation Programmes (NLCP}. Notably,
Watar pollution in 16 14 mafor and 58 minor and several hundreds mora rivers of
india remains a serious problem with mijlians of titres of sewage, Industrial and
agriuullural waste discharged Into these rivets with a mere 10% of such waste
water generated being treated, presently. Worse, lakes and ground water are

tinder severe threat from the impact of pollation. Thoudh the Committoe's

nted uyon in the preceding Chapters, the Committee are. of the
lisquieting aucit_revelati

considered view that the rather

all for, 01008.



~172-

minimum potable water to all free of cost, >

2. HeightenIng awareness of students : The Commuittas are happy fo nate that _
their initiative to seek public views from alt ovar the Country inviting suggestions

on ‘Prevention of Wafer Pollution in India’ received a heat tenting response. The
Soimiltse note the profound concern of the citizens over water polfution and
mounting water scarcity across the country, Considering the signiticance ‘and
paramount importance of Public Awareness, Commnunity Involvement and
Partlolpation in tackling he issue of water pollution, the Committee's findings,
observations and recommendations of this important aspact have been
enumerated In Chapiar XIV of this. Ropar, Ths Conunittco .are, however,
particufarly happy to observe thai tho Ministry of Human Resources {Department
of ‘School Education, and Literacy) have taken some initiatives to sensitise
impressionable minds of students on environmental issues including ihe need

* for prevention of water polJution as onumerated in their Detaifed Note reproduced

in Asmexure ॥ of the Report. However, वाणी more needs 10 be done ७1 ६
sustalned basis to build and disseminate awareness tight from the primary
school level. The fundamental duties of citizens as enshrined In eur Constitution
partlcularly one for protectian of the onvironment further heeds to be highlighted,

(i) The existing inttlatives to sensitise students and. the gen existing initiatives to sensitize students and the eneral public on lig on
prevention of water polfution and_other environmental issuss ha further
strongthaned keeping in _ylew the fundamental duty of avery citizen to keonisg in yiow the fuadamantal duty of avery citizen to -
Brofect and impro improve the natural enviroument inctuding forests, iziq forests, lakes ane,
wild Hfe: हि है हे

(8) Appropriate Teachers Orientation i Programmes be designed and renutar
taining imparted te the teachers; and

(ti) The 3188 specific hazards of wafer pollution, whether surface 80 ground _



"3... Need for Nati

At.

water, be publicised regularly and widoly and useful devicestt

{he Committee may be aporised of the action taken jn the matier,

al consensus on Water ; The Committae note that the
Directive Prisiciples of State Policy enshrined ia article 48A of the Constitution
enjoins upon the State to make endeavour for protection and improvement of the

anvironmnent. Article S1A(g) casts an obligation upan every citizen of India to .

protect and impsove the natural environment. The Gonimittee are, however,
deeply dismayed that water poifution remains the largest ead mounting
environmental hazard, The Committes are deeply ‘concerned to note that thé
praparation of Wator Quality Managemant (WOM) Plan by the State Governments
in‘accordance with the quidelines circulated hy the MoEF is hanging fire as
‘Water’ & a State subject (Entry 47, List Il, 7th Schedule). Furthor, the 73rd and
74th amendments fo the -Constitution endowlig the Panchayats and
Municipantles with the esponsibility of management of water and sanitation have
diluted tha power of States ag the Paltutlon Contral Boards are not aquipped with
any Consiltutional/Legal provisions to take action against local authorities in
cases of nol complianco/non enforcement with respect fo Water Pollution. The
Commiltes observe that thls dichotomy needs to be addressed urgenily to bring
about distinct clarity on the role and responsibilitios- of various authorities for
prevention of water pollution and environmental degradation. In thls coitext, tha

1 Committee also note ॥ the Departnientally Related Parliamentary Standing

Committee on Wator Resources in their 107 Report of 157 Lok Sabha had

. stressed on the need to build tiatloaal consensus to bring ‘watar’ either in the
. Union List of tt the Concurront List. The Natiana! Water Policy, 2012 recognizes

the rights of the States ta frame suitable policies, laws and regulation on water
and alsa emphasized on ihe fesd to evolve a broad over-archting cational legal

: framework of general principles on water. The Committee concur with the

_ Iscommendation of the DRSC on Water Resources and urge the Government to
take urgént urgént action ta set the stage for enactment of ४ comprehensive national *

lat

 Jegistatton on wator after evolving a broad nz national consensus. consensus, to bring water hi

the Concurrent fist and formate an over-arching national 19791 framework for
effective water management. conseryation, development and - equitable
distribution with adequate urovisions for doyolution of necessary authority fo the



“14

es of citizens {0 protest and
abiding forests, lakes, x ofc. may be well

“4 Implementation of the Road Man :-The. Committee observe with profound
concern that though the Watar (Rravantion and Coritro! of Poilution) Act, 1974 is
in place, thie law heifher speciiically identifies potlutton as an environmental
offence nor address the restoration of water bodies as a priority action, Further,
the existing tegislations relating to control and prevention of water poltution viz.
the Water {Provontlon and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, the Water Pravention
and Conlral of Pollution) 66४४ Act, 1977 and the Environment (Protection) Act
1986 fall short-of in many vital aspects including enforcing compliance in cases
of violation, Needlass to say, a $tiong, camprohensive and vibrant legal
Framework with a strict enforcement regime is a dire stecessity for effective water
quality protection and polluiton prevention. The Committee also note that
consequent to the Audit Report, an expert Committee, constituted by the MaEF in
consultation with tho Planning Commission, has brought out a Road Map for
Prevention of Water Pollution m1 India for tn plementation of the
recommendations/observations made In. the Audit Report within the existing legal

_ and Constitutional framework. Tha Road Map recommends an-amendment to tho
* Enviroment (Protection Act), 1986 fo addresa various Important issues 1

environmental management viz, hike in penaites for contravention .of -Ks
provistons; a civil adnsinistrative adjudication system to ensure fast. tracking of
tha imposition of ponaltios on anvironmentaf offenders; provision for furnishing
Sukable bank guarantees fer speclic performance and for resiorallon of
damaged environment; establishment of a National Environmental Appraisal and

‘Monitoring Authority (NAEMA) to carry out, onvironmontal appraisals and

monitoring of compliance conditions. The Committee are dismayed to note that
no tanglble action has been {nitlated to Implement-the Read Map for prevention

and contro} of water pollution and effective environniontal managemont. The :

Committee therefore tecommend that urgent and time bound aetion be taken to therefore recommend that urgent and time bound aetion be taken to
implement the Read Map and the Gommitfee apprised in due course. -Further, the

Commities recommend that action be also“taken’ for s sustained involvement of
enlightoned citizens, farmers, youth, NG NGOs, ‘academicians and (| the public to keep
ant effective and unremiitiag vight on pollution of water [7९

ther SRE RETIRE



-195-

monitoring mechanisms for check cheeking |
tachnological support enitoring water quality 10 addition to. di

awareness about indigenous methods and t

aud farmers: stringeat monit
Inlake noints; ०९.

5... Comprehensiv (of Leqistation : The Conunittes nota that le bo
major pollutants of rivers and lakes across the country are sawaga and industdal
effluents, Against an ostimated sewage generation of about 38264 MLD from only
class | Cities and class ॥ Towas of the Country, the avaiiabte trealinent capacky
is for 2 mere 11787 MLD sewage. Worse, nearly 39% of sewage treatment plants

+ de nof conform to tha affluent dischargs standards prescribed tnder the

Environment (Protection) Rutos for discharge into streams. Adntittedly,
Inadequate resources coupled with growing papulation with proportionate

‘increase in seways generation as well 4s acute shoriage of trained manpower
and poor technolegy hinders total sewage collection and treatment facility in

almost every fownicify af tha Country. The Cominittee were apprised that ब two
pronged strategy, one financial incentive and twa, legisiative suppost through

creation of an exclusive financiat Institution to cater te over Increasing demand of

funds’ for funding high cost sewerage and industrial poliution control ratated

projects; private participation 10 face ihe challenge of sewage collection and its

treatment; and a national level designated singla agency to deal with sanitatlon
sector aro being considered as part of the major reforms in this sector. Keeping
in view serlous structural lacunae and weaknesses In the fenislative framework,

ihe Comunitts Somnitiee recommend :

(0). A comprehensive review of al} oxisting legislailons 08 carried tor creation arried for creation

of a consolidated leaislailve framewbrk to address the critical challenges

_ being faced in the contral of potlution ot. water hath polat.and non-potht
sources expeditiouslyin a lima hound manner: _

(i) Scparatian of sewers and rivers 80: as fo ban sewaus Waatm of sewers and rivers $0" as. fo ban sewage Waatment,at the
- moulh of vers and consequent discharge of treated sewage waste inta
water bodies

suitable uses;

diversion of such waste for agricullore/hortiouliurofother



I

ANG:

tot

related projects;.

_ tiv) Financial incentive: incenflives viz. Tax benok fitsisubsicioatmarket suppart for sewage

Wy ment of a nvironmontal Appraisal arg
Monitoring At ily {NEAWA
envisaged in fhe Road May:

(vi) Appropriate 18681 interventic interventions for increasing the numi

related cases as well as establishment of an alternate civil admi
agludication system, as already envisagod, to ensure fast tracking of
water pollution | allution related elated cases; econonile Instruments for pollution control
gompllance; technological, support for constant unaradation of palfuti of alfution

jstrative

(vl) Appronrlate and effective 18991 provisions for enabling activa involverient

of the Civil Society 10 tha pravention | and_control of pollution of water

through pattnership modols far monitoring and : surveillance, establishment
of . .

itizens Ombudsmen, etc.

6. Stringent penal provision for water pollution neaded : The Committee aro

startled to observe that tha maximum penalty/fino in casa of water poihition as
proscribed under the Wator Act of 1974 is limited to a mere % 10,000/-.
Apparenily, such an undeterring penaity proviston coupled with a trighty tolerant
Inspection ragima af the State Pollution Control Boards [82085] sncourayes
defiance, nan-adhoronce and violations rather than compilance of the law,
Admittedly, a proposal for enhancing the minimuns penalty franz % 10,008 to z
1,00,000 for. violation of the Water Act, #974 and the Environment (Projection)
Act, 1986 without amending the provisions for imprisonmomt with maxifaum
panaity upto हैं 40 crore was under consideration. Water 09010 4 State subject, the

Central Goverument by Ministry's owt: admisston, can only supplement .the



_ Mere-887, carried out by the Environmeatal Survelifance Squad (ESS) of Cental

-\77-

efforts of tho State Governments and the initlative for enhancing penaitics has te
coma eventually from the States, The Comnmilteé further tind that us per the
provisions. of sections 25/26 of the Water Act, 1974, na industry or treatment
disposal system ran be established without tho previous consent of the State
Pollution Controt Board and discharge of sewage or trade effiuants in oxceys of
the standards preserthed fs pisishable wlth imprisonment upto six ‘years
alongwith fine, Ackmittedty, section 334 of the-Watar Act for initiating penal action
for water poliution waa effective only for Incdtistrios and has hot worked well in
fie doniestic sector as weli as for local authorities, with the transfer of subject of
sanitation to the local bodies vide tho 73% and 747" amendments fo the
Constitution. The aniy option loit of taking locai authorities fa tho courts for non-

conipllance is Undoubtedly, a tedlous and time consuming process, Notably;
other options like enhancing costs are being explored. While acknowledging that
calculating damage costs of environmerit remains a very complicated matter as
futuristic cost elements have aloo to be taken, the Committee observe that only
mere levy of damage costs by way of enhancing Pondlties may not as such
become an affective deterrent. The dismal number af Inspections, totalling fo a

Poflutia Control Board (CPCB) in last three years (2309-2012) on 1055 grossly
poliuting industriss In the 0०७४9 generating as much as 9982 MLD efiluents
_ reveals the wealnesses Ik the enforcement regine for-pollution of watar vis-a-vis
the quantum of pollutants generated. Conipared to this, the total number of
Courts cases flied under the Water Act ay on 30.06.2012 stood at a fair 6320, alsa
indicailve of the latge number of violations taking place all over the country. The -
- Committee further nate that, directions issved under seclians § and 18(4}(b} of
the Water Act, 1974 during the last 3. years (2009-2912} totalling to 118 and 495
respectively included 7 directions issued to NGRBA Under section 18(1)(b} of the
Act. The Committee therefore recuininend that:

i) The proposat for enhancing the minimum ‘penalty from हैं 49,000 to ₹
1,600,600 for violation of the Water Act, 1974 880 the Environment
{Protection) Act, 19388 without amending the provisions for imprisonment imprisonment
with maximum penalty ७७६० ₹ 10 erare be ally upto % 10 crore be Implemested expeditiously;

fii) Other options for ensuring complance options for ensuri: complance to non polluting norms _by- the
duinestic sectors as wall as for local authqrities may also be explored;



18
iA robust
mm

ater Inspection reyline be put it place with inbuilt provisions for
well as surprise checks by an enip and woll-

{iv} Ado uate funds bo provided by tho Union and the State Governments for

- this purpose and fhe necessary thanpewer be trained to. work _in tls:

ragime,

no Implementation of National Water Policy : The Commiltee observe that the
National Water Policy was ariopted in 1987, reviewed ॥ 2002 and updated In
2012. Furthes, the National Conservation Strategy and Policy Stalement on
Environment and the National Environment Policy were formulated 9 1992 and
2008. These documonts form the broad policy framework ‘of environmental
issues piacing the addressal of water poltution as one of the thrust areas, The
Comittee observe with serlous concer that while only 18 States have framod
Water Policy, most of them do not give adaquafo omphasis to Prevention and
Cootro! of Water Pollution except the Stale Government of Kerala which seeks to
address water poilution issues. 1०३79, 14 States have already- enacted tha
Ground Water Sill and another 16 States have taken initiatives for enactment of
*, such a Bill based on tho Modo! Bill circulated to the StatesfUnion TereHories for
Regulation and Control of Ground Water Development and Management. The
Committee further find that as regards 90109 framework, the Road Map for
‘Management of Water Pollution in India’ prepared by the MoE in consultation
with the line Ministrica addressos various important issues in environmental
Management Viz. hike In the penalties for coutraventlon of its provision, a civil
administrative adjudication system to ensure fast tracklng of the imposition of
penalties for ‘environmental offenders: ‘proposal io establish a Naffonal
Environmental Appraisal and Monitoring Authority (NAEMA] to carry out
environmental appraisals and monitoring of compitance conditions; effing up of
Bureau of Water Efficiency [RWE) under tha Water Rosourcos Ministry; Iegal

eniily status to common effiuent treatment plants to facilltate investments and °

enablé> enforcement of standards; encouragement of integrated Pest
Management (PM) and uss of biodegradable hesticides as alao . explicit
accounting of groundwater pollution in pricing policies of agricuttural inputs;
establishment of. bio-congervative zone around water body; ‘ialegrated water



179

resources Ruaagement, etc. Taking note of the laudable objoctives of ‘the

National Water Policy, 2012, tha Committee recotnn Fscomnmend +

ही). The National Water Hoard urgently prepare a plan of

tlonal Water Policy, 2042:

monitortne. of implantentation of th:

{ti)

Environmant Policy 1982;

(iil) Mandatory perlodic syoview be made of the. th implementation, of various
polictes relevant to the Issue of watar_polkillon, environmental
conservation and findings theraof publicly disciosed ; and

(vi) The proposals rolled out In the Road Map pertalilg to_poticy framework framowork
99 Implemented in Nght earnast to achieve the stated objectives within the

given lime frame and the Committee apprised.

“vii An inventory of all water bodies including riv rivérs, Jakes, ponds, streants,
wells, etc, be made _and digitalised within a time bound programme,

8. identification of systemic deficlencles and need for, qreater_synaray

between CPCB snd SPCBs : The Committee note that the policy making
Taspansiblilty for preventing polution of riversflakes rests with the Ministry of

Environment and Forests (MoEF) and Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB)
and the Central Ground Water Board (CGW6j in the Ministry of Water Resources
(MoWR).-(m plementation of these, policy maasures rests with the. National River

” Conservation Directorate (NRCD) for River/Lake Poflution and “MoEF and MoWR

for Ground Water; and . for monitoring of tiverfiake poliution, the designated

authorities are NRCDICPGB and for ground water pollution, its CGWB and the.

Water Quality Assessment Authority (WQAA}: The Committee further observe
that in most States, the responsibility of control of water pallation has been
assigned to the Stats Poilufion Contiel Boards (SPCBs), Surprisingly, beside a



“189-

multitude of autharitles, the Committee pote sheer wait of functlonal co-relafion
between them especially between the CPCB and SPOBs, The Committee ara
appallad to find glaring systemic woaknesses and deficiancios fike lack of trained
manpower; acute need for cleaner lochnologies for frdating waste; tack of
adequale number of laboratotles for waley quailty monitoring, grossly inadequate
funding: inadequate Infrastructure facifilies; virtial non-existence of 16050
with technical axparts such as from: री; grossly inadequate staffing for
inspection by SPCBs; etc. which have undoubtedly affected the performance of
these existing Institutions. fhe Committee th ‘afore would like to be apywisad of

{i} A comprehensive review of the present Kstltutlonal set up be cartled out
to_rectity existing lacunae_so that the varlous agencies work in tandem

with complate synergy or an ८ complate synergy or an apa laad agency be sot up with powers of
enforcement;

{ii) Major reforma_undas_consideration for capacity augmentation and
strengthening of existing institu of _existin: institutions for optimum uff for_optiniamny utilisation through
adequate resource funding, addressing infrastructural and {rained
Manpower constraints be implemented within a tine bound pi bound programme;

(lif} Initiatives already stated to be In process may be implemented in a ilme

bound manner to yield the desized positive oyteomes: and

(iv) Linkages be established with premier third party agencise__ like

, ITsiResearch Instltutes/__Universities/Experts for a__lilistic,_mutti- holistic, mutti-

disciplinary appraach for appitcat application of best available 18५ Hable techniques fo uive
greater Impetus fo the national drive for water pollution control,

3. Enforcement of uniform Viater Quality Manitotitig R of uniform Water Quality Manitothig Regine * The Committee
are dismayed to find thal the Water Guallty Assessment Authority (४०४४),

mantlated ta diract agencies to standardize water quality monitoring mathads, -
eisuro proper treaiment of waste water te restore water quality of boll surface ~
and ground water, lake up R&D activity related to water quafity management and _

sromote recycling and reuse of treated waste water, fad issuad oniy Uniform

दा १७५ een ना



-181-

Monltoring Protocof {UMP) In 2005. Though a Task Force had recommeixied for
development ef Water Quality Daia infotmation System {WQDES} for coardinaisd

collection, use and dissemination of data and review of water quality monitoring
network, etc, WQAA was yet to take action for promoling recycling ०7 re-use of
sewagellndustvial effluents, drawing up action plans for quality improvements In
water bodies, schemes for-resttiction of water abstraction, roviewIng’ lhe statis
of natural water resources, identifying hotspots, otc. The Committee are
distressed to nota that Water Quality Reviow Committees (४0६०5), though
constituted in 17 States as of March, 2013, they were largely inactive. Regular
meetings of WQRCs were held only in Makarashtra and Hhnachal Pradesh
Warso, audit polated that the Water Quailty Assessment Authorlly fad only
seven meetings since its inception In 2001, Admittadly, water qualify monitoring
was being presently carrisd out at 1700 locatians under the Natural Water Quality
Monitoring Progéammne (NWQMP) carried out by the Central Polhitlon Control
Board /State Pollution cantral Boards In addition to Groundwater quallty
monitorlng being carried out at 15,000 statlons mostly In rural areas hy Central
Ground Water Board and polluted river strotchesiwater bodies identified. The
Committee are appatied 10 note the alarming hicrease in polluted stretches from
10 In 1988-89, 37 In 1992 and exponentially to 156 in 2040, Statediy, WQAA is
pursuing wkh State Governments ta prepare Water Quality Managemant Plan for

each ahd every State with necessary guidelines already ini circulation besides

implementation of the National Lake Conservation Plan (NLCP) since June 2001
for treatmentirejuvenation of polluted/degraded lakes through an fnteqrated
reasystem approach. The Committee note that 62 lakes have already boon

identified across the Country for conservation, though the Government have not

Indicated how matty lakes are there in the Couniry, The Committee however,
dsplare that WOAA has miserably 7819० to discharge the onerous mandate given
to it. Further, 10 thal: deep dismay, hone of the States have prepared Water
Quality Mianagemont Plain despite quidelines issued by the WGQAA. The

Committae are, however, pleasad to uote the elaborate: monitoring of water ,
-qualily network done hy CPCB ai 1429 stallons covering 283 rivers, 84 lakes, 9

tanks,-41 pond’, 18 crooks/aea water on the basis of. 64 parameters analyzed

“ from water samples collected from thesa water boilles, In accordance witl: the

‘objectives of water quality monitoring set cut In the Road Map. Ths Road Map
finther envisages enhancing tho scope and coverage of water quality monitoring

_ Needs ‘by way of inezeasing the number of monitoring stations (though without



~182-

indicating how many are needed}, its automation and parameters and
reconunends, infer-alia, compilation of the sfatas of pollution of all majorininor
Rivers and thelr tributarles and lakes/wetiands to be updated every 2 years which
witl fonn the basis for initiating action for the abatement of poflution of water
hodies; formulation of 9 sak of Standardized Sarvice Local Benchmarks (SLBMs}
for Urban Water Sapply and Ganitation (UWSS) as per Intertalivnal Besl
Practices by 1४007 afready in clreuiation 16 alt the States far adaption in
infrastructure development péojects; compilation of a report on the status of
pollution of ground water sourcos.in ths country; soloction of locations for
diawhny samples ag jer the unifann protocol on wam Orders, 2005; allocation of
a minlmum 10% of project funds for water’ quality manitoring programmes;
inclusion of specialized paramsters like heavy metals, pesticides for better
“source identification besides biclogisal indicators for establishing causes of
pollution etc. Keepin w the iandate of WQAA to enforce ३ uniform water
guatity monitoring practices all ove the Country which, und practices ail ovey the Cat which, undoubtedly, is the sine
-gua_nen of any effective water quality monitoring regime, tha Committee
fecommend :

(8 Overhatling and revamping of the WQAA as wal! as WORCs constituled In
ithe States so that they meet regularly and periodically and dis

functions effectively and efficiently;

(i) The WQAA_ may be made an empowered apex requtatory body to. set
standards in water qualify monitoring and enforce compliance of such

standards; and

{iil} A comprehensive, is9ue-wise implamantation statue of the objactivas of
Water Quality Monitoring set out In the Road Map be submitted to the
Committee within six months of the presentation of this report,

40. Need for Lead Coordinating agoncy for Lead Goordinaling agoncy : The Committee note that considering
the Inter-State and Inter Ministerial nature of the issue of water pollution, 8
proposal is wider consideration far constitution of a lead coordinating body
within the Planning Commission ifsaif as an agency for implomentafion af the
‘Road Map drawn up subsequetit to the Audit Report. Statedly, the proposal Is at
the conceptual stage and being discussed for consensus with various
stakeholders for formulation of a conoreta propésal in this regard, The

charge thelr”

RETESET

+ entre ४ PRINTS POT



-183-

synergy between the Union and the States and the Department

Comittee would like fo he apprised of the outcome within six mooths after the
presentation of this rev हु

11. The Committee pote that
city sewage and kidustrial wasta discharge constitute the major watar poliuting
sources for rivers as only about ३0 percent of the waslo water gelerated Is

treated, feaving the reat untreated waste discharged as ft Is into the water

of sewade. treat

bodies, One of the major constraints, water being a State subject, major
responsiblity for sewerage facilities rasts with the State Governments and the
MoEF only supplements their efforts.: By the year 2025, it is estimated that the
sewage generated would be 4100 MLD and taking into account the extant
sewerage freatinent capacity and tha capacity of 700 MLD to be created, thara
would be untreated sewerage of about 2200 MLD. This would nasd huge
investment as estimated by the High Powered Expert Commiltce (HPEC) on
Urban hifrasiructure and Services. Therefore, there is an imperalive need for

_ creation of an oxclusive iInanclal Institution like NABARD. Such a body could bo

tasked with the responsiblity of craaling civic Infrastiucture in fowns and ०883

“with equity participation of Centre, States,.ULSs and the public; obtaining

external assistance from bilateral and Unilateral agencies through a thix of equity
and debt; mobilization of funds from privata sactor bankaffinaactal Institutions;
enhancing capacliles of municipalities for recovery of user charges of water and
sewage system; etc. The Committee further ‘observe that ‘sanitation’ being a
State subject, National Urban Sautitation Policy (NUSP) romained ४ model policy

+ for the Sfatos to prepare their own sanitation strategies despite being tn

oxistonce since 2008. By the Ministry's own admisston, the currant distal stale

~ in the sewage treatmmant capacity is reflected with, a total avallablo 14,789 million
Ires as against production of 38,250 million 196 a day-of domestic sewage ~

including commercial and agricultural run off in class | and class ॥ towns and
cilics exciuding indusivies, as per fhe latest 2010 data. Further, of tha ona-third
treatinent capactty, 30 to 40 percent Sewage ‘Treatment Plants ere not working

optimally due to mechanical as wel! as managemont failures. Statedly, under the
- World Bank funded Mission for Clean Ganga, proposals to execute projects on



-184-

PPP models to ensure 100% sewage collection stralght from the houses rather
than Interception and diversion under the Clly Sanitation Plan are belng
considarad, Rasidas, davetaiting of sewage treatment schemes and municipal

solid waste managoment with a reform otianfed agenda is also heing consitiered

“Under Ihe ४० ‘compouents of JNNURM aamely Urban Infrastructure aed

Govemance (UtG) and Urban Infrastructure Developinent Scheme for Small and,
Mediu Towns (UINSSM}. The Committee however ahserve that though the
Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Contnittes (cSMc) under the Chairmanship

of -Secratary {UQ) with menibers from various Minisiies Including MoEF
-approves and sanctions prejects under JNNURM In consultation with

appropriate Poltution Control Authority, the actual implementation of the
projects Is done by the State GovernmentsiULBs thotigh monitored by MoUD.
The Commitlee find that the Road Map, emphasizes on a ime bound action pian
to onsure 108% sewage treatment hy Sfate Govenmentsii,Bs, Notahly, the
Road Map implemantation ‘would involve concerted action by the Pianning
Commission In consultation with the Ministry of Finakce through capacity

* building of SPCBs and CPCB. The Read Map recommends stepping up of

alfocation under JNNURM poticy for rafional usa of water in recognition of the

-fact thal waler bodies should haves enough water for dilution in.order to take care

of effluents dlscharged after treatment and (0 sustain ifs self cleansing process.

7 The Road Map aiso contemplates monitoring by independant water Regulators

and comprehensive actian plan for abatement of idantified poliufed stretches in
syncltyoulzation with ongelng programmes. The Committes furtties observe ‘hat
given the right technical inputs and adequate resource funding, the STPs can

help generate élagtricity apart from neutralising the foxicily of the sewage. The -

Cominitiee also note that 23 Treatment Storage Disposal Facility (TSDF} which
have been set up all over the Country, taking care of large Industrlal estates and
as far as salid toxic and hazardous residues are concerned, they ate being

property Inanaged. Taklng cognizance of the slnglo biggest hurdic in the contro! the contro! .

of water pollution viz. untreated sewage and indusifial effluents discharted Into sewage and indusifial efilients dischard¢ed Into
water bodies with treated waste water con wi th treate aste water constiluting 10%, the Complitee

recommend:

(® Integration of extant sewage treatment schemes under watar pe under watas_pollulion
contro! progranunes of NRCD/NRCP with those of municipal solid waste

fy



UIDSSM 35 envisaged in tie [२

tii) Mere robust moni
Steering Committ
Govermnsntel|

the _Nafienal
hy State

Projects sanctioned undar JNNURM:

{iti} at by State GovernmantgiULBs be lraplemonted in

(iv) Appropriate and earnest eff be made to oxtend 100% financial support

foi sewarana treatinent plants:

(¥) More stringent rules be made for disposal of solid toxi¢ and 14 hazardous

waste and. tigerous monitoring and also to ensure that )_ensure that facilittes -

Brecessing such wastes aro maintained alt year round fer optimun (शाप
efilclency;

{vi) A_sustainable solution of cost tecuvery as well as cast sharing for
sewerage collaction, freatment and disposal through stringent regulatory

noms relying on approprate combination of flats and inesntives pe -

worked out so that such costs are equitably distibuled amongst all
citizens based on the principles of ‘polluters pay‘ and ‘bonoticiar! and ‘bonoficiatles pay’ to
ensure optimum uss of water; है

(vi) Agaressive awareness/sensitization proarammos be launched on |

sustatned hasis aiming af educating the public about sharing the cost of

‘treatment of sewage generate of sewage generated by them 9५ highlighting the direct and
indirect benefits thera-from; and न

(भी)।शण्ब०60ए७ 911 concerted efforts ॥9-119५० by‘ the-Upion Government to *

ancourage all the States to prepare 618॥ own sanitation strategies In
harmony with the National Urban Sanitation Policy (NUSP}, 2008 and

The Complies may be apprised « ay be apprised of the action taken within six months
the presentation of this report. हु -



7186+

12... lvenforisation of water bodies and_ formal
campandir

n of taryat: nd
of rujes : Tha Committee are atartlod to note absence of a database‘

-on inventoty of water borlies and keystone spacies. Worse, no assessment of

the risks of polluted water in riversiakes/ground water fo health and
“anvitonment has ever head conducted across the Country. On the staw pace af
idontifi cation of keystorie species, the Committee were apprised that
Kientiiication of ‘keystone speules was location-speclfic and need-based.
Admittedly, efforts towards a comprehensive laventorisation water bodies in the
Country wore ‘being mada by tie CPCB in ceilaboration with the National
Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC) to harness the potential of remote sensing for |
such a ‘gigantic task besides launching of web-based India Ground Water
Information System (GWIS} Project, a Joint veniura with ISRO to make water
sasources data availabdlo in Standard GIS form to user colmtunity. i order to
have a comprehensive inventory of all riverfakesiground water sources of the
Country, ihe Road Map also points out the efforts of CPOB and SPCBs to
intensivaly survey poli uted river stretches and wator quality monitoring casried
out at 1700 locations in riversilakesftanks, ete. and groundwater monitoting in
1500 locations hy Central Ground Water Board (CGB), Nofably, there Is almost
total absence of biological indicators coupled with a very poor periodicity of

- lesting of chemical indicators done onty ance a year reveajlig the dismal state

of affairs, fnaufficlent infrastructural facliitles In CPCB and SPCBs; inadequate
natural water flows in riversistreams due to discharge of sewage and Inclastttal
effluents and diversion of water for various purposes including irrigation;
inadoquate laboratories; inadequate trained manpower such as taxonomists
who are needed for Identification Gf specles In the rivers; resource constralnts

- for undertaking review of research activities already carried out, etc. and new

studies for identification of bio indicators have been cited as hindratces
towards the complete inventuriaation of biological indicators. ‘The Committes
are also dismayed to find that though’ a vide range of human and natural
processes affect biological, chemical and physieai characteristica of walec
conlaminating and impacting thelr quality adversely, (dentificatlon and
quantification of such contamtnants had not been done tn respect of any river or -
lake in India by MoEF, CPCB or hy MoWR. Sanilarly, while identification and
quantiication of poifution levels in.ground water Ia terms of arsenic, nitrate, ~
lon, duoride and satinity in groundwater for each of the States in India has hean.



-३8/-

clone hy CPCB, the Committes note with profound concern that no identification
and quantification has been done regarding presence of nutyianfs, human
produced cheinlcals and other toxins im ground water. Needless to say,
Humetous human activities viz. agriculture WIE) resultant nutrient enrichment,
pesticide contamination aud increasing salinity, industry, भरत, disposal of,

human waste, grawlh, urbanization, climate change, ets. do दा water quality

te a great exfent and are major causes of waler pollution. Intriguingly, fe
Conmittee find that at the centro while BMUEFICPCB/MaWR have not carried out
gasessment affecting tho quality of water from any aueh activlly hased
perspectiva, the scenario is worse In the States with only a few states having
made assessment for quanii{ication of the offects uf various activities ‘affocting
the quallty of water in various rivers and lakes. Worse, there was total absence
of identification of risks to wetlands assoclated with rivaze/lakes as 650 to major
aquatle species, birds, plants and animals due to pollution of rivers and lakes
80919 a major risk fo the environment as a whole. The Committee also note
with soriaus concern that while in the year 2009, Ministry of Health and Faanily
Welfare reported 1.14 ¢rora cases of acute dlarrheal discases, the risks to
human heaith from water borne diseases as a rasult of water poliution had not
been assessed by the MoEF/CPCR. Admittedly, thaugh the CPCB had
undartaken studiesfinventories of pollution sources and their effacta in various
river basins, resource constraints form the major impedimont in the Water
Quality Monttoring Programme. The Road Map ‘furthor seeks to address
potiution dua to agricultural runoff through propagation of Jidiclous use of
pesticices’ and insecticides In agricultural practice as enforcement of pollution
control laws for activities leading to such diffused pollution was difficuit.
Statediy, the Natfonal Environment Polley ‘also racommends taking explicit
account of groundwater: poflution In pricing policies of agricuitural inputs
especially pesticides, dissemination af agronomy practices, ancauraying
Iniegsated Pest Management (IPM) ard use of biodegradable pesticides through
various projects viz. National Project on Organic Farming (NPOF); National
Project on Managemant of Soil Health and Fertility (NPMSH & 7); Modernisation
of Past Management Approach in india, ete. Besides, targets are heing worked
out to reguiate pollution causing activitics to develop water quality criteria and

"standards hy CPCB Gased on risks assessment an the basis of scientific

research work. Tho Committee further find that though tho assessment of risks
associated with exceeding laid down criteria have been lald down, the Road Map



-183-

has vot clearly stipulated the actionable plans fo he taken in case of deviation or
han-complianse front these criterla. Gn the aspect of groundwater pollution, the
Road May stated-that the 00४08 under the MoWR is the responsible agency and
the Contrat Ground Water Authority has alroady issued necessary directions to
regularize Indisctiininaie borfuy and withi¢rawal of groundwater to preserve and
protect ground water, Besides, the Report of Ground Water Pollution ‘Hots pats’;
‘Approach Baper or Ground Water Quality Issues in Andaman and Nicobar and

_ Lakshdweep Isiands; and ‘Mitigation and Remedy of Groundwater Arsenic
Manace in India ~ A Viston Docunient’ has been published. Taking nota of the

(it A comprehensive Inventorisation te dano of all rivors and lakes and the
keystone species associated with them as a couditlon_pre¢ species associated with them as_a_ condition precedent,
planning the control of pollutlon in acquati¢ resources within a stinulated
iimeframe;

(8) Consolidated dala _he prepared and perlodically updated both on
gualitative and quantitative basis on water resources covering surface as”
well ag_ground water in the Country 30 as to factlitate setting objectives
for wafer potlutlon id control;

Support_and funding. and ding. reauisite siudies for identification of biological
jndicaloss canabla_of detacting low level toxic pollutants not measurable
by chemical indicators;

(ty) Earnest efforts be made to achlove tha targets _set_by the Planning

Commission for restoration of politited river stretches Into thelr pristine
form by the year 2017; . * : :

हे (४) identification and quantification be done of contaminants to both surface 9०1 surface

and ground water as well as the risk assessment aosociated witls thom be

garriod out expeditiously 3116 appropriate remedial n neasnres easnres taken [0
control and prevent poltution of water and environment; and हु ह

(vl) A comprekers:
Rrenared an thi

४ TELA A DTT eon LI



189- ¢

13. Water. cciality. foals _and sensitizat f farmers : The Committe are
dismayed ta observe that MoEF have failed to develop water quality goals and
corresponding parameters’ for each river and lake, The Ministry have merely
doveloped water quality criteria for five activitles and general ‘standards of
‘wastewater dischargo to a water body, lane and sea under the Environment
Profection Act, 1986 but was yet to establish enforceable water quality
standards that protect human and ocosystem health. Worse, nolther any
standards for agriciltural practices and run off pollutants 10५७७ for riversttakest
groundwater were set nor any monitoring of such pollution dons by

" MOEFICPCBICGWB, Intriguingly, tha CGWB stated that {l was ‘outside Its
_ purview revealing the confuston “at the ground vis-a-vis tha rola and

responsibilities of various agencies and resultant passing of the buck, The
Miaisty of Agriculture and concerned Oppartments are, statedly, introducing
best managemont pracitces so that Water quality is not affected due to tun off
which inter-afla Includes awareness programmes of farmers communities
towards use of optimum water, ferlilizers and pesticides, encourage Integrated

Pest Management (IPM) and -use of blo-fertilisers/biodegradable pesticides, .

Inpienientation of Farmers Field Schoo! (FFS) under IPM in a bigger way; ote.
Also wetlands identlfled under the Ramsar Convention which wera not 30 far,
considered for establishing water quatily network were being covered with
strengthening ofthe monitoring network during the 42th Plan perled, The
Committee abserve that peltution from agricultural sources Is ane of the biggest
han-point source of paltution, But, surprisingly, te allocation for strengthening
and niodernization of Pest Management was &18,13 ‘crore ia 2009-19 and %35.00
crore ॥ 2012-44. The allocation of $42.71 crora in 2014-12 for the National
Project on Mautayenent of Soil Health and Fertility saw a decline to €34.0¢ crore
in the year 2012-13 while the aflocation for the National Praject on Inorganic



"49.

Fanning remained more or 1055 stagnant at ₹2031 crore in 2009-10 to २24.00
crore in 2042-13. ‘Taking: In ५ 8131 the Mot Kd -naithor developed Water ©
Quality Goals for gach rivarlake nor established any enforce: * guality
Standards especially for agricultural run offs, which } West 1

and__apecific standards गा laid down fur ४६ ius poliutakts such as
Ritogen/phosphorus! pesticldess ferilizers, ete:

Gi) Vigarous and sustained offorts be made far educatings: the
farmers for sustainable use of bio fertlitzersinanures and Inteated Pest

Manacement to prevent and contro! deleterious agricultural runoffs due to

use_of_chomical fertilizersiposticides gonsiiluting a major pollutant of 8 major pollutant of |

water bodies especially the groundwater: bodies especially the groundwater:

{iti) Linkages be set up/strongthoned amongst I Institutions. especialy Ministry
of H&EW and CPCBIMGEF/CGWBISPCBs 30 that real_time data collected
on water quality monitoring may he shared Instantansously for. immediate he shared instantaneously for.immerlate
concurrant action 9५ concemed agoncies especial action 9४ concerned agoneies especially those having high
risks to human health such as outbreak of water borne diseases, ete; and

.

{iv} Ths project ‘Noam! which had hagn closed avid way may be restarted 30 as
to _hamess !1018'3 rich biodiversity and to give impetus (० environment
iriandly agricuituzal practices,

14, {Malnienance of eco flaws : The Committeo also observe that surface water
aise gets polluted due to want of adequate eco-fiows. It Is distressing that even
after the 23th Finance Commission suggested for establishment of water

Regulators in every State, nof a singla water regulator has so far been

constituted, The Committee note with profound concern thal ki the absance of
any Central Water Regulator lo chack large scale water diversion from water
badies for a varlety of uses, the Country ts not aquippad fo chock diversion of

- water from its rivers for domestic uso or contral flows inte rivers taking bulk of

the water beyond our international boundaries, Taldng_pote of the stark.



- 0) Farmers be incantivised te grow more water efficient crops and ad adont

-L91-

be suitably restructured and equipped with such power and

{iii} Installation of Water meters be made mandatory and the principle of
‘Beneficiaries Pay’ be applied ॥॥ cver_the County to water_usars for
wator-extraction beyoud a permissible unl!, 89 welt as to avoid wastage of
water, ,

15. Use of effigiani water consumption and conservation techniques : Mindful
ofthe rising population, lin fled avallabifity of water, and the Imperative need fo Imperative need for
adopting Improved techniques for water conservation and preyantion, water use

officiency, recveling and revise of drainage water, the Committee recommend
that:

less_was| stefut_irrigation technique like drip irrigation, take steps’ for

gradual removal of water subsidies and people be encouraged 16 use

more water efficient technologies and reuse waste wator:

(ii) Indian _Gounell of Agriceltural_ Resoarch (ICAR} and aaricaltural ICAR} and agricultural

universities should develop now variefles of crops to substitute water -

quzzting yaristies ;

(ii) The Yagitional and time-tested ways of water harvesting and sturaye be -

popufarized, oncauraged and Incenfivized:

(iv) Aperepriate mechanism bo worked out involving the National Remote
Sensing Cantre {NRSC} and the Ministry of Auiculture (०४) for
harnessing the. Botentis! of [87008 sensing techinalogy for conserving



-192-

water, preventing evaporation foss and loss due to seepage of water into

fhe soil, ९10, by napping the car 1002५ Siress of crops/plants; arid

(¥) Strict stiputatio

18 Res
‘are deeply distressed te observe that the Ganga, considerad tha holiest of the
rivers by mitiions of paopte and a national river, has beceine one of the 1४७
mosf polluted rivers In the world. It is all the more saddening that despite
launching of the ‘Ganga Action Plan’ and more recently (2009} of the ‘Mission
Clean Ganga’ by the National Ganga River Sasin Authority (NGRBA), the
pollution levei in the Ganga has only aggravated. The Gommiltes note that
despite the far reaching recommendations of the PAC (2003-04), made In thair
62nd Report-of 13th Lok Sabha om ‘Ganga Action Plan’, for creation of Sewaga
Treatment Plants, Industrial Effluent Troatment Plants, Tofiet Complexes,
Electric Crematoria, (mproventent af Bathing Ghats, river front developments,
etc., much remains to be done to lnplement those recommendations, Tho
Committee note that the National Ganga River Basin Authority (NGRBA) was set
up In 200% ae an empowered planning, financing, nonitering and co-ordinating
*. authority for Ganga River. The Authority uses river basin as the unit of planning
to shift from town centric fo river-basin approach in ordar to hava , 8
comprehensive raspanse covering water quality and fiow, sustalnable access,
onvironmental management, prevention and controt of pollution ॥ tha form of a
National mission, The Committee are however, dismayed to find thal tha basin
level approach has so far heen extended only to Ganga River Basin though there
are 24 major river basina in india. The Committee further note with concern that
. only government level stakeholders were Involved In consultations while setting
up the NGRBA and no involvement of privala SectoriCivit Saciaty in investment
decisions in the planning procgss was found. Worse, MoCF took Rmited action
on integration of policies, decisions aud costs across muttl-sectoral interests _
relating te pollution viz. industry, agriculture, urban development, navigation,
fisheries managamant, conservation, etc. Strategic decision making at the river
basin scale which guided action at sub-basin or local levels were also found to
he absent, The Road Map however places a-thrust on ‘innovative River Front
Developmant Project’ which were statedly under saricus consideration for



-193-

raising alternate revenve tools apart from collections hy way of “Beneficiary Pay’
concept or through the PPP models. The Committee observe that under the
‘Mission Clean Ganga’, tke NGRBA has set the target that na untreated
munizipal sewage and industrial efftuents flow into Ganga by the year 2120.
Notahiy, the NGRBA Programme contemplates support for investments in waste
water, industrial pallufion, solid waste and river front managsmont and
addresses non-point solitco pollution and ecologinal flows in canteast to a fown-
contre and ‘end-of-the-pipe’ waste water fraatment focus of tho previous afforts.
The programmo has also engagad the consortium of seven premier ifs की
preparing dynamic, basin-level management plans, Admittedly, various
Initiatives under the Mission Clean Ganga taken up by fie NGRBA to holistically
address the Issue of contro? of pollution of River Gauga which inter-alia included
Project on ‘Pollution tnventocisation, Assesament and Surveillance (PIAS) ta
Ganga River Basin’ for Inventorisation of Grossiy Palluting Industries
discharging into the main sfraam of the Ganga, A total of 764 such industries
had statedly been identilied as on March, 2013 with waste water discharged
amounthig to 3200 MLD. Besides, monitoring work of 46 STPs and 3 CETPs;
Action Plan to use Cleaner Technologies or reduction in waste for Industrles
viz., Paper & Pulp, Distiery, Sugar, Chemical, CETP and STPs; Action Plan to
check unauthorized mixing of sand, Ilmsstone, ७०; Institutlonal Strengthening
of Environmental Regulation and Capacity Building at-an estimated cost of हैं
71.66 crore; Real Tine Monitoring System for River Ganga at an estimated cost
€ % 85.40 crore out of which र 3.38 crare had heen earmarked for community
ving with public participation Invelviag NGOs, local Institutiona and sacial

activists; ete have also beet: Initiated, The Committee find that alnce the
inception of NGRBA in 2009, the total expenditure incurred under various
NGRBA Programmes for abatemant and coutro! of water pollution of river Ganga
stands at € 1178.06 crores as of December, 2013, Tho Cammittes observe that in

comparison to the Ministry's own estimation of a cost of 28,000 crores for tha.

National Mission for Clean Ganga within ay efght year porspacilyve plan, tho
expenditure incurred so far appears to be minuscule considering the fack that
almost four years have elapsed sinue the inception of NGRBA, Statedly, efforts
are also helng made to develop strong and dedicated operatioua-tevel
lnstitutlons for planning, managing and implementing tho programme with
single-point accountability, to empower the 2.85, proposal for ‘Ganga
Knowledge Centze' to upgrade the knowledge hase for the Ganga System se as



-194-

to ensure that planning and investments were made on strong and adequate
information; to premote Public Participation through strategic and broad-based
communication, etc. Emphasts has alse been given for considoration of PPP
raodo} for fining of sewerage schemes, Institutiun of ‘automatic real fime
maniloring system in the main stream of river Ganga so that the data ‘generated
at 15 minutes lifervat is monitored an a regular basis

{ii) Ensure that the ‘Misslon Glean Ganga’ gets frugtitled by the year 2920 so
that fhe purity of the Ganga Is restored to ffs pristine form:

Manner for ralsing funds for sowage treatmentfpollution control of malor
tivers Including of the river-Gunga;

(0०) Involve the Private Sector as weli 99 the Civil Saciaty in the planning and

Iplementation of the progranunes of the NGRBA:

(४ Take efficacious initialivesfmeasures for integration: of policies, decisions
and costs across multi-sectoral Interests relating to water pollution contro! Water pollution controt
such as industry, agriculture, urban development, navigation, fisheries ation, tisteries
“hanagement, conservalion, poverty reduction strateqies:

(vi) Ensure that the State River Conservation Authorities hold! their mestings at
regular intervals and offectivo interventions ara made by the States to

implement the projects; and

{viijExtend holistic planting, implementation and monitoring of pollution
control programmes to fie 24 other major river basins of the Country,

The Conmmittee shoidd fike fo be apprised of the action taken to
impleinent_thass recommendations and all other measures taken to
Inyplement the Mission 01997 Ganga and te control pollution it other maloz
dlver basins of the Country,



i
j
1
i

- 195.

17... Lack of accountability structures पु The Commitico are surprised to find fhat
neither the MoEF nor the States have introduced any accountability structure
cither to prevent pollution of ground water or address pollution front agricultiral
sources; Although CPCB has prepared a list of sources of pollution, MaEF. has
not created any specitic programmer to prevent effitents entering the rivers.
Worse, even tho implemontation of the NRCP and NLCP was. flawed due to the
lack of compschensive survey to assess tha amount of poltitants discharged into
rivers and lakes. Yhe Comvraittes observe that such deficiencies In tho finalization
of ptofects without any scientific data on actual pollution foad on water bodies
have affected the performance of tha programme in se far as abatement of
pollution control is concerned. Weakiesses In control activities to ensure
accountability of technical and financial aspects of projects as also
unsatisfactory level of implementation of projects In the States reveals 1901 with
many projects delayed boyend the scheduied completion dafes and 28 projects
costing हैं 251.27 crore constructed but nof commissioned. The Committee alse
find that Inclusion of rivers under NRCP was not based on their pollution levels
with the result more polluted rivers were not salacted for pollution control; the
Stato-wiso selection of rivers In NRCP was as synimetrical with more river
stretches approved for selection from States like MP and TN though Maharashtra,
Gujarat and Andhra Pradesh had more polluted rivers. Adinittedly, Stales
implementing the projects faced probleme in land acquisition, getting requisite
permissions, technical problems, problems from contractors, resistatice fram
locals pver proposals for construction of STPs, disputes over sites, Inability to
arrest sewage flow, non-availability of land, etc contributing to non-completion of
projects resulting in poor impiementation In many States. The gross

Incffactivonose of NLCP in conservation and restoration of iakes (8 evident from

the fact that only two of the projecte out of 22 test checked, had bean completed
and rest had mat time overrun or were abandoned. The Commlttss consider it
rathor untenable that the NRCO doas not deal with cases of Industrial pallytton on
the specious ground that the industeial pollution ts dealt with by CPCB. The
Committee thorefore feel that It would be » appropriate and_mure efficacious. efficacious Jf

- industrial 1 polliition 18 99 brought within the remit of, NRCO whare they pol whare the oliute



-196-

4%. Nead to promote environmant friendly practices _ for (6७! freatment

of waste : The Committee are concerned to find that inspite of the fact that under
the NRGP, comprehensive programmes for execution of various types of pollution
contro! works have beon undertaken, the aald projects sulfers cost and tinio
overruns due to lack of inter-agoncy co-ordination, delays in acquisition of land
far $1Ps and pumping stations, contractual problems, Court Cases, etc. The
revisod guidelines for preparation of DPRs address, as claimed, issues that may
impede tmplementation which infer-afla include preparation of City Sanitation

. Plan (CSP), integrated sower network in place of drain interception and diversion,

compulsory dovefailing of projects under INNURM/UIDSSMT State Plans; Design,
Build and Operate (DBO} model for O&M (Operation & Maintenance}; Mandatory
Tripartite MoA amongst Gol, State Government and ७.85; Dedicated cell ior

implementation of projects in States; Projact proposal appraisal by independent .

Institations/Experts for enhancing quality and cost optimization; third party

‘jnepection for implementation af projects; Recycle and reuse of trealed sewage;

adoption of innevailon and hest technology option for sewage ireatment; ७७8 of
digital maps and information-Gommunication-Technology {ICT} 1003 for project
planning and design; coverage of schemes for management of municipal 3910
waste ; slakaholder consultation at tha stage of formutation and implementation
of project ta ensure active Involvement of various stakeholters and clyil socicty
to generate support and encourage ‘ownership; etc. While noting the good

practices sought to be promoted in the revised guidelines which include Inter-alfa -

Rain Water Harveating; promotion of solar energy; Improved sanitation scheme
based on higher user charges; upgradaton of existing community sanitation and
sewage infrastructure; thrust on innovative river dont doveiopment (२६०)
Projects; introduction of ‘River fastival; ‘River Rune’ under the Public
Participation, [nformation, Education and Communicatlon (iEC} Activities;

Desigt parameters uf STP based on actual measurement and analysis; atc. the है

Committee are, howaver, dismayed to find that the evaluation report of
performance of 84 out of 175 STPs built under NRCP conductad by CPCB
revealed dismal performance with only 8 rated as good, 30 satisfactory and
46 poor or vary poor with Inadequate capacity and utilization and neglected
etudge removal facilities most of which were found to be. out af order.

Surprisingly, as also admitted by the. Ministry, the national capital was -

treating only 62 percent of sewage generated, Bengaluru, 10 percent and
Hyderabad, 43 percent with iha exception of



51975

Ahmodabad teeatlng the entire sewage yenerated. Tho Committee note that tho
points talsed by the impact evaluation report of tho NRCP and NLCP Projocts ॥॥
the Country conducted by independent third parlies fave, moro’ or less, heen

addvessed by the Ministry. The Cammittce however observo that the DPRs remain
technology neutral, Tha Committee find that 62 lakes alf over the Country ware
idontified for cohsorvation under the NLCP by the Ministry In November, 2003 aid

tate Governimants were asked to review this list and priorilise the lakes in thetr

States for subiaission of proposals under NLCP. The Conmmittes are however:

dismayed to find that only 12 Statas/U7s had prioritized thair lakes for submission
of proposals under NLCP, Worse, blo-conservation zones have not been natified

thlersiore recammend :

@) Preparation of zeal time data of polfution lpad_source-wlsa on each water
body bofore the finalization and actual Implementation of protects:

i) jmportant issues like enylronmental_ clearances, land acquisition and
echnical fssues_be anticipated and 30004 0५६ well in Gime toe obviate
hurdles at execution stage and to avoid ilme and cost overruns;

(॥) 108 reasons for underutifization of Instatled STPs be _eddressed
है 929280॥॥0051४ _ [10118 appropriate mechanisms _keeping ॥1 श6९४ the ping tn view the
Alinedabad city which treats the 100 percent sowage generated by it,

(ix) The Ministry ramp _up_ its efforts so as _fo_ensuré & robust parigdic
Inspection for monitoring the Implementation of Water Pollution Control
Programmes in accordance with the quidel in pecordance wi 2 guidelines ६ and

(५) (४०६६ and the States should plan drainage for the, Cities as a whole In

conjunction with the, Minkstty of Urban Develo Devel pment (MoUD), Instead of 19.20), Instead 9 हि

piecemeal approval ० random STPy and f&Ds_as_ the tuplemeniiag
agencies work under the control of MoUB, -'

419, Greund Water Pobution : The Committee depiora that no scheme or
progranune has besti formulated to prevent poliution of ground water including

“the pofiution caused from agricultural sources. Notably, no authority has been है
हे Set up fo look exclusively Into issue of Ground Water Poilution on the lines of



-138-

NRCP & CPCB. ‘The Commtittee also note with profound concern that the Unions
MoEF does aot -inpiement any programme for treatment and restoration of
groundwater. Similarly, 10 State karl introduced any specific programmes for the
restoration and treatment of ground water with the exception of Tamil Nadu and

” Rajasthan, A Vision’ Decumenl on "Mitigation aid Remedy of Grownidwater

Arsenic Menace tn India’ has been brought out in June 2010 by tie National
institute of Hydrology, Roorkee under lhe aiges of CGWB, New Delhi, The
documents contains a Road Map fur achieving envisaged targets far control and
abatement of groundwater pollution especially (७ make i arsenle (ree among
others. The Gommitteé vote with profound concern the occurrence of arsenic In
gtoundwater and the consequential health hazards to the people which had been
doscribed as the biggest natural grotindwater calamity in the world. An estimated
100 million people in the Ganga-ieghna-Brakmaputra Plans {including
Bangladesh) alone are at a risk from groundwater arsenle contamination above
WHO guidelines, and a good portion of 500 million peopte living in this belt face
the danger of drinking arsenle contaminated waler. Similarly, certain acaa of
Punjab is known as cancer halt due to contaminated ground water, The
Comimiites are, therefore, anguished that the Government have ‘totally neglected
the area of the ground water-pollutlon constituting a serlous threat to millions of
peapls across the Country. Taking note ' ० the serious _thraat posed _-by
contamination af qround water, the Committee recommend that;

(i) Specific Accountability Structure be gstabl Structure be established at the Central as well as

the Sfate Levois on an urgent basis for handing issues relating to ground
water; .

10 Specific Programmes be worked out at the Union as well as the State

Govarnments for restoration and treatment af polluted Ground water whick

fg recedtng af alarming speed (7 many parts of the country; ६
(पक) The Read, Map contained _in -the”Yision ‘Docu Document on ‘Mitigation and ५८

Remedy of Groundwater Arsenls Menace in India’ prepared by the National

institute of Hydtalogy {NIH) be implemented on an urgent footing: © + +

(५) Alierrate sustainable programmes be launched for ensuring supply of
arsentc-free wafer through conjunctive ‘use of surface water and in sity



-199-

Dy ind Involved for their

10. face_the_monage of grou

Mitton particularly to the
dangars of arsenic contamination; .

lent

(४) Available information ble infovmation generated throust enu irical_rasearch studies on

groundwater 09! noiluiten, need_to, be consolidated and disseminated to .

focewarn the people of the affected araaa;

{vii} Appropriate steps be initlated for emulation and replication of the sug of the SURCESS
of West Benga! State in monitoring public sources of arsente groundwater

the magnitude of tha task involved, sultable measures be faken

for augmentation of capacity of laboratortes, tralned and skilled manpower,
ready availability of robust, reflabie, cheap and simple fest ४७ to test

ground water guaiity for arsenic contamination especially In. In vulnerable
areas; and .

{viii} in vle

(0) A Strategic Natlonal 180 ० Action be drawn up for providin' roviding arsenic safe safe

water tg the community on a priority besls after establishing a national
standard for arsanig in drinking water, दि

20, Rigorous monitoring by, and regular connect between, Monitoring
authorllles * The Commiites observe with profound concem that even though a
high powered Maniloring Authority headed by the Prime Minister, Member,
Planning Commission Union Minister, MoEF and Secretary, MoEF exists at the
Gentra and similar high powered Monitoring Committces headed by respective
State Chief Minister, Chief Secretary, -sic. “exist at the States, the only review
mdéetings were held by ther way back in 2002 and 2003. This Is raflective of sheer
jack of monitoring at afl the three levels Viz., Local, State ‘and Central. Worse, the

four High Powered Committees existing at iho Centra! level do tiot exist in a

hierarchy and operate independent of each other wiih no evidence af sharing of

thelr findings aud recommendations. The Gonmities also note with concem poor
Internal controls and want of accountabitity as evident by peer monitering of



-296-

nelwark to track pollution of wafer in rivers and lakes, fallure to updats and revise
water quality parameters, absoice of database, poor dissomination of data; ote;
The Comnilitee further observe paucily of networ for racking pollution of rivers,
takes and ground water; lack of classification of monttoring lecations as baseline,
frend and flim stations; lack of raal-tima monitering of water pollutlon; lack of

“ assesstuent of trophic status of rivers and assessment of ecalogicalibiolagical

indices of riversiakes; regular inspectlovs of projects by MOEP and non
availability of completion reports of projects; etc, Statediy, the monitoring
network comprises of 2008 locations ॥ 27 Statos-and 6 Union Tertitortos spread
over the Country covering 383 rivers (1085 locations), 127 lakas, 9 tanks, 59

ponds, 40 creeks/seawater, 17 caivals, 34 dralns and 595 well. The Conimitiee”

ware apprisad that CPCB hac initiated the process for iastaliafion and
cowtnunication of Tan Real Time watar quality monitoring stations [8 in Ganga

-. anc 2 in Yamuna} which were remotely controfied stations anu likely to start

functioning from the financtal year 2013-14; development of web-based GIS
(Gsographical Infarmation System) to disseminate water polluticn monitoring
data likely to be, operational by end of 2043 as a step for improving both quantity
and quality of such database; strengthening of monitoring network by converting
all monitoring Kocations with stations and reclassifying as hasefins with 800 Jevet
of 109७ fhan 3 mgi; frend stations with BOO of 3-6 mgil; and impact Station with
Bod level éxceediiig Sma/l; ef. Considering that effective monttorng 13 sine-
gua-non to effective implementation both for micro monitoring at the ground jevel

sand macro nioniforing at the apex level, the Commiitae recommend thal :
{i} Periodic review of the prone iow of the progress of faiplemsntaiion of water polkution cont wi 00 conttol

programmes be made mandatory at all the Cantral, State and Lacal levels;

{ii} Appropriate mechanism: be evolved to bring about a more robust and
effective functlonal connect emongst 8॥ the high powered Moattoring
Committees at various fevals so that their findings and recommendations
ara_sharad not only for effective synergy but also _to-abvials’ scope for
dupilcattan; - .

(iff) As envisaged in the Road Map, the role and rosponsibifity of tha public as a rosponsibifity of tha public as a
watchdeg th, _manitartug of implementation — implementation of _watér —pallufion

abatement/eontro!_pronraimmes as one of the mosi_natential teal for है

effective monitoring nead to. be publicised aggressively and ona sustained

EET TES Bar STINT TA PT न



~201-

basis all over the Gountry, and

'७ 10 uenerale accurate real-time monitoring dala, 18986
Cok

(७ As anvisagad, steps

है। 7४ 1 Oxygen (0200), ote. instead of age _valias as also other
lallyes, to sfrongthen’ tho monitoring mechanism bo implemented. to
“ achteve tangible outcomes within the fiver Ymeling,

fon contro! prog : The Committee are
disturbed to observe that despite more than 26 years of impiamentation of
pragrammes to control poltution of tivers, our rivers remain critically polluted
with high levats af organic pollution by the presanse of high levels ef BOD, 00
and TC and the inability of our rivers to sustain acquatic life due & organic

.poliutants and high levels of faecat-related bacteria, viruses and protozoa which
causes diseases, only raveals fhe failuro of tha efforts of the Governinent to ©
contro! pollution in our rivers thraugh NRCP, The Conunittee alse note with

profound concern that the results of the programmes under NLCP, In operation
for more than 10 yeass, had not heen assessed ta ascerfain meastirable
improvernent In chemical parameters af lakes, Worse, no impact assessment was
possibie for control of pallution of ground water as 10 programms, either at the
Central Level or at the State Level, was being Implemented for control of pollution
and restoration of groundwater despite (neveasing. paliutlan of ground water
sources and presence of contaminants like arsenic, nitrate, ftuoride, satinily; etc.
The Cortnittee observe that though water fy a state subject and pollution
preventlon and conservation of water 20085 including lakes remain in the
domain ए Stata Governimetits, the NRCD betng the primary funding agency and
the nodal autharity for prevention of pollution, greater respansibifity rests with

‘the MoEF. The Committee, tharefora, urge that Inadeguacies and deficiencles

observed in the Audit reporl may be addressed expeditiously and a nationwide
impact assansment be done of aif ongoing programmes for_control ard for control_ared

abatement of pollution of we water to ascertaln their efficacy and to take mid-term

course corrections, lf Jequired. Urgant and efficacious measurss may also be
faken as contemplated in 019 Road Map and also outlined in this report, for

controtling naliution of ground water, lakes and rivers. The Committee may _be-

aporised of action taken In this regard In due course.



-202-

22. Higher allocation, and offactive utitization, of funds : The Committee note
with profound concer that funds available for contrel and prevention of water
bellution and restorailon of wholesomeness of water were % 3.28 croro per
StatefUT per year du , :

ing the last § years. This is just a pittance given the gigantle

. probfam of potlifion provention. Worse, the implementation alsu suffered due to

poor financial masagement like- diversion of funds, nofh-disclosure of accrued
interest, funds nof utilized for Implementation, funds ‘parked iii bank accounts, .
unspent balances not refimdad, cost overruns and osealations due fo tardy
impltornentation, etc, The Committee are dismayed to 1008 that resowrees
generated fron) water cesa coitstilute a very meagre amount which was barely
10.75 per cent of the total expenditure incurred by MoEF with disbursement to

“CPCB and 82088 amounting to Z 920.68 crore’in the last five years {2005-2040).

Notably, the water cess collected under the Water {Prevention and Control of
Pollution) Cess Act, 1977, far heing disbursed to CPCB and SPCBs remained
dismally meagre dua to axtrentely low rata structure of Water Cess which is two
paisa 10 fifteen paise per kiloliter with defaultere lable to pay three 04156 to thirty
palse per kltollter.: Surprisingly, the Commities observe that la the last 34 yaars,
the Water ess rate was revised only in 1992 and 2003, Keoping In viow that
funds allocated for implamantation of programmes relating to prevention of
pollution “rivers; lakes and ground and ground water Need 10 be spert effectively, efficiently
‘and economically, the Commilttes recommend that;

(I) Allocations for control of water pollutig control_of water oliution be commensuraisly enhanced
-given the gargantuan problem of wates pollution and the Joaming threat to

human. beings and the entire ecology;

{ii} The. manitoring mechanism be thoroughly ovorhauled and adequately thoroughly svorhaulad_and adaquatol
sfrengthened so that allocations are fully Ulilized, projects are strledy
monltoreg and there ls, no tine and cost overruns —

(Ui) The Initiatives enumerated in the Road Map f the Road Map for effective ulitization of Funds.
and _improvedisbeady Inplemsntation of prolects_ba implemented in right

garnest;and — है a

bas



-203-

frarship : The Committee ate startiad fo

ng public awareness and |
observe that the programmes for abatement of water pallitiog was rnosity

conbuctor driven with discussions being Hinted generally to State Governnerts
and Lacal. Bodies with 10 meaningful Involvement of the 92086 and the
community, . Considering the enormity of tha problem af water polhition ‘andl its
threatoning implications for the uation, the Cocuniittee hardly naad ta emphasise:
the averriding need for haightoning public awareness, meaningful involvement of

the elvll society in project formulatloivimplementation’ monitoring and making |

them responsible partneis tn the national campaign to confrot water pollution.
Notably, butiding oir the lessons from the Ganga Action Plan, the NGRBA
Framework Communication and Public Outreach Programme envisages involving
every stakeholder including Students and Youth to ansure effective abatement of
pollution and consarvation of river Ganga through strategic communication and
enhaneed public partlelpation and oufraach. The PAC {2003-04} in thair Ganga
Action Plan Report (62°, 43" LS) had made spécitic recommendation for building
awareness for keeping the Ganga Clean. The Committee in their ATR [26th Report
of PAC (2005.06}], had deplored that the Government treated a vexed question af
raising mass awareness campaigu against throwing non-cremated dead bodies in
the holy river as a simple law and order prablem which was fo bo handled by the
Supermdentent of Polica, Subsequenily, la thefr Action Taken Statement on the
Report, tha Govornment stated that local seers and public representatives were
being persuaded tn the State of Uttaranchal to create a consensus on stopping
Jai Samadnies and burning of dead badles but the goat was yot to be fully
realized. 1६ was assurod that, improved waod based cramaforium were being

ह pranoted due te erratic power supply and also genera! public reluctance to

accopt the electric crematorium, acceptahility of which was aso found to bo very

"low. The Committee also find that no monitorlig mechanism exists on the actual
number of dead bedies thrown in fhe river ovar the years. The Comniittee alse -
ahserve that the 0२86 on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests in.

their 412" Report on Demand for Grants (2003-2004) of the MoEF referred to the a

successful cleansing of the Thames River. Nalably, the demonstrated zebounding

of river Thaines with its full biodiversity which was declarad biologically dead in |

the 19608, is a. tangible proof which needs replication in India. Admittedly, tha
National Mission Clean Ganga.(NMiCG) has taken this as an important reference

and i was part of NMCG's Communicatlon and Public Outreach Campaign during

ऊ



Wed

Kumbh Mela. The Committee further find that the Road Map of the MoEF alsa
envisages necessary formulation of Sflective public education, é@wareness and
parilclpation programme as part of DPR so as to make the projects soclably
acceptable. Tho Committee further fine that hiring of expert agency to formulate
Public Parlicipation Strategy, avrangomonte to involve voluntcers of NYKs, Public

as Watchdog tn manttorlngsupervistig project linplenseatalion atid O&Ms ara

-also envisaged fo ba integrated with this component. Keeping in view thelr
aforesaid observations, the Commiltes reat a

1911 Sewage
Treatment Piants which may be integrated with a social coniric approach 30

that sewage treatment and pollution control emerges as ७॥ lupactfil
nationalmovement .

{i)

(ii) The demonstrated successful model of cleaning river Thames may be

rapficatad through appropriate adaption of techniques and stratedies trategies for
cleaning our flyers, beginning with more polluted rivers;

(iii) The Vedic invocation to the rivers. and the Mother Earth and the scriptural ral

ediets prohibiting pallutlen of rivers ७७ contained i the Rig Veda, the
Atharva Veda, Brahimanda, Purana and other texts _be complied ard
popularized and also included in school syllabus’ (० hefabten public
awareness with reapect to the dira need for restoring the purity of our
ryers: .

(0७ A_camprehensive and effective public participation and outreach
programme may he formulated, as aiso envisaged in the Road Map and put
in placs expeditiously; and

भें The youth power should be harnessed for ewer shoufd be harnessed for creating awareness and suitable
programmes under Natlonal Sorvice Scheme (NSS) jaunchod, jaunehod,

24, Conetusion : The Committee's exantInatlon revealed Inter-aifa, fundamental
weaknesses in the Constitutional, Legislative, Policy and inatitutional frameworks
governing the 13308 of prevention and control of Wafer Polfution in India; yrosa

” deficiencles. In the planning for contol of pallution of rivers, jakea and

groundwater with incomplete inventorisatlon of tlversflakes and keystone species



~165-

associated with tham and non-identification of existing pollution levels, nan-
{uantificafion of contaminants, ate; unsatisfactory performance atid shorffatls in
the intplementatian of programmes “such as National River Gonsarvation
Programme (NRCP) and National Lake Conservation Prograrama (NLCP) for
coutrol' of pallution of rivers, fakes and ground water as weil as inadequate
monitosing of these programines pointing to weak Intemal sontrols existing at afl
levels of Goverment; Inaffretive monitaring of Implamentedtion of projacts at the
laval of the States, delays, cost escalatlons and poor qualily wark; fadequate
funds for centrol and praveution of water pollution and restoration of polluted
water aygravated by poar flnancfal managomant calling for far greater oversight
over utilization of funds to ensure that funds ase spent timely and for the purpose
sanctloned; total negiect of the aspect of addressing ground water poltufion
pariivularly arsenic contamination; woefully inadequate and undstorring penally
provisions; a highly tolerant [nspectlan ragime of the 51088; and eugineering
centric approach towards tackling fhe issue of water polfulon with more
emphasis on Sewage Treatmoni Plants; etc. The Committee find that a Road Map
for Management of Wator Pollufian in India as well as a Vislon Document for
Mitigation and Remedy of Groundwater Arsenic Menace in India have been
brought to mitigate the problem of Water Pollution in afl forms and manner.
Relterating that the Government implement jhe measur implement asures outiined In thelr own
Road Map, the Vision Document and the recommendations made in this report
with a sense of national urgancy In an integrated and holistic manner 99 as to
conserve, presorve end ensure ike purity of all our water bodies, 119 Cammitiea
reconimend that they be apprised of the implementation status within six months
of the presentation of this repert,

New Delfit ह PROF, KV. THOMAS.
December, 2014 _ . Chairperson,
Agrahayana 1936 (Baka) Public Accounts Gonwmittee.



sete TE ATA,



-206-

ANNEXURE ~i

IMPLEMENTATION ASPECTS OF PROJECTS UNDER THE NATIONAL LAKE

“CONSERVATION PLAN {NLCP) -AS ENUMERATED (N THE ROAG MAP FOR

‘MANAGEMENT OF WATER POLLUTION IN INDIA’ BROUGH OUT -BY MoEF IN
MARCH, 2042.

PREPARATION OF PROJECTS UNDER WI.CP

0)

Ai)

ii)

(¥)

(¥)

The components/ectivites covered under 1५६७२ are aimed at achisviry
treatnentfrejuvenation of poltuledidegraded lakes,

Under the scheme,, prevention of pollution load entering the fake from its
basinvcatchment is ensured by Intercepting, diverting and ifs lrealment. These
works include sewerage and sewage keatment for the entira lake catchment
Moreover, | & D works are planned either separately for the 08080 fake

"catchments as a part of basin management or dovotailed with the Integrated
sewerage system for the whole town under other schemes of SNNURMAIDSSMT

of Ministry of Urban Development,

The mandate of NLCP Scheme 1$ pollution prevention and conservation of
perennial fakes. To. ensure that, hydrological bslance. for lake catchments is
cénsidered, which Is dependent tipon physical profite of the water body, clrhatic
conditions Including precipiiation, [and use pattern of the area 319. Afforestalon as
a part of catchment area Wealment has a positive impact on surtace rmod
availability to the lake.

Waler is the Slate subject, Pollution preventian and conservation of water bodies.

including Jakes remains the domain of the State Governments. Natlonal River ~

Conservation Directorate (NRCD} in the Miniatry is supplementing efforts of the
State Governments tn conservation of lakes through centraily spensared scheme

of NLCP for conservation and management of polluted and degraded lakes in

urban and semi-urban areas of the country.

In absence of specie water quality criteria In respect of fakes, for the presenl, the |
target is 9 achieve lake water qualily as notifigd in raspect of rivers under NRCP



(vi

(vk)

vii}

(0

9

Gi

-207-

Le. Designated Best Use (0811) criterla for surface waters for bathing quality,
which in tum signifies health of lake anosystem.

Water quatily of lakes, Indicatlng their healt), is being assessed by the concemedt

State Governnients/As in-regulas manner to evaluate tha impact of conservation

raeasures ‘undertaken, both ‘during implomentation and post project phase.

Knprovement in lake watee quality and addressing lake ‘catchment aspects

responsible’ for lake degradation, Jeads to iniprovement in take ecology aver 8

portod of time

Under the GEMS/MINARS Programme, water qualily nionttoring of surface water
hodles including lakes across the county Is being carried out regulady by
CPCBYSPCBs. Presently, watar quality of 107 lakes at 417 sfalions is being
monitored by CPCS.

The focus of lake conservation pragramme is on improvement in water quality in

Physio- chemical .terme. Water quality monitoring of lakes, both during |

iapiementation and after completion of the project, is being catited out by the
concerned. State Governments/As in cegular manner to evaluate the impact of
conservation measures undertaken. Stalus of water qualily of jokes also forms a
pait of the proposals (DPR) submitled for consideration under NLCP.

Tha water quality of lakes as repotted in tha OPR serves the purpose of
assessment of their poltution status. The water quality for most of the lakes has
shown improvement over 08४ pre-project quality.

Dus to prevailing sile conditions, Jocal/physical censtrainte and other
Inplerentation problems, it may not be practical and feasible many af the mes to
execute the works by Ihe concemed State GovernmentAs, within the schedule

~ time frame. That remains a key factor for not submitting the physical progress

report and UC/ESs by the concerned [As in regular manner, -

In the States, namiely, Kamataka, Madhya Pradesh, Uttarakhand, and J&X (fajor

“beneficiaries of the programme}, Laka DeveloprientConservation Authorities are

already in place al the: State’ evel, for co-ordination with वा thé concerned

_. departments/agancles and to moniter the implementation of works in the



208-

respective “States, .In Rajasthan, the High Lavel Standing Commitiss (ith the

MoEF representative as its member) has been set up under the Chairmanship of

_ the Chief Secretary, for pailey formutation & reguiation of River_ake Development
Programnies. . हर

(0). NLCP Is 9 schema with mult-sectoral approach leading [6 problems of recruiting

singie Design & Struclure Corisultants. -Aiso, the bidding pracass al State devel &

other modification process take a.tonger tine In some casos teading 10 delays in
. implementation, Besides these, other site specific problems for some of the
_ Projects have atso resulted in delayed, stast os their implententation,

(xii) Evaluation of 1६07 together with NRCP, 's presently being carrled out by
independant agencies engaged by this Ministry,

xx) Lakes are presenlly not covered by any specific legal stalute,- Sut several
legislations erfacted till date have refavance and provisions for conservation of
lakes. These {nckide the Forest Conservation Act, 1980, the Wildlife Act, 1972,
The Water (Prevention & Contot of Pollution} Act, 1974 and the Environment
(Protection) Act, 1986. National Environment Policy (NEP), 2006 also speaks for
setting up of a legally enforceable mechanism for lakes and wetlands to prevent

degradation and enhance their conservalion.

The objective of NLCP scheme Is to restore and conserve urban and semi urban
Jakes of the country through an integrated eco-system approach, which takes care of

conservation measures for the enlire lake catchment. NLCP guidelines are alsa framed

fo prepare proposals based on catchment aporoach.

Core components under NLCP include prevention of paltution from point seurces
by interceptiig, diverting and treating the pollution foad entering the lakes from their
catchment. Accumulation of nutrients is also addressed by in-situ lake conservation
measures, calchment area ealment warks, hydrautic Improvement of faaders.etc.

“Ag such, the guidelines for NLCP help In preparation of comprehensive 02२5
taking Into consideration the entire lake catchment including pollution especially through
sewage and surface sun-off. . .



~t0d-

LAKE ENCROACHMENT

Couservation of water vodie: and the Issues retated to their encroachment fall
within the dermal of the respective State Goveraments. However, administrative
requirements contained in NUCH guidelines call upan the project proponents for the
following:-

1. To take necessary steps for declaring the like boundary through a Goveruntent

order, :

fi. To ensure removal of encroachments in the take sitbrergénce areatiake
boundary, पु

ii. -To consider for noillying the 'Estabilshment of.a Bid-conseevation Zone’ around
the water body for batter safe guard of lake suroundings from the growing
pollution potential and the encrogchments

, RESTRUCTURING THE NLCP PROGRAMME

Out of 61 Lakes covered under the NLCP scheme, works on 23 lakes have since

- baan cornplisted so far, Tha project on twin lakes in Mokekclung {Nagaland} were

sanctioned in Oct, 2009 and are targeted for complotion in Ocf, 2011, nense not delayed
The Pushkar Sarovar project was sanctioned in October, 2010 with implementation
periad df 30 months.

Though some projects ike” Banjara lake in Huderabad, Veli-Akkulum take in
Kerala, Kodalkanat fake In Tamilnadu eto. have been delayed due tu Interventions of
local stakeholdars or for other inevitable reasons, the Ministry has been Interacting with
Ihe respective State Governments st different levels to resolve Iho stalemate.

_. As cantairied in Nuce guidelines, presenuy, the target as per NLOP guldeiines, fs
_ to achieve fake water quality 3s pér Designated Gest Use (0810) criteria for surface ©
waters for bathing quality{as notified in respect of rivors under NRCP}, which tun:
signifias health of lake ecosyStem_



210-

The focus of take conservation programme is जा improvement in wator quality in

” physio-chendvaf terms. Water quafity monitoring of lakes, both during implementation

and after completion of the project, is being cartied aut by the concernad Slate

Governments/tAs in regufar mane: to evaluate the inipact of consesyatlon maasives

. Undertaken, Status on water: quality of lakes also forms a part of the proposals (DPR)
sulbmittedt for consideration under NLCP,

Funds for setting up [abs to analyse the water quality through approved labs have
been sanictionad-for all projects under NLCP, The walor quality for most of fhe fakes has
shown improvement over their pre-project quality.

“SELECTION OF LAKES FOR INCLUSION UNDER NLCP

In order to identify polluted and degraded fakes across the country and at the

instance of Planning Commission, a study was carried out by the Ministry in November

2003. A list of 62 fakes across the counlry requiring conservation was prepared under the
study. The State Governments were asked to raview this fist and to priorilize the lakes in
their States for submisston of proposa's under NLCP.

Some states namely Chhattiagarh, Himachal Pradesh, Bihar, Manipur, Assarn eto,
furnished priority lista but either did not submit any proposal for consideration under
_NLCP, or the same were not found meefing NLCP guidelines. Other States sont lhelr
proposals, which were examined in tha Minislry and approved for funding under NLCP,
faltowing the Guidelines of Ministry of Finance In this regard

Some proposals for conservation of lakes were received and sanctioned even
before the States were requested for prioritization. The States a€ limes, also resorted to
changing the order of prioritization.” -

New proposals for conservation of lakes. are considered for sanction subject te
heir admissibttity as pet NLCP guidetines, pollulian status, prioritization and avaltablity
of funds under the Plan.

"~The Ministry has subsequently revised and published NLCP Guiddlines in May, 1

2008, ih consultation with the exports, State Governments/L.DAs/concernes IAs and



_ conservation of lakes. Under NLCP, MolF had Issued guidelthes for preparation of -

HL

other stakehalders, The States have since een proactive and mora concermod abéut.the

lake conservation in bisir jurisdiction

PRESCRIBED DIRECTIONS REGARDING POLLUTION -PREVENTION AND
TREATMENT

Ministry of Environment and Forests has been implementing the National Lake

_ Conservatton Plan (NLCP) since 2001 for conservation and managenrent of polluted and

degraded lakes i urban and semi-urban areas, The major objettives of NLCP inctude
oncouraging and assisting Slato Govarnments for sustainable management and

detailed project reports and focuses upon the responstbilitles of the State Governments
tc work in close partnership with tie Governmenl of India in protaction, conservation and
sustainable management of lakes.

In order to Identify polluted and degraded.takes across the country, a study was
carried out at the instance of Planning Commission. A list of 62 fakes across tho country
requiting conservation was prepared under the study. The State Governments wére
asked ta ceview this st and to prioritize the fakes In thelr States for submission of
proposals under NLCP, Proposals for lakes canservation are considered for sanciion
subject fo their admissibifity as per MLCP guidelines, pollution status, prioritization and

“availability Of funds under'the Plan.

In so far as prevention is considered, pollutian of lakes is due to dischamge of
untreated waste water and commercial effluents, Itis tha responsibility of SPCBs and
ULBs छ enforce discharge standards which have been notified by (708/5?085

‘tn tha light of experience gained in the implementation of GAP and NRCP, it is
naw recognised that effective civil society / public participation can only bring about full
success of the programme. As per the revised guidelines, it Is necessary to formulate an

. effective public education, awareness and participation programme as part of OPR so as

fo make the projacts socially accaptable. An expert agency-with right kind of background
and experience may be engaged lo formulate Public Participation strategy.

Two types of outcomes are expected from this -activily, The frst one is public
participation and through it agraontent on complex issues fike house connections, water
conservation at household levels, proper collection of garbage so that it 0085 not choke

sewers/drains, sharing increased burden- of O&M ‘cost, proper layout OF sewerage



-242-

systems and location of STPs, ditfusing conflicts, if any, on programms components et¢.
This can be best achleved through cansultation at varius stages of project formulation
and implementation, Tha second one is hcreaslng -public understanding abatt the
progéanmes through awareness..Thls shaukd he-achieved through workshops, seminars,
Stree! plays, city runs and tiverside walks, Active involvement of students and teachers
community in seliouls and colleges'ean greatly ttelp in achleving the objectives. Public
cart also play the role of a waichdog in supetvising project implementation and operatian
‘and maintengnce which woutd help faprove the quality of the programme. Fmphasis
may be pteced on increasing public participation under NGRBA. Apart frova biring expest
agencies for lhis purpose, arrangements to hwolve Nehru Yuva Kandra Sangathan have
badn put in place, which shoukt be integrated with this component

INTEGRATED MANAGEMENT OF ALL IMPORTANT RIVERS, LAKES AND GROUND
WATER AS IT 1S DONE FOR RIVER GANGA

The present coverage of Rivers and Lakes under the NRCP and NLCP
respectively is based on the resources allocated to the Ministry by the Planning
Conmission. The river conservation strategy is being reviewed from lime ‘to time In the
light of experiences gained. Taking on beard the lessons learni, the National Ganga
River Basin Authority has been. constittded as an empowered planning, financing,

manitering and coordinating aulhariy for conservation of the Ganga River with a holistic

river basin ‘approach ४ new instllutional structures at the centre and state levels. The
abjéctive is to have the river basin as the unit of planning, a shift from Ihe ea(ler town
centric approach and te have a comprehensive response covering water quality and flow,
sustainable access, environment management, prevention and controf of poliulion and

_ food and energy secutity, In the form of a national mission, A holistic approacts th

preparing pollution abatement projects is now being adopted. The revised approach wil
serve later as a made! for other civere also. Presently, the central plans for lakes and
wetlands are propased to be merged fram the 12" Five Year Plan onwards to enable an
integrated approach. Further, it is submitted that the issues related to tmanagoment of
Ground Water are dealt by the Minislry of Water Resources,



serene ne ee -*


~213-

ANNEXURE ff

GIST OF IMPORTANT: SUGGESTIONSIVIEWS RECEIVED FROM THE PUBLIC IN
RESPONSE 10 PAC COMMUNIQUE DATED 36.08.2012 PUBLISHED tN 3¢ LEADING
“DAILIES ALL OVER THE COUNTRY (ENGLISH/HINDI/REGIONAL LANGUAGES) ON
“PREVENTION OF WATER POLLUTION

Considering 19 larger impartance and topicality of the subjecl, the Commiltec —

had elicited the response of Interested crganisations/public (hrough a Press communique
published (HindivEnglishVernacufar languages) all over the country. A fotal number of
1148 Meingranda, 64 in English and 54 In Hindi were received from across the country,
This Includes various suggestions from individuals/organisationS like fresh environment

_ consultancy; Tata Consultancy Servicas; North Gast Institute of Sclence and Technology,

The Energy and Resources Institute (TERT); ele. A gist of the mara impadant polnts and
issues culled out from thesa suggestions is reproduced belovy,

|. RESEARCH ON POLLUTION OF WATER

+ Help of Regional Reseaclt Laboratorias (RRL} should be sought to find out the

exact nature of poluution whether from chemkal discharge or massive microblat
laad into the water as is done by Regional Institute of Science & Technalagy,
. vorhat, Assan.

3. Sdiulian 10 the probien) of chemical water pollution is chemical purification and for
bactertal polhution, it should be ultra violet {tration .

« Panchayat leve! water purification system for providing drinking water al village
level wilh budgetary provisions.

+ Proper utilization of surplus water in states like Assam by way of establishing
water boitling plants

+ Proper methodical calculation about water requirement fdr each state based on
population (38 per population census data) agriculture and industry needs.

+ Study on potlution fevel-and pollution pattern as per tha requirement, rainfall
topography of all States. ~ .

1... THE FUNCTION OF THE MUNICIPALITY /CORPORATIONS/LOCAL 80065
TOINCLUDE: . है -

+ Identifying the domestic sewage and industrial offiuents. according to thelr quality
गाव. quanlty.

+ Proper channeling or piping of effluents eilher domestic sewage or industrial ~

effluent to the storage pits/chambers upto the treatment’ plant.
* Operation and malntenunce of the treatment pfant



di

FUNCTION OF STATE GOVERNMENT AND CENTRAL GOVERNMENT 10:

« . Provide fund for vraction of teatmont plant to the municipalities, or focal bodies for
their work towarels designing, execution of te trealment plant and Distribution of
the treated waler and

_ FUNCTION OF THE STATE AND CENTRAL POLLUTION CONTROL BOARD

* Monitor violation of laws by the goveming bodies & individuals and checking the
-leated water parameters as dissolved oxygen, BOD, COD, boron, ph, oil
and grease other element like cromtum, hg atc,

Awrite up on Sewerage treatment process has also been enclosed.

Pro - action on environmental protection and ail kinds of pollution.

Pro - action of drainage system of factories and cities. ~

Drainage system should be effective .

Drains from companiesfactories should be regulated/monitored, samples to be

laken and analysed.

« Any factory drain/dlspose with highly potiuted water should he collected within the
factory area and disposed off through proper chemical process

+ Garbage managemant’ policies such as different colour coding: for garbage

segregation and disposing, ete. should be put In.

°

e*eoe

¢ There are rules under various provision but tha provisions of law musl equally give

“harvesting should be promoted: on priority basis so that underground water”

punishment te Olficlals/stafis who 0० not detect water pollution in his area of
supervision. A day.in a week must be made mandatory for all offictals from (१ te
botlom to be an inspection and all Inspection records be made transparently
online for public. . Ad

A} industrlaS Disposats: Almost all the Major Industries situated aleng river beds,
which are periadically audited by Central Pollution Board, do have ETPs. But it has to
be strictly ensured that की the ETPs are working throughout the year and most
importantly no untreated water shall pass straight into tha fiver, A particular Oept
should be accountable for any non confarmily.

8) City Disposals: Santtatlon organizations shalt plan strict strategies to clear water
before disposing it to river. Heavy penalties for Smati / Medium industries for

disposing untreated wale? [ato common sever tlnes and create general Civic

awareness,

C) Miscellaneous: Pollutian from excessiva usage of chemical ‘fertlizers to. be
checked hy using attematives:

10] Indirect: to arrest the depletion of rivers own mechanism to cleanse itself. River
beds to be cleaned pertodtcalty and incorparation of nallical déansers inte the river.
Joining rivars af flood affected areas through channels will be dually beneficial. Water

qualityftabie rises.



abs

Implementation can be donc जाए through honest cfforts and developing civic
senses, which wo lack.

V. INDUSTRIAL EFFLUENTS

No industies should be alowed ६8 daposlt industrial waste both wat and dry into rivers,
tanks and wells. The warking of slatutary bogrds monitoring and ineasuring pollution
must be revlewed and steps must be taken 10 improve it. The problems of these boards
must be sorted aut at the aarliest. In no ease the canals bearing industrial waste should
be flowing fowards rivers. Hf Where are any plan of Joining rivers, they owist be
implemented fast.

+ Recycling all types of waste
डे Propagation and promotion of Watorfilters
+ Water treatment plants through public private partnarship mode.

The capaelty of the existing ptants must be expanded further and new lechnotogy
in this area may ba adopted

" Sludy may be conducted as to:

* Whether upgradation of unauthorised layouts reduces the risk of water polfution.
Recently Delhi govt as taken this conmendable step.
« Whether temples all over the county are centribullng to water pollution.

Practical ways you can prevent water palution

« Store and handle hazardous substances carefully »

« Pravent pollution from uncontrolled refeases 00 leak by marking loading and
unioading areas and isolating them from the surface water drainage system;

+ Store alt above-ground storage tanks, drums and containers an an impermeable
base within a drip tray, bund or any olser suitable secandary containment system
lo contain any spills;

+. lastall drip trays, or other forms of containment, genealh any equipment that is
likety to Isak or tesuil in spills of pollutants.

e Empty drip trays regularly se that thay de-not overflow,

+ Procedures to prevent pollution from drainage aystern, eg. keep an updated

drainage plan ॥ colour cade your drains.

_ Water harvesting in all cities and towns and villages.

« Bat the manufacture of thin plastle baqs.

+ Unshackle the fivors from various projects
+ ० Sewaga disposal of cities Into tho Iver should aditere ta mandatory and set
benchmarks which the focal municipal corporations and independent agencies

should monitor the qualify of the discharged water, Rapeatad violation of,

benchmarks should be Sie reason to punish the officials rasponsibte foc ft



Vie.

-216- «

चैक term and attachment of property for poliuters.
Punish the perpstraters and punish the officials wna failed to report and check this
wolation. 1... ° हु

: हे + . .
Invite axparts from all over the world who have heen atlle to suacasafully -
“revive and restore the rivers का their own countries, पर है

ithas to be a holistlc plan and! impfemented with integrity.

Run campaigns for the students

Use onvironmant-friendly household products

_Anpty natural pesticides and fertilizers

Gon't litter
Disposal of litter in an appropriale waste disposal area,
Dispose of toxic products with care.

Use less water as decreasing water consurnption is one of the keys lo minimize
water pollution.

FOCUS ON THE INDIVIDUAL ANQ THE COMMUNITY CAN HELP tO
MINIMIZE WATER POLLUTION,

Case study of Bombay Municipat Corporation for Officient reduction of
plastic waste responsible for water polfutlon- use of powder named
POLYBLEND as road making material there by reducing plastic waste while

" , also-increasing efficlency of roads by 38 per cent ‘This 5107 can he taken

” forward on a large extent foc reduction of plastic waste.

In watar treatment planis, more B.0.D plants must be intraduced providing.

oxygen for the terobic iniurebes to breakdown more and more organic
wasto and make the water pure for further use, ‘ -

- Community partlctpation - Community can fake up strict steps themselves

to save our water resources. In villagos, people should be taught and
educated about the adverse affects of water potlution and should he
encouraged to gave water 83 much as thay can because it's onty them who
car make achange. ~ : :

- Water harvesting must be made compuisoty for every 30280 te take up.

Deadlino should be set up under which every household should conte up

“with this:practice. This step has béen taken in certain places such aa some

parta of Murabai, Kerala etc. and positive results have shown its success.

Sleict faws must ba set up and heavy fines must be imposed. for throwing
garbape In water bodies and workers should be enforced faking care of
these resources. This step can even combat the problem ofunemployment.



Vit.

AE

Replacement of sewer pipas in Trilokpurt Colony, East Delhi, which aro 30
years old resulting i: cotttamination of drinking water supply through it.

Cullection and fasting of polluted water, identifying fts make-up and
chemical composition and. seurce as to where it comes and. tiealing i
autitably to make it fit for re-use for marine life and poorste.

Municipal sewaye: Shift ror Combined System td Separate System.

Removal af organic wastes through mechanical, biological or chemical

~ troaiment processes.

Removal of nitrogen and phosphates.
Removal of salts through the process of ‘Elecrodialysis'.

Insecticides, Pesticides, Chiorinated hydrocarbons and Weedicides: Carbon
-absorpiion tertiary wator treatment Is effective mothed In cemaving organic
pesticides. .

Urgent need of public-private partnership in treating palluted waters for

community particlpation in smali towns and vitlages, the folluwtig can be

“done:

~- Awareness among masses using different madia. Funds may 99
earmarkad for this purpose. .

- Awareness of schoa!-going siudetits special lecture and introducing text
books and designing speclat courses on the topic In villages,

« Awareness of farmers on judicious use of input Jike fertilizers’ and
pesticides ete, in agriculture. A 4Re programme on i) Right types of
chemical, ॥) Right dose, मी) Right method of application and lv) Right
time of application be 01160 urgently. For this, ail resources including
State Agr. Universities facilities like KVKs be geared up,

- Awareness of villagers, especiafly ladies to rightly handle garbago.

+ Cammunity participation programs can be started for reclamation of
polluted water. :

All efforts being mado in hig cities through Munlclpat Corporations In”

handling sewage may be initiated in emalt towns arid villages as well.

EFFECTS OF SEWAGE TREATMENT :

. All forms of sewage traatmant consist of a sequence of physical, biological

and sometimes chemical processes almed at temeving dissolved and
suspsaded organic matter. The sewerage systom needs to be repaired at
fixed intervals on scientific considerations, The water standing on the road
ad.adjacent areas are to he drained out immediatoly.

Tanks, ponds, natural reservoirs overgrown with weeds and. coutaining
insects are ta bo cieaned at a regular interva) as per expertisciontific
decision, .



-218-

+ Dead bodies of human, animal, beasts; corpses, half bumt cotpacs nof to bo
thrown to civer and natural water reservoirs. Dead bodies of animals not to
be throwa on roads/strects, arks, any public faces or private fand.
Punishment to be fixed for thal.

» Water and other anyiranmentat patlutants causing surface and ground water
* pollution are aut to be discharged by Industries outside their preiisas.

+ Industrial, domestic efftuonis are not to be discharged into water courses
without adequate treatment,

VU, TREATMENT OF POL AUNTEO.WATER

Biological Filter

+ Skidge digostionand drying
5 Terltary treatment
+ Agricultural utilization of sewage,

+ The legal/indicial Prevention of poflation water

CITIZEN'S CONDUCT, RULE; CITIZENS' DUTY OF "FOR CONSERVATION OF
ENVIRONMENT

* Constitution of India grants "Human Right" for a Pollution free atmosphere.

Aimosphere consists of Ais, Water and Land (Soil),

« Present day problem of Environmental Hotfutlon is very deap roofed, its

sscalation is to the extrema oxtont, Presontly It ig such that tie Gavermment
Machinery (The tereayeratic Machinery) is Insufficient to tackle. tha
Poliution problem, :

+ Thia laws on the prevention of pollution Is not sufficiont for the Purpose and

1 tha judicial machinery is also not adequate so to prevent the Envizonmental
Patlution, -

« When ‘citizens enjoy the Right of “pollution free environment” by our

Constitulion, conversely citizens have tho duty to keep the Environment
clean and pollution free, As such cifizens duity charter (canduct tutes for
citizen) Ie to be framed, 88 every citizen is responsible for cleaning tha
Environment. Environmental Potiution problem has become so acute that
Govornment machineries alone are not sufficient for that so “charter of

Dutles" and “conduct: Rute" to be framed and distrihuied to citizons for the |"

" purpose of “Conservation of Environment" Education.

+ At the beglnniiug/tnitial stage if should be on the incentive basis and after:
that on imposed. duty hasis, Depanding on tha response. towards "Citizens
Buty to the conservation of Environment’, fight punishment may be
imposodiprescribed. Protection of Environment is of utmost itiporlance for
the safety of “Human Belang” and all other lving creatures and even nav -

living creatures.

ITE APRESS



XK.

_ & Some methods ace being used by industry for treating oc dispasing of waste हैं

Xi,

219.

« [tis nevertheless important that “Environment-Protection", "Environment:

Conservation" education ts to ba introduced In school level

CONSTRUCTION OF CIRCULAR DRAIN FOR DRAINING ALL SMALL. DRAINS
OF THE CITY ANDL-SEWAGE FROM CIRCULAR DRAIN TG GO FOR
TREATMENT

¢ “Prevention of water polution can be possthle through “self-help-groups"- _
which cai increase the recreational value of a fishing lake, Beaches, Resort -

owners, Commercial-fishermen and tis communities,

» Sewage treatment plants, advanced waste treatment mathods (chemical
coagulation and fillratioa, carbon adsorpfion chemicat oxidation, jon
exchange, ¢ecirodialysis, raverse osmosis, alr stripping, advanced
blologica! sysiems) should he used

waier that are not having any present counterpart in rauniclpal treatment.
Some inake use of solar evaporation to help reduce poliition prablams Sut
this involves loss of water. Many industries racover valuable by products
from thelr waste water. Usa of brine injection wells ta dispose of oil field
brines.

‘« Reverse osmotic technique is used to recover sodium sulphate from rayon

-mifi offluent. The technique is also used to recover water for reuse,
Similarly, 70% of the protoin and 80% of the lactose can ba recovered from
cheese by reverse osmosis which otharwise would cause a serious
pollution problem,

PREVENTION BY THREE PS- POLLUTANTS, PROCESSES, PEOPLE
« By and large, everyone should adapt. eS
1] Claan cow! technology ;
2)' Renewable enoray strategies
3} Fuel efficiency standards
4) Low methane farming everywhere in india.

5} In India there is no.shortags of Man Power. There js lack of proper
deplayment. Plenty of cream: retired’ personnel from Pubilc Services are
readily avaltable and thelr excollont services as volyntaays can be
channallised for useful purpose of checking the menace of water poilytion,
at every level of area, For such purposes "Citlzen Police” & “Social audit"
wif do better. .

Supreme Caurt appointed Monitoring Committee (EPCA) is alroady working
under Ministry of Environment & Forests". The area of Community
participatlom at villagetown/city levels in checking the menace of water
potution can be’ entrusted te this conimiitee by lurning Into a full-fledged
permanent constitutional body.

5)

7) Rain waterharvestiity should be mace compulsory.



361,

“E20.

8} In case of any dofauit, water connection should 16 cut off. That is what has
been dene In Tamil Nadu. Ail the siates should make it oémptlsory and this
should be on paper, whelher It has beet Implemented or not should be
taken care of, *

TREAT FACTORY ICOMPANY AND MUNICIPAL SEWERAGE
© Management of Municipal Sewage हु ह
० Ban on fertilizers and pésticides Agricuiture lands

’ Control’ pollution’ from Ocean. Ship-generated pollution is a ३०७७2 of
conicern since a lypical 3,000 passenger. हु

At least controt ship generated pollution and municipal sewaye, garbage (like
Mumbal) arid Oi refineries pollution at Indian coastline. हु

. Constructed wetlands : :
+ Use advanoad technologies for water and waste water treatment:
4. Filtration types ह
2... Micro fittration
3. * Ultra titration
4. — Nanofiltration
. Reverse Osmasis
. Mass awareness for Water pollution. हि
« Conduct for research for waler pottutlon, -
- Urban dirty water is to be purified before entering fivers gnd takes.
¢ Policy. towards borawells to be implemented.
‘ Plantation of tees around divers and lakes,

. Hydrofogical profile of the River. Yarnuna should not be altered. Flood
Plans Zoning Bill may be enacted,

« llegat construction on the river bed must be removed, Water channet of
about six hundred meter be left on both banks, trees to be planted.

. Water pondage level be ralsed te RL 210,800 M: RL 204,800 M and RL
- 202.700 M upstrcar of Wazirabad Barrage, Yamuna Bairage and Okhla
Bajrage respectively. . . yo,

* Regwatory Tribunal must be created. Polluters be punished under criminal
jaws. .

+ Bring water in the concurrent fist

« Create a forte called “erivironmental 9008" for controtiing and moniloring
water gobuitian है oo -

+? Make new nattonal water quality policy.



-221-

Organiza a national symposium to assess the current status af water
quafity and disseminate tre data te the grass 1091 level.

State Government to create a special data infrastructure (SD!) designated
as Quallly Spatial Oata for uptoacing thie water quality dafa and rade
available fo the public through village resource centexs.

Awareness programmes. है

Water quatity Monitoring has to ha strengthened.

Establish well squipped labs espectalty for bacteriological analyses.
Apply natural pesticides and fertilizers. :

Dispose of toxic products wilh care,

_ Arousing public consciousness and civic sense.

Stiyent exemplary punishment against not only the concerned violators
but also the concarned authorities In default, .

* Compulsory treatment of all the oufiet systems to RiverfGanal or even Saa
_ BOUITAS. : व

“End to open air Latines, washing, cleaning Sathing, immersian of idols

directly in the source of streams.

Reguiated plantation with malitenance of the same by focal resident .
groups along both sides of streams.

Removal of unauthorized aceupations/ erections from sides and beds of
water source, “ e .

Periodical poliution tests.

506 enforcement of the directions given by the Supreme Court in ita
jadgoment on Vellore cltizens welfare Forum vs. Union of India and other.

Assessing the havoc caused by the tanneries, dyeing and bleaching
industries ad awarding compensation in case of default by the Loss of
Ecology (Prevention and Payment of Compensation) Authority.

Exercising its powers by the Ambur Municipality as per the provisions onder
sectian 226-231, 249-253 and 338 to 342 of Madras District Municipality
Acl, 1920. 7

Exercising the powers under Section 63 of the Water (Prevention and
Control of Potlutlons) Act, 1974 inthe case af tammeries in Ambur and_the
surrounding areas.

Establishment of Treatmont Plants In (he fines of Plants established by
Tamil Nadu Leather Development Carparation TALCO.

Educating the affected persons abdut the frful benefit af section 133
CrPC. i



XU

2५४.

2m

Filing PIL in the foe of writ against the fanners for discharging untreated
cffucnts and against the Government for implementing provisions of Water
Act and Air Act,

POLLUTION PREVENTION ACTIVITIES

०० +

Appropriate use of solid waste disposal

Project shauld have tecal geology knawwedga to assess the probability of

groundwater contaralnaticn,

Rain water harvesting poltution contrat.

Regular water quailly testtrg.

Use of organic farming. .

Atrange agricultural field sehoot, field trips, form a sociaty with sfakeholdors
and other communities. available In the village

CONSERVATIONAL TECHNIQUES:

Practising आफ crapping, contour ploughing, crop rotation, pasture
TnarRagement etc.

* Animal waste control system.

Erasion control practice,

Material slorage and runoff contro faclities,
Posticide and fertilizer application restrictions.
Publie education program,

MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES FOR LONG-TERM SUSTAINABELITY

Public education and outreach through band ‘out matertais.
Pubile involvement ~ meetings, skit.
Consiruction site runoff contral हि
Water once extracted fram rivers or underground for Industrial use must be
facycied and not pannitied to be drained back into water bodies.

Grey (waste} water for human consumption should after proper treatinent .

be recycled for nen potable human uses
Prémotlon of eca-san toliets that do nat permit mixing of human feacas
ang uring and insiead conver them into Useful natural manure and
insecticide.

System of local stewardshis of water bodies like ponds, wells, nalas,
and rivars,

Secuilly of ground water sourcds.

Use of Effective Microorganism (EM) methad for cleaning and recyeling -

‘in villages and towns.

Use of Effective Microorganism (EM) melhod for sewage lrealtnent In eftles. *
Sewage to amply itself into Mini Floating. Sawage ptants placed along

* the lenglh of the Water Body.

Construct Lock Gates to disaliow the flow of the waste for removal to
Land based 05965 Areas, - . .



-223-

“Sot up Low Cost Sanilation Facilitias and route the Open Defecation
Waste to the Mini Floating Sewage Ptants or use fhe sama lo croalt Blo
gas and Monure/ Fertilizers, -

- Offer Pramotionat [ncantive Schemes,

Create था Industey for Re-cycling certain matedats instead of disposing
tne sanie., .

_ Criteria for cormmon effluent treatment pants (CE Ps) as wall as
Treatment starage and disposat facility site (1501.

TSDF site le be, withiri 100 kn af distance of the project only ५७७ 6 the
risk associated with fransportation of nazardaus waste,

Efffuent Channel Project. (M/s ECHL) not be granled permission for
furlher expansion until the criteria of disposal of Gujarat Pollution Control
Board is achieved. ,

Common effluent treatment plants and sewage treatment plant should
conduct environmental impact assasoment study. :

Government autharity’ should regularly monitor whether CETPs are
funciloning propeily and the effluent reaching CETP and final ETPs confirm
To the norms. है .

The infrastructure and technologies of veatmant plant should be
strengthened.

Complete assessment and quantification of contaminants,

Wasies and garbages have la ba removed from the sides of canals,
tanks and tivers. है

Waisr bodies have fo he desitied, weeds removed.

Traaiment of used water before allowing to run into the mala strean,

Wastage of the Dyeing units be treated at the common effluent
treatment plants. _ . -

Collection of recyclable wastes. ° ~ :

Branch of Nallonal Green Tribunaf he opened at ali Slate Caphat.

. User of organic fertiliser and pesticide for agriculture purpose be given
pansion from LLC.

Following steps be taken by government to control population as rapid
growth of pupulaton leads 10 water pollution

- Reward facilities for one child couple,

~ Reward facilities for wo child couples. ©

-  Faclittes to be stopped for above two child couple.

Efforts and dedication by individual, groups, communities and indusiiles,

Use of phytoremediation using Prosopis jutiflora for combating florids हि

pollujion in water.
Ralnwater harvesting should be made compulsory and in case of
default there, water connection and drainage connection should be cut,
* Implementing the laws proporly. .
“Np Discharge of Treated or Unireatad Efluents.
Maintenances of the Flow of Rivers.
Revised effluent Discharge Standards.
Promotion of SRI and Organic Farming.
Agricultitral Pollution correction:
- Increase in Sewage Treatment Plant Capacity.
Strengthanitig the Existing Monitoring System,

Adoptitig a more Stelngent Poliuter Pays Approach.



ee eee

२-० ७ +*

224.

Incegendant Environment Impact Aggessi

loformal Reautation and Peeots's Participation.

Protection of rivets and abalement of poitulion to he made an election
rrandate,

Innnetsion of Idols In rivers, lakes, Sea must he stopped,

Pouring-drainage waste in river water bé stopped

Olsposing Corpses in river, lake, well must be stopped

Washing Aninvls, clothes, utensils in the tlver, fake must be stopped.
Oredging sands from dyer, lakes, sea ara to be stopped

Central and State Governments :need to slop’ the ‘technotogy
upgradation funds' and other subsidies oxtended fo lhe Tannedes tiniess
Zere discharge level is abtained है

Civic bodiss need to follow effective ways to recycle waste water.

Effective Iniptementation of legistation to han plastics

Government must take measure to protect encroachment of river bed,

Traditional management of water bodiss.

Basic sululions

‘Efficient and effective designing of the treatinent plants.
Efficient and fechaically skilled staff.
Strict Iinplementation of Water Act

Technicaf solutions

Legislation

Use of advanced wastewater frealment_ technologies through
membrane filtration fixe Membrane Bloreactor (MBR), Advanced Oxidation
Procasses (AQP).

Water Pollution Controt Act tar prompt and exemplary compensations to
the affected people at the cost of the polluters,

Amend the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 to Rak penalties far
violation,

Amend Environment Impact Assessnent notification where any actly
that would affect Iha water bodies adversely will require Environment
dearance and ELA,

Enact Clean Water Act to.include right to water and protection of natural
water bodies.

Institutfons

eeee

Intitutions involved in waler pollution control «lust have for Its
Tnanitoring function a committee with about 50% of the members from

oulside the government including NGO, affected cornmunity members, -

media and errinant citizens,

Fund should not be released without fartnatian of suck a committee for
any project.

Use of alt forms of plastics and afumtnium foil must be banned right
away.

‘Government must come aut with a policy in conjunction with
manufacturers of bottles or suppliers for recyoiltag these plastic ७७४४४.

Improveinent of the local teansport facitifies,

Water harvesting from the condensed water from Alr conditioner.

Sewage entaring lhe rivers has fo be chacked.

Water resources capacily augmentation by desiiting of dams, lakes and
ponds and investing in Rain water harvesting structures. *

re lt MATT + २३ पद.



-225-

Address the issue of proper water supply, distibution and also waste
water dralnage systems $0 thal a correct basic design of ireatment plant
can be proposed,

Recycling of waste water’as ‘an alternate source of water that can be

treated and reused for non gpolable purpose, operated and maintained by
the comniunily.

Cost racovery from ४१४ reusing community,

Aquifer mapplag,

Information and extension programme for scicntitic appileatian of agra
chernicals.

Usa af GIS and Reitiote Sensing based Decision Suppart Systems.

Increase in the wastewater treatment capacity and its” optimum
utilization,

Reguiations te deat with water pollulton ताज houssholds, conimorclal
infrastructure and ag¢lcultural sector,

Increase the water quatily monitoring network.

Making the best available technology for waste water treatment
affordable to the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs). "

Measures instituted (0० sensitiza the students about environment 89085 हे

including the need far preventitig water pollution,

Incorporated varlous topics refaled to Water Pollution and its prevention
fof the Upper Primary, Secondary and tha Highor Secondary Stages by
NCERT.

Schools have been advised to set up Eco Clubs vide 0060 No. 16

" dated 12.06.2001 by CBSE,

The CBSE Teachers’ Manual an Environmental Education from Classes
110 Vi has included topics on climate change and Global Warming.

CSE organized National Uroan Water Awards.

Organizes 085९ Annual Sclence Exhibition which includes theme of
Walter Conservation

Sewerage treatment plants fer citles and villages

Cancellation of Licance, subsidy, permission for not having

sewerageiwater treatment plants for factories and industries.

Punishment to factories owner for allowing contaminated water ta low
into straams/rivers.

TFrealmant plants for Solid waste in cies. .

A concerted attempt to mitigate the ftucride pollullon 6 drinking water
as a welfare measure to.improve the quailty of life and paapte in North East
Region,

Monitoring of all water supply system 10 minimiza Iba potentially harmful
40083 before it ceaches common paople.

people.

Weeds such as ‘Kai’ (Hindl name} te be removed to reduce water
pollution

Prevont recusting Incidénts of cloudburst by daptaying mobile vehicles
mounted with meteorolagical magnet & disperse Nimbasiratus cloudsfother
cloiids with iodine seeding therein.

Acrangement for uninterrupted idgation of crops in the indian region

hdentify the places of water pollution out of garbage in cillés and do

water sampling #ero

Poution prevention coupled with oh opportunity fo attract more



Bia

_ Setup blological banks from bacteriasffossils useful for biotegical war in
manufacturing niedicines by developing their resistance pulwer.

Seek suggestions from students of medicai/enginecring colleges ta 7

tackle biolagical war.

Disposal of sewage of big cities at a ¢
mnies away in.sea wilh the help of dtedger ships.

Meet tha challenga of wator potiution duc to extraction of mefal and
petroleum fron the sea.
lndependent government systems with latest equipment that do not buckle
undar industrlat and potitical powers.
Eminent ४5०४5 In respective fields fo vokintarily register wiih the Govt
and to give feedback about the causes of pollution anc passitie solution.
Pottution contol office must ceilfy on thelr website every month about (६8 .
expected. quality parameters of indusifal effluent and actual quatity
parameter of Industrial effluent.
industrias to deposit certain amount with the Govt. overy month based on
the pre-decided criteria, Suilable tnvestigation / actlon be taken including
forfeiting their amounts deposited in case of more than ten complaints by
eminent person.
Special emphasis on importance of cleanilness of water bodies, personat
and social discipline to be followed to avoid pollution of water bodies,
Practical Tratniny and visit to unclean and polluled places

108 of minhmum 7 nauiical

Retigious heads to educate masses of change the existing practices.

Graund water poltution

.

Find out ways of using natural ingredients in pesticides which are not
hasmfut to humans or animals.

Proper mechanism to check the arrangements being put in place by
Indusifes before they get ficense and monitor their activilies from time to
time.

Proper sewage system and its treatment before Gat water Is released to
the natural drainage channels. . !

River Water Pofution

sea ee

Make a profile of the river.

Stop the flowing of drains directly to the river.

Making people aware about the pollution belng caused hy cultural traditions
and evolving ways and modified rituals that will satisfy the peapte
amotionaity, न

Construction of Sixlane Expressway.

Cortidor for inatallation of Solar Panel.

Grean corrktor,

Polythene bags should be totally banned all over the country:

All tha house owners to construct Septic tanks within their respective
prefnises

India-wide programms to mobilize communities and Panchayats for
inclusive management of water resource.

Constituting and promoting community driven interventions or prograitis to
mitigate surface and ground water polfifion and encauraging water
conservation.

Promofing fong term programrnatic interventions far education, awareness
and capacily buliding of local communities.



-227-

Setting up of an ICT (Information and Communlgation technatogies) based

“on MIS (Management information syste} at village, district and state level.

Exploring different models of partnership In managing pollution

Regular trainiag and capacily bediding of the stakchoktets Invalyed af all

tiers.

- Mare sitngent clearances like the ubsence- of any water poliuaion

points/sources, full avaitahillty and, effective functoning of installed
apparalus for the treatment of the waste watedinduskial waste etc. shout
be available wilh the seller for the Wansfar fo take ptace of Industrial set
Ups.

Retational monthly check uy of residentialicommercialfindustrial complexes.
for checking the probabitily of leakages.

Cantrokiing electicily for tube well farming according to the season of the
crop to prévent the out of track sowing of crops by farmers.

Interaction and awayeness:

” Annual scholarship/compctition regarding water felated

essays/paintings/dance/plays ete. conipatitions.

Cieatlon of an online’ farum to bridge Ihe gap and increase the publicity of
differant water programs.

Introduction of 8 nationavinternational water-fest where different minds
mest, and where people san showcase their talents, research,
accomplishments etc,

Promotion of a very powerti force in the Indisn culture which is the spiritual
organizations for spreading the message.

Most lnporlant

.

Increased spending on Research and Develaprnant in this specific field, as
the research involved is one ime investment and effective collaboration
with foreign govermmant or NGOs.

Creation of a separate agency of professionals far inviting different water
Felated projects.

The setting up of different varictics of plants which can purify pollutants
according te the different level of pollutants prasont in different parts of the
coustlry,

Exfucating the Bublic wih regard to.

+ the problems due to water pollutian, * : o

+ the differences befween drain.mechanisms - sewage, storm water
drain, Ganais.

+ steps to prevent sewags from reaching storm watar draia.

1‘ steps to reduce the amounl of sewage generated, through gray
water fe-cycling. .

+ Use of every posstble medium to educate the public.



_ 8919 of Panchayat Panchayats

2B.

Drafl Modet Bit for the Conservation, Protection and Regutation of
Groundwater, 2011 was enclosed. .

+” - People shoukt be made aware uf the deptating quatity of wator and [ts
growing demand.
of Environmental sublect bo included necessarily from class one to Post
Graduation,

Change in 1.16 Stylo

8 Use pure water only when itis necessaty.
e Use of plastics should be hilisimized and disposed in such a manner that में
does not anter inte reservoirs, rivers 26.

Disposal of golluled water of the towns and Industrial units

. Prevent effluents coming out of Industrat factories lo mix in pure water,
बढ Framing strict laws.
’ Plants to tread polluted water be established at varius places.

ithe prevention of water pollution

. Gram Panchayais should be glyen an itmportant role to tackle the problem
- _ of polfuffon b1 Ihe villages with guidelines,
के Gram Panchayats should (क्षित9 schemes locally for the prevention af
. pollution.
+ _ Reguiarly evaluating and reviawing the schemes by framing Gram Samit.
= Making pubile aware and providing proper assistance with voluntary fabaur
service.
Panchayats should impart unemployed young men and women a special
training at Panchayat level.

“Land and Water conservation

. Making wate shed. :
. Treatment of water by making big reservoirs of water and Intensive farming.

Land excavation should be ptamed

| Safe disposal of fly ash

e Fly ash omanating from thermal power stations should ba properly
dispased. .

Proper disposal of effluents emanating from Idustrial_piants.'and impure _

water of citios

° Sirict ules should be made and enforced and the cantaminated Water be
lreatedd physically, chemically and-biotogically



229

Chemicals in agricutture produce

3९ of nesllcides and inserd
Use of bio atid herbal medicines 08 pronioted.
Integrated Past Cantral technique be adopted which iS.cheap and simple.

tution in religgonts fi

Proper disposal of waste material lefl in big religious festivals. :
Speclal care should be takan about tho cleanliness of bathing places on the
bank of haly rivers and reservoirs, हि ‘
Estabiishing ‘Natlonal/Night Shelfer and Comraunity Kitchen Authority’.

Give priority te horticulture before iadustrialization,

Gardens should be developed in the  snvall tawns Instead of district.
headquarters. .

The Goverment should avaiva the mechanism to allow capitalist class to
invest in horticulture. : हु :
Arrangement for providing bio toftets fk 19000 trains cunning across India,

There should be tanks where used water of washbasin could be stored and.

utilize in flush toilets after Ieating ft

Effective steps for arrangement of potable water In trains and passengers
by the Railway Organisation.

Appointing Safaiwatahs (Sanitary Workers) in adequate numbers.

Mobile Toilet Bathrooms showd be arranged in avery disticls by the
Government which could be used it sacial/religlous occasion.

Separate sewage line for Ihe excrement af hatels efc. opening at safe place
away from the cilies. -

- Formulation of Law to encourage peapie construct soak pit for their touses.

Use of polythene should be banned and garbage should not be dumped
here aitd there, :
Awareness of the people of the H-effects of polythede and garbage.

Noa-potable water should be supplied through pipetines. .
Drains linked directly to tivers should be treated by the cenatruction of
sewage treatment plants. . हु मु

Copper plates 81000 be Installed In § feet, 4 feat, 3 feat, 2 fect and 4 feet
deep pits and drainage wastes should be routed Into the divers through
pipes. . .

PVC pipes be used far drip irrigation and spanking.

“Taps shoutd not $e left running in the public toilets.

Public awareness progratnmes should be organized at city and stale level

. for judicious use of water. .
- Selling of milk and waler in poly bags and plastic bottles should be banned.

"Awareness among the peaple and a feeling of publle welfare ta denottute’

the environmertt putting aside all our reservations.
Clean water under ariicte StA(g) of the Constitution of India.

Water shauld be used as per requirements.
Drinking water should be well covered.

Peopis should not be allowed fe throw dead bodies of antrials in the rivers
ar ponds.



>230-

Plastic items should be banned at refigious places which aca adfacent ta
Fives. : .
No habitation should be allowed on the banks of the ¢ivers.

Coinpantes manufacturing various products of daily use should enaure that
their products have no hasmifil chemicats art ate lotally eco-friendly,

- Plastics products should be banned immediately and green technology हु

should be developed.

Labourers should not be allowed to live on the banks of tivers and the.

adtinistation should areange for their habitation,
Dams should not be constructed on rivers and afowed to flow without aay

> tindvance. ot है
Unnecessary construction work should Hol be cacied aut on tha banks of

fivers. हु
Use of soap by people 79॥ रा in religious spots should be banned,

Plantation of irass which soak exira water like pine tree which causes

macxiinuit logs to (he land should be stopped. पर
Paaple should not be allowed fo throw jewellery and coin in rivers.

we



ANNEXURE Til

DETAILED NOTE ON THE MEASURES INSTITUTED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF

SCHOOL EDUCATION AND LITERACY 10 SENSITIZE THE STUDENTS ABOUT .

ENVIRONMENT . ISSHES INCLUDING THE NEED FOR PREVENTING WATER
POLLUTION हे

The Nalional Council of Educational. Resaarch and Tralaing are apex

organizations in School t:ducation and the Central Buard af Secondary Education under.

the aegis of Ministry of Hlunian Resource Development. Measures instituted by both the
organization are detailed as under:

A. National Council of Educational Research & Traintig (NCERT)

Nationai Council of Educational Research & Training (NCERT) has Incorporated
various topics especially releted to Water Pollullon and its prevention at relevant

. chapters and secllan in the textbooks and other curcicular Inaterial developed by the

Deparment for the Upper Primary, Secondacy and tha Higher Secondary Stages to
sensitize impressionable minds of sludants. A jist of Topics especially related to water
poilulion and its prevention in NCERT’s Textbooks |$ attached.

B, Central Board of Secondary Education(CSSe)-

1, The Central Board of Secondary Education has taken cognizance of the
importance of Environment Education long back. The schools have been advised
to set up Eco Clubs 4s far back as 2001 vide Clrcular No. 16 dated 12.06.2012,
The-Board has given directions to all its affiliated schools to impart Environment
Education integrated in different subjects in ail classes from +X throug! the
activily mode 10 sensitize studants to global warming’ and other environment
related concerns.

2. Directives have been sent to schools from time to Ume to Inpart education to.
‘students about environmental issues and concerns and Iniliate necessary action
about environmental pratection. The CBSE prescribes the syllabus in Environment
Education that has baen prepared by NCERT.

3, CBSE brought out the twe Manuals as support material te help teachers in
effective transaction of the curriculum ie. Guidetines for taachers for Classes |
to VI: An activity based manual, These Manuals cansist of graded activities
relalad to anvironmental issues and concerns.

4, The Teachers’ Manual on Environmental Educatton froma Classes | to VI has
the folowing activitics on Climate Change and Glabal Warming (copies enclosed}.

a. Water Cycle in Nalure (Page No. 73)
9. Purifying Water by Solar Energy: _ | (Page No. 77)
6. How Plants Modiiy the Environment (Page No. 81)
d. .Green House Effect matt (Page Na, 87)°

5.

Similarly in the Training Manual For Class IX, there are various activities such
“as: - 2 है हैं



6.

a. Watsr Conservation {Page No. 20)

Thee is'a section on Eca Clubs in the quarterly fournat CENBOSEC published by
the Board. The Board sensitizes schaols about water management by providing
useki links ane information under this sectian, The CENBOSEC issue Oclover-
Sevginibes 2009 - provided Information: regarding te india Water Portal
{ypew.indiawateportal.org) which is an open, Inclusive, web-tased platform for

7 sharing watersmaaayament knowledge amongst practitioners and the general

~

ee ee

9.

10

Public. It sims fo draw on the storehouse of traditional and modérn praclices, use
technology tools tke GIS and multhnedia to add further value to if and then
disseminate il to a larger audience through the internet.

The CBSE organized National Urban Water Awards (NUWA) in the year 2010
The objectives of line pragramme were:-

To ensure Walter Conservation and its Judicious Use

To create awareness regarding Safe drinking water and Its upkeep

Te create awareness regarding establishment of Water Harvesting Structure
To ensure Waste Wator Racycling in Schools

To create awareness regarding Consarvalion of Green Spaces

The Board has ajso starled Natlonal School Sanitation Inflalve along with
Ministry of Urban Development and GIZ. The programme encourages schools to
practice Water Conservation through activilies such as Rain Waler harvesting and
Waterless Urinals.

The CBSE organizes’ CBSE Annual Sciance Exhibllion which often includes’

theme af Water Conservallon. The exhibition witnesses many projects by skidents
on tssuas related fo Water even from ofher themes.

The CBSE has also givan waightings to tho activities canducted under Eco-clubs,

Based Assessment. This would, amang other things, also result in promoting -

. . various issues such as Water Conservation.

. AS 8 result of these inlvatives many schools In different parts of the country have

i . Health and Wellness clubs and other extra-curricular activities under the Schoal
tt

reportedly started activities tinat lead to water conservation,



Scierice tor Vit Wastewater

Sections

Chapter ‘Sumber &

=

ह Extended Learning

18.1; Water, Our Lifetine

.2: What is Sewage

+ Activity 18.2 .

18.3:Water Freshens Up - An Eyentfl Journey

- Sewers and. sewerage ”

~ Activity 18.3 on study of sewage route

+ Treatment of polluted water

- Activity 18.4 on simple way of water treetment

10.4: Wastewater Treat iment Plant -
- Detailed process of wastewater treatment

48:6: Betler House Keeping, Practices
AQ. 7: Sanitation and Disease .
13.8: Alternative Acrangement-tor Sewage Disposal

18.9: Sanitation: at Pubtic Places

- Visit of sewage treatment plane



. 10.2००2 52] puz Wor

sordwes J3}8M Jo Sujaser ue ¢-94 (147२०

म्च्फार

Suayszey jo Gay ३३ Ua UAW

wy Suppom 3099 pug 1३1४3
ie adenas 3० ४०५
8३४४४; अंभारण

yo UG Es!

AepAare ‘aydiuis itm उ०918

,आधभषाग 5

37

{paying s29e 4S) Mor] pue Jaye गप९३०१ SI 12११६ :5°3}

: voresydouny -
BEIEYISIP ०है४/४२६ JO 5179)13 -
1४:०:४770 pue eSemay INsswog :1 ८9

sonss]
yejuswuostaug - 91]

[३०])0० ISIE [EPL

sazsnDsay
*yearg en,
jo juawabeuay ~ 91.

४6७४० 9५1 JO ७०-३४०३०४ ०४० Way! xOg

एजश्जाएण1ण

"18 १8९/७६ ‘aponseg अण्याप्रन० -
GOWAN, 72932/७ LOL

sapsnosay -

ily

BINbIT उज9000/५ ४ :2898/ : xi Joy anualns |

JeAMRN - FL

(1 १४६ Purse JO UE JRA ए 7 PRY -
203 PUP SAIANIY - BUlWee] एशएएम्फउ

* prey अपर
;५2२%०३ (5982० ७ ‘eWOG Jaye VOWS
1२७ "UOLNyod salem Inoge ६६४909/0/5७
yay urs $129[0/0 5019596 878 ए' 81. 69५77 -
youog, 3G LED TRUM :6'97

syeysaqew
Jaye fo Udriorisisuc> VO 29. AIALITY -

. BBUED 39003 ey? ७० ApNys ase -
yeimeg २०० 3910१ 5००१ MOH :८ ३1

JSUEINHOd >ग४/0 -
। एणआागी०१ sae :१ ४

उ०1९/४६ pue +

“yousrnposut | iv 40 gorntyed 58६ |. MA 40; ४2०७|०5 | ८

REIT?



Project Boalc in

Environmental
2 t

Im fort

~ Elixir life - water.

Bro: fect Geox in
Environmental
Education for

{ Class iX

Project 8996 in
Environmental
Education for
Ctess X ‘
Teachers’
| Handdook on
Environmentai
Education for
Ube Higher

| Secondary

sc

j Stege

का. Quality of water

12 - Water bodies in

Ne

neighbourhood ‘

Geosphere

16,22: & Case Study of (ntegrated Waste Water: Treatment
- 4a integrated mix of artificial and na tural processes for water

treatment in Arcata, Catifornia- . -

5.5: Management of Gaseous, Solid, Liquid and Mazar 605 Wastes

3.4: Air, water (fresh and marine), soil pollution - sources and

cansequences

5.9: Strategies for Reducing Pollution and Improving the &

nvironment



Se:

SA OTS ET.

TENTHS 4 Sst AEA TAMTI TN ot teats,



cGwWe. «(Central Ground WaterBoard - .__ हु
. Gre _| Central Pollution Control Board
Cr. __[Crematoia, ... 7 oe
DPR. _ [Belated Fr Detailed Project Report _
FAB i .
[1a0 «CT Interception and Diversion हु
| JNNURM Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewable
pe -_|{Mission
LCS '_.[Low Cast Sanitation
mid __| Miltion liters per day (a measure of water quantity).
MoEF Ministry of Environment and Forests
MoUD : | Ministry of Urban Development
[MoWR | Ministry of Water Resources
MPS - Main Pumping Station है
NGRBA - -|Natlonal Ganga River Basin Authority
National Lake Conservation Plan
National River Conservation Directorate

. [NRCP | National River Conservation Plan
[O&M Operation and Maintenance
RFD River Front Development  _

“RBL-

LIST OF ACRONYMS AND TECHNICAL TERMS USED IN THE REPORT |

|

State Pollution Control Board
{Sewage Treatment Plant
Solid Waste Management
Urban lofrastructure Development Scheme for _
Small and Medium Towns a
United Nations Environment Programme
Water Quality Assessment Authority
Water Quality Review Committee
-[An egsential part of water quality monitoring
systems,.baseline stations aré eStablished in areas
“away from human influence, these give data. for].
comparison purposes.



Ange

Basin approach

.{time and any single management intervention has
jimplications for the system as a whole

_jway of thinking that assists Basin managers and

River and la ins are dynamic over space and

Incroasingly, human activities are impacting. the
ecological integrity of lakes, Basin approach is a

stakeholders in’ achieving sustainable
management of rivers and fakes and their basins.
it takes into account lhat rivers ancl fakes have a
great variety of resource values Whose sustainable
develapment and use tequire special management
considerations for their static water properties.

ee

| ‘BOD

BOD isa chemical procedure for determining the
uptake rate of dissolved oxygen by the biological

organisins in a body of water and is widely Used as |

an indication of the quality of water,

Bio-indicators

Biological monitoring gaes beyond — the
conventional measures of water quality fo address
questions of ecosyslem function -and integrity. tt
involves the measurement of species or a group of

used to determine environmental integrity

species {ike invertebrates whose population is |

| Domestic Deflouridation Unit

DDFU

‘| DO is a relative measure of the amount of oxygen

that is dissolved: or carried in the water body.
Adequate ‘dissolved oxygen is needed and
hecessary for good water qualit

Flux/lmpact .
‘|stations ©

An essential part of water quality . monitoring

systems, flux stations determine fluctuations of |’

critical pollutants from river basin to ocean of
regional sea

Keystone
species.’

A keystone species is a species. so critical to. an

ecosystem that its removal could potentially

‘|-dastroy the entire system. The concept of keystone

species has become an important issue in

[conservation today as_the loss or decline of



_ 230 -

MINARS

E species may have — far-reaching
cansequences for the structure and functioning of
the eco-systems in which they live
Monitoring of Indian National ‘Aquatic Resources
a programme established by CPCB

Non-Paint
| source pollution

It occurs when poliitants are delivered indirectly
through. tansport or environmental change. Non-
|peint sources are much more difficult to monitor
and control

contaminants in ground water streams and lakes

Point . source}It occurs when harmful substances are emitted
pollution directly into a body of water. Point source pollution
is easier to monitor and regulate.

Tc Total Coliform which Is an indicator of presence of

_ 8०8 matter in water.

Trend stations .

An essential part of water quality monitoring
systems, the purpose of frend stations is to test for
long-term changes in water qllality and identify
trends of pollution.

UASB Upfiow Anaerobic Sludge Blanket, a technology for

treatment of effluents from sewage treatment
lants.

GAP __ Ganga Action Pian :

RRL Regional Research Laboratories 7

PPP udlic Private Partnerships,

CANR Committee on Allocation of National Resources

PCCs Pollution Contro! Committees

ESS ' Environmental Surveillance Squad

CETP Common Effluent Treatraent Plant

EIA, . Environment Impact Assesstnent

NAEMA National Environmental Appraisal and Monitoring

Authori

Pe integrated Pest Management__

FFS Farmers.Field Schoot

BWE —— pe of Water Efficiency
IWRM Integrated Water Resources Management. }

oday they account for tha majority of |



“215

Water Qu Quality Review Committees कि
Terms, of Conditions
ater Quadity Management Plan

na Water Quality Keview Committees

Urban Water Supply and S

| High Powered Expert Committee
न Urban Sanitation Policy

| Chemical Oxygen Demand . /

North .Eastern’ Region Urban Development

* | Programme

Central Sanctioning and Monitering Committee .
Quarterly Progress Report .

‘| independent Review and Monitoring Agency

Project Monitoring Unit _
Investment Programme Coordinator Cell
National Steering Committee

SIPMIU
_ | lmplemseniation Unit
National Remote Sensing Centre

| NPOF National Project on Organic Farming न
NPMSH&F National Project on Management of 3091 Health &
: . Fertilit
{DAG a
81.17 Season Long Training Program _ -o
IGAR tadian Council of Agricultural Research.
SAUs State Agriculture Universities, /
DPPQ&S’s ‘| Directorate. of Plant Protection, ‘Quarantine &
i ; Storage's . . _
DBT _} Department of Bio-Technolog
{CMR Indian Council of Medical Research
RKVY. Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana
NHM National Horticulture Mission
HMNEHS [Horticulture Mission for North-east and Himalayan

State Investment Programme Management and



YD

—

~~ |Zeré Liquid Discharge

{th institute

National - Environinental Engineering Research
Pollution  Invenlorization, Assessment & |
| Surveillance

Grossly Polluting Industries

Nationa! Mission for Clean Ganga

State Pragramme Management Groups
Ganga Knowledge Centre

State Ganga [iver Conservation Authority

State River Conservation Authority
1 Design, Build & Operate

Third Party Inspection - |

Feasibility Report . |!
Designated Best Use :

Information-Gomraunication-Technolo

Divisional Project Monitoring Cell

Geographical Information System ___
_| Urban Local Bodies :

Communication and Public Outreach Program

Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangthan

National Environment Awareness Campaign

‘[infermation, Education and Communication

Agro Eco-System

_| Central Integrated Pest Management Centres

Non-Governmental Organizations :

VOs _t' Voluntary Organisations - |

PRI Panchayati Raj Institutions : है

ie -[Andian Institute of Technolog

TSBF Treatment Storage Osposal Facility _

CCEA Cabinet Committes.on Economic Affairs, ..__

PHED Public Health Engineering Department
| CIPMCs Central Integrated Pest Management Centres —|

City Sanitation Pian



King og
रा ~ Al
———— a ‘[Gity Devel Developinent Plan
LDA “Tinton Agr Land Development Authorities
iAs __.__| Implementing Agencies
UC —— | Utilisation Certificates :
NEP ‘National Environment Policy =
(७: Improved Crematories a
WHO World Health Organisation .
YAP कि Yamuna Action Plan |
WRIS | Water Resources Infor mation System a
____ [Memorandum of Agreements _

008 .