130

HYDROCARBON PRODUCTION SHARING
CONTRACTS

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Forty-Seventh Report (16" Lok Sabha)}

MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM.& NATURAL GAS

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2018-19)

ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTIETH REPORT

ne etennner asses

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

'सत्यमेद जयते

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2169

ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTIETH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2018-19)

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

‘HYDROCARBON PRODUCTION SHARING
CONTRACTS

- [Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Forty-Seventh Report (16 Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS

Presented to Lok Sabha on: 19.12.2018

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 19.12.2018

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

December, 2018/ Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)


CONTENTS

PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMITTEE (2018-19)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2017-18)
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-VIII OF
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2017-18)

INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER I Introductory

CHAPTER I Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government

CHAPTER Ill Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received
from Government

CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee and which require reiteration

CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies/no replies

APPENDICES

* Minutes of the second sitting of Sub-Committee VIII of Public
Accounts Committee (2017-18) held on 8.02.2018

i* Minutes of the Third sitting of Public Accounts
Committee(2017-18) held on 13.03.2018.

tr Minutes of the Tenth sitting of PAC (2018-19) held on
30.07.2018.

wr Minutes of the Twelfth sitting of PAC (2018-19) held
on 9.8.2018.

Vv Minutes of the Twenty-first sitting of PAC (2018-19) held
on 14.12.2018.

vi Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the

Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts
Committee contained in their Forty-seventh Report (Sixteenth
Lok Sabha)

* To be appended at the time of Printing.


16.
17,
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2018-19) OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2018-19

Shri Mallikarjun Kharge

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay

Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Smt. Riti Pathak

Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank”
Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal

Shri Abhishek Singh

Shri Gopal Shetty

Dr. Kirit Somaiya

Shri Anurag Singh Thakur

Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi

Dr. Ponnusamy Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA
Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Shri Shwait Malik
Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya
Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
Shri C.M.Ramesh
Shri Bhupender Yadav

Chairperson

ही RNS

SECRETARIAT

Shri A.K. Singh - Additional Secretary
Shri T. JayaKumar - Director

Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Additional Director

Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2017-18) OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2017-18

Shri Mallikarjun Kharge - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey
6. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. _ Smt. Riti Pathak
9. Shri Neiphiu Rioht
10. Shri Abhishek Singh
11. Prof. Ram Shanker
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
14. Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi
15. Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA
16. Shri Naresh Agrawal
17. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
18. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
19... Shri Mohd. Ali Khan?
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy*
21... Shri Ajay Sancheti
22. Shri Bhupender Yadav

—
1 Ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon acceptance of his resignation from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 22 February, 2018.

? Elected w.e.f. 29 December, 2017 in lieu of vacancy caused due to retirement of Shri Shantaram Naik.
3 ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 18 August, 2017 and re-elected ७.९.

29 December, 2017,


COMPOSITION OF THE SUB COMMITTEE Vill OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2017- OF THE SUB COMMITTEE Vill OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2017-
18)

Sub-Committee — VIII (Follow up Audit of Hydrocarbon Production Sharing Contract for KG
- DWN-98/3 Block for the Financial Years 2012-13 and 2014 3-14)

Convenor : Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
Alternate Convenor : Shri Nishikant Dubey
Members : Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

1:
2.
3.
4,
5.
6.

Dr. P. Venugopal |
Shri Ajay Sancheti
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita

i Ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 2 April, 2018.


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2018-19), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this One Hundred and Thirtieth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Forty-Seventh
Report(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Hydrocarbon Production Sharing Contracts‘
relating to the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas.

2. The Forty-Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabhal/laid in Rajya Sabha on
28 April, 2016. The Sub-Committee Vill of PAC (2017-18) took oral evidence of
Ministry of Law & Justice (Department of Legal Affairs) on 13 March, 2018 on the delay
in submission of action taken replies in respect of observations/ recommendations
pertaining to the Ministry of Law & Justice. The final replies of the Government to the
observations/recommendations contained in the 47th Report were received on 18 April,
2018, 9 May, 2018 and 2 November, 2018, The Public Accounts Committee (2018-19)
considered the draft Report at their sittings held on 30 July, 2018 and 9 August, 2018
and thereafter adopted the One Hundred and Thirtieth Report at their sitting held on 14 °
December, 2018. Minutes of the Sittings form appendices to the Report.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report. है

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty-seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha) is given at Appendix-VI.

NEW DELHI; Mallikarjun Kharge

18 December, 2018 Chairperson
27 Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


CHAPTER -1
REPORT

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the

Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in

their Forty-seventh Report (16 Lok Sabha) on "Hydrocarbon Production Sharing

Contracts".

2.

The Forty-seventh Report which was presented to Lok Sabha on 28" April, 2016

contained 31 Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken Notes on all the

Observations/Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Petroleum

and Natural Gas and are categorized as under:

(i)

(ii)

(ii)

(iv)

Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 1, 2, 4, 6, 13, 15, 16, 18,19, 21, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29 & 30

Total: 17
Chapter — Il

Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:
NIL

Total: NIL
Chapter - Ill

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

Para Nos. 3, 7, 8, 9, 10, & 31

Total: 06
Chapter - IV

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies/no replies:
Para No. 5, 11, 12, 14, 17, 20, 22 & 23

Total: 08
Chapter -V


3. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee, inter-alia, included
detailed examination of Production Sharing Contracts (PSCs) under New Exploration
Licensing Policy (NELP) particularly with respect to KG-DWN-98/3 (KG-D6) Block,
Panna-Mukta and Mid & South Tapti Fields and RJ-ON-90/1 Block. The examination of
the subject had revealed certain shortcomings/deficiencies and the Committee had
accordingly given Observations/Recommendations in their Forty-seventh Report. As
regards KG-DWN-98/3, the Committee had recommended on the various issues
including Non- relinquishment of contract area, Award of Contracts on the basis of a
single financial bid, Review of Declaration of Commerciality (DoC) in respect of three
discoveries, viz. D29, D30 and D31, Contract for Engineering, Procurement, Installation
and Construction (EPIC) of offshore facilities, Classification of Start-up and Production
Bonuses as part of recoverable costs and Piece-meal hiring of drilling rig. In respect of
Panna-Mukta and Mid & South Tapti Fields, the observations were on non-signing of
Crude Oil Sales Agreement (COSA), Cost Recovery of Unconsumed Production
Inventory, Delay in Water Injection (WI) Project in Panna field resulting in declining
production, Sale of gas in contravention to MOPNG’s directives and in case of RJ-ON-
90/1 Block the main observations were related to delay in submission of Work
Programme & Budget (WP&B), adjustment of shipping cost beyond delivery point,
inability of Government nominee to lift crude, pricing of RJ crude and delay in finalizing

optimization concept.

4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
have been reproduced in the relevant chapters of this Report. The Committee will now
deal with action taken by the Government on their Observations/Recommendations

which either need reiteration or merit comments.

5. The Committee desire the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas to furnish
Action Taken Note in respect of Observations/Recommendations contained in
Chapter | and final/conclusive action taken replies in respect of the
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter V for which interim reply
had been given by the Government within six months of the presentation of the
Report to the House.


6. The Committee deplore the inordinate delay in submission of final Action
Taken Replies by the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (on 18 October, 2017
and thereafter on 18 April, 2018, 9 May, 2018 and 2 November, 2018) on the
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 477 Report (1467 Lok Sabha) of
the Public Accounts Committee presented to the House on 28 April 2016, which,
regardless, should have been furnished within six months from the aforesaid
date. It is worth mentioning here that the Sub-Committee VIII of Public Accounts
Committee (2017-18) at their sitting held on 8 February, 2018 were pained to note
the non-furnishing of opinion/clarification by the Ministry of Law and Justice on
Observations/Recommendations pertaining to them. The Sub-Committee Vill of
PAC (2017-18), therefore, decided to call Ministry of Law and Justice (Department
of Legal Affairs) for evidence on 13 March, 2018. The final replies after
incorporating the advice of Department of Legal Affairs were sent vide OM dated
18 April 2018, 9 May, 2018 and 2 November,2018. The Committee are dismayed to
note the callous attitude of both Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas and
Ministry of Law and Justice in delayed submission of Action Taken Replies and
opine that instances of such nature should definitely be obviated in future. It is
needless to say that suitable instructions be issued to all concerned to adhere to

Committee’s timelines.

7. Roles and functions of Directorate General of Hydrocarbons (DGH)

(Recommendation Para No. 3)

Audit had highlighted that technical advisory and related functions should be
discharged by a body completely subordinate in all respects to MoPNG and functions of
regulatory nature should be discharged by an autonomous body, with an arm's length
relationship with Gol. The Committee noted that the Ashok Chawla Committee on Open
and Competitive Mechanism for Allocation, Pricing and Utilization of Natural Resources
in its Report on PSCs had also observed that transparency in the management of
contracts and associated considerable financial implications should be enhanced by
increasing the independence of the regulatory mechanism, clarifying the separation of
the policy maker, regulator and the operator and bringing the decision making process
into the open. The Committee took note of the reply of the MoPNG that regulatory
functions are demarcated and laid down by way of contract terms, Act and Rules; DGH
ensuring compliance of regulations by Contractors and role of technical advisory

3


discharged by DGH under the direct control of MoPNG and a separate study by Boston
Consulting Group (BCG) was done by MoPNG before taking future course of action.
The Committee in their original Report had noted that DGH encompass two sets of
functions with potential conflict of interest - an upstream regulatory function and a
function of rendering technical advice to the Gol. The Committee observed that long
delays in operational decision making, budget approvals, huge administrative burden of
conducting cost audits, disputes arising between the government and operating
companies on matters of cost recovery, information asymmetry and the potentially
misaligned incentives were affecting the management of the PSCs by the Government.
The Committee were of the opinion that the first step towards better management and
effective implementation of the provisions of the PSCs would be to strengthen DGH and
instead of filling places with deputationists for 3-5 years, a separate cadre of technical
experts should be constituted for the technical and advisory functions of DGH. Further,
the Ministry would have to consider separating regulatory functions as technical experts
cannot be strained to double up as regulators and also policy makers cannot possibly
be effective regulators. The Committee were of the opinion that the mandate of extant
Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board (PNGRB) "to regulate the refining,
processing, storage, transportation, distribution, marketing and sale of petroleum,
petroleum products and natural gas excluding production of crude oil and natural gas so
as and to ensure uninterrupted and adequate supply of petroleum, petroleum products
and natural gas in all parts of the country" may be extended/ strengthened to include the
exploration, development and production of crude oil and natural gas for regulating the
PSCs . The Committee had recommended that since a large number of PSCs have
already been signed and RSCs will be signed in future, the Ministry should take the
decision in this regard at the earliest.

8. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in their Action Taken Note have
stated as under:-

"DGH was set up by a Resolution dated 8" April, 1993 by the Government
of India, in the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, consequent upon approval of
Cabinet. As per the Resolution, the objective of DGH is to promote sound
management of Indian petroleum and natural gas resources, having a balance
tegard for environment, technological and economic aspects of petroleum
activity. DGH provides support to the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas on
technical and regulatory aspects of Exploration & Production (E&P) activity.

To implement these objectives of DGH, technical experts from various disciplines

of E & P Industry, including from National Oil Companies (NOCs) and Public

Sector Units (PSUs) have joined DGH. Financial powers have been delegated to

DGH and other measures are also being taken to strengthen the DGH so that

they help in promoting E&P activities in the country. DGH has also taken several
4


initiatives in the recent past such as creation of National Data Repository,
coordinating the survey of un-appraised areas in various sedimentary basins,
nodal agency for Discovered Small Field Rounds etc. DGH is also taking steps to
make Hydrocarbon Exploration Licensing Policy (HELP) operational.

The staffing pattern of DGH gives it flexibility in sourcing different skill sets from
various PSUs. It also gives DGH flexibility in terms of period of deputation in
consultation with PSUs. Creating a separate cadre of technical experts may not
be desirable for a small organization such as DGH as it may not offer career
advancement opportunities in long term.

The establishment of upstream regulator has been deliberated in the past also
and it was felt that normally a regulator in any field is required when level playing
field to all the parties (private, foreign and public) needs to be provided. In the
upstream sector, policies such as NELP, CBM and newly formulated HELP
provide a level playing field to the companies. Further, there is no inter se
competition between different operators once the blocks have been allotted
following competitive bidding, and each operator focusses on his field for
production. Therefore, the Ministry is of the view that a separate independent
upstream regulator is not required at this stage.

Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board (PNGRB) was constituted under
The Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board Act, 2006 (NO. 19 OF 2006)
notified vide Gazette Notification dated 311 March, 2006. It regulates the refining,
processing, storage, transportation, distribution, marketing and sale of petroleum,
petroleum products and natural gas excluding production of crude oil and natural
gas so as to protect the interests of consumers and entities engaged in specified
activities relating to petroleum, petroleum products and natural gas and to ensure
uninterrupted and adequate supply of petroleum, petroleum products and natural
gas in all parts of the country and to promote competitive markets. The current
form of PNGRB Act, 2006 exclude the upstream sector and for bringing the
Exploration & Production activity under the ambit of PNGRB, there will be a need
to make significant amendments in the PNGRB Act.

From the experience on functioning of PNGRB, it is noted that PNGRB regulatory
framework for midstream and downstream sector is under evolution at present
and need more focussed approach to regulate effectively in long run to see the
results as envisaged in its creation."

9. While vetting the above ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:-

“The fact, however, remains that the Ministry has not given an action plan for
separation of regulatory and technical functions, as recommended by the PAC.

Audit has no further comments to offer.”
5


10. In their further comments to the above said audit observation, the Ministry stated
as under:-
“No further comments.”

11. The Committee had observed long delays in operational decision making,
budget approvals, huge administrative burden of conducting cost audits,
disputes arising between the Government and operating companies on matters of
cost recovery, information asymmetry and the potentially misaligned incentives
affecting the management of the PSCs by the Government. They, therefore, had
opined that in order to strengthen the implementation of the provisions of PSCs,
a separate cadre of technical experts should be constituted for the technical and
advisory functions of DGH. Further, the Committee had recommended that the
mandate of PNGRB be extended/strengthened to include the exploration,
development and production of crude oil and natural gas for regulating the PSCs.
The Committee, however, note from the reply of the Ministry that the Directorate
General of Hydrocarbons (DGH) was set-up by a Resolution of 1993 to promote
sound management of Indian petroleum and natural gas resources and provide
support to the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoPNG) on technical and
regulatory aspects of Exploration and Production (E&P) activity. The Ministry
further stated that technical experts from various disciplines of E & P Industry,
including from National Oil Companies (NOCs) and Public Sector Units (PSUs)
have joined DGH, financial powers have been delegated to DGH and hence
creating a separate cadre of technical experts may not be desirable for a small
organization such as DGH as it may not offer career advancement opportunities

in long term.

As regards strengthening PNGRB, the Ministry stated that In upstream
sector, policies such as NELP, CBM and newly formulated HELP provide a level
playing field to the companies and there is no inter-se competition between
different operators once the blocks have been allotted and, therefore, a separate
independent upstream regulator is not required at this stage. The Ministry further
submitted that its current form exclude the Upstream sector and for bringing the
Exploration & Production activity under the ambit of PNGRB, significant

6


amendments in the PNGRB Act will be a needed. Also, from the experience on
functioning of PNGRB, its regulatory framework for midstream and downstream
sector is under evolution at present and need more focussed approach to

regulate effectively in long run to see the results as envisaged in its creation.

The Committee find that the reply of the Ministry only indicate steps taken
by it to broaden the technical base of the DGH and clearly, no specific steps have
been taken for effective regulation of the E&P activities by the DGH. The
Committee opine that PSCs are agreements between an Operator and the MoPNG
and DGH cannot regulate PSCs effectively since it is functioning under the
auspices of one of the parties i.e. the MoPNG. The Committee feel that with the
advent of Revenue Sharing Contracts (RSCs) and constantly expanding E&P
activities, sooner or later, an effective regulator would be needed. Further, as
disputes and conflicts are on the increase, referring them to a neutral authority
would be better received by the affected parties. It would also help to fast track
settlements and lessen referring of cases to the arbitrators. The Committee while
opining that a single regulatory body should regulate the activities in the P&NG
sector, reiterate that the mandate of PNGRB may be broadened to include
exploration and production of crude oil and natural gas for regulating the PSCs/
RSCs. The Committee desire that the role of DGH may be confined to giving
advice in technical matters and can be institutionalized to boost research
activities and technical expertise in E&P sector. Further, the Committee are of the
view that E&P activities including research and development are long term ones
and hence the technical staff should not be short term deputationists. The
Committee, while reiterating that a separate cadre with technical expertise be
constituted to strengthen the system, feel that with so many PSCs and the advent

of RSCs, promotional opportunities will automatically open up for the cadre.

12. Award of Contracts on the basis of a single financial bid
(Recommendation Para 7)

The Committee in their original Report observed the Audit’s scrutiny of payments
made by the operator between 2006-07 and 2007-08 revealed instances of huge
procurement contracts where it could not derive assurance as to the reasonableness of

7


the costs incurred, primarily due to lack of adequate competition i.e. award on single
financial bids; major revisions in scope/ quantities/ specifications; post price bid
opening; substantial variation orders- with consequential adverse implications for cost
recovery and Gols financial take. The Committee noted the observation of the Audit that
since any commercially prudent private acquisition would have also attempted to
generate competition and thereby obtained the most competitive price which was not
perceptible in the aforementioned process. The Committee recommended the MoPNG
to carefully review in depth the award of 10 specific contracts (of which 8 were awarded
to Aker Group companies) on the basis of single financial bid. The Ministry in their reply,
however, instead of conducting any review, stated that the Operating Committee
monitored the contract award as per Appendix F of PSC and C&AG did not quantify the
impact and also did not find any affiliated transaction or fraud to invalidate the integrity
of procurement. While taking a serious view of the MoPNG's reply the Committee
opined that since MoPNG have been vested with the resources of the country in
fiduciary capacity and therefore have the inherent responsibility to ensure that the
resources are exploited in the interest of the country and accordingly, keeping a check
on the outflow of resources in the form of Cost Petroleum is an inseparable part of such
responsibility. The Committee, therefore, recommended that the Ministry should
develop robust monitoring mechanism within the existing PSC framework to ensure
that, henceforth, a fully transparent and cost-effective process adopted by the Operator
which gives assurance to the Government that costs have indeed been competitive.

13. ॥1 this regard, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in their Action Taken
Note stated as under:-

"Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas agrees with the above recommendation
of PAC that contractors have to follow a transparent bidding process. Normally,
the contractors’ interest is also in minimizing the costs so that revenue from the
blocks are maximized. However, considering the exceptions brought out by the
audit in these contracts, DGH has been directed vide letter dated 144i
September, 2016 to do the following:

(i) The work programme and budget to be approved by the Management
Committees (MC) of the Blocks / Fields to be scrutinized by DGH in-depth, for
having robust initial estimates.

(ii) The terms of reference of the MC appointed auditors and the Government
auditors for conducting audit and bringing out audit exceptions may be amended
and enhanced to include a certificate from them that they have satisfied
themselves regarding procurements having been made competitively and as per
the PSC provisions.


Any deviations in the procurement procedures brought out by the auditors would
be considered by the Government and necessary adjustments would be made
in the books of accounts including disallowing costs, if the explanations given by
the contractors are not satisfactory."

14. | While vetting the said ATNs, Audit made the following comments:-

“The fact, however, remains that for development of a robust monitoring
mechanism, as recommended by the PAC, apart from the fact that the Ministry has
devolved the entire responsibility of ensuring the competitiveness of the cost on Audit
(the MC appointed auditors and the Government auditor), the Ministry has not
suggested any additional mechanism for monitoring the cost effectiveness at their
(Ministry's) level.”

15. In their further comments to the above said audit observation, the Ministry stated as
under:-

“Apart from the fact that the non-operating partners at Operating Committee
Level are part of Decision Making Process at the time of procurement, various
reports in prescribed formats as per PSC are required to be submitted by
Operator on periodical basis to DGH/MoPNG. Hence in addition to various
Audits, the procurement process is under constant review.

While agreeing to the Committee's views that a fully transparent and cost-
effective process is adopted by the Operator which gives assurance to the
Government that costs have indeed been competitive, it is submitted that the
existing PSC provisions are sufficient to take care of Audit's/PAC concerns.
Nevertheless Government representatives on MCs and DGH would be advised
to keep in mind the Audit's/PAC concerns and if any deviation from PSC is
observed, the same would be reported to MoPNG for appropriate action as per
PSC.”
16. The Committee note that in pursuance of their recommendation, the
Ministry directed DGH to undertake approval of Work Programme and Budget
(WP & B) of the Blocks/Fields by the Management Committees (MCs) and also
desired to amend and enhance the terms of reference of the MCs appointed
auditors and the Government auditors for conducting audit and bringing out audit
exceptions where procurements are not in consonance with the PSC provisions.
Further, any deviations in the procurement procedures brought out by the
auditors would be considered by the Government and necessary adjustments
would be made in the books of accounts including disallowing costs wherever
9


the explanations given by the contractors are not satisfactory. The Committee
find that although the Ministry has issued instructions to DGH thereby asking MC
to scrutinize the estimates in-depth and certifying the procurements by the
Auditors appointed by the MC and the Government, neither a robust monitoring
mechanism within the PSC framework nor any additional mechanism for
monitoring the cost effectiveness at its level has been provided for. The
Committee are of the view that a timeline within which estimates are to be
approved by the MC and scrutinized by the DGH may be prescribed to ensure that
work programmes are actually useful and further, providing for auditor's
certificate on the deviations again is a step which would be taken after the
transaction has taken place. Therefore, the Committee are of the view that
internal controls should be adequately strengthened and a mechanism be
developed where the DGH/ Ministry are simultaneously intimated about major
deviations or contracts beyond a threshold value. Action taken by the Ministry,
on this aspect, be intimated to the Committee within three months of the

presentation of this Report.

17. Review _of Declaration of Commerciality (DoC) in respect of three
discoveries viz. 029, 030 and 031
(Recommendation Para 8)

As required under PSC, the Operator submitted in February 2010 a DoC
(Declaration of Commerciality) proposal for D29, D30, D31 and D34 discoveries for
review by the MC and the DGH in June 2010 informed Operator that the discoveries
were marginal and not viable at US$4.2/ mmbtu since the Modular Dynamic Test
carried out by the operator did not provide individual testing rates to demonstrate
sustainable production levels. The DGH, again, in October 2010 communicated to the
operator that the DoC could not be reviewed. However, in November 2011, DoC in
respect of D34 discovery was reviewed after the Operator submitted related additional
test data/ information. But, in respect of D29, D30 and D31, DGH stated that
commerciality of discoveries could not be evaluated in the absence of production tests
which provide sustainable production levels from the reservoir as no appraisal wells
were drilled in the pools of discovery wells to substantiate the production rates
considered by the Operator. DGH felt that the profile generated without considering
MDT/ (Drill Stem Test) DST data in the wells was not on a sound technical basis. In
May 2012, the Operator again requested MC to complete review of DoC for D29, 30

10


and D31 and submitted a proposal in October- November 2012 to undertake DST in
only one well out of the three discoveries and DGH while agreeing to the proposal
asked the Operator to submit a plan for surface flow test for other two discovery wells
also. However, the Operator did not carry out the same and later argued that, as per
PSC, a) the DST was not mandatory, b) the Contractor has the right to determine
requirement for DST based on its technical judgment and c) it was not the only test.
Subsequently, DGH, in April 2013, proposed that the area pertaining to these three
discoveries be relinquished as the Operator could not keep a part of the Contract Area
for an indefinitely long period in the garb of an incomplete DoC proposal. In October
2013, the matter was referred to CCEA (Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs) for its
information fully explaining the facts and circumstances of the case and the Contractor
was allowed to retain 298 sq km. contract area as the matter was being considered. The
Committee noted from the reply of the Ministry that the issue was reopened for review in
view of the petroleum potential of the discoveries in an energy starving country for an
appropriate decision by competent authority in terms of the PSC provisions and the
interest of energy security. The Committee further noted from the reply of the MoPNG
that the CCEA has, in April 2015, given relaxation for conducting DST by capping such
test cost recovery up to US $ 15 m per test and, accordingly, the operator had then
completed DST for D29 and D30 discoveries and had relinquished D31 discovery and
had to submit revised DOC for D29 and D30 by 28th April 2016. The Committee were of
the view that Government took around 5 years in taking a decision on the issue. The
Committee observed that the long delays in clearances and operational decision making
results in huge cost overruns and eventually affects the Government's share of PP. The
Committee were of the view that energy starving country needed regular supply of the
resources which is hindered by such delays. The Committee while noting that the CCEA
has relaxed the provisions by providing that Operator should either relinquish or carry
out DST and pay penalty for delays or develop the discoveries on his own in ringfenced
manner, had recommended that a comprehensive policy may be brought out allowing
alternative tests for confirming commerciality of the discoveries to ensure that the policy
does not get redundant with introduction of new technologies.

18. In this regard, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in their Action Taken
Note have stated as under:-

“DST is a conventional testing method available as on today for measuring the
petroleum recovered at the surface. Hence, DST was considered as a basis of
accepting the DOC. Government considers technological upgradations in the
upstream sector and policies are brought out/modified after considering the
issues in a holistic manner.”

11


19. The Committee has taken note of the fact that long delays in clearances
and operational decision making resulted in huge cost overruns that eventually
affected the Government's share of Profit Petroleum (PP). The Committee had,
therefore, recommended that a comprehensive policy be drafted allowing
alternative tests for confirming commerciality of the discoveries to ensure that
the policy does not get redundant with introduction of new technologies. The
Committee note fromthe reply of the Ministry that the technological upgradations
in the upstream sector are considered by the Government and policies brought
out/ modified after considering the issues in a holistic manner. Evidently, the
process of consideration of issues by the Government takes time as in this case
Government took 5 years to bring out a policy. The Committee had, therefore,
recommended for a dynamic policy to contain delays which result in huge cost
overruns. The Committee while reiterating their earlier recommendation that in
order to contain delays and subsequent cost escalation a comprehensive policy
be brought out, again desire that constant efforts may be made to cut down

procedural delays especially wherever huge financial implications are involved.

20. Optimized Field Development Plan (OFDP) for four satellite discoveries
(Recommendation Para 9)

The Committee noted that Contractor in July 2008 submitted a Development
Plan (DP) in respect of 9 Satellite Gas Discoveries (SGD) for approval of MC which was
found non -viable at the gas price of US$4.2 per mmbtu. The Contractor submitted in
December 2009, an Optimized Field Development Plan (OFDP) for four satellite
discoveries. Initially, the OFDP was not techno-economically viable; however it was
made marginally viable by devising different scenarios and changing assumptions e.g.
exclusion of royalty as expenditure, variation in capex etc and was eventually approved
by the DGH. The Committee noted that MoPNG had directed DGH to engage a third
party for validation of capex but no third party could be engaged and the MC approved
OFDP without waiting for the decision of MoPNG in this regard. The Committee noted
that Audit had recommended that MoPNG may consider fixing norms/ criteria for
working out techno-economic analysis of a FDP. The Ministry in its reply had submitted
that the economic viability was evaluated at different scenarios so as to optimize the
decision making in order to avoid non- development of any discovery and since techno
economic evaluation is guided by the principle of economics and application of mind,

12


setting separate norms may not be possible. However, the Ministry in their written
replies had then submitted that the team constituted for framing the “Good International
Petroleum Industries Practices’ has identified the best practices being followed for all
technical and commercial activities under the PSC and the report has been submitted
for adoption and notification. The Committee while appreciating that the Good
International Petroleum Industries Practices were being identified desired to be apprised
of the practices as soon as they are notified and further desired the Ministry to ensure
that decisions were taken by the MC after getting views from all the stakeholders, as in
the instant case, in the absence of validation of capex by third party, the reasonability
and justification of capex and Gol share of PP could not be assured. The Committee
also desired that MoPNG seek explanation of the representatives of MoPNG i.e.
Chairman of MC, and the representative of DGH in the MC who did not wait for
MoPNG's decision.

21... 11 this regard, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in their Action Taken

Note have stated as under:-

1. “Good International Petroleum Industries Practices (GIPIP) have been
proposed by the Committee constituted for the purpose and the same has
been accepted by the Government. These guidelines are available on
MoP&NG’s web site. The GIPIP guidelines provide a detailed account on
various practices being followed in the upstream sector and would be used
along with PSC in the interpretation of PSC provisions. GIPIP brings out good
practices in the area of Exploration, Discovery, Declaration of Commerciality,
Development, Production etc. and would help the contractors in standardizing
and streamlining the operations and would also help them to know the details of
submissions to be made to DGH. However, the contractual provisions would be
paramount in taking decisions on various issues and GIPIP supplements the
decision making in the sector.

2. Vide MCR dated 03.01.2012, Optimized Field Development Plan (OFDP)
of four satellite discoveries was approved by MC in respect of the Development
Strategy that included reserves, number of wells, production facilities, delivery
point, date of first gas and development area. The Capex was not part of the MC
approval. The cost recovery for development and production operations will be
the actual as per audited expenditure. The actual CAPEX gets independently
validated when the annual accounts are audited and cost recovery is restricted
to actual expenditure irrespective of the estimates projected by the Contractors
as part of OFDP.

13


3. MoP&NG has asked DGH to seek explanation of Chairman of the
Management Committee and representative of DGH in MC as recommended by
the PAC.”

22. While vetting the said ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:-

“As recommended by the PAC, explanation given by the Chairman of the
Management Committee and representative of DGH in MC may be given to the
PAC.”

23. In their further comments to the above said audit observation, the Ministry stated
as under:-

“As commented by CAG, explanation of MC Chairman-cum-representative
of DGH was sought and is attached at Annexure-9A for perusal of PAC. The MC
was to approve the development plan as per PSC time lines and since no third
party could be appointed, the FDP was approved without Third Party validation
based on consensus decision of DGH.”

24. The Committee while noting that Good International Petroleum Industries
Practices (GIPIP) are being identified for all technical and commercial activities
under the PSC had desired to ensure that decisions are taken by the MC after
taking views of all the stakeholders as in the case pointed out by the Audit, the
MC approved the Optimized Field Development Plan (OFDP) without waiting for
the decision of the Ministry. The Committee expect that MoPNG will identify GIPIP
for all technical and commercial activities in the Revenue Sharing Contract (RSC)
era soon. The Committee note from the submission of the Ministry that actual
Capital Expenditure (CAPEX) gets independently validated when the annual
accounts are audited and the cost recovery is restricted to actual expenditure
irrespective of the estimates projected by the Contractors as part of Optimized
Field Development Plan (OFDP). The Committee are astonished to note the casual
reply of the Ministry since actual expenditure whether capital or revenue gets
independently validated when the annual accounts are audited. In the opinion of
the Committee the reply of the Ministry renders the whole process of validation of

estimates, plans etc. redundant. Further, when the Ministry had asked for an

14


independent validation, the direction should have been followed scrupulously
and the Ministry instead of accepting its lackadaisical monitoring and taking
action against the MC is giving lame excuses. The Committee further note from
the explanation of the Chairman-cum- representative of the DGH that the
Development Plan was to be approved as per PSC timelines and since no third
party could be appointed, the FDP was approved without Third Party validation
based on consensus decision of DGH. The Committee are dismayed to note that
the representative of DGH being accountable to the Ministry did not consult the
Ministry before the approval of the FDP. The Committee feel that the decision for
not appointing third party for validation could be deliberate so that the Ministry
gets flexibility in the decision making. The Committee further desire that the
decision for not appointing third party for validation may be inquired into and

disciplinary action taken against the officers found responsible.

25. Contract for Engineering, Procurement, Installation and Construction

(EPIC) of offshore facilities

(Recommendation Para 10)

“The Committee noted that the Operator awarded contract for Engineering,
Procurement, Installation and Construction (EPIC) of offshore facilities for development
of D1-D3 fields to M/s Allseas Marine Contractors S.A. (AMC) in October 2006
consisting of three milestones to be achieved by July 2008. However, AMC was not
able to achieve the milestones and informed the Operator in June 2008 that various
factors attributable to Operator, AMC and sub-contractors were preventing it from
performing its obligations under the contract, rendering it inoperable both in delivery and
contract administration. AMC asked the Operator to pay for the extra expenses to
achieve the earliest possible First Gas date and also the additional expenses already
incurred in the past months due to deviations in the suggested scheme. The Committee
noted that the Operator initially refuted the claims made by AMC asserting that the AMC
should acknowledge and accept responsibility for its lack of performance, but,
eventually after discussions with AMC submitted a proposal before the OC requesting it
to grant some concessions demanded by the AMC. The Committee found that the OC
gave concessions which included providing additional resources for expediting the
works without any cost to AMC, substituting the subsea construction vessel by paying
mobilization fee, additional diving spread free of cost, additional amount for delays not
attributable to AMC, relaxation in levy of LD, incentive for achieving first gas by
specified date and assistance and paying for resources for expediting jumper

15


fabrication. As per Audit, Appendix C of PSC provides that / amounts paid with respect
to non-fulfillment of contractual obligations are not recoverable and not allowable” and ,
therefore, should not be recoverable from the block. As per Operator, " ..the options
before the Operator were not only limited but would have carried dubious legal
credibility in view of the fact that it could insist on imposing liquidated damages knowing
fully well that certain reasons for delay not being on account of AMC such a decision
would have been contested and would have only led to the AMC halting work on the
project and getting into prolonged litigation with the Operator.” MoPNG in its reply stated
that the post vendor contractual agreements between the Operator and the vendor
validly amended the original vendor-contract and the audit report did not point out any
legally tenable ground for cost disallowance such as affiliated transactions to the undue
advantage of Contractor, any incidence of fraud and costs not supported by payment
evidences. Audit further observed that these concessions granted by the Operator were
not in line with EPIC contract including provisions relating to change in contract price.
The Committee after carefully considering the audit opinion and the replies of both
Operator and Ministry were of the view that in order to ensure transparency in post
vendor contractual agreements, in future, the Ministry should prescribe a threshold
amount for the change orders above which the Operator should invariably approach it
for clearance.”

26. In this regard, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in their Action Taken

Note have stated as under:-

"The PSC prescribes a procurement procedure which needs to be followed by all
the contractors operating under the PSC regime. Any deviation in the procedure
would need to be pointed out by the audits envisaged under the PSC. Once the
audit notifies these exceptions and quantifies the financial effect for such
procurements, necessary adjustments can be made in the books of accounts of
the contractors of the block after considering their response to the audit
exceptions.

The audit exceptions brought out by the auditors are considered by the
Government and necessary adjustments are to be made in the books of
accounts. It is agreed that the concern expressed by PAC and recommendation
made by PAC are valid and need to be addressed within the existing PSC
framework.

It is therefore imperative that the role of audit as envisaged in the PSC is
strengthened and also scrutiny of budget estimates is also made more rigorous.
Therefore, as mentioned in the reply to the recommendations no. 7 instructions
have been issued to DGH for more rigorous assessment of budget proposals and

16


also to take a certificate from the auditors that they have satisfied themselves
that all the procurements have been made through competitive process."

27. While vetting the said ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:-

“PAC has observed that to ensure transparency in post vendor contractual
agreements, in future, the Ministry should prescribe a threshold amount for the
change orders above which the Operator should invariably approach it for
clearance. Ministry's reply, however, does not specifically address PAC’s
observation regarding prescribing of the threshold amount for the change
orders.”

28. In their further comments to the above said audit observation, the Ministry stated
as under:-

“The PSC prescribes a procurement procedure which needs to be followed by all
the contractors operating under the PSC regime. These matters are reviewed
and monitored by MCs.

While agreeing to the Committee's views regarding transparency in post
vendor contractual agreements, it is submitted that prescribing a threshold
amount for the change orders above which the Operator should invariably
approach Ministry for clearance at this juncture is not being considered. Cases
where change order exceeds 25% of cost estimate/original order, then the same
may be discussed more rigorously in MC and get approved from it since MC is
the competent forum to deliberate and decide on such issues.”

29. The Committee after taking note of the fact that the concessions granted by
the Operator were not in line with Engineering, Procurement, Installation and
Construction (EPIC) contract (including provisions relating to change in contract
price) were of the view that in order to ensure transparency in post vendor
contractual agreements, in future, the Ministry should prescribe a threshold
amount for the change orders above which the Operator should invariably
approach it for clearance. The Ministry in their action taken reply, have stated that
prescribing a threshold amount for the change orders above which the Operator
should invariably approach Ministry for clearance at this juncture is not being
considered. Further cases where change order exceeds 25% of cost
estimate/original order may be discussed more rigorously in Management
Committee (MC) and get approved from it since MC is the competent forum to

deliberate and decide on such issues. The Committee while stressing upon their

17


earlier recommendation and in view of the Ministry's reply opine that
concessions/ deviations from the provisions of the PSC should, in order to be
transparent, be made only after intimating all stakeholders. The Committee are of
the view that the responsibility to apprise the Ministry on any
concessions/deviations from the PSC may lie on the representatives of the
Government in the MC.

30. Payment of compensation on Free Issue Materials (FIMs)
(Recommendation Para 15)

The Committee noted that the Operator had awarded four contracts
relating to construction of OT, construction of Jetty and infrastructure facilities near the
OT on cost -plus basis to L&T Ltd and M/s AFCONS Infrastructure Ltd (Al Ltd). These
contracts contained provisions for FiMs (Free Issue Materials) which were to be
arranged by the Operator at its own cost and, therefore, different clauses of the
contracts excluded various FIMs supplied by the Operator from the purview of payment
of compensation to the vendor. But, a percentage of the value of FiIMs of some
categories supplied by the Operator was included in the payment of compensation to
the vendor. The Operator submitted that in order to incentivize the contractors to bid for
supply of labour & provision of construction equipment contract, Operator had to agree
for a reasonable mark-up on FIMs and that these FIMs were not capital items and were
related to day to day construction materials which require project execution skills,
planning and co-ordination to meet construction schedule and if procurement were kept
in the Contractor's scope directly then this would have resulted in double taxation with
respect to VAT and Service Tax and increased compensation on this account. MoPNG
in its reply had stated that the post vendor contractual agreements between the
Operator and the vendor validly amended the original vendor-contract and the audit
report did not point out any legally tenable ground for cost disallowance such as
affiliated transactions to the undue advantage of Contractor, any incidence of fraud and
costs not supported by payment evidences. The Committee were of the view that the
Ministry should call for a comparative statement of costs incurred due to such
provisioning and costs incurred if the materials were directly procured by the vendor
before taking a decision on the allowance of the costs.

31... ॥ this regard, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in their Action Taken

Note stated as under:-

18


32.

33.

"As per the PAC recommendation, DGH was asked to get the comparative
statement from the Contractors. DGH took operator's response which can be
summarized as:

“Due process as per PSC was followed for executing the contracts and payments
were made as per contract. Contractor has agreed to pay a reasonable markup
on civil FIMs like cement, steel, welding rods, 61 pipes and other consumables
which is usual practice in turn-key construction contracts in order to incentivize
vendors to bid or supply of labour and provision of construction equipment. No
mark-up was paid on cost of projects, capital items like equipment, bulks etc. and
on HSD supplied by the Contractor. The payments were made pursuant to a
valid contract which was finalized through a competitive bidding process. The
Contractor has ensured overall savings to the project by avoiding payment of
double taxation by buying the construction materials directly.”

The purchase price which would have been borne by the vendor is not known
since the contractor had procured the construction materials and not the vendor.
As per operator's statement, the cost of supplies would have been higher
because of mark-up even if the purchase price of the free supplies remaining
same for both the contractor and vendor. There would have been higher
incidences of taxes by way of VAT and Services Tax on account of mark-up
which could be avoided by the contractor as per their response. Cost is
supported by payment evidences.

The allowance of cost is in accordance with Article 15 on ‘Recovery of cost
Petroleum’. The sub-Article 15.1 stipulates. “The Contractor shall be entitled to
recover Contract Costs out of a percentage of the total value of Petroleum
produced and saved from the Contract Area in the Year in accordance with the
provisions of this Article.”

While vetting the said ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:-

"The Ministry has yet to clarify whether amendments can validly be made which
change the basic principles of the contract and whether such mark-ups are
usually charged by the vendors in similar contracts. Clarifications in this regards
may be submitted to PAC for their perusal."

In their further comments to the above said audit observation, the Ministry stated

as under:-

“While appreciating the Committee's view that the Ministry should call for a
comparative statement of costs incurred due to such provisioning and costs
incurred if the materials were directly procured by the vendor before taking a
decision on the allowance of the costs, it is worth mentioning that since vendor

19


did not procure the material, no purchase price (of vendor) is available for cost
comparisons.

Article 8.3 of the PSC puts an obligation on the Contractor to conduct all
Petroleum Operations within the Contract Area diligently, expeditiously, efficiently
and in a safe and workman like manner. Therefore, the operator is under
contractual obligations to take operational decision in discharge of its
responsibility: Contractors are expected to take decisions which are in the best
interest of the field and also for maximizing gains for all the stakeholders.

Keeping in view the Committee's concerns, Government representatives on MC
and DGH are being advised to keep in mind the Audit's/PAC concerns and if any
deviation from PSC is observed, the same would be reported to MoPNG for
appropriate action as per PSC. “

34. The Committee note the Operator's submission that a reasonable mark-up
of Free Issue Materials (FIMs) were agreed to in order to meet the construction
schedule and avoid double taxation. The Ministry were asked to obtain a
comparative statement of costs incurred due to such provisioning and costs
incurred if the materials were directly procured by the vendor before taking a
decision on allowance of costs. The Committee further note from the reply of the
Ministry that the payments were made pursuant to a valid contract and also
ensured overall savings to the project. Further, as per the Operator the purchase
price which would have been borne by the vendor is not known since the
contractor had procured the construction materials directly and not the vendor.
The Committee are unable to comprehend as to how the Ministry have subscribed
to the claims of the Operator regarding overall savings in absence of a
comparative data. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier
recommendation that the Ministry should ask for a comparative statement of
costs incurred by the Operator and costs incurred if materials were directly
procured by the vendor before taking a final decision on allowance of cost as it
has a direct bearing on Government of India’s take on Profit Petroleum. The
Committee further desire to be apprised of action taken in this regard within two

months of presentation of this Report to Parliament.

20


35. Non-signing of Crude Oil Sales Agreement (COSA)

Recommendation Para No. 19

The Committee noted that despite elapse of more than 21 years (since
1994), COSA has not been formalized by the Panna-Mukta JV with IOCL (Gol nominee)
due to non-resolution of issues such as delivery point, storage charges, dead freight,
voyage costs/ losses, terminal charges, measurement conversion table, dollar rupee
exchange rate, lay time in monsoon and delayed payments and interests thereon. The
non-signing of COSA for Panna-Mukta PSC has previously also been commented and
highlighted in C&AG audit reports of 1996, 2005 and 2011. Thus, non-signing of COSA
led to non-resolution of storage and voyage expenses and are shown as recoverable by
PMT JV from Gol/Gol's nominee i.e., IOCL. The Ministry and ONGC while deposing
before the Committee and in their written submission had stated that various
correspondences and meetings were held between PMT JV & IOCL since the
commencement of crude oil sales in 1994-95. However, the issues could not be
resolved. Subsequently, in 2014 a Task Force was constituted which has so far held
seven meetings, the last one being on 08.03.2016. As per the Minutes of the 5th
meeting of Task Force held on 20.04.2015, the settlement of issue related to sale of
crude oil for Panna — Mukta had agreed on along with agreement that the PMT JV shall
prepare a draft settlement agreement on the basis of these signed minutes within 15
days. The PMT JV were to share a draft of the more detailed COSA within 90 days from
the date of execution of the Settlement Agreement. The Parties had agreed that post
signing of the settlement agreement and until such time that the COSA is executed, the
settlement agreement shall be binding agreement between the Parties and shall be
basis on which all future sale and purchase of crude oil from Panna-Mukta area occurs.
The Committee were shocked to find that even though 21 long years have passed, the
PMT JV could not resolve the pending issues resulting in non-signing of COSA and loss
to the exchequer. This showed the non-serious approach of the PMT JV as well as
IOCL. The Committee also desired the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas to look
into the reasons for inordinate and inexplicable delays and failure of the monitoring
mechanism of the Ministry, fix responsibility by taking appropriate punitive action
against the concerned officials and apprised on the matter within four months of the
presentation of the Report.

36. In this regard, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in their Action Taken
Note stated as under:-

"GOI had appointed IOCL as its nominee to purchase entire crude oil produced
from the Panna-Mukta field in accordance with Article 18.1 of the PSC in which

21


ONGC and RIL are Indian consortium partners. Signing of Crude Oil Sales
Agreement (COSA) is a commercial practice between buyer and seller and
Ministry does not have a direct role in this. The non finalization of COSA is
mainly because of non-acceptance by PMT JV of the terms and conditions
insisted by IOCL regarding applicable period for dollar to rupee conversion in
respect of the crude oil sold by PMT JV.

To resolve this long pending issue, the Ministry has taken initiative to intervene to
finalise the COSA. A meeting was held on 23 May, 2016 to bring all the
stakeholders together. Ministry is collating the information regarding practices
being followed in other PSCs and by other Indian companies in respect of such
payments for crude oil produced under the Pre-NELP and NELP PSCs to get the
COSA finalized at the earliest."

37. While vetting the said ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:-
"Signing of Crude Oil Sales Agreement (COSA) is an essential event which will
provide finality to the commercial transactions (including Gol share of Profit
petroleum).
In this regard it was observed that section 1.6 of Accounting procedure on
‘Currency Exchange Rates’, mentions that
‘For translation purpose between USD and INR or any other currency, the
previous month’s average of the daily means of the buying and selling rates of
exchange as quoted by SBI (or any other financial body as may be mutually
agreed between the parties) shall be used for the month in which the revenues,
costs, expenditure receipts of income are recorded’.
Hence the conversion issue needs to be addressed accordingly at the earliest so
as to settle the financial implications well before expiry of the PSC term in
December 2019.
A copy of the minutes of the meeting held on 23 May 2016 may be provided to
the PAC."

38. In their further comments to the above said audit observation, the Ministry stated

as under:-
“As per vetting comments of CAG, a copy of the minutes of the meeting held on
23 May 2016 is attached at Annexure-19A and copy of Settlement Agreement is
attached at Annexure-19B for perusal of PAC.”

39. 116 Ministry, in their further reply/update, has furnished following:-

22


“ Crude Offtake and Sales Agreement (COSA) between IOC and PMT JV
Partners has been signed and executed on 27.10.2017.”

40. The Committee, in their original Report, were shocked to find that even
though 21 long years had passed, the Panna-Mukta-Tapti Joint Venture (PMT JV)
could not resolve the pending issues resulting in non-signing of Crude Oil Sales
Agreement (COSA) and loss to the exchequer. The Committee desired the
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas to look into the reasons for inordinate and
inexplicable delays and failure of the monitoring mechanism of the Ministry and
fix responsibility by taking appropriate punitive action against the concerned
officials. The Committee on perusal of the reply furnished by the Ministry are
unhappy to note the evasive and casual reply of the Ministry that signing of
COSA is a commercial practice between buyer and seller and Ministry does not
have a direct role in this. The Committee are of the considered view that the
failure to take timely action for the last 21 years which resulted in continuous loss
to the Gol exchequer, the onus automatically shall fall on the Ministry concerned.
Moreover, the Operator (ONGC) and Gol nominee (IOCL) both being PSU's, the
Ministry cannot absolve itself of its responsibility in bringing them on common
platform for an amicable resolution of the issues involved. The Committee has
serious doubt that the Ministry do not want to settle the financial implications as
the period of contract will automatically end in December, 2019. The Committee
while noting that COSA between IOC and PMT JV Partners has been signed and
executed on 27.10.2017 only after being repeatedly pointed by the Audit and
intervention of the Committee desire that disciplinary action be taken against
those responsible for the delay in execution of the COSA which has resulted in

irreparable loss to the Government exchequer for the last 21 years.

41. Sale of Gas in contravention to MoPNG's directives
Recommendation Para No. 23

In their earlier report, the Committee observed that ONGC ignored
MoPNG’s directives of March 2006 and entered into a long term contract for 12 years
and signed GSPA in June 2006 with M/s Torrent Power Limited (TPL) for supply of 0.9
mmscmd of gas at the rate of US$ 4.75 / mmbtu with a provision to review the price

23


after expiry of 3 years from the date of first supply. At the same time, contrary to Gol’s
decision the other two partners, RIL and BGEPIL, also sold gas at the rate of US$5.58
per mmbtu (i.e. higher by US$0.01 per mmbtu of revised PSC price of Tapti field).
Supply to TPL commenced from 30 May 2008 and continued at the lower rate of US$
4.75 per mmbtu till May 2011 and it was made at PSC price only from June 2011. The
gas sold to TPL was at a price lower than the price prescribed in the PSC (Panna-Mukta
revised PSC price of US$ 5.73 / mmbtu and Tapti revised PSC price of US$ 5.57 /
mmbtu). Further, the Committee observed that ONGC also did not reduce the sale of
gas proportionate to the decline in production in the Tapti and Panna-Mukta fields
during the year 2008-09 to 2011-12 and on the contrary sold more gas to TPL during
2009-10 to 2010-11 vis-a-vis 2008-09. The Ministry had submitted, since GAIL was
unable to lift gas at a higher PSC formula based price, ONGC entered into agreement in
June 2006 with TPL. Further, the Ministry had stated that the notional revenue loss was
on account of the fact that the PSC formula based price was above the prevailing
market price and in the absence of GAIL lifting the entire gas quantity, the Ministry
permitted the constituents of JV to sell gas at rates ranging from US$ 3.86 to US$ 5.58.
The Committee were in agreement with Audit that the argument of ONGC on Article VIII
of Tripartite Agreement i.e. the GAIL was fully responsible for the performance of the
existing contract is not tenable as ONGC was selling its share of gas to TPL below the
PSC price and it was obligatory on the part of ONGC to periodically inform GAIL about
the drop in level of production for making proportionate reduction in supply to TPL. The
Committee were of the firm view that the Ministry, should have been proactive in
monitoring the dispensation of additional gas production (over and above 10.8
mmdcmd) by the PMT JV when it had issued clear instructions. The Committee strongly
deprecated the casual approach of the Ministry in protecting the interest of the
government and desired that the failure of ONGC first to find a buyer at PSC price and
later on to curtail on pro rata basis the supply of gas to TPL be enquired into and
responsibility be fixed. The Committee also desired the Ministry to look into whether the
competitive prices were not obtained by the other two JV partners while supplying the
gas to their affiliates.

42. In this regard, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in their Action Taken
Note stated as under:-

"MoP&NG decisions to allow ‘direct marketing’ of gas by PMT Contractors, and
also allow GAIL and other buyers to pay prices different from PSC prices were
consequent to circumstances not envisaged in PSC. The GAIL was unwilling to
accept the PSC price arrived with TPL through a competitive bidding process.

Consequent to MOP&NG’s decisions to allow ‘direct marketing’ of gas, other two
partners supplied the gas to their affiliates at different prices ranging from US $

24


3.96 to US $ 5.58 per mmbtu during the year 2006-07 & 2007-08, which being
affiliate transaction cannot be considered as competitive prices.

The following actions have been taken in compliance with PAC’s observations:

(i) In respect of the issue regarding ONGC obligation on selling its share of gas to
TPL below the PSC price, it has been referred to DGH for identifying the
magnitude of its impact on GOIPP, if any, and make recommendations on loss of
revenue to the government.

(ii) DGH has been directed to recover with interest the Loss of government
revenue ofUS $ 0.52 million in the form of Profit Petroleum (PP) and royalty due
to sale to affiliates of Panna gas in contravention to PSC."

43. While vetting the said ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:-:-
"The final course of action is awaited. The amount is yet (January 2017) to be
recovered. As the PSC term is expiring in 2019, same needs to expedited
Status of recovery may be submitted to PAC."
44. In their further comments to the above said audit observation, the Ministry stated
as under:-
(i) The issue regarding ONGC obligation on selling its share of gas to TPL

(ii)

below the PSC price has been referred to DGH for identifying the magnitude
of its impact on 501 share of Profit Petroleum, if any, and make
recommendations on loss of revenue to the government. DGH has sought
legal advice from Senior Government Counsel, which is awaited. After
obtaining legal advice, the further course of action would be decided. ATN in
the matter would be submitted to PAC as soon as comments/replies/ATN are
received from DGH.

Directives have been issued to GAIL on 30.08.2017 for recovery of US $ 0.52
million from Sale Proceeds towards Profit Petroleum (PP) and Royalty due to
sale to affiliates of Panna gas in contravention to PSC. M/s RIL & BGEPIL
have requested the Ministry to revoke its directions as this issue is already
under the consideration of ongoing Arbitration. This matter has also been
referred to DGH on 26.09.2017 for obtaining legal opinion from Government
Counsel. ATN in the matter would be submitted to PAC as soon as
comments/replies/ATN are received from DGH.

25


44. The Ministry in their further reply/update has furnished following information:-

“ (i) The magnitude of impact of ONGC obligation on selling its share of gas to
TPL below the PSC price, on GOI share of Royalty and Profit Petroleum
due to sale of gas quantity to TPL at lower rater (US$ 4.75 per mmbtu)
from 30" May 2008 to May 2011 in respect of PMT PSCs separately has
been calculated by DGH and additional amount of Royalty and Profit
Petroleum due from ONGC is as under:

SI.No. | Field Name Gol Take -—|Gol Take — PP
Royalty (in USD) | (in USD)
1. Panna-Mukta 807,175 3,036,864
Mid & South Tapti 1,155,673 3,655,480
Total 1,962,848 6,692,344

DGH has been requested to make recommendations on loss of revenue to
the government.

(ii) MoPNG has recovered US$ 0.52 Million through GAIL form the sale
proceeds from PMT PSC.”

45. The Committee had strongly deprecated the casual approach of the
Ministry in protecting the interest of the government and desired that the failure
of ONGC first to find a buyer at PSC price and to curtail, on pro rata basis, the
supply of gas to M/s Torrent Power Limited (TPL) be enquired into and
responsibility be fixed. The Committee also desired the Ministry to look into
whether competitive prices were not obtained by the other two JV partners (RIL
and BGEPIL) while supplying the gas to their affiliates. The Committee on perusal
of the Ministry’s submission are baffled to observe that the decision to allow
‘direct marketing’ of gas by PMT Contractors at prices different from PSC prices
were consequent to circumstances not envisaged in PSC. Logically, PMT
partners should have approached the Ministry for a decision in a situation that
was beyond the purview of the PSC. The Committee are unable to comprehend
the Ministry’s silence all these years in taking effective steps to prevent the
violation of PSC by the JV partners resulting in huge loss to the nation and
seeking legal advice/opinion only after being pointed by the Committee. Now,
w.r.to ONGC selling gas to TPL, the magnitude of impact on Gol share of Royalty

26


and PP has been computed to USD 1.962 million and USD 6.692 million
respectively for which DGH has been asked to recommend on loss of revenue to
the Government. As regards JV partners (RIL and BGEPIL) sale of gas to
affiliates, MoPNG has recovered USD 0.52 million through GAIL from the sale
proceeds from PMT PSC. The Committee in view of both the outcomes are of the
considered view that an independent inquiry be initiated by the Ministry into the
sale of gas in contravention of the provisions of PSC and the Committee be
apprised of the findings thereof within three months of the presentation of the

Report to the House.

46. Delay in finalizing optimization concept

Recommendation No. 31

The Committee noted that an optimization concept for Bhagyam field was
presented to MC in August 2010 to which the final approval of MC was communicated
in December 2010 which resulted in delayed commencement of the activities. The
Operator reasoned that after MC review of the proposal, substantial deliberation took
place on the concept optimization and the minutes were got signed by circulation.
MoPNG in their reply stated that the MC first deliberated on the concept in July 2010
and in October 2010 passed the resolution and it took two more months for all the
representatives to sign the resolution. The Committee also noted that due to delay in
execution of the activities, the budget for the year also remained under utilized. The
Committee observed that the MC took unduly long time i.e. four months in approving the
proposal and the lackadaisical approach eventually affected the commencement of
activities. The Committee were of the view that delays invariably lead to cost overruns
which ultimately adversely impacted the Government's share of profit petroleum. The
Committee desired that a time frame may be prescribed for signing of such resolutions
of the MC and the Committee be apprised thereof.

47. In this regard, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in their Action Taken
Note stated as under:-

"Normally, the management committee resolutions are signed the same day
reflecting the discussions and approvals accorded in the meeting. However,
sometimes there is a difference of opinion on an issue between the contractors
or between the Government and the Contractor, then the Resolutions / Minutes
get delayed. The system of MC meeting has been streamlined to ensure that
delays in signing MCR are avoided."

27


48.

49.

While vetting the said ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:-

"To assess the time taken in signing of MC meetings, details of 10 MC meetings
held from January 2014 to August 2016 as furnished (February 2017) by the
Operator and ONGC were reviewed. It has been observed that time taken in the
final sign off of MC minutes from date of MC meetings ranged from 32 to 121
days. Further, the minutes of MC meeting held on 4 August 2016 were still
awaiting sign off (10/02/2017) in MOPNG. This was on the higher side despite
the assurance by MOPNG that the system of MC meeting has been streamlined.

The Ministry has stated that the system of MC meeting has been streamlined to
ensure that delays in signing MCR are avoided. In this regard measures taken
may be submitted to PAC."

In their further comments to the above said audit observation, the Ministry stated

as under:-

50.

“Copy of Minutes of MC Meeting No. 45 held on 4" August 2016 signed by all the
MC Members, is attached at Annexure-31A. As it has been submitted earlier that
endeavours are made to sign the MCR on the day of MC Meeting itself as far as
possible/practical though in certain cases due to disagreement on exact
coverage of the issue in MCRs or MCRs initiated through Circulation, the MCRs
may not be signed on the day of MC Meeting itself. However, as observed by
Audit against Observation/Recommendation No. 26, there has been overall
improvement in the process of approval of work programme and budgets by the
MC as compared to the previous years. Nevertheless Government
representatives on MCs and DGH are being advised to keep in mind the
Audit's/PAC concerns and expedite signing of Minutes of Meetings.”

The Committee were of the view that delays invariably lead to cost

overruns which ultimately adversely impacted the Government's share of profit

petroleum. The Committee, therefore, desired that a time frame be prescribed for

signing of such resolutions of the Management Committee (MC) and the

Committee be apprised thereof. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry

that the system of MC meetings have been streamlined to ensure that delays in

signing MCR are avoided. However, they are shocked to note that out of the

sample 10 MC meetings, it has been seen that delays in final signing of MC

minutes ranging from 32 to 121 days. The Committee are unable to pardon the

delay in signing of minutes of MC meetings for months together i.e. even upto

28


four months. It has been, further, observed that the copy of the MC meeting
minutes held on 4 August, 2016 furnished by the Ministry have actually signed by
all the MC Members only after being pointed out by the Audit. This clearly shows
utter failure of the Ministry in monitoring the implementation/streamlining of MC
meetings and signing of the Resolutions timely. The Committee while noting from
the reply of the Ministry are dismayed to observe the lackadaisical approach of
the Ministry to the specific issue addressed by the Committee. The Committee,
therefore, take a serious view on the failure of the Government representatives in
the MC and for delay in signing of minutes even after introduction of streamlined
procedure and desire that the prescribed procedures be followed in letter and
spirit and a mechanism for monitoring may also be developed by the Ministry for
overseeing execution of the directions on the issue. The Committee, further,
desire that definite and concrete measures be put in place by the MC to get timely
approval and signing of the resolutions thereby eliminating cost over-runs and

protecting the Government of India’s share of Profit Petroleum (PP).

29


CHAPTER Il

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
GOVERNMENT

Observation/Recommendation

Introductory:

The Committee note that with the reforms in the economy, the Government
decided to liberalize the framework governing the oil and gas Exploration and
Production Sector hitherto the preserve of the Government Sector. In early 1990s,
Government of India invited foreign and domestic Private Sector Companies to
participate in the development of discovered oil and gas fields, and in some cases,
fields partially developed by the National Oil Companies (NOCs)-Oil and Natural Gas
Corporation Limited (ONGC) and Oil India Limited (OIL). During pre-NELP exploration
bid round, National Oil Companies (NOCs) were licensees of the blocks and had right to
take participating interest upto 30% in development phase. Government awarded small
and medium sized discovered and producing oilfields as well as some exploratory
blocks to foreign and domestic Private Sector Companies in this round. In 1997, the
Government formulated a New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP) which was notified
in 1999 with the objective of not only attracting private capital but also introducing the
technical expertise and efficiency of global players in the field. Under the NELP regime,
both NOCs and private companies were allowed to participate in the bidding of
acreages on a level playing field and blocks were awarded through open international
competitive bidding and after award, the PSC( Production Sharing Contract) was signed
between Contractor parties and the Government of India. The PSCs for specific fields/
blocks laid out the roles and responsibilities of all parties, stipulated the detailed
procedures to be followed at different stages of exploration, development and
production and also indicated the fiscal regime (cost recovery, profit sharing etc) .
Though, under both pre-NELP and NELP regimes, period of exploration was regulated
by the terms and conditions of PSC and Petroleum Exploration License (PEL) and
petroleum mining was regulated by terms and conditions of PSC and Mining Lease
(ML), the content of PSCs varied substantially among those for discovered fields, pre
NELP exploratory blocks and NELP blocks and even within different NELP rounds. The
principle underlying the PSC (Production Sharing Contracts) model, under the NELP,
involved a sliding scale for profit sharing between the Government of India and the
Contactor based on the Pre Tax Investment Multiple (PTIM) i.e. an index of the
accumulated net cash flow to the contractor relative to the accumulated expenditure on
exploration and development activities. The exploration risk viz. the costs incurred in
searching for oil and natural gas, without certainty of discovery, were to be borne by the

30


Contractors as they incurred capital expenditure towards the discoveries and it was only
when hydrocarbons were discovered and assessed to be commercially viable, the
Contractor had the right to recover costs from the revenue streams accruing from sale
of oil and gas. The balance revenue, termed as Profit Petroleum (PP) after the
Contractor had recovered all his costs was to be shared between the Contractor and the
Government. The Government share of revenues became significant only when the
production reached substantial levels and the Contractor had recovered his
accumulated costs. Further, PSC also contemplated a Management Committee (MC),
chaired by a Government of India representative, with the responsibility to approve field
development plans, as well as annual work programmes and budgets for development
and production operations to ensure that the expenditure proposed to be incurred as
well as actually incurred by the Operator did not adversely affect the Government's
revenue interests.

Article 25 of the PSC stipulated 2 levels of Audit by independent auditors viz. a)
Appointed by the Management Committee; b) Appointed by the Government. The
C&AG undertook a Special Audit (2nd level audit) of four blocks viz. Panna-Mukta,
Tapti, KG-DWN-98/3 and RJ-ON-90/1 out of the eight blocks on the request of
Secretary, MoPNG made in the wake of large stakes of the Government in the form of
royalty and profit petroleum, and concerns voiced in some quarters about the capital
expenditure being incurred by some Contractors in the development projects awarded
under NELP. The C&AG Audit included scrutiny of the records of the MoPNG and DGH
for the period 2003-04 to 2007-08 and supplementary scrutiny of the records of four
operators for the period 2006-07 and 2007-08. The findings of the C&AG Audit have
been incorporated in their Report No 19 of 2011-12 on "Performance Audit of
Hydrocarbon Production Sharing Contracts". C&AG accepted the request of MoPNG to
audit 8 blocks and undertook Audit of four blocks PY-1, PY-3, Kharsang and CB-ON-7
for the years 2007-09 and initiated Performance Audit of the implementation of the
Hydrocarbon PSCs at the MoPNG and DGH and financial and propriety audit at the
Operator's premises in respect of the rest of the four blocks viz. KG-DWN-98/3, Panna-
Mukta, Tapti and RJ-ON-90/1 for 2008-12.The observations emanating from the
aforesaid Audit are contained in CRAG Report No. 24 of 2014. The Committee took up
examination of both the Reports simultaneously as these are based on the Audit of the
same blocks over different periods. The Committee note that the C&AG in their first
Report had not quantified the costs to be disallowed as per their findings under the PSC
provisions by the Operators. The Committee further note from the submission of the
Secretary, MoPNG that in the absence of quantification of the deficiencies by the
C&AG, it was not possible for them to act thereupon. However, in their second Report,
C&AG have done the quantifications of the costs to be disallowed wherever price
discovery was possible. The Committee's examination of the subject and their

31


observations / recommendations on the issues raised in both the Audit Reports are
detailed in succeeding paragraphs.

(SI. no. 4 Part - Il of 47" report of Public Accounts

Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

Action Taken
Statement of Fact placed at Introduction to the Observation / Recommendations
in Part — ॥ of the Report.

Vetting Comments of Audit
No comments

Reply on Vetting Comments of Audit by MoPNG
No comments

(Amar Nath)
Joint Secretary (E)
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
O.M. No. O-24012/1/2014-EO (Pt.1) Dated: 18" October, 2017

QObservation/Recommendation

Production Sharing Contracts and the Cost Recovery:
The Committee note that the basis on which the share of the Government in

Profit Petroleum is decided is called ‘Pre-tax Investment Multiple’ which is the ratio of
cumulative net cash income to the cumulative exploration and development cost. The
cumulative investment remains as a denominator and it helps to prevent the contractor
to maneuver on annual basis i.e. by increasing the production in a year or increasing °
the cost in a year, the Contractor will not be able to take advantage. The Committee
note that whatever revenue comes in, the Contractor will recover his cost out of the first
90 percent; the 10 percent which remains with him is called profit petroleum and the
sharing formula in that 10 percent is that the contractor will take * 9 (90 percent) and the
Government will get ° 1 (10 percent) i.e. the Government's profit will jump from 10
percent to 60 percent if the PTIM changes from 1.5 to 3.5. But the Audit has pointed out
that Government's share comes down when the cumulative investment goes up and the
investment multiple comes down. The Ashok Chawla Committee on ‘Allocation of
Natural Resources' had highlighted that the IM-based profit sharing system "gives
incentive (to an operator) to increase his investment or front-end his work plan in order

32


to see that the threshold where Government's profit take rises rapidly is not reached.”
The Chawla Committee had further pointed out that once the PTIM crosses 2.5, the
Government's share of profit increases dramatically for which the operator may adopt all
investment and strategies possible to ensure that the PTIM stays within the 2.5 limit.
The Ministry submitted that based on experience, over so many years of NELP, it was
seen that today 90 per cent of problems, which it was facing, and all arbitrations and
litigations, were basically related to cost recovery. The Committee further note from the
submission of the Ministry that the formula has been revised keeping in mind the
C&AG's observations and the Ashok Chawla Committee's recommendation and its own
experiences, and a revenue sharing model contract in place of the present profit sharing
regime has been introduced, for future bidding rounds under new Hydrocarbon
Exploration and Licensing Policy. The Committee while appreciating the switch over to a
new model desire that, in case of already signed 249 PSCs, it becomes imperative that
the contentious issues arising there from are resolved in an amicable manner with
prospective application.
(SI. no. 2 Part - Il of 47" report of Public Accounts
Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by MoPNG
Government of India has taken several initiatives recently to ensure transparent

and policy based administration. Several policy initiatives have resolved existing
disputes and have also helped in taking decisions where there were potential disputes.
The policy initiatives such as Policy Framework for Relaxations, Extensions and
Clarifications at the Development and Production stage under PSC regime for early
Monetization of Hydrocarbon Discoveries, Policy on Testing Requirements, Policy for
Extension of PSCs of Small and Medium Sized Discovered Fields have helped in taking
decisions in uniform, transparent and clear manner which have helped in resolution of
disputes and moving ahead with discoveries which were stuck on account of difference
of opinion between the contractors and the Government.

Government is focusing on policy based administration with clear and
transparent decision making to ensure smooth operation of PSCs.

Vetting Comments of Audit
No further comments are offered

Reply on Vetting Comments of Audit by MoPNG
No comments.

(Amar Nath)
Joint Secretary (E)
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas

33


O.M. No. 0-24012/1/2014-EO (Pt.1) Dated: 187 October, 2017

Observation/Recommendation

New Gas Pricing Policy:

The Committee note that CCEA approved a new gas pricing policy in 2014 based
on the modification of gas pricing formula proposed by the Rangarajan Committee with
prospective application and as per the formulation approved ,upward revision in gas
prices would be approximately 75% less as compared to the price arrived at using
Rangarajan formula, approximately 80% of the additional revenue due to revision in gas
price would go to the Government companies and Government would get additional
revenue of approximately Rs. 3800 crore per annum on account of higher royalty,
higher profit petroleum and higher taxes. The Committee further note the Government is
considering incentivizing gas production from deep-water, ultra deep-water and high
pressure-high temperature areas, which are presently not exploited on account of
higher cost and higher risks and a proposal is under consideration for new discoveries
and areas which are yet to commence production, first, to provide calibrated marketing
freedom; and second, to do so at a pre-determined ceiling price to be discovered on the
principle of landed price of alternative fuels. The Committee while appreciating that the
Government has already initiated steps to provide marketing and pricing freedom in a
calibrated manner to be produced from the difficult areas such as deep water, ultra
deep water, high pressure and high temperature reservoirs with a upper cap on pricing
and also pricing and marketing freedoms for the fields to be auctioned under the
Discovered Small Fields Policy and blocks to be offered under new Hydrocarbon
Exploration and Licensing Policy are of the view that care should be taken to ensure
that gas is neither sold at very high prices as the ceiling price is dependent on prices of
alternative fuels and nor at very low prices to benefit some parties on the pretext that it
is being sold below the ceiling price.

(SI. no. 4 Part - Il of 47" report of Public Accounts

Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by MoPNG
The Committee has recommended that care should be taken to ensure that gas

is neither sold at very high prices as the ceiling price is dependent on prices of

alternative fuels and nor at very low prices to benefit some parties on the pretext that it

is being sold below the ceiling price. The government has notified that the ceiling price

of natural gas to be produced from discoveries in deepwater, ultra deepwater and High
34


Pressure-High Temperature areas shall be calculated as lowest of the (i) landed price of
imported fuel oil, (ii) weighted average import landed price of substitute fuels and (iii)
landed price of imported LNG. Thus, a mechanism has been built in to ensure that the
natural gas sold under the marketing including pricing freedom is at reasonable prices
to the satisfaction of all the stakeholders.

The gas price ceiling for the period from April to September, 2016 has been
computed by Petroleum Planning and Analysis Cell (PPAC) of the Ministry as US $ 6.61
/ mmbtu on GCV basis. The domestic natural gas prices for the corresponding period
have been worked out to be US $ 3.06 / mmbtu. Similarly, for the period 11 October
2016 to 31% March, 2017 the ceiling price is US$ 5.30/mmbtu and the domestic natural
gas price is US$ 2.50 mmbtu. The price movements are aligned to prevailing prices in
the international hubs. Thus, there is a transparent enabling policy framework for the
upstream players for making investment decisions; while gas prices worked out through
pricing guidelines, 2014 protect user industries.

Further, the landed price based ceiling would be calculated once in six months.
Thus, the gas prices would be monitored regularly by the government.

Vetting Comments of Audit
No comments

Reply on Vetting Comments of Audit by MoPNG
No comments.

(Amar Nath)
Joint Secretary (E)

Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
O.M. No. 0-24012/1/2014-EO (Pt.1) Dated:18'"October, 2017

Observation/Recommendation

Non- relinquishment of contract area:

The Committee note that since the Contractor was allowed to enter the second
and third exploration phases without relinquishing 25 percent each of the total contract
area and to retain the entire Contract Area by treating it as ‘discovery area’ at the end of
Phase-| and Phase-ll, Audit had recommended that MoPNG should review
determination of the entire contract area as discovery area strictly in terms of PSC
provisions as contained in Article 4.1 and 4.2 and delineate the stipulated 25%

relinquishment area at the time of the conclusion of the 1st and 2nd exploratory phases
35


and then correctly delineate the discovery area, linked to wells or wells drilled in that
part, without considering any subsequent discoveries. The Committee also note from
the reply of MoPNG that it has applied appropriate provisions as deemed fit as per
Article 4 that deals with the Contractor's right to retain and relinquish the Contract Area
in phases and permits the retention of the ‘discovery area' by the Contractor at the end
of exploration phase | and II for further exploration and appraisal operations and Article
3.11 that deals with retention of portions of Contract Area beyond the exploration
phases on account of development operations . Further, MoPNG in its reply have
submitted that the discoveries made in phase-! were in plio-pleistocene zone and the
discovery area demarcated is related with the plio-pleistocene stratigraphic level.
However, the area demarcated separately in subsequent phase i.e. 5445 sq. km. is
related with different stratigraphic level, therefore, discovery area was related with the
discovery made at specific stratigraphic level and retention of discovery area was in
accordance with article 1.39 of PSC. The Committee also note that Audit in its latest
report have recommended that pragmatically, MoPNG should accept sharing of
exploration cost of only those of the wells which resulted in a commercial discovery and
disallow the cost recovery already effected by the Operator on the remaining wells. The
Committee take note of the MoPNG's concurrence, though delayed, to the retention of
the entire Contract Area as Discovery Area by the Contractor till the conclusion of
Phase Ill which was based on 3D seismic surveys of the Block insisted upon by the
DGH, which was technically qualified to take such decisions. The Committee also note
that though under NELP-! to NELP-VII, the provision of relinquishment of 25 percent
contract area was there but from NELP-VIIl onwards, the operator(s) need not
relinquish any area. The Committee after taking into consideration the observations of
C&AG, the submissions of the operator and the Ministry and the provisions of the PSC
particularly Article 4.1 of the PSC which states that ".in the event Development Areas
and Discovery Areas exceed 75%, the Contractor shall be entitled to retain to the extent
of Development Areas and Discovery Areas” are of the opinion that delineating
Development and Discovery Areas require technical expertise and accordingly the MC
and DGH on the request of the Contractor allowed the contractor to retain the ‘Contract
Area’ as the ‘Discovery Area’ and ,therefore, the exploration costs incurred by the
Contractor on unviable discoveries cannot be disallowed as the Contractor is entitled to
recover Contract Costs out of a percentage of the total value of petroleum produced and
saved from the "Contract Area” as per the PSC.

(SI. no. 6 Part - Il of 47" report of Public Accounts

Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by MoPNG
MoP&NG has taken similar stand and agrees with the observation of PAC.

36


Vetting Comments of Audit
Audit has no further comments to offer.

Reply on Vetting Comments of Audit by MoPNG
No comments.

(Amar Nath)
Joint Secretary (E)
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
O.M. No. 0-24012/1/2014-EO (Pt.1) Dated: 187" October, 2017

Observation/Recommendation

Fabrication and installation of living quarters:

The Committee note that as per the agreement relating to functional
requirements in FPSO, the general facilities / requirements for operations include air-
conditioned living quarters with configuration of one bed, two beds and four beds cabins
to accommodate 104 people and the contract price was based on creation of additional
living quarters of 40 beds and re use on an as-is basis of 64 existing living quarters on
the FPSO with minimum refurbishment. However, extensive refurbishment and
upgradation with modifications and re-design of the 64 existing living quarters was done
on the request of the Operator which resulted in additional compensation to the vendor.
The Operator explained that the personnel working offshore are subjected to hard life
and harsh working conditions and upgraded and extensively refurbished living quarters
would not only mitigate some of the hardships but also improves productivity , safety
and alertness. MoPNG in its reply has stated that the post vendor contractual
agreements between the Operator and the vendor validly amended the original vendor-
contract and the audit report did not point out any legally tenable ground for cost
disallowance such as affiliated transactions to the undue advantage of Contractor, any
incidence of fraud and costs not supported by payment evidences. Audit observed that
it was the responsibility of the vendor to depute personnel on the FPSO and the existing
contract with additional 40 quarters had met the requirements of the FPSO charter
contract and also the harsh working conditions were always known and could have
been finalised at the time of procuring FPSO. The Committee also note that the
development plan for the MA field included the cost of purchase of FPSO but the
Operator chartered the FPSO. The refurbishment was also guided by the option of
purchase at any time during the charter period which has not been exercised so far. The

5. Committee observe that refurbishments could have been negotiated at the initial stages

as the harsh conditions and existing layouts were available at that time. The Committee,
37


however, are surprised to note that the Ministry, in its presentation to them, has
bunched all the expenditure related issues and given a single reply to all of them without
any issue related reasoning, clarification or explanation. The Committee, therefore,
desire to be apprised of the MoPNG's reply on the need, necessity and level of the
refurbishment undertaken at the request of the Operator.

(SI. no. 13 Part - Il of 47" report of Public

Accounts Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by MoPNG

As per the principles of PSC the contractor's and the Government's interests are
aligned in minimizing the cost and maximizing the gain from the petroleum operations.
Accordingly, contractors are expected to take decisions which are in the best interest of
the field and also for maximizing gains for all the stakeholders. The procurements are
handled by the Operating Committees in all the PSCs. Government/DGH may not be in
position to go into individual procurements and same is to be done by the auditors.
Government considers the exceptions provided by the auditors and take a view on
them. The basic aspect to be seen in the procurement is that they are made
competitively and there is no fraud or related party transactions so that contractors may
not be able to siphon off the revenues from the fields.

DGH was directed to look into the need and necessity of refurbishment of
quarters. DGH had sought response from the contractors. The operator has brought out
that the refurbishment was needed for providing basic amenities for operating personnel
to work efficiently and safely. The operator has highlighted that the refurbishment was
necessitated for safe, efficient operation and maintenance, for better reliability, for
alleviation of harsh offshore conditions on FPSO, for improving working conditions and
in the overall interest of the project. The compensation paid by the contractor was on
actual expenditure incurred.

In this regard, it is stated that it is the responsibility of the operator to improve the
working conditions in the overall interest of the project. Therefore, the operator is
authorized to take operational decision to discharge its responsibility. The contractor is
required to ensure safety and acceptable working conditions.

Vetting Comments of Audit

Ministry has endorsed the views of operator that the refurbishment was needed
for providing basic amenities for operating personnel to work efficiently and safely. The

38


Ministry has not given its own views on the need, necessity and level of the
refurbishment undertaken at the request of the Operator, as recommended by the PAC.

Reply on Vetting Comments of Audit by MoPNG

Article 8.3 of the PSC puts an obligation on the Contractor to conduct all
Petroleum Operations within the Contract Area diligently, expeditiously, efficiently and in
a safe and workman like manner. Thus, to improve the working conditions in the overall
interest of the project, the operator is under contractual obligations to take operational
decision in discharge of its responsibility and is required to ensure safety and
acceptable working conditions.

Contractors are expected to take decisions which are in the best interest of the
field and also for maximizing gains for all the stakeholders. If any HSE (Health, Safety
and Environment) issue occurs, it would not only result in loss of manpower and
resources but overall disruption to operations & production.

FPSO is a comparatively new facility being used in India. Hence anticipating and
envisaging everything at planning stage may not have been feasible. If some extra
requirements emerged during implementation or after usage, the same have to be met
keeping safety and other operational requirements in view. It is also an industry
practice that any subsequent requirements are tried to be met through existing/original
vendor as looking for new vendor is not only time consuming but may be costly and may
not be compatible. Moreover, the Operator is required to ensure safety and acceptable
working conditions not only as per PSC requirements but other statutory requirements
also.

(Amar Nath)
Joint Secretary (E)
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas

O.M. No. 0-24012/1/2014-EO (Pt.1) Dated: 180 October, 2017

Observation/Recommendation

Payment of compensation on Free Issue Materials:

The Committee also note that the Operator had awarded four contracts relating
to construction of OT, construction of Jetty and Infrastructure facilities near the OT on
cost -plus basis to L&T Ltd and M/s AFCONS Infrastructure Ltd (Al Ltd). These
contracts contained provisions for FIMs (Free Issue Materials) which were to be

39


arranged by the Operator at its own cost and, therefore, different clauses of the
contracts excluded various FIMs supplied by the Operator from the purview of payment
of compensation to the vendor. But, a percentage of the value of FiMs of some
categories supplied by the Operator was included in the payment of compensation to
the vendor. The Operator submitted that in order to incentivize the contractors to bid for
supply of labour & provision of construction equipment contract, Operator had to agree
for a reasonable mark-up on FIMs and that these FIMs were not capital items and were
related to day to day construction materials which require project execution skills,
planning and co-ordination to meet construction schedule and if procurement were kept
in the Contractor's scope directly then this would have resulted in double taxation with
respect to VAT and Service Tax and increased compensation on this account. MoPNG
in its reply has stated that the post vendor contractual agreements between the
Operator and the vendor validly amended the original vendor-contract and the audit
report did not point out any legally tenable ground for cost disallowance such as
affiliated transactions to the undue advantage of Contractor, any incidence of fraud and
costs not supported by payment evidences. The Committee are of the view that the
Ministry should call for a comparative statement of costs incurred due to such
provisioning and costs incurred if the materials were directly procured by the vendor
before taking a decision on the allowance of the costs.
(SI. no. 15 Part - Il of 47" report of Public
Accounts Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by MoPNG

As per the PAC recommendation, DGH was asked to get the comparative

statement from the Contractors. DGH took operator's response which can be
summarized as:
“Due process as per PSC was followed for executing the contracts and payments were
made as per contract. Contractor has agreed to pay a reasonable markup on civil FIMs
like cement, steel, welding rods, Gl pipes and other consumables which is usual
practice in turn-key construction contracts in order to incentivize vendors to bid or
supply of labour and provision of construction equipment. No mark-up was paid on cost
of projects, capital items like equipment, bulks etc. and on HSD supplied by the
Contractor. The payments were made pursuant to a valid contract which was finalized
through a competitive bidding process. The Contractor has ensured overall savings to
the project by avoiding payment of double taxation by buying the construction materials
directly.”

The purchase price which would have been borne by the vendor is not known
since the contractor had procured the construction materials and not the vendor. As per
operator’s statement, the cost of supplies would have been higher because of mark-up
even if the purchase price of the free supplies remaining same for both the contractor
and vendor. There would have been higher incidences of taxes by way of VAT and

40


Services Tax on account of mark-up which could be avoided by the contractor as per
their response. Cost is supported by payment evidences.

The allowance of cost is in accordance with Article 15 on ‘Recovery of cost
Petroleum’. The sub-Article 15.1 stipulates. “The Contractor shall be entitled to recover
Contract Costs out of a percentage of the total value of Petroleum produced and saved
from the Contract Area in the Year in accordance with the provisions of this Article.”

Vetting Comments of Audit
Ministry has yet to submit the comparative statement of costs incurred due to

such provisioning and costs incurred if the materials were directly procured by the
vendor. This may be submitted to PAC for their perusal.

Reply on Vetting Comments of Audit by MoPNG
While appreciating the Committee's view that the Ministry should call for a

comparative statement of costs incurred due to such provisioning and costs incurred if
the materials were directly procured by the vendor before taking a decision on the
allowance of the costs, it is worth mentioning that since vendor did not procure the
material, no purchase price (of vendor) is available for cost comparisons.

Article 8.3 of the PSC puts an obligation on the Contractor to conduct all
Petroleum Operations within the Contract Area diligently, expeditiously, efficiently and in
a safe and workman like manner. Therefore, the operator is under contractual
obligations to take operational decision in discharge of its responsibility. Contractors are
expected to take decisions which are in the best interest of the field and also for
maximizing gains for all the stakeholders.

Keeping in view the Committee's concerns, Government representatives on MC.
and DGH are being advised to keep in mind the Audit's/PAC concerns and if any
deviation from PSC is observed, the same would be reported to MoPNG for appropriate
action as per PSC.

(Amar Nath)
Joint Secretary (E)
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
O.M. No. O0-24012/1/2014-EO (Pt.1) Dated: 18" October, 2017

Observation/Recommendation

Classification of Start-up and Production Bonuses as part of recoverable costs:
As per Audit, during the period 2008-09 to 2009-10, the Operator charged long

term bonus (LTB), productivity linked incentives (PLI), start-up bonus and production
bonus paid to its employees in proportion to number of hours they were engaged in the

41


work relating to this block. The Operator has been paying LTB as a retention bonus and
PLI to its E&P employees. In addition the start-up and production bonuses were given to
the E&P employees on the occasion of starting first gas production. Audit had stated
that PSC provides for payment of bonus to those assigned personnel who are directly
and necessarily engaged in the conduct of the petroleum operations and allows
recovery of eligible costs related to the Contractor's locally recruited employees who are
directly engaged in the conduct of petroleum operations under the contract in India and
assigned personnel and includes salaries, wages and other costs which are as per the
personnel policy and are of a regular nature. Audit had observed that since start-up and
production bonus are one-time and of an ad-hoc nature, these should not be paid from
the revenue earned from the sale of gas. According to Operator, the PSC nowhere
stipulates such restrictions and the opinion of the audit is not in line with the provisions
of the PSC as it is clear that the cost of employee benefits, including bonus are eligible
for cost recovery and the start-up and production bonus was paid to employees as a
performance bonus for completion of activities directly concerned with the project to
improve employees morale and productivity. Audit further stated that Operator has been
paying LTB as a retention bonus and PLI to its E&P employees for improving morale
and productivity and retaining the experienced employees. MoPNG in its reply has
stated that the post vendor contractual agreements between the Operator and the
vendor validly amended the original vendor-contract and the audit report did not point
out any legally tenable ground for cost disallowance such as affiliated transactions to
the undue advantage of Contractor, any incidence of fraud and costs not supported by
payment evidences. The Committee are of the view that as the disagreement between
the parties involves correct interpretation of the provisions of PSC, MoPNG may seek
the views of Ministry of Law thereon and apprise the Committee thereof.
(SI. no. 16 Part - Il of 47" report of Public
Accounts Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by MoPNG
Para 3.1.2 of PSC brings out that:

“3.1.2 Labour and Associated Labour Costs

(a) Contractor's locally recruited employees based in India

(a) Costs of all Contractor's locally recruited employees who are directly
engaged in the conduct of Petroleum Operations under the Contract in India.
Such costs shall include the costs of employee benefits and Government benefits
for employees and levies imposed on the Contractor as an employer,
transportation and relocation costs within India of the employee and such
members of the employee’s family as per the personnel policy of the employer as

42


required by law or customary practice in India. If such employees are engaged in
other activities in

India, in addition to Petroleum Operations, the cost of such employees shall be
apportioned on a time sheet basis according to sound and acceptable accounting
principles.

(b) Assigned Personnel

Costs of salaries and wages, including bonuses, of the Contractor’s employees
directly and necessarily engaged in the conduct of the Petroleum Operations
under the Contract, whether temporarily or permanently assigned, irrespective of
the location of such employees, it being understood that in the case of those
personnel only a portion of Whose time is wholly dedicated to Petroleum
Operations under the Contract only that pro rata portion of applicable salaries
wages and other costs as specified in Sections 3.1.2©, (d), (e), (f) and (g) shall
be charged and the basis of such pro rata allocation shall be specified

(c) | The Contractor's costs regarding holiday, vacation, sickness and disability
benefits and living and housing and other customary allowances applicable to the
salaries and wages chargeable under Section 3.1.2(b) above.

(d) | Expenses or contributions made pursuant to assessments or obligations
imposed under the laws of India which are applicable to the Contractor’s cost of
salaries and wages chargeable under Section 3.1.2(b) above.

(e) The Contractor's cost of established plans for employees group life
insurance, hospitalization, pension, retirement and other benefit plans of a like
nature customarily granted to the Contractor's employees provided however, that
such costs are in accordance with generally accepted standards in the
international petroleum industry, applicable to salaries and wages chargeable to
Petroleum Operations under Section 3.1.2(b) above.

(f) Personal incomes taxes where and when they are paid by the contractor to
the Government of India for the employees of the Contractor, including those
made for travel and relocation of the expatriate employees, including their
dependent family and personal effects, assigned to India whose salaries and
wages are chargeable to Petroleum Operations under Section 3.1.2(b) above.

(g) Reasonable transportation and travel expenses of employees of the
Contractor, including those made for travel and relocation of the expatriate
employees, including their dependent family and personal effects, assigned to
India whose salaries and wages are chargeable to Petroleum Operations under
Section 3.1.2(b) above.

43


Transportation cost as used in this Section shall mean the cost of freight and
passenger service and any accountable incidental expenditures related to
transfer travel and authorized under Contractor's standard personnel policies.
Contractor shall ensure that all expenditures related to transportation costs are
equitably allocated to the activities which have benefits from the personnel
concerned.”

As per the recommendations of PAC, views of MOLJ have been sought on,
“Whether booking of payment of US$ 12.48 million on Start-Up and Production
Bonuses to the revenue earned from the sale of gas is covered under Section 3.1.2 of
the Accounting Procedure Appendix C of PSC?". Views of MOLJ are awaited.

Vetting Comments of Audit
Ministry has stated that views of MOLJ have been sought on, “Whether booking
of payment of US$ 12.48 million on Start-Up and Production Bonuses to the revenue
earned from the sale of gas is covered under Section 3.1.2 of the Accounting Procedure
Appendix C of PSC?”, which are still awaited. The PAC may be apprised of the views of
the MOLJ.

Reply on Vetting Comments of Audit by MoPNG

As per recommendation of PAC, MoPNG has referred the matter to MoLJ on
14.10.2016 for their comments. Subsequently, the matter was discussed with MoLJ
from time to time to address their queries. MoLJ returned the file on 15.09.2017
seeking some documents, additional information and clarifications. DGH has been
requested to provide these documents, information/clarifications vide letter dated
19.09.2017. PAC would be apprised as soon as the views of MoLJ are received by this
Ministry.

Further Reply on Vetting Comments of Audit by MoPNG
Ministry of Law & Justice (MoLJ) has advised as under:

“A combined reading of clause (b) and clause (d) of Section 3.1.2 indicates that
contractor's costs of salaries and wages including bonuses chargeable to be
determined in accordance with the applicable laws of India. It is relevant to mention that
bonuses to be given to the employees directly and necessarily engaged in the conduct
of petroleum operations are the part of wages. Therefore, the same has to be
determined in accordance with applicable laws of India. In view of this, it may not be
correct to say that provisions of Bonus Act, 1965 are irrelevant to determine the
bonuses said to be given to the employees especially in the circumstances when the
Operator is declining to provide employment contract.

44


It is gathered from the papers made available by the administrative Ministry that Stand-
up and Production bonuses were one time bonuses and ad hoc nature. To claim that
talented and experienced employees are retained by such start-up and production
bonuses does not appear tenable.”

As advised by MoLJ, DGH has been directed to disallow US$ 12.48 million incurred on
Start-up and Production Bonus paid to employees engaged in the block.

Further Vetting Comments of Audit
PAC may be apprised of the recoveries effected from the Operator in this regard.

Reply on Further Vetting Comments of Audit by MoPNG Audit by MoPNG

Operator has been advised to reverse an amount of USD 12.48 million and remit
to the Government consequential Government share of Profit Petroleum. The
contractor, however has not either paid the additional profit petroleum on account of
disallowance of cost or reversed the amount of USD 12.48 million despite reminders
from DGH. Therefore DGH has been directed to take action as per PSC provisions.

(Amar Nath)
Joint Secretary (E)

Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
O.M. No. O-24012/1/2014-EO (Pt.1) Dated: 2"? November, 2018

Observation/Recommendation

Bonus paid for time saved during rig movement: movement:

The Committee further note from the observation of the Audit that the Operator
paid M/s Transocean bonus for time saved during the rig movement between wells with
hanging Blow Out Preventor (BOP) which were not covered under the terms and
conditions of the contracts and hence should be disallowed. According to the Operator,
the vendor was entitled to performance incentive in accordance with the provision of the
contracts for completing the wells ahead of the target number of days and the incentive
scheme was to be mutually agreed and payment modalities were to be separately
worked out as per the contracts. But Audit contended that the incentive should have
been accordingly paid for completion of wells rather than a single activity of rig
movement. According to MoPNG, the amount involved was actual expenditure incurred
in petroleum operations in a transaction not reported by audit to be an affiliate
transaction or transaction unduly benefitting the Operator/ Contractor. The Committee
are of the view that as the disagreement between the parties involves correct
interpretation of the provisions of PSC, MoPNG may seek the views of Ministry of Law
thereon and apprise the Committee thereof.

45


(SI. no. 18 Part - Il of 47™ report of Public
Accounts Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by MoPNG
The views of MOLJ have been sought on, “Whether the bonus payments for time

saved during the rig movement between wells with hanging Blow Out Preventor (BOP)
should be disallowed for cost recovery?” Views of MOLJ are awaited.

Vetting Comments of Audit
Ministry has stated that views of MOLJ have been sought on, “Whether the

bonus payments for time saved during the rig movement between wells with hanging
Blow Out Preventor (BOP) should be disallowed for cost recovery?” which are still
awaited. The PAC may be apprised of the views of the MOLJ.

Reply on Vetting Comments of Audit by MoPNG
As per recommendation of PAC, MoPNG has referred the matter to MoLJ on

14.10.2016 for their comments. Subsequently, the matter was discussed with MoLJ
from time to time to address their queries. MoLJ returned the file on 15.09.2017
seeking some documents, additional information and clarifications. DGH has been
requested to provide these documents, information/clarifications vide letter dated
19.09.2017. PAC would be apprised as soon as the views of MoLJ are received by this
Ministry.

Further Reply on Vetting Comments of Audit by MoPNG
Ministry of Law & Justice (MoLJ) has advised on this issue as under:

“With regard to the Bonus Payment for time saved during the rig movement
between wells with hanging Blow Out Preventor (BOP) should be disallowed for cost
recovery, it may be appreciated that this is a pure question of facts to determine the
aspects of time which was claimed to be saved and whether there was any provision in
the PSC to provide incentive in that regard, if there is any provision in the PSC to impart
bonuses and there was exclusive benefit then the same to be determined accordingly.”

As advised by MoLJ, DGH has been directed to review the matter in light of
provisions of PSC and take appropriate action for allowance/ disallowance of costs
depending upon any efficiency achieved in time saving or exclusive benefits during rig
movement with the BOP in hanging position.

Further Vetting Comments of Audit
Further progress in this regard may be apprised to PAC.

46


Reply on Further Vetting Comments of Audit by MoPNG
An amount of USD 2.83 million paid as bonus to M/s Transocean has been

disallowed on the ground that no time efficiency has been achieved by paying the bonus
in the instant case. The Operator was advised to reverse an amount of USD 2.83 million
paid to M/s Transocean in the audited accounts for the FY 2017-18 vide DGH’s letter
dated 31.05.2018. However, the reversal has not been reflected in the audited accounts
for the financial year 2017-18. Therefore DGH has been directed to take action as per
PSC provisions.

(Amar Nath)
Joint Secretary (E)

Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
O.M. No. O-24012/1/2014-EO (Pt.1) Dated: 277 November, 2018

Observation/Recommendation

Non-signing of Crude Oil Sales Agreement (COSA)

The Committee note that despite elapse of more than 21 years (since 1994),
COSA has not been formalized by the Panna-Mukta JV with IOCL (Gol nominee) due to
non-resolution of issues such as delivery point, storage charges, dead freight, voyage
costs/ losses, terminal charges, measurement conversion table, dollar rupee exchange
rate, lay time in monsoon and delayed payments and interests thereon. The non-signing
of COSA for Panna-Mukta PSC has previously also been commented and highlighted in
C&AG audit reports of 1996, 2005 and 2011. Thus, non-signing of COSA led to non-
resolution of storage and voyage expenses and are shown as recoverable by PMT JV
from Gol/Gol's nominee i.e., 1001. The Ministry and ONGC while deposing before the
Committee and in their written submission have stated that various correspondences
and meetings were held between PMT JV & IOCL since the commencement of crude oil
sales in 1994-95. However, the issues could not be resolved. Subsequently, in 2014 a
Task Force was constituted which has so far held seven meetings, the last one being on
08.03.2016. As per the Minutes of the 5th meeting of Task Force held on 20.04.2015,
the settlement of issue related to sale of crude oil for Panna — Mukta have agreed on
along with agreement that the PMT JV shall prepare a draft settlement agreement on
the basis of these signed minutes within 15 days. The PMT JV were to share a draft of
the more detailed COSA within 90 days from the date of execution of the Settlement
Agreement. The Parties have agreed that post signing of the settlement agreement and
until such time that the COSA is executed, the settlement agreement shall be binding
agreement between the Parties and shall be basis on which all future sale and purchase
of crude oil from Panna-Mukta area occurs. The Committee are shocked to find that

47


even though 21 long years have passed, the PMT JV could not resolve the pending
issues resulting in non-signing of COSA and loss to the exchequer. This shows the non-
serious approach of the PMT JV as well as IOCL. The Committee also desire the
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas to look into the reasons for inordinate and
inexplicable delays and failure of the monitoring mechanism of the Ministry and fix
responsibility by taking appropriate punitive action against the concerned officials.
Accordingly, the Committee may be apprised on the matter within four months of the
presentation of the Report.
(SI. no. 19 Part - Il of 47" report of Public
Accounts Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by MoPNG
GOI had appointed IOCL as its nominee to purchase entire crude oil produced

from the Panna-Mukta field in accordance with Article 18.1 of the PSC in which ONGC
and RIL are Indian consortium partners. Signing of Crude Oil Sales Agreement (COSA)
is a commercial practice between buyer and seller and Ministry does not have a direct
role in this. The non-finalization of COSA is mainly because of non-acceptance by PMT
JV of the terms and conditions insisted by 1001 regarding applicable period for dollar to
rupee conversion in respect of the crude oil sold by PMT JV.

To resolve this long pending issue, a meeting was held on 23” May, 2016 to
bring all the stakeholders together. The information regarding practices being followed
in other PSCs and by other Indian companies in respect of such payments for crude oil
produced under the Pre-NELP and NELP PSCs is also being collected to get the COSA
finalized at the earliest.

Vetting Comments of Audit
Signing of crude oil sales agreement (COSA) is an essential event which will

provide finality to the commercial transactions (including Gol share of Profit petroleum).

In this regard it was observed that section 1.6 of Accounting procedure on
‘Currency Exchange Rates’, mentions that

‘For translation purpose between USD and INR or any other currency, the
previous months average of the daily means of the buying and selling rates of exchange
as quoted by SBI (or any other financial body as may be mutually agreed between the
parties) shall be used for the month in which the revenues, costs, expenditure receipts
of income are recorded’.

Hence the conversion issue needs to be addressed accordingly at the earliest so
as to settle the financial implications well before expiry of the PSC term in December
2019.

A copy of the minutes of the meeting held on 23 May 2016 may be provided to
the PAC.

48


Reply on Vetting Comments of Audit by MoPNG

As per vetting comments of CAG, a copy of the minutes of the meeting held on
23 May 2016 is attached at Annexure-19A and copy of Settlement Agreement is
attached at Annexure-19B for perusal of PAC.

Further Reply/Update by MoPNG

Crude Offtake and Sales Agreement (COSA) between IOC and PMT JV Partners
has been signed and executed on 27.10.2017.

(Amar Nath)
Joint Secretary (E)

Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
O.M. No. O-24012/1/2014-EO (Pt.1) Dated: 2"? November, 2018

Observation/Recommendation

Award of Contract for Installation of Platforms

The Committee note that PMT JV entered into a settlement agreement with M/s
Swiber for relocating the PK and SWP platforms on a nomination basis in March 2010
rather than on a tender basis as mandated in the PSC. The actual cost for
transportation and installation far exceeded the estimates. It was astonishing to find that
against the estimated cost, the actual contracted price was more than double. The PMT
२४७ contention that the estimate was merely on early estimate of likely cost was
objected to by the Audit. The Audit pointed out that the estimates for PL project had
been prepared in August 2008 and the contract was awarded merely a month later in
September 2008 to M/s Swiber for SWP and PK platforms based on quotes received in
the tender for SWP and PK platform. Audit, therefore, concluded that the cost incurred
for the transportation and installation under PL project was comparatively very high vis-
a-vis the original estimates. The PMT JV in their explanation submitted that they
engaged Swiber to undertake the modifications to minimize the time for award of
contract as the material was under care of Swiber and there was concern that there
might be a dispute under the existing contract with Swiber regarding incomplete scope
and also there was no desire to incur extensive storage costs from Swiber.

The Committee are not satisfied with the MoPNG's observation that audit
exception has been notified to the contractor. The Committee while deprecating the

49


lackadaisical attitude of the MoPNG recommend that the Ministry should look into the
issue of award of contract to M/s Swiber on settlement basis rather than on tender basis
as mandated in the PSC and also see if it has adversely affected the Gol's share.

(SI. no. 21 Part - Il of 470 report of Public
Accounts Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by MoPNG

DGH has been advised to constitute an internal committee comprising of the
representatives with technical and financial background to look into the entire process
for award of contract on nomination basis. If on the basis of this scrutiny, it is found that
loss has been accrued to the Government, the same may be quantified and cost
regarding award on nomination basis may be disallowed.

Vetting Comments of Audit
Scrutiny by the internal committee needs to be expedited so that the action can
be taken well before the expiry of the PSC term in 2019.
The finding of internal committee and action taken thereon may be submitted to
PAC.

Reply on Vetting Comments of Audit by MoPNG

The internal committee has reviewed the following three issues and after
examining, proposed no action on account of the following reasons:
Issue No. 1: Award of Contract on nomination basis
The successful bidder was awarded the contract after following the due procurement
process and there was adequate completion in the procurement process to ensure rate
reasonability. The contract for installation of PL platform was an extension of the
original contract awarded after due process. ‘Repeat order’ and ‘change order’ are
common practices in E&P industry. The Committee considering the time, cost and risk
factors, found it prudent on the part of contractor to extend the existing Contract after
negotiating a lump sum rate, considering the prevailing critical circumstances that might
lead to more uncertainties with regard to costs and time as well.
Issue No. 2: The cost incurred for the transportation and installation under PL project
vis-a-vis the original estimates
The Committee after considering the cost of alterative new contract concluded that had
the contract been awarded on a variation day rate basis, the cost of installation have
been much higher.
Issue No. 3: Loss to GOI
The Committee noted that the profit computation for sharing with Gol under PSC
provisions is akin to computation of taxable profit under the Indian Income Tax Act

50


(Section 42) and Article 15.2.2 of PSC equate PSC with Income Tax Act. The
Committee’s view on the instant issue is in line with the Income tax regime in India that
does not penalize the Contractor in these circumstances. PSC does not contain
provisions whereby costs can be disallowed under the instant circumstances. The
Committee does not find any basis under PSC for proposing cost disallowance.

As per vetting comments of Audit, the findings of internal committee of DGH are
- attached at Annexure-21A for perusal of PAC.

(Amar Nath)
Joint Secretary (E)
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
O.M. No. 0-24012/1/2014-EO (Pt.1) Dated: 187" October, 2017

Observation/Recommendation No. 24

Delay in Non-Fixation of Transportation Losses of Condensate

The Committee note that although the PSC for Mid and South Tapti was silent on
the disposal of condensate, i.e. whether it is gas or crude oil, PMT JV was treating the
condensate as gas till December 2005. Further, the transportation and processing of
PMT gas was undertaken by ONGC through its South Bassein - Hazira offshore trunk
pipeline and onshore Hazira facilities respectively and was governed by a Settlement
Agreement of December 2005 between ONGC and PMT JV. In the Settlement
Agreement, the condensate transportation losses from the Tapti delivery point to
ONGC’s Hazira Plant were to be determined by a Condensate Expert to be jointly
appointed by ONGC and PMT JV. Pending determination of such losses, it was agreed
to treat the Tapti condensate losses provisionally as ‘zero’. The Audit further noticed
that while ONGC was considering internally 6 per cent as transportation and processing
loss from condensate, the PMT JV was considering the loss as ‘zero’ from 2005. The
ONGC's submission that with the appointment and submission of the report by the
Condensate Expert (M/s Worley Parsons Consulting) both parties have agreed to
consider a shrinkage of 3.6 per cent. Further, the proposed amount payable to ONGC at
US$7.943 million has to be adjusted against pending PMT JV invoices of US$13.08
million up to 30.09.2015. In view of the differential consideration of condensate losses
ranging from ‘zero' (PMT JV) to 6 percent (ONGC) and subsequent calculation of
shrinkage as 3.6 percent (Condensate Expert) clearly shows that the validity of
observation made by the Audit. The Committee are of the view that the issue of fixation
of transportation losses of condensate should not have been kept pending for so long
and therefore desire that the Ministry may take appropriate steps to look into the non-
serious attitude of the PMT JV for not appointing the Expert although the Settlement
Agreement was reached in 2005. The Committee further desires that all issues related

51


to approvals and final settlement of the matter may be pursued expeditiously and the
Committee apprised accordingly.

(SI. no. 24 Part - Il of 47" report of Public

Accounts Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by MoPNG
The records pertaining to delay in fixation of transportation losses of condensate

have been sought from ONGC and DGH. Further action would be taken by Ministry on
the basis of scrutiny of these records.

Vetting comments of Audit

“As the PSC term is expiring in December 2019, the issue needs to be resolved
expeditiously.”

Reply on Vetting Comments of Audit by MoPNG

ONGC has informed that the matter has been resolved amicably and final
settlement has been arrived with JV-PMT and payments were made by ONGC (which
were withheld earlier) to JV-PMT in July 2016 after adjustment of its own dues.

It has also been informed that delays occurred due to specialized nature of the
job, finalization of scope of work and selection of suitable expert took time. Moreover,
being joint responsibility of all three concerned parties (ONGC, RIL and BGEPIL) as a
whole to agree and appoint such an expert, it took more time. Further, even after
submission of report by condensate expert, more time lapsed on account of
discussions/deliberations to arrive at a mutually acceptable decision and further
approvals by respective managements of all three partner companies.

(Amar Nath)
Joint Secretary (E)
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
O.M. No. 0-24012/1/2014-EO (Pt.1) Dated: 18" October, 2017

Observation/Recommendation
Matters Related to Arbitration
The Committee find that the two JV partners namely RIL and BGEPIL served
Arbitration notices to Gol and have raised claims pertaining to i) Cost Recovery
provisions under Panna-Mukta and Tapti PSC, ii) Calculation of IM, iii) Amount of

52


royalty payable under PMT PSC, iv) Amount of cess payable by Contractor to Gol, v)
Amount of service tax payable under PSC, and vi) Meaning and effect of Accounting
and Audit provisions. It has been further noted that on the directions of the Ministry,
ONGC has not participated in the Arbitration and ONGC has agreed that they shall
abide by the arbitral award. The Committee further note that majority of the problems in
the PSCs over the NELP regime are related to cost recovery. While appreciating the
Government's move for doing away with micro-management or day-to-day operations
and moving from profit sharing towards the revenue sharing model, the Committee hope
that this will help the prospective PSCs for lesser disputes and thereby early settlement
of issues between the parties. The Committee desire that an effective mechanism
should be developed for speedy resolution of cases so that the aggrieved parties need
not spend long years for redressal of their grievances.
(SI. no. 25 Part - Il of 47" report of Public
Accounts Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by MoPNG
The future contracting model would be on Revenue Sharing basis which will not
involve cost recovery and many of the disputes related to the present PSC regime will
not occur in it as cost recovery has been a major contention between the contractors
and the Government. The future models would also not involve micro management by
the Government and the contractors will be given more freedom to take decisions.

In order to make high risk E & P Industry attractive and investor friendly,
arbitration as dispute resolution mechanism, has been provided in all contracts in line
with the global practice. With the recent amendment of Indian Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, the arbitration process in future is expected to redress the disputes
more speedily.

Further, PSC also provides for dispute resolution mechanism through sole
experts and conciliation. The resolution of disputes through sole experts and conciliation
are speedy mechanism and would be considered as and when such issue arises.

Vetting Comments of Audit
As no further action is expected in current PSC, the issue need not be pursued.
Compliance in future agreements would be seen in audit.

Reply on Vetting Comments of Audit by MoPNG
No comments.

(Amar Nath)
Joint Secretary (E)

Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
O.M. No. O-24012/1/2014-EO (Pt.1) Dated: 187 October, 2017

53


Observation/Recommendation

Delay in Submission of WP & 8:

Audit observed that there were delays in submission of annual WP&B in each of
the years from 2008-09 to 2011-12 on the part of OC ranging from 91-111 days and on
the part of MC ranging from 70-239 days which meant that the WP&B for a financial
year was actually approved after the beginning of the financial year and, shockingly, the
WP&B for 2011-12 was submitted to the MC in April 2011 and approved by MC in
December 2011. The Committee note from the reply of the Operator that “annual
WP&B merely reflect phasing of the expenditure on year to year basis ...what was more
critical was the project sanction which existed by means of MC approved FDPs..” and,
further, from the reply of the MoPNG that the "PSC provides that the Contractor should
submit the annual work programme and budget to the MC by 31st December of the
previous year. Though there is no time limit for grant of approval by the MC, presumably
the MC has three months (90) days for approval of the annual work programme &
Budget before the year commences. With this background, the time taken by MC for
approval of the budget is not found to be materially different and the PSC timelines were
generally adhered to”. The Committee are shocked to note that a Ministry of
Government of India that is well versed with the budgeting process and its benefits is
undermining its importance. The Committee are of the view that it is obvious, the
budgets are to be approved before the onset of the financial year, hence, there are no
timelines prescribed in the PSC. The Committee also do not approve the Operator's
contention that budgets merely reflect phasing of expenditure on year to year basis and
observe that besides estimating, as realistically as possible, the cost to be incurred in
the ensuing year, they provide a means to monitor how closely the actual progress
toward achieving the objectives is being made relative to the proposed budget. The
Committee while appreciating that the WP&B for 2015-16 was approved by MC before
31.3.2015 desire that the same practice be followed every year as the WP&B authorizes
a particular activity within the approved budget.

(SI. no. 26 Part - Il of 47% report of Public Accounts
Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by MoPNG
The recommendation of the Committee regarding timely approval of Work

Programme and Budget is accepted and all the endeavours would be made to get the
same approved within the stipulated timelines. Sometimes there are delays on part of
the contractors to submit the WP & B. However, DGH and Ministry are making efforts to
get these approved timely so that E & P activities may move ahead. For the current year
also the timely approval of WP & B was a priority for the ministry / DGH and the same

was done in a time bound manner.
54


Vetting Comments of Audit

To assess the time taken in submission of Work Programme & Budget (WP & B)
by Operating Committee (OC) to Management Committee (MC) and its approval by MC,
details relating to WP&B as furnished (February 2017) by Operator-Cairn India Limited
and ONGC, for the yeas 2013-14 to 2016-17 were reviewed. It has been observed that
there was improvement in time taken in submission of WP&B by OC to MC as
compared to the submissions during 2008-12 and consequently, the MC had also
approved the WP&B for 2013-14 on 04 April 2013, for 2014-150n 20 May 2014, for
2015-16 on 16 March 2015 and 2016-17 on 12 March 2016. However, the signing of
minutes of MC meetings in which the WP& B for 2013-14 to 2016-17 were approved
took time ranging from 47 to 94 days. This needs to be reduced so as to avoid adverse
impact/delays on execution of approved agreed activities pending receipt of signed
minutes of respective MC meetings. Further, remarks against point No 13: Delay in
finalizing optimization concept in succeeding paragraphs may also be pursued.

Reply on Vetting Comments of Audit by MoPNG

As observed by C&AG, there has been overall improvement in the process of
approval of work programme and budgets by the MC as compared to the previous
years. It may be seen from the WP&B for the Financial years 2015 — 16 and 2016 - 17
that the WP & B were approved before commencement of the relevant FY, as desired
by PAC.

Presently, DGH is conducting Quarterly review meetings in respect of each
block/ field for review of the approved agenda. Thus, MCRs are approved by MC before
onset of the FY. Nevertheless Government representatives on MCs and DGH are being
advised to keep in mind the Audit's/PAC concerns and expedite signing of MoMs.

(Amar Nath)
Joint Secretary (E)
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
O.M. No. 0-24012/1/2014-EO (Pt.1) Dated: 18" October, 2017

Observation/Recommendation

Adjustment of Shipping Cost beyond Delivery point:

As per PSC, the Contractor would be responsible for all costs prior to the delivery
point (DP) and the Gol or its nominee would be responsible for all costs beyond the
delivery point and as an interim arrangement, the Gol had allowed delivery point at

55


Kandla Port for transporting crude to HPCL & MRPL. The Committee note that as HPCL
did not take any crude against its allocation and the Operator transported crude from
October, 2009 to June 2010 to MRPL and RIL through the delivery point at Kandla and
adjusted the expenditure (for oil supply beyond the DP towards shipping of crude to
MRPL & RIL) against the revenue which resulted in short payment of Profit Petroleum to
Gol. As per the Operator, since HPCL did not eventually buy crude ०1 and MRPL
refused to lift the crude oil from Kandla Port, sales to RIL and MRPL were made through
marine vessels and the costs so incurred were charged from the revenue as per Artcle
19.3 of PSC which provides that in case of Arm's length sales, the delivery point shall
be the outer flange of the export terminal or the customer's facility in India or as the
case may be. The Committee, however, note from the reply of the Ministry that the
Contractor was advised by DGH in August 2012 disallowing cost recovery followed by a
reminder in January 2014. The Ministry has again in March - April 2016 reiterated that
“the Contractor has been advised disallowance of cost and differential profit petroleum
will be collected". The Committee are not able to comprehend as to why after lapse of
around 4 years Ministry has not been able to collect the differential profit petroleum
when the C&AG had quantified the costs in 2012 itself. The Committee desire that the
differential profit petroleum may be collected at the earliest and the Committee apprised
thereof.
(SI. no. 27 Part - Il of 47" report of
Public Accounts Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by MoPNG
The amount of differential profit petroleum has been remitted by the Contractor.

Vetting Comments of Audit
Information/documents furnished (February 2017) by the Operator, Cairn India
Limited and ONGC indicated that differential profit petroleum of USD 1912817
(Operator: USD 1338972 on 22 July 2016 and ONGC: USD 573845 on 13 July 2016)
has been remitted to the Government_towards for shipping cost which was not allowed
by GOI for cost recovery.

Taking note of the above, no further action is proposed.

Reply on Vetting Comments of Audit by MoPNG
No comments.

(Amar Nath)
Joint Secretary (E)

Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
O.M. No. 0-24012/1/2014-EO (Pt.1) Dated: 187 October, 2017

56


Observation/Recommendation

Inability of Government Nominee to lift crude:

According to Audit, as per Article 18.2 of PSC, the Gol or its nominee is under
obligation to purchase the entire crude from the contract area and, accordingly, Gol
designated MRPL as its nominee for RJ crude as ONGC and HPCL both had confirmed
their ability to process the entire crude indicating that a pipeline would be laid from
Barmer to Mundra port for taking the crude to their existing refineries viz. MRPL and
HPCL. However, MRPL informed Gol that it could not take full allocation because of
peculiar characteristics of RJ crude which resulted in nomination of multiple refineries
by Gol for purchasing the crude; shifting of DP from Barmer to Salaya to Bhogat; and
delaying of commencement of production from Q4 2007 to H2 2009. Gol approved in
April 2008 shifting of delivery point from Barmer to Salaya, a location suitable for
nominated refineries, but in December 2008, when the work had already started, the
Operator requested for shifting it to Bhogat in view of ecological considerations and the
pipeline from Barmer to Salaya was completed after a delay of 10 months in May 2010
and from Salaya to Bhogat scheduled to be completed in Q22010 was completed in
June 2014. The Committee note that the delays resulted in rescheduling of drilling of
wells and sale of crude through tankers which caused the controlled/ moderated
production during the delayed period. Further, the Gol nominated refineries could not lift
their allocated crude as MRPL discontinued its off-take till the installation of its Coker
unit, HPCL did not lift any crude and IOCL had confirmed uplifting subject to commercial
viability. Two spur lines built to facilitate delivery of crude to I[OCL also remained
underutilized as [OCL did not lift its full allocation. The Committee note that the inability
of the refineries nominated by the Gol to lift RJ crude led to various delays and had
huge cost implications. The Committee feel that the Ministry should have been extra
cautious while nominating other refineries once MRPL failed to lift the allocated crude
despite confirmation by the ONGC at the beginning. The Committee are also shocked to
note that the Ministry only followed the Operator and its advice and did not take
adequate measures before sanctioning the pipeline from Barmer to Salaya as
ecological clearances should have been insisted upon by the Ministry itself before
sanctioning the first pipeline. Also, since IOCL had only agreed to lift crude subject to
commercial viability, the Ministry should have undertaken a cost-benefit analysis before
approving the two spur lines for IOCL. The Committee while observing that the
lackadaisical approach of the Ministry and unprofessional attitude of the PSUs like
ONGC , HPCL etc. led to delays and cost overruns which adversely affected the Gol
share of Profit Petroleum and expect the Ministry to be pro-active and more professional
in its approach in future.

(SI. no. 28 Part - Il of 47" report of Public
Accounts Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

57


Action Taken by MoPNG

Crude oil from the Rajasthan Block RJ-ON-90/1 is challenging not only in terms
of transportation, but also processing. Its distillate yield percentage is low when
compared to other indigenous crudes. Complex refinery configuration is required for
maximizing the distillate yield. GO] nominated refineries could not lift the crude oil
earlier mainly on account of technical limitation of their refineries. MRPL, after initial
inability to lift the crude oil, has started to off-take crude during the FY 2015-16. 1001,
which has been lifting the crude oil during earlier years is further in the process of
upgrading its infrastructure like heated crude oil pipeline from Viramgam to Koyali. The
government nominated PSU refineries are taking requisite steps for meeting logistics
and processing challenges for such complexity, which was not faced earlier in the
country. Further follow up would be taken up with the PSU refineries on increasing their
off-take from the Block.

Vetting Comments of Audit

Information submitted (February 2017) by the Operator-Cairn India Limited and
ONGC indicated that during 2013-14 to 2016-17 (till January 2017) the off take by
private refineries (RIL and Essar) registered a declining trend from 83 % to 70 % of the
total off take of crude from the RJ block, yet, the actual off take by the PSU refineries
(1001. 809 MRPL) was still below actual allocation by the Government. The PSU
refineries are still required to increase their off take at least to the extent of allocated
quantity.

PAC may be apprised of the action taken by the Government in this regard.

Reply on Vetting Comments of Audit by MoPNG
The Government Nominees have started off-taking much higher amount of crude
oil, as observed by C&AG as well. However, exact amount of crude off-take may vary
on year to year basis due to operational exigencies. Further, PSU Refiners are being
advised to adhere to increase their off take at least to the extent of allocated quantity.

(Amar Nath)
Joint Secretary (E)
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
O.M. No. O-24012/1/2014-EO (Pt.1) Dated: 18" October, 2017

Observation/Recommendation

Pricing of RJ crude:
As per PSC, the calculation, the basis of calculation and the price of crude oil

determined would be subject to agreement before it was finally determined and pending
final determination, the price determined by the Contractor would be used. Since the

58


price formula for working out the price is yet to be agreed by the MoPNG, the term
sheets executed by the Operator with the private operator refineries were based on
agreed price with no provision of revision from retrospective effect. MoPNG in June
2010 while informing the Operator that the position taken by private refineries with
regard to revision of price was not acceptable and advised that sales made to these
refineries be on provisional prices until final decision was arrived at by the Gol. The
Committee note the contention of the Operator that basic pricing formula agreed upon
with the IOCL is being used with the private refiners also and that formula was finalized
with IOCL at arm's length. MoPNG in their reply have stated that PSC provides
Government intervention when price is not at arms' length. The Committee find that
Ministry has taken contradictory stands, firstly, it informed the Operator that the price
charged was to be provisional and that the sales to the domestic private refineries were
not to be construed as arms' length saleshowever, in their presentation to the
Committee it stated that Government intervention was not required. The Committee
take serious view of the misleading responses given by the Ministry and desire that
since the pricing of crude requires interpretation of the PSC, opinion of Ministry of Law
may be sought and the Committee apprised thereof.

(SI. no. 29 Part - Il of 47" report of Public Accounts

Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by MoPNG
As Recommended by PAC, views of MOLJ have been sought on, “Whether the

intervention of Government on pricing of crude oil produced from the Block was required
as per the PSC in absence of any issue of affiliated transaction?” Views of MOLJ are
awaited.

Vetting Comments of Audit
As brought out in the audit observation, the price of RJ crude is still (February

2017) provisional as stated by ONGC and the Operator in their reply dated 09 and 10
February 2017 respectively. Further, as indicated in the reply of Ministry, the matter has
been referred to MOLJ (the Ministry of law and Justice).

In view of above, it is proposed that the Government may intimate the decision
regarding RJ price to Audit as and when taken.

The views of MOLJ on, “Whether the intervention of Government on pricing of
crude oil produced from the Block was required as per the PSC in absence of any issue
of affiliated transaction?” may be submitted to PAC.

Reply on Vetting Comments of Audit by MoPNG

59


(i) As per vetting comments of Audit, the decision of the Government
regarding RJ price would be intimated to the Audit as and when taken.

(ii) | As per recommendation of PAC, MoPNG has referred the matter to MoLJ
on 22.09.2016 for their comments. Subsequently, the matter was
discussed with MoLJ from time to time to address their queries. They
have also been requested for an early advice in the matter. PAC would be
apprised as soon as the views of MoLJ are received by this Ministry.

Further Reply on Vetting Comments of Audit by MoPNG
Ministry of Law & Justice (MoLJ) has given their advice on the provisions of Article 19 of

PSC relating to “Valuation of Petroleum” as under:

“4, On perusal of the provisions of Article 19 of the PSC, it may be seen that Articles
19.3, 19.4 and 19.8 provide basis of valuation of crude oil in case sale is made at Arms-
length, to the Government or the Government Company and sales made other than to
the Government or the Government Company or Arms-length sales respectively. They
do not provide about the price determination.

2. Article 19.6 and Article 19.7 are the Articles that provide by whom the relevant
price shall be determined and finalized. Therefore, it may be mentioned that in any type
of sale as per Article 19.6, price determined by the contractor shall be subject to
agreement by the Government or the Government Company before it is finally
determined. In case of default of agreement between the parties within 30 days, or such
longer period as may be mutually agreed between the parties, from the date of
commencement of commercial production or the end of each delivery period thereafter,
then price shall be finally determined under Article 19.7 by sole expert appointed under
Article 33 and his decision shall be final and binding on the parties. Pending final
determination, the price determined by the contractor for crude oil shall be used, unless
the Government or the Government Company has raised an objection to such price, in
which case the last established price, if any shall be used.

3. In view of above, it may be concluded that the price shall be finally determined
only with the agreement of Government or Government Company, and in case of
default of agreement between parties, the price shall finally be determined by the sole
expert. However, till the price is finally determined by the sole expert, the price
determined by the contractor for the crude oil shall be used, if the same is not objected
by the Government or Government Company and in case of objection, last established
price, if any, shall be used, which would be valid only of that period for which it is
determined (Article 19.2).”

As advised above by MoLJ, the price is to be determined with the agreement of

Government or Government Company under Article 19.6 of PSC, and in case of default
60


of agreement between parties, the price is to be determined by a sole expert under
Article 19.7 of PSC. In thepresent case, the Contractor has entered into agreement with
GovernmentCompanyfor price determination of crude oil,and usedthe same basic
pricing formulafor selling the crude oil to private operator refineries. In view of the
agreement between the Contractor and Government Company, intervention of
Government is not envisaged at this stage.

(Amar Nath)
Joint Secretary (E)
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
O.M. No. 0-24012/1/2014-EO (Pt.1) Dated: 9'"May, 2018

QObservation/Recommendation

Award of contracts beyond PSC provisions:

The Committee note that Audit, while reviewing 41 contracts, in respect of which
payment was made during the years 2006-07 and 2007-08, found that 3 contracts were
awarded on nomination or on single financial bid basis, 1 was awarded without
assessing reasonability of rates and in 2 cases, extensions beyond contractual
provisions were allowed without availing economies of scale. The Operator in its reply
stated that the tendering process is resorted to by the Operator, however, approval for
award is endorsed by the OC and during this period initial phase of field development
was in progress with efforts to commence early production and the OC endorsed
contracts in the best interest of the Contractor and also, in some cases only one bidder
was technically qualified and some contracts were extended in the operational interest.
MoPNG stated that OC consisting of members from ONGC and Cairn Energy monitors
the award of procurement contracts and the interests of the Government are well
protected by ONGC as Government nominee and licensee in the consortium. Audit,
however, pointed out that in most of the procurement cases, ONGC approval for award
proposal to the OC came much after placement of Letter of Awards by the Operator.
The Committee while noting the presence of ONGC as Government nominee in OC find
that ONGC is only ratifying contracts and not involved actively while awarding the
contracts. The Committee, therefore, desire that, henceforth, ONGC be more resolute in

61


its role as the protector of Government's interest and any deviation from the provisions
of the PSC may be brought into the notice of MoPNG invariably.

(SI. no. 30 Part - Il of 47" report of Public
Accounts Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by MoPNG

ONGC was asked to provide its comments on the observations of PAC by DGH.
ONGC vide its letter date 24.08.2016, has stated that they are carrying out due
diligence, both on technical and commercial issues of various projects prior to
endorsement of Operating Committee Resolutions (OCRs) of various contracts and
making all efforts to protect the commercial interest of ONGC and 501.

Considering the recommendations of the Committee, DGH has been asked to
take following actions:

(i) DGH has been advised to look into the contracts and recommend whether cost
recovery is to be considered for these contracts.

(ii) ONGC has been directed to be more proactive in Joint Venture (JV)
procurements and ensure that all the procedures prescribed in the PSC are being
followed.

Vetting Comments of Audit

Information furnished (February 2017) by ONGC indicated that DGH sought the
details of these contracts in reference vide letter dated 12 August 2016 which was
replied by ONGC vide letter dated 24 August 2016. Subsequently, MoPNG also
intermittently sought (02/06/26 September 2016) (03 days) the clarification/details on
the subject from ONGC which were replied by ONGC. Further, vide letter dated 16
January 2017, MoPNG asked ONGC to submit the details to DGH, the reply to which
was under finalization in ONGC.

ONGC further stated (February 2017) that ONGC is carrying out due diligence
both on technical and commercial issues of various projects prior to endorsements of
OCRs of various contracts and make all efforts to protect the commercial interests of
ONGC and Gol. The Operator is advised time and again to follow laid down JV
procurement procedures as prescribed in the PSC.

It is evident from above that MoPNG/DGH and ONGC were now seized of the
issues brought out by audit. Therefore, it is proposed that the Government may intimate
the impact of these actions on procurement process for RJ block.

62


The outcome of advices/directions given to DGH and ONGC as stated in ATN
may be submitted to PAC for their perusal.

Reply on Vetting Comments of Audit by MoPNG

The findings of internal committee of DGH are attached at Annexure-30A for
perusal of PAC. As per findings of the internal committee of DGH,
comments/replies/ATN on certain issues have been asked for from operator through
DGH and ONGC. ATN in the matter would be submitted to PAC as soon as
comments/replies/ATN are received from DGH and ONGC.

Further Reply/Update by MoPNG

Final report of internal committee of DGH has been received and is attached at
Annexure-30B for kind perusal of PAC. Findings of the internal committee of DGH are
summarized below:

1. Award of contract_on nomination basis_or_on single financial bid basis-
Contract to M/s J.P. Kenny

i) Pre-Feed Contract-The Committee has recommended not to disallow the
cost as the contract was awarded after competitive bidding.

ii) Supply of Project Personnel (M/s JP Kenny)-In absence of information
from ONGC regarding unreasonable expenditure, the Committee has
recommended to disallow entire cost of USD 10 million.

2. Procurement of High capacity pump packages

The OCR was not signed by ONGC but ONGC has confirmed the payment of
cash call by them. Therefore, the Committee is of the view that the operator's
stand that OCR is deemed approved, is valid.

3. Contracts extended beyond contractual__provisions, without availing
economics of scale

a) Contract to M/s John Energy-In absence of providing OC approval
by Contractor, the Committee has recommended to disallow an
amount of USD 4.92 million towards hiring of workover/ services rigs.

b) Contract to M/s Baker Hughes- In absence of providing OC approval
by Contractor, the Committee has recommended to disallow the costs
for excess amount of USD 7.79 million towards hiring of work over/
services rigs

63


In view of the recommendations of Internal Committee of DGH, the following
actions have been taken:
i) DGH has been advised to take further action of cost disallowance in the
following cases:
a) Supply of Project Personnel (M/s JP Kenny)- To disallow entire cost
of USD 10 million.
b) Contract to M/s John Energy-To disallow an amount of USD 4.92
million towards hiring of workover/ services rigs.
c) Contract to M/s Baker Hughes- To disallow the costs for excess
amount of USD 7.79 million towards hiring of work over/ services rigs

ii) ONGC has been advised to be vigilant in Joint Venture (JV) procurements
and ensure that all the procedures prescribed in the PSC are complied
with.

(Amar Nath)
Joint Secretary (E)

Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
O.M. No. O-24012/1/2014-EO (Pt.1) Dated: 277 November, 2018

64


CHAPTER Ill

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED
FROM GOVERNMENT

- NIL -

65


CHAPTER IV

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION

Observation/Recommendation
Roles and functions of DGH:

The Committee note that the roles and functions of DGH encompass two sets of
functions with potential conflict of interest - an upstream regulatory function and a
function of rendering technical advice to the Gol. Audit had, therefore, observed that
technical advisory and related functions should be discharged by a body completely
subordinate in all respects to MoPNG and functions of regulatory nature should be
discharged by an autonomous body, with an arm's length relationship with Gol. The
Committee note that Committee on Open and Competitive Mechanism for Allocation,
Pricing and Utilization of Natural Resources (Ashok Chawla Committee) in its Report on
PSCs had also observed that transparency in the management of contracts and
associated considerable financial implications should be enhanced by increasing the
independence of the regulatory mechanism, clarifying the separation of the policy
maker, regulator and the operator and bringing the decision making process into the
open. The Committee take note of the reply of the MoPNG that regulatory functions are
demarcated & laid down by way of contract terms, Act and Rules; DGH is ensuring
compliance of regulations by Contractors and role of technical advisory is discharged by
DGH under the direct control of MoPNG and a separate study by Boston Consulting
Group (BCG) was done by MoPNG before taking future course of action. The
Committee observe that long delays in operational decision making, budget approvals,
huge administrative burden of conducting cost audits, disputes arising between the
government and operating companies on matters of cost recovery, information
asymmetry and the potentially misaligned incentives are affecting the management of
the PSCs by the Government. The Committee are of the opinion that the first step
towards better management and effective implementation of the provisions of the PSCs
would be to strengthen DGH and instead of filling places with deputationists for 3-5
years, a separate cadre of technical experts should be constituted for the technical and
advisory functions of DGH. Further, the Ministry will have to consider separating
regulatory functions as technical experts cannot be strained to double up as regulators
and also policy makers cannot possibly be effective regulators. The Committee are of
the opinion that the mandate of extant Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board
(PNGRB) "to regulate the refining, processing, storage, transportation, distribution,
marketing and sale of petroleum, petroleum products and natural gas excluding
production of crude oil and natural gas so as and to ensure uninterrupted and adequate

66


supply of petroleum, petroleum products and natural gas in all parts of the country" may
be extended/ strengthened to include the exploration, development and production of
crude oil and natural gas for regulating the PSCs . The Committee opine that since a
large number of PSCs have already been signed and RSCs will be signed in future, the
Ministry should take the decision in this regard at the earliest.

(SI. no. 3 Part - Il of 47" report of Public Accounts

Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha

Action Taken by MoPNG
DGH was set up by a Resolution dated 8" April, 1993 by the Government of

India, in the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, consequent upon approval of Cabinet.
As per the Resolution the objective of DGH is to promote sound management of Indian
petroleum and natural gas resources, having a balance regard for environment,
technological and economic aspects of petroleum activity. DGH provides support to the
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas on technical and regulatory aspects of E & P
activity.

To implement these objectives of DGH, technical experts from various disciplines
of E & P Industry, including from National Oil Companies (NOCs) and Public Sector
Units (PSUs) have joined DGH. Financial powers have been delegated to DGH and
other measures are also being taken to strengthen the DGH so that they help in
promoting E&P activities in the country. DGH has also taken several initiatives in the
recent past such as creation of National Data Repository, coordinating the survey of un-
appraised areas in various sedimentary basins, nodal agency for Discovered Small
Field Rounds etc. DGH is also taking steps to make Hydrocarbon Exploration Licensing
Policy (HELP) operational.

The staffing pattern of DGH gives it flexibility in sourcing different skill sets from
various PSUs. It also gives DGH flexibility in terms of period of deputation in
consultation with PSUs. Creating a separate cadre of technical experts may not be
desirable for a small organization such as DGH as it may not offer career advancement
opportunities in long term.

The establishment of upstream regulator has been deliberated in the past also
and it was felt that normally a regulator in any field is required when level playing field to
all the parties (private, foreign and public) needs to be provided. In the upstream sector,
policies such as NELP, CBM and newly formulated HELP provide a level playing field to
the companies. Further, there is no inter se competition between different operators
once the blocks have been allotted following competitive bidding, and each operator
focuses on his field for production. Therefore, the Ministry is of the view that a separate
independent upstream regulator is not required at this stage.

67


Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board (PNGRB) was constituted under
The Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board Act, 2006 (NO. 19 OF 2006) notified
via Gazette Notification dated 31st March, 2006. It regulates the refining, processing,
storage transportation, distribution, marketing and sale of petroleum, petroleum
products and natural gas excluding production of crude oil and natural gas so as to
protect the interests of consumers and entitles engaged in specified activities relating to
petroleum, petroleum products and natural gas and to ensure uninterrupted and
adequate supply of petroleum, petroleum products and natural gas in all parts of the
country and to promote competitive markets. The current form of PNGRB Act, 2006
exclude the Upstream sector and for bringing the Exploration & Production activity
under the ambit of PNGRB, there will be a need to make significant amendments in the
PNGRB Act.

From the experience on functioning of PNGRB, it is noted that PNGRB regulatory
framework for midstream and downstream sector is under evolution at present and
need more focused approach to regulate effectively in long run to see the results as
envisaged in its creation.

Vetting Comments of Audit
The fact, however, remains that the Ministry has not given an action plan for

separation of regulatory and technical functions, as recommended by the PAC.
Audit has no further comments to offer.

Reply on Vetting Comments of Audit by MoPNG
No further comments.

(Amar Nath)
Joint Secretary (E)

Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
O.M. No. 0-24012/1/2014-EO (Pt.1) Dated: 187" October, 2017

Observation/Recommendation

Award of Contracts on the basis of a single financial bid:

Audit found that the payments during 2006-07 and 2007-08 revealed instances of
huge procurement contracts where it could not derive assurance as to the
reasonableness of the costs incurred, primarily due to lack of adequate competition i.e.
award on single financial bids; major revisions in scope/ quantities/ specifications; post
price bid opening; substantial variation orders- with consequential adverse implications
for cost recovery and Gols financial take. The Committee note the observation of the

68


Audit that since any commercially prudent private acquisition would have also attempted
to generate competition and thereby obtained the most competitive price which was not
perceptible in the aforementioned process, MoPNG may carefully review in depth the
award of 10 specific contracts (of which 8 were awarded to Aker Group companies) on
the basis of single financial bid. The Ministry in their reply, however, instead of taking up
any review, have stated that the Operating Committee monitored the contract award as
per Appendix F of PSC and C&AG did not quantify the impact and also did not find any
affiliated transaction or fraud to invalidate the integrity of procurement. The Committee
while taking a serious view of the MoPNG's reply that in absence of any quantification,
action cannot be taken opine that MoPNG has been vested with the resources of the
country in fiduciary capacity and therefore has the inherent responsibility to ensure that
they are exploited in the interests of the country and accordingly, keeping a check on
the outflow of resources in the form of Cost Petroleum is an inseparable part of that
responsibility. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should develop robust
monitoring mechanism within the existing PSC framework to ensure that, henceforth, a
fully transparent and cost-effective process is adopted by the Operator which gives
assurance to the Government that costs have indeed been competitive.

(SI. no. 7 Part - tl of 47% report of Public Accounts

Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by MoPNG

Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas agrees with the above recommendation of
PAC that contractors have to follow a transparent bidding process. Normally, the
contractors’ interest is also in minimizing the costs so that revenue from the blocks are
maximized. However, considering the exceptions brought out by the audit in these
contracts, DGH has been directed vide letter dated 44" September, 2016 to do the
following:

(i) The work programme and budget to be approved by the Management Committees
(MC) of the Blocks / Fields to be scrutinized by DGH in-depth, for having robust initial
estimates.

(ii) The terms of reference of the MC appointed auditors and the Government auditors
for conducting audit and bringing out audit exceptions may be amended and enhanced
to include a certificate from them that they have satisfied themselves regarding
procurements having been made competitively and as per the PSC provisions.

Any deviations in the procurement procedures brought out by the auditors would
be considered by the Government and necessary adjustments would be made in the
books of accounts including disallowing costs, if the explanations given by the
contractors are not satisfactory.

69


Vetting Comments of Audit
The fact, however, remains that for development of a robust monitoring
mechanism, as recommended by the PAC, apart from the fact that the Ministry has
devolved the entire responsibility of ensuring the competitiveness of the cost on Audit
(the MC appointed auditors and the Government auditor), the Ministry has not
suggested any additional mechanism for monitoring the cost effectiveness at their
(Ministry's) level.

Reply on Vetting Comments of Audit by MoPNG
Apart from the fact that the non-operating partners at Operating Committee Level
are part of Decision Making Process at the time of procurement, various reports in
prescribed formats as per PSC are required to be submitted by Operator on periodical
basis to DGH/MoPNG. Hence in addition to various Audits, the procurement process is
under constant review.

While agreeing to the Committee's views that a fully transparent and cost-
effective process is adopted by the Operator which gives assurance to the Government
that costs have indeed been competitive, it is submitted that the existing PSC provisions
are sufficient to take care of Audit's/PAC concerns. Nevertheless Government
representatives on MCs and DGH would be advised to keep in mind the Audit's/PAC
concerns and if any deviation from PSC is observed, the same would be reported to
MoPNG for appropriate action as per PSC.

(Amar Nath)
Joint Secretary (E)

Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
O.M. No. 0-24012/1/2014-EO (Pt.1) Dated:18"" October, 2017

Observation/Recommendation

Review of DoC in respect of three discoveries, viz. 029, 030 and 031:

The Committee note that as required under PSC, the Operator submitted in
February 2010 a DoC (Declaration of Commerciality) proposal for D29, D30, D31 and
D34 discoveries for review by the MC and the DGH in June 2010 informed Operator
that the discoveries were marginal and not viable at US$4.2/ mmbtu since the Modular
Dynamic Test carried out by the operator did not provide individual testing rates to
demonstrate sustainable production levels. The DGH, again, in October 2010
communicated to the operator that the DoC could not be reviewed. However, in
November 2011, DoC in respect of D34 discovery was reviewed after the Operator
submitted related additional test data/ information. But, in respect of D29, D30 and 031,
DGH stated that commerciality of discoveries could not be evaluated in the absence of

70


production tests which provide sustainable production levels from the reservoir as no
appraisal wells were drilled in the pools of discovery wells to substantiate the production
rates considered by the Operator. DGH felt that the profile generated without
considering MDT/ (Drill Stem Test) DST data in the wells was not on a sound technical
basis. In May 2012, the Operator again requested MC to complete review of DoC for
229, 30 and D31 and submitted a proposal in October- November 2012 to undertake
DST in only one well out of the three discoveries and DGH while agreeing to the
proposal asked the Operator to submit a plan for surface flow test for other two
discovery wells also. However, the Operator did not carry out the same and later argued
that, as per PSC, a) the DST was not mandatory, b) the Contractor has the right to
determine requirement for DST based on its technical judgment and c) it was not the
only test. Subsequently, DGH, in April 2013, proposed that the area pertaining to these
three discoveries be relinquished as the Operator could not keep a part of the Contract
Area for an indefinitely long period in the garb of an incomplete DoC proposal. In
October 2013, the matter was referred to CCEA (Cabinet Committee on Economic
Affairs) for its information fully explaining the facts and circumstances of the case and
the Contractor was allowed to retain 298 sq km. contract area as the matter was being
considered. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that the issue was
reopened for review in view of the petroleum potential of the discoveries in an energy
starving country for an appropriate decision by competent authority in terms of the PSC
provisions and the interest of energy security. The Committee further note from the
reply of the MoPNG that the CCEA has, in April 2015, given relaxation for conducting
DST by capping such test cost recovery up to US $ 15 m per test and, accordingly, the
operator has now completed DST for D29 and D30 discoveries and has relinquished
D31 discovery and has to submit revised DOC for D29 and D30 by 28th April 2016. The
Committee are of the view that Government took around 5 years in taking a decision on
the issue. The Committee observe that the long delays in clearances and operational
decision making results in huge cost overruns and eventually affects the Government's
share of PP. The Committee are of the view that energy starving country needs regular
supply of the resources which is hindered by such delays. The Committee while noting
that the CCEA has relaxed the provisions by providing that Operator should either
relinquish or carry out DST and pay penalty for delays or develop the discoveries on his
own in ringfenced manner are of the view that a comprehensive policy may be brought
out allowing alternative tests for confirming commerciality of the discoveries to ensure
that the policy does not get redundant with introduction of new technologies.

(SI. no. 8 Part - Il of 47" report of Public Accounts

Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by MoPNG
DST is a conventional testing method available as on today for measuring the

petroleum recovered at the surface. Hence, DST was considered as a basis of
71


accepting the DOC. Government considers technological up gradations in the upstream
sector and policies are brought out/modified after considering the issues in a holistic
manner.

Vetting Comments of Audit
Audit has no further comments to offer.

Reply on Vetting Comments of Audit by MoPNG
No comments.

(Amar Nath)
Joint Secretary (E)

Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
O.M. No. O-24012/1/2014-EO (Pt.1) Dated: 18" October, 2017

Observation/Recommendation

Optimized Field Development Plan (OFDP) for four satellite discoveries:

The Committee note that Contractor in July 2008 submitted a Development Plan
(DP) in respect of 9 Satellite Gas Discoveries (SGD) for approval of MC which was
found non -viable at the gas price of US$4.2 per mmbtu. The Contractor submitted in
December 2009, an Optimized Field Development Plan (OFDP) for four satellite
discoveries. Initially, the OFDP was not techno-economically viable; however it was
made marginally viable by devising different scenarios and changing assumptions e.g.
exclusion of royalty as expenditure, variation in capex etc and was eventually approved
by the DGH. The Committee note that MoPNG had directed DGH to engage a third
party for validation of capex but no third party could be engaged and the MC approved
OFDP without waiting for the decision of MoPNG in this regard. The Committee note
that Audit had recommended that MoPNG may consider fixing norms/ criteria for
working out techno-economic analysis of a FDP. The Ministry in its reply had submitted
that the economic viability was evaluated at different scenarios so as to optimize the
decision making in order to avoid non- development of any discovery and since techno
economic evaluation is guided by the principle of economics and application of mind,
setting separate norms may not be possible. However, the Ministry in their written
replies has now submitted that the team constituted for framing the “Good International
Petroleum Industries Practices” has identified the best practices being followed for all
technical and commercial activities under the PSC and the report has been submitted
for adoption and notification. The Committee while appreciating that the Good
International Petroleum Industries Practices are being identified desire to be apprised of

the practices as soon as they are notified and further desire the Ministry to ensure that
72


decisions are taken by the MC after getting views from all the stakeholders, as in the
instant case, in the absence of validation of capex by third party, the reasonability and
justification of capex and Gol share of PP could not be assured. The Committee also
desire that MoPNG seek explanation of the representative of MoPNG i.e. Chairman of
MC, and the representative of DGH in the MC who did not wait for MoPNG's decision.
(SI. no. 9 Part - Il of 47% report of Public Accounts

Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by MoPNG

4. Good International Petroleum Industries Practices (GIPIP) have been proposed
by the Committee constituted for the purpose and the same has been accepted by the
Government. These guidelines are available on MoP&NG's web site. The GIPIP
guidelines provide a detailed account on various practices being followed in the
upstream sector and would be used along with PSC in the interpretation of PSC
provisions. GIPIP brings out good practices in the area of Exploration, Discovery,
Declaration of Commerciality, Development, Production etc. and would help the
contractors in standardizing and streamlining the operations and would also help them
to know the details of submissions to be made to DGH. However, the contractual
provisions would be paramount in taking decisions on various issues and GIPIP
supplements the decision making in the sector.

2. Vide MCR dated 03.01.2012, OFDP of four satellite discoveries was approved by
MC in respect of the Development Strategy that included reserves, number of wells,
production facilities, delivery point, date of first gas and development area. The Capex
was not part of the MC approval. The cost recovery for development and production
operations will be the actual as per audited expenditure. The actual CAPEX gets
independently validated when the annual accounts are audited and cost recovery is
restricted to actual expenditure irrespective of the estimates projected by the
Contractors as part of OFDP.

3. MoP&NG has asked DGH to seek explanation of Chairman of the Management
Committee and representative of DGH in MC as recommended by the PAC.

Vetting Comments of Audit
As recommended by the PAC, explanation given by the Chairman of the
Management Committee and representative of DGH in MC may be given to the PAC.

Reply on Vetting Comments of Audit by MoPNG
As commented by CAG, explanation of MC Chairman-cum-representative of
DGH was sought and is attached at Annexure-9A for perusal of PAC. The MC was to

73


approve the development plan as per PSC time lines and since no third party could be
appointed, the FDP was approved without Third Party validation based on consensus
decision of DGH.
(Amar Nath)
Joint Secretary (E)
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
O.M. No. O-24012/1/2014-EO (Pt.1) Dated: 187" October, 2017

Observation/Recommendation

Contract for Engineering, Procurement, Installation and Construction of offshore
facilities:

The Committee note that the Operator awarded contact for Engineering,
Procurement, Installation and Construction (EPIC) of offshore facilities for development
of D1-D3 fields to M/s Allseas Marine Contractors S.A. (AMC) in October 2006
consisting of three milestones to be achieved by July 2008. However, AMC was not
able to achieve the milestones and informed the Operator in June 2008 that various
factors attributable to Operator, AMC and sub-contractors were preventing it from
performing its obligations under the contract, rendering it inoperable both in delivery and
contract administration. AMC asked the Operator to pay for the extra expenses to
achieve the earliest possible First Gas date and also the additional expenses already
incurred in the past months due to deviations in the suggested scheme. The Committee
note that the Operator initially refuted the claims made by AMC asserting that the AMC
should acknowledge and accept responsibility for its lack of performance, but,
eventually after discussions with AMC submitted a proposal before the OC requesting it
to grant some concessions demanded by the AMC. The Committee find that the OC
gave concessions which included providing additional resources for expediting the
works without any cost to AMC, substituting the subsea construction vessel by paying
mobilization fee, additional diving spread free of cost, additional amount for delays not
attributable to AMC, relaxation in levy of LD, incentive for achieving first gas by
specified date and assistance and paying for resources for expediting jumper
fabrication. As per Audit, Appendix C of PSC provides that " amounts paid with respect
to non-fulfillment of contractual obligations are not recoverable and not allowable” and ,
therefore, should not be recoverable from the block. As per Operator, / ..the options
before the Operator were not only limited but would have carried dubious legal
credibility in view of the fact that it could insist on imposing liquidated damages knowing
fully well that certain reasons for delay not being on account of AMC such a decision
would have been contested and would have only led to the AMC halting work on the
project and getting into prolonged litigation with the Operator.” MoPNG in its reply has
stated that the post vendor contractual agreements between the Operator and the

74


vendor validly amended the original vendor-contract and the audit report did not point
out any legally tenable ground for cost disallowance such as affiliated transactions to
the undue advantage of Contractor, any incidence of fraud and costs not supported by
payment evidences. Audit further observed that these concessions granted by the
Operator were not in line with EPIC contract including provisions relating to change in
contract price' The Committee after carefully considering the audit opinion and the
replies of both Operator and Ministry are of the view that to ensure transparency in post
vendor contractual agreements, in future, the Ministry should prescribe a threshold
amount for the change orders above which the Operator should invariably approach it
for clearance.
(SI. no. 10 Part - Il of 47" report of Public
Accounts Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha

Action Taken by MoPNG

The PSC prescribes a procurement procedure which needs to be followed by all
the contractors operating under the PSC regime. Any deviation in the procedure would
need to be pointed out by the audits envisaged under the PSC. Once the audit notifies
these exceptions and quantifies the financial effect for such procurements, necessary
adjustments can be made in the books of accounts of the contractors of the block after
considering their response to the audit exceptions.

The audit exceptions brought out by the auditors are considered by the
Government and necessary adjustments are to be made in the books of accounts. It is
agreed that the concern expressed by PAC and recommendation made by PAC are
valid and need to be addressed within the existing PSC framework.

It is therefore imperative that the role of audit as envisaged in the PSC is
strengthened and also scrutiny of budget estimates is also made more rigorous.
Therefore, as mentioned in the reply to the recommendations no. 7 instructions have
been issued to DGH for more rigorous assessment of budget proposals and also to take
a certificate from the auditors that they have satisfied themselves that all the
procurements have been made through competitive process.

Vetting Comments of Audit
PAC has observed that to ensure transparency in post vendor contractual
agreements, in future, the Ministry should prescribe a threshold amount for the change
orders above which the Operator should invariably approach it for clearance. Ministry's
reply, however, does not specifically address PAC’s observation regarding prescribing
of the threshold amount for the change orders.

Reply on Vetting Comments of Audit by MoPNG

75


The PSC prescribes a procurement procedure which needs to be followed by all
the contractors operating under the PSC regime. These matters are reviewed and
monitored by MCs.

While agreeing to the Committee's views regarding transparency in post vendor
contractual agreements, it is submitted that prescribing a threshold amount for the
change orders above which the Operator should invariably approach Ministry for
clearance at this juncture is not being considered. Cases where change order exceeds
25% of cost estimate/original order, then the same may be discussed more rigorously in
MC and get approved from it since MC is the competent forum to deliberate and decide
on such issues.

(Amar Nath)
Joint Secretary (E)
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
O.M. No. 0-24012/1/2014-EO (Pt.1) Dated: 18" October, 2017

Observation/Recommendation
Delay in finalizing optimization concept

The Committee note that an optimization concept for Bhagyam field was
presented to MC in August 2010 to which the final approval of MC was communicated
in December 2010 which resulted in delayed commencement of the activities. The
Operator reasoned that after MC review of the proposal, substantial deliberation took
place on the concept optimization and the minutes were got signed by circulation.
MoPNG in their reply stated that the MC first deliberated on the concept in July 2010
and in October 2010 passed the resolution and it took two more months for all the
representatives to sign the resolution. The Committee also note that due to delay in
execution of the activities, the budget for the year also remained under utilized. The
Committee observe that the MC took unduly long time i.e. four months in approving the
proposal and the lackadaisical approach eventually affected the commencement of
activities. The Committee are of the view that delays invariably lead to cost overruns
which ultimately adversely impacts the Government's share of profit petroleum. The
Committee desire that a time frame may be prescribed for signing of such resolutions of
the MC and the Committee be apprised thereof.

(SI. no. 31 Part - Il of 47" report of Public
Accounts Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by MoPNG
Normally, the management committee resolutions are signed the same day

reflecting the discussions and approvals accorded in the meeting. However, sometimes

76


there is a difference of opinion on an issue between the contractors or between the
Government and the Contractor, then the Resolutions / Minutes get delayed. The
system of MC meeting has been streamlined to ensure that delays in signing MCR are
avoided.

Vetting comments of Audit

“To assess the time taken in signing of MC meetings, details of 10 MC meetings
held from January 2014 to August 2016 as furnished (February 2017) by the Operator
and ONGC were reviewed. It has been observed that time taken in the final sign off of
MC minutes from date of MC_meetings ranged from 32 to 121 days. Further, the days. Further, the
minutes of MC meeting held on 4 August 2016 were still awaiting sign off (10/02/2017) of MC meeting held on 4 August 2016 were still awaiting sign off (10/02/2017
in MOPNG. This was on the higher side despite the assurance by MOPNG that the by MOPNG that the
system of MC meeting has been streamlined.

The Ministry has stated that the system of MC meeting has been streamlined to
ensure that delays in signing MCR are avoided. In this regard measures taken may be
submitted to PAC.”

Reply on Vetting Comments of Audit by MoPNG

Copy of Minutes of MC Meeting No. 45 held on 47 August 2016 signed by all the
MC Members, is attached at Annexure-31A. As it has been submitted earlier that
endeavours are made to sign the MCR on the day of MC Meeting itself as far as
possible/practical though in certain cases due to disagreement on exact coverage of the
issue in MCRs or MCRs initiated through Circulation, the MCRs may not be signed on
the day of MC Meeting itself. However, as observed by Audit against
Observation/Recommendation No. 26, there has been overall improvement in the
process of approval of work programme and budgets by the MC as compared to the
previous years. Nevertheless Government representatives on MCs and DGH are being
advised to keep in mind the Audit's/PAC concerns and expedite signing of Minutes of
Meetings.

(Amar Nath)
Joint Secretary (E)
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
O.M. No. O-24012/1/2014-EO (Pt.1) Dated: 18" October, 2017


CHAPTER V

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE GOVERNMENT
HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee find that the Contractor has invoked arbitration in almost all the
cases where Government has disallowed the costs. The Committee also note that the
Ministry in their submission before the Committee agreed that there were anomalies in
the provisions and the Ministry was learning over the process right from the pre-NELP
stage. The Committee further find that a “policy framework for relaxations, extensions
and clarifications at the development and production stage under the PSC regime for
early monetization of hydrocarbon discoveries” was issued by the Ministry in November
2014 to rectify the anomalies noticed by them in practical implementation of the
provisions of the PSCs. The representative of the Ministry, during the evidence, on a
query regarding how to reduce litigations and arbitrations stated that "under the new
policy where it has moved away from the production-sharing to revenue-sharing
contract it will not look at the day-to-day management like cost recovery and other
things. It would only be interested as to how much production operator is doing; how
much revenue he is getting; and out of which how much he will share with the
Government which he has to declare upfront in a formula while bidding and that will be
followed”. The Committee while appreciating that the Ministry has learnt its lessons are
apprehensive about the status of issues between the Government and the Contractors
that have been lingering on due fo the original provisions which have now been relaxed.
The Committee are of the view that a strong dispute resolution mechanism should be
put in place to address the concerns of both parties and further desire that the Ministry
decide its course of action in such cases and apprise them.

(SI. no. 5 Part - Il of 47" report of Public Accounts
Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by MoPNG
The Ministry has been formulating policies from time to time to address the gaps
under the PSCs in order to reduce the possible litigation between the parties. A
transparent and policy based administration would help in reducing the disputes.

The Government has brought out several policies to ensure a transparent policy
based administration in the sector. These policy interventions have obviated many
potential disputes by resolving underlying issues. Government is taking steps to ensure
a good climate for investors in upstream sector. More than 30 cases have been

78


resolved by the Policy Framework for Relaxations, Extensions and Clarifications at the
Development and Production stage. Similarly, Policy on Testing Requirements has
helped in moving ahead with several discoveries which were stuck because of lack of
clarity on the issue. Policy for Extension PSCs for Small and Medium Sized
Hydrocarbon Discoveries has also helped in providing a transparent mechanism for
evaluating extension proposals.

In addition to above steps, the PSCs provide for alternate methods of Dispute
Resolution. Alternate Methods of Dispute Resolutions are:

a. Through Sole Expert

b. Through Conciliation

c. Through Arbitration

Sole Expert can be appointed for the matter specifically referred in PSC or in any
other matter which party may agree so to refer to Sole Expert. Other Disputes can be
resolved through Conciliation or Arbitration. Prior to submitting a dispute to arbitration,
the Parties may by mutual agreement submit the matter for conciliation in accordance
with Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.

In case, grievances still persist, then arbitration is a standard internationally
accepted and acknowledged mechanism in respect of Dispute Resolution. MOP&NG is
closely monitoring all the arbitration/legal cases arising out of disputes in PSCs for
expeditious resolution. With the recent amendment of ‘Arbitration and Conciliation Act’,
arbitration process is expected to be smoother, faster and cost effective.

Vetting comments of Audit
“As recommended by the PAC, the Ministry may apprise the PAC regarding the status

of the ‘issues between the Government and the Contractors that have been lingering on
due to the original provisions which have now been relaxed’.”

Reply on Vetting Comments of Audit by MoPNG
The Government issued a Policy Framework for Relaxations, Extensions and
Clarifications in November, 2014. The Policy aimed at addressing the issues between
the Government and the Contractor which had been lingering on due to lack of clarity on.
extant PSC provisions. A copy of this Policy is placed at Annexure — 5A. The list of
cases resolved under this policy in the various NELP blocks is placed at the Annexure —
5B.

(Amar Nath)
Joint Secretary (E)

Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
O.M. No. O-24012/1/2014-EO (Pt.1) Dated:18" October, 2017

79


Observation/Recommendation
Extension of Dry Docking Life

The Committee note that, in May 2007, Operator entered into an agreement with
M/s Aker Contracting FP AS, Norway (ACFP/ vendor) for chartering of a Floating,
Production, Storage and Offloading (FPSO) facility for ten years on lease rental basis
for extraction, production, storage and offloading of oil & gas from MA oilfield, from the
date of first production. However, within four months of signing the agreement, the
Operator requested the vendor to extend the dry docking (a term used for repairs or
when a Ship is taken to the service yard so that the submerged portions of the hull can
be cleaned and inspected) life of the FPSO from 10 to 15 years for a one -time
compensation to the vendor. The Operator reasoned that the decision was taken to
avoid interruption in production during the dry-dock period at the end of 10 years,
additional costs due to increased scope of work, inflation, mob/ demob for dry-docking,
potential loss of reserves due to uncertainty about revival of wells after closure and loss
in value due to deferment of production. ." MoPNG in its reply has stated that the post
vendor contractual agreements between the Operator and the vendor validly amended
the original vendor-contract and the audit report did not point out any legally tenable
ground for cost disallowance such as affiliated transactions to the undue advantage of
Contractor, any incidence of fraud and costs not supported by payment evidences.
Audit had observed that extension of dry-docking period from 10 to 15 years while
keeping the FPSO charter period to 10 years, led to higher cost recovery and adversely
affected Gols share of PP and since the Operator has yet to renew the agreement after
September 2018, it may not result in any expected benefit till the contract gets
extension. The Committee are of the view that instead of asking for any legally tenable
ground MoPNG should ensure that the benefits claimed by the Operator are
materialized by monitoring the implementation of the post vendor contractual agreement
in letter and spirit. The Committee are of the view that the additional costs incurred for
extending the contract to 15 years should be allowed to the contractor only when the
utilization of FPSO exceeds 10 year under the PSC.
(SI. no. 14 Part - Il of 47" report of Public
Accounts Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by MoPNG
In pursuance to the above recommendation of PAC, DGH has been directed vide

letter dated 26" September, 2016 regarding reversing and deferring the cost recovery of
US $ 17.36 million till September, 2018.

The cost recovery for this amount would be considered only on renewal of the
agreement of FPSO by the Contractor for further period of 5 years, beyond the existing
107 year period which is ending in September 2018.

80


Vetting comments of Audit

“In view of Ministry's directions to DGH regarding reversing and deferring the cost
recovery of US $ 17.36 million till September, 2018 and the assurance given by them
that the cost recovery for this amount would be considered only on renewal of the
agreement of FPSO by the Contractor for further period of 5 years, beyond the existing
10th year period, no comments are offered.”

Ministry had no comments on audit’s above observations
(Amar Nath)
Joint Secretary (E)
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas

O.M. No. O-24012/1/2014-EO (Pt.1) Dated:18"" October, 2017

Observation/Recommendation

Increased cost for expediting Date of First Production of oil and gas

As per Audit, at the time of issue of ' Request for Proposal’ RFP for FPSO, one of
the eligibility conditions insisted upon by the Operator was that the Date of First
Production of Oil (DFPO) be on or before 15.2.2008 which was changed and the final
agreement stipulated that it could be between 7-27.4.2008 but was subsequently
extended to 30.9.2008 in October, 2007. In July 2008, the vendor communicated that
the work and delivery dates could be expedited by putting in place measures having
cost consequences which were agreed to by the Operator and included payment for
mobilizing its commissioning team and one-time compensation on account of expediting
deliveries and timely installations. Audit observed that, in April 2008, MC had approved
the DFPO on or before June 2009 and, therefore, there was no necessity for expediting
deliveries, as the vendor was entitled to lease rental for FPSO from DFPO, it was in his
interest to achieve that at the earliest and the vendor had actually missed his deadlines
and was already working on extensions. As per the Operator, the execution of all the
contracts were inter-linked and involved significant interfaces, delay in execution of one
aspect could have had a cascading impact on the schedules resulting in far greater
expenditures and that under the PSC, RIL had the right to make certain operational,
technical and commercial decisions based on its best judgment and it was not
appropriate to second-guess these judgments in hindsight. As per the Ministry, the post
vendor contractual agreements between the Operator and the vendor validly amended

81


the original vendor-contract and the audit report did not point out any legally tenable
ground for cost disallowance such as affiliated transactions to the undue advantage of
Contractor, any incidence of fraud and costs not supported by payment evidences. The
Committee are of the view that though the Operator is the best judge of the operational
and technical needs and decisions required therein, the commercial implications of such
decisions directly affect the interests of the Government and the whole nation. The
competitiveness of the transactions carried out by the Operator would therefore, always
be open to public scrutiny. The Committee after considering the views of the C&AG,
Operator and the Ministry opine that a cost-benefit analysis of the decision taken by the
Operator to expedite the first gas date may be made before allowing the costs.
(SI. no. 12 Para - Il of 470 report of Public
Accounts Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by MoPNG

On the recommendation of PAC, DGH was directed to get the cost benefit
analysis from the Operator and validate / check it. DGH asked the operator its response
on the issue. The response of the operator has been received.

The operator in its response for cost-benefit analysis has reaffirmed the benefit of
its decision for earlier commencement of production of over 1 Million barrels of Oil and
consequent saving of costs. DGH has been asked to get further details for actual cost-
benefit analysis.

Vetting comments of Audit
“PAC may be apprised about the status of the cost-benefit analysis and the results
thereof.”

Reply on Vetting Comments of Audit by MoPNG
DGH has sought details of the actual cost benefit analysis from the Operator vide
letter dated 16.02.2017 and reminder dated 04.07.2017 with a note that non-resolution
of audit exception due to inadequate clarification may result in disallowance of the
corresponding costs. ATN in the matter would be submitted to PAC as soon as further
comments/replies/ATN are received from DGH.

Further Reply/Update by MoPNG
The Operator in its letter dated 20.09.2016 had explained the benefits of

expediting date of first production of oil and gas. In compliance with the
recommendation of PAC, DGH advised Operator to provide cost benefit analysis of the

82


expenditure incurred. In response to DGH's letters, Operator has re-iterated its earlier
stand vide letters dated 09.08.2017 and 05.03.2018 and stated that it took operational
decisions in the best interest of the project.

However, keeping in view the Committee’s concerns and recommendations and
non-providing desired details/information by Operator, DGH has been advised to carry
out a cost-benefit analysis from the data/information available with DGH, in a time
bound manner.

(Amar Nath)
Joint Secretary (E)

Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
O.M. No. O-24012/1/2014-EO (Pt.1) Dated: 211 November, 2018

Observation/Recommendation
Construction of Onshore Terminal:

The Committee note that the contract for construction of Onshore terminal (OT)
was awarded on cost-plus basis to L&T Ltd. (vendor) and as per original contractual
provisions "no compensation is payable to the vendor on account of the Plant &
Equipment (P&E) provided by the Operator either owned or hired in the case of vendor
being unable to mobilize the P&E. However, the said clause was amended to exclude
cranes from its ambit and resultantly, the Operator, in addition to incurring expenditure
on hiring of these cranes, had to pay top up compensation on them like other P&E
supplied by L&T. The Operator in its reply submitted that since the suppliers of the
crane were reluctant to accept the contract through L&T and due to shortage of such
cranes in the market, it had to hire the cranes directly and as these cranes require a lot
of handling by the L&T, the Operator was justified in the payment of compensation to
the vendor. Audit had observed that the scarcity of the cranes in the market or
reluctance of suppliers to deal with L&T could not be a justification for amending the
contract and pay additional amount to L&T as the principle underlying such transactions
was clear in the respect that it had already provided that no compensation is payable to
the vendor in case of vendor being unable to mobilize P&E and, therefore, the cost
recovery may be disallowed. MoPNG in its reply has stated that the post vendor
contractual agreements between the Operator and the vendor validly amended the
original vendor-contract and the audit report did not point out any legally tenable ground
for cost disallowance such as affiliated transactions to the undue advantage of
Contractor, any incidence of fraud and costs not supported by payment evidences. The
Committee desire that Ministry look into the contract to see whether such amendments

83


can validly be made which change the basic principles and whether such mark-ups are
usually charged by the vendors in similar contracts and apprise the Committee thereof.

(SI. no. 14 Part - Il of 47" report of Public

Accounts Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by MoPNG
The role of the Ministry in the procurements made under the PSC has been

highlighted in the above recommendation. The Ministry envisage the strengthening of
the controls by having a strong audit mechanism and proper scrutiny of budget
proposals. The same has already been complied as per the observations of PAC.

DGH was directed to get the comments of operator regarding procurement
issues highlighted by PAC in the above recommendation. DGH has sought comments
from the operator. The response received from the operator can be summarized as
“Charging of mark ups by the vendors in such contracts is usual. In the instant case, the
contract was validly amended with mutual agreement of both parties. The contractual
information in such contracts is kept confidential by the parties to the contracts.
Therefore, instances in contracts executed by other companies may not be possible to
collect and provide. “DGH has analysed the response and had mentioned that any
contract validly amended is acceptable.

Ministry would ask DGH to further look into cases pertaining to other operators

Vetting Comments of Audit

The Ministry has yet to clarify whether amendments can validly be made which
change the basic principles of the contract and whether such mark-ups are usually
charged by the vendors in similar contracts Clarifications in this regards may be
submitted to PAC for their perusal.

Reply on Vetting Comments of Audit by MoPNG

The matter of ‘mark-ups’ was taken up with the other major operators viz. Cairn,
ONGC and OIL.

Cairn has confirmed that ‘mark-up’ charge is agreed in cost-plus contracts and in
practice, cost variations may be necessitated due to various reasons of engineering
maturity, constants and other execution challenges / changes and it would not be
feasible to go through the approval process for each such change / variation.

84


OIL has informed that in Oil India Limited, if there is any deviation in scope of
work or terms of reference during the execution of contract, the same is done with due
approval of Competent Authority, keeping basic principle of the contract intact.

ONGC vide their letter dated 30.08.2017 has informed the following:
“As regards the Post Vendor Contractual Agreement between the Operator and
the Vendor, there is no such provision in PSCs of Pre-NELP blocks.

However, it is to submit that, in line with the tender conditions in large LSTK/EPC
contracts of Non PSC ONGC nominated Blocks, the mark ups are usually considered in
the contract to be charged by the vendors for various plant and equipment to be
provided by the Vendor. The Mark ups is used in ONGC for LSTK contracts on the
supply of additional material required for the project as mentioned in the tender
document as a standard clause with mark-up of 7.5%.”

From the above replies of Cairn, OIL and ONGC, it can be seen that mark-ups
are charged by Vendors, depending upon the circumstances of a particular contract and
practices of a company. As commented by CAG, the views of other operators are
submitted to PAC for their perusal.

(Amar Nath)
Joint Secretary (E)
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
O.M. No. 0-24012/1/2014-EO (Pt.1) Dated: 18" October, 2017

Observation/Recommendation

Piece-meal hiring of drilling rig:

The Committee note that the Operator awarded charter hire of an off-shore deep
water drilling rig to M/s Transocean Offshore International Ventures Limited
(Transocean/vendor) in April 2005 for 24 months. In December 2005, seven months
after awarding first contract, the Operator initiated the tendering process for charter
hiring beyond 2007 as the Operator observed that availability of Deepwater drilling rigs
had become scarce. The second contract was again awarded to Transocean for 36
month period commencing from August, 2008. Audit observed that despite having
adequate drilling prospect and keeping in view the poor response received from the
vendors for provisioning of the rigs, the Operator did not find it prudent to consider the
option of long-term hiring and availing the firm rate advantage of such long term hiring
which resulted in additional expenditure. The Operator submitted that approval for
laying of pipelines to evacuate & market gas was delayed by the MoPNG by 17 months

85


which delayed the project and considering the aforesaid uncertainty in execution of IDP,
there was no rationale for contractor to commit drilling rigs on the basis of IDP. MoPNG
in its action taken notes stated that “this can be at best considered as inadequate
appreciation and lack of proper planning by the Contractors. The Contractors may not
be aware of future behaviour of market for hiring of services. Audit may reconsider this
disallowance”. MoPNG in its latest reply has stated that the post vendor contractual
agreements between the Operator and the vendor validly amended the original vendor-
contract and the audit report did not point out any legally tenable ground for cost
disallowance such as affiliated transactions to the undue advantage of Contractor, any
incidence of fraud and costs not supported by payment evidences. The Committee after
taking into consideration the Audit observation, the submission of the Operator and the
replies of the Ministry are of the view that costs cannot be disallowed as both the
contracts were awarded on the basis of competitive tendering process in accordance
with procedure prescribed in the PSC , moreover, whether additional costs have
actually been incurred by the Operator and the extent of any such extra expenditure
cannot be assumed in absence of per day rates that would have been quoted by the
vendor for a five year contract instead of the two year contract that was awarded in
2005. However, the Committee do not appreciate the Ministry's passive role in such
high value contracts and reiterate as recommended by them in the preceding
paragraphs that a threshold amount for the orders/ contracts may be prescribed above
which the Operator should invariably approach the Ministry for clearance.
(SI. no. 17 Part - Il of 47 report of Public
Accounts Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by MoPNG

Under Article 8.3 of PSC, the contractor shall conduct Petroleum operations at
his sole risk, cost and expense, provide all funds necessary for the conduct of
petroleum operations including funds for the purchase or lease of equipments, material
and supplies required for petroleum operations as well as for making payments to
employees, agents and sub-contractors. The procedure for acquisition of goods and
services are provided in appendix F of PSC. The procurement decisions are taken by
the Operating Committee comprising of representatives of contractors.

Ministry agrees with the concern expressed by PAC regarding high value of
procurements made under PSC and ensuring competitiveness in such procurements.
However, these would need to be regulated within the existing PSC frameworks. The
role of auditors in such scenario becomes very important in bringing out exceptions
related to various issues in general and procurement issues in particular. Ministry takes
a view considering the observations of the audit and any excess cost recovery on
account of discrepant procurements is disallowed.

86


The role of Ministry in getting into individual transactions and procurements may
not be desirable as it may become intrusive for smooth operations and therefore
monitoring would be through audit exceptions. Instructions would be issued to the
auditors by DGH based on MoP&NG's directions for certifying competitive
procurements, and all non-compliance and nomination procurements would come to the
notice and will be acted upon.

Vetting Comments of Audit
PAC has observed that to ensure transparency in post vendor contractual

agreements, in future, the Ministry should prescribe a threshold amount for the change
orders above which the Operator should invariably approach it for clearance.

The Ministry's reply, however, does not specifically address PAC’s observation
regarding prescribing of the threshold amount for the change orders.

Reply on Vetting Comments of Audit by MoPNG
The PSC prescribes a procurement procedure which needs to be followed by all
the contractors operating under the PSC regime. These matters are reviewed and
monitored by MCs.

While agreeing to the Committee's views regarding transparency in post vendor
contractual agreements, it is submitted that prescribing a threshold amount for the
change orders above which the Operator should invariably approach Ministry for
clearance at this juncture is not being considered. Cases where change order exceeds
25% of cost estimate/original order, then the same may be discussed more rigorously in
MC and get approved in the MC since MC is the competent forum to deliberate and
decide on such issues.

(Amar Nath)
Joint Secretary (E)
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas

O.M. No. O-24012/1/2014-EO (Pt.1) Dated: 18" October, 2017

Observation/Recommendation

Cost Recovery of Unconsumed Production Inventory:

The Committee note that Section 3.1.8 of the PSC stipulates that material and
equipment held in inventory shall be charged to the accounts only when such material is
removed from inventory and used in Petroleum Operations. However, contrary to the

87


PSC provision, the contractor has charged production inventory to cost recovery on
date of purchase irrespective of its actual usage in Petroleum Operations. It was also
seen that some inventory was not used for more than four years. The cost recovery
made by the contractor without actual usage for petroleum operations had adversely
affected Gol share of PP. The PMT JV's contention that such production consumable
items are maintained at reasonable levels so as to avoid any production downtime due
to non-availability of such items was contested by the audit. Audit further pointed that
PMT JV may ensure that production inventory is charged to accounts only when such
material is removed from inventory and used in petroleum operations as provided in the
PSC. The Committee while deprecating the PMTJV's violation of provisions of a
mutually agreed PSC, desire that as agreed to by the Ministry, year wise inventory
included by Operator in the contract cost should be corrected in the account for
subsequent years.
(SI. no. 20 Part - Il of 47 report of Public
Accounts Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by MoPNG
The operator was advised by DGH to reverse the unconsumed inventory charged

to cost recovery in each year and recast the account accordingly. The operator has not
complied with the direction of DGH within the timeline of 2 months i.e by 20.12.2016.
The operator has been directed again on 26.12.2016 to submit the compliance report at
the earliest.

Vetting Comments of Audit
In view of non-compliance by the Operator, with the directions of MoPNG/DGH

(in line with Committee recommendations), the issue persists. Further progress in the
case may be intimated to PAC.

Reply on Vetting Comments of Audit by MoPNG
Compliance Report was sought by DGH vide letter dated 24.10.2016 and

subsequent reminder on 26.12.2016 which has not been provided by the Operator.

The issue has been disputed by BGEPIL and RIL (Claimants) and identified in
the list of audit exceptions for reference to and determination by the Tribunal in the
ongoing arbitration between Claimants and Respondent-Government of India pursuant
to Final Partial Award (FPA) dated 127 October 2016 and clarification Decision dated
28" December 2016 and subsequent direction of the Tribunal.

ATN in the. matter would be submitted to PAC as and when arbitration
proceedings are finalized and orders are issued.

Further Reply/Update by MoPNG
Arbitral Tribunal vide its Award dated 11" January 2018, accepting the

Claimants’ submission that it would not be practical to charge the costs and/or
88


expenditure of certain production related items to Contract Costs on consumption,
dismissed the category of audit exceptions relating to ‘charging of unconsumed
inventory to cost’. For example, it would not be practical to charge the cost of a bolt or a
nut at the time when this is in fact used for Petroleum Operations. On that basis, the
Tribunal found that the Contractor's classification of controllable movable assets and
non-controllable movable assets as the latter being those contained in the ‘production
inventory’, to be correct.

In view of the Award of Arbitral Tribunal, contention of audit is not agreed and no
further action is required.

(Amar Nath)
Joint Secretary (E)

Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
O.M. No. O-24012/1/2014-EO (Pt.1) Dated: 2"4 November, 2018

Observation/Recommendation

Delay in Water Injection (४४) Project ॥ Panna Field Resulting in Declining
Production

The Committee are concerned to note that delay in implementing Water Injection
(Wi) in Panna field has resulted in decline in production. The DGH as well as the JV
were aware of the continuous fall in reservoir pressure and consequent decline in
production from Panna field from 2003 onwards (10-12 per cent in 2003 to 12-15 per
cent in 2007-08 and to 18-20 percent in 2010-11). Keeping in view the decline in
production the PMT JV submitted a ‘Panna B Zone Water Injection Pre-Feasibility
Report’ in 2011 and subsequently requested for extension of PSC term till economic life
of the field. The Committee are shocked to know that DGH in March 2012 in response
to the JV have stated that pressure maintenance should have been started as soon as it
was evident that the reservoir pressure was falling below saturation point and that the
Operators should have proposed WI in early 2000 if they were serious about good
operational standards and reservoir management. The Committee further note that
DGH is yet to approve the feasibility report and as on date there is no further progress
on the decision on the PSC extension. The fact that Pre-Feasibility study report
submitted by PMT JV in September 2011 for expeditious implementation of WI scheme
and DGH taking six months (October 2011 to March 2012) to take a decision and
communicate to the JV, puts question on the DGH role resulting in delay in Water
Injection project and consequent decline in production from Panna field. The Committee

89


desire that the Ministry to impress upon the DGH to complete the examination and
subsequent implementation of the Report along with other measures to check declining
trend in the production from Panna field. The Committee also desire the Ministry to take
view on extension of PSC at the earliest.

(SI. no. 22 Part - Il of 47 report of Public

Accounts Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by MoPNG
As per the report of expert engaged by DGH, water injection project was not

viable. No new technology has been suggested to make the project economically viable.
In the expert report, it was suggested to continue with the existing reservoir recovery
practice since the incremental production would not be cost effective. In such scenario,
water injection project would have adversely impacted the economic profit.

GOI has notified PSC Extension Policy dated 28.03.2016 under which the
Contractor can apply and get extension. PMT JV is yet to apply for any extension of
PSC under the policy. Government would consider the extension request when received
from the operator.

Vetting Comments of Audit

While the JV had submitted the pre- feasibility report on WI project in September
2011, the expert appointed by DGH had submitted its report in Oct 2011. DGH took six
months to review the FR and communicated its comments in piecemeal even though it
had actively participated in the technical committee meetings/ workshops and had also
advised the JV on the studies to be conducted.

PMT JV had submitted the pre-Feasibility study in Sep 2011. Considering that
the returns on WI project were to accrue only after 4-5 years, the JV had also requested
for PSC extension in September 2011. The 501 had notified the PSC extension policy
only in March 2016. The PSC term is expiring in Dec 2019. As stated in the ATR, so far
the JV has not applied for extension. With elapse of time the project has been rendered
unviable.

Unless PMT JV applies for extension of the PSC term of Panna Mukta it cannot
re-examine the viability of the project. Hence no remedial action is possible at this
stage.

90


Reply on Vetting Comments of Audit by MoPNG
No comments.

(Amar Nath)
Joint Secretary (E)
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
O.M. No. O-24012/1/2014-EO (Pt.1) Dated: 18" October, 2017

Observation/Recommendation

Sale of Gas in contravention to MOPNG’s Directives

The Committee observe that ONGC ignored MoPNG directives of March 2006
and entered into a long term contract for 12 years and signed GSPA in June 2006 with
M/s Torrent Power Limited (TPL) for supply of 0.9 mmscmd of gas at the rate of US$
4.75 / mmbtu with a provision to review the price after expiry of 3 years from the date of
first supply. At the same time, contrary to Gol decision the other two partners, RIL and
BGEPIL, also sold gas at the rate of US$5.58 per mmbtu (i.e. higher by US$0.01 per
mmbtu of revised PSC price of Tapti field). Supply to TPL commenced from 30 May
2008 and continued at the lower rate of US$ 4.75 per mmbtu till May 2011 and it was
made at PSC price only from June 2011. The gas sold to TPL was at a price lower than
the price prescribed in the PSC (Panna-Mukta revised PSC price of US$ 5.73 / mmbtu
and Tapti revised PSC price of US$ 5.57 / mmbtu). Further, the Committee observe that
ONGC also did not reduce the sale of gas proportionate to the decline in production in
the Tapti and Panna-Mukta fields during the year 2008-09 to 2011-12 and on the
contrary sold more gas to TPL during 2009-10 to 2010-11 vis-a-vis 2008-09. The
Ministry have submitted, since GAIL was unable to lift gas at a higher PSC formula
based price, ONGC entered into agreement in June 2006 with TPL. Further, the Ministry
have stated that the notional revenue loss was on account of the fact that the PSC
formula based price was above the prevailing market price and in the absence of GAIL
lifting the entire gas quantity, the Ministry permitted the constituents of JV to sell gas at
rates ranging from US$ 3.86 to US$ 5.58. The Committee are in agreement with Audit
that the argument of ONGC on Article VIII of Tripartite Agreement i.e. the GAIL was fully
responsible for the performance of the existing contract is not tenable as ONGC was
selling its share of gas to TPL below the PSC price and it was obligatory on the part of
ONGC to periodically inform GAIL about the drop in level of production for making
proportionate reduction in supply to TPL. The Committee are of the firm view that the
Ministry, should have been proactive in monitoring the dispensation of additional gas
production (over and above 10.8 mmdemd) by the PMT JV when it had issued clear
instructions. The Committee strongly deprecate the casual approach of the Ministry in

91


protecting the interest of the government and desire that the failure of ONGC first to find

a buyer at PSC price and later on to curtail on pro rata basis the supply of gas to TPL

be enquired into and responsibility be fixed. The Committee also desire the Ministry to

look into whether the competitive prices were not obtained by the other two JV partners
while supplying the gas to their affiliates.

(SI. no. 23 Part - Il of 47" report of Public

Accounts Committee Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by MoPNG

MoP&NG decisions to allow ‘direct marketing’ of gas by PMT Contractors, and
also allow GAIL and other buyers to pay prices different from PSC prices were
consequent to circumstances not envisaged in PSC. The GAIL was unwilling to accept
the PSC price arrived with TPL through a competitive bidding process.

Consequent to MOP&NG’s decisions to allow ‘direct marketing’ of gas, other two
partners supplied the gas to their affiliates at different prices ranging from US $ 3.96 to
US $ 5.58 per mmbtu during the year 2006-07 & 2007-08, which being affiliate
transaction cannot be considered as competitive prices.

The following actions have been taken in compliance with PAC’s observations:

(i) In respect of the issue regarding ONGC obligation on selling its share of gas to TPL
below the PSC price, it has been referred to DGH for identifying the magnitude of its
impact on GOI share of Profit Petroleum, if any, and make recommendations on loss of
revenue to the government.

(ii) DGH has been directed to recover with interest the Loss of government revenue of
US $ 0.52 million in the form of Profit Petroleum (PP) and royalty due to sale to affiliates
of Panna gas in contravention to PSC.

Vetting comments of Audit
(i) The final course of action is awaited.

(ii) The amount is yet (January 2017) to be recovered. As the PSC term is expiring in
2019, same needs to expedited.
Status of recovery may be submitted to PAC.

Reply on Vetting Comments of Audit by MoPNG
(i) The issue regarding ONGC obligation on selling its share of gas to TPL below

the PSC price has been referred to DGH for identifying the magnitude of its

impact on GOI share of Profit Petroleum, if any, and make recommendations on

loss of revenue to the government. DGH has sought legal advice from Senior

Government Counsel, which is awaited. After obtaining legal advice, the further
92


course of action would be decided. ATN in the matter would be submitted to PAC
as soon as comments/replies/ATN are received from DGH.

(ii) Directives have been issued to GAIL on 30.08.2017 for recovery of US $ 0.52
million from Sale Proceeds towards Profit Petroleum (PP) and Royalty due to
sale to affiliates of Panna gas in contravention to PSC. M/s RIL & BGEPIL have
requested the Ministry to revoke its directions as this issue is already under the
consideration of ongoing Arbitration. This matter has also been referred to DGH
on 26.09.2017 for obtaining legal opinion from Government Counsel. ATN in the
matter would be submitted to PAC as soon as comments/replies/ATN are
received from DGH.

Further Reply/Update by MoPNG
(i) The magnitude of impact of ONGC obligation on selling its share of gas to TPL
below the PSC price, on GOI share of Royalty and Profit Petroleum due to sale
of gas quantity to TPL at lower rate (US$ 4.75 per mmbtu) from 30" May 2008 to
May 2011 in respect of PMT PSCs separately has been calculated by DGH and
additional amount of Royalty and Profit Petroleum due from ONGC is as under:

| Se, | Field Name Gol Take- Gol Take-PP

No. Royalty (in USD) in USD’

1 Panna-Mukta 807,175 3,036,864

2 Mid & South Tapti 1,155,673 3,655,480
Total 1,962,848 6,692,344

DGH has been requested to make recommendations on. loss of revenue to the
government.

(ii) MoPNG has recovered US$ 0.52 Million through GAIL from the sale proceeds
from PMT PSC.

(Amar Nath)
Joint Secretary (E)
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas

O.M. No. O-24012/1/2014-EO (Pt.1) Dated: 2"! November, 2018
NEW DELHI; MALLIKARJUN KHARGE

48 December, 2018 _ CHAIRPERSON

27 Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka) PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE


APPENDIX
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
CONTAINED IN THEIR FORTY-SEVENTH REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

Total number of Observations/Recommendations

Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
which have been accepted by the Government:

Para Nos. 1,2,4,6,13,15,16,18,19,21,24,25,26,27,28,29
&30

Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of
the reply of the Government:

-Nil-
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been

accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

Para Nos. 3,7,8,9,10 & 31
Observations/Recommendations in respect of

which the Government have furnished interim
replies/no replies:

Para Nos. 5,11,12,14, 17, 20, 22 & 23

31

Total : 17
Percentage: 55%

Total : 0
Percentage:0%

Total : 06
Percentage:19%

Total : 08
Percentage: 26%