      128  
 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF PUBLIC PRIVATE  
PARTNERSHIP- INDIRA GANDHI INTERNATIONAL  
AIRPORT, DELHI 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in their 94th Report (15th Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION  
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEETNH LOK SABHA 
 
 
                 
                      
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


2 
 
PAC NO.  2167 
 
 
O N E  H U N D R E D  A N D  T W E N T Y  
E I G H T H  R E P O R T 
 
 
 
  PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
  (2018 -19)  
 
 
  (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in their Ninety- Fourth Report (15th Lok Sabha)] 
 
               MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION  
 
                                           
                                                                              
 Presented to Lok Sabha on:  19-12-2018 
 
             Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   19-12-2018 
 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
December, 2018 /Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)  
 
 
  
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF PUBLIC PRIVATE 
PARTNERSHIP- INDIRA GANDHI INTERNATIONAL 
AIRPORT, DELHI 
 
 
 

3 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS  
COMMITTEE (2018-19)      
(iii) 
 
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………... …………………….. 
  
(iv) 
CHAPTER I              
  
Report ………………………………………………. 1 
CHAPTER II* Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government …………………….. 
 
CHAPTER III* Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
replies received from the Government ..………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV* Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have no t been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration ……………………………………………. 
 
 
CHAPTER V* Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which the Government have furnished interim 
replies ………………………………………………… 
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES* 
 
I 
 
Minutes of the 21 st sitting of the Public Accounts 
Committee (2015 -16) held on   
14th December, 2018. 
 
 
II Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public 
Accounts Committee contained in their  Ninety -
fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
   
 
______________________________________________________________ 
*Not appended to the cyclostyled copy of the Report 
 
  

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
2018-19 
 
 
 
  
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge   - Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria  
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra 
5.    Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar   
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
7. Smt. Riti Pathak 
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank” 
9. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
10. Shri Abhishek Singh 
11. Shri Gopal Shetty 
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya  
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
15. Dr. Ponnusamy  Venugopal 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda 
17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
18. Shri Shwait Malik 
19. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
21. Shri C.M. Ramesh 
 
22. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh                         - Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja                         - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Shankarnath Sharma Laimayum - Committee Assistant 

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2018 -19), having been 
authorised by the Committee, do present this One Hundred and Twenty -eighth Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Ninety -Fourth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on "Implementation of Public Private Partnership - 
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi ".  
 
2. The Ninety-Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on  
6th February, 2014. Replies of the Government to all the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received.  The Public 
Accounts Committee considered and adopted the One Hundred and Twenty -eighth 
Report at their sitting held on 14 th December, 2018.  Minutes of the sitting are given at  
Appendix I. 
 
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the 
Report. 
 
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to 
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Ninety-Fourth Report (Sixt eenth Lok Sabha) is 
given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                               MALLIKARJUN KHARGE 
  December, 2018                                                           Chairperson, 
  Agrahayana,1940 (Saka)                                     Public Accounts Committee 
 
  

6 
 
PART-A 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
R E P O R T 
 
 This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
their  Ninety-Fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on “Implementation of Public 
Private Partnership-Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi” based on the C&AG 
Report No. 5 of 2012-13 (Performance Audit) Union Government, relating to the Ministry 
of Civil Aviation.  
 
2. The Nine ty-Fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)  was presented to Lok 
Sabha/laid in R ajya Sabha on 06th February, 2014.  It contained 17 Observations/  
Recommendations.  Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/  
Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation almost after a 
delay of two years from the dat e of presentation of its original Report and are 
categorized as under: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee which have been 
accepted by the Government: 
 
 Paragraph Nos. 1,2,4,5,8,10-13, 15 and 16 
Total: 11 
Chapter- II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
 
-NIL- 
Total: NIL 
Chapter- III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
requires reiteration: 
 
 Paragraph Nos. 3,6,7, 9  and 14 
Total: 05 
Chapter- IV 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies: 
 
 Paragraph No. 17  
Total: 1 
Chapter- V 

7 
 
3. The Committee desire the Ministry of Civil Aviation to furnish Action Taken 
Notes in respect of Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter I and 
final Action Taken Replies in respect of Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in Chapter V for which interim replies h ave been given by the Ministry 
within six months of the presentation of the Report to the House. 
 
4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Civil Aviation on the 
observations/recommendations of the Committee contained in their Ninety-fourth Report 
(15th Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report.  In the 
succeeding paragraphs, the Committee have dealt with the Action Taken by the 
Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations made in the Original 
Report which either need comment or reiteration. 
I  Concession Period 
 [Recommendation Para No. 3] 
5. The Committee note d that in terms of Article 181(b)  of Operation, Maintenance 
and Development Agreement (OMDA) , Delhi International Airport Private Ltd. ( DIAL) 
enjoys the unilateral right to extend the concession period for another 30 years on the 
identical terms and conditions provided no JVC event default takes place during 20 th 
and 25 th year of first concession period. The Cabinet Note of September 2003 
specifically envisaged that concession period of next 30 years could be subject to 
'mutual agreement and negotiation of terms'. Surprisingly, this condition was missing in 
OMDA signed in April 2006 though the MoCA denied extending any favour to DIAL on 
the ground that the concession period was decided by the EGoM constituted by the 
Cabinet to finalise various transaction documents. The Committee note d that the 
Cabinet in September 2003 had  given permission only for privatisation of airports . 
Further, the extension of concession period was not automatic/unlimited as conditions 
like satisfactory performance in first 30 years was stipulated under OMDA . These 
provisions relating to extension of  lease period were finalized before Request for 
Proposal was issued to the qualified bidders. The Committee note d that the initial 
concession period of 30 years could be extended by another 30 years. Asked about the 
reasons for extending the concession per iod by another 30 years, the Ministry 
submitted that it was felt that the investment would need a longer time-frame and also to 
attract more bidders for Delhi and Mumbai airports, the EGoM made a provision for 
further extension of 30 years. This was finall y approved by the Cabinet. The Committee 

8 
 
desired to know how this joint venture would pave the way for future airport 
development and modernization in our country. 
6. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note submitted as under: 
"While entering into an a greement with the JVC, it was ensured to check the 
unwarranted benefits to it by laying down the stringent conditions on JVC such as 
adherence to laid down st andards, performance indicators,  mandatory 
investment, satisfactory performance throughout the period,  objective service 
quality requirements etc. Non -compliance of which attracts penalties and 
liquidated damages which can lead to termination and cancellation of the 
agreement by AAI and Government. Hence, JVC does not have automatic right 
to extend the per iod but is subject to conditions and review by AAI and further 
subject to overall stringent yardsticks laid down in OMDA and monitored by AAI. 
Further, Airports have long gestation periods and the investor needs long term 
period to plan and execute project s apart from making considerable upgradation 
depending on the requirement. In the present case, IGI Airport, New Delhi has 
been planned to be fully developed in six phases spread over many years. It is 
prominent to notice that the case of implementation of PPP at Delhi & Mumbai 
airports was one of the pioneer efforts in the Civil Aviation sector as there was no 
such precedence available before the Government . Hence, there was 
apprehensions among the prospective bidders regarding, availability of enough 
opportunity for them to extract the profit out of their huge investment s. These 
airports required huge investment and management skill to build and operate 
them as world class airports. lf AAI were to do it, there would have been a severe 
resource crunch for AAI and it could not have taken up development of other 
airports. Through these JV Companies on one hand AAl could mobilise on 
investment of about Rs. 24,000 crores and on the other hand AAI spent about 
Rs. 12,000 cr ores to develop about 60 airports in metro, non -metro and other 
towns/cities. Moreover, since awarding the Delhi airport project to D IAL, AAI has 
earned revenue share of Rs. 6306.81 crores till FY 2 013-14. AAI has effectively 
utilized this revenue share for development / modernization of its metro airports 
like Chennai, Kolkata and other 35 non-metro airports. The revenue share is also 
being u sed further to develop/upgrade Tier ll & Tier lll city airports across the 
country. Further, an economic impact assessment study was also conducted by 
National Council of Applied Economic Research (NCAER) w ith respect to the 
privatization of IGI Airport outlining its economic &  social impact. The findings of 
the study are as under:  
Economic lmpact:- 
 Economic impact of lGI Airport estimated to be Rs.29,470 Crore during 2009-10 - 
Contribution of 0.45% to the national GDP  
- Contribution to Delhi's GSDP is 13.53%  
 Economic impact of lGlA by 2020, expected to be approximately Rs.90,950 crore  
- Contribution of 0.7% of the National GDP  
- Contribution of 22.2% to Delhi's GSDP  
Social lmpact:- 
 Delhi airport's operation contributes 15,78,000 jobs  
- Contribution to national employment 0.34%  
- Share in Delhi's total employment as 25.9%. 
 Delhi airport's construction activities contributed - 614 thousand direct and 
indirect jobs every year during 3 years of construction 

9 
 
 Employment benefits, especially from tourism & investments, shared with other 
regions & States.  
The above facts show that the implementation of PPP at l GI Airport, New Delhi 
has acted as a catalyst in the economic growth of the country and has helped 
tremendously in development of airport sector by allowing AAI to pay attention 
towards building necessary infrastructure for providing regional connectivity to 
the remote areas.  The Master Plan prepared by DIAL included the targets/ 
milestones for development of IGI Airport in phases.  The Master Plan was 
primarily based on traffic trigger points and linked to traffic growth. Besides, as 
stipulated in OMDA, DIAL is in the process of review and update of the Master 
Plan to meet the traffic demand and incorporate ne w traffic challenges. As 
regards utilization of revenue earned from DIAL, AAI has received total revenue 
of Rs. 6306.80 crores from DIAL from 2006 -07 to 2013 -14. AAI has spent an 
amount of approx. Rs. 12743.10 crores (including revenue from DIAL) from 
2007-08 to 2013-14 on modernization /development of various airports.  
Annual revenue share received from DIAL from 2015 – 2016 to 2017 -2018 is Rs. 
6,700.46 crores. " 
 
7. The Committee  noted that the Cabinet in September , 2003 while giving 
permission for privatization of airports  had specifically envisaged that 
concession period of 30 years could be extended subject to 'mutual agreement 
and negotiation of terms'. However, this condition i s conspicuous in OMDA. The 
Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that some provisions have been 
included in the OMDA for checking unwarranted benefits to the operator. The 
Committee also note that DIAL is in the process of reviewing the Master Plan and 
updation of the same to meet the  traffic demand and also incorporate new traffic 
challenges. The Committee while opining that the extension should only be given 
to the operator subject to 'mutual agreement and negotiation of terms' desire  the 
Ministry to ensure  that a thorough scrutiny o f the implementation of project by 
the DIAL should be undertaken before extending the contract  and any violation of 
the provisions of the contract be strictly dealt with, financial loss, if any, to the 
exchequer prevented and interest and welfare of the pa ssengers/users of the 
airport protected. The Committee also desire the Ministry to apprise the status of 
the review and updation of the Master Plan to meet the traffic challenges of over 
40 million passenger projected by the year 2022. 
II Right of First Refusal  
 [Recommendation Para No. 4] 
 
8. The DIAL was given unilateral right to manage the IGIA for sixty years and in 
addition to it, S tate Support Agreement gave DIAL the Right of First Refusal (RoFR) 

10 
 
with regard to any second airport planned within 150 km radius of the IGIA. The Second 
airport was to be planned through a competitive bidding process in which DIAL too 
would participate and in case of being unsuccessful, DIAL would be allowed to match its 
bid with the most competitive bid, if it was within 10 per cent of that bid. This condition 
was applicable in the first 30 years. The Ministry, in response, submitted that 
development of second airport is based on triggers like, existing airport reaching 
saturation point, traffic sharing and host of other factors which are clearly inbuilt in policy 
on Airport Infrastructure 1997. Further, the Ministry added that as per the study 
conducted by International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO), second airport may not 
be needed until 2022. According to the Minist ry, the RoFR condition was approved by 
EGoM and laid down before the issue of RFP wherein DIAL was not the final bidder. 
The Committee had observed that the second new airport, if planned, functioning in the 
competitive environment will be under the regula tory regime of Airports Economic 
Regulatory Authority of India (AERA) and will not have the benefit of dual till or hybrid till 
system. It would, therefore, be virtually impossible for a new bidder to share a large 
percentage of revenue and survive in a co mpetitive environment in which the existing 
Delhi airport already would have significant benefits. The submission of the Ministry was 
that the matter was considered in the IMG & the EGoM and it was felt that, based on 
global experience the absence of RoFR,  the JVC would be exposed to significant 
investment risks if a second airport came in the vicinity. Moreover, the second airport at 
Delhi may not be needed until 2022 and at Mumbai till the traffic reaches the saturation 
point of 40 million. The Ministry a lso submitted that safeguards have been provided to 
ensure competitiveness and transparency. The Committee had expressed hope that the 
assurances given would be fulfilled.  
 
9. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note submitted as under: 
 
 "Yes. It is reiterated that competition and transparency will be ensured in the 
 process whenever RoFR is exercised.” 
 
10. The Committee find that in response to their recommendation on the issue 
of Right of First Refusal (RoFR), the Ministry of Civil Aviation have assured that 
transparency and competitiveness will be ensured in the process whenever RoFR 
is exercised . Although  the Committee hope that the assurance given would be 
fulfilled, they desire the Ministry to put in place a robust in -built mechanism so 
that competition and transparency is engraved in the process wh ile RoFR is 

11 
 
exercised when a second airport come up in t he vicinity of Delhi . The Committee 
feel that such a step on the part of the Ministry would enable them to avert a 
situation which, otherwise, give undue benefit  to any concessionaire in a Public 
Private Partnership Project. They would also like to be apprised of the steps 
taken by the Ministry in this regard.  
 
III Revenue Earnings and Misuse of Upfront fee 
 [Recommendation Para No. 5] 
 
11. The Committee in their 94th Report had inter -alia observed that as per Article 
11.1.1 of OMDA a onetime upfront fee o f Rs.150 crore was fixed for each of the Delhi 
and Mumbai airports by MoCA on the basis of decision of Inter -Ministerial Group (IMG) 
who considered average revenue earning from both the airports. The Ministry of Civil 
Aviation attempted to justify its actions by submitting that AAI got a much higher amount 
of about Rs. 6 crore in comparison to the amount that it would have got through nominal 
lease rental basis. Further , it was also added that the additional land of 'Excluded 
Premises' could have been transferred to DIAL without any compensation to AAI as this 
land was to be used only for aeronautical purposes. Asked about the basis of charging 
Rs.150 crore upfront fee from the JVC, the MoCA submitted that different models were 
discussed by the EGoM. The EGo M, after discussion, approved the quantum of upfront 
fee of Rs.150 crore as also recommended by the IMG. The Ministry further submitted 
that the leasing of land by AAI to DIAL was in return of its share of 45.99 percent of the 
total revenue and therefore t he question of lease rental was inconsequential and that it 
would not be correct to make comparison with the lease charges imposed on DGCA 
and BCAS.  The Committee in their Original Report had desired to know the total 
earnings of DIAL and the revenue earned by the Government year -wise, in terms of its 
approved share, to enable the Committee to infer whether public interest was 
substantially sub served by such a negotiated settlement as claimed.  
 
12. The Ministry of Civil Aviation in their Action Taken Note submitted as under: 
"The details of Revenue earned by DIAL since awarding the Delhi Airport project 
(i.e. 2006-07 to 2013-14) and Revenue share to AAI and the Net Revenue of AAI 
prior to handing over of IGI Airport on PPP i.e., for 2005-06 is given below: 
                  
 

12 
 
(In Rs. Crore) 
 
FY 
DIAL’s 
total 
Rev 
(A) 
AAI’s 
Share 
 
(B) 
DIAL’s Revenue 
(C) 
= (A-B) 
DIAL’s Net Revenue 
(Profit/Loss) 
(D) 
2006-07 591.38 271.98 319.40 29.33 
2007-08 875.65 402.71 472.94 56.66 
2008-09 958.10 440.63 517.47 -23.49 
2009-10 1171.83 538.92 632.91 19.89 
2010-11 1255.22 577.28 677.94 -450.20 
2011-12 1530.95 704.08 826.87 -1085.40 
2012-13 3333.71 1533.17 1800.54 72.52 
2013-14 4004.44 1838.04 2166.40 410.83 
  
 In addition to above AAI’s revenue share, DIAL has also contributed in the 
revenue to GoI in terms of payment of various taxes (such as Service tax, VAT, 
Income Tax, etc) during the period i.e. 2006 -07 ( Rs.86.42 crores); 2007 -08 
(Rs.106.85 crores); 2008 -09 ( Rs.116.46 crores); 2009 -10 ( Rs.110.79 Crores); 
2010-11 ( Rs.165.17 crores); 2011 -12 ( Rs.237.52 crores); 2012 -13 ( Rs.521.15 
crores) and 2013 -14 ( Rs.593.97 crores). Further, it may be observed from the 
above table that DIAL has, so far, incurred a cumulative loss of Rs. 969.86 crs 
since taking over the operations of IGI Airport, New Delhi in 2006.  This goes on 
to show that this model of PPP has benefitted AAI/Govt. through enhanced 
collection of revenue/taxes. Thu s AAI has been able to develop/modernize its 
other airport in the country, subserving the public interest.  
 The revenue share paid by DIAL for 2008 -09 was Rs. 440.63 crores. Further, a 
part of upfront fee paid initially (Rs. 5.00 crores) was also transfer red to revenue 
showing a total revenue of Rs. 445.63 crores in the financial statements of AAI. 
Hence, as against quoted by Audit, the revenue share of Rs. 440.63 Crores to 
AAI for 2008-09 is correct.  
Further, the Total revenue earned by DIAL for 2010 -11 was Rs. 1261.67 crores. 
After After writing off the “Bad debts” of Rs. 6.46 crores, the revenue of DIAL 
came as Rs. 1255.21 crores. 
The total revenue earned by DIAL for 2012 -13 was Rs. 3324.88 crores. A prior 
period income of approx. Rs. 8.83 crores not sh own under revenue but under 
separate head was to be added to get revenue figure of Rs. 3333.71 crores.” 
 
13. The Committee find that there has been a steady increase in AAI's revenue 
share from 2006 -07 to 2011 -12, and during 2012 -13, the revenue share of A AI 
increased more than double the amount earned during 2011 -12.  However, the 
Committee are surprised to note that the rising trend of revenue earnings could 
not be sustained in the subsequent year i.e. 2013 -14.  The Committee feel that in 

13 
 
such kind of a p roject revenue share usually get upward momentum after the 
initial teething period.  In case of DIAL also during 2012 -13 i.e. after 6 years of its 
operationalisation, the total revenue generated increased from Rs. 271.89 crore in 
2006-07 to Rs. 1533.17 cro re in 2012 -13.  The Committee hope that the figures of 
the revenue generated are correct as  per provisions of OMDA and be apprised of 
the earnings of DIAL/AAI during the last five years. 
 
IV. Commercial Exploitation of Land 
 [Recommendation Para No. 6] 
  
14. The Committee in their Original Report had noted that AAI leased out 4799.09 
acres of land as demised premises at Rs.100 annually to DIAL and for 190.19 acres a 
one time fee of Rs.6.19 crore was charged. As per OMDA, DIAL was allowed to utilize 
5%of the total land area i.e. 4799.09 acres of demised premises (i.e. 239.95 acres) for 
commercial exploitation. DIAL had projected an earning capacity of Rs.681.63 crore per 
acre from the land in terms of license fee over the concession period of 58 years. The 
projected earning capacity for 239.95 acres worked out as Rs.1,63,557 crore wherein 
AAI share as Rs.75220 crore i.e. 45.99 percent of the total revenue. As of February 
2013, DIAL were able to lease out only 45 acres of land. As against the projection of 
Rs.1.92 crore per acre for 2012 -13, DIAL actually received a lease rental of Rs.1.96 
crore per acre. To a query of the Committee, the Ministry stated that the sole bidding 
criterion was the OMDA Fee which was the revenue share of AAI from gross revenue of 
the airport and it captured the earning potential of the airport from both airport activities 
and the land. The decision to allow 5 per cent of land for commercial exploitation was 
taken by EGoM on the advice of Department of Economic Affairs and Financial 
Consultant (FC) and did not go through the  route of market valuation of land. This area 
was subjected to monitoring by AAI and MoCA from time to time. As per OMDA, DIAL 
could utilize 5 per cent of land area of 4608.9 acres (190 acres subsequently transferred 
and not included) of demised premises for Non -Transfer Assets i.e. commercial 
exploitation which works out to 230.44 acres and not 239.95 acres. As on 31.12.2009, 
45.08 acres of land had been awarded by DIAL for commercial exploitation. According 
to the s ubmissions made before the Committee, DIAL suffered a cumulative loss of 
more than Rs.1706 crore whereas in 2013 DIAL was expected to earn Rs.1859 crore 
through aeronautical revenues. The Ministry submitted that as against the permissible 
commercial exploitation of 5 per cent land, DIAL had not so far used even 1% against 

14 
 
the limit of 5%. The Committee had desired to be apprised of the total revenue year -
wise earned by the AAI from DIAL after taking over the Delhi airport as also the 
projected revenue share in the next three years.  
 
15. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note furnished information about the r evenue 
received by AAI from DIAL from FY 2006-07 to 2013-14 as also reproduced at Para 9 of 
this Report. They further submitted as under: 
                                                                                                   
"As per the current tariff, the projected revenue share of AAI  for the next 
three years is as below : 
Assumptions: 1) average effective traffic growth rate @ 3.55 %,  
                        2) Tariff will remain the same at current rates  
 
Head  FY2014-15 FY2015-16 FY2016-17 
Revenue Share - 
AAI 1903.33 1970.90 
 
2040.87 
 
 
Tariff revision is due w.e.f. 1st April, 2014 and the calculation given above 
may undergo a change after finalization of Tariff by AERA for 2014-2019.  
The Assumptions for arriving at the projected revenue of DIAL are 
considered based on (i) USD conversion rate (considered @ Rs. 64 per 
dollar), (ii) Aeronautical Traffic mix for Aero income taken as per previous 
corresponding twelve months trend (Seasonal impact) and (iii) Traffic 
Growth. Based on the above assumptions, the Actual revenue received for 
2013-14 (Rs. 1838.04 crores) was extrap olated by the effective traffic 
growth of 3.55 % to get the figure of Rs. 1903.33 crores. The figure for 
2014-15, 2015 -16 and 2016 -17 was similarly projected assuming the 
traffic growth of 3.55%. However, the actual revenue received for 2014 -15 
is Rs. 1967.80 crore in place of projected figure of Rs. 1903.33 crores due 
to higher effective traffic growth." 
 The actual revenue share (Monthly Annual Fee) received by AAI 
from DIAL is as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Financial Year Amount (Rs. in 
crores) 
2015 – 2016 2,304.15 
2016 – 2017  2,634.84 
2017 – 2018 1,761.47 
TOTAL 6,700.46 

15 
 
16. The Committee find that the Ministry of Civil Aviation have furnished the 
information regarding the projected revenue share of AAI from 2014-15 to 2016-17 
whereas the thrust of the recommendation of the Committee was on 'commercial 
exploitation of land'. The Committee  undertook a local visit to the Indira Gandhi 
International Airport, Delhi on 7 March, 2017 to ascertain actual implementation of 
the PPP proj ect by the DIAL . They were dismayed to note the unscientific  
commercial exploitation/encroachment of the walking space meant for 
passengers inside the security hold area where the restaurants, duty free shops 
and executive lounges  etc. have come up . The Committee note from the 
submission of DG, CISF that DIAL has been ignoring the security concerns raised 
by the CISF  that it would be difficult for them to evacuate passengers in large 
numbers, in case of emergency, as the passage has become zig -zag. The 
Committee are surprised to note that the  advice of security agencies is  being 
overlooked for commercial interests. The Committee are also dismayed to note 
that that the license holders are using the licensed land and space areas for their 
offices in separate wings and desire the MoCA to take immediate  action in this 
regard. 
 
V Airport Development Fee  
           [Recommendation Para No.7] 
 
17. The Committee in their Original Report had noted that Article 13.1 of OMDA 
specifically provides that the “JVC shall arrange financing and/or meeting all financing 
requirements through suitable debt and equity contributions in order to comply with its 
obligation including development of airports pursuant to the Master Plan and the major 
development plans”. The Committee were, however, dismayed to observe that instead 
of finding ways of debt and equity contribution, in February 2009, MoCA allowed DIAL 
to levy a Development Fee (DF) at IGIA for the purpose of funding or financing the cost 
of up-gradation, expansion or development of the Airport in contravention of the 
provisions of Article 13.1 of OMDA. The rates of levy of DF were Rs.200 per departing 
domestic passenger and Rs.1300 per departing international passenger. The Ministry 
submitted that the DIAL in 2008 proposed the development of the airport at an 
estimated cost of Rs.8975 crore but the proposal to collect fund for the development by 
way of refunda ble security deposit from the hospitality district was rejected by the 
Ministry on the ground that excessive high order of security deposit for about five and a 

16 
 
half years of annual lease rental would impact revenue shareable by AAI. Lenders also 
refused to enhance the debt due to constraints on serviceability of debt. Furthermore, 
only Rs.1471 crore worth refundable security deposit could be arranged by the DIAL 
from disposal of commercial land as against an originally envisaged amount of Rs.2,738 
crore due to restrictions imposed by MoCA/AAI. Hence in terms of Section 22A of the 
AAI Act 1994 the Ministry approved levy of Development Fee purely on ad -hoc basis to 
bridge the funding gap of Rs.1827 crore for a period of 36 months. Further, the 
Supreme Court declared that w.e.f. 01.01.2009 no DF could be levied or collected from 
the embarking passengers at major airports under Section 22A of the 1994 Act unless 
AERA determined the rate of such DF. Notably the levy of DF was not quashed by the 
Court. DIAL collec ted DF amounting to Rs.2302.20 crore uptill January 2013 and an 
amount of Rs.1262.01 crore proposed to be recovered till March 2016 (total Rs.3564.21 
crore). The DF was later reduced to Rs.100 per domestic departing passenger and 
Rs.600 per international d eparting passenger w.e.f. 01.01.2013 from Rs.200/- and 
Rs.1300/- respectively. The Committee would like to know the circumstances and the 
rationale for fixing such a high Development Fee which was later reduced substantially. 
 
18. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry submitted as under : 
 
"The basic rationale for levy of Development Fee is aimed at funding or financing 
the cost of upgradation, modernisation or development of the airport under 
section 22A of the AAI Act, 1994. De velopment Fee collected was to be utilised 
for the development of Aeronautical Assets only, which are ‘Transfer Assets’ to 
Airport Authority of India (AAI) in terms of OMDA. AERA upon an application by 
DIAL determined DF in respect of IGI Airport, New Delh i after due consultation 
process with the stakeholders, vide Order No. 28/2011-12 dated 14.11.2011. The 
rate of levy of DF were Rs. 200/ -per embarking domestic passenger and Rs. 
1300/ -per embarking international passenger.  Subsequently, AERA vide its 
Order no. 30/2012 -13 dated 28th December, 2012 revised the rate of DF to Rs 
100/- per departing domestic passenger and Rs 600/ - per departing international 
passenger. Based on the original levy of DF rates, the period for billing of DF was 
upto May 2013 for S tage 1 and from June 2013 to February 2014 for Stage -2. 
With the reduced rate of DF and taking in to account the remaining amount of DF 
(Rs. 1413.02 crore), as on 01.01.2013, the DF billing is expected to continue till 
April, 2016. Hence, the rate of DF was subsequently reduced by AERA by way of 
extending the period of collection, keeping in mind the amount which had 
remained to be collected. It is evident from the above factual position that the 
actual amount of DF to be collected has remained the same. Th e reduction in 
rate has resulted in an increase in the period of its levy only".  
 
19. The Committee observe that Development Fee (DF) was levied w.e.f. 
February, 2009 at the rate of Rs. 200 per embarking domestic passenger and Rs. 

17 
 
1300 per embarking international passenger. The period for billing of DF was upto 
May, 2013 for stage I and from June , 2013 to February, 2014 for stage II. However, 
it was reduced to Rs. 100 per domestic embarking passenger and Rs. 600 per 
international embarking passenger w.e.f.  1.1.2013 by the Airport Economic 
Regulatory Authority (AERA) by extending the period of collection of DF upto 
April, 2013 though the amount of DF to be collected remained the same.  The 
Committee are disappointed to note that both MoCA and DIAL took d ecisions 
against the interests of the passengers which ended in adverse decision by the 
apex court.  The Committee are perturbed to note that the Action Taken Note 
submitted by the Ministry failed to explain the facts/conditions and the reasons 
for fixing high Development Fee which was subsequently reduced substan tially 
w.e.f. from 01.01.2013. Therefore, the Committee reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and desire the Ministry to explain the reasons for not doing due 
diligence and charging high Development Fee which was reduced subsequently. 
 
VI. Deficient Land Records at IGI Airport 
 [Recommendation Para No.9] 
 
20. The Committee in their Original Report had noted that as per records of the 
Directorate of land of the AAI, as on 9 February 2011, the total land available at IGI 
Airport was 51 06 acres of which 4799.09 acres was Demised Premises and 306.91 
acres was Carved out Assets. However, details of the land such as Khasra number, 
land award, etc. were not available for verification by the Audit. The Mini stry put the 
onus of maintaining such land records on the other Ministries/Departments who had 
been looking after the affairs of the airport since its inception prior to independence. 
Regarding total area handed over to DIAL, the Ministry stated that it wa s based on the 
demised area Map which was shown in schedule 25 of OMDA and schedule 1 of the 
Lease Deed. The Committee were distressed to note that in the absence of proper 
records of the land of IGIA and also given the fact that no joint physical survey w as 
conducted, public land was transferred to DIAL.   Given the commercial potential of the 
public land and also the right of DIAL to commercially exploit 5% of the land  the 
Committee recommended that necessary survey of the land be undertaken and physical 
markings erected to identify the demised land and carved out assets for future and the 
Committee be apprised within six months.  
 
 

18 
 
21. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have submitted as under: 
 
"M/s DIAL has independently carried out a survey in 2013 of the land of IGI 
airport through an external hired agency. The agency carried out the survey 
using total solution and Differential Global Positioning System (DGPS) and 
developed an Auto Computer Aided Design (CAD) drawing. Further, the required 
action to survey the land including physical markings in respect of all land – 
demised premises, carved out assets and excluded assets is being taken by the 
airport operator. This being a huge exercise the work could not be completed in 6 
months and it is anticipated that the work will be completed by 30 th June, 2015.  
The additional time is required since the existing records are not available and 
the ownership details are also not readily available.The Ministry further submitted 
that DIAL had appointed M/s Geokno India Private Limited for carrying out the 
necessary survey as per the recommendations of the Committee.  As per their 
findings the area of different assets have been listed below : 
                     (i)   Total survey area = 4773.42 acres 
                     (ii)   Carved out assets = 42.69 acres 
                     (iii)  Excluded premises =247.52 acres 
                      (iv)    Demised premises =4483.21 acres." 
  
22. The Committee are surprised to note that the area of different assets such 
as 'total land', 'carved out assets' and 'demised premises' etc. listed in the survey 
report undertaken by M/s Geokno India Private Limited vary from the records of 
the Directorate of Land of AAI.  The Committee feel that accuracy in the area of 
different assets is of paramount importance in view of the high commercial value 
of the land and consequent right of DIAL to commercially exploit 5% of the land.  
Therefore, the Committee urg e upon the Ministry to find out reasons for the 
discrepancy in the areas of different assets.  They would also like the Ministry to 
find the reasons , if any, in distorting the areas of  above mentioned  different 
assets.  The Committee would like to  have re-verification of land records by the 
appropriate authority and  be apprised of the precise details of the areas of 
different assets and the reasons for discrepancies therein and the punitive action  
taken, if any, by the Ministry in this regard. 
 
VII Revenue Sharing 
 [Recommendation Para No. 13] 
 
23. The Committee in their Original Report had noted that the Dual Till takes into 
account 30 per cent of the revenue generated by non -aeronautical services and this 
gave an unfair advantage to the DIAL at the cost o f Government/passengers. The 
Ministry stated inter-alia that EGoM on 15.02.2005 decided that 'hybrid/shared till' 'price 

19 
 
cap approach' be adopted for fixation of aeronautical tariff with 30% of non -aeronautical 
revenue to be considered for subsidizing the aeronautical tariff. Accordingly, these 
provisions were set out in the SSA and it was also mentioned about establishment of 
AERA to take into consideration provisions of OMDA offered by the Central Government 
in any agreement or memorandum of understanding  or otherwise. 30% of non -
aeronautical revenue should be taken into account by AERA while determining the 
aeronautical charges. In other words, 46% of the remaining 70% of the non-aeronautical 
revenue was to be shared with AAI by DIAL. The Committee felt t hat the 'shared till' had 
actually increased the burden on the travelling passengers as the aeronautical tariffs 
were not subsidized by a significant part of non -aeronautical tariff. Further, most of the 
non-aeronautical services which were low capital int ensive and high revenue services 
were frozen in OMDA and differ significantly from the provisions of AERA Act. The  
Committee had,  therefore, urged Government to consider this aspect while awarding 
contracts for other airports under PPP in future. 
 
24. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note submitted as under: 
"In regard to the suggestions of the PAC, it is mentioned that Government of 
India is in the process of formulation of a policy on Economic Regulation for 
airport sec tor keeping in view all aspects . Further comments of MoCA:  At 
present, there is no proposal for implementation of PPP model under Operation, 
Management and Development Agreement, as done in case of Delhi and 
Mumbai Airports.  The proposal for implementation under PPP model for 
Chennai, Kolkata, Jaipur and Ahmedabad is cancelled." 
 
25. The Committee note that the non -aeronautical services which were low 
capital intensive and high revenue services were frozen in OMDA and differ 
significantly from the provision of AERA Act and had urged the Government to 
consider this aspect while awarding contracts under PPP model for other 
airports.  The Committee note the initiati on of the process of formulation of a 
policy on Economic Regulation for the airport sector  by the Ministry . The 
Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to expedite the formulation of the policy 
and apprise the Committee in this regard within six months of the presentation of 
the Report. 
 
 
  

20 
 
VIII. Adverse impact on revenue sharing by AAI on outsourcing of non -
aeronautical services by DlAL 
 [Recommendation Para No. 14] 
 
26. The Committee noted that many of the services had been outsourced by DIAL to 
as many as 11 Join t Venture companies. Equity share s of DIAL in these companies 
range from 26 per cent to 50 per cent. The revenue share in these companies ranges 
from 10 per cent to 61 per cent. DIAL also collected Rs. 503 crore from these ventures 
as security deposit and reflected as unsecured loans in i ts financial statement. When 
queried, the MoCA clarified that the aggregate security deposits collected by DIAL from 
the 11 JVs is Rs. 512.82 crore out of which about Rs. 190 crore has been ploughed 
back as equity by DIAL in the JVs and the remaining amoun t has been used to meet 
pad of the cash losses that DIAL has suff ered in the last 2 years i.e. 20 10-11 and 2011-
12 (Rs. 840.79 crores). These deposits are refundable at the end of the concession 
term. "The Financial statements of these JVs form part of Ind ependent Audit Report for 
each quarter. The Ministry categorically ave rred that none of the selected 
concessionaires are Group companies or affiliates on any of the DIAL shareholders. On 
the issue of JVs, the Ministry of Law & Justice opined that JVs  are permissible under 
Article 8.5.7 of OMDA and Article 1 1.1.2 imposes an obligation to pay @ 45.99% of the 
projected overall revenue for said year. However, it is silent about any share in the 
revenue generated or to be generated by the Sub -contractors formed or to be formed. 
The apprehensions of the Committee that the outsourcing of non -aero services by DIAL 
would adversely impact revenue sharing wer e sought to be allayed by the M oCA by 
stating that the efforts were made by DIAL to increase the non -aeronautical revenue 
and the same was raised from Rs. 315 crore to over Rs. 1000 crore in seven years. 
This meant that to the possible extent aero r evenue would be offset and consequently 
tariff rates would come down. The Committee also note that given the  equity 
participation of DIAL in these JVs, these sub -contracts are violation of the principle of 
arms-length as enshrined in the OMDA. The Committee would  like to kno w how the 
revenue share would go up once the capacity of cargo operations and car park ar e fully 
utilized especially when the income from these two have shown a declining trend after 
these businesses wore transferred to JVs.  As recommended b y the Committee 
elsewhere in this regard, a transparent mechanism be evolved after fullest consultation 
with the stakeholders with respect to the audit of PPP projects and the Committee 
apprised in due course. 

21 
 
  
27. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note submitted as under: 
"Further, although, there is an inbuilt mechanism to ensure that the JVs formed 
by M/s DIAL operate at arm's length from DIAL, this Ministry got carried out a 
Special Audit through DIAL by engaging M/ Rawla  & Co. Chartered Accountants 
on the following points:  
 i.   Formation and Operation of JV's of DIAL i s as per the provisions of 
OMDA; 
 ii.  The capital structure of these JV Companies; 
 iii. Shareholding of DIAL and GMR group companies in the Equity of these 
companies; 
 iv. Audit practices and corporate governance in these companies. 
 The Special Auditor has, inter -alia, observed that M /s DIAL has not violated the 
provisions of OMDA and formation of the JVs was as per the agreement. Though there is 
temporary drop in the revenue from Cargo & Car Park activities, the same cannot be attributed 
solely to the formation of JVs for providing these services. DIAL had never intended to carry out 
these services at its own. lt is a global practice that the non -aeronautical activities are not 
carried out by the airport operator itself but through third parties. As regards Cargo, in the initial 
period the revenue share received by AAl from cargo operations was high as DIAL had to do 
self-operation. lt was never intended to be self -handled by DIAL in the long run. However, DIAL 
after taking over the airport from AAl, had to manage the cargo operations for a limited period till 
the two concessionaires were identified as per requirement of OMDA. With investment of 
approx. Rs. 430 Crores up to Mar'15 by the concessionaires, the capacity of the cargo terminals 
has increased manifolds. With the growth of cargo market, the revenue share from cargo activity 
will increase gradually. Similarly, in case of Car Park, initially it was surface parking. However, 
surface parking was not an option for lon g term operations. With MLCP (M ulti-Level Car 
Parking), a much bett er and necessary infrastructure was created requiring an invest ment of 
approx. Rs. 300 Crores.  The revenue share from parking is gradually increasing (with 
revenue share increasing from 10% to 40%), mainly to take care of loan commitments 
which may be seen from the following table: 
(In Rs. Crores) 
FY Cargo Car Parking 
2010-11 138.59 9.7 
2011-12 128.46 5.47 
2012-13 128.47 5.76 
2013-14 140.73 9.65 
2014-15 156.24 10.23 
, 
As regards the issues raised by the Audit in respect of Report of M/s Rawla , it is 
stated that the bidding process was already reviewed by M/s Thakur Vaidyanath 
Aiyar & Co., who were appointed by AAI, and they confirmed that formation of 
the JVs (i) did not lead to revenue loss to AAI, (ii) was OMDA compliant and (iii) 
was on sound business principles." 
 

22 
 
29. The Committee had noted that many of the services had been outsourced 
by DIAL to as many as 11 Joint Venture Companies and equity shares of DIAL in 
these companies ranged from 26 to 50% and further, revenue share in these 
companies ranged from 10 to 61%. The Committee note from the reply of the 
MoCA that it had got carried out a special audit through DIAL by engaging a 
chartered accountant firm  and subsequently by AAI  which observed that DIAL 
has not violated the provisions of OMDA and formation of JVs was as per the 
agreement. The Committee however, note with concern that the special audit was 
not comprehensive and transparent as the auditor failed to comment on 
important issues and was also for a limited period from 2010-12. The Ministry also 
stated that D IAL has taken minority interest in few concessions only after award 
of the concessions with no change in terms. The Committee appreciate the fact 
that revenue share from the cargo activity and car parking have increased 
gradually from the year 2012 -13 onwa rds. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the updated status of the JVs to whom contracts for non -aeronautical 
services have been awarded, respective share of GMR/DIAL and details regarding 
the Chairperson/ Directors in the Board of these JVs.  The Committee desire to 
know the Revenue earnings during the last five years of all the Joint Venture 
Partners/Subsidiaries separately through aeronautical/non-aeronautical services 
and expect a strict mechanism to cross check their books of accounts.  The 
Committee also wish the Ministry to apprise the details of the subsequent audit 
by M/s Thakur Viadyanath Aiyar  of company appointed by AAI so as to ascertain 
the rectification of the deficiencies in the special audit  done through M/s Rawla  
by DIAL. 
 
..... 
  

23 
 
PART-B 
 The Committee  undertook a local visit to the Indira  Gandhi International 
Airport, Delhi on 7 March, 2017 to ascertain actual implementation of the PPP 
project by the DIAL. The Committee visited arrival and departure lounges at both 
Terminal 1 and Terminal 3 and the Airport Operations Control Centre (AOCC) at 
Terminal-3. The Committee noted that the Terminal -1 is used by some of the 
airlines for domestic departures/ arrivals. At Terminal -3, the Members formed 
small groups and visited the International Departure Lounge and inspected the 
commercial usage of th e space available for passengers especially the 
restaurants, shopping, duty free complexes and executive lounges.  
 Thereafter, the Committee had an informal  discussion with the 
representatives of the Ministry of Civil Aviation, Airport Economic Regulator y 
Authority, Airports Authority of India, CISF, Air India, Inter Globe(Indigo) Airlines, 
Jet Airways and Air Passengers Association of India. When asked about the 
reasons for allotment of huge areas to commercial establishments, the 
Ministry(MoCA) replied that DIAL had so far used around 6% area of the terminal 
buildings put together against the 20% as per IATA Airport Development 
Reference Manual for commercial purposes. DG, CISF, however, stated that these 
commercial establishments will be a big hindrance  to evacuate people in case of 
emergency and the Ministry has not responded to their letter in this regard. The  
Passengers Association has in its written memorandum submitted that the 
airport charges huge rentals from vendors and food chains operating fro m the 
airport premises with the in -built provision for revising them periodically and the 
services provided at the airports are expensive and lounges are dirty and food 
quality is poor. Further, adequate facilities for seamless travel of passengers are 
lacking. It was pointed out by the APAI that though feedback forms are provided, 
the actual experience of passengers is nightmarish, as response by the 
concerned officials on these complaint/feedback at both the terminals of the IGI 
Airport is poor. 
 The details of the local visit undertaken by the Committee along with all the 
issues raised by the Members are elucidated in the Tour Report which is 
appended to this Report. The observations/ recommendations of the Committee 
after the local visit to IGI Airport are contained in the succeeding paragraphs. The 
Committee desire MoCA to furnish their replies on both the issues contained in 
Tour Report and the observations/recommendations contained in the succeeding 
paragraphs within one month of presentation of this Report to the Parliament. 
 The Committee note from the background note submitted by the MoCA that 
"While governments work to serve the public in capital investment projects, 
private partners are understandably focused on recouping their investment and 
on generating a profit." The Committee while acknowledging that private partners 
focus on generating a profit are of the firm opinion that the underlying philosophy 
of a PPP project is welfare of the people of the country as national resources(land 

24 
 
in this case )of the country are harnessed for generating revenue in these 
projects. However, the Committee after visiting the IGI Airport are disappointed to 
note that the commercial interests are dictating the modalities in this case. 
 During the visit, the Committee  found that the operators have not allocated 
space inside the terminal buildings at Terminal -1 and 3 scientifically. The 
Committee observed that the land allotted for commercial use, though, within the 
permissible limit, as per the submission of the DIAL/ MoCA, is obtruding into the 
areas meant for passenger movement. The Committee opined that the operators 
have not thought about the safety of passengers while allotting spaces inside the 
terminal premises as retail shops have cropped up at every nook and co rner and 
some of them protruding sharply into the walking spaces. Members of the 
Committee felt that mishap or disaster could be foreseen given the present state 
of narrow lanes for movement of passengers. The Committee felt that 
comfort/safety of users should not be compromised for commercial interests and 
took a serious note of the unscientific allocation of areas to commercial 
establishments inside the terminal buildings. The Committee desire that the 
passages inside the terminal buildings should be free d from these retail shops 
and a plan for straightening up the passages may be prepared and executed 
urgently. The Committee while  noting that there is no aerobridge at Terminal -1 
desire that aerobridges may be provided at the terminal for enabling passeng ers 
to board and disembark easily and comfortably. 
 The Committee strongly deprecate the complicity of MoCA ,which has a 
representative on the Board of DIAL, and AAI, which has a 26% share in the DIAL, 
in commercial use of the spaces inside terminal buildi ngs without looking into 
the security concerns, passenger safety and ac tual need for such retail 
shops.The Committee are also dismayed to note that the MoCA has not given 
heed to even the security concerns raised by the CISF. The Committee 
recommend that t he utilization of space inside the terminal buildings should be 
done (i) in coordination with the security agencies (ii)on the basis of cognitive 
psychology of the passengers and (iii) after giving due consideration to the safety 
and smooth movement of the  passengers not only during normal times but also 
in case of emergency/ exigency. The Committee desire the DIAL to carry out 
modifications as suggested by the CISF for ensuring compliance to the safety 
norms and obtain a safety certificate from the CISF at  the earliest and apprise the 
Committee accordingly. 
 The Committee are of the strong view that, though, DIAL had so far used 
around 6% area of the terminal buildings put together against the 20% as per 
IATA Airport Development Reference Manual for commerc ial purposes, any 
further allotment of areas for commercial use will compromise the safety of the 
passengers and the security at the airport. The Committee feel that instead of 
going by the reference manuals which prescribe the maximum limits, in general, 
the criteria should be situation on the ground, which , in this case, does not allow 

25 
 
the present type of commercial  expansion. The Committee are of the strong view 
that any more commercial expansion inside the terminal buildings would not only 
lead to cho king of the area but also restrict smooth movement of passengers. 
The Committee, therefore, desire that the MoCA take up this matter in the right 
earnest with DIAL for stipulation of a reasonable limit for commercial use in the 
OMDA itself. 
 Though, due to paucity of time, the Committee could not visit the land and 
space area provided on license basis for commercial development at Delhi 
Airport managed/ operated by GMR, the Committee understand that these license 
holders are using the licensed land and spac e areas for large number of other 
offices in separate wings which raise concern about further commercial 
exploitation of these spaces. The Committee are of the strong view that the 
operators have not made any study about the passenger movement, their 
accommodation needs  and accessibility to the airport before licensing out the 
land which is evident from a large  number of hotels cropping up in the area and 
consequent illegal use of the licensed land for other purposes. The Committee 
further note that EGoM decided in its meeting held on 22nd June 2005 that all 
commercial activities unrelated to the airport should not be part of OMDA. 
Accordingly, AAI is not empowered under the AAI Act, 1994 to lease land to the 
proposed Concessionaire for commercial activiti es listed in Schedule 19 of the 
draft OMDA Agreement like building of golf courses, business parks, high tech 
parks, commercial offices, leisure facilities, commercial arcades, sports 
complexes, shopping complexes and convention centres etc. unconnected wi th 
the scope of airport development and management. The Committee strongly 
deprecate the inaction on the part of the MoCA and desire that immediate action 
may be taken against all such license holders who are running other businesses 
from the licensed land  by initiating an independent investigation and revocation 
of the licenses of those found guilty.  
 The Committee, further, note that the Air Passengers Association of India 
has also raised grievances regarding the poor state of facilities at the IGI Airpo rt 
which include restriction in safe movement of passengers, dirty lounges and 
restrooms during peak hours, low quality food and ill -managed food courts, long 
queues, inadequate seating facility at the T -1 and T -3 lounges, inconvenient 
baggage handling cou nters, lack of transport connectivity between T -I and T -3, 
poor cart facilities, uneven terrain outside Terminal and long queues both outside 
the Terminals and inside at the security check points etc. Further, the Committee 
were told that , though, feedback forms are available , no action is taken on these 
suggestions/complaints. The Committee deplore the laxity of MoCA for not taking  
strict action against the operators in this regard. The Committee desire  the 
Ministry to undertake a review of the managem ent of crowd of passengers and 
the facilities offered at the Airport and take necessary action for fast -tracking/ 
smoothening up the processes and improving the standard of facilities being 
offered. The Committee further desire that the CISF personnel depl oyed at the 

26 
 
airport be adequately trained to handle large number of passengers promptly and 
courteously. Also, a uniform format for e -tickets may be prescribed for the 
airlines since different formats may not be comprehensible to the security 
personnel. Fu rther, the menace of touts may also be dealt with both CISF and 
Delhi Police together as difference in jurisdictional spheres help touts in getting 
away easily. 
 The Committee note that the Levy of Development Fee (DF) by DIAL at IGI 
Airport for financing the cost of upgradation, expansion or development of 
Airport was in contravention of the provisions of OMDA, AAI Act and AERA Act.  
The Committee, further, note  that the MoCA had agreed to the levy of DF on 
adhoc basis to the extent of Rs. 1827 crore for 36 months. However, due to the 
intervention of Delhi High Court and subsequently by Supreme Court there was a 
substantial reduction in DF from Rs.200 per domestic passenger and Rs.1300 per 
international passenger to Rs. 100 and Rs.600 respectively w.e.f. 1  January, 2013. 
The Committee are disappointed to note that both MoCA and DIAL took d ecisions 
against the interests of the passengers which ended in adverse decision by the 
apex court.  The Committee are of the strong view that capital requirements 
should not be fulfilled by levying unethical Developmental Fee on the passengers 
who are made to contribute towards the airport infrastructure  which is the sole 
responsibility of the DIAL and its shareholders. In fact, passengers have been 
made to pay for the infrastructure, the aeronautical services, the non-aeronautical 
services and the 26% contributed by the AAI is also public money in addition to 
the land which is a national resource. Further, DIAL is increasing its earnings by 
acquiring shares in the Joint V entures that were awarded the contracts for non -
aeronautical services. DIAL is also levying the car parking charges in a time slot 
manner for parking the vehicles in the MLCP infrastructure created at a cost of ` 
300 crores. The Committee, however, note wi th concern that the time taken from 
receipt of the parking token and the parking of the vehicle is roughly half an hour. 
The Committee desire that operators may think of other ways of raising capital 
and should not in future impose such burden on the passengers. 
 The Committee had noted that many of the services had been outsourced 
by DIAL to as many as 11 Joint Venture Companies and equity shares of DIAL in 
these companies ranged from 26 to 50% and further, revenue share in these 
companies ranged from 10 t o 61%. The Committee note from the reply of the 
MoCA that it had got carried out a special audit through DIAL by engaging a 
chartered accountant firm which observed that DIAL has not violated the 
provisions of OMDA and formation of JVs was as per the agree ment. The Ministry 
further stated that DIAL has taken minority interest in few concessions only after 
award of the concessions with no change in terms. The Committee, however, 
note that the auditor's report confirmed that representatives of DIAL are Direct or - 
Chairman in the Board of JV companies pointing towards breach of principle of 
arm's length. The Committee are disappointed to note that the MoCA got a special 

27 
 
audit done, to look into the transactions made by DIAL, through DIAL 
conveniently overlooking the principles of financial propriety.  
 Further, the Committee had noted that public land was transferred to DIAL 
without proper records of the land and without carrying out any joint physical 
survey to determine the exact area to be transferred. The Co mmittee were 
dismayed to note the MoCA's reply have, shockingly, stated that M/s DIAL had 
independently carried out a survey in 2013 of the land at IGI Airport through an 
external hired agency which is a huge exercise since the existing records were 
not available and the ownership details were not readily available. The Committee 
observe that the MoCA transferred the public land without any records in 2006 
and then got the survey done independently by the operator in 2013 which could 
only be completed by 20 15.Further, the Committee are surprised to note that the 
area of different assets such as 'total land', 'carved out assets' and demised 
premises etc. listed in the survey report undertaken by the external agency vary 
from the records of land of AAI. The Co mmittee are disappointed to note such 
delinquency on part of MoCA in managing national assets.  
 The Committee are of the view that MoCA has apparently gone overboard 
while extending concessions to DIAL, has been privy to preposterous commercial 
expansion at the Airport and has been disappointing in monitoring the 
implementation of PPP project by DIAL. The Committee while endorsing the view 
that policy of expansion of airports and growth in aviation sector should be in 
tandem with the Government’s objective  of making flying affordable for everyone 
desire that a cost-benefit analysis be carried out to see whether such projects are 
actually serving the public interests or only benefitting the private partners.  
 The Committee while noting that DIAL enjoys the unilateral right to extend 
the concession period for another 30 years on the identical terms and conditions 
provided no JVC event default takes place during the 20th and 25th year of the 
first concession period are of the view that giving a unilateral righ t to an entity to 
extend the concession period on same terms and conditions, without any 
thorough scrutiny of the performance during the first concession period is bound 
to make that entity complacent in its approach. The Committee opine that since 
10 years have been completed, a review of the performance of DIAL be 
undertaken by a Committee of Secretaries(CoS) which should be followed by 5 
yearly reviews to ensure that the operators have adhered to the laid down 
standards and the principles of financial pr opriety, managed the national 
resources efficiently and serviced the people satisfactorily. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                               MALLIKARJUN KHARGE 
  December, 2018                                                           Chairperson, 
  Agrahayana,1940 (Saka)                                                           Public Accounts Committee 

28 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
CONTAINED IN THEIR NINETY-FOURTH REPORT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations  17 
 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee  Total : 11  
which have been accepted by the Government:  Percentage: 64.71 
 Para Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 8,10-13, 15 and16  
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the    Total : 0  
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of   Percentage: 0 
 the reply of the Government: 
 
 Para Nos.  -Nil 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of   Total : 5 
which replies of the Government have not been   Percentage: 29.41 
 accepted by the Committee and which require  
 reiteration: 
  
 Para Nos. 3, 6, 7, 9 and 14 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of   Total : 1 
which the Government have furnished interim replies:  Percentage: 5.88 
  
 Para No.    17 
 
 