94

WORKING OF CENTRAL BOARD OF FILM
CERTIFICATION (CBFC) AND ACADEMIC
ACTIVITIES OF SATYAJIT RAY FILM AND
TELEVISION INSTITUTE, KOLKATA FOR THE
PERIOD FROM 2010-11 to 2014-15

MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND
BROADCASTING

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2017-18)

NINETY-FOURTH REPORT

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

जयचते

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2128

NINTY-FOURTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2017-18)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

WORKING OF CENTRAL BOARD OF
FILM CERTIFICATION (CBFC) AND
ACADEMIC ACTIVITIES OF SATYAJIT
RAY FILM AND TELEVISION INSTITUTE,
KOLKATA FOR THE PERIOD FROM
2010-11 to 2014-15

MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND
BROADCASTING

Presented to Lok Sabha on: 28.03.2018

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 28.03.2018

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

MARCH, 2018 /CHAITRA, 1940 (Saka)


CONTENTS

PAGES
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2016-17)... (ili)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2017-18)...... (iv)
INTRODUCTION... (vii)
REPORT
PART-1
| Introductory
i Working of Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC)
ill Audit Review ee
IV Timelines in issue of certificates
Vv Film certification process
Vi Certification of imported films
Vil Validity of certicates
Vill Academic activities of Satyajit Ray Film and Television Institute Kolkata

for the period from 2010-11 to 2014-15

IX Introductory
x Audit Review
Xt Student Admissions
XII Course implementation
Xitl Delay in course completion
XIV No research conducted
XV Short term courses
XVI Post graduate course in television
XVII Captive TV project
XVIII Inadequate teaching
XIX Adhocism in evaluation

PART - Il

Observations/Recommendations on Working of Central Board of Film

Certification (CBFC)

Observations/Recommendations on Academic activities of Satyajit Ray
Film and Television Institute (SRFTI), Kolkata for the period from 2010-

11 to 2014-15


APPENDICES

। Minutes of the 227 sitting of the PAC (2016-17) held on 6" January,
2017

I Minutes of the iting of the PAC (2017-18) held on 23% March, 2018

औँ Not appended um Wu cycloery lech श्र के अपन


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2017-18)

Shri Mallikarjun Kharge - Chairperson

MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

hri Sudip Bandyopadhyay

hri Subhash Chandra Baheria

hri Prem Singh Chandumajra

ri Nishikant Dubey

hri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
hri Bhartruhari Mahtab

mt. Riti Pathak

hri Neiphiu Rioh!

hri Abhishek Singh

tof. Ram Shanker

CP NAYS YN
PANNANHRNAANRN

Dr. Kirit Somaiya

hri Anurag Singh Thakur
Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi
Dr. P. Venugopal

जी की YN SOS
n

RAJYA SABHA

6. Shri Naresh Agrawal
17. bri Satyavrat Chaturvedi

s
18. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
19. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan?
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy?
21... 8
2. SI

Ss

hri Ajay Sancheti
bri Bhupender Yadav

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh - Additional Secretary

2. Shri T. Jaya Kumar - Director
3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary

1 Ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon acceptance of his resignation from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 22
February, 2018. .

2 Elected w.e.f. 29 December, 2017 in lieu of vacancy caused due to retirement of Shri Shantaram Naik,

3 ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 18 August, 2017 and
re-elected w.e.f. 29 December, 2017.


ee ND एछ फ्री ७ N

moe
- Oo

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2016-17)

Prof. K.V. Thomas - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
Shri Nishikant Dubey
Prof. Richard Hay
Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Smt. Riti Pathak
Shri Neiphiu Rio
Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
Shri Abhishek Singh
Dr. Kirit Somaiya
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi
Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA
Shri Naresh Agrawal
Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
* Shri Bhupender Yadav
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Shri Shantaram Naik
Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
Shri Ajay Sancheti

* Elected w.e.f. 09.08.2016 vice Shri Vijay Goel, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f. 05.07.2016.


INTRODUCTION

॥ the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee, having been authorised by the
Committee, do present this Ninety-fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on "WORKING OF
CENTRAL BOARD OF FILM CERTIFICATION (CBFC)" and "ACADEMIC ACTIVITIES OF
SATYAJIT RAY FILM AND TELEVISION INSTITUTE, KOLKATA FOR THE PERIOD
FROM 2010-11 to 2014-15" based on Para Nos. 11.1 and 11.2 respectively of the
C&AG's Report No.11 of 2016 relating to Ministry of Information and Broadcasting.

2. The above-mentioned Report of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India was laid on
the Table of the House on 02.08.2016.

3. The Public Accounts Committee (2016-17) took up the subject for detailed examination
and report. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Information
and Broadcasting, Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC), Satyajit Ray Film and Television
Institute (9२-11), Kolkata, Indian Motion Pictures Producers’ Association (IMPPA) and the Film
and Television Producers Guild of India Ltd. (FTPGIL) on the subject at their Sitting held on
06.01.2016. The subject relating to Satyajit Ray Film and Television Institute (SRFTI) was also
discussed by the PAC (2016-17) during its study visit to the Institution at Kolkata on 28,02.2017.
However, due to paucity of time, the subject was carried forward to PAC (2017-18) and
accordingly, a draft Report was prepared and thereafter the Committee considered and adopted
the same at their Sitting held on 23.03.2018. The minutes of the Sittings are appended to the
Report.

4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations of
the Committee have been printed in thick type and form Part- Il of the Report.

5. The Committee would also like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC), Satyajit
Ray Film and Television Institute (SRFTI), Kolkata, Indian Motion Pictures Producers’
Association (IMPPA) and the Film and Television Producers Guild of India Ltd. (FTPGIL) for
tendering evidence before them and furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in
connection with the examination of the subject.

6. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered fo them in
the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India and the Committee
Secretariat in preparation of the Report.

NEW DELHI; MALLIKARJUN KHARGE
23 March, 2018 Chairperson

02 Chaitra, 1940 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


REPORT
PARTI

1. INTRODUCTORY

1. The Committee selected Chapter 11 of the C&AG's Report No.11 of 2016
relating to Ministry of Information and Broadcasting (Mol&B) for detailed examination
and report. Para 11.1 relates to Working of Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC)
while para 11.2 relates to Academic activities of Satyajit Ray Film and Television
Institute, Kolkata for the period from 2010-11 to 2014-15.

2. Audit scrutiny of Para 11.1 of Chapter 11 of C&AG's Report No. 11 of 2016
revealed many systemic deficiencies’ in the working of Central Board of Film
Certification such as unexplained delays in the film certification process, altering of
order of films for examination, conversion of certified films from A to UA/A category etc.
Audit also evidenced lack of internal controls within the CBFC for tracking the records of
film certification which carried a risk of issue of duplicate certificates for the same film to
different individuals not holding copyrights. Further, scrutiny of Para 11.2 revealed that
Satyajit Ray Film and Television Institute, Kolkata (SRFT!) had failed to introduce
various courses as envisaged in its objectives even after 20 years of its establishment.
The activities of the Institute was marred with delay in completion of courses, vacant
seats in various courses, lesser teaching hours and gap in evaluation of performance of
students.

3. Against this backdrop, the Committee obtained background note and requisite
replies and some other clarifications from the Mol&B, CBFC and SRFTI. The PAC
(2016-17). had visited Satyajit Ray Film and Television Institute on 28.02.2017 to
understand the ground realities of the Institute and held informal discussions with its
representatives. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Mol&B,
CBFC and SRFTI on 06.01.2017 and obtained information on the subject. Based on the
information gathered, the Committee proceeded with examination of the relevant issues
in detail as outlined in the succeeding chapters.


Chapter - |
Working of Central Board of Film Certification

4. The Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC) setup under the Cinematograph
Act, 1952 performs the statutory function of certifying films for public exhibition. All films,

music videos and documentaries meant for public exhibition, irrespective of their length - ,

and media type (Celluloid, video, CD or DVD) are subjected to certification by CBFC.
The CBFC performs the certification process in accordance with the Cinematograph
Act, 1952 read along with the Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983 and the
Central Government guidelines of 1991. |

5. Section 3(1) of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 constitutes the Board of Film
Certification which shall consist of a Chairperson and not less than 12 and not more
than 25 Members appointed by Central Government. At present there are 18 Board
Members headed by a Chairperson.

6. The CBFC functions with its headquarters at Mumbai and has 9 Regional Offices
at Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Guwahati, Cuttack, Chennai, Bangalore, Hyderabad and
Thiruvananthapuram. An Advisory Panel assists the CBFC in its various regional offices
headed by Regional Officer (RO). The members of regional Advisory Panels are drawn
from various walks of life, being persons who are qualified to judge the effect of films on
the public.

7. Section 5B of the Act stipulates that a film shall not be certified if any part of it is
against the interest of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State,
friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency or involves defamation or
contempt of court or is likely to incite commission of any offence. Section 5B(2) of the
Act authorizes the Central Government to issue such directions as it may think fit,
setting out the principles which shall guide the CBFC in sanctioning films for public
exhibition. Accordingly, under Section 5B(2) of the Act, the Central Government issued
Guidelines for certification of films for Public Exhibition in 1991. While certifying a film,
the CBFC is guided by these guidelines.

8. The Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983 lays down the procedure of film

certification as follows:

(i) The material for certification is required to be submitted to the Regional
Officer of the concerned Regional center. In case of a dubbed film, it may be


supmitted at tne same Kegional Uttice where the original tilm was certitied and

the same category certificate would be awarded.

(ii) On receipt of all the film materials, requisite fees (certification fees,
screening fees and Cine-workers Welfare Cess) and written matter required
under the rules, the Regional Officer will form an Examining Committee to view

the film. The composition of this committee will be as follows:

a. In the case of a short film (less than 70 minutes in duration or less
than 2000m in celluloid), it will consist of an officer of the CBFC and an

advisory panel member one of whom shall be a woman.

b. In the case of a long film/feature film (other than short films), it will
consist of.an officer of the CBFC alongwith four advisory panel members,
two of whom shall be women. If the Examining Officer (EO) is not present,

5 advisory panel members may also constitute the Examining Committee.

(iii) After the film has been previewed, each member gives his/her report in |
writing about the general theme of the film, deletions and/or modifications
recommended in light of the applicable guidelines and the category of certificate
the film should be given.

(iv) The Examining Officer then submits report to the Chairperson. If the
Chairperson and the applicant agrees with the recommendations of the
Examining Committee, the Chairperson directs the Regional Officer to initiate
further procedures for issue of certificate, on behalf of the Board, in conformity
with the recommendations of the Examining Committee made either unanimously
or by majority.

(v) If required, the Chairman on his own motion or on the request of the
applicant if he disagrees with the decision of EC, may refer. a decision of
Examining Committee to a Revising Committee. The appeal to the Revising
Committee can be made by the producer within 14 days of the Examining
Committee’s recommendation.

(vi) A Revising Committee will consist of the Chairperson or in his absence, a
member of the Board and not more than nine advisory panel members, provided
none of them were on the Examining Committee that viewed the film earlier.


(vii) The Revising Committee will view the same film print shown to the
Examining Committee without any changes. Each member will be required to
record his verdict before leaving the theatre. Where the Chairperson disagrees _
with the decision of the majority committee, the Board can itself examine the film
or cause the film to be examined again by another Revising Committee and that -
decision of the Board or the second Revising Committee, as the case maybe is

regarded as final.

(viii) After the applicant is apprised of the decision of the Board, Examining
Committee or the Revising Committee, he may submit a revised version to the
regional officer for certification of the revised film. If the applicant is aggrieved by
the order of the Board, an appeal can be made under section 5C of the 1952 Act
to the Film Certification Appellate Tribunal (FCAT) which is at present headed
by a Former Chief Justice of High Court as Chairperson.

The time limits set down for various processes of certification are as follows:-

~ Pp Preess ।श।ए _ Time Limit
[Scrutiny of Application 7 days|
Formation of Examination Committee (EC) 15 days|
Forwarding the EC report to Chairman 10 days
Communication of the order to the applicant 3 days|
Surrender of cuts by the producer 14 days|
Examination of cuts 14 days
Issue of Certificate 5 days
[Total Time Limit 68 days

I.
10.

AUDIT REVIEW

mu

observed:

Audit test checked the procedures followed for certification of films in which

tiple issues pointing towards gaps in internal control and certification process were



\ay mouluuny ७७ 110 tevorus Hom 1” April, 2७1३ revealed that CBFU has altered the
order of some films for examination by Examination Committee without recording any
reason by the Regional Officer for altering the order.

b) In some cases there was delay in issue of certificates even after approval of a
clear certificate by the Examining Committee. No reason for delay was found on record.
c) CBFC has converted 172 A category films into ‘UA’ category and 166 films of UA
category to U category from 2012 to 2015 without any supporting provision in the Act.

d) Sub-rule 6 of Rule 21 of the Cinematograph (Certification) Rules envisages that
in the case of imported films, the applicant shall furnish the original or the certified copy
of the import license together with the customs clearance permit. The scrutiny of Audit
showed that CBFC issued certificates to the applicant for public exhibition of imported
video films without obtaining the certified copy of the imported license and customs
clearance permit. है

e) CBFC had accepted films for which certificates were already issued earlier.
CBFC could not verify whether a film was certified earlier by them or any other regional
office and hence probability of two or more certificates being issued for the same film
existed.

11. Against this backdrop, the PAC (2016-17) selected the subject as reported in
Para 11.1 of the C&AG's Report No. 11 of 2016 for detailed examination and report.
Subsequently, the Committee obtained background note and requisite replies and some
‘other clarifications from the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting (Mol&B) and CBFC.
The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the. Mol&B and CBFC on
06.01.2017 and obtained information on the subject. However, due to paucity of time,
the examination on the subject could not be completed during 2016-17 and the subject
was carried forward to the successor Committee i.e. PAC (2017-18). Based on the
information gathered, the Committee proceeded with examination of the relevant issues
in detail as outlined in the succeeding paragraphs.

lll. TIMELINESS IN ISSUE OF CERTIFICATES

12. Rule 41 of the Cinematograph Rules prescribe different time limits for the various
stages of certification process totalling to 68 days if the applicant does not request the
film to be seen by the Revising Committee.

13. All films should be certified on first come first serve basis. The RO has
discretionary power to alter the order of examination of the film if a written request from

5


the applicant is received and the RO feels that there are grounds for an early
examination which he would duly record.

14. However, Audit noted that in 57 films (32.57 per cent) which jumped the queue,
letters from the applicant requesting for special consideration or RO’s justification
accepting the request were not found on records. A clear U/UA or a Clear A certification
was done for 135 films. However, in 49 films (36 per cent) despite completion of
certification process, time taken for issue of certificates ranged between 3 and 491 days
and an average time of 26 days. No reasons for delay, after approval of clear certificate
by EC, were found on record. Further, in 31 cases during the period 2013-14 and 2014-
15, time taken to certify the film ranged between 75 days to 491 days and average of
169 days. The reasons for delay were not seen recorded on the file.

15. The Ministry in their written submission to the Committee stated that most of the
films in this regard were the films for which certification was sought for theatrical
release. The applicants approached the CBFC for certification after finalizing the
release date. Non-certification of such films would have resulted in incurring heavy
losses to the filmmakers. CBFC, in order to facilitate such films and help the filmmakers
avoid incurring heavy losses due to non-release as per the schedule, enabled
certification ahead of other applicants where there was no issue of urgency. However,
CBFC has noted the point that such decisions should be placed on record and the
certification process out of turn in the case of a particular film would be considered only
based on submission of acceptable reasons for the same in writing from the applicants

concerned.

46. During oral evidence, the representative of the Film & Television Producers'
Guild of India Limited submitted as under:

“To start with, the Committee had mentioned the unexplained delays in the
certification process. What | would like to say is that there might be various reasons
for that. One might be the lack of staff at the CBFC; two, it could be the seasonal rush
of movies that would tend to release around festivals etc. and therefore there might be
more movies at that point of time that might be sent for submission. We would like to
believe that the CBFC is transferring from manual to the online approach in terms of
the application. So, we hope that in future the rush goes down. Secondly, as far as
altering the order for films by the Committee is concerned, such instances do occur
regularly. This mainly happens due to the immediate requirements of a production
house due to the film release time lines. We think that the provision to introduce a fast
track system would help. Under this provision, you pay additional fees if you want your


1॥11 10 08 Tast-tracked In Case you have not been able to complete it well in time for the
release. We do believe the Shyam Benegal Committee report also mentioned the same
thing. So, it would be useful if that could be set in place. But! think the finding of the
Audit Committee that there is an alteration of the order is true and that does happen."

17. The Secretary, Mol&B, during oral evidence, submitted as under:

sees in all the cases where the films are jumping the queue at the time of
certification, two things are being ensured now. Of course, it was not done in the past
and that is a fact which cannot be denied. The new Chairman has ensured that, one,
there is an application from the producer and he gives his reasons requesting for an
early certification. Then there is an order passed in writing on the files that, yes, these
are the reasons which are acceptable and we should do it out of turn. We are doing
it.”

18. The Committee wanted to know that in cases where the RO accepted jumping of
queues by the film producers for getting early certification for their films and whether the
ROs' justification had been maintained, the Ministry, in their reply stated that as per
Rule 41(3) of Cinematograph Act, 1952 and Rules, 1983 there was a provision for out of
turn examination under which the CBFC examined films meant for theatrical release.
Rule 41(3) provided that the Regional Officer may on receipt of a written request from
any applicant, if satisfied that there were grounds for an early examination, alter the
order of examination of the film after recording the reasons in writing. However, in some
cases, the reasons were not recorded. The reason for this lapse was due to drastic
increase in workload over the years, owing to increase of number of films including
short films/advertisements/documentaries, thus making it extremely difficult to record
everything in a file. Presently every week at least 8 to 10 movies are getting released for
public exhibition. All producers are in a hurry to release their movie on vacant dates.
Though the movies are cleared before the stipulated time limit, the examination and
; issue of certification are done as per the guidelines and Act and the procedure laid
down there under. At present it is being ensured that no film is being given out of turn
allotment for screening unless specific request is received and reasons for acceptarice

of request are recorded.

19. | The Committee observed that CBFC was biased towards big banners in the case
of film certification wherein jumping queues and obtaining early certificates could clearly
be seen and wanted the take of the Board on this, the Ministry, in their reply to the
Committee stated that there was no partiality towards ‘big banner’ films from CBFC’s
side. However, it so happens that the really big budget films actually fix their release


before production of the film. In that scenario, once their dates are fixed and due to time
overrun in their production, they may start the actual certification process very close to
their release date. In such a scenario, the applicants approach CBFC for out of turn, _
early certification. Non-certification of such films would have resulted in incurring heavy
losses to the filmmakers. CBFC, in order to facilitate such films and help the filmmakers -
avoid incurring heavy losses due to non-release as per the schedule, enabled
certification ahead of other applicants where there was no such urgency expressed.
However it is now being ensured that in all such cases, reasons are recorded for

jumping the queue.

20. Acclear U/UA or a Clear A certification was done for 135 films. However, in 49
films (36 per cent) despite completion of certification process, time taken for issue of
certificates ranged between 3 and 491 days and: an average time of 26 days. No
reasons for delay, after approval of clear certificate by EC, were found on record.
Further, in 31 cases during the period 2013-14 and 2014-15, time taken to certify the
film ranged between 75 days to 491 days and average of 169 days. The reasons for

delay were not seen recorded on the file.

21. During oral evidence, the representative of Indian Motion Picture Producers'

Association submitted as under:

",,...there is definitely a delay in certification which also has been suggested in
the Audit report and the timeline which was there in the original Act were according to
1954 when communication was by courier or by mail. Now everything having changed,
that much time is not required and films can be cleared in lesser time. | would like to
explain this part. The delay is taking place because there are a number of films to be
screened. Out of 1000 films, there are 100 films which are of big budget and 900 are
small or medium budget films. They are the ones who are normally affected. If you go
into the history of films which have taken 700 to 900 days to get cleared, they are small
or medium budget films which have had to pay all kinds of impossible demands in terms
of cuts, although the Act does not provide for any cut. The Act provides for certification.
The Shyam Benegal Committee, the Mudgal Committee and several Committees were
formed from time to time but the recommendations of all the Committees have been
overlooked and the Chairman, CBFC has been given the power to decide what can
remain in a film or not: That is why every Chairman who comes, changes the rules.
The guidelines need to be revised."

22. The Committee wanted to know why there had been undue delay in the
certification process of films despite its approval by the Examining Committee and
wanted the details of all cases of delay in certification beyond 68 days provided in the


Cinematograph Rules, the Ministry, in their reply, stated that time taken for issue of

certificates after Examination Committee date, was as follows :-
a. Less than 3 days — 86
b. 4-10 days- 27
6. 11-100 days - 19
0. 100 days plus - 3

The time limits in case of clear cases have to be computed in accordance with Rule
41(2), Rule 41(6) and Explanation to Rule 41 which lays down that “In calculating the
periods specified in this rule working days alone shall be taken into account and
Sundays and other Holidays shall be excluded”. As can be seen from above, majority of
the films, i.e. 113 clear films, were certified within 10 days. As for the balance 22 cases,
there were sufficient reasons and majority of the delay was attributable to the non-
compliance of further formalities by the Applicant /Producer. In accordance with the
prescribed process, the Examining Committee after viewing a film recommends
certification of a film for public exhibition under any of the prescribed categories with or
without excisions/modifications. The producer is informed of this decision and if he
agrees with the decision, is required to submit the final version of the film as cleared by
the Examining Committee. Irrespective of a clear film or a film with cuts, the final version
of any film needs to be viewed by the Examining Officer for the purpose of verifying at
least the length of the film. The length of a film is of paramount importance as it is
mentioned in the Certificate and without that data, no exhibitor would accept or
distribute the film further for exhibition purposes. It may be noted that if the filmmaker is
not in agreement with the certification recommended by the Examining Committee (with
or without cuts/modifications), he has to approach the Revising Committee or the Film
Certification Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be. Here also the filmmaker would
need to submit the final version of the film as cleared by the Revising Committee or the
Tribunal in DVD to the CBFC. Only on submission of the final version of the film in DVD,
the certificate is issued. The Audit has simply calculated the time taken between the
viewing by Examining Committee and the date of issue of certificate and opined that
there is considerable delay in the issue of certificate in the case of some films. The
delays occur due to non-observance of the procedure by the applicants.


23. Further, the Committee wanted to be apprised of the reasons of these delays, the
Ministry replied that in most of these cases, reasons for delay had not been found
recorded. The reason for this is huge increase in workload over the years making it
extremely difficult to record everything in a file which may cause further delays. During
the year 2005, a total of 7418 certificates were issued from the CBFC offices, while in
the year. 2015-16, the number of certificates issued increased to 17942. However, for
improving the process of certification CBFC has developed an On-line application and
process to avoid delay and improving transparency, using the latest trends in
technology. CBFC is ensuring to issue certificates within the prescribed timeframe in
the act. After the online certification goes live, the system itself is expected to take care
of such delays. Even in cases where the delay is attributable to the applicant, the
system will close the file after the expiry of prescribed time as given in the Rules.

IV. FILM CERTIFICATION PROCESS

24. Section 4 & 5A of the Act provides for examination of films wherein any person
desiring to exhibit any film shall in the prescribed manner make an application to the
Board for a certificate in respect thereof, and the Board may, after examining or having
the film examined in the prescribed manner and grant the applicant U, U/A, A or S
certificate as the case may be. Sub-section (3) of Section 5A of said Act provides that a
certificate granted by the Board under this section shall be valid throughout India for a
period of ten years. There is no provision in The Cinematograph Act, 1952 regarding the
process of conversion of films from “A” to “UA’/"U". However, Audit noted that CBFC
had converted 172 “A” category certified films into “UA” category films and 166 films of
“UA” category to “U” category films during 2012-15 without any supporting law or

provision in the Act.

25. The Ministry in their written submission to the Committee stated that CBFC
receives application for change.of category of certification of a film which has already
been certified from an applicant after making voluntary changes. Such applications are
received for screening of films on TV and satellite channels. CBFC entertains such
requests, examines such films and certifies them in accordance with Rule 21, 22, 23,
24, 25 and 26. It is pointed out that the explanation under Rule 21 which concerns with
the submission of application for examination of films clearly states that for the purpose
of certification for public exhibition, every revised version or shorter version of a film
shall be deemed to be a fresh film. The relevant application forms prescribed under

10


Rules provide for information on the category of certification of the film if it has already
been certified and the category of certification which is now being sought. The CBFC
after following the process as prescribed in the Rules either changes the certification
category duly taking into consideration the content which was examined by them or
rejects the request. CBFC did reject change of certification in some cases which were
appealed before the Hon'ble Film Certification Appellate Tribunal and the Hon’ble
Tribunal has disposed of such appeals by either allowing re-certification or upholding
the decision of the CBFC. It is therefore submitted that the procedure being followed by
CBFC in the case of re-certification of films is in accordance with the prescribed Rules
and same has been upheld by the Appellate Tribunal.

26. During oral evidence, the representative of the Film & Television Producers'
Guild of India Limited submitted as under:

"Cinematographic Bill that was introduced in 1952 did not really anticipate the
fact the films would be widely seen on television. Because of that, there was no
provision within the Act that really covers the recertification of films. With the
introduction of television as a medium, most films today are watched on
television and not in the cinema. The cinema being a closed environment, when
there is a certification, then children are not permitted in and adults have the right
to keep children away from that. On television, the understanding is that we
would like all films on television to be UA or U. This practice of the conversion
actually helps the producers to be able to re-certify their films from A to UA
or U category and that has been in place for many years. | do believe the
amendment Bill alongwith the recommendations of the Mudgal Committee and
the Shyam Benegal Committee also cover the fact that this is something that
should be put in place."

27. During oral evidence, the representative of Indian Motion Picture Producers’
Association submitted as under:

“What | am saying is that the majority of films get stuck in censorship except a
few controversial ones about which the CBFC says ‘It cannot be censored; it is
banned; it is a bad film.’ But the Film Certification Appellate Tribunal finds that
“ the film is fine and there is no need for a cut. But the producer has to suffer for
six months. He makes films on borrowed money and he is paying heavy interest.
Very few producers can come to FCAT. One reason for that is that FCAT is
appointed by the Ministry at their own whims and fancies. There are periods
when there is no Chairman there. Files are pending for six months for want of a
chairman. In May 2016, the Chairman suddenly got up and said there is a
new technology called DCP which is the only format in which we will view films.
There is no rule allowing the Chairman to insist that the. screening has to be
done. When we asked him, he has quoted one rule. We told him it was wrong.
Then he quoted another rule which was also wrong. He said, he wanted to see

11


28.

29.

the picture in the final format. That is a load on the producer. What happens is
that after the certification, we go into the post-production where you are not in a
position to cut a particular scene or beep a certain dialogue. Before that, if you
want something deleted, it is okay but if you want to see my final production in
DCP and then cut it, | have to do the whole process again. Earlier, the DVD
was watched and you saw the same film. The definition as per the Act is
‘tunnable print’ which is where you can see and hear the picture. This is the
established practice."

Further, he added:

"Let the producer be responsible. Let the criminal case be filed against him. He
should be more careful while screening a movie. The ‘A’ certificate and other
movies should be given a separate time. Let them have night shows only on TV;
or, they should have separate theatres for that. In America also, there are adult
shows with separate theatres. The same thing can be done in India. | think, about
twenty years ago, by some other Chairman, the same suggestion was given. |
think, the producer or director or writer should be completely responsible and
they should be given complete freedom. Shyam Benegal Committee also made it
clear that there should be no cuts, the film should be certified as it is, and could
be allotted screening times separately if they are adult films. An adult film is
anything in which even one scene is found objectionable. If there is one gali they
make it adult. They say ‘either you cut it or we will not do it’. So, re-certification
from ‘A’ to ‘U’ is because of that reason. The film has nothing else objectionable
except a couple of scenes which are cut out and the film is certified. Sir, has
asked a very relevant question about existence of such censorship boards in
other countries. As far as | am aware, except Islamic countries Dubai, Pakistan
or other Islamic countries, there is no censor board. There is only a Rating
Board in UK, US and other countries. They rate whether a film is for 16 years or
older or younger. There is no system of cutting. Cutting is only in Islamic
countries. We have become champions in that. In some films all the dialogues
are only mute, you can only hear beeps in the film."

Supplementing the above, the representative of the Film & Television Producers'

Guild of India Limited, during oral evidence, submitted as under:

" | think it is quite correct that there are Film Certification Boards in other
countries and not Censorship Board though our Board is also called the Central
Board of Film Certification. Very often there are recommendations about what
should be beeped out and so on and so forth. | think the Shyam Benegal
Committee Report also recommends exactly the same thing that the film should
not be touched. It should be given a certificate whatever you believe it is suitable
to be viewed as, whether that be ‘A’. They have suggested ‘A’ with caution.
They have suggested the “UA’ category be broken up into two separate
categories; ‘UA-12’ and UA-15’. So, the 12 year old and above and 15 year old
and above can therefore have that sort of distinction. And, then there is a ‘U’
category.

12


30.

Further, during oral evidence, the representative of Indian Motion Picture

Producers' Association submitted as under:

31.

"The DCP that | was mentioning, a particular format, which is not needed and my
small producers have to pay unnecessarily for it and it is a waste of money. That
is being done only because it can be screened only in few theatres of his choice,
where he has friends and because this system is not capable of being viewed
everywhere, whereas a DVD can be seen in the office itself. No more than two to
three films can be seen in a day. That is why the delay is. Everything is inter-
connected. You expressed doubts about small films and big films. You look at
the list of 791 films which have been delayed by 691 days and 90 per cent
of them are small films. Films for children have to be certified. Films for adults it
has to be certified. But it does not have to be because here we are issuing
certificate for ticket buying audience. It is not for people who are gathering in
Mohalla and watching a free presentation of a film. They are paying Rs. 100/-,
Rs. 200/- or Rs. 250/- to buy a ticket and we are not allowed to show them what
they want to see. They are paying the money because they want to see it. But
they say you make only bhajan films. Who will watch it? As it is production is
dead. Production sector is almost dead and over with. | am not joking."

Supplementing the above, the Secretary deposed as under:

“It is mentioned that the certificates of the ‘A’ category films have been changed
to ‘UA” or ‘U” in certain cases or the certificate of ‘UA’ category have been
changed to ‘U’ category. Basically, ‘A’ category is the film which contains adult
content. It may be in terms of obscenity, nudity, violence and things which could
have an adverse impact on the psyche of the minors or the other vulnerable
groups of society. ‘U’ category film is allowed to be screened for universal
screening for everybody and ‘UA’ is the category which says that it can be
screened with parental guidance or supervision. In Western countries, it is called
parental guidance or under supervision. So, these are the three categories that
we have at the moment and the Ministry has already responded about this
conversion of certificate category from one to the other. | would like to reach what
Rule 21 says:

"For the purpose of certification for public exhibition, every revised version
or a shorter version of a film shall be deemed to be a fresh film."

Essentially this problem arises because when a film is screened in a
cinema hall, that is the usual mode of screening and there the entry is
restricted. For example, if it is an ‘A’ category film, it is incumbent upon the
exhibitor, that is the cinema hall owner, to ensure that no child below whatever is
the age prescribed enters the cinema hall. So, there is some kind of a control
mechanism there. This requirement for certification for open public exhibition
mainly came into play when we started talking in terms of television because
television is right inside our homes and it is very difficult or at least till very
recently, it was almost impossible to control as to who watches television. So,
children can watch, adults can watch and they can watch together also. So,
where does the need for re-certification arise? If a film which is otherwise
classified as ‘Adult Only’ film, if it is to be screened on television, it cannot be
allowed to be screened with that certification."

13


32.

33.

34.

He further added:

"Once we accept that a case being brought for television or for digital
screening of a film is to be treated as a separate film for which there is a specific
mention in the rules, then a higher authority question may not arise because the
higher authority will look at it if an appeal is filed. So it is not a case of an appeal.
This would be treated then as a case of fresh application for re-certification. So,
the same Board will do it. If there is a need of an appeal, then that matter goes to
the appellate mechanism that is already created under the Act which is in the
name of the Film Certification Appellate Tribunal. So, if need be, the appeals
go to that particular authority if we consider that this is a case of re-certification.
So, the same film can exist in two different formats, one format where it is
screened in the cinema halls and where it is given ‘A’ certification and the same
film, in a modified version, in a toned down version can be screened for television
or cable where it will be given ‘U’ or ‘UA’ certification. ‘A’ certified films cannot be
allowed to be screened on television."

He also explained:

"An important development has taken place in the whole sector of film
certification. There have been a number of controversies; some of them may
have continued for some time, | would just like to state that CBFC is not the final
authority. There is a Film Certification Appellate Tribunal (FCAT) which is created
under the very Act, which creates the CBFC. The F-CAT tribunal is headed by a
person not less than a serving or a retired judge of at least High Court. We have
the F- CAT now in position. So, considering the amount of work that comes
before CBFC, the number of cases going before the F-CAT is a very, very small.
It is less than one per cent cases going before the F-CAT. So, F-CAT is the first
channel of relief if somebody disagrees with the Board. Then, after F-CAT, the
judicial system of this country is very strong. The High Courts and Supreme
Court are also there and people in the past have gone before these
courts. It is the individuals, who are sitting in the screening committees or the
revising committees. But by and large people have got a relief and, if not at
the hands of the CBFC, other bodies like F-CAT, High Courts and the Supreme
Court are also there. So, the legal system or the system that is created by the
hon. Parliament in the Act, we feel, is working satisfactorily as far as the end
result is concerned. In between in the CBFC if there are problems, we are
committed to addressing those."

When the Committee wanted to know the reasons for the conversion of the film

certifications, the Ministry replied that the Cable TV Networks Act provide that only films

having a U or a UA certificate can be telecast on Television/Doordarshan. Thus if the

movie has an A category classification from CBFC, it would not be possible to telecast

such films on cable. Therefore, the filmmakers attempt to tone down the content of the

film themselves and edit content in such a manner that it can then be considered for

certification as a U or UA category much after it has been released in Cinema Halls.

14


35. The Committee wanted to know whether there was a need to amend the Act
keeping in view the changing dynamics of film industry and also the societal values. The
Ministry stated that the present Cinematograph Act was enacted in the year 1952 and
there have been many changes in the field of cinema with the proliferation of TV
channels, Cable network throughout the country, advent of new digital technology
making all kinds of content accessible to all and above all, a change in societal values,
all of which require that the Cinematograph Act or the Cinematograph (Certification)
Rules, 1983 or the Guidelines 1991 are revisited from time to time.

Vv. CERTIFICATION OF IMPORTED FILMS

36. Rule 21 of the Cinematography (Certification) Rules, 1983 provides that every
application to certify a film for public exhibition shall be made in writing in Form
prescribed on the basis set out in the Second schedule. Sub-rule 3(d) of Rule-21 further
provides that if the application is made by the person other than the producer or
copyright holder of the film, an authorization in writing on a stamped paper of
appropriate value to be notified by the Chairman from the producer or copyright holder
of the film. Sub-rule 6 of Rule-21 envisages that in case of films which are imported, the
applicant shall furnish the original or a certified copy of the’ imported license together
with Customs clearance permit and with the Customs clearance papers, and such film
shall not be examined by the Board for certification for public exhibition in India unless
the Board is satisfied that the film is validly imported in accordance with the import
policy of the Government. For the purpose of certification for public exhibition every

revised version or shorter version of a film shall be deemed to be a fresh film.

37. However, Audit highlighted that CBFC issued certificates to the applicants for .
public exhibition of Video Films imported into India without obtaining the certified copy of
the imported license and Customs clearance permit and had accepted films for which
certificates were already issued earlier April, 2015. CBFC could not verify whether a film
was certified earlier by them or any other regional office and hence probability of two or
more certificates being issued for the same films existed.

38. In its Background Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry stated that the
Ministry of Commerce and Industry, Department of Commerce vide its Public Notice No.
64/1997-2002 dated 29" January, 2002 had exempted from import license for the
import of cinematograph feature films and other films (including film on video tape,

15


compact video disc, laser video disc or digital video disc). Accordingly, CBFC was not
required to ask for import license for a film. However, CBFC at the time of accepting
applications for certification of such films, did ask for copies of agreement between the
copyright holder/producer of the film and the person who imports the film and seeks
certification, copy of shipping/airway bill or copy of digital download document [in the

case of transfer of the content online].
Vi. VALIDITY OF CERTIFICATES

39. As per Rule 29 of the Cinematograph Rules 1983, a certificate granted by the
Board under sub-section(1)of section 5A in respect of a film shall be valid for a period of
10 years from the date on which the certificate is granted wherein relation to the
certificate of a film the period has expired, a fresh certificate in forms set out in
Schedule ॥ as the case may be, issued on an application made in this behalf and the
same shall be dealt with as if it were an original application; provided that a regional
officer may, with the prior approval of the Chairman, dispense with examination of the
film,, if the application is for the issue of certificate in the same form in which it was

issued earlier.

40. Audit noted instances of revalidation of certificates which were valid for 10 years
only on the basis of application received from copyright holders. It was found that,
neither the examinations of such films were conducted nor the Chairman’s approval to
dispense with the examination had been obtained. Also, verification of original rights of
the movie was not done and a flat rate of  1020/- was levied irrespective of the duration

of the movie.

41. The Ministry submitted that earlier CBFC did not have the facility to verify
whether a film was certified earlier or not unless declared by the applicant. However,
following digitization of records of all Regional Offices, the probability of issue of such
certificates has greatly diminished. With the implementation of the second phase of
computerization of certification process of CBFC, any duplication would be identified at
the application stage itself and this problem would be completely removed.

16


42, During oral evidence, the representative of Indian Motion Picture Producers‘

Association submitted as under:

"Titles are also registered with us. There is a concern in the Report over issue of
duplicate film titles to the same film to different copyright owners. | am talking
about that happens because for imported films you do not insist on a title or
clearance certificate from the Indian Association. On the basis of exporters and
importers association you issue certificate to any and every. So, the objection
found is very genuine. But if they are brought under the ambit of the Indian
Association there will be some control and we will know. So, the present
system of controlling in the film industry is non-duplication, making sure that
certificate once issued is not issued again and disputes of which sometime go to
court and sorted out."

43. The Committee wanted to know when there was no need to revalidate film
certificates, why did the CBFC continue to accept films for revalidation of certificates
and charged fees on it, the Ministry replied that revalidation of certification was done by
the CBFC as per the provisions of Rule 29 of Cinematograph Act. The revalidation of
films had been done as per Rule 29(1), 29(2), and 29(3) before 25.9.1984. As per the
notification issued by Mol&B dated 25.9.1984 the validity of certificate is perpetual.
Therefore the practice of recertification was stopped. For the period mentioned in the
Audit Report, few cases were received for Re-verification. These films were those who
had received certification valid for only 10 years (prior to 25/9/1984). It may be seen that
all such cases referred to the period 1954 to 1963. The verification fees applicable at
the lowest slab (Rs.1020 per application) were charged by CBFC. The Certificates were
issued after obtaining the approval of the then CEO (Head of the Department). After
Audit raised the query, the practice has been stopped.

44. The Committee wanted to be apprised about the mechanism through which it
was being ensured that the duplication of certificates was not taking place, the Ministry
replied that earlier there was no facility to keep check on whether the film was certified
or not but due to digitalization of some records in the 117 Five year plan, the probability
of such certificates has greatly diminished. However, with the implementation of 2™
phase of computerization of CBFC, this minor possibility would also be eliminated
altogether as various field related to each film would be resident in the consolidated
database of all the nine Regional Offices. Consequently, any duplicity would be
identified at the application stage itself and the possibility of any duplicate certificates for

the same film would cease to exist.

17


45. When the Committee wanted to know what were the loopholes which resulted in
the generation of fake/duplicate film certificates, the Ministry replied that fake certificates
have been noticed to be issued as there is no security feature embedded in the .
certificates presently. As for duplicate certificates, the Certificates are issued on the
basis of Office address submitted by producers. If the address lies within the specified
jurisdictional area of the Regional Office, the application is accepted in that particular
Regional Office. Instances have come to notice where the applicants have taken
another address to try to submit the application in another regional office where they do
not know the language of the film, for a perceived better category decision. Another way
in which duplicate certification used to happen was in case of imported films wherein the
local importer of any film entered into a contract with the foreign producer. This
copyright license was given only for a few years, say 4-5 years. The local importer then
applied for and got the certificate made for that film, which he could use only during the
term of the contract. Subsequently, after the expiry of the old contract, another local
importer would enter into a new contract with the foreign producer for a few years.
During this period, the new importer will seek a fresh certificate for the same film as the

certificate carries the name of the applicant.

46. The Committee wanted to know what measures CBFC had taken to curb the
availability of fake/duplicate film certificates, the Ministry stated that in the second phase
of computerization involving Online certification, it is envisaged that the new certificates
would also carry a QR code which would have the details about certification embedded
in it. A mere scanning of the QR code with any smart phone would take the person to
the CBFC website and all details would then be seen. It will instantly point out any fake

certificate. By digitizing all existing records and having them available on a single
consolidated database, the Ministry be able to identify any instance in which films which

have already been issued certificates, have come up again for certification etc.

47. | When asked about the rationale for prescribing 12 to 25 members rather than a
fixed number of members to the CBFC, the Ministry replied as under:

“Appointment of Chairperson and Members of the CBFC is in accordance with
Section 3(1) of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 read with rule 3 of the
Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983. A medium like films with rich
diversity, 12 to 25 Members would be more representative. This will cover the

18


gaps at times of unavoidable vacancies. It is felt that each State should be
represented by at least one or two Board Members as there are different dialects
around the country”.

48. On being asked about the criteria followed by the Ministry in appointing Members
and the Chairman of the CBFC, the Ministry submitted as under:

"Appointment of Chairperson and Members of the CBFC is in accordance with
Section 3(1) of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 read with rule 3 of the
Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983. As per Section 3(1) of the
Cinematograph Act, 1952,
“For the purpose of sanctioning films for public exhibition, the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a
Board to be called the Board of Film Certification which shall consist of
a chairman and not less than twelve and not more than twenty-five
other members appointed by the Central Government.” "

49. Ona query relating to the number of members in the advisory panels in each of
the regional centres in the country and the criteria adopted to appoint the members of
advisory panels, the Ministry stated as under:

"Advisory Panel members are appointed in accordance with Section 5 of the
Cinematograph Act, 1952 read with Rules 7 and 8 of the Cinematograph
(Certification) Rules, 1983. Advisory Panel shall consist of such number of
persons, being persons qualified in the opinion of the Central Government to
judge the effect of films on the public as the Central Government may think fit to
appoint thereto.
Sub-rule (2) under Rule 7 states that “an advisory panel shall consist of such
number of members as the Central Government may, after consultation with the
Board, determine”. Desired strength of the advisory pane! members in respect of
each Regional Office of CBFC is worked out after carrying out a detailed analysis
of work load in each of the regional offices based on the number of feature films,
video films and short films certified".
50. When asked about the procedure of appointing, powers and duties of regional
officers, the number of regional centres and the Regional Officers in each of these
centres, the Ministry replied as under:
Regional Officers are appointed in accordance with the Recruitment Rules framed
for the purpose. As per Recruitment Rules (the method of recruitment to the post of

19


Regional Officer is to be filled by “33 1/3% by promotion, failing which by transfer on
deputation and failing both by direct recruitment; 66 2//3 by transfer on deputation,
failing which by direct recruitment. The tenure of deputation period is 4 years
according to the RRs. |

There are nine Regional Offices of 0870 located at Mumbai, Delhi, Chenndi,
Bengaluru, Hyderabad, Thiruvananthapuram, Cuttack, Kolkata and Guwahati.

As per sub-section (2) of Rule 9 of Cinematograph (Certification) Rules the Regional
Officers, Additional Regional Officers, Assistant Regional Officers and other officers
appointed shall perform the such duties as may be assigned under these rules, or

by the Chairman / Chief Executive Officers or by the Board.

The following are important functions of Regional Officers:

To supervise the work of scrutiny on behalf of the CBFC of applications from
producers of Cinematograph films or their representatives in respect of all
films.

Appoints an Examining Committee in respect of each application.

Associate himself as a member of the Committee for examining the film in

accordance with the guiding principles laid down in the Cinematograph Act.

Sign on behalf of the Chairperson the certificates authorizing the public
exhibition

For the purpose of enabling the Board to perform its function under the Act, the
central government in accordance with Rule 9 of the Cinematograph
(Certification) Rules, 1983 appoints Chief Executive Officer, Regional Officers,
Additional Regional Officers, Assistant Regional Officers and such other *
officers at the headquarters and at each of the regional offices of the Board.
Regional Officers, Additional Regional Officers, Assistant Regional Officers and
other officers appointed shall perform the such duties as may be assigned
under these rules, or by the Chairman/Chief Executive Officers or by the Board.
The Chairperson/Chief executive Officer may grant leave to or suspend or
remove from service any officer appointed by him under the powers delegated
to him.

20


The new online system includes development robust MIS system to track and

monitor the performance of CBFC and its Regional Officers.

51. On being asked about the number of meetings of the CBFC have been held in
“ each of the last five’ years and the agenda of these meetings, the Ministry replied as
under:
"The details of Board Meetings held during the last 5 years are as follows —

Year No. of Board Meetings
2012-13 [|i 65  ।|
2013-14 3
2014-15 4
2015-16 1
2016-17 | 4 |

52, When asked about the number of workshops for Advisory Panel Members that
have been conducted in each of the last five years for each regional centre, the Ministry
submitted as under:

" During the last five years, 3 workshops have been held at Delhi, Chennai and
Hyderabad. "

53. | Regarding number of cases that have been detected and reported for violation of
category classification in the theatres during last 10 years, the Ministry replied as under:

" No such cases have been reported to CBFC during the last 10 years."

54. As for number of cases that have been detected and reported for not screening
the certification before the film is actually screened and not carrying out the cuts as
prescribed by the CBFC while screening of the films in theatres, the Ministry submitted
as under:

"No complaints/cases detected or reported for not screening certification before
the film is actually screened or for not carrying out the cuts as prescribed by the
CBFC."

55. On being asked about how does the Ministry propose to regulate content shown
over the internet and the new concept called web-series, the Ministry stated as under:

"The content available over the internet is regulated under the Information
Technology Act, 2000 and the Rules framed thereunder. Under Section 79(3)(2)
of the rules framed under the IT Act, 2000, intermediaries must observe due
diligence as prescribed under Rule 3 in the Information Technology
(Intermediaries guidelines) Rules, 2011. Section 79(3) of the Information
Technology Act, 2000 provides for removing or disabling access to the material
which is being used to commit unlawful acts. "

21


56. When asked about the present status of the computerization project relating to
issue of film certification by the CBFC which was to be completed by March, 2017, the
Ministry replied as under:

"Online certification system ‘e-cinepramaan’ and the new website cbfcindia.gov.in

were launched by then Hon’ble Minister of 1&B on 27-3-2017. The application .

has been working smoothly since then and all certification process including
payments for certification fees are being done online only."

22


Chapter - Il

Academic activities of Satyajit Ray Film and Television Institute, Kolkata for the
period from 2010-11 to 2014-15

1. INTRODUCTORY

57. Satyajit Ray Film & Television Institute (SRFTI), Kolkata was established in 1995
by the Government of India as an autonomous academic institution under the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting (Mol&B). The Institute is registered under the West
Bengal Societies Registration Act, 1961. The Institute provides higher and professional
education and technical expertise in the art and technique of film-making and television
production. It has been constructed on a sprawling campus of 39.36 acres of land

located at the Eastern Metropolitan Bypass Road in Kolkata.

Management & Organisational Framework:
58. The institute is run by a Society constituted by the Government of India. As per
Clause 30) of the SRFTI’s Regulations, the composition of the society is a combination
of officials (who are ex-officio members) and non-officials who are selected from
different walks of life by the Central Government. A President heads the Society who is
also nominated by the Central Government.
Official members:
i. . Joint Secretary (Films), Ministry of I&B;
ii, Chief Executive Officer, Prasar Bharati or his/her nominee not below the rank of
Deputy Director General;
iii, | AS&FA, M/o 1&B or his/her nominee not below the rank of Deputy Secretary;
iv. Managing Director, National Film Development Corporation;
v. Director, Film & Television Institute of India, Pune; and
vi. Director, SRFTI.
The official members remain members of the Institute as long as they retain the office or
status by virtue of which they became members of the Institute.
Non-official members:
i. The President to be nominated by the Central Government;

23


iii.

59.

Three Experts to be nominated by the Central Government in their individual
capacity to represent the activities of the Central Government in the fields of
Education, Cultural, External Affairs, Science and Technology or Electronics;

Five persons of eminence connected with the Films, Television, Education,
Journalism, Literature, Fine Arts, Dramatics, Performing Arts etc. to be
nominated by the Central Government;

Three persons from among the alumni of the Institute or the former Institute to be
nominated by the Central Government; and

Such other person as may be nominated by the Central Government or as may
be co-opted by the Institute in accordance with prior directions of the Central
Government for such period as the Central Government may prescribe.

The tenure of the non-official members is of three years. Out of the members of

the Society, a Governing Council (GC) is formed whose non official members are

elected by the members of the Society. It is the apex decision making body of the

Institute which is headed by the President of the Society who acts as the Chairperson of

the Governing Council. GC is responsible for overall superintendence and management

of the Institute. Academic Council (AC), constituted by GC, consists of 6 domain

specialists in addition to Dean and six HODs of the institute and representatives of

students and alumni. AC is mandated to oversee all the academic and pedagogy-

related issues. Director, the chief executive officer of the institute, acts under the

guidance and directions of GC and is assisted by Dean and Registrar for academic and

administrative functions respectively.

Courses Offered:

60.

i.
ii.
iii.
iv.
Vv.

vi.

61.

SRFTI offers 3-year post-graduate diploma courses in six specializations:
Direction & Screenplay Writing;

Cinematography;

Editing;

. Sound Recording & Design;

Producing for Film & Television; and
Animation Cinema

The intake for each course is 12 students and in each course (for Animation

Cinema intake is 10 at present), 2 seats are reserved for foreign nationals nominated by

ICCR. The Institute is shortly going to start PG Diploma courses for television and a

24


short certificate programme for the 12+ students of North Eastern region at Itanagar,
Arunachal Pradesh.

Admission Method to PG Diploma Course conducted by the Institute:

62. SRFTI conducts competitive entrance examination on all India basis for taking
admission. The entrance examination consists of a written test followed by an
interactive orientation session and viva-voce for short-listed candidates. Admission
advertisement appears in major newspapers all over India. While the written test is held
at multiple centers all over the country; the interactive orientation session and viva-voce
are held at the Institute premises in Kolkata. The written examination consists of a
common paper on Creative Aptitude and Mental Aptitude and another paper on Specific
Area Aptitude in the discipline of choice.

Faculty:

63. The Institute has a core faculty of 20 teachers, which includes five Professors, six
Associate Professors and nine Assistant Professors. The members of the existing
faculty are persons of standing in their respective fields and are either film/design
school graduates or professionals of repute. The Institute adopts the system of drawing
from working professionals from the industry as Guest Faculty for taking classes and
practical on special subjects. Apart from this, the Institute also invites eminent
professionals/experts in cinema and television to conduct workshops.

Student Scholarship:

64. | SRFTI awards students’ scholarship to top 12 meritorious students on the basis
of admission test for the first year and thereafter top 02 students from each stream
receives the scholarship for second and third year. The amount of internal scholarship
per annum is equal to 50% of the annual tuition fee.

New Initiative — Film & Television Institute In Arunachal Pradesh:

65. As part of Government's initiatives for overall development of North Eastern
Region of the country and to encourage talent among youngsters of the North East in
the sector of Film and Television, it was proposed to establish a Film and Television
Institute in any one of the North Eastern States on similar line to that of Film &
Television Institute (FTI), Pune & Satyajit Ray Film & Television Institute (SRFTI),
Kolkata. SRFTI, Kolkata was assigned the task of conducting a study on the feasibility
of setting up of an institute in any of the North Eastern State by visiting the States as
well as interacting with the State Governments.

25


66. As enshrined in the Budget Speech 2015-16 of Hon’ble Finance Minister of India,
SRFTI prepared Detailed Project Report for establishing the proposed Institute in
Arunachal Pradesh. State Government of Arunachal Pradesh has formally handed over
the allotted land of 52.2 acres to Ministry of [&B on 25.08.2016. The project, at-the
estimated cost of = 204.32 crore, is likely to be completed by 2020. As the setting up of
permanent campus of Film Institute at Arunachal Pradesh would require 3-4 years, the
Ministry has planned to start courses from March, 2017 from a temporary campus
where 06 months foundation courses would be offered to the students belonging to
North Eastern region.

Proposal to upgrade the status of SRFTI:

67. A Cabinet proposal to frame “National Institute of Film, Television and Allied
Studies Act” was prepared with an objective to grant SRFTI & Film & Television
Institute, Pune, the status of Institutions of National Importance. The draft Cabinet Note
was submitted to Cabinet for its approval on 5'" December 2014. The main objective of
the proposed bill was to provide statutory backing to these institutions so that the
Diplomas awarded by them would get due recognition. In context of number of such
proposals submitted by different Ministries to declare their institutes as “Institutions of
National Importance” through an Act of Parliament, the Ministry of Human Resource
Development was to consider having a single comprehensive enactment for all such
institutions of higher education. Consequently, the matter was considered in detail
afresh in consultation with the Ministry of HRD and other concerned where it was
suggested that rather than going in for multiplicity of legislations to create these
University level institutions, the Ministry will explore alternate routes to achieve the
stated objectives. Accordingly, it has now been decided that the Ministry would initiate a
proposal of creating an overarching University through “Deemed University” route for all
existing & proposed Institutions under its administrative control.

Ul. AUDIT REVIEW

68. SRFTI was audited under Section 14 (1) of the Comptroller and Auditor
General’s (DPC) Act 1971. An audit was conducted on the academic activities of the
SRFTI covering the period 2010-11 to 2014-15.

69. During audit it was found that SRFTI had failed to introduce various courses as
envisaged in its objectives even after 20 years of its establishment. The activities of the
Institute was marred with delay in completion of courses, vacant seats, lesser teaching

hours and gap in evaluation of performance of students.

26


70. Against this backdrop, the PAC (2016-17) selected the subject as reported in
Para 11.2 of C&AG's Report No. 11 of 2016 (Compliance Audit) for detailed
examination and report. Accordingly, PAC (2016-17) had visited SRFTI!, Kolkata on
28.02.2017 to understand the ground realities of the Institute and held informal
discussions with its representatives. Subsequently, the Committee obtained background
note and requisite replies and some other clarifications from the Ministry of Information
& Broadcasting and SRFT!. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of
the Mol&B and SRFTI on 06.01.2017 and obtained further information on the subject.
However, due to paucity of time, the examination on the subject could not be completed
during 2016-17 and the subject was carried forward to the successor Committee i.e.
PAC (2017-18). Based on the information gathered, the Committee proceeded with
examination of the relevant issues in detail as outlined in the succeeding paragraphs.

lll. = STUDENT ADMISSIONS

71. Audit pointed out that SRFT! conducts three year post graduate courses in five
disciplines. It skipped enrolment for academic session 2010-13 and 2014-17 to revise
curricular design and syllabi. SRFTI instead of continuing with the old syllabi decided to
skip the full batch for two years until revision of syllabi. Due to non-enroiment of
students for two years, SRFTI suffered loss of revenue of € 1.84 crore towards tuition
fees, hostel rent, internet charges and library fees. Also, students were deprived
opportunity to learn the art and craft of film making for cinema and television.

72. In their written submission to the Committee, SRFTI stated that with a view to
teach contemporary contents and for shifting to digital domain, the syllabus was revised
in 2010-13 for implementing the modular structure (a University standard across the
world). The syllabus was again restructured in 2014-17 and therefore it was decided to
skip enrolment for those academic sessions. The domain shift required a certain kind of
equipment, which reached gradually. With the fast changing technology of film making,
it would not be prudent to continue with old syllabus and impart educations on out-dated
skills. Skipping academic session also helped in clearing backlogs.

73. Also, SRFTI submitted that the curriculum taught to the students in 2009 was
considered to be faced with the following difficulties —

a) There was a major shift in audio-video technology from analog to digital;
b) Basic method of teaching in SRFTI was celluloid film that was analog
based;

27


०) Challenges faced due to non-availability of celluloid film stock;

d) Celluloid Film labs were shutting down their operation; and

e) Distribution and Screening of films in theaters were going through a
change from traditional celluloid projection systems to Digital Cinema

Package system).
This necessitated a change in syllabus with an aim to:

a) introduce proper Digital medium to replace the celluloid film technology;
b) rationalize the core input in the syllabus in major departments to cope with
the technology as well as completing the course in time; and

०) set up of new guidelines for the projects in respect of digital domain.
74.  SRFTI further submitted that the 107 batch of students started on 25.11.2011
instead of March 2011 as the course was deferred by seven months because during the
45"" meeting of the Governing Council of SRFTI held on 13" August 2010, the members
decided that the 10" batch of students would be covered by the revised syllabus. The
syllabus was again restructured in 2014-17 with the main aim of avoiding delay in
course completion. The introduction of two new programs - Producing for Films and
Television in 2012 and Animation Cinema in 2015 also required a fresh look into the
academic programme schedule.
75. When the Committed enquired as to who all were assigned the task of framing
the new syllabi, SRFTI furnished that it had assigned the task of framing new syllabus to
a Syllabus Committee comprising of Director (SRFTI), Sh. Jahnu Barua, two eminent
film directors who are ex-students of FTII, Dean, SRFTI, Dean, FTII, all HODs of SRFTI,
and two academicians/experts. The deadline given to the Committee was 15.09.2010.
Similarly during 2014, the task of restructuring the syllabus was assigned to a
Committee consisting of Shri Nilotpal Majumdar, Dean, Shri Sankalp Meshram, outside
expert, Ms. Miriam Joseph, outside expert, Shri Hitesh Chaurasia, ex-student, Shri
Ashoke Viswanathan, outside expert, Prof. Suresh Chhabria, Ex-Prof, FTII, and Prof. Ira
Bhaskar. The deadline given to this Committee was 31.10.2014.

76. The Committee wanted to know whether any financial calculations were
assessed before deciding to discontinue the full batch for two years leading to a loss of
₹ 1.84 crore and why was this issue not taken up after completion of one academic
session (2010-13) taking into account while depriving the students opportunity to learn
the art and craft of filmmaking. SRFTI submitted that continuing with outdated syllabus

28


based on fast fading analog technology would have meant more injustice producing
only obsolete skills and would have been of no use to the students and therefore it was
imperative that the syllabus be revised and keeping this in mind, financial calculations
were not undertaken. The complete domain shift of filmmaking from analogue to digital
required immediate intervention and no further delay. Therefore, students were admitted
only after the syllabus was revised and introduced with advanced technology based
equipment to give them the opportunity to learn the art and craft of contemporary film

making.

77. — Audit highlighted that there were 13 vacant seats under foreign quota pertaining
to the session 2011-14, 2012-15 and 2013-16. But SRFTI did not consider enrolling
Indian students against such vacant seats although it had enrolled Indian students
against the vacant foreign quota seats for the session 2008-11 and 2009-12. Thus, non-
enrolment of 13 Indian students resulted in loss of revenue of हैं 18.04 lakh towards

student fees apart from underutilization of resources.

78. SRFTI stated that due to lack of foreign applicants which are routed through
Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR), the full quota of 2 students in each
specialization, was not filled up. Often foreign candidates join the Institute as late as two
months after the commencement of academic session and therefore, it was not possible
to assess vacant seats on time. In some cases, although there were applicants for
enrolment, seats couldn't be allotted as specialization choice had been mismatching
with specialization offered. Also seats could not be filled up due to non-availability of
qualified students. Besides, Indian candidates meeting minimum benchmark are not
always available. Now, in line with the recommendation of CAG, the Institute has started
filling up the vacant seats under foreign quota from the Indian applicants on and from
the academic session 2016-19.

79. To a query of the Committee whether any issues were noticed during the
enrolment of Indian students against the vacant foreign quota seats for the session
2008-11, SRFTI replied that a total of 40 students were admitted against 40 seats [10
seats X 4 Departments = 40; Indian Seats were 32 (4X8) and Foreign seats 8(4X2)]. No
Foreign student was referred by ICCR in that year and all the seats including the one
reserved for Foreign Students were filled in by Indian students. However, considering
the trend of non-availability of foreign students, the Institute increased the seats in each

29


department from 10 to 12 by increasing the number of seats of Indian students from 8 to
10 to ensure that the uncertainty involved in the recommendations from the ICCR could
be tackled and resources available with SRFTI could be optimally utilized.

80. Audit also highlighted that there were also 14 vacant seats under reserved
category during the years 2011-12, 2012-13 and 2013-14 and noted that SRFTI -
followed three stages of assessment for admission of students and out of total passed
students in written examination, limited numbers of students in the merit list were called
for the next level of assessment. Final merit list was prepared on the basis of marks
obtained in all stages of assessment. Scrutiny of records related to admission for the
year 2013-14 revealed that out of 566 passed students, SRFTI -had called only 142
students for next stage of assessment but: still there were four vacant seats in réserved
category. To avoid vacancies, SRFTI had not considered second/third merit lists as
done in other educational institutes for filling up the vacant seats.

81. SRFTI submitted that the admission process starts with the formation of an
admission committee which consists of two external experts besides insiders. The
selection methodology includes deciding weightage of marks, cut off marks, ratio in
which the prospective students will be called for interview, for each stage of selection
process is determined by the admission committee to ensure a benchmark of quality of
the prospective students. Based on the benchmark, students are called for orientation
and interview in 1:2 ratio against the number of vacancies in each discipline. But even
after calling sufficient number of candidates and publication of successive merit lists -
11, 2" merit list & waiting list, seats could not be filled up due to non-availability of
qualified candidates. However, the Institute has taken a note of the entire issue and 67
out of 70 seats were filled up for the academic session 2016-2019. 3 seats in Producing
for Film & Television could not be filled up because of non-availability of qualified
candidates, even after taking special drive by offering option of choosing these
disciplines amongst candidates from other disciplines who missed the opportunity to get

admission in their respective choice.

82. When the Committee enquired about the ratio of number of vacancies to the
number of candidates shortlisted after written examination, SRFTI furnished that the
ratio of vacancies and shortlisted candidates (Indian national) called for Orientation
Course and Interview during past years were:

30


Year No. of Vacancies for Indian Called for Interview Ratio
candidate

2011-12 40 123 1:3.

2012 - 13 50 132 1:2.6

2013 - 14 50 142 1:2.8

2015 - 16 | ४ | 68 123 1:1.8

2016 - 17 70 129 1:1.8

The total number of shortlisted candidates varied in different years as SRFTI called all

candidates for interviews having equal score based on the cut off number.

83. When the Committee ascertained the reasons as to why the second/third lists
were not considered to avoid the vacancies, SRFTI submitted that the second/third
merit list from the shortlisted candidates to fill the vacancies are always considered. In
2013, the first merit list was published on 30.10.2013 & second list (as well as waiting
list Le. 3rd list) was published on 12.11.2013. The course started on 25.11.2013. All
these dates were prescheduled.

IV. - COURSE IMPLEMENTATION

84. The Audit scrutiny revealed that even though the objectives of SRFT! include
conducting under-graduate diploma courses on Television and Film but SRFTI stated
that it did not conduct any such courses due to inadequacy of infrastructure and man-
power. SRFTI offered only three years post-graduate diploma course with specialization
in five disciplines of film making viz. Direction & Screenplay writing, Cinematography,
Sound Recording & Design, Editing and Producing for film & television. Each course
involved theory as well as practical classes and projects involving short/diploma film
making. SRFTI also organized workshops as a part of the course implementation.

85. SRFTI submitted that in accordance with the resources available, SRFTI has
made efforts to induct new courses and it may be noted that two post graduate diploma
courses have been inducted very recently - Producing for Film & Television,
commenced from 2012 & Animation Cinema, commenced from 2015. SRFTI is in the
process of expanding its activities. The construction work of Center of Television and
New media is near completion and the first batch is expected to be commenced by end
of next year. SRFTI has proposed to conduct a 2 year PG Diploma program with

31



specialization with a student intake of 10 students per specialization in the following
disciplines:

1. Writing for Television and Radio.

2. News and Entertainment Production for Television and Radio.

3. Production Management for Television and Radio.
SRFTI is also working on setting up its extended campus in Itanagar, Arunachal
Pradesh that is expected to come up by 2020. In the meantime, it has planned to start
six months foundation course in Film & Television from March, 2017 from a temporary
campus for the students belonging to North Eastern region.
86. SRFTI apprised the Committee about its efforts to remove the inadequate
infrastructure and man-power causing hindrance in course completion by furnishing that
the Government had provided ~ 55 crores during the current plan period for

infrastructure development by:

a) creation of additional infrastructure and up-gradation of existing
infrastructure including girls hostel, class room theatre, seminar room,
work station, common storage facility, TV center, building for editing
department etc.

b) replacement of old equipments, procurement of new equipments and
software for newly created animation and production management
departments as well as procurement of modern equipments to address the
technological changes in the industry including HD technology.

Further to address the issue of inadequate manpower, the Institute adopts the system of
drawing working professionals from the industry as Guest Faculty for taking classes and
practical sessions on special subjects. Apart from this, the Institute also invites eminent
professionals/experts in cinema and television to conduct workshops. For project works

and other specialized jobs also, SRFTI hires trained professionals on need basis.

87. The Committee wanted to be apprised of the details about any cost benefit
analysis being conducted for Undergraduate Diploma courses, whether the objectives of
SRFTI were modified in accordance with the non-conduct of the same and further
wanted to know as to who was responsible for taking the decision regarding the conduct
of the courses. SRFTI furnished that the cost benefit analysis of undertaking UG
diploma program had not been undertaken at any point till date. The PG diploma offered
by SRFTI is not recognized by UGC. Therefore, commencement of a full time Under

32


Graduate programme not recognized by UGC will not be beneficial to the students as
he or she will not have any other career options after completing the programme. A full-
fledged undergraduate programme along with establishment of research department
could be taken up only when SRFTI was able to confer degrees instead of diplomas.
However, the option of starting UG Courses was still not closed as the Institute would
consider to commence these courses once non recognition of its degree/diploma got
resolved. Hence, the objectives were not modified. Also, Academic Council constituted
on the directives of the Governing Council of SRFTI was responsible for recommending
decisions regarding academic matters. The Governing Council in turn vets the decisions
of the Academic Council. The finance related matters are approved by the Standing
Finance Committee as per Bye-Laws of the Institute.

५४. DELAY IN COURSE COMPLETION

88.
course completion. Although, SRFTI diagnosed the causes of delay in course

Audit scrutiny revealed that there had been a delay of more than 2 to 6 years in

completion as infrastructure issues, delay on medical ground and synergy between

crew members etc., it did not take any measure to eliminate the causes of delay.

Batch/Academic | Date of Date of final Period of delay beyond
Year commencement | assessment course duration of three
of course ears (in Years and Months
37 (2001-04) August 2001 September 2010 6 years
47 (2002-05) June 2002 October 2010 5 years 3 months
57 (2003-06) August 2003 February 2011 4 years 5 months
.. 67 (2005-08) June 2005 April 2012 3 years 9 months
7" (2007-10) August 2007 May 2013 2 years 8 months
87 (2008-11) November 2008 May 2014 2 years 5 months

89.

Diploma films of particular batch could never be contained within three years. However,

SRFTI submitted before the Committee that time taken to complete all the

the academic inputs and activities were carried without substantial delay and the delays
arose from the projects which started from the end of second year in the three year
course. The major projects which are a part and parcel of 3 years course at SRFTI are
Short Film, Documentary, Playback and Diploma film. All these projects, except the
Documentary, entail manpower, equipment and shooting floors. So, the delay in

completion of the course was primarily because of these projects and the delay in

33



completion of the projects were primarily due to the lack of trained manpower needed
for shoots, lack of adequate infrastructure and failure on the part of students to stick to
their time schedule. Academic Administrative support was progressively strengthened
to optimize full capacity utilization for intake of students and timely completion of
courses. SRFTI managed to significantly tighten its schedule through continuous
updation of syllabus and presently was also in the process of restricting the execution of
the final dissertation project to ensure timely completion of projects. The average time
spent by a student in the Institute came down to about 3.5 years and the Institute is
trying to bring down the same.

90. Toa query of the Committee as to why did the Mol&B remained a mute spectator
towards the callous attitude of SRFTI in delaying of completion of the final assessment
by more than 2 to 6 years causing irreparable damage to the future of the students and
loss to the exchequer. SRFTI replied that the time taken to complete all the Diploma
films of particular batch could not be contained within three years. However, other
academic activities such as theory, practical and workshops were carried out without
substantial delay and the delay occurred due to the projects which started from the end
of second year in the three year course and shortage of manpower. The delay in
completion of the course was primarily because of these projects and the delay in
completion of the projects was mainly due to above reasons and also due to lack of
efforts on the part of students to stick to their time schedule. While the Ministry was
assisting SRFTI by providing adequate funds to upgrade its infrastructure, equipment,
etc., SRFTI was actively pursuing the following in order to reduce delay in course
completion:

i. playback project batch has been normalized for the curriculum of the thirteenth
batch and onwards.

ii, to ensure parallel productions for reducing time under the supervision of the
Dean and HoDs, the Producing for Film & TV (PFT) course has been entrusted
with the job of outsourcing the final year dissertation film.

91. The Committee wanted to know who was responsible for ensuring that the
course completion was not delayed and why was no follow up done despite delay in
every session, SRFTI furnished that appointment of permanent skilled manpower for
project works could not be justified due to lesser workload associated with the job and
SRFTI was facing difficulty in hiring on need basis as the available trained manpower

34


preferred their primary professional assignments first leaving a very narrow window of
their availability. Infrastructure development was a gradual process and.SRFTI has
always been strengthening its infrastructure with the help of financial assistance
provided by the Ministry. However, such investments were made prudently considering
various factors in mind. Similarly, procurement of additional equipment was risky due to
factors like high costs, obsolesce, expenditure on maintenance, etc. and therefore,
taking such equipment on hire on need basis was more feasible proposition given the
cost versus the workload. But, this approach sometimes lead to non-availability of
equipment on time which also contributed towards delay.

VI. NO. RESEARCH CONDUCTED

92. Audit noticed that as per objectives, SRFTI had to undertake research in film and
television but did not establish a Research Department. It had appointed one Film
Research Officer in May 2011 but his services were being utilized for other works.

93. SRFTI, in its written submission to the Committee stated that it had organised
national seminars, academic conference, master classes under the research wing.
There also had been publications associated with it. SRFTI had also encouraged
fostering various interfaces among academia, researchers and professionals nationally
and internationally in advancing the dialogue on forms and techniques. The Institute had
started one independent Research Fellowship Programme under its research wing. In
the year 2016-17, three fellowships had been awarded for research in Indian Cinema.
The programme was also aimed at making a database of research material on Indian
Cinema.

94. The.Committee wanted to know as to who was responsible for establishment of
the research department and whether any follow up was done to ensure the setting up
of the same. SRFTI submitted that it conducted three year Post Graduate Diploma
courses in Cinema and the Diploma which were not recognized by UGC as SRFTI was
not authorized to award master degrees at present and as such there was no proposal
for setting up a Research Department at present.

95. Further, the Committee wanted to be apprised of about the research work carried
out by the Film Research Officer and why were his services utilized in other
departments despite being appointed for conducting research. SRFTI replied that the
job description of Film Research Officer did not entail any research work as such and

35


his services were being utilized according to the responsibilities associated with the said
post. The Film Research Officer reported to the Dean of the Institute.

96. When the Committee wanted to know whether any corrective measures were
taken to address the issues hindering the research activity. SRFTI replied that it may
consider establishment of research department once the issue of non-recognition of
degrees/diplomas awarded by the Institute got resolved. However, it had started
working in this direction and three Research Fellowships had been awarded in
November 2016. The research material created by the research fellows would be used
as a database for further research when full-fledged research will be conducted.

Vil. SHORT TERM COURSES

97. As per their objectives, SRFTI had to organise short term/refreshers/in-services
training courses. However, Audit noted that SRFTI had not offered any regular short
term course and stated that introduction of short term courses might disrupt the regular
PG courses due to insufficient manpower and infrastructure. Audit also observed that
the Academic Council, in August 2012, decided to communicate the constraints of
conducting such courses to the Ministry for addressing the issues. Further, Audit
highlighted the fact that SRFTI, did not take up the matter with the Ministry till January
2016. Thus, absence of effective action on the part of SRFTI resulted in failure to
introduce regular short term courses and diploma courses on acting. On the other hand,
FTIl, Pune had conducted five regular short term courses.

98. SRFTI submitted that it has been conducting short term film appreciation courses
for National School of Drama (NSD) & Bharatendu Natya Academy (BNA) on regular
basis which are as follows:

BNA NSD
Year No. Of Duration of the | Year | No. Of Duration of the
Students Course
participated Students course
participated
2014 14 4" August to | 2014 19 4" June -
26""September 26'September

2015 18 13" Julyto | 2015 25 21 July- 1 August —

36


O06"September

2016 15 017 Juneto | 2016 25 277 July - 06" August
23 July

SRFTI further submitted that FTII was better equipped to conduct regular short term
courses with their better infrastructural and manpower base compared to them as there
were only 27 sanctioned teacher posts at SRFTI against 52 such sanctioned strength at
FTI.

Vill. POST GRADUATE COURSE IN TELEVISION

99. ॥ April 2012, SRFTI had sought from the Mol&B, a lump sum amount of % 23.66
crore to set up a Centre for excellence in Television for offering two year post graduate
diploma in six disciplines. SRFT| had projected 31 March 2015 as the likely date of
completion of the Centre.. The Mol&B, in November 2012, approved the proposal with a
sanctioned amount of % 8.64 crore only on lump sum basis. However, in April 2014 only,
SRFTI prepared a master plan for the Centre and gave a list of building requirement to
Civil Construction Works (CCW), All India Radio (AIR), Mol&B to present the estimates.
In September 2014, CCW presented an estimate of हैं 57.69 crore towards the total
construction cost. As the estimate was much higher than the sanctioned grant, SRFTI
decided in October 2014 to construct one small TV studio and three academic
departments for running three courses instead of six. However, Audit noted that both
the works had not been started till October 2015. In December 2015, SRFTI stated that
after the completion of the construction and availability of infrastructure, faculty and
other resources, full-fledged Television course could be started.

100. In July 2016, an expert committee prepared an outline of three courses to be
inducted in the Television Centre. The Governing Council, SRFTI had given its in-
principal approval to begin the courses from next year. SRFTI had planned to conduct 2
year PG Diploma program with specialization with intake of 10 students per
specialization in the following disciplines:

1. Writing for Television and Radio.
2. News and Entertainment Production for Television and Radio.
3. Production Management for Television and Radio.

37


The studio is expected to be completed by March 2017, while the academic building is
expected to be completed in 2018. However, the classes of the first batch will start only
in 2017.

101. When the Committee enquired as to why ithe master plan was not prepared
before the submission of proposal to the Ministry, SRFTI replied that the estimates for
construction was prepared so that the fund requirement would be assessed at the time
of formulation of plan scheme and subsequently the plan was modified and tailored
according to the fund actually sanctioned and allocated to the Institute. Further, to the
questions of the Committee about the estimated amount higher than the sanctioned
grant and whether SRFTI had informed the Ministry about its plans to set up a TV studio
in place of the sanctioned centre of Excellence to reduce the number of courses from
six to three, SRFTI stated that there were adequate representations at Joint Secretary,
Additional Secretary & Financial Advisor level in the Governing Council of the Institute
so that the Ministry was well aware of developments occurring in the Institute and
participate in decision making process without compromising on the autonomy granted
to the Institute.

IX. CAPTIVE TV PROJECT

102. With the objective to provide training to the students on online telecasting,
SRFTI, in March 2005, engaged Broadcast Engineering Consultants India Private
Limited for setting up Captive TV. However, SRFTI failed to provide dedicated TV studio
required for Captive TV project and consequently, equipments of Captive TV, for which
an expenditure of = 55.04 lakh had been incurred, was being utilized for showing
movies till the year 2011 and later on was used for making programme and hands-on
training of students. Thus it did not fulfill its intended purpose. In December 2015,
SRFTI stated that the Captive TV equipments were used for academic project
development and training as well. But the fact remained that the Captive TV project
could not be utilized for intended purpose of online telecasting.

103. SRFTI submitted that keeping abreast with the latest technology available, the
Institute was being connected with National Knowledge Network (NKN- a state-of-the-
art Pan-India Gigabit network on which thousands of Institutes are connected) for
intended purpose of online telecasting and the same facility was being extended to
hostels and other academic areas. The students would now have options of viewing HD

streaming of many television channels through various popular streaming sites (e.g.

38


Nettlix, Cracle, Hulu, TubiTv). In addition to that, Institute's student's films were being
made available in an on-campus deployed digital repository (Dspace). The equipment
procured for Captive TV project were used by academic departments to strengthen the
infrastructure though majority of the equipment procured had reached end of their life.
104. The Committee wanted to know why did SRFTI fail to provide a dedicated TV
studio for setting up Captive TV and whether any monitoring of the Captive TV project
was done. Also, in view of the failure of the Captive TV project, the Committee sought
whether any alternative means were adopted to provide online telecasting to students.
SRFTI furnished that the overall administrative and academic activities of the Institute
including the Captive TV project were monitored by its Governing Council. However, as
the entire Captive TV project got delayed due to curtailment of the budget. Moreover,
the concept of Captive TV lost its relevance with availability of various online हु
broadcasting platforms in cyberspace.

X. INADEQUATE TEACHING

105. As per the Bye-laws, academic load of lectures/tutorials/practicals of Assistant
Professor and Lecturer per week was not less than 8 and 16 hours respectively. In July
2011, SRFTI re-designated the post of Lecturer and Assistant Professor as Assistant
Professor and Associate Professor respectively. Audit scrutiny revealed that most of the
Assistant Professors and Associate Professors did not achieve the core load per week
as stipulated in the Bye-laws. During the period from November 2012 to March 2013,
the average classes taken by eight out of ten Assistant Professors ranged between 0.93
and 14.9 hours per week while that by one out of four Associate Professors was 6.4
hours per week while rest of Assistant Professors and Associate Professors fulfilled
minimum requirement of teaching hours. During the period from November 2013 to May
2014, the average classes taken by all the Assistant Professors ranged between 0.5
and 7.08 hours per week while that by three out of four Associate Professors was
between 0.07 and 1.94 hours per week while one Associate Professor fulfilled minimum
requirement of teaching hours. During the period from December 2014 to July 2015,
one Assistant Professor and one Associate Professor did not take any class. The
average classes taken by the remaining 10 Assistant Professors ranged between 2.68
and 10.90 hours per week while that by remaining three Associate Professors was
between 5.20 and 5.76 hours per week.

39


106. SRFTI submitted that it had a curriculum of projects besides theoretical and
practical classes. These projects were associated with extensive mentoring by teachers
on one-to-one basis that started from the conception to end with projection on the .
screen. Considering the number of projects in curriculum, a substantial part of the
teachers’ time was spent on mentoring for projects which could be logged as it took -
place on a continuous fashion. In addition, the teachers of SRFTI were engaged in
additional activities like conducting festivals, holding additional charge of Dean &
Director, attending meetings, holding enquiries etc. and these activities were also not
logged thereby apparently reflecting erroneous figures of inadequate teaching hours
indicating half scenario and not in totality. Mechanism for monitoring of teaching hours
of faculty had been incorporated in the modular pattern of the academic programme that
had come into effect from August, 2015.
Xl. | ADHOCISM IN EVALUATION
107. As per Bye-laws, a student was eligible for promotion to the next higher level on
scoring a minimum of 40 per cent and above in written examination and minimum 50
percent and above in each practical exercise/assignment/session. However, Audit
scrutiny revealed that students scoring less than the stipulated minimum passing marks
had been promoted in contravention of Bye-laws. In some cases, more marks had been
recorded in the mark sheets than that was awarded by Department. Also, below
satisfactory grading of diploma films made by a number of students indicate that the
teaching process in SRFTI need to be reviewed. An incidence of loss of papers has also
been pointed out by the Audit.
108. In this regard, the Ministry stated as follows:
As per Academic Rule 4.4.1.3 of Academic By-laws of the Institute a student
failed to submit his/her assignment in time had to appeal for a Make-up
examination/submission and on recommendation of the HoD and further
approval of Dean, concerned students may be granted permission for the same.
Rule 4.6.7 of the Academic By-laws states that students wilfully not
appearing/and or not completing theory/written examinations of current session
and/or not completing projects/exercises of current session and/or not submitting
requisite sessional shall not be promoted. The decision therein of the Dean shall
be final and binding. Audit pointed out that the students were promoted with
approval of the Dean, after considering the overall performance of the students in
the respective semester. It may also be mentioned here that SRFTI had earned

40


109.

the rare distinction of its students' films having been selected in Cannes Film
festival (Cine Foundation Category) for four times. For the last three years,
SRFTI had been invited by Normal University of China with full hospitability for a
collaborative cinema workshop due to high standards of storytelling by students
of SRFTI. The Institute was periodically monitoring the curriculum and reviewing
the evaluation and assessment pattern. With the introduction of revised syllabus
with modular structure, module-wise student evaluation mechanism came into
existence that clearly avoid adhocacy. Audit pointed out that incorrect recording
of the marks had already been corrected. The incidence such as loss of papers
of Cinematography Students from the custody of an Assistant Professor was
viewed seriously by the Institute and necessary action was taken. However, the
decision of taking into consideration of the preliminary assessment result was
taken by the Department in consultation with Dean, otherwise the entire result of
the Department would get withheld.

The Committee, while highlighting Audit findings about evaluation of performance

of students indicating that the teaching process in SRFTI needed to be reviewed,

wanted to know whether any system was in place to review the performance of the

teachers and what steps were taken to establish the same, SRFT! submitted that it was

governed by Government Rules unless otherwise specified in its Bye-laws and the

performance of faculty were assessed as per APAR system as existing in other

Government set up. However, teachers of SRFTI were open to evaluation by students

by virtue of a decision taken in the Academic Council on 17 January 2016, the details of

which were again discussed in the meeting of the Academic Council held on 8" August

2016. Teacher Performance Feedback Form to be filled up by students was available

on the website of the Institute. The structured format for the evaluation of teachers

under the directive of the Governing Council was already under process.

creed

41


PART Il

OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Working of Centrai Board of Film Certification
1. Introductory: The Committee while scrutinizing the Audit Report on the
working of Central Board of Film certification noted many systemic deficiencies
such as unjustifiable delays beyond prescribed period in certification process;
altering of order of films for examination; conversion of certified films from 'A' to
‘UA/A' category etc.. Also, they noticed lack of internal controls within the CBFC
for tracking the records of film certification which carried a risk of issue of
duplicate certificates for the same film to different individuals not holding
copyrights. The scrutiny of the subject by the PAC (2016-17) and PAC (2017-18)
further’ revealed various other short comings. The  observations/
recommendations of the Committee have been detailed in the succeeding

paragraphs.

2. The Committee note that the Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983
prescribe different time limits for various stages of certification process, totalling
to 68 days and all the films are required to be certified on “first come first served”
basis. The Regional Officers (ROs) have been given the discretionary powers to
alter the order of examination of films, if a written request from the applicant is
received and the RO concerned feels that there are grounds for an early
examination, which are to be recorded in file. However, inspection of 175 records
by the Audit from 11 April 2013 revealed that in 57 films (32.57 per cent) which
had jumped the queue, letters from the applicant requesting for special
consideration/RO’s justification accepting the request were not found on records
and further note that a clear 'U/UA' or a clear ‘A’ certification was done for 135
films. Further, in 49 films (36 per cent) despite completion of certification
process, time taken for issue of certificates ranged between 3 to 491 days after
recommendation for grant of certificate by Examining Committee (EC). The
Committee could not find any tenable reason for not issuing the certificate for
months together even after clearance by the EC and desire that in light of a case
study by Audit relating to fabrication of documents and favouritism by Secretary
to Chairperson, detailed inquiry into the cases of inordinate delay may be
conducted and the Committee may be apprised of the findings thereof. The

Committee are further concerned that while this discrepancy could not be

42


detected by the system it came to light when a complaint was received by the
Central Vigilance Commission and, therefore, desire that the Ministry may look
into the matter and streamline the system by establishing a control mechanism
under which the decisions involving relaxations made by Committee/RO are
subjected to review by the Board to ensure transparency in the working of CBFC.
The Committee further desire to be apprised of the cases pointed out by the
Vigilance wing in the Ministry/CBFC during the last 10 years and punitive action
taken against those found guilty.

3. The Committee are dismayed to note that CBFC, in order to help big
filmmakers who had applied for certification very close to release date, granted
certificates to their films ahead of other applicants even when there was no such
urgency expressed. The Committee exhort the Ministry/CBFC to ensure a
transparent and disciplined regime by certifying films on first come first serve
basis with no favouritism and by encouraging big and small banners alike to
apply well before the release date. With regard to out-of-turn preference for the
certification of certain films, it is necessary that there should be some sound
reasons to justify the exercise of discretionary powers by the RO and which
should be recorded in the file. The Ministry/CBFC may prescribe the guidelines
under which order of certification may be altered. The power of Regional Officer
(RO) to alter order of examination of the film be exercised only in those cases
covered under the guidelines and the reasons may invariably be recorded in each
case of deviation. Further, the Committee observe that CBFC has submitted a
proposal for enhancement of certification fee for introduction of “Tatkal charges”.
The Committee desire the priority to applicants paying Tatkal charges be given
while ensuring that other applicants get certificates within the stipulated period.

(i). The Committee further note that CBFC had issued certificates to films without
verifying whether the film was certified earlier by them or any other Regional
Office and hence probability of two or more certificates being issued for the same
films existed. The Committee understand from the reply of the Ministry/ CBFC
that ever increasing workload, manpower constraints and when the cuts
submitted were contested etc. led to delays in film certification and further dates
were given depending on the availability of the Examining Officer and one

member who had originally watched the film. The Committee feel that non

43


maintenance of systematic records, absence of manpower planning, non
adherence to prescribed timelines, non-existence of internal control framework
and lackadaisical attitude led to issue of multiple certificates to the films, delays .
etc..The Ministry/CBFC cannot take umbrage of shortage of manpower for the
mistakes of issuing certificate twice to same films by CBFC. They should have
increased manpower as per requirement from time to time. The Committee,
therefore, desire the Ministry/CBFC to augment its manpower urgently in line with
the increasing workload and submit a proposal for recruiting personnel after
taking into account the present and future manpower requirements under
intimation to the Committee. The Committee are of the view that all existing
records be digitized centrally within a prescribed timeframe to avoid any further
instance of issuance of duplicate certificate and efforts made to identify films
where duplicate certificates were issued and appropriate action taken to rectify

the mistake in each such case.

(ii) | The Committee note that the computerization project envisages automation
of the entire process of certification including filing of online application, secured
online fee payment, integration of relevant data, scheduling of examination,
intimation thereof to all concerned, formation of Examination Committees,
reporting, intimation for cuts, intimations for certificate and identification of any
duplicity at the application stage itself. They, therefore, are of the view that
timeframes be revised/ shortened for every stage taking into account
computerization of whole process be scrupulously followed and delays duly
accounted for. Further, all producers, copy right holders or those applying for
certification of imported films and titles be mandatorily registered and all details
regarding applications received, cleared, pending etc be made available online so

as to ensure transparency and efficiency in the system.

(iii) | The CBFC should develop a robust internal control mechanism followed by
regular internal audit of the system to ensure that the same is working properly

and effectively.

4. «The Committee find that there is no provision in Cinematograph Act 1952 to
convert films from “A” to “UA”’/”U” category , however, CBFC had converted 172
“A” category certified films into “UA” category films and 166 of “UA” to “U”

44


te

category during the period 2012-2015. The Committee observe from the reply of
the Ministry that there is no specific provision which prohibits recertification of
films already certified and the practice being followed by CBFC as the competent
certifying authority appears to be in accordance with Rule 21, 33 and 35 made
under the Cinematograph Act. The Committee find that the Rules 21,33 and 35 as
quoted by Ministry do not empower CBFC to re-certify the films. The Committee
observe from the reply of the Ministry that in order to get a U,UA certificate
required to telecast films on Cable TV, the filmmakers edit content of the film
themselves and apply for recertification. The Committee desire that
Cinematograph Act be suitably amended to make provisions for recertification of
films to telecast on Television and a formal procedure be framed to enable
conversion of films a transparent exercise and more specific categorization of
films into 'UA12+' and 'UA15+' etc. The Committee exhort that such conversion be
reflected clearly on the website of CBFC/Ministry.

5. The Committee note that as per notification issued by Mol&B in September
1984, the validity of certificates was perpetual instead of 10 years as per earlier
provisions. However, the CBFC continued to accept films for revalidation of
certificates which points to the clear failure of the Ministry in enforcing its own
orders.

Further, as per Sub-rule 6 of Rule 21 of the Cinematograph Rules, 1983, the
applicant has to furnish the original or a certified copy of the import license
together with custom clearance permit for public exhibition of video films
imported in India but in many cases as pointed out by the Audit, CBFC did not
obtain the same. The Ministry submitted that since the Department of Commerce
vide public notice dated 29" January 2002 had allowed import of cinematograph
feature films and other films (including films on video tape, compact video disc,
laser video disc or digital video disc) without a license, the condition could not be
complied with. .

In view of the above discrepancies, the Committee adjure the

Ministry/CBFC to bring out a manual of rules/guidelines incorporating all

the relevant notifications and latest instructions issued in connection with

certification of films at one place to avoid recurrence of such instances.

45


6(i). The Committee note that the Cinematograph Act prescribes constitution of
a Board to be called the Board of Film Certification consisting of a Chairman and
not less than twelve and not more than twenty-five other members to be
appointed by the Central Government. As per reply of the Ministry, each state
should be represented by at least one or two Board Members as there are
different dialects around the country. The Committee hope that the Government
while constituting the CBFC ensure that one or two representatives from each
state is/are appointed there. The Committee are unhappy that proper records
about the agenda of the Board meetings have not been kept and that in 2014-15
and 2015-16, the Board met only once a year. The Committee are unable to
comprehend the need for a high profile Board when they are not even inclined to
meet frequently and discuss the film certification process and its impact on the
public at large. The Committee exhort that the Board be more proactive and a
guiding spirit in the healthy working of the institution. The Committee are of the
view that the number of members of the CBFC be fixed so that each State/region
gets represented in the Board and one/two Board member/s be attached to every
Regional Office to ensure its transparency. The Committee further enjoin that
tenure of the members of the Board and the Advisory Panels should only be
renewed/extended after analyzing their contribution in the film certification
process . The Committee while noting from the reply of the Ministry that desired
strength of the advisory panel members in respect of each Regional Office of
CBFC is worked out after carrying out a detailed analysis of work load in each of
the Regional Offices based on the number of feature films, video films and short
films to be certified desire that an analysis of the involvement/ performance of the
panel members may be made at the end of tenure to ensure that such numbers as
appointed were actually required. The Committee while noting that only three
workshops for Advisory Panel Members were conducted during last five years
are of the considered opinion that the workshops should be a regular feature to
enlighten and update the Panel Members about the latest issues involved in the
examination of the films and to implement the guidelines issued by the CBFC,
from time to time. Further, the Committee are amazed to note that not even a
single case has been detected and reported for violation of category
classification or for not screening certification before the film is actually screened

or for not carrying out the cuts as prescribed by the CBFC. The Committee while

46


te

noting from the reply of the Ministry that since Cinemas is a State subject (as per
Entry 33 of the List-ll, subject to the provisions of Entry 60 of List 1), the
responsibility for enforcement of category classification on the ground lies
primarily with the State Government desire that requisite information be collected

from the States and furnished to the Committee.

(ii) | The Committee observe that since 1952 when the Cinematograph Act
was enacted , there have been many changes/ developments in the field of
cinema with the proliferation of TV channels, cable network, you tube and
advent of new digital technology making various kinds of contents
accessible to all. Further, the CBFC established under the provisions of the
Act has been steadily losing its credibility! significance and non-
controversial character. The Committee note that the CBFC has been
taking discretionary decisions in absence of any specific rules/ provisions.
With the advent of new technology in the cinema field and emergence of
media as a powerful medium to discuss and form opinions, CBFC needs to
keep abreast of latest developments in the field and control its Regional
Offices in an effective manner so as to ensure complete transparency in
the working of the CBFC. The Committee are also concerned to note lack of
control of CBFC over contents available on internet. The Committee,
therefore, desire that the Act may be reviewed and amended suitably
keeping in view the changing dynamics of film industry and the change in

societal values.

(iii) 116 Committee also desire that the film makers be enabled to certify
their films themselves and for being eligible for self certification under
specific categories, the CBFC may prescribe detailed parameters keeping
in view the ethos and traditions of the country to guide the film producers
to align with the requirements for certification under that category. In case
the CBFC/Examining Committee does not agree with the category under
which certification has been applied for, the film may be referred to ‘Film
Certification Jury’ comprising of retired Judges, eminent lawyers, film

makers, eminent actors, writers and acclaimed artists for a matured view .

47


7. The Committee note that Indian film industry is the largest in the world with
nearly one thousand feature films and fifteen hundred short films being made
every year. The Committee observe that films are one of the most appreciated art -
forms where the viewers receive knowledge, understanding of the lives and
traditions of the people and these films influence their own ideas consciously or
sub consciously, their way of life and their relationships. The Committee further
observe that the film makers put their own insights into their films to find the
most effective form to engage the viewers. The Committee note the judgment
given by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in 1989 in which it had observed that "...the
movie has unique capacity to disturb and arouse feelings. It has as much
potential for evil as it has for good. It has an equal potential to instill or cultivate
violent or good behavior. With these qualities and since it caters for mass
audience who are generally not selective about what they watch, the movie
cannot be equated with other modes of communication.". Since India is a diverse
and heterogeneous country, the Committee are of the opinion that filmmakers
should maintain a certain level of propriety with respect to contents of their
films. The Committee find that recent controversies have given rise to numerous
debates on extent of freedom of expression vis-a-vis censorship and public
feelings. The Committee opine that wide reach and deep impact of films make
intervention by the Government desirable as the public opinion tends to be
divided between those arguing for freedom of expression, those for restrictions
and others who argue for balanced approach. The Committee are of the
considered view that though control by Government is needed to check divisive
influences, in order not to offend any particular group, the events must be

depicted in a manner that no one suffers at the expense of others .The Committee 4

expect the film makers to exercise self restraint with respect to religion, historical .
facts, culture, ethos, tradition and profession so that people do not get exposed .
to damaging content and their moral and cultural heritage is effectively
safeguarded. The Committee also desire that the cinema should be the guiding,

binding and enlightening medium.

48


Academic activities of Satyajit Ray Film and Television Institute, Kolkata(SRFTI)
for the period 2010-11 to 2014-15

Introductory: The C&AG carried out an audit of the academic activities
of Satyajit Ray Film and Television Institute, Kolkata (SRFTI) for the period from
2010-11 to 2014-15 and highlighted that SRFTI had failed to achieve their stated
objectives as it could not introduce various courses viz. undergraduate course
for film and television, post graduate diploma courses in television and regular
short term courses in films even after 20 years of its establishment. Further,
students were not enrolled for two years and a number of seats remained vacant!
unutilized due to improper planning. Also, the Institute did not execute academic
activities properly as none of the batches were completed in prescribed time,
lesser teaching hours by faculty and instances of gap in evaluation of
performance of students were noticed in audit. The examination of the subject by
the PAC (2016-17) and (2017-18) further highlighted various other short comings.
The observations/recommendations of the Committee have been detailed in the

succeeding paragraphs.

9. The Committee note that SRFTI instead of continuing with the old syllabi
did not enroll students for two batches i.e. 2010-13 and 2014-17 pending revision
of curricular design and syllabi. The Committee while observing the reply of the
SRFTI that with the fast changing technology of film making, it would not have
been prudent to continue with old syllabus & impart education on out-dated skills
are unhappy that a premier institute like SRFTI failed to revise syllabi in time. The
Committee feel that any Institute that imparts education in any field has to face
such challenges/updation i.e. new inventions, rapidly evolving technology,
changing values etc. and incorporating these changes into the syllabus should
be a continuous and simultaneous exercise. The Committee are of the view that
instead of dispensing with admissions, SRFTI should develop a mechanism
whereby syllabus may be revised periodically and the updation exercise should

start immediately after implementation of a revised curriculum to ensure that

neither revenue is lost by the Institute nor any opportunity for learning the art is
denied to the prospective students.

49


10. The Committee note from the reply of SRFTI that lack of adequate

infrastructure and manpower has been responsible for most of the shortcomings

pointed out by the C&AG such as non-enrolment of Indian students against *

foreign students' quota, non- introduction of under-graduate courses, delays in
course completion, not undertaking research activities and not conducting short
term/refreshers/in services training courses. The Committee are dismayed to note
that SRFTI which was established in 1995 is complaining of inadequate
infrastructure for providing facilities enshrined in its objectives even after more
than 22 years of its establishment. The Committee while noting that Government
has provided Rs. 55 crores during the current plan period for infrastructure
development in SRFTI are of the view that the Institute should now work urgently
towards creating the required infrastructure and fix timelines which must be
strictly adhered to. The Committee also desire that the Ministry may look into the
issue of providing adequate manpower to the Institute so that it can do justice to

the objectives for which it has been established.

11. | The Committee note from the reply of SRFTI that appointment of permanent
skilled manpower for project works could not be justified due to lesser workload
associated with the job and SRFTI is facing difficulty in hiring on need basis as
the available trained manpower prefers their primary professional assignments
first and similarly, procurement of additional equipment is risky due to factors
like high costs, obsolesce, expenditure on maintenance, etc. and therefore,
taking such equipment on hire on need basis is more feasible proposition given
the cost versus the workload but, this approach sometimes leads to non-
availability of equipment on time. The Committee are of the view that SRFTI
should give extra emphasis on completing the courses in time as non completion
of courses timely may hamper career of students. The Committee desire that few
agencies providing these equipment and trained manpower may be empanelled

for the purpose so that they are available and called for as and when needed.

12. The Committee note with concern that SRFTI had not offered any regular
short term courses citing insufficient manpower and infrastructure and express
their displeasure over the fact that SRFTI did not take up the matter with the
Ministry for addressing the issues till January 2016. The Committee also do not

50


agree with the contention of the SRFTI that the Ministry is apprised of the matter
as the officials of the Ministry are part of the Governing Council. The Committee
are shocked to note that even though officials of the Ministry are represented in
Governing Council, the SRFTI could not impress upon the Ministry that the
Institute could not offer short term courses due to insufficient manpower and lack
of infrastructure. The Committee, therefore, desire that SRFTI should take up the
matter earnestly with the Ministry and apprise the Committee of response of the .

Ministry thereon.

(i). The Committee note that undergraduate courses and research
department can only be started in the SRFTI once the issue related
to awarding of diploma/ degree is resolved. The Committee desire
that the Ministry may take up this matter with UGC on urgent basis
and apprise the Committee of the decision of the UGC.

13. Audit has pointed out that most of the Assistant Professors and Associate
Professors did not achieve the core load per week as stipulated in the Bye-laws
as the teachers of SRFTI were engaged in additional activities like conducting
festivals, holding additional charge of Dean & Director, attending meetings,
holding enquiries etc apart from their regular teaching job. The Committee note
that since SRFTI is an internationally renowned institute, many miscellaneous
activities took place on campus as part of the learning process. However, the
calculation of teaching hours based on the duration of academic programmes of
faculties including both theory and practical sessions presented a very different
picture. The Committee, therefore, desire that planned teaching hours may depict
hours to be devoted to formal teaching and mentoring separately so as to ensure

that the faculty members devote minimum time to each area.

(i) Audit scrutiny highlighted various irregularities in the evaluation
process and promotion of students in contravention of Bye-laws of the
Institute. The Committee while opining that uniform and strict parameters
ensure competitiveness and sense of discipline amongst students expect a
premier Institute like SRFTI to invariably adhere to the norms to assure
students of transparent evaluation process. The Committee desire that

$1


variations may only be made in exceptional circumstances which should

be duly recorded and approved by the competent authority.

(ii). The Committee while opining that the teaching and evaluation
process may have serious implications regarding the quality of education
being imparted and that of the students passing out of the Institute exhort
the Ministry to constitute a sub-committee to review whole gamut of issues
plaguing the Institute and give suggestions for improving the quality of
teaching and techniques adopted.

14. The Committee note that activities of the Institute were marred with
delay in completion of courses, vacant seats, lesser teaching hours and
gap in evaluation of performance of students. The Committee are of the
view that lack of monitoring by the Ministry led to violation of the
procedures. The Committee, therefore, desire that a mechanism of inspection of
the Institute by the Administrative Wing of the Ministry/CVO or by internal audit
team may be developed urgently to ensure accountability and transparency in
the working of SRFTI.

NEW DELHI; MALLIKARJUN KHARGE
23 March, 2018 Chairperson
02 Chaitra, 1940 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

FEI IIIS IRR ऋ के

52


MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SECOND SITTING PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17) HELD ON 6™ JANUARY, 2017.

The Committee sat on Friday, the 6! January, 2017 from 1400 hrs to
1615 hrs in Committee Room "D Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT
Prof. K.V. Thomas - Chairperson
LOK SABHA
Prof. Richard Hay

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
Dr. Kirit Somaiya
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
Shri Shivkumar 0. Udasi
Dr. P. Venugopal
RAJYA SABHA
hri Bhubaneswar Kalita
10. Shri Shantaram Naik
11. Shri Ajay Sancheti
LOK SABHA LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
12. Shri A.K. Singh - Additional Secretary
13. Shri T. Jaya Kumar - Director
14. Shri A.K. Yadav - Deputy Secretary

SNOaA # ० ७

o
n

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE ARETE S_OF THE OFFICE OF THE C&AG OF INDIA OF THE C&AG OF INDIA

1. Shri Rakesh Jain - Dy.C&AG (RC/LB)
2. Shri V. Ravindran - Director General(RC)
3. Shri Manish Kumar - Principal Director (PC)
4... Shri Manoj Sahay - Principal Director (AB)
5... Shri Guljari Lal - Principal Director (Central)
THE FILM & TELEVISION ES ES ERREVISION PRODUCERS GUILD OF INDIA LTD, GUILD OF INDIA LTD.

1... Shri Siddharth Roy Kapoor - President

INDIAN MOTION PICTURE SR MIC TURE PRODUCERS’ ASSOCIATION (IMPPA) ASSOCIATION (IMPPA
1. Shri T.P. Aggarwal - President
2. Shri Anil Nagrath - Secretary

33


-2-

MINISTRY OF INFORMATION & BROADCASTING

1. Shri Ajay Mittal - Secretary
2. Dr. Subhash Sharma - Additional Secretary & FA
3... Shri Mihir Kumar Singh - Joint Secretary (P&A)
4. Shri Deepak Kumar - Director (Films) -
CENTRAL BOARD OF FILM CERTIFICATION (CBFC)
1. Shri Pahlaj Nihalani - Chairperson
2. Shri Anurag Srivastava - Chief Executive Officer
SATYAJIT RAY FILM AND TELEVISION INSTITUTE (SRFTI)
1. Shri Amaresh Chakraburty - Director
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the representatives from The Film

& Television Producers Guild of India Ltd. and Indian Motion Picture Producers’
Association (IMPPA) to the Sitting of the Committee convened for hearing their views on
the Para 11.1 of the C&AG’s Report No. 11 of 2016 on the subject “Working of Central
Board of Film Certification (CBFC)”.

3. Thereafter, the representative from The Film & Television Producers Guild of India
Ltd. apprised the Committee about the possible reasons for the delays in film certification
namely: (i) lack of staff at CBFC; (ii) seasonal rush of films waiting to be released around
major festivals; (iii) altering the order of films by CBFC submitted for certification; (iv) non-
clarity in the Cinematography Act, 1952 about the conversion of certified films from ‘A’ to
‘UA’ category; and (५) lack of record keeping in the CBFC. Further, the representatives
from the Indian Motion Picture Producers’ Association (IMPPA) also pointed out various
shortcomings and discrepancies namely: (i) selectiveness by the CBFC for certification of
films by big budget producers or production houses; (ii) Censorship or cuts in the films
‘submitted for certification whereas the 1952 Act doesn’t provide for any cuts but for
certification; (iil) Laxity on the part of Film Certification Appellate Tribunal (FACT); (iv)
insistence on re-certification of films for trivial reasons; and (v) non-implementation of

Mudgal Committee and Shyam Benegal Committee recommendations.

4. Thereafter, Members of the Committee sought clarifications from the
representatives of The Film & Television Producers Guild of India Ltd. and Indian Motion
Picture Producers’ Association (IMPPA) on various pressing issues endemic to the subject
matter in hand. The Chairperson, then, thanked the representatives for appearing before

the Committee and furnishing information in connection with examination of the subject.

Su


-3-
The representatives of the film bodies then withdrew.

5. The Hon'ble Chairperson, then welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting, CBFC and Satyajit Ray Film and Television Institute
(SRFTI) to the Sitting of the Committee convened for taking oral evidence on the Paras
11.1 and 11.2 of the C&AG's Report No. 11 of 2016 on the subjects “Working of Central
Board of Film Certification (CBFC)” and “Academic activities of Satyajit Ray Film and
Television Institute Kolkata for the period from 2010-11 to 2014-15” respectively.
Thereafter, the Chairperson highlighted various shortcomings in the CBFC viz. conversion
of 172 ‘A’ category films into ‘UA’ category films and 166 UA category films during 2012-15
without any supporting law or rules; jumping of queues of 32.57% in 175 test checked
cases with regard to film certification; time taken for issue of certification ranged from 3
days and 491 days; need for a clear system of examination on out-of-turn preference in
certification of films; lack of guidelines for exercising discretion quotas; need for a vigilance
wing in SRFTI etc.

6. The Members also raised queries relating to various issues such as reclassification
of films from “A” to “UA"?’U” category, non-observance of time limits for various stages of
certification process, jumping of queue by film producers for early certification of their
submitted films, out-of-turn preference for the certification of certain films, delay in
issuance of certificate even after the approval of grant of clear certificate by Examining
Committee, skipping of enrolment by SRFTI students for academic session of 2010-13 and
2014-17 on the Pretext of revision of curricular design and syllabi, failure to fill the seats
reserved for reserved categories, namely SC/ST/OBC, and lastly not setting up of any
Research Department for the past 21 years by the Institute. As most points required
detailed information, the representatives were asked to furnish written information within
fifteen days thereon.

7. The Chairperson, then, thanked the representatives of the Ministry of Information
and Broadcasting, CBFC and SRFTI for appearing before the Committee and furnishing
valuable information on the Subject. The Chairperson also thanked the Members for their
active participation in the discussion on the Subject and the Officers from the Office of the
‘C&AG of India for their assistance.

A
\

\
\


The witnesses then withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings has been kept on record.

The Committee then adjourned.

—sb-