‘CIVIL ENGINEERING WORKSHOPS
IN INDIAN RAILWAYS’, ‘DELAY IN
BUILDING THE NEW RAIL BRIDGE
OVER RIVER SONE’ AND ‘SIGNAL
AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS’
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2014-2015
FIFTH  REPORT
SIXTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
5

FIFTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2014-2015)
(SIXTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
‘CIVIL ENGINEERING WORKSHOPS IN INDIAN RAILWAYS’,
‘DELAY IN BUILDING THE NEW RAIL BRIDGE
OVER RIVER SONE’ AND ‘SIGNAL  AND
TELECOMMUNICATIONS’
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
Presented to Lok Sabha on 25.11.2014
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 25.11.2014
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
November, 2014/Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka)

PAC  No. 2033
Price:  `  45.00
© 2014  BY  LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager,
Government of India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2014-15)...................... (iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2013-14)...................... (v)
COMPOSITION  OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE -I (RAILWAYS) OF THE PUBLIC
ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE (2013-14)............................................................... (vii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (ix)
REPORT
PART   I
An Overview............................................................................................
CHAPTER  I  Civil Engineering Workshops in Indian Railways..................
I. Introductory ......................................................................
II. Modernisation of CEWs ...................................................
III. Installed Capacity and Production Planning .....................
CHAPTER  II  Delay in Building the New Rail Bridge over River Sone .......
I. Introductory ......................................................................
II. Delay in sanctioning the work of Bridge ...........................
III. Planning and Execution Lapses ........................................
CHAPTER  III  Signal and Telecommunications ..........................................
I. Introductory ......................................................................
II. Problems being experienced in Southern Railway Trials ...
III. T rain Protection Warning System (TPWS) .......................
IV . Train Collision Assistance System (TCAS) ......................
PART  II
Observations/Recommendations .............................................................
 APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Second sitting of the Sub-Committee-I (Railways) of
the PAC (2013-14) held on 11th October, 2013.............................
24
1
2
2
2
4
10
10
10
12
16
16
18
19
19
28

II. Minutes of the Third sitting of the Sub-Committee-I (Railways) of
the PAC (2013-14) held on 14th March, 2014...............................
III. Minutes of the Seventh s itting of the PAC (2014-15)
held on 19th November, 2014 .......................................................
(ii)
30
32
PAGE

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2014-15)
Prof.  K.V . Thomas  —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
4. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey
6. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank”
9. Shri Neiphiu Rio
*10. V acant
11. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
†12. V acant
13. Dr. Kirit Somaiya
14. Shri Anurag Thakur
††15. V acant
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
17. Shri Vijay Goel
18. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya
19. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
20. Shri Shantaram Naik
21. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
22. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Director
3. Shri A.K. Yadav — Under Secretary
* V acant vice Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy who has been appointed as Minister w.e.f. 9th November,
2014.
† V acant vice Shri Jayant Sinha who has been appointed as Minister w.e.f. 9th November, 2014.
†† V acant vice Dr. M. Thambidurai who has been chosen as Hon’ble Deputy Speaker, Lok Sabha
and has since resigned from the membership of the Committee.
(iii)

(v)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2013-14)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Adsul
3. Dr.  Baliram
4. Shri Ramen Deka
5. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
6. Dr. M. Thambi Durai
7. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
8. Shri Jayaprakash Hegde
9. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
10. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
12. Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam
13. Shri Ashok Tanwar
*14. Shri Ajay Maken
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Prakash Javadekar
†18. Shri Ashwani Kumar
19. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
††20. Dr. V . Maitreyan
21. Shri  N.K. Singh
22. Smt.  Ambika Soni
* Elected w.e.f. 14th August, 2013 vice Dr. Girija Vyas appointed as Minister of Housing, Urban
Development and Poverty Alleviation w.e.f. 17th June, 2013.
† Elected w.e.f. 3rd September, 2013 vice Dr. V . Maitreyan ceased to be a Member upon his
retirement as a Member of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 24th July, 2013.
†† Elected w.e.f. 3rd September, 2013 vice Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan appointed as Minister
of State for Commerce and Industry w.e.f. 17th June, 2013.

COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-I (RAILW AYS) OF
THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2013-14)
Shri Prakash Javadekar — Convenor
MEMBERS
2. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
3. Dr. V . Maitreyan
4. Shri Ramen Deka
5. Shri Jayaprakash Hegde
(vii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee, having been authorised by the
Committee, do present this Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on "Civil Engineering
Workshops in Indian Railways, Delay in Building the New Rail Bridge Over River Sone
and Signal and Telecommunications" based on C&AG Report No. 32 of 2011-12 Union
Government—Railways relating to the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board).
2. The Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended
March, 2012, was laid on the Table of the House on 20th December, 2012.
3. The Public Accounts Committee (2013-14) took up the subject for detailed
examination and report. A Sub-Committee was constituted for the purpose. The
Sub-Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Railways
(Railway Board) on the subject at their sitting held on 11th October, 2013. The
Sub-Committee of PAC (2013-14) considered and adopted this Report at their sitting
held on 14th March, 2014. As the Report could not be considered by the Committee
during the term of the PAC (2013-14), the subject was again selected by PAC (2014-15)
which considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 19th November, 2014.
The Minutes of the Sittings form Appendices to the Report.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in thick type and form Part-II of the Report.
5. The Committee thank the Public Accounts Committee (2013-14) and their
Sub-Committee for taking oral evidence of the Ministry and obtaining information on
the subject.
6. The Committee would also like to express their thanks to the representatives of
the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) for tendering evidence before the
Sub-Committee and furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in connection
with the examination of the subject.
7. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. K.V. THOMAS,
24 November, 2014 Chairperson,
03 Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(ix)

REPORT
PART  I
An Overview
The C&AG Report No. 32 of 2011-12 containing many aspects of
Indian Railways was laid in Parliament on 20th December, 2012. The Committee took
up three issues out of that Report for examination. They were 'Civil Engineering
Workshops in Indian Railways'; 'Delay in Building the New Rail Bridge over River
Sone'; and 'Signal and Telecommunication' based on Paragraph No. 3.2, Paragraph
No. 3.4 and Chapter VI respectively of the said Audit Report. The Chairperson,
PAC appointed a Sub-Committee under the Convenorship of Shri Prakash Javadekar,
MP and a Member of the PAC to examine the issues and report to the main Committee.
In the process, the Sub-Committee obtained Advance Information/Written Reply/
Post-Evidence Information from the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) besides
taking oral evidence of the Ministry. The Sub-Committee also undertook an
on-the-spot Study Visit to Civil Engineering Workshop, Mughalsarai and Research,
Development and Standard Organisation (RDSO), Lucknow to get first hand
information on the subject matters. Based on the written and oral deposition of the
Railway Board and the field level information gathered by the Sub-Committee during
their Study Visit, the three issues have been discussed separately in the following three
Chapters of this Report followed by the Committee's Observations/Recommendations.

CHAPTER I
CIVIL ENGINEERING WORKSHOPS IN INDIAN RAILW AYS
I.  Introductory
The Civil Engineering Workshops (CEWs) were established to fulfil the needs
of manufacturing bridge girders, track components such as glued joints and various
other items such as Platform Shelters, Foot Over Bridges, Push/Motor Trolleys, Lifting
Barrier Gates, Gate Locks, etc. when fast expansion of railway network was taking
place in the country and meagre facilities for the same were available. There are ten
CEWs that were established between 1900 and 1965 and which are functioning on
nine Zonal Railways. Seven Zonal Railways, which are not having their own workshop,
have been attached with the existing workshops for taking care of their normal
requirement. The Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007-12) had envisaged a critical role for
Civil Engineering Workshops (CEWs) in view of anticipated increased demand for
fabricated steel structures for re-building/re-girdering existing bridges to make them
fit for running heavier axle load trains and construction of new bridges on the Dedicated
Freight Corridors. As a result, the magnitude of the steel fabrication works to be
undertaken by the CEWs was to increase substantially.
II.  Modernisation of CEWs
1.2 Audit scrutiny revealed that the CEWs set up more than five decades ago
were functioning with quite old machines and required technology upgradation. It was
estimated in 1993 itself that each CEW would be required to invest funds to the tune
of ` 40 to 50 crore towards modernisation during the next five years. Although a
substantial requirement for steel fabrication was anticipated in Ninth Plan, a modest
allocation of ` 90 crore only was earmarked in Eleventh plan for executing upgradation
works. Subsequently, a seminar of CWM/CWE held in Pune in 2009 had recommended
a comprehensive modernisation plan to increased automation and procure latest
machines. It was assessed in June, 2009, that requirement of steel fabrication would
increase from 10,000 to 30,000 MT per annum as against average annual production
of 14,000 MT.
1.3 Audit also observed that the average age profile of machines in CEWs ranged
from 22 to 47 years against the expected average codal life of 15 years. No plan for
modernisation of the CEWs had been prepared as on date, as recommended in the
seminar in Pune. Out of the Plan allocation of ` 90 crore, the actual investment upto
September, 2011 was ` 17.32 crore only, ` 6.45 crore for augmentation works and
` 10.87 crore for procurement of machinery. In seven CEWs, the procurement of new
machines and execution of augmentation works was nil/negligible.
1.4 In the above context, the Committee desired to be apprised of the concrete
efforts made for the modernisation of the CEWs. In reply, the Ministry submitted that
2

3
modernisation/upgradation had been a continuous process undertaken in engineering
workshops as per requirement and availability of funds. The existing machines which
were quite old were replaced in a phased manner with machines of improved technology
through Machinery and Plant programme of the Railway as per availability of funds.
However, paucity of funds has been a constraint for providing new technology machines
and augmentation of infrastructure in bridge workshops.
1.5 Asked to state the measures taken to overcome the fund constraints, the
Ministry, admitting that the funds allocated were less than the demand projected,
submitted that the terms of references of the Committee set up to take holistic review
of the workshops also included examining and identifying the requirement of new
machinery/technology along with other infrastructural requirements for technological
upgradation of each workshop. The Ministry further stated that once the Committee's
recommendations were submitted and accepted, an action plan would be made
accordingly for providing new technology machines and augmentation of infrastructure
in Bridge workshops. The phase-wise requirement of funds would be assessed and
pursued accordingly.
1.6 The Committee then enquired about the precise reasons for the procedural
delays hampering modernisation and steps taken to obviate recurrence of such delays.
In reply, the Ministry stated that modernisation of a workshop involved procurement
of machinery and/or civil works. Procurement of machines was mainly done through
COFMOW/Stores department and it took about two to three years to procure/
commission the machines due to the procedures involved. The Ministry further stated
that a Committee had been set up to undertake holistic review of each workshop which
would also include identification of their modernisation/technological needs. The
Committee was required to undertake holistic review of each workshop, inter-alia,
examining the following issues and make recommendations:
(a) To examine and identify requirement of new machinery/technology along
with other infrastructural requirements for technological upgradation of
each workshop.
(b) To examine and suggest desirable product mix with a view to facilitate
development of core competency of each workshop and considering cost
of manufacture.
(c) To examine requirement and availability of manpower.
(d) To examine issues relating to productivity, capacity assessment/utilization,
cost manufacture and relevance of workshops, keeping in view existing
and future needs.
(e) To examine the conversion factors applied for converting and producing
of general items in Equated Units (EUs) terms and suggest modifications,
if any.
(f) Any other issue which Committee may consider relevant.
1.7 Asked to intimate the latest status of the Committee set up to undertake
holistic review of each workshop, the Ministry aprised that the Committee had visited

4
nine workshops and its deliberations were in progress. The Ministry also stated that
the Committee had not given any interim report so far and it was expected that the
Committee would submit the full report by 31 December, 2013.
1.8 On being asked to state categorically the measures taken/contemplated to
speed up the modernization process, the Ministry submitted that the existing machines
which were quite old were being replaced with improved technology machines through
Machinery and Plans Programme of the railways as per availability of funds. EOT
cranes, road mobile cranes, fork lift trucks etc. have been provided to strengthen/
upgrade the handing system in some workshops. Measures have also been taken for
augmentation of steel bridge girder fabrication capacity of some of major workshops.
Workshops at Manmad, Sabarmati, Mughalsarai and Arakkonam have since
successfully completed fabrication of welded open web girders for 25 Ton loading
standard involving multiple stage inspection of RDSO.
1.9 The Sub-Committee then desired to know the target date given to RDSO,
Lucknow to revive the Consortium Bridge workshops. In reply, the Ministry stated
that vide Railway Board's letter dated 18 April, 2013, RDSO had been advised to
review the consortium to Bridge Workshops and organize regular meetings. The agenda
items for discussion in the meeting had already been circulated and the meeting of
consortium of bridge workshops was scheduled to be held on 12th and 13th September,
2013 at Plant depot, Mughalsarai, East Central Railway.
1.10 Asked to state the outcome of the meeting held on 12th and 13th September
2013, the Ministry apprised that in the meeting of consortium of Bridge Workshops,
several items were discussed e.g. issues related to modernization/mechanization and
improvements of Workshops, repair to workshop infrastructure and machinery,
dedicated fabrication works for each workshop, inspection schedule of girders by
RDSO, procurement of steel, adoption of standard fabrication practices etc. The Minutes
of the Consortium of Bridge Workshops has been sent by Chief Engineer (Works)/
Central Railway and the same were reportedly under examination at RDSO/Railway
Board for issuing further order.
III.  Installed Capacity and Production Planning
1.11 Audit observed that the key factor of production plan of workshop is its
installed capacity that determines the optimum production level. The determination of
installed capacity of a workshop is essential to help the management to identify
production bottleneck imbalances, idle capacity and prepare measures for efficient
use of resources; to assess the optimum level of operators and to allocate apportion
and absorb the costs of operations.
1.12 But Audit scrutiny revealed that data regarding installed capacity was not
available in five CEWs and in the remaining five CEWs, it had not been reassessed at
regular intervals. Audit further pointed out that the installed capacity of Arakkonam
workshop was reduced injudiciously. There was under-utilisation of installed capacity
in four CEWs.
1.13 In the above context, when the Committee desired to know the reasons for
non-availability of the data on the installed capacity and lack of reassessment of the

5
installed capacity at regular intervals, the Ministry in their written deposition, submitted
as under:—
"Capacity of workshop mainly depends on available infrastructure including
machinery and handling equipments lay out, manpower, product mix being
manufactured etc. Till recently, neither any alternative fabrication process was
introduced nor there were significant changes in core activities of the workshops
which may have necessitated reassessment of installed capacity of workshops.
Mainly unserviceable/old machines have been replaced. Thus need was not felt
to reassess the installed capacity of the workshops. However, now some of the
workshops have switched over or in the process of switching over to fabrication
of welded open web girders confirming to enhanced 25-Ton loading standard.
Also the product mix has undergone substantial changes with some workshops
almost stopping manufacturing of major track items to give thrust to fabrication
of steel bridge girders in line with Board's directives. Thus, once product mix
undergoing changes gets stabilized, the capacity of workshops will be reassessed
keeping in view ongoing capacity augmentation activities giving due
consideration to availability of manpower which is diminishing every year due
to superannuation etc."
1.14 The Committee then enquired about the reasons/justifications for reduction
in the installed capacity at Arakkonam. In reply, the Ministry stated as under:—
"One of the major factors for determination of the capacity of a workshop is the
manpower and the number of shifts utilized for production. In respect of
Arakkonam workshop, the staff strength of technicians has been declining every
year and the vacancies due on retirement are not being filled (except 4 vacancies)
for the last many years. The declining manpower and elimination of night shift
activities have caused reduction in capacity of workshop."
1.15 Asked to state the categorical measures taken/proposed to prevent under-
utilization of capacity of CEWs, the Ministry deposed as under:—
"(i) Machines which are quite old are being replaced with improved technology
machines in phases as per availability of funds.
(ii) Material handling system in workshop is being strengthened/upgraded,
where required, by way of providing EOT cranes, road mobile cranes,
fork lift truck etc. as per availability of funds.
(iii) Efforts are being made to regularly improve the product mix with a view
to reduce the production of general items as far as feasible.This will help
in maintaining the fabrication of same item for longer period. Some
workshops have already reduced significantly manufacturing of general
items.
(iv) Provision of stand by generator sets, where required, to  overcome power
failures as per availability of funds."

6
1.16  The Committee desired to be apprised of the production target for each of
the proceeding five years and the actual output product-wise. In reply, the Ministry
submitted that CEWs have been manufacturing large number of general items in addition
to fabrication of steel bridge girders depending upon the  requirements/situations arising
during the year. Hence, product wise targets were not specified and resource utilization
assessed with the yardstick of 1.0 equated tone/man/month.
1.17 Asked to state whether the system of recording machine hour utilization
been introduced in all the CEWs, the Ministry stated that the record of machine hour
utilization was being maintained/introduced in Engineering workshop at Jalandhar,
Lucknow, Bongaigaon, Lallaguda and Sini for major machinery. Necessary steps were
being taken by Arakkonam and Sabarmati workshops for maintaining the necessary
record for major machines.
1.18 In evidence, the Committee desired to known about the private participation
in girder manufacturing. In response, the Member (Engineering) Railway Board
submitted:—
"The private industry in girder manufacturing did not develop too much. Apart
from the Railways, we only had the PSUs  like the BBJ and Bridge & Roof
Company. They are the major PSUs which have been manufacturing girder
for us. So, the main disadvantage of this was that both these companies were
based in Kolkata. Other than Kolkata, there used to be a lot of problems. We
revived the steel girders becuase steel quality improved; fabrication technology
improved. Riveting was very much labour-intensive. So, when the welding
technology came, we modernised our workshops. Then, the private companies
started coming in, seeking approval from the Railways to permit them also to
manufacture girders. L&T was the first company which is outside the PSUs,
outside the Railways. We have now about five or six parties which are approved.
For example, for the Ganga Bridge at Patna, there are three fabricators. One is
G .P. Tanpa, the other one is Royal Infrastructure and Munger is with BBJ. The
Bogibeel Bridge in Assam is a major Bridge. This is a joint venture between
L&T and Ramboll of Denmark. So purely, still there are only four or five
Indian companies which can manufacture the girders. Anybody can do platform
shelter and minor fabrication. But the large span open web girders are
manufactured only by four or five parties."
1.19 Asked to state the requirement and production capacity of the PSUs and
the private companies, the Member (Engineering) Railway Board apprised:—
"Requirement  is quite matching. The PSUs have a fixed target. The Railways
is generally producing of 5000-6000 tonnes per annum. Whatever is the excess
requirement that is taken by the private parties. Of course, right of refusal is
with all railway   workshops. No officer can go to the market unless  he has a
certificate from the local workshop saying that it is unable to manufacture because
it has adequate workload. So, no bridge workshop can complain that its
production capacity is short because of lack of orders. That certificate is
mandatory before doing the tender."

7
1.20 On being asked to mention the price comparison  between the PSUs and
the Private Companies, the representative of the Ministry further deposed.
"The Private Companies concentrate only on bulk orders. They have the economy
of scale. Their price is normally 10 per cent lower than our price. But when we
take one girder, then the price is much higher. For example, for Chakibonk in
Pathankot and the Konkan Railway, we faced the same problem. For one girder,
you have to make all the jigs, fixtures and templates. The private companies will
not do it unless they have large number of girders."
1.21 The Committee enquired about the downgrading and upgrading of the
workshops as part of the modernisation process. In response, the Member (Engineering),
Railway Board apprised:—
"We are continuing with it. We are downgrading where the private industry is
flourishing and the requirement has come down. If you see the surrender in
the Arakkonam Workshop, it is very high because the activities in which they
were specialised in are not required any more. But we are not doing it in
Bongaigaon and Gorakhpur because still there are a lot of old bridges and the
restoration of bridges are required, especially during Monsoons. So, we are
not closing down anything but the activity of downgrading and upgrading keeps
on going."
1.22 Asked to state specifically whether a comprehensive and rationale plan had
been chalked out in this regard, the representative of the Ministry deposed:—
"The meeting has taken place at the RDSO. It will give the rationale plan as to
what girder is manufactured, how much will be manufactured in-house. It will
issue a ten year programme. Emergency girders are all manufactured in-house.
It is the support  arrangement. When we make the restoration which needs the
temporary girder, that also is manufactured in-house because it is a very safety
and critical item. So, we do not want any compromise in quality on that. One
Crib may be used once in five years but the day it is used is important. So, those
are manufactured in-house."
1.23 The Committee then desired to know the important service being rendered
by the workshops to meet the immediate and long term requirements. In response, the
Chairman, Railway Board submitted in evidence:—
".......The Railway Workshops do a very imprtant service when we fail from the
trade, when we need things almost instantly. For it is not possible to place an
order on the trade because it requires tender finalisation, supply, etc. to go into
contractual details. But when it comes to our workshops since they are of our
own, we can re-distribute what we have allotted depending on the requirement.
There is a distribution programme of various workshops as to what girders will
go where. It is a year-on-year basis. We do not have to wait for a very long time.
To that extent, they also do an excellent job for meeting the immediate and
unforeseen requirements."

8
1.24 The Committee then enquired about the details of the manpower vacancies
in all the CEWs. In their written deposition, the Ministry furnished the following
information:—
Sl. Name of workshop Railway T otal V acancies
No. as on 31.03.2012
1. Engineering Workshop at Manmad CR 240
2. Engineering Workshop at Mughalsarai ECR 52
3. Engineering Workshop at Jalandhar NR 148
4. Engineering Workshop at Lucknow NR 142
5. Engineering Workshop at  Gorakhpur NER 98
6. Engineering Workshop at Bongaigaon NFR 26
7. Engineering Workshop at Arakkonam SR 213
8. Engineering Workshop at Lallaguda SCR 7
9. Engineering Workshop at Sini SER 261
10. Engineering Workshop at Sabarmati WR 192
Grand Total 1379
1.25 Expressing concern at such large number of vacancies in various CEWs,
the Committee queried about the sanctioned strength vis-a-vis the staff on roll and
measures taken to bridge the gap. In response, the Ministry furnished the following
updated data:—
Workshop Railway Sanctioned Staf f as on Vacancies Action being taken to fill
 strength roll on as on        up the  vacancies
as on 01.04.2013 01.04.2013
01.04.2013
      1      2 3 4 5 6
Manmad Central 1019 855 164 The creation of vacancies
Mughalsarai East Central 611 517 94 and filling up of vacancies
is a continuous process
due to continuous
Jalandhar Northern 634 488 146 retirement, periodic review
Lucknow Northern 604 412 192 of cadre position etc.
Therefore, as such no
Gorakhpur North 499 426 73 tar get date has been fixed
Eastern for filling up the vacancies
However, the action for
Bongaigaon North 318 272 46 filling up the vacancies
East through Railway
Frontier Recruitment Board,
Arakkonam Southern 1175 964 21 1 Railway Recruitment Cell &
Departmental  promotions
Lallaguda South 226 216 10 etc. is being taken as
Central required. Further, the
Committee set up to

9
Sini South 627 372 255 undertake holistic review
Eastern will also deliberate on
manpower requirement
Sabarmati W estern 833 618 215 and availability of the
workshops.
Total 6546 5140 1406
1.26 In view of the proposal made in the CWMs/CEWs seminar held in 2009
that production schedule meeting be held at the Railway Board's level preferably twice
a year, the Committee enquired about the reasons for not doing so. In reply, the Ministry
submitted that the recommendation of CWMs/CWEs seminar held in IRICEN Pune
on 13th and 14th July, 2009 that production schedule meeting be held at Railway
Board's level preferably twice a year was not accepted by the Board as the same was
not considered necessary. However, these meetings were regularly held at various
levels in Zonal Railways to analyse the demands and capacity and for planning
production schedule of concerned workshops.
1.27 In response to a specific query of the Committee, the Ministry apprised
that there were no Engineering Colleges in the country exclusively pertaining to the
Railways.
 1      2 3 4 5 6

CHAPTER  II
DELAY IN BUILDING THE NEW RAIL BRIDGE OVER RIVER SONE
I.  Introductory
Sone Nagar (SEB)—Mughalsarai (MGS) section (124 km)  is a vital corridor
for movement of coal, other minerals and goods from Bengal-Bihar-Jharkhand fields
to North India and is a part of the Grand Chord (Mughalsarai Asansol) on the Delhi-
Howrah route. To cater to the increasing traffic load, it was planned to lay an additional
line between SEB—MGS which necessitated a three-line bridge over river Sone. Audit
pointed out that there was already a decision in January, 1990 to replace the existing
bridge over River Sone on age-cum-condition basis. Therefore, the simultaneous
completion of both these works together was imperative because absence of a third
line between Dehri-on-Sone (DoS) and SEB would result in erosion of line capacity
of the section from the envisaged 83 paths to 72 paths and accordingly the Railway
Board, in November, 1992 directed that the works should be progressed simultaneously.
However, the work of construction of the third line between DoS and MGS (excluding
the bridge work) was sanctioned in 1990-91 and the work was progressively completed
and opened for traffic between 1997-2002 at a cost of Rs. 262.24 crore. But the Bridge
work was neither sanctioned nor progressed simultaneously. The administrative sanction
for the bridge work was accorded only in 1997-98.
II.  Delay in sanctioning the work of Bridge
2.2 In the above context, the Committee desired to be apprised of the reasons
for delay in sanction and completion of work and specific efforts made to complete
the work at earliest. In their written deposition, the Ministry submitted as under:—
"For provision of 3rd line between Sone Nagar and Dehri-on-Sone stations in
Mughalsarai-Sone Nagar section, a bridge was required across river Sone.
However, any new bridge could have been constructed only at adequate distance
from the existing bridge to ensure its safety during the period of construction of
new bridge. The new bridge also needs to be connected to Sone Nagar and
Dehri-on-Sone by suitable modifications in respective yards. Further, the existing
bridge on river Sone which was constructed during 1898 ( i.e. more than
90 years old at the relevant time) was showing signs of distress and having
speed restriction on both Up and Down lines. Also, the girders of Down Line
were of ‘early steel’ requiring replacement. The bearings also required
modifications due to adoption of enhanced MBG 1987 loading on Indian
Railways. Thus, replacement of existing bridge was also under consideration. If
bridge for additional line was taken up independent of the replacement of existing
bridge then there would be technical complications in location of  above two
bridges and their connections with Sone Nagar and Dehri-on-Sone yards. Thus,
due to technical constraints, construction of  bridge for additional line and
10

11
replacement of existing bridge were required to be undertaken concurrently.
Hence, it was decided that all the bridge works on Sone river (new bridge for the
3rd line and replacement of existing bridge) should be integrated and taken up
as a separate project. Thus the new bridge for 3rd line was not included in the
work of 3rd line sanctioned in 1991.”
2.3 Asked to state the latest progress of the 3rd line work, the Ministry submitted
that the 3rd line had already been commissioned except bridge over river Sone which
was expected to be commissioned during 2013-14  alongwith the required modification
to Dehri-on-Sone and Sone Nagar Yard.
2.4 To a specific query as to why there was a delay of seven years in sanctioning
the work of bridge after the third line of work was sanctioned, the Ministry stated as
follows:—
“Due to constraints of funds and resources, the 3rd line work was divided in two
phases. The work from Dehri-on-Sone to Pahleza, Karwandiya to Shiusagar
Road and Karmnasa to Mughal Sarai was included in phase-I and remaining
seven block sections were included in phase-II. It was decided in April, 1994 to
start the execution of work included in phase-II. Thereafter action was initiated
for award of contracts etc. for the same. As on March, 1997  total progress of
3rd line work achieved was 41%. Thus, it may be seen that there was no abnormal
delay in sanctioning the bridge work.”
2.5 Audit pointed out that the Eastern Railway requested Railway Board to
sanction the new Sone bridge at an estimated cost of   ` 125.63 crore in 1991-92 based
on techno-economic survey carried out by them in January 1990 and further
investigation was carried out by M/s Stup Consultants thereafter. However, the
administrative sanction for the bridge work was accorded only in 1997-98 and sanction
for detailed estimates of ` 248.64 crore in December, 1999. The contract was awarded
to M/s AFCONS Infrastructure Ltd. in April 2003.
2.6 In the above context, when the Committee desired to be apprised of the
delay to an extent of more than four years in the award of works after administrative
sanction was accorded, the Ministry stated as under:—
“The work was awarded to M/s AFCONS infrastructure Ltd. in April, 2003 with
a completion period of 48 months and the work was commenced by contractor
in right earnest. However, there was steep rise in market prices of cement and
steel in 2004-05 contractor had started representing for extra payments more
than what was permissible under price variation clause. As under extant rules, it
was not permissible to consider contractor’s request to give higher compensation
for abnormal increase in cost of steel and cement more than what was permissible
under price variation clause in the contract agreement and contractor had stopped
the work at site, the contract was foreclosed in October, 2009 without risk and
cost of contractor.
After short closure of old contractor in October, 2009 contractor was issued
notice to witness the final measurements. The final measurements were recorded

12
on 16.01.2010 and balance quantities were worked out. Thereafter, tenders for
balance work were opened on 30.04.2010 and after one round of negotiations
contract was finally awarded on 09.05.2011. Though somewhat more time was
taken but keeping in view the complex nature of work involved, it cannot be
considered as excessive.
The tender for balance work was awarded in May, 2011 at a cost of  ` 26.80
crores. The work re-commenced immediately and balance work of superstructure
was completed by November 2011. For the balance miscellaneous work such as
guide bunds, protection bunds, stone pitching etc. work is in progress.”
2.7 Audit pointed out that the execution of work was inordinately delayed as the
approved design and drawings were supplied to the contractor in piecemeal during
execution of work, the last being in February, 2006 i.e. 35 months after the award of
contract. The contractor, however, failed to complete the work within the extended
period of contract (December, 2009) on account of sharp increase in price of raw
materials and the contract had to be foreclosed without any financial liability.
2.8 In the above context, the Committee enquired about the reasons for an
inordinate delay of 35 months in providing the approved design and drawing to the
contractor. In reply, the Ministry stated that the design/drawings of different components
of the bridge were supplied to the contractor in phases in a manner such that delays do
not affect the progress of bridge work which was not unusual for an important bridge
work of that size.
2.9 The Ministry further clarified that the work involved construction of about
3 km long important bridge having 93 spans of 30.48 m each. Finalisation of design
and drawings for such an important bridge required series of consultations, deliberations
by specially constituted Technical Advisory Group (TAG) which also included outside
eminent experts and modifications which was always a time consuming process. The
design has been finalized with due expediency keeping in view the complexities
involved.
III.  Planning and Execution Lapses
2.10 Audit scrutiny revealed that there had been certain planning and execution
lapses on the part of the Indian Railways. When asked whether the Railway Board had
taken any action to streamline the system so as to avoid recurrences of such lapses, the
Ministry clarified as under:—
“For an important bridge project of this size, time taken in preparation of scheme/
drawings cannot be considered to be execessive. However, there was a steep
rise in market prices of cement and steel just after commencement of bridge
work in 2004-05. The contractor had started representing for extra payments
(more than what is permissible under price variation clause) on account of
abnormal hike in prices of steel and cement during the intervening period. Railway
had taken requisite steps/action to resolve the issue including by setting up High
Level Committee. As under extant rules, it was not permissible to consider the
contractor’s request to give higher compensation for abnormal increase in cost

13
of steel and cement more than what is permissible under price variation clause
in the existing contract agreement and contractor had stopped the work at site,
the contract was foreclosed in October 2009 under clause 61 of General
Conditions of Contract i.e. without risk and cost to contractor. This had
necessitated award of fresh contract for the execution of the left over work.
Thus, abnormal steep increase in market prices of cement and steel, which were
beyond railway’s control, had caused delay in execution of work. The price
variation clause has since been revised to take care of such violent fluctuations
in the market prices of steel and cement to a large extent.”
2.11 The Ministry further stated as under:—
“There has been no delay in sanctioning of rebuliding of bridge No. 531 as
existing rail bridge with 2 line track structure is still in service. Keeping in view
the line capacity requirements, railway have planned and sanctioned the third
line project and rebuilding of bridge no. 531 accordingly. There has been no
delay in approval of design and drawings of new bridge as this is an important
bridge and design and drawings took time in according final approval no account
of consideration of various design parameters such as Seismic Co-efficient, Scour
depth etc. deliberated by TAG Committee, RDSO etc.”
2.12 As regards the foreclosing of the work by the contractor, the Ministry
clarified the position as under:—
“There was a steep rise in market prices of cement and steel just after
commencement of bridge work in 2004-05. The contractor started representing
for settlement of their claims/extra payment to resolve their dispute on account
of abnormal hike in prices of steel and cement during the intervening period.
Railway took necessary steps/action to resolve the issue at every level and also
through high level committees. As it was not possible to consider the contractor’s
request to give higher compensation for abnormal increase in cost of steel and
cement more than what is permissible under PVC (Price Variation Clause) in
existing contract agreement and the contractor has stopped working at site, the
contract was foreclosed in Oct. 2009 under clause 61 of GCC i.e. without risk
and cost to the contractor.”
2.13 Asked to state the difficulties in providing connectivity on the Sone Bridge,
the Member (Engineering) Railway Board deposed:—
“We are completing by first week of November, the two lines which are existing
on the old bridge, we have to just cut and connect the new bridge. The
Commissioner of Railway Safety has been approached. The date is fixed—last
week of October. Commissioner of Safety will make inspection. Then, we would
need about seven hours traffic block; both the ends would be connected.
Hopefully, by first week of November, that will be done. Third line is a new line
between Sone Nagar and Dehri-on-Sone does not exist. So, yard remodelling
would be involved and that we would try to complete by March, 2014.”

14
2.14 In a post-evidence information, the Ministry apprising the Committee of
the latest status, submitted as under:—
“So far 60% work of stone pitching work has been completed. The stone pitching
work is targeted for completion before onset of Monsoon of 2014. Further, the
linking of track over bridge on all three lines have been completed. In the first
phase, two lines are being connected. Third line will be connected during major
yard remodelling of Sone Nagar and Dehri-in-Sone yard which includes Route
Relay Interlocking (RRI) work also. Work of RRI building is in progress. The
major yard remodelling work of Sone Nagar and Dehri-on-Sone yard is planned
for completion by March, 2015.”
2.15 Expressing concern over the delay in meeting the target, the Committee
finally sought to know as to whether the work completed was as per the target spelt out
and if not, the reasons therefor and the remedial measures taken in this regard. The
Ministry clarified the position as under:—
“The target for stone pitching work has been the same as given earlier. However,
the third line is now targeted for connection with Sone Nagar and Dehri-on-
Sone station yards by March, 2015 as a separately sanctioned RRI work of these
two stations is also to be completed for proper yard connectivity. The RRI work
alongwith connection of third line with two stations is targeted for completion
by March, 2015.”
2.16 The Committee then desired to be apprised of the details of the target date
of completion of work, the percentage of work completed and the reasons for delay, if
any, relating to all the nine existing important bridges across various rivers where the
work was reportedly at different stages. In reply, the Ministry submitted the following
details:
Sl. Railway Bridge Section Proposed Latest % of Target date Remarks
No. No. span Antici- work of
pated compl- completion
Cost eted (TDC)
(In crores
of `)
1     2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
1. Eastern 8 across Bandel- 2x135m 334.8 65% 30.4.2014 Substructure and
river Naihati 1x150m approach via duct
Hooghly Through completed.
Type Superstructure work
in progress.
2. Eastern 18 across Barakar- 10x30.5m 69.11 100% — Bridge work has
river Kumar- +5x45.7m bridge been completed.
Barakar dhubi Through work Approach work and
Type compl- station Yard
eted remodelling is in
progress for
conecting the Bridge.
3. East 531 Mughal- 91x32.926m 445.11 100% — Bridge work has been
Central across sarai-Gaya +32.926m bridge completed. Station
river Sone +2x32.266m work Yards remodelling is
PSC Box compl- in progress for
Girder eted connecting the Bridge.

15
4. East 136 Kiul- 10x45.7m 71.41 20% 31.12.2015 Sub structure work in
Central across Patna Through progress. The TDC is
river Kiul type subject to availability
of funds.
5. Northern 249 Delhi- 13x61m 136.95 25% 31.03.2016 Part of substructure
across Sh ahdara Through work has been
river type completed. The work
Yamuna got delayed due to
refusal of transferring  the
part of land in Salimgarh
fort area by ASI. Due to the
objection from ASI, the
alignment has now been
modified and retendering is
under process.
6. North 111 Allahabad- 40x45.7m 293.5 — 31.03.2018 Detailed estimated
Eastern across V aranasi Through has been prepared and
river type under finance vetting
Ganga at Railway level.
7. North 16 across Manjhi- 18x61m 204.6 10% 31.03.2017 Substructure work in
Eastern river Bakulaha Through progress. The TDC is
Ganga type subject to availability
of funds.
8. Southern HR-1 Shoranur- 16x36.6m 48.19 95% 28.02.2014 W ork is nearing
across Cochin PSC Box completion.
sea Harbour girder +
Terminus 1x36.6m U
type girder
& 1x10.6m
PSC Girders
9. South 184 Kuduchi- 14x45.7m 49.41 15% 30.06.2015 Substructure work in
western across Ugarkhurd Through progress. The TDC is
river type subject to availability
Krishna of funds.
2.17 The Committee enquired whether the Ministry/Railway Board were in
receipt of any communication from the United Kingdom wherein any interest had
been evinced to see the old and signature bridges in India so as to gauge their longevity
and functioning. In reply, the Member (Engineering) Railway Board submitted in
evidence:
“We have not on our record except some signature bridges. When I was in Kolkata
some ten year back, then, we had got a letter, about the Hoogly bridge, they said,
it was more than 100 years, we would like to see as to how it is functioning. The
delegation had also come from there. We have a lot of interest in seeing signature
bridges.”
1     2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

CHAPTER III
SIGNAL AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS
I.  Introductory
Pursuant to the adoption of Corporate Safety Plan (2002-13), Railway Board
informed (2004) the Standing Committee on Railways inter-alia about the introduction
of ACD and TPWS and also committed that the ACDs would be installed on entire
Broad Gauge system by 2013. When the performance of pilot project for installation
of ACD over Northeast Frontier Railway (NFR) was reported to Parliament (Report
No. 26 of 2008-09 tabled on 24 July 2009), Railway Board stated that ACD had been
successfully installed on trial basis on NFR and would be extended to three other
Railways (Sourthern, South Central and South Western Railways). Further, in the White
Paper on Indian Railways presented to the Parliament (2009), Railway Board indicated
that based on the experience gained over NFR, revised specifications for ACD were
framed and KRCL was asked to develop ACD with revised specifications for trial on
three Railways. Subsequently, the Minister of Railways, in her Budget Speech
(25 February, 2011) had also declared that trials for improved version of ACD had
met with success and the same would be commissioned on three Railways.
3.2 Anti-Collision Device (ACD) is a train collision prevention equipment based
on a microprocessor. It consists of a central processing unit, a global positioning system
and a digital modern for communication with other ACDs. There are two types of
ACDs equipment viz. mobile ACDs for locomotives and stationary ACDs for stations
and level crossings. All the ACDs interact with each other and exchange information
about the locations of trains when these are within their radio zones up to three
kilometers. In case two trains approach each other on the same track, ACDs apply the
brakes on both trains to stop them.
3.3 Train Protection and Warning System (TPWS), a variant of Auxilliary
Warning system (AWS), is a train protection system. It automatically activates brakes
on any train that passes a signal at danger or its over-speeding. TPWS minimize the
consequences of signal passed at danger by providing the facilities of over-speed
sensores and train stop. TPWS helps the Motorman of an EMU/MEMU train by
automatically initiating service brakes and emergency brakes in case of over-speeding
or disregarding the signals and providing various information like permitted speed,
actual speed, audible warning, target distance etc.
3.4 Audit scrutiny revealed that after conducting limited trials during 2000-03
in Northern Railway (NR) and NFR, Indian Railway signed a MOU with KRCL for
undertaking the work of provision of ACD. Field surveys on NFR were completed in
September, 2003 and working arrangement agreement for erection and commissioning
of 1018 ACDs over NFR was signed in September, 2004 (Modified in May, 2007)
with KRCL. The first Site Acceptance Test (SAT-I) of ACDs on Katihar-Jalpaiguri-
16

17
Samukatala of NFR done during July to August 2005 indicated spurious detection of
abnormal situations causing unwarranted applications of train brakes, mismatch of
information amongst different ACDs installed on the loco, guard van, at stations and
level crossings and the work was stopped on the direction of Ministry of Railways in
May, 2006 pending evaluation of performance parameters by a Multi Disciplinary
Team (MDT-constituted by Railway Board in November, 2006), transfer of design
documents to RDSO as well as verification of selection of technology partner by KRCL.
Audit further observed that the results of SAT-II of pilot project of ACD system
conducted in March, 2007 by RDSO and NFR needed to be evaluated by a MDT.
Audit also observed that the design documents of ACD were not made available by
KRCL (who owned the system design) to the MDT for the evaluation of the system.
As a result, Railway Board could not establish its own safety parameters for want of
expert evaluation by MDT. Besides, during SAT-II, about 23.64 per cent ACD were
either found defective or decommissioned.
3.5 In the above context, the Committee desired to be apprised of the reasons
for the MDT not evaluating ACD. In response, the Ministry submitted as under:—
"KRCL was not in a position to share ACD design documents (both software
and hardware) on account of need to safeguard the Intellectual Property Rights
(IPR) of KRCL for ACD technology, for which the Controller of Patents of the
Patent Office of Government of India caused the Patent No. 198166 to be sealed
as of 24.09.1999 in favour of Konkan Railway Corporation Ltd. [who at present
is in possession of an invention for ‘An Anti-Collision Device (ACD) System
for Trains and the like Transportation Systems'].
KRCL was not able to give any design document as requested by multi
disciplinary team founded by Railway Board due to IPR related issues and the
same was discussed in various meetings with KRCL. In the absence of the same,
no evaluation could be carried out by MDT.
In evaluation of the system by KRCL, TUV Germany, Lloyds Register Asia
(TRA)/Hyderabad and ETDC/Chennai have been associated with expert inputs
also provided by Members of Advisory Council on ACD drawn from BARC,
ISRO, DOT & NCST Organizations. RDSO was involved in evaluation of
performance of ACD during SAT.
It may be mentioned that evaluation of performance has been done in different
phases (conceptualization development of design, manufacturing, verification
and validation, testing, installation, performance and commissioning) by KRCL
for the ACD system that has been provided for pilot project on NFR."
3.6 Asked to state the results of the evaluation of performance done by KRCL
on the ACD system, the Ministry submitted that based upon the operations and technical
problems observed during trials on NFR, an improved version of ACD called Version
1.1.2 had been developed by KRCL for deployment over NFR. ACD Version 1.1.2
had been validated by ETDC, Chennai and also provisionally cleared by RDSO for
deployment on one of the Divisions of NFR (Tinsukia). The Ministry further stated
that after evaluation of the performance of improved version of ACD on Tinsukia
Division of NFR, its deployment on other divisions of NFR would be taken up.

18
II.  Problems being experienced in Southern Railway Trials
3.7 In evidence, the Committee were apprised that specific operational and
technical problems had been experienced in Southern Railway trials. When enquired
about the nature of such problems, the Ministry informed as under:—
"ACD field trials on 43.55 kms. long Pattabiram-Arakkonam Jn. Section (RE
area having automatic signaling in multiple lines suburban section on Chennai
division of Southern Railway) were conducted by RDSO, KRCL & Southern
Railway as under:—
* First trial from 20.09.2010 to 02.10.2010
* Second trial from 06.01.2011 to 21.01.2011
During these trials on Southern Railway, performance evaluation of ACD in
electrified multiple lines and automatic block section was carried out.
As brought out in the Annexure attached, 50 deficiencies were identified. Main
Problems encountered in ACD tested in Southern Railway were as under:
(a) While following a train ahead in auto section, additional braking by ACD
even at 20 kmph.
(b) Even when Loco Pilot (LP) stops at red signal and moves below 20 Kmph,
additional braking when collision like situation perceived.
(c) Rear end collision could not be prevented in all cases.
(d) Collision between two trains when any one of the trains has Track Id-Fail
Safe (TID-FS) at a relative speed of 50 kmph cannot be eliminated.
(e) Instances of spurious STN NO COMM (Station No Communication)
messages received in Locomotives".
3.8 Asked to state the measures taken/proposed to deal with the problem faced
in Southern Railway trials, the Ministry submitted that KRCL had analysed the above
said 50 deficiencies in ACD Version 2.0 as under:—
* 34 number of items which will be complied fully;
* 07 number of items which will be complied partially, mainly due to removal
of Guard ACD from architecture of ACD network;
* 09 number of items for which compliance is not feasible in the present
design of ACD network.
3.9 The Ministry further submitted that since the operational & technical problems
experienced during the trials in Southern Railway could not be fully resolved by KRCL
due to design limitation of ACD and also the Report of High Level Safety Review
Committee headed by Dr. Anil Kakodkar did not clearly recommend for continuation
and proliferation of ACD system on Indian Railways, KRCL had put on hold further
development of ACD Version 2.

19
3.10 The Committee then asked whether all the recommendations as contained
in the report of the High Level Safety Review Committee headed by Dr. Anil Kakodkar
had been accepted and implemented by the Indian Railways. In response, the Ministry
submitted that the recommendations which pertained to various Directorates were
under examination by the Safety Directorate of the Ministry of Railways.
3.11 Asked to categorically state the fate of ACD system, the Ministry submitted
that based on experience on SR and NFR, the KRCL has now developed an improved
ACD Software Version 1.1.2m which has been validated by the Electronics Test &
Development Centre (ETDC)/Chennai. Performance of the improved ACD Software
V ersion 1.1.2m shall be jointly evaluated by RDSO & NFR with KRCL, after its
deployment on Tinsukia Division of NFR by Oct. 2013.
3.12 In an updated information the Ministry apprised that since the operational
and technical problems experienced during the trials in Southern Railway it cannot be
fully resolved by KRCL due to design limitation of ACD, further proliferation of ACD
on complicated and High Density Routes (HDN) on other Zonal Railways is not
contemplated. Instead it has been planned to undertake development of Train Collision
Avoidance System (TCAS) by RDSO for its deployment on Indian Railways.
III.  Train Protection Warning System (TPWS)
3.13 Audit pointed out that the TPWS work in North Central Railway had not
been completed despite incurring an expenditure of Rs. 41.54 crore.
3.14 In the above context, the Committee queried about the time by which the
commercial trials of TPWS in nominated trains in NCR would be completed. In reply,
the Ministry submitted that it had been felt necessary to also observe performance of
TPWS fitted Electric Locos on Goods trains on Hazrat Nizamuddin-Agra section. It
was, therefore proposed to also carry out trials in goods trains by providing TPWS on-
board equipment on 10 W AG 9 Goods Locos. Fields trials on goods trains worked by
the W AG 9 locos shall be monitored for their operational performance and any other
technical issues. Regarding progress of work, the Ministry apprised that installation of
track side equipment on H. Nizamuddin-Agra section was completed in December,
2011 while installation of on-board equipment on 35 W AP 7 locos was completed in
May, 2012.
3.15  Asked to state the status of the procurement of TPWS, the Ministry apprised
that RITES was awarded a consultancy for recommending a low cost ATP system.
Based upon the recommendations, TPWS (ETCS Level 1) works have been approved
for 3330 RKMs covering Automatic Signalling Sections/HDN routes. In the first phase,
out of the sanctioned 3330 RKMs, it was proposed to roll out TPWS (ETCS Level 1)
on 1870 RKMs on Automatic Signalling section of Indian Railways where EMUs,
MEMUs, DEMUs and Main Line Locomotives were running.
IV .  Train Collision Assistance System (TCAS)
3.16 As mentioned earlier, due to design limitation of ACD, further proliferation
of ACD on complicated and High Density Routes (HDN) on other Zonal Railway was

20
not being contemplated. Instead, the Ministry had planned to undertake development
of Train Collision Avoidance System (TCAS) by RDSO for its deployment on Indian
Railways. The TCAS system incorporates train collision functionality of ACD and
A TP (Automatic Train Protection) functions as available in train protection system.
3.17 During a study visit to the RDSO, Lucknow, the Committee were informed
that the Research Organisation was developing TCAS, a fusion of ACD and TPWS
and a multi-vendor, inter-operable and cost effective system. When the Committee
desired to have the details i.e. need, specification, salient features of the TCAS, the
Ministry submitted as under:—
"Need  for TCAS
To overcome major problems noticed in ACD (Anti collision Device) due to its
dependence on GPS (Global Positioning System) for location, error in Deviation
Count Theory resulting in wrong Track ID (TID), not a failsafe system and need
for large numbers of mid-section repeaters, RDSO finalize specification of TCAS
by involving Indian vendors. TCAS system incorporates train collision
functionality of ACD and ATP (Automatic Train Protection) functions as available
in train protection systems. Specifications are to open standards and multiple
vendors shall be able to develop the system.
Specification
The specification for the first phase i.e. Absolute Block System has been finalized
as RDSO/SPN/196/2012 Version 3.1.1. through the process of Expression Of
Interest (EOI) invited in 2011, 6 firms were shortlisted by RDSO.
Salient features
(a) It is fusion of train collision and Automatic Train Protection (ATP)
functionality.
(b) System is also interfaced with existing Signalling system to provide feature
of prevention of SPAD (Signal Passing at Danger)
(c) Displays aspect of Signal on the route in the Locomotive on real time
basis along with speed control functionality.
(d) Continuous update of Movement Authority (MA) resulting in less
operational constraints and effective stoppage before Signal at Red.
(e) Braking model optimized for Indian Railway conditions.
(f) Manual SOS facility both from Loco and from Station.
(g) System presently developed is suitable for Absolute Block System.
(h) Final system shall be validated to SIL-4.
3.18 On System Description the Ministry apprised as under:—
"System consists of loco and station equipment. Loco equipment consists of a
computer which is interfaced with existing Odometry system, Braking System,

21
GPS Antenna, Radio Modems and RFID Reader. Station unit is interfaced with
signalling system and also has GPS, Radio etc. RFID tags are installed on the
track. The train keeps track of its exact location by reading the RFID tags. The
Station sends the signalling related information and the position of other trains
to all locos in vicinity through radio communication. Based on this, events such
as collision like situation, Signal Passing at Danger, train approaching very fast
to a Signal at Danger etc. are detected and speed control by automatic brake
application is carried out by the system. Signalling Information between two
stations is exchanged through OFC link."
3.19 As regards the advantages of TCAS vis-a-vis ACD and TPWS, the Ministry
clarified as under:—
S.No.               Features TCAS ACD TPWS (ETCSL1)
1. Collision Prevention Yes No No
2. Collision Prevention Yes Not prevented No
in all cases
3. Display of Signal Aspect on Yes No No
real time basis in Loco (DMI)
4. SOS facility from Loco and Yes Yes No
Station
5. SIL-4 Safety Certification Yes No Yes
6. Open Specification Yes No Yes
7. Multi Vendor, Inter-operable Yes No Yes
system
8. Requirement of Repeaters in No Yes No
Mid-section
9. Dependency on GPS for No Yes No
safety critical application
10. Continuous update of Yes No No
Movement Authority
3.20 In evidence, giving an overview of the advantages of TCAS over ACD &
TPWS, the representative of the Railway Board deposed:—
"Sir, I want to submit that anti-collision device was initially put as a pilot project
on North-East Central Railways on 1,736 route kilometres. We had initially a
lot of technical and operational problems encountered in the device. Lot of efforts
were made technically to improve the device and a number of improvements in
the software were also taken up. But the situation even today is that about
500 braking are taking place which are unwanted on the trains and there is no
abnormality in this section. The technical solution has not been found out. They

22
are making efforts. We may not be able to go beyond it. So we are going for a
new product called TCAS which has been developed in-house through RDSO
design associating eight industries in India. Already the contract has been awarded
to two firms and third is getting awarded shortly. The trials are already started.
They have been done for two blocks sections. We are going to complete five
block sections by December end. We will see the various aspects of it and once,
it is found to be successful, it will take some more time, then a decision can be
taken to cover the train protection system on the Indian Railways. This TCAS is
a device which is a combination of ACD and TPWS, where, if a driver is going
to exceed beyond his signal mandate, the train is braked automatically. It is a
unique device which is also being appreciated by the world suppliers becuase
they do not manufacture this device. It looks so promising but the answer will be
known when the trials will be completed. So, we are in a situation to find out the
alternative, if the ACD does not become successful. So, we are still making
efforts."
3.21 On the issues of concept field trial, extended field trial, latest status and the
future expansion plan the Ministry submitted as under:—
"Concept field trial of TCAS has been conducted successfully in Oct. 2012 on
Tandur-Nawandgi section in Secunderabad Division of SC Railway.
Demonstration of TCAS trial to Chairman, Railway Board and Member,
Electricals, was made by RDSO on 16.10.2012. Further, demonstration to
Committee of Additional Members from Railway Board was made on 10.11.2013.
By end of 2012-13, a few agencies were able to develop lab demo models.
Extended Field Trial
Extended field trials have been planned by RDSO on 250 km section Lingampali-
Extended-Wadi-Bidar Section of SC Railway for further development of TCAS
with multi-vendor, interoperability features. Tenders have been awarded by
RDSO to various firms for conducting extended field trials.
Present Status
Extended Field trials for testing of various types of RFIDs, radio range and
display of signalling information in loco (DMI) were carried out with one station
equipment and one loco equipment in Secunderabad div. from 29.08.2013 to
06.09.2013. Two field trials were conducted in Sept. 2013 during which
demonstration of basic functionalities of TCAS model and basic interoperability
feature between two equipments of two different vendors was successfully
demonstrated.
Further plan
Full Prototype of the system shall be ready for trials by Feb. 2014 and functional
trials with 40 locomotives on 250 Rkm section shall start by Feb./March' 14.
Operational deployment of TCAS on Railways will be considered after successful
extended field trials expected to be completed by September, 2014".

23
3.22 The Committee asked whether the Railway Board was periodically making
any study or survey in the most accident and collision-prone sections. In response, the
representative of the Ministry submitted in evidence:—
"Sir, each and every case of accident is gone into detail as you rightly said. We
find out the environmental situation why repeat accidents in some sections or in
some areas. We tried to study whether it is a mistake on part of some signal or
some other condition which is making the driver of locomotive to commit mistake.
All these factors are analysed in detail at the divisional level and then at
Headquarter level and we monitor each and every case in Board and the corrective
action is being taken. As you rightly said, for introduction of A TP also, we will
take note of it and we will prioritise sections in such a manner that where the
sections are more vulnerable, they will be prioritized."
3.23 In evidence when the Committee desired to hear the views of the
Railway Board on the acceptance of the recommendations of the High Level Safety
Committee Report, the representative of Railway Board deposed:—
"Sir, at present this report is under finalisation. How much we accept and how
much we do not accept, what we partially accept, this process is already on. We
will be able to supply this reply after some time when we finalise it."

PART  II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
Civil Engineering Workshops
The Committee note that there are ten Civil Engineering Workshops (CEWs)
that were established between 1900 and 1965 and functioning on nine Zonal
Railways to fulfil the needs of manufacturing bridge girders, track components
and various other items such as Platform Shelters, Foot Over Bridges, Push/
Motor trolleys, etc. The Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007—12) has envisaged a
critical role for CEWs in view of the anticipated increased demand for fabricated
steel structures for re-building/re-girding the existing bridges. The Committee
are highly concerned to find that these CEWs are functioning with quite old
machines whose average age profile ranged from 22 to 47 years against the
expected average codal life of 15 years. As these Workshops were in urgent need
of technology upgradation, a seminar of CWM/CWE held in Pune in 2009 had
recommended a comprehensive modernization plan to increase automation and
procure latest machines. The Committee are unhappy to find that despite the
recommedations made in the Pune Seminar, no plan for modernization of the
CEWs was prepared till the Audit review. The Ministry have now submitted that
the existing machines which are quite old are being replaced in a phased manner
as per the Machinery and Plant Programme of the Railways. Further, a Committee
has been set up to undertake a holistic review of each workshop which would
also include identification of the modernization/technological needs. The said
Committee has already visited nine workshops and its deliberations are in
progress. In view of the imperatives involved, the Committee exhort the Ministry
to continue/ initiate the requisite and effective measures for comprehensive
modernization and upgradation of the CEWs and complete the same in a time
bound manner duly prioritizing considering the age profile of the edquipments.
The Committee would like to be expeditiously apprised of the specific measures
initiated, based on the suggestions/recommendations of the Committee constituted
by the Ministry, for providing new technology machines and augmenting the
infrastructure of the CEWs.
2. The Committee are perturbed to observe that funds allocated to the CEWs
are less than the demand projected. They are also unhappy to find that it takes
about two to three years to procure/commission machines for the CEWs due to
procedural rigmaroles. While viewing with serious concern the constraints being
faced by the CEWs, the Committee impress upon the Ministry to urgently assess
the requirement of funds by the Workshops and accordingly take appropriate
measures so that fund constraints do not impede the modernization plan of the
CEWs. The Committee also desire that the Ministry should streamline the process
and procedures by incorporating e-tendering for procurement and commissioning
24

25
of modern machines so as to ensure their installation in a time bound manner
and consequential increased productivity.
3. The Committee observe that the Research Design and Standard
Organisation (RDSO) has been advised by the Railway Board to review the
Consortium of Bridge Workshops and organize regular meetings as a result of
which RDSO has discussed several issues pertaining to the modernization/
mechanization and improvements of workshops, repairs to workshop
infrastructure and machinery, procurement of steel, inspection schedule of girders
etc. The conclusions/suggestions of RDSO are reportedly under the consideration
of the Railway Board. In view of the scarce private participation in the
manufacture/supply of girders etc. and the excellent job rendered by the
Workshops in meeting the immediate and unforeseen requirements, as candidly
admitted by the Chairman, Railway Board, the Committee urge the Ministry to
take time bound action on the suggestions of RDSO to explore the possibility of
increased private participation so that the CEWs meet the growing requirements
more effectively. The Committee also desire that a comprehensive study be carried
out to assess the capacity utilization of the Workshops vis-a-vis the installed
capacity so as to ensure effective utilization of both manpower and machinery.
4. The Committee are dismayed to find that there are 1406 vacancies in
various cadres in the ten CEWs as against the combined sanctioned strength of
6546 personnel. Worse, no target date has been fixed for filling up the vacancies
on the plea that creation and filling up of vacancies is a continuous process and
manpower availability and requirement will be assessed by the Committee set up
to undertake a holistic review of the Workshops. The Committee are not satisfied
with the reasonings of the Ministry for not prescribing a target date for filling up
the vacancies. They would like to emphasize that, till such time the manpower
requirement is pending consideration by the Committee constituted for the
purpose, the Ministry should take urgent requisite measures to fill up the vacancies
so as to obviate any adverse effect on the productvity and output of the Workshops.
The Committee further desire that a study on the rationalization of the CEWs be
undertaken so as to ensure that there is optimum utilization of human resources
with no idle manpower in the Workshop. The Committee also desire that the
Railway Board should meticulously follow the instructions issues by the DoPT in
drafting a annual Recruitment Plan.
5. In view of the fact that there are no exclusive Railway Engineering
Colleges in the country, the Committee would like the Ministry, in consultation
with the appropriate authorities, explore the feasibility of establishing such
exclusive university and colleges so that skilled specialised professionals are
available to effectively cater to the various technical activities undertaken by the
Railways at different points of time.
Delay in Building the new Rail Bridge over River Sone
6. The Committee note that in order to cater to the increasing traffic load
on the Sone Nagar (SEB) - Mughalsarai (MGS) section (124 kms) which is a vital

26
corridor for movement of coal, other minerals and goods from Bengal-Bihar-
Jharkhand fields to North India, it was planned to lay on additional line between
SEB-MGS which necessitated a three line Bridge over River Sone. The Committee
find that while the work of the construction of the third line between Dehri-on-
Sone (DoS) and Mughalsarai was sanctioned in 1990-91 and the work was
progressively completed and opened to traffic between 1997-2000 at a cost of
` 262.24 crore, the Bridge work was neither sanctioned nor progressed
simultaneously. The administrative sanction for the Bridge work was accorded
only in 1997-98; sanction for detailed estimates of ` 248.64 crore was given in
December 1999; contract was awarded in April 2003; and the work is still in
progress. The Ministry have submitted that due to technical reasons and
constraints of funds and resources, the third line work was divided into two phases.
The Ministry have further contended that though somewhat more time was taken,
keeping in view the complex nature of work involved, it can not be considered as
excessive. The Committee are not satisfied with the contention of the Ministry as
apparently there has been inordinate delays at various stages in the executions of
the work, notwithstanding the complex nature of the job which is obvious in
construction of new Rail lines/bridges. The Committee while cautioning the
Ministry to guard against procedural delays such as late administrative approval,
delayed sanction of funds and award of contract, impress upon the Ministry to
take requisite and effective measures to ensure the completion of the Bridge work
in a fixed time frame for smooth movement of minerals and goods from the Bengal-
Bihar-Jharkhand fields to North India. The Committee also desire that a strict
and robust monitoring mechanism be put in place not only to enforce the
contractual obligations on the part of the contractor but also to take periodical
stock of the progress so as to avoid any further delay in the completion of the
work.
7. The Committee note that at present work relating to nine important
bridges across various rivers is at different stages of completion under the Eastern,
East Central, Northern, North Eastern , Southern and South Western Railways.
The target date for the completion of these bridges range between 2014 and 2018.
The Committee recommend that the Railway Board should evolve a robust and
foolproof mechanism to monitor the periodical progress of the ongoing work
pertaining to the nine bridges under various Zonal Railways as well as NFR so as
to ensure their completion within the respective target dates.
Signal and Telecommunications
8. The Committee note that pursuant to the adoption of the Corporate Safety
Plan (2002-13), the Railway Board decided to introduce Anti-Collision Device
(ACD) and Train Protection and Warning System (TPWS) in Indian Railways.
However, after the successful trials of ACD in North East Frontier Railway, its
operational and technical problems were experienced during the trials in Southern
Railway. Thus, due to the design limitation of ACD and the reservations expressed
in the Report of the High Level Safety Review Committee headed by Dr. Anil
Kakodkar for continuation and proliferation of the ACD system in Indian

27
Railways, further development of ACD has been withhold. The Committee note
that the introduction of the TPWS in the North Central Railway is under
experimentation and based on the field trials and performance of the system it
would be extended to other Zones. Thus, due to the uncertainty surmounting the
effective performance of ACD and TPWS because of a lot of technical and
operational problems, the Railways have planned to undertake development of
another safety system called Train Collision Avoidance System (TCAS) which is
a fusion of ACD and TPWS besides being a multi-vendor, inter-operable and
cost effective system. The Research, Design and Standard Organisation (RDSO)
has been assigned the job to develop TCAS for deployment on Indian Railways.
The Committee find that the concept field trial of TCAS has been successfully
conducted in October 2012 and extended field trials have been planned by RDSO
after which operational deployment of TCAS on Railways would be considered.
In view of the many advantages of TCAS over ACD and TPWS, as reported, the
Committee would like the Ministry to resort to periodical monitoring of the
progress of the development of TCAS by RDSO so that the momentum towards
developing and proliferating an effective collision prevention system on Indian
Railways is maintained unabated.
9. In view of the fact that international exposure to the Officers/Professionals
is very meager/inadequate in the RDSO, as reported to the Committee during
their field visit, the Committee recommend that the DG, RDSO should be delegated
the powers to depute RDSO personnel for training abroad for the requisite
exposure to new technology/developments which can be gainfully utilized for
undertaking research activities on Indian Railways. The Committee also desire
that autonomy with financial powers to function within the sanction budget for
award of consultancy contracts and placement of orders be accorded to RDSO
so that the assigned task to the Research Organisation is accomplished seamlessly.
10. Having said that, the Committee also desire that a critical assessment of
the utility and performance of RDSO be periodically undertaken so as to ensure
optimal and gainful utilization of the entire infrastructure, including real estates,
belonging to the Research Organisation.
11. The Committee note that the recommendations of the High Level Safety
Committee Report are under consideration of the Government. In view of the
apt concerns and suggestions of the High Level Committee, it is imperative that
the Ministry urgently consider them and apprise the Committee of the details of
acceptance and action taken to implement them.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. K.V . THOMAS
24 November, 2014 Chairperson,
03 Agrahayana 1936 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF SUB-COMMITTEE-I (RAILW AYS)
OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2013-14) HELD ON
11TH OCTOBER, 2013
Sub-Committee-I (Railways) of the Public Accounts Committee (2013-14) sat
on Friday, the 11th October, 2013 from1100 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in Room No. 'G-074',
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Prakash Javadekar — Convenor
M
EMBERS
Lok  Sabha
2. Shri Jayaprakash Hegde
Rajya  Sabha
3. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Ms. Divya Malhotra — Director General (Railways)
2. Ms. Ila Singh — Director General (Railway Board)
3. Shri Purushottam Tiwary — Principal Director of Audit (PAC)
Representatives of the Railway Board Ministry of Railways
1. Shri Arunendra Kumar — Chairman, Railway Board
2. Shri Rajendra Kashyap — Financial Commissioner,
Railway Board
3. Shri Subodh Jain — Member Engineering, Railway Board
4. Shri D.P. Pande — Member Traffic, Railway Board
5. Shri Kul Bhushan — Member Electrical, Railway Board
6. Shri Sudhir Mital — Addl. Member (Mech. Engg.),
Railway Board
28

29
7. Shri Tribhuvan Gupta — Adviser (Bridges), Railway Board
8. Smt. Saroj Rajware — Adviser (Finance), Railway Board
2. At the outset, the Convenor, Sub-Committee-I welcomed the representatives
of the Office of the C&AG of India and the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) to
the sitting of the Sub-Committee. Observing that the sitting had been convened for
taking oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Railways  (Railway
Board) on the subjects: (i) 'Civil Engineering Workshops in Indian Railways';
(ii) 'Delay in Building the New Rail Bridge Over River Sone'; (iii) 'Signal and
Telecommunications'; (iv) 'Rail Link to Kashmir'; and (v) 'Environment Management
in Indian Railways—Stations, Trains and Tracks' based on various Audit Paras/Reports,
the Convenor impressed upon the witnesses not to disclose the deliberations of the
Sub-Committee to any outsider, especially the Print and Electronic media. The
Convenor then asked the Chairman, Railway Board to give an overview of the subjects
under examination, with special reference to the Audit findings and the Ministry's
response thereon.
3. The Chairman, Railway Board, accordingly briefed the Sub-Committee on
the aforesaid five subjects highlighting the measures taken to upgrade and modernize
the Civil Engineering workshops; the status of the Rail Bridge over River Sone; the
introduction and expansion of the anti-Collision Devices; various initiatives undertaken
towards Environment Management in Indian Railways and the progress of various
stretches in the project Rail Link to Kashmir.
4. The representatives of the Ministry of Railways thereafter responded to various
queries raised by the Members. As some queries required detailed and statistical reply,
the Convenor asked the Chairman, Railway Board to furnish written reply on the same
in due course.
5. The Convenor thanked the representatives of the Ministry for deposing before
the Sub-Committee and furnishing the available information on the subjects. He also
thanked the representatives of the Office of the C&AG of India for extending assistance
to the Sub-Committee in the examination of the subjects.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting was kept on record.
The Sub-Committee, then, adjourned.

APPENDIX II
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF SUB-COMMITTEE-I (RAILW AYS)
OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2013-14) HELD ON
14TH MARCH, 2014
The Sub-Committee sat on Friday, the 14th March, 2014 from 1130 hrs. to
1200 hrs. in Room No. 'G-074', Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Prakash Javadekar  —  Convenor
MEMBERS
Rajya  Sabha
2. Dr. V . Maitreyan
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Yadav — Under Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Ms. Divya Malhotra — Director General (Railway)
2. Shri Purshottam Tiwary — Principal Director (PAC)
2. At the outset, the Convenor, Sub-Committee-I (Railways) of PAC (2013-14)
welcomed the Members and the representatives of the Office of the C&AG of India to
the sitting of the Sub-Committee. The Convenor then apprised that the meeting had
been convened to consider and adopt three Draft Reports of Sub-Committee-I
(Railways). Thereafter, the Sub-Committee took up the following Draft Reports one
by one for consideration:
(i) Draft Report on ‘‘Civil Engineering Workshops in Indian Railways’’, ‘‘Delay
in Building the New Rail Bridge Over River Sone" and “Signal and
Telecommunications’’ based on Paras 3.2 and 3.4 and Chapter V respectively
of the C&AG Report No. 32 of 2011-12;
(ii) Draft Report on ‘‘Rail Link to Kashmir’’ based on the C&AG Report No. 19 of
2012-13; and
(iii) Draft Report on ‘‘Environment Management in Indian Railways—Stations,
Trains and Tracks’’ based on the C&AG Report No. 21 of 2012-13.
3. After due deliberations, the Draft Reports were adopted with some
modifications/Amendments.
30

31
4. The Convenor thanked the Member for his participation in the consideration
of the Draft Reports and the representatives of the Office of C&AG of India for
assisting the Sub-Committee in the examination of the subjects.
The Sub-Committee, then, adjourned.

APPENDIX III
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2014-15) HELD ON 19TH NOVEMBER, 2014
The Committee sat on Wednesday the 19th November, 2014 from 1100 hrs. to
1400 hrs. in Committee Room 'C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. K.V . Thomas  —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok  Sabha
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
3. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura
4. Shri Nishikant Dubey
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank"
7. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
8. Shri Anurag Thakur
Rajya  Sabha
9. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
10. Shri V ijay Goel
11. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya
12. Shri Shantaram Naik
13. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Director
3. Shri Jayakumar T. — Additional Director
Representatives from the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Smt. Suman Saxena — Dy. CAG
2. Shri P. Mukherjee — Dy. CAG
32

33
3. Shri P. Shesh Kumar — Director General
4. Shri S. Nandeolkar — Director General (Rlys.)
5. Shri A.M. Bajaj — Principal Director
6. Shri B.P. Yadav — Principal Director
7. Shri P. Tiwary — Principal Director
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the representatives
of the Office of the C&AG of India to the Committee. The Chairperson then apprised
the Members that the meeting has been convened to consider and adopt two Draft
Reports, further selection of five subjects for examination during the year and to take
oral evidence of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas on the subject 'Performance
Audit of Hydrocarbon Production sharing Contracts' based on C&AG Report No. 19
of 2011-12.
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up the following Draft Reports for
consideration:
(i) Draft Report on the subject ‘Civil Engineering Workshops in Indian
Railways’, ‘Delay in building the new Rail Bridge over River Sone’
and ‘Signal and Telecommunication’ based on C&AG Report No. 32
of 2011-12.
(ii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Seventy-Ninth Report (Fifteenth
Lok Sabha) on 'Service Tax on Banking and Other Financial
Services’.
4. After some discussions, the Committee adopted the Draft Report on the subject
‘Civil Engineering Workshops in Indian Railways’, ‘Delay in building the new Rail
Bridge over River Sone’ and ‘Signal and Telcommunication’ with modifications/
amendments. The Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventy-Ninth Report (Fifteenth
Lok Sabha) on ‘Service Tax on Banking and Other Financial Services’ was adopted
without any modification.
5. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairperson to finalise the two Reports
adopted by them, in light of their suggestions and factual verifications received from
the Audit and present the same to the House on a date convenient to him.
*** *** *** ***
A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record.
The Commitee, then, adjourned.
***Not related with the Report.