56

NON-COMPLICANCE BY MINISTRIES IN TIMELY SUBMISSION
OF ACTION TAKEN NOTES ON THE NON-SELECTED AUDIT
PARAGRAPHS OF THE C&AG OF INDIA

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their 1* Report (16" Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF
EXPENDITURE)

- PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)
FIFTY-SIXTH REPORT

ss  ऑ़ल्‍[$

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


FIFTY-SIXTHREPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

, NON-COMPLICANCE BY MINISTRIES IN TIMELY
SUBMISSION OF ACTION TAKEN NOTES ON THE NON-

SELECTED AUDIT PARAGRAPHS OF THE C&AG OF
INDIA . .

[Action Taken ‘by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their First Report (16" Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF FINANCE “(DEPARTMENT OF
EXPENDITURE) ©

Presented to Lok Sabha on;

Laidin RajyaSabhaon: ee, \ oy erate
on

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

November, 2016 /Kartika, 1938 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2016-17)

INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER |
CHAPTER II*

CHAPTER III*

CHAPTER IV*

CHAPTER V*

Report ......

Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ,.......................-

Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
replies received from the Government ,...............
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
Le) ............................, ००५५५ ०५-----५५५५०--०-

Observations/Recammendations in respect of

“which the Government have furnished interim

18188 ,........... ccc ceeecceeeeeeceuqeesasepenaevecccenere

APPENDICES*

Minutes of the 18" Sitting of Public Accounts
Committee (2016-17) held on 10" November,
2016.

Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their Eighteenth
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

ANNEXURE

“Not appended to the cyclostyled copy of the Repo! ~~ appended to the cycfostyled copy of the Report


11.

12

13.

14

15.

16.
17,
18.
19.

20

21,
22.

-FwON a

SOEPN Oe के [७

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

Prof. K.V. Thomas .
MEMBERS -
LOK SABHA

Chairperson

Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
Shrt Prem Singh Chandumajra
Shri Nishikant Dubey

Prof, Richard Hay

Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Smt. Riti Pathak

Shri Neiphiu Rio

Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
‘Shri Abhishek Singh

Dr. Kirit Somaiya

Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
Shri Shivkumar 0. Udast

Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Naresh Agrawal

Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi

* Shri Bhupender Yadav
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Shri Shantaram Naik

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
Shri Ajay Sancheti

SECRETARIAT

Shri AK Singh
Shii S.C. Chaudhary
Shri Tirthankar Das
Shri Paolienlal Hackip

- Additional Secretary
- Joint Secretary

- Additional Director
- Deputy Secretary

* Elected wee.f. 09.08.2016 vice Shri Vijay Goel, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f. 05.07.2016.


INTRODUCTION

], the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2016-17), having been
authorized by the Committee, do present this Fifty Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their First Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Non-Compliance by Minisiries/Departments in timely submission of Action Taken
Notes on the non-selected Audit paragraphs of the C&AG of india’ relating to
Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure).

2. The First Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 25
November, 2014. Replies of the Government to all the Obsefvations/Recormmendations
contained in the Report were received. The Public Accounts Committee considered and,
adopted the Fifty Sixth Report at their sitting held on 10 November, 2016. Minutes of
the sitting are given at Appendix |

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the

- Report.

4. The Committée place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the’ action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the First Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given at

Appendix-H.

NEW DELHI; है PROF. K.V. THOMAS,
/६ November, 2046 - _ Chairperson,

46 Kartika, 1938(Saka} Public Accounts Committee.


CHAPTER -1

REPORT

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with Action Taken by the

Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their

First Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on “Non-Compliance by Ministries! Departments in
timely submission of Action Taken Notes on the Non-selecetd Audit Paragraphs of
the C&AG of India” relating to the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure).

2. The First Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha/iaid in Rajya

Sabha on 25!" November, 2014. It contained 15 Observations/Recommendations. Action
Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendatiéns have been received from

the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) and categorized as under:

{i)

fi) “

Gi)

(iv)

Observations/Recommendations of the Committee which have been accepted

" by the Government:

Paragraph Nos. 1, 2, 4, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 14 and 15

“Total: 10
Chapter- li

Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the replies received fram the Government:

~NIL -
Total: 00
Chapter- )॥

Observations/Recommendations in respect. of which Teplies of Government
have not been accepted by. the Committee and which requires reiteration:

Paragraph Nos. 3 and 6
Total: 02

Chapter- IV

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Goverment have
furnished interim replies:

Total: 03
_ Chapter- ४

Paragraph Nos. 9, 12 and 13



2

3. The Committee desire that the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure)
furnish at the earliest final/conclusive Action Taken Note on the Observation!
Recommendation Nos. 9, 12 and 13 of their First Report (145th Lok Sabha) in respect
of which the Ministry have furnished interim replies.

4, -The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Finance on the
Observations/Recommendatians of the Committee contained in their First Report (1 50 Lok
Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. In the succeeding
paragraphs, the Committee have dealt with the Action Taken by the Government on some of
their Observations/Recommendations made in the Original Report which either need

comment or reiteration

I Explanation on Paras Pending for two or more years
(Recommendation Para No, 3)

5, The Committee's in their original Report had observed that the analysis of the

pending position regarding submission of Action Taken Notes by the various
Ministries/Departments revealed several deficiencies in the monitoring mechanism both at
the Ministry/Department level as well as in the Department of Expenditure which Is the nedal
agency for monitoring the Action Taken Notes. As per the latest information furnished by the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure—Monitoring Cell) as on 30.06.2013 a total
number of 815 Audit paras in respect of which Action Taken Notes were pending with
various Ministries/Departments from the years 1987-1988 to 2012-13. Out of these 815
pending paras, 152 related to Ministry of Defence, 163 related to Department of Revenue ..
{CBDT & CBEC), 178 related to Ministry of Railways. However, as per information furnished
by the Audit as on 30.06.2013, a total number of 722 Audit Paras for Action Taken Notes
were pending in various Ministries/Departments. Out of these 722 paragraphs, (208)
paragraphs pertained to various Civil Ministries followed by Railways (169), Defence (143),
Revenue Wing of Ministry of Finance comprising CBDT (Director Taxes), 085९ (Indirect
Taxes) (112) and (71) Scientific Departments, Shockingly, out of these 722 pending paras,”
Action Taken Notes in respect of 135 paragraphs were not received by the Audit even for
the first time. Further, Action Taken Notes in respect of 283 paragraphs were received by
the Audit but these were. returned to respective Ministries/Departments with comments. The
re-submission of the Ministries on them was stilt awaited. Action Taken Notes in-respect of
146 paragraphs were under vetting in Audit. The Committee are dismayed at the large scale



3

pendency of Action Taken Notes in various Ministries/Departments and also the jong
periods for which these 13५8 been pending. Such a huge pendency of Action Taken Notes
in large number of Ministries/Departments particularly Ministries of Finance, Railways and
Defence clearly reveals that the Audit observations were taken in a most casual manner by
the defaulter Departments. Further, the Committee regret to. note that several
-Ministries/Departments failed to furnish the ATNs to the Committee on a large number of
paragraphs even 5-10 years after the relevant Audit Reports were laid on the Table of the
House. The Commitiee, therefore, seek explanation for each ease of unconscionable delay
of beyond two years in furnishing the ATNs frarn each of the defaulter Ministry/Department.

6. The Minisiry in their Action Taken Note submitted as under: व

“Para 3 of the Report pertains to Department of Revenue and they have been

requested to furnish the ATN". हु
7. The Committee in their First-Report (16th Lok Sabha) in Para "3" inter-alia had
brought to the notice of Department of Expenditure (nodal agency for ATNs) that 722
Audit Paras (as: per Audit) as on 30 June, 2013, were pending in various
Ministries/Departments for ATNs. Gut of these 722 Paragraphs, (208) pertained to
various Civil Ministries followed by Railways (169), Defence (143}; Department of
Revenue i.e., 2850 and CBDT (112) and Scientific Departments (71). The Committee
now note that instead of furnishing a Ministry/Department-wise comprehensive reply,
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) has merely stated that" Para 3 of
the Report pertains to Department of Revenue and they have been ‘requested to
furnish the ATN", which is not only unsatisfactory but also casual reply as it does not
contain any information regarding other Ministries. The Committee are further
constrained to note that not a single Ministry have submitted their explanation with
respect to audit paras that have been pending for two years or moré subsequent to
the laying of those Audit Reports In Parliament. What is even more disturbing is that
the PAC Report was presented to Parliament on 25 November, 2014 i.e. nearly two
years before and the Monitoring Cell has informed the concerned
Department/Ministry on 2 June, 2016 only. Yet, no remedial action has been taken so
far in consonance with the recommendation contained in the Report even after a
lapse of almost two years from the date of presentation of the PAC report. The

Committee, therefore, reiterate ‘their recommendation and desire that Minlstry of

‘Finance (Department of Expenditure) to direct all the Ministries and Departments”

Myntatvy



4

concerned to submit the remedial action.taken notes. along with the explanation, on
each of the Audit Paras pending with them for more than 2 years, within two months
of presentation of this report to Parliament through the Monitoring Cell to this
Committee. They further desire the Monitoring Cell to prepare a consolidated
statement showing compliance or otherwise by Ministries/Departments and furnish
the same to the Committee alongwith the explanatory notes received from each
Ministry/Department.

॥. Reconciliation of Audit Paras ©
{Recommendation Para No. 4)

8. The Committee in their original Report had observed that the figures supplied by the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure-Monitoring Ceil) with regard to number of
pending audit paras with them do not tally with the figures provided by the office of the
C&AG. As on 30.8.2013, the Monitoring Cell had indicated the number of pending audit
paras as 815 starting from the years 1987 fo 2013. However, according to Audit as on
30.08.2013, a total of 722 paragraphs were pending with various Ministries/Departments.
The Committee desire that all the Ministries/Departments may be exhorted to take urgent

“steps to reconcile the figures at regular intervels in consuitation with the Audit and the

correct reconciled figures submitted to the Committee while furnishing the .action taken
replies on this Report in due course.

9. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:

"As reconciliation of pending Audit Paras is a continuous process, this Ministry.
has taken the figure of discrepancy i.e. 206 as on 15.09.2014 (as a cut-off
date). The pendency of C&AG Audit paras has been reconciled with the
figures of the Office of C&AG on the basis of the inforrnation provided by them
upto 28.02.2015. As a result of vigorous efforts the pendency figure of
Monitoring Cell has been reconciled with the figure of the Office of C&AG and
the figure of discrepancy has now come down to 10 Paras only which are still
to be reconciled. Monitoring Cell ts taking every effort, in consultation with the
Office of C&AG and the concerned Ministry/Department to reduce the figure to
zero",

10. The Committee appreciate the steps/measures taken by the Monitoring Cell,

Ministry of Finance in reconciling figures of pending Audit Paras between the
Ministries and Office of the C&AG. The Committee note that the discrepancy has
come to 10 paras only. The Committee feel that an in-built mechanism should be

developed in each Ministry/Department for submitting vetted remedial action taken



5

notes on the Audit paras concerning their respective Ministries/Departments to the - -
PAC through the Monitoring Gell. Since a iarge number of Audit Reports are tabled on

* the floor of the House in each session of Parliament, the Committee feel that the
effort of the Monitoring Cell, Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) should be a
continuous exercise’ aimed. at bringing down the discrepancy of the pendency figures
of ATNs to nil. The, Committee, therefore, recommend that consistent efforts for
reconciliation of the Audit paras should be made by the Monitoring Cell in
consultation with the office of C&AG in order to bring about zero discrepancy in
pendency figures. ,

lil, Timeframe for clearing pending ATNs
हु (Recommendation Para No. 5)

41. The Committee in their original Report had noted that the consolidated pendency
position of C&AG audit paragraphs in respect of all the Ministries/Departments as on
30.06.2013 was 815, The Committee had expressed their displeasure that despite their
constant concern and exhortations, some of the major Ministries/Departments still had large
number of pendencies as on 30.06.2013 particularly the Ministries of Defence, Finance and
Railways. Such inordinate delay in submission of ATNs “was not acceptable to the
Committee. The Committee, therefore, had urged the Ministries/Departments concerned ta
expedite clearance of the pending audit paragraptis within a period of three months and
submit status report in this regard ta the Committee. The Committee had noted that Ministry
of Railways (Railway Board) had issued an office order prescribing the time schedule to be
adhered to for finalisation of audit paragraphs, and recommended that the Department of
Expenditure (Monitoring Cell) should also issue a similar order to all the
Ministries/Departments to adhere the prescribed time-imit for submission of ATNs. The
Committee further had recommended that each Ministry/Department prescribe their own
time schedule within the time allotted by the Department of Expenditure (Monitoring Cell)
like - time-limit for obtaining information from various filed formations/various
zones/autonomous bodies, compilation of ATN, etc. The. Committee desired/recommended
that such a detailed time-schedule, both by the Department of Expenditure (Monitoring Cell)
as well as each of the Ministry/Department should ensure that the ATNs are submitted to
the Committee within the presented time of four months of the tabling of Audit Reports in

Parliament.



- 12.

6

The Ministry in their. Action Taken Note submitted as under:

Activity Respsnsib en en Timeframe 7
| Je Entity “| from start of
No. ATN life cycle
1. Publication of | CAG CAG to publish and to] 10days | 10 days

Audit Para on provide a list'mapping table

CAG website of audit para to

. Ministries/Departments with
: a copy of Monitoring Cell
2. Uploading of |C&AG = -& | All reports of C&AG will be | 10 days | 20 days
Audit para on] MC uploaded by the Monitoring
APMS portal Cell and Office of C&AG
will provide audit reports
along with 8 list of
observations/paras of
concerned
Ministries/Departments — in
pdf format on their website |
है Preparation © of |-Min/Dept. | Concerned Min/Dept. will] 30days | 50 days
draft ATN ‘and prepare the draft ATN and

uploading — the upload the same on APMS

same on APMS: portal and forward the

portal and to same to CAG for vetting

forward - the

same to CAG

for vetting
| Clarificatlon/furt | CAG If clarificatianffurther | 20 days | 70 days

her information infermation required 0४ .

any more if C&AG to examine the draft

required by ATN, they will Seek the

CAG and same from the concerned

uploading — the min./dept. by uploading the

same on APMS same an APMS portal,

portal
5 Revised/Final Min/Dept, | Min/Oept. will prepare the | 20 days | 90 days

ATN ta be replies to

forwarded. to clarifications/information

Audit . by sought by CAG and

Min/Dept. by upload/send the Tevised

uploading the ATN to Audit

samé on APMS

‘portal o
' Vetting of fhe | CAG CAG will vet the draft ATN | 10 days | 100 days

draft ATN and and upload/send back the

uploading of same

vetting -

comments — on

APMS portal
7 Finat ATN duty-| Min./Dept. | Min/Dept. will forward the | 70 days | 110 days

* | signed by JS or |. final ATN duly signed by JS

above and or above to MC (30 copies

uploaded/forwar in English version and 15

ded to MC copies in Hind? version’

a Preparation of | MC MC will prepare the bundle | 10 days | 120 days

bundles = and and forward the same to LS .

forward the

same fo LS



7

* Include all activities including processes for addition, consolidation, deletion of
: para/ATNs due, ATN stages tracking, reporting etc.
. The whole process will take 120 days where clarification/information is

required from the Min./Dept.

* The whole process will take 100 days where no clatificationfinformation is
requird from the Min. /Dept.

* Office of C&AG will provide audit reports along with a list of observations/paras
of concerned Ministries/Departments in pdf format on their website.

43, .The Committee are unhappy to note that the Monitoring Gell i.e. the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Expenditure} and even the individual Ministries/Departments
have failed fo furnish replies in response to the recommendation contained in the
Report. The Committee take strong exception to lack of response on the part of the
Ministry/Department in giving the action taken reply to the recommendation of the
Committee and therefore, seek an explanation from the Ministry of Finance
{Department of Expenditure) in this connection and also desire that responsibility in
this regard be fixed and informed to the Committee. The Committee regret that the
Ministries/Departments have not adhered to the prescribed time schedule for
obtaining requisite material from various authorities/bodies etc and furnish the same
to the Monitoring Cell, They, however, note that in a recent exercise, the Committee of
Secretaries (CoS) had in a meeting held on 05.06.2016 took stock of the pendency of
ATNs in all Ministries and-have drawn up a time frame for clearance of all pending
ATNs by December, 2016. Taking note of the exercise undertaken by the CoS, the
Committee desire the Monitoring Cell in the Department of Expenditure to ensure the

_ compliance by all Ministries/Departments to the stipulated time-frame and furnish a
detailed report to this Committee.

\V. Compliance of time bound reduction of ATNs
(Recommendation Para No. 6}

14. The Committee in their original Report were pleased to note that the Finance Minister
also reviewed the pendency position with the Financial Advisers twice in a year. The
Committee, however, urged that the review meetings by the Finance Minister be held
periodically as stated and alongwith. regular review meetings of the Committee of
Secretaries (209) headed by the Cabinet Secretary. The Committee also noted that
submission of pending audit paras is monitored by Cabinet Secretariat through CoS and that
during the meeting held on 22.1 4.2012 targets were fixed for clearance of 100 percent of all |
7. the pending paras upto the Report year 2009-10 and 50 percent reduction of paras for the



8

Reports of 2010-11. It was seen that the achievement of the tatget, as_far as the audit
teports upto the year 2009-10 in concerned, was poor and further strengthened the
apprehension of the Committee that older the pendency more difficult it becomes to settle it.
The Committee had also desired that the Monitoring Cell, Department of Expenditure,
Ministry of Finance do the necessary follow up of all the decisions taken and directions
given by the Finance Minister as well as the Committee of Secretaries, appraise about

actions following such review meetings and the results achieved every six months.

15. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have submitted as under:

"The recommendation of the Committee have been noted. Monitoring Cell,
Department of Expenditure has circulated the decisions taken and directions
given by the Finance Minister as well as the Committee of Secretaries (CoS)
to all the Ministties/Departments vide OM No, 7/2/2016/MC/76 dated
03.05.2016. Ministries/Departments have been requested to take time bound
‘action for the settlement of old Audit Paras under intimation to Monitoring

Cell".
16. The Committee appreciate the endeavour of the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Expenditure) in placing on record the decisions taken/directions given
by the Finance Minister as well as the Committee of Secretaries where targets have
been fixed for clearing the pending ATNs within a specific time period. However, the
Committee feel that mere fixing of target for-time bound reduction of ATNs would not
suffice without strict/stringent monitoring effortaction by the Department of
Expenditure. The Committee, therefore, deslre that the, Ministry of Finance,
Department of Expenditure should carry out scheduled monitoring exercises keeping
in view the time-frame and targets so fixed by the Finance Minister and the

Committee of Secretaries.

Vv. Fixing of Responsibility

(Recommendation Para No. 9)

17. The Committee in their original Report had observed that in general the Ministries
examined have not indicated any inclination towards fixing of responsibility on the
concerned officials for delay on their part in timely submission of ATNs. However, some
Ministries have-assured that they will fix responsibility for the delays. The Committee,
considering the prevailing laxity, had recommended fixing of responsibility by all the
Ministries/Departments for delays beyond four months in submission of ATNs.

18. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note submitted as under:



9

"The observations of the Committee. have been communicated. to all the Secretaries
and Financial Advisers of Ministries/Depariments vide this Department's O.M. No. 12
(11¥E-Coord/2015 dated 25.05.2015. The Ministries/Departments have been advised
to submit the ATNs within the prescribed time schedule”.

19. The Committee are constrained to note that despite the fact that all
Ministries/Departments — having been communicated. the | Commitiee’s
recommendation to fix responsibility on the concerned officials for delays in timely
submission of ATNs, no concrete information to this effect has been received. The
Committee feel that mere intimation by the Monitoring Cell would not be sufficient in
“this regard. The Monitoring Cell needs to be more pro-active ‘not only in eliciting
information with regard to pendency of the ATNs in various Ministries/Departments,
but also-in sensitizing them for taking action against the officials responsible for the
delay. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure) may now collect information from all Ministries/Departments having
pending ATNs on the number of cases where responsibilities had been fixed, and to
_ furnish a consolidated statement to this Committee Jatest by 30th November, 2016.

Vil. Perusal of Standing Audit Committees (SACs} Meeting
{Recommendation Para No. 12)

20.. The Cominittee in their earlier Report had observed that Standing Audit Committees
(SAGs) constituted by the various Ministries were one of the important monitoring
mechanisms, by which the timely submission of Action Taken Notes (ATNs) are. ensured.
The Committee had also noted that from the data available, it was seen that many of the
Ministries/Departments were not conducting the SAC meetings regularly, worse, many of
them had not conducted even a single SAC mesting for months fogether. This
inconsistency, the Committee strongly felt, had been one of the major factors that had led to
such a backlog. The Committee, therefore, recommended that monthly SAC-meetings be
made mandatory and should be conducted by officers of the level of Joint Secretary ar
above and they should be held in the first week of every month, The Monitering Cell of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) should monitor such meetings and: co-
ordinate with each Ministry/Department in this regard, Further, the Committee had also
recommended that all such audit paragraphs and the compliances on them by each Ministry
should be circulated to all the field formations to ensure non-recurrence.of similar audit
objections in future. ;

21. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note submitted as under:



10

“Monitoring Cell, Department of Expenditure have already circulated the
recommendations of the Committee to Financial Advisers of all the
Ministries/Departments of the Government of India as we nodal officers of all the
Ministries/Departments for strict compliance with direction to upload the details of the
SACs meetings the remedial action taken in the meeting etc on the APMS portal on
monthly basis vide OM dated 19.01.2015 (copy enclosed)".
22. The Committee hote that the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure)
had circulated to all the Ministries/Departments an office memorandum on 19
January, 2015, on holding SAC meetings during the first week of every month. The
Committee in this regard feel that circulating a Memorandum will not serve any
purpose unless it is followed and implemented in letter and spirit by the Ministries
and Departments. The Committee observe that being the nodal Ministry, the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Expenditure) should regularly monitor compliance to the
directive issued by them. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that monthly SAC
meeting be made mandatory, conducted by an officer of Joint Secretary level or
above in the first week of every month. Further, the Committee also recommend that

compliance by each Ministry be regularly monitored by the Monitoring Cell.

Vil. Use of APMS Portal for sireamling early settlement of ATNs
(Recommendation Para No. 13)

23. The Committee in their earlier Report had noted that the Audit Para’ Monitoring
System {APMS) was started in pursuance to the PAC recommendations in the 11th Report
(45th Lok Sabha) for developing a computerized system to monitor and keep track of the
ATNs of CAG Paras for early settlement. The APMS was to provide a Management
Information System (MIS) for strengthening, streamlining and speeding up the task of
submission of ATNs on CAG Paras with details such as Ministry, Year, Report No., Para
No., Chapter, subject and the 4 stakeholders i.e. the Ministries, Audit (C&AG), Monitoring
Cell and Lok Sabha Secretariat. Surprisingly, as per the Ministry's admission only as on
date 21 Ministries were using the Portail, out of around 81 Ministries/Departments. Worse,
as many.as 31 Ministries/Departments out of 81 Ministries/Departments did not attend the
training programme that was organized by the Monitoring Cell (Department of Expenditure)
from 09.09.2013 10 18.10.2013 for acclimatizing with the. use: of APMS Portal. Taking note of
the decided advantages of the APMS and other IT tools in vogue, the Committee. had
recommended the need fo stress that all Ministries/Departments make full use of the IT as

part of the larger goal of e-governance.



dW

24. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:

"At the time of Sub-Committee meeting on 07.11.2013, there were 21
Ministries using the APMS portal. Earlier 50 Ministries/Departments out of fotal
81 had been trained from 09.09.2013 to 18.10.2013. Thereafter, another
training session was organized for remaining 31 Ministrtes/Departments and
Audit from 16.01.2014 to 04.03.2014. Subsequent to upgradation of APMS
portal for C&AG audit paras in October 2014, a fresh round of training has also
been organized from 17.10.2014 to 18.02.2015. Apart from the training total 13
Meetings were also held from 15.12.2014 to 30.01.2015 for review of use of
APMS portal with the representatives of 40 Ministries/Departments. At present
43 Ministries/Departments (as on 04.03.2015) out of 57 Ministries/
Departments having audit paras pending are using the APMS portal (about
75%). An O.M. No.4/1/2015-e-MC dated 17.03.2045 (Annex-l) has been
issued to ail the Ministries/Departments stating the Ministries/Departments
shall henceforth themselves upload the status of their CAG paras and ATNs
online through the APMS portal compulsorily as the practice of manual
forwarding of draft/revised ATNs and vetting comments will be discontinued
very soon. The Ofo C&AG has also been addressed vide 0.0. No. 4/1/2015-e-
McC dated 13.03.2015 (Annex-ll) for using the portal for uploading their
comments on the ATNs".

25. The Committee acknowledge the efforts of the Ministry of Finance (Department
of Expenditure) in optimizing the use of APMS portal by alt the
Ministries/Departments by conducting training programmes, The Committee desire
that such training programmes may be conducted at regular interval at least twice in
a calender year so that the officials are aquainted with the APMS portal. in their ATN
on Para | of the recommendations contained in the Committee's 20th Report (16th Lok
Sabha), the Ministry have stated that all Ministries/Departments are now visible on the
APMS even if they have '0' (zero) pendency. The Committee appreciate the
achievement and recommend that the training on APMS should be a continuous
exercise in Ministries and Departments to guard against any possible vacuum likely
to be created due to routine transfer/promotion or other exigencies.

NEW DELHI; PROF. K:V. THOMAS
_/& November, 2016 Chairperson,

29 Kartika, 1938 {Saka} Public Accounts Committee

ऋ#ऋ ४ ऋ%+