1 
 
 
 
109 
 
 
ACCOUNTING OF PROJECTS IN INDIAN 
RAILWAYS 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
              
  
                      
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 

2 
 
 
 
PAC NO. 2143 
 
O N E  H U N D R E D  A N D  N I N T H  R E P O R T  
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(201 8-19) 
 
 
(SI XTEENTH  LO K S ABH A)  
 
 
 
 
                           
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD) 
                                      
   
                                                                                 
Presented to Lok Sabha on:  ………….…… 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   ………………. 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
August 2018/ Shravana 1940 (Saka)  
 
 
ACCOUNTING OF PROJECTS IN 
INDIAN RAILWAYS 

3 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
PAGES 
 
REPORT 
 
PART- I 
 
I INTRODUCTORY  1 
II WORKS REGISTERS 1 
III COMPLETION REPORTS 3 
IV PROJECT APPRAISAL 4 
V ASSET REGISTER 5 
VI MATERIAL RECONCILIATION STATEMENT 6 
VII RELEASED MATERIALS 7 
VIII WORKS ON COST SHARING BASIS 8 
IX CONTROL OVER EXPENDITURE 9 
X EXCESS OVER SANCTIONED ESTIMATE 10 
 PART – II  
 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 12-21 
 APPENDICES *  
I. Minutes of the Fifth sitting of Sub -Committee - II 
(Railways) of the Public Accounts Committee 
(2017-18) held on 12-10-2017. 
 
II. Minutes of the Eleventh sitting of the Public 
Accounts Comm ittee (2018 -19) held on 07 -08-
2018. 
 
 
 
* Not  appended 
 

4 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 Shri Mallikarjun Kharge   - Chairperson 
 
 M E M B E R S  
 
L O K  S A B H A  
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria  
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra 
5.    Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar   
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
7. Smt. Riti Pathak 
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank” 
9. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
10. Shri Abhishek Singh 
11. Shri Gopal Shetty 
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya  
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
15. Dr. Ponnusamy  Venugopal 
 R A J Y A  S A B H A  
 
16. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda 
17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
18. Shri Shwait Malik 
19. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
21. Vacant 
 
22. Vacant 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri T. Jayakumar     - Director 
3. Smt Anju Kukreja  - Under Secretary 

5 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB COMMITTEE-II (RAILWAYS) OF THE PUBLIC 
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2017-18) 
 
Convenor                  : 1. Dr. Kirit Somaiya  
Alternate Convenor   : 2. Shri Naresh Agrawali  
Members                   : 3. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
 4. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
 5. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
 6. Prof. Ram Shanker  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 Ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 2 April, 2018.  
 
 
 

6 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2018-19) having been authorised by 
the Committee, do present this One Hundred and Ninth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 
'Accounting of Projects in Indian Railways'  based on Chapter 3 of C&AG Report 
No.19 of 2014 related to the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board). 
2. The above-mentioned Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India was 
laid on the Table of the House on 28th November, 2014. 
3. The Sub-Committee - II (Railways) of the Public Accounts Committee  (2017-18) 
took up the subject for detailed examination and report.  The Sub -Committee took 
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) on the subject 
at their sitting held on 12 th October, 2017. Accordingly, a Draft Report was prepared and 
placed before the Public Accounts Committee (2017 -18) for their consideration. The 
Committee considered and adopted this  Draft Report at their sitting held on 7 th August, 
2018.  The Minutes of the Sittings are appended to the Report. 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and  
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type and form Part- II of 
the Report.  
5. The Committee thank their predecessor Sub -Committee for taking oral evidence 
and obtaining information on the subject.   
6. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministry of Railways (Rail way Board) for tendering evidence before them and furnishing 
the requisite information to the Sub -Committee in connection with the examination of the 
subject. 
7. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to 
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                   MALLIKARJUN KHARGE 
7 August, 2018                                                                                            Chairperson, 
16 Shravana, 1940 (Saka)                                                 Public Accounts Committee  
       
 
 
 
 

7 
 
 
 
REPORT 
 
I. INTRODUCTORY 
1. This Report is based on Chapter 3 of C&AG Report No.19 of 2014 on the subject 
"Accounting of Projects  in Indian Railways"  wherein Audit had observed that Indian 
Railways is in general not following its own rules and regulations laid down in the 
Financial Code and Engineering Code for efficient execution of projects and for proper 
accounting of financial transactions. In the abs ence of proper records it is not possible to 
ascertain expenditure incurred in executing a project; it indicates a lack of financial 
discipline and increases risk of losses -both material and financial, in implementation of 
projects. This assumes significan t importance in view of the large number of projects 
under implementation in the railways. Completion reports were not prepared for 674 
projects completed/commissioned prior to March 2011. This includes 92 projects 
commissioned from 2008-09 to 2010-11 and 466 projects commissioned more than three 
years ago, of which 78 projects were commissioned twenty years ago. The date of 
completion of 116 projects was not on record. Cases of expenditure in excess to 
sanctioned estimate etc remained un-regularized for decades and has led to the situation 
of no control/check over expenditure on capital works. The Ministry of Railways incurred 
expenditure more than its agreed percentage of cost due to non -following the terms and 
conditions of the agreements executed with th e State Governments relating to cost -
sharing projects. The PAC (2017-18) selected the subject and allotted the same to Sub-
Committee-II (Railways) for detailed examination and report. In the process of 
examination of the subject, the Sub -Committee obtained  background note from the 
Ministry of Railways (Railway Board). They also took oral evidence of the representatives 
of the Ministry and obtained post evidence replies. Based on the written and oral 
depositions by the Ministry, the Sub -Committee examined th e subject in detail and 
discussed some important issues as enumerated in the succeeding paragraphs. 
II. WORKS REGISTERS 
 
2. Engineering Code (Para 1472) and Para 521 of Financial Code-Volume I stipulate 
the procedure of maintenance of works registers to facil itate the control of expenditure 
with reference to sanctioned estimates, budget allotment and details of expenditure on 
each work. Para 1478 of Engineering Code stipulates the procedure to be adopted to 
facilitate control over works expenditure against est imate as well as allotment. The 

8 
 
 
 
Accounts Officer should furnish periodically the estimated cost allotment, expenditure 
and up-to-date expenditure on each work during the year to the Executive Engineer.  The 
cost of ongoing and completed projects included i n the books of Accounts is to be 
validated by reconciling the expenditure booked in the Works Register. To ensure 
correctness of figures exhibited in the books of Accounts, prompt reconciliation of 
expenditure booked under projects is necessary. Review of records revealed that the 
total expenditure of ` 51,667.83 crore was booked (up to March 2013) in 305 Works 
Register in respect of 144 projects (excluding 10 projects each in NR and ECoR) 
maintained by accounts office whereas the expenditure mentioned in t he books of 
Executives was only `35,960.86 crore.  The variation in expenditure of  `15,706.97 crore 
was not reconciled. 
3. While admitting the audit observations, Zonal Railway Administration stated that 
the arrears in reconciliation were due to staff shortage, shortage of time etc. 
4. The Committee desire d to know about the  reasons for difference in booking of 
expenditure in the Works Registers maintained by the Accounts and Executives . The 
Ministry in their reply furnished as under: 
 "As per codal provision (P ara 1472 of Engineering Code) a single set of Works 
 Registers is to be maintained by Accounts Office. The works register captures 
 information on expenditure actually charged to the estimate. Parallel sets of 
 Register are separately maintained by the Executive,  which capture information 
 at various stages -  at the time of preferring of bill, quantum of work, material at 
 site etc.  The differences are transient and on  account of time lag in posting of 
 adjustments in the works register."   
5. The Ministry further stated that  actual expenditure on the Projects is ascertained 
primarily from Works Register maintained in Accounts Office. These figures are arrived 
at after considering cash expenditure as well as adjustment on account of receipt of 
material etc. from other Railways/ expenditure on labour etc. The amount booked in the 
Works Register is the actual expenditure vis-à-vis the Project. 
6. In response to a query of the Committee about the steps taken by the Railways to 
ensure that the expenditure is correc tly booked in the works registers and there is no 
difference in the figures of expenditure as per Accounts and Executives of each work, the 
Ministry stated as under: 

9 
 
 
 
 "After finalization of Accounts for the month, the detailed work -wise expenditure 
 statement is prepared and sent to the Executive offices to facilitate reconciliation 
 of expenditure booked under projects in terms of para 1478E and 524 F I. 
 Information on expenditure is now captured from an IT platform (Software IPAS) 
 and works registers are accordingly being maintained on an IT platform.  The cash 
 book amounts and adjustment amount are posted in Works Register while 
 finalizing Accounts Current. Reconciliation in accounts is therefore automatic and 
 ensured by the system. A copy of Works R egister is now being provided to the 
 Engineering Counterpart for the purpose of updating the Engineering Departments 
 Register." 
 
III. COMPLETION REPORTS  
7. Engineering Code (Para 1704) stipulates that after all charges and credits relating 
to the project have been booked in the accounts of the project, a completion report of the 
project should be prepared. It further states that the completion report should be checked 
in the Accounts Office to see that the entries have been prepared on the proper form and 
entries therein correspond with the particulars of the sanction and booked outlay. Para 
1705 of Engineering Code stipulates that the Completion Report is to be prepared to 
compare the cost of the work actually incurred with that provided in the last  sancti oned 
estimate. Audit examined the records maintained by accounts/executives relating to 
monitoring the preparation of completion reports and observed that the completion 
reports were not prepared for 674 projects completed/commissioned prior to March 
2011. This includes 92 projects commissioned during 2008 -09 to 2010 -11 and 466 
projects commissioned more than three years ago, of which 78 projects were 
commissioned twenty years ago.  However, the details regarding even the date of 
completion of remaining 116 projects were not on record. 
8. The Committee enquired as to why the Completion Reports, which are required to 
be prepared to compare the cost of the work actually incurred and provided in the last 
sanctioned estimate, had not been prepared by the Railways  and i n the absence of 
Completion Reports how the Railways ascertain the final expenditure incurred on a 
project and compare with that provided in the last sanctioned estimate . The Ministry 
during evidence accepted that IR is lagging behind in this area. In a written submission 
the Ministry stated as under: 
 "Preparation of Completion Reports after completion of the work is a regular 
 process. Sometimes there may be delays due to arbitration/court proceedings etc. 
 as a result of which payment of final bills may be held up, non -receipt of share 

10 
 
 
 
 from  State Govts/Parties which provide the deposits for works to be undertaken. 
 Consequent to this Audit Report, the System of preparation and finalization of 
 Completion report has been reviewed . Instructions have b een reiterated to all 
 Railways to strictly follow the codal provisions. This has led to considerable  
 improvement in the system with 6651 completion reports drawn in 2014 -15 to  
 2016-17. There has been a definite improvement in the way . Completion Reports 
 are now being maintained." 
9. In view of the large delay in preparing the Completion Reports , the Committee 
desired to know about the existing system of monitoring the preparation of Completion 
Reports and what steps IR has taken to ensure that the Complet ion Reports are 
prepared timely.  They also asked about the action plan o f the Railways to prepare the 
Completion Reports of 78 projects commissioned twenty years ago . The Ministry in a 
written submission stated as under: 
 "Delay is due to non finalization  of final bills. Final bills may not be preferred by 
 contractors due to reasons of dispute, arbitration, court cases, delay in finalization 
 of compensation for land acquisition, pending financial adjustments, shortage of 
 funds to clear final bills etc. Final bills may also not be drawn up in cases where 
 residual share from the parties to the deposit works is yet to be received. A 
 monitoring mechanism has also been put in place by Zonal Railways to maintain 
 and report the progress on this matter. Accor dingly there has been significant 
 improvement in the position of preparation of Completion reports for example: 
 SWR have confirmed that all the CRs have been drawn up. On WR, SR targets 
 have been fixed to reduce the outstanding by 50% by 31.12.2017." 
IV  PROJECT APPRAISAL  
10. Financial Code -Volume-I (Para 243) stipulates that a post project appraisal is 
necessary to find out if the financial return anticipated from a project at the estimate 
stage was actually realized in due course. This is accomplished by conducting a 
Productivity Test for all major works.  Audit examined the position relating to post project 
appraisal and found that in none of the 93 major projects completed (New Lines, 
Doubling & Gauge Conversion) during 2007 -08 to 2011 -12, the Productivi ty Test was 
carried out by Zonal Railways.  Thus, the mandatory test to assess the actual financial 
returns of the projects vis -à-vis the estimated return was not carried out in all the 93 
projects reviewed in audit across the Zonal Railways. 
 
11. The Committe e enquired that in the absence of post project appraisal, how the 
Railways ascertain that the financial return anticipated from a project at the estimate 
stage was actually realized in due course . The Ministry stated that a s per extant 

11 
 
 
 
instructions, post p roject appraisal is due in all major works. It has to be undertaken in 
projects 7 years after the completion. 
12. When the Committee asked about the  reasons for non -conducting post project 
appraisal by the Railways in 93 major projects of New Lines, Gauge Conv ersion and 
Doubling completed during 2007 -08 to 2011 -12, the Ministry in their reply furnished as 
under: 
 "Productivity test was delayed in some cases due to non finalization of Completion 
 reports and non availability of information with respect to parame ters of 
 assumption made at the time of estimation.  
 After audit has taken up this issue the system was reviewed and as can be seen 
 from the table attached (Annexure-A), the number of Productivity tests done has 
 actually improved from 6 in 2014 -15 to 35  in 2016-17.  A total of 53 Productivity 
 tests have been finalized in the years 2014 -15 to 2016-17. For example, Southern 
 Railway has subsequently conducted productivity tests for 3 projects viz TPJ -
 MNM  GC, IGU -CBE Doubling, CGL -AJJ Gauge conversion et c. SWR had 
 conducted PPA for MYS -CMNR, YPR-TK and Kengeri -Ramanagaram (DL), WR 
 has conducted Productivity test  for Gandhidham -Adipur DL, Gandhidham-Kandla 
 port, Akodia-Mohammedkhera-Shulja and Pratapnagar-Chottapuddepur." 
 
13. In his deposition before the Committee on this issue the representative of the 
Ministry admitted that: 
"Drawing up of Completion Reports and productivity tests are post -project 
exercises. Here the position is that we are lagging in this but in 2015 we had 
issued instructions to each o f the Zonal Railways to pick up three major projects 
for the purpose of productivity test. That work is on. So far, we have got reports of 
about ten such projects for productivity tests." 
 
14. He further submitted that: 
"We were slightly in arrear in the produ ctivity tests and completion report works. 
We have taken up this in right earnest." 
 
V ASSET REGISTER  
15. As per Para 1720 of Engineering Code, an Asset Register is to be maintained 
wherein the investment cost of projects should be docketed and the register handed over 
to the Open Line (Divisions) after completion of the project, as a part of handing over 
records for retention as permanent record. Block Accounts exhibit value of Assets 
created by Railways from various sources of finance such as Capital, Deprec iation 
Reserve Fund, and Development Fund etc.  Ministry of Railways (November 2000) in the 
Action Taken Note contained in the 9 th Report of the Standing Committee on Railways 

12 
 
 
 
(1997-98) on Railway Finances informed the Standing Committee on Railways that 
standardized format for the Asset Register had been developed and circulated to all 
Zonal Railways and Production Units. Audit examined the position prevailing in 
Construction Organizations and found that out of 525 works test checked, Asset Register 
was not maintained in respect of 500 works and cost of the commissioned projects was 
not transferred to Divisions. 
 
16. The Committee enquired about the reasons for not preparing the Assets Registers 
of the projects and handed over to the Open Lines (Divisions) afte r completion of 
projects.  The Committee were informed by the Ministry as under: 
 "Assets Register are prepared by Accounts Office on finalization of Completion 
 Report. In cases where Completion Reports were not finalized, the Asset 
 Register was not upda ted. NWR has indicated that in 10 projects, Asset Register 
 was not prepared on account of court/arbitration cases.  
 In case of Guria -Marwar, Ajmer -Bangaragram, Bangagram -Guria, Marwar -Rani 
 and Kesavganj-Swaroopganj, the Asset Register was not prepared as the projects 
 are yet to be completed. Other Railways viz SR,SWR, have confirmed that Asset 
 Registers are now being maintained. Similarly other Railways have also now 
 started maintaining Asset Registers." 
17. In this regard, during evidence, Chairman Railway Board stated that: 
"we will give you a target date by when our Asset Register will be completed." 
 
18. On being enquired about the status of development of standardized format of the 
Asset Register and its software for compiling the Asset Register  the Minis try informed 
that Standardized Format of Asset Register on Pan -India basis for Accounting Reforms  
in line with relevant requirement of commercial accounting standard has been finalized 
and Zonal Railways are now maintaining the same as per the new format. 
 
VI MATERIAL RECONCILIATION STATEMENT  
19. Railway Board stipulated (September 2009) that reconciliation of material issued 
to and utilized by the contractor should be done while passing each on -account bill 
without waiting for preparation of final material r econciliation statement. Passing of on -
account bills without material reconciliation statement would lead to instances where 
excess materials issued to the contractors would remain unrecovered from them leading 
to undue benefit, without being recovered. Au dit reviewed 5,737 on -account bills in 
respect of 164 selected projects and observed that 619 bills were passed after 

13 
 
 
 
preparation of material reconciliation statement. Remaining 5,118 on -account bills were 
passed without preparation of material reconciliation statement. 
20. Since, the Railway Board’s instructions in this regard have not been followed by 
the Zonal Railways , the Committee desired to know the reasons thereof.  In response 
thereto the Ministry replied as under: 
 "The supply of materials and utiliza tion thereof is being monitored by executive at 
 regular intervals and no bill is made without the issue/receipt statement of 
 material.  On completion of the work, the final material statement is made and 
 accordingly recoveries effected, if necessary, in  the final bill.  This procedure is 
 being followed at all the stages from preparation of bill to passing of the bill.   
 Material reconciliation statement is required to be submitted  with an account bill,  
 and instructions have been reiterated for the procedure to be followed."  
 
VII RELEASED MATERIALS  
 
21. The expenditure voted by the Parliament is on gross basis but the compilation of 
expenditure by Plan Heads is on net basis taking into account the credit or recoveries 
generated by the realization of cre dit for released materials. Hence, a watch on actual 
realization of credit as provided in the estimate is necessary. Proper assessment and 
account of released material is important not only from the point of view of booking of the 
expenditure but also from the point of view of physical recovery of all the materials. 
 
22. Review of 53 gauge conversion projects revealed that as against the estimated 
credit towards released materials of `1,870.15 crore, the actual realization was `1,240.57 
crore resulting in short  realization of `629.58 crore. Work -wise details of estimation and 
actual realization of Credit for Released Rail Materials were not available in NER and 
ECR and hence the correctness of realization (whether on gauge conversion projects or 
track renewal wo rks) and accountal of Credit for Released Rail Materials could not be 
verified. As against the estimated value of `1,150.47 crore, the actual realization was only 
`473.37 crore resulting in short realization of `677.10 crore (58.85 per cent ) in 26 
projects. In 16 other projects as against the estimated value of `274.95 crore, the actual 

14 
 
 
 
realization was ` 590.89 crore. In SECR and ER, no credit was earned though the credit 
for Released Rail Materials in respect of four projects was estimated at ` 70.32 crore. 
 
23. The Committee enquired about the records of credits for released materials by the 
Zonal Railways and not kept as per the codal provisions  and reasons for so much 
differences in estimated and actual realization of credits for released materials . In 
response, the Ministry stated that c odal provisions exist for accountal of the Released 
materials. Their actual realization depends on the actual release of materials and the 
price realized. The variation occurred between estimation and actual realization 
depending upon the quality of the material released its subsequent sale by way of 
auction and market fluctuation. In light of the Audit objections, Railways have been 
strictly instructed to follow the codal provisions. 
 
VIII WORKS ON COST SHARING BASIS 
 
24. Any plan expenditure incurred by Railways on behalf of other parties as well as 
such investment/expenditure incurred by other parties as is not funded by Railways 
either through Gross Budgetary Support/Internal Resources/Safety Fund should rightfully 
be accounted  for under Extra Budgetary Resources (EBR). Such items/activities inter 
alia, include: (i) Deposit works of private/Public entities executed by Railways (ii) Cost 
sharing projects of new lines/gauge conversion/doubling etc. (iii) Public Private 
Partnership (PPP) projects (iv) State Government’s share in Road Over Bridges 
(ROBs)/Road Under Bridges (RUBs) . Railway Board advised (May 2013) the Zonal 
Railways that all investments in rail infrastructure through EBR funded through other 
sources need to be capture d/reported to Railway Board on monthly basis along with the 
monthly Account Current. Zonal Railways were also advised to furnish the information 
relating to 2012-13 along with March actuals. 
 
25. Audit observed that i n 13 projects  executed on cost sharing basi s with the State 
Governments, the Railways incurred `394 crore more than its agreed percentage share 
of cost incurred.  A comment on excess expenditure amounting to ` 270.38 crore by 
Ministry of Railways due to short receipt of funds from Government of Mah arashtra for 

15 
 
 
 
Mumbai Urban Transport Project (MUTP) being executed by Mumbai Rail Vikas 
Corporation Limited (MRVC) has been commented upon in the Annual Accounts of the 
MRVC Limited for the year 2012-13. This could lead to financial burden on the Ministry of 
Railways which is already facing resource crunch.  
 
26. In their reply to aforesaid Audit observation the Ministry submitted that: 
"Zonal Railway (SCR) Administration stated that the State Government is being 
requested to release the funds based on the progress of the projects. Accordingly, 
Railway Board is also being requested to allot fund in August Review and Revised 
Estimates. However, the final allotment of additional funds by Railway Board is 
known only at the time of allotment of final grant. Hence the re is difference in 
allotment of funds by the State Government and Railway Board. However, the 
differences, if any, are adjusted in subsequent years." 
 
27. The Committee enquired about the reasons for not following the terms and 
conditions of the agreements re lating to the cost sharing projects strictly to ensure the 
proportionate and time ly funding by State Governments. In their replies t he Ministry 
submitted as under: 
"The cost sharing projects require that parties deposit their portion of costs with 
the Railways. This amount is deposited before the start of work. The proportion of 
the cost sharing between the Railways and outside parties is laid down in the 
contract agreement. 
In certain cases cost overrun may happen in view of increased costs of labour, 
material as these projects may get delayed and take time to be fully executed.  
However, the realization of increased cost is a time taking exercise and while the 
work itself cannot be stopped merely for want of funds from the dep osit making 
party, the work co ntinues and Railways bears the cost, subject to final receipt of 
the increased share from the State Government. However, all out efforts are being 
made to realize the dues from the State Government." 
 
IX CONTROL OVER EXPENDITURE  
 
28. As per Para 519 of Financ ial Code-Volume-I, control over expenditure on works 
executed under Grant No.16 is exercised through (a) preparation, in advance, of 
estimates of the expenditure to be incurred (b)  allotment of funds through budget grants 
for the year, on the basis of the se estimates and (c) continuous and concurrent review of 
the expenditure as incurred against the details of the estimates and against the 
sanctioned grants, so that revisions of estimates or re -appropriation of fund are arranged 
for at the earliest point o f time. Para 524 of Financial Code -Volume-I provides that the 

16 
 
 
 
Accounts Officer should prepare every month two reviews, one by Plan heads of the 
Grants and the other by individual works. Test check of 525 works relating to monthly 
review of expenditure reve aled that while the Plan -head wise monthly review by 
Accounts Office was conducted in respect of 367 works; the same was not conducted for 
the remaining 158 works; and Work -wise monthly review by Accounts Office was not 
conducted in respect of 210 works. M onthly review was, however, condu cted for the 
balance 315 works. 
 
29. A comparison of figures of allotment and utilization of funds during 2012 -13 made 
in respect of 916 projects revealed that though the allotted funds were fully utilized in 207 
projects, expenditure in excess of Budget grant was incurred to the tune of ` 572.24 crore 
in 310 projects. However, the funds to the tune of ` 902.32 crore were surrendered in 
respect of 399 projects. 
 
30. The Committee desired to know as to why the monthly reviews as contemplated in 
the Financial Code had not been conducted by the Railways and as to how the Railways 
exercise control over expenditure in  the absence of conduc ting periodical review of 
works. The Ministry in their reply furnished as under: 
 "Monthly Review, as  contemplated in the Financial Code, are undertaken at the 
 level of source of funds/plan heads rather than at the level of Works by Finance 
 Department. No expenditure in excess of budget is ordinarily allowed over the 
 budgeted outlay for the year. Where ver expenditure is likely to exceed/remain  
 short re -appropriations from/to such works are made or parliamentary sanction 
 obtained." 
X EXCESS OVER SANCTIONED ESTIMATE 
31. As per Para 1136 of Engineering Code, expenditure or liability on a work in 
excess of th e sanctioned estimate without the prior sanction of the competent authority 
should not be incurred. Railway Board reiterated (February 2000) that estimates should 
be prepared carefully and in case there is likely to be an increase in the sanctioned 
estimate, the revised estimate should be prepared well in time and no expenditure 
beyond 10 per cent  over the sanctioned estimate should be incurred till the revised 
estimates are sanctioned. Audit observed that in respect of 60 works projects, 
expenditure of ` 44.35 crore was incurred without sanction of estimate and ` 4,957.52 

17 
 
 
 
crore was incurred in excess of sanctioned estimate in respect of 555 projects/works. 
Thus the expenditure of ` 5,001.87 crore incurred on 615 projects ranging from one year 
to more than twenty years remained unsanctioned as of March 2013. 
 
32. The Committee asked the Ministry about the reasons for expenditure remained 
unsanctioned for so long i.e. more than a decade and  the expenditure on the projects is 
being incurred without sanctioned esti mate. They also enquired about the  action plan of 
the Railways to get regularized the unsanctioned expenditure and also strengthening the 
internal control mechanism to avoid booking of expenditure on the project without 
sanction by the competent authority i.e. the DRM/GM . The Ministry in a written 
submission stated as under: 
 "Normally the works are executed only after sanction and revisions are also made 
 concurrently as and when required through material modifications, revised 
 estimates etc.  However, com pletion estimates take time for accounting of all 
 residual liabilities and assets. Instructions exist for these items to be reviewed and 
 regularize the same with the sanction of competent authorities. Railways have 
 been instructed to make action plan to  fix a target for regularization of all pending 
 items of unsanctioned expenditure and review the position periodically so that 
 pendency in this head is eliminated." 

18 
 
 
 
PART II 
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
1. This report is based on Chapter 3 of C&AG Repo rt No. 19 of 2014 on the 
subject "Accounting of Projects in Indian Railways".  Indian Railways undertakes 
various projects from time to time for augmentation of network capacity including 
renewal and replacement of depleted assets while incurring expenditu re on such 
works/projects, it is essential that the utilization of the resources have to be 
properly accounted for and periodically monitored. The Committee note from the 
Audit Report that Indian Railways is , in general not following its own rules and 
regulations laid down in the Financial Code and Engineering Code for efficient 
execution of projects and for proper accounting of financial transactions. The 
Committee also note that completion reports were not prepared for 674 projects 
completed/commissioned prior to March 2011. This includes 92 projects 
commissioned during 2008 -09 to 2010 -11 and 466 projects commissioned more 
than three years ago, of which 78 projects were commissioned twenty years ago. 
The date of completion of 116 projects was not on record . Cases of expenditure in 
excess to sanctioned estimate etc remained un -regularized for decades and has 
led to the situation of no control/check over expenditure on capital works. The 
Ministry of Railways incurred expenditure more than its agreed percentag e of cost 
due to non -following the terms and conditions of the agreements executed with 
the State Governments relating to cost-sharing projects. 
2. The Committee find that Engineering Code (Para 1472) and (Para 521 ) of 
Financial Code -Volume I stipulate the pr ocedure of maintenance of works 
registers to facilitate the control of expenditure with reference to sanctioned 
estimates, budget allotment and details of expenditure on each work. Para 1478 of 
Engineering Code stipulates the procedure to be adopted to fac ilitate control over 
works expenditure against estimate as well as allotment. The Accounts Officer 
should furnish periodically the estimated cost allotment, expenditure and up -to-
date expenditure on each work during the year to the Executive Engineer. The cost 
of ongoing and completed projects included in the books of Accounts is to be 
validated by reconciling the expenditure booked in the Works Register. To ensure 

19 
 
 
 
correctness of figures exhibited in the books of Accounts, prompt reconciliation of 
expenditure booked under projects is necessary. Review of records revealed that 
the total expenditure of ` 51,667.83 crore was booked (up to March 2013) in 305 
Works Registers in respect of 144 projects (excluding 10 projects each in NR and 
ECoR) maintained by acco unts office whereas the expenditure mentioned in the 
books of Executives was only `35,960.86 crore.  The variation in expenditure of  
`15,706.97 crore was not reconciled. The Committee are appalled to note the reply 
of Zonal Railway Administration (SECR, S R, NCR, SCR, NER, NEFR and MR)  that 
the arrears in reconciliation were due to staff shortage, shortage of time etc. It has 
also been stated by the Ministry of Railways that the differences are transient and 
on account of time lag in posting of adjustments in the Works Register . The 
Committee are not convinced by the reasons given by the Ministry of Railways. 
The Committee would like to know that how the Ministry of Railways is trying to 
augment the accounting staff for proper maintenance of all the Works Registers as 
per the Engineering codes. Since expenditure booked in Works Registers was not 
reconciled, it was not possible to ascertain the actual expenditure incurred on a 
project. The Committee, therefore, feel that there is an urgent need to take 
appropriate steps for prompt reconciliation of expenditure booked under various 
projects so as to ensure financial propriety . As regards the steps taken to ensure 
that the expenditure is correctly booked in the Works Register s, the Ministry 
informed that informat ion on expenditure is now captured from an IT platform 
(software IPAS) and Works Registers are accordingly being maintained on an IT 
platform. Reconciliation in accounts is , therefore, automatic and ensured by the 
system. While appreciating the aforesaid m easures, the Committee hope that in 
future such irregularities in reconciliation would not recur. They would also like to 
be apprised of the present status of reconciliation of variation in expenditure to 
the tune of ` 15,706.97 and similar instances/cases identified in all other projects of 
Ministry of Railways for the last three years. 
 Completion Reports 

20 
 
 
 
3. Engineering Code (Para 1704) stipulates that after all charges and credits 
relating to the project have been booked in the accounts of the project, a 
completion report of the project should be prepared. It further states that the 
completion report should be checked in the Accounts Office to see that the entries 
have been prepared on the proper form and entries therein correspond with the 
particulars of th e sanction and booked outlay. Para 1705 of Engineering Code 
stipulates that the Completion Report is to be prepared to compare the cost of the 
work actually incurred with that provided in the last  sanctioned estimate. The 
Committee observe that the completion reports were not prepared for 674 projects 
completed/commissioned prior to March 2011. This includes 92 projects 
commissioned during 2008 -09 to 2010 -11 and 466 projects commissioned more 
than three years ago, of which 78 projects were commissioned twe nty years ago.  
However, the details regarding even the date of completion of remaining 116 
projects were not on record.  Attributing the reasons for  non-preparation of 
completion reports, the Ministry of Railways stated that sometimes there may be 
delays d ue to arbitration, court cases, delay in finalization of compensation for 
land acquisitions pending financial adjustments, shortage of funds to clear final 
bills etc. The Committee have further been informed that consequent to Audit 
Reports, the system of preparation and finalisation of completion Report has been 
reviewed. Instructions have been reitereated to all Railways to strictly follow the 
codal provisions, which has led to improvement in the system with 6651 
Completion Reports drawn during 2014-15 and 2016-17. Further, action plan  has 
been drawn to prepare the Completion Reports of 78 projects commissioned 
twenty years ago . The Committee have also been apprised that a monitoring 
mechanism has also been put in place by Zonal Railw ays to maintain and re port 
the progress in the matter. Accordingly, there has been significant improvement in 
preparation of Completion Reports (CRs) as in SWR all the CRs have been drawn 
up. On WR  and SR targets h ave been fixed to reduce the outstanding by 50% till 
31-12-2017.  
 The Committee are shocked to observe that there is no explanation by the 
Ministry as to why Completion Reports of 78 projects commissioned twenty four 
years ago were not prepared. The Committee have serious doubt that as the books 
of accounts were opened for such a long period, there is a possibility of adding on 

21 
 
 
 
expenditure even after completion  of actual work .  The Committee note that Para 
1705 of the Engineering  Code stipulates that Completion Report has to be 
prepared inorder to compare the cost of work actually incurred with that provided 
in the sanctioned estimate.  If the test checked cases in the Audit Report reveals 
non-preparation of Completion Reports of 78 projects commissioned even 24 
years ago the Committee can very well visualize that what  would be the quantum 
of non -completion of Reports at present in the entire Railway Zones.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that after taking stock of the total non 
Completion Reports, Chief Accounting Authority in the Railway Board as well as 
the conc erned accounting authorities in all the Railway Zones should be held 
responsible for this lapse and suitable punishment awarded to them.     Besides, a 
robust internal control system to assess and verify the cost of completed projects 
in the books of Accounts should be evolved by the Ministry. The Committee would 
also like to be apprised of  the present position of 50% outstanding reports which 
were to be completed by 31-12-2017.  
 Project Appraisal 
4. Financial Code-Volume-I (Para 243) stipulates that a post project appraisal is 
necessary to find out if the financial return anticipated from a project at the 
estimate stage was actually realized in due course. This is accomplished by 
conducting a Productivity Test for all major works. Audit examined the position  
relating to post project appraisal and found that in none of the 93 major projects 
completed (New Lines, Doubling & Gauge Conversion) during 2007 -08 to 2011 -12, 
the Productivity Test was carried out by Zonal Railways.  Thus, the mandatory test 
to assess the actual financial returns of the projects vis -à-vis the estimated return 
was not carried out in all the 93 projects reviewed in audit across the Zonal 
Railways. The Committee find that after the Audit pointed out this lacuna, the 
number of productivity tests done has actually improved from 6 in 2014 -15 to 35 in 
2016-17 in the years 2014 -15 to 2016 -17. The Committee further note that 
productivity test was delayed in some cases due to non -finalization of completion 
reports and non -availability of informatio n with respect to parameters of 
assumption made at the time of estimation. The Committee are surprised to note 
that non -conducting the post project appraisal of major projects has not only 

22 
 
 
 
violated the codal  provisions but also resulted in non -payment of d eferred 
dividend liability on New Lines to Government of India as recommended by 
Railway Convention Committee. The Committee take note of the fact that only after 
being pointed out by Audit, the Ministry of Railways woke up and improved the 
number of produ ctivity tests which is nothing but regrettable. In such a situation, 
the Committee cannot but come to the conclusion that non -observance of codal 
provisions had led to such  a situation that productivity test was not carried out 
even in a single project out  of the 93 major projects completed during 2007 -08 to 
2011-12. The Committee would like the Ministry of Railways to review these cases 
and apply necessary corrective measures to ward off such lapses again. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of outcome  of the measures taken in this 
regard. 
 Asset Register 
5. As per Para 1720 of Engin eering Code, an Asset Register ha s to be 
maintained wherein the investment cost of projects should be docketed and the 
Register handed over to the Open Line (Divisions) after c ompletion of the project, 
as a part of handing over records for retention as permanent record.  The 
Committee find that out of 525 works test checked, Asset Register was not 
maintained in respect of 500 works and cost of the Commissioned projects was 
not transferred to Divisions. Attributing the reasons for this lapse, the Ministry of 
Railways stated that in cases where Completion Reports were not finalized, the 
Asset Register was not updated. In view of th e above,  the Committee note that 
whole the system in  Ministry of Railways for accounting of projects is faulty and 
needs improvement in every aspect from execution of projects to proper 
accounting of financial transactions. In the absence of proper records it is not 
possible to ascertain expenditure incurre d in execution and finalization of project. 
The Committee are again constrained to observe that out of 525 works test 
checked, Asset Register was not maintained in 500 works.  The Committee 
understand that the figure could be large if the works in all over the country were 
examined. The Committee are surprised to note that none of these cases have 
been pointed out by the Internal Audit of the Ministry. This shows the pathetic 
condition of the internal audit system of the Indian Railways which needs a 

23 
 
 
 
thorough overhauling. Now the Committee have been informed that the 
standardized format of Asset Register on Pan -India basis for Accounting Reforms 
in line with relevant requirement of commercial accounting standard has been 
finalized and Zonal Railways are now maintaining the same as per the new format. 
Further, the Ministry apprised the Committee that Zonal Railways have now started 
maintaining Asset Registers . While appreciating this move, the Committee would 
like to know about the target date by when all the A sset Registers would be 
completed. 
 Material Reconciliation Statement 
6. Railway Board stipulated (September 2009) that reconciliation of material 
issued to and utilized by the contractor should be done while passing each on -
account bill without waiting for p reparation of final material reconciliation 
statement. Passing of on -account bills without material reconciliation statement 
would lead to instances where excess materials issued to the contractors would 
remain unrecovered from them leading to undue benefi t, without being recovered. 
Audit reviewed 5,737 on -account bills in respect of 164 selected projects and 
observed that 619 bills were passed after preparation of material reconciliation 
statement. Remaining 5,118 on -account bills were passed without prepa ration of 
material reconciliation statement.  However, the Ministry of Railway have not 
provided the reasons thereof. The Committee are unable to understand as to why 
the Railway Board's instructions in this regard have not been followed by the 
Zonal Railways. The Committee have been informed that the Ministry have a sound 
mechanism for monitoring the supply of materials and utilization thereof and this 
procedure is being followed at all the stages from preparation of bill to passing of 
the bills and instruc tions have been reiterated for the procedure to be followed. 
The Committee are surprised to see that out of 5737 on -account bills, 5118 bills 
were passed without material reconciliation statement while the Ministry stated 
that they have a sound mechanism f or monitoring the supply of materials and 
utilization thereof. The Committee feel that the procedure followed by the Ministry 
was not in line with the extant provision s of reconciliation of material while 
passing each on-account bill. The Committee therefo re, desire that the Ministry of 
Railways should ensure that the extant procedure in this regard is further 

24 
 
 
 
monitored so as to make it more effective and instructions issued are followed by 
all the Zonal Railways in letter and spirit. 
  
 Released Material 
7. The Committee find that review of 53 gauge conversion projects revealed 
that as against the estimated credit towards released materials of `1,870.15 crore, 
the actual realization was `1,240.57 crore resulting in short realization of `629.58 
crore. Work-wise details of estimation and actual realization of Credit for Released 
Rail Materials were not available in NER and ECR and hence the correctness of 
realization (whether on gauge conversion projects or track renewal works) and 
accountal of Credit for Release d Rail Materials could not be verified. As against 
the estimated value of `1,150.47 crore, the actual realization was only `473.37 crore 
resulting in short realization of `677.10 crore (58.85 per cent) in 26 projects. In 16 
other projects as against the es timated value of `274.95 crore, the actual 
realization was ` 590.89 crore. In SECR and ER, no credit was earned though the 
credit for Released Rail Materials in respect of four projects was estimated at ` 
70.32 crore.  On being enquired about the reasons fo r so much differences in 
estimated and actual realization of credits for released materials, the Committee 
have been apprised that this variation occurred depending upon the quality of the 
material released, its subsequent sale by way of auction and market  fluctuation. 
Ministry have also informed that in light  of the Audit objections, Railways have 
been strictly instructed to follow the codal provisions. The Committee deplore the 
casual approach of the Ministry in dealing with such an important issue. Since  
non-maintaining of the records of credit for released material by the Zonal 
Railways and no/lesser amount of credits realised than anticipated give rise to the 
possibility of embezzlement of public funds, the Committee desire that 
responsibility of the of ficers concerned with the aforesaid cases may be fixed at 
the earliest and the Committee be informed about the steps taken in this regard so 
as to avoid recurrence of such cases in future. 

25 
 
 
 
8. The Committee note that in 13 projects executed on cost sharing bas is with 
the State Governments, the Railways incurred `394 crore more than its agreed 
percentage share of cost incurred. Excess expenditure amounting to ` 270.38 crore 
by Ministry of Railways due to short receipt of funds from Government of 
Maharashtra for Mumbai Urban Transport Project (MUTP) being executed by 
Mumbai Rail Vikas Corporation Limited (MRVC) has been commented upon in the 
Annual Accounts of the MRVC Limited for the year 2012 -13. This could lead to 
financial burden on the Ministry of Railways wh ich is already facing resource 
crunch. When enquired about the reasons thereof, the Committee have been 
informed that in certain cases cost overrun may happen in view of increased costs 
of labour, material as these projects may get delayed and take time to  be fully 
executed. It has also been informed that the realization of increased cost is a time 
taking exercise and while the work itself cannot be stopped merely for want of 
funds from the deposit making party, the work continues and Railways bears the 
cost, subject to final receipt of the increased share from the State Government. In 
their reply to Audit, the Zonal Railway (SCR) Administration stated that the State 
Government is being requested to release the funds based on the progress of the 
projects. Ac cordingly, Railway Board is also being requested to allot fund in 
August Review and Revised Estimates. However, the final allotment of additional 
funds by Railway Board is known only at the time of allotment of final grant. Hence 
there is difference in all otment of funds by the State Government and Railway 
Board. However, the differences, if any, are adjusted in subsequent years.  The 
Committee feel that for execution of any project, it is imperative that the same may 
be monitored regularly for their timely completion so as to avoid time and cost 
overrun. The Committee, therefore, emphasize that the Ministry of Railways should 
prepare investment schedule of all on -going projects after proper consultation 
with concerned State Governments so that the cost of sh aring projects is not 
exceeded. Further, Railway Board should ensure that the instructions issued by 
them regarding monthly reporting of the investment made/expenditure incurred by 
other parties through Extra Budgetary Resources (EBR) are scrupulously foll owed 
by them  so as  to ensure the proportionate and timely funding by State 
Governments. 

26 
 
 
 
 Control over expenditure 
9. The Committee note that test check of 525 works relating to monthly review 
of expenditure revealed that while the Plan-head-wise monthly review by Accounts 
Office was conducted in respect of 367 works; the same was not conducted for the 
remaining 158 works; and Work -wise monthly review by Accounts Office was not 
conducted in respect of 210 works. Monthly review was, however, conducted for 
the balance 315 works.  The Committee regret to observe that no reasons for not 
conducting monthly reviews as prescribed in the Financial Code have been 
enumerated by the Ministry. They have also not elaborated on the steps taken to 
ensure conducting of effective  monthly reviews as contemplated in the Financial 
Code. The Committee are constrained to observe that in the absence of 
conducting periodical review of works, how could the Railways exercise control 
over expenditure. Thus, the Committee feel that there is an urgent need to conduct 
two monthly reviews one by Plan-heads of the Grants and the other by individual 
works so as to keep control over expenditure on the works executed under Grant 
No - 16. The Committee would like to be informed of the steps taken in this regard 
and such review meetings held after pointing out by Audit and outcome thereof 
within two months of the presentation of this Report. 
Further, a comparison of figures of allotment and utilization of funds during 2012 -
13 revealed that there was a wide variation between the budgeted figures and the 
actual expenditure. This leads the Committee to the conclusion that Ministry of 
Railways have failed to precisely anticipate, assess and provide for the funds 
actually required by them. The Committee woul d, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry of Railways should pinpoint the inadequacies and evolve an effective 
mechanism to bring systemic improvement in accurate estimation of budget 
requirements. 
 Excess over sanctioned estimate 
10. The C ommittee are appalle d to note that in respect of 60 works projects , 
expenditure of  ` 44.35 crore was incurred without sanction of estimate and 
`4,957.52 crore was incurred in excess of sanctioned estimate in respect of 555 

27 
 
 
 
projects/works. Thus expenditure of ` 5,001.87 crore incurred on 615 projects 
ranging from one year to more than twenty years remained unsanctioned as of 
March 2013.  What is still more disturbing is the fact that these unsanctioned 
expenditure remained un-regularised for two decades depicts the slackness on the 
part o f the concerned Executive departments for not following these cases  and 
getting them regularised for such a long period. The Committee would like to know 
as to whether any responsibility has been fixed against the concerned officers for 
showing laxity in such cases. Now, the Committee have been informed that Zonal 
Railways have been instructed to make action plan to fix a target for regularisation 
of all pending items of unsanctioned expenditure and review the position 
periodically so that pendenc y in this head is eliminated.  It is thus evident that no 
sincere efforts were made by the Ministry to devise a mechanism to seriously 
address this issue before pointing out by Audit. Obviously such cases indicate not 
only apparent inadequacies in the accou nting system in the Railways but also 
glaring lapses on the part of accounting officials. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend the Ministry of Railways to enquire into the re asons for such 
a long pendency for sanctioning of expenditure in order to identify the individual 
officers responsible for such a glaring lapse and to initiate disciplinary action 
against them. The Committee would like to be apprised of the concrete action 
taken by the Ministry of Railways in this regard within a period of three  months. 
The internal control mechanism should also be strengthen so as to avoid incurring 
of expenditure without proper sanction by the competent authority and also to 
timely regularise the unsanctioned expenditure. The Committee would also like to 
be app rised of the present status of regularisation of all pending items of 
unsanctioned expenditure. 
 
************ 
                                                           
 