29

DUTY DRAWBACK SCHEME

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Seventh Report (16! Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF FINANCE, DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE,
CENTRAL BOARD OF EXCISE AND CUSTOMS :

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2015-16)

/
TWENTY - NINTH REPORT

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI



PAC NO, 2061

re

TWENTY-NINTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2015-16)

; (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

DUTY DRAWBACK SCHEME

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Seventh Report (16" Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF FINANCE, DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE,
CENTRAL BOARD OF EXCISE AND CUSTOMS

ert
मु ~DolS
Presented to Lok Sabha on: (6.12 228

LaidinRajyaSabhaon: LE, the Lf

December, 2015 / Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka)



CONTENTS '

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2015-16)

INTRODUCTION  ............ बज हन्‍_-ा'ज्न्‍-- teeeenterrentneaenteseneas
CHAPTER | रिश्ृणां EE
CHAPTER II* Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government .........................-
CHAPTER IlI* — Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
replies received from the Government ................
CHAPTER IV* ' Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
/ accepted by the Committee and which require
TeHCTALION ............... cee eee ee ceeereeenetneeeeneneres
CHAPTER V* Observations/Recommendations in respect of

which the Government have furnished interim
TOPHOS .................. ७००० बन्_नन्‍> जज जलन तह 9५५

APPENDICES*
Minutes of the Fifteenth Sitting of the Public
Accounts Committee (2015-18) held on 9g!
December, 2015 है

Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public .

Accounts Committee contained in their Seventh ~

Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

PAGE
(iii)

(iv)

14

45

51

52

54

*Not appended to the cyclostyled copy of the Report



16.
17.
48.
49,
20.
21.
22.

मी ७ ७:८०

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMIT

(2015-16)

Prof. K.V. Thomas - Chairperson

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri 5.5, Ahluwalia
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura
Shri Nishikant Dubey
Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank"
Shri Neiphiu Rio
Shri Dushyant Singh
Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
Dr. Kirit Somaiya
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
Shri Shivkumar Udasi
Dr. P. Wenugopal

RAJYA SABHA
Shri Naresh Agrawal
Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
Shri Anil Madhav Dave
Shri Vijay Goel
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Shri Shantaram Naik
Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy

SECRETARIAT

. Shri A.K. Singh - Additional Secretary

Shri T, Jayakumar - Director
Shri Tirthankar Das - Additional Director
Shri Deepankar Kamble - Committee Officer



INTRODUCTION

1, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2015-16), having been authorised
by the Committee, do present this Twenty-ninth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Duty Drawback Scheme’
telating to Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue - Central Board of Excise &
Customs.

2. The Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 11
December, 2014. Replies of the Government to the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 9" June, 2015. The Public Accounts
Committee considered and adopted the Twenty-ninth Report at their sitting held on
gh December, 2015. Minutes of the sitting are given at Appendix-i.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha).is given at
Appendix-il.

NEW DELHI; PROF. K. V. THOMAS,
90 December, 2015 . Chairperson,
18 Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee



CHAPTER — |

REPORT

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with Action Taken by the

Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in

their Seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on “Duty Drawback Scheme” based on

Section - II of the C&AG Report No. 15 of 2011-12 relating to the Ministry of Finance,
Department of Revenue (Central Board of Excise & Customs).

2. The Seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabhaz/iaid °
in Rajya Sabha on 11" December, 2014. It contained 26 Observations/
Recommendations. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/
Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Finance, Department of

Revenue (Central Board of Excise & Customs) and are categorized as under:

(i) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee which have been
/ accepted by the Government:

Paragraph Nos. 1, 4-7,9-24 and 25

Total: 22
Chapter- Il

(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:

Paragraph No. 8 :
Total: 01
Chapter- IIf

(iii) Observations/Recommendations in: respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which’
require reiteration: हु

Paragraph Nos. 2and3°
Total: 02
Chapter- IV

(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies: :

Paragraph No. 26
हैं Total: 01
Chapter- Vv

4



2
3. The Committee desire that the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)
furnish the final/conclusive Action Taken Note on the Observation/Recommendation
No. 26 of their Seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) in respect of which the Ministry
have furnished interim reply.

4 The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Finance, Department of
Revenue (Central. Board of Excise & Customs) on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Seventh Report (Sixteenth
Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. In the
succeeding paragraphs, the Committee have dealt with the Action Taken by the
Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations which either need

" reiteration or merit comments..

L Identification of Goods
(Recommendation Para No. 2)

5. The Committee were constrained to find that the rules which lay down
parameters for identification of goods in case of re-exports are not only inadequate
but also beset with discrepancies. Audit in their test check found 12 cases of
discrepancy in parameters like dimension, gross weight, chemical properties etc.
involving drawback payment of 1.42 crore due to discrepancies and ambivalence in
the rules. In the absence of specific instructions, the establishment of such identity
remained with the discretion of the Assistant Commissioner of Customs concerned
leading to the discrepancies. To the suggestion to issue supplementary rules for
‘ensuring accurate’ identification of re-exported goods, the Ministry replied that
necessary instructions in this regard inter-alia emphasizing physical vetifjcation and
passing of speaking orders had been issued vide Circular No. 46/2011-Cus dated
20.10.2011. While the effectiveness of this measure remains to be seen, the
Committee urge the Ministry to initiate. tangible: measures for removal of lapses,
irregularities and discrepancies in the identification of the goods for re-export. Taking
note of the fact that due to the spread of commodities under re-export, it may not be
possible to lay down specific parameters in each and every case as these would
constrict and restrict the officers’ capacity to exercise due diligence in identifying the
goods and would lead to routine denials of benefit to exporters, the Committee
recommend that suitable mechanism be put in place to prevent negative discretion of



; : 3 5
the customs officials concerned so as to help ensure identification of re-exported

goods with the originally imported goods as well as cross verification of the-physical
properties of goods placed for re-export alongwith documentary declarations.

6. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:

"The Ministry's instruction (Circular no. 46/2011—Cus dated 20.10.2011)
requires the field formations to pass speaking order giving detailed
reasons with regard to establishing the identity of the goods or
otherwise in each case under Section 74 of Customs Act, after following
principles of natural justice. This ensures statutory review, by the
Commissioner, on the aspect of legality and propriety of each decision
of the Assistant Commissioner. it also allows an aggrieved exporter to
file an appeal against the said decision. This measure of quasi-judicial
decision making ensures that all aspects get considered. It has the
inbuilt mechanism to rectify a decision in which the identification of the
goods may not have been satisfactory. Thereby, it prevents the
exercise of discretion with less than due diligence.

a) It is ascertained that, between November 2011 and October

/ 2014, 4205 speaking orders were passed by Assistant Commissioners
w.r.t. Section 74 of Customs Act. Of this, 138 decisions were in the
nature of rejection in which 61 involved the ground that identity of the .
goods was not established. In addition, 17 decisions were reviewed by
the Commissioner and ordered for filing of appeal in which 5 decisions
were such where Commissioner held the view that the identity had
been incorrectly held as established.

b) Therefore, it is submitted that the’ measure is working
effectively’. .
7. The Committee note that instead of taking any tangible measures, as
recommended by the Committee, for removal of lapses/irregularities’ and
discrepancies in the identification of goods for re-export, the Ministry have
simply highlighted their Circular No. 46/2011-Cus dated 20" October, 2014,
which, was considered adequate enough for establishing the identity of the
goods. Moreover, the Ministry claimed that the existing system provides an in-
built mechanism to rectify a decision in which the identification of the goods
may ‘not be satisfactory. However, the Committee have been given to
‘understand that Audit.in their test check had found 12 cases of discrepancy in
. parameters: like ‘dimension, gross weight, chemical proportion etc. involving |
drawback payment of % 1.42 crore due to discrepancies and ambivalence in the

भू

rules. This clearly reveals the inherent inadequacies in the existing system to



: 4

prevent negative discretion of the customs officials concerned so as to help
ensure appropriate identification of re-exported goods. While reiterating their
earlier. recommendation, the Committee, further urge the Ministry to consider
framing rule under 74(3) of the Customs Act indicating broad parameters for
identification of re-expoited goods with the imported items, so that an effective
mechanism could be in place. The Committee may be apprised of the action
taken in this regard. ~

i Determination of Use
(Recommendation Para‘’No. 3)

8. In their Seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha), the Committee had found that
no CBEC instruction existed specifying how to determine whether goods were “used”
or not and thereby resulting in fraudulent claim of drawback in many cases. Audit in
their test check found 55 cases involving drawback payment of % 1.74 crore where a
large number of goods fulfilled the criteria for “used after import", but were treated as
unused goods. Such gross misuse of this provision indicated defects in the rules
requiring the exporters to make declaration whether the goods had been put into use
or not after importation in the Shipping Bill. The Committee were informed that the
Ministry had since issued instructions vide Circular No. 46/2011 - Customs dated
20.11.2011 in respect of duty drawback claims under Section 74 and the
_Assistant/Deputy Commissioner of Customs should pass a speaking order following
the principles of natural justice giving detailed reasons with regard to determination of
use, if any, while sanctioning drawback thus making it a quasi-judicial process. for
ensuring proper examination of the cases. The Commiltee, had however, found that
between November 2011 and June 2013, a total of 2442 speaking ordefs were
passed and in 13 cases the Commissioners were not satisfied with the legality and-
propriety of the decisions and ordered filing of appeal. Deeply. concerned over the
functioning of the field formations and the concerns expressed by the
Commissioners, the Committee had urged the Ministry to put in place a robust .
_ monitoring system so that fraudulent claim of drawback on "used after import goods"
could be prevented. The Committee had also desired the Ministry to earnestly act in
the 55 cases involving हैं 1.74 crore relating to determination of use reported by Audit .

and recover the drawback fraudulently claimed by the exporters.



+ os 5
9. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated

as under:

(i) Out of the 55 cases observed by Audit, in 27 cases the goods were
either unused or lower drawback was paid taking into account that goods were”
used. Of the remaining 28 cases, recovery effected in 18 cases, demand
confirmed in 7 cases, and 3 cases are under adjudication. The exporters have
filed appeal in all 7 cases where demand was confirmed and 1 case is decided
in appeal wherein the demand has been set aside.

(i) Ministry submits that the quasi-judicial process introduced in year 2011
for determining use of goods, after the exporter has made its declaration on
this aspect in the shipping bill, is a robust system since the senior officer,
namely the Commissioner is statutorily bound to examine each decision of the
Assistant Commissioner and be satisfied that the determination of use or non-
use of the goods after import was legal and proper. This process of review by
Commissioner and the Commissioner ordering filing of appeal when it is not
satisfied about the correctness of the decision provides the inbuilt mechanism
that acts as a counter-check preventing higher than due drawback on goods
that have actually been used after import. Moreover, the fact that there shall
be a statutory review acts as a forceful factor in ensuring proper decisions
based on full facts by the quasi-judicial authority”.
410. The Committee regret to note that the Ministry have not taken any
concrete action in pursuance to their recommendations regarding monitoring
mechanism to prevent fraudulent claims of draw back on "used after import
goods”. Further, the Committee are not convinced by the replies submitted by
the Ministry and are of the view that findings of the C&AG on 55 test checked
cases reveal only tip of the iceberg. The Ministry have not made sincere efforts -
to find out similar such cases, lying undetected, and recover the duty draw”
back fraudulently claimed by the exporters. The Ministry have simply explained
the mechanism that existed prior to December, 2014. in dealing with the issue
of determination of use. Moreover, the Ministry seem to have too optimistic
view regarding the effigiency of their Circular No. 46/2011-Customs dated 20th
November, 2011 as if it is a panacea for curing all the ills associated with the
Duty Drawback Scheme in general and the determination of use in particular.
The very fact that between November, 2011 and’ June, 2013, a total of 2442
speaking orders were passed and in 13 cases the Commissioners were not
satisfied with the loyalty and propriety of the decisions and ordered filing of.
appeals is a clear testimony that the existing system was inadequate to check
the Duty Drawback Scheme. The Committee, therefore, hope that the Ministry

-will make all out efforts to fix loopholes in the existing mechanism and. rectify



> a 6 * 4
the same to make it more effective in checking the Duty Drawback Scheme.
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and urge the
Ministry to put in place a robust monitoring mechanism so that fraudulent

claim of drawback on "used after import goods" is prevented.

lll. . Time Barred Claims and Delayed Replies to Deficiency Memo
(Recommendation Para No. 4)

11. In their Seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha), the Committee were perturbed’
to find that against Rule 5 of Re-export of Imported Goods Rules, 1995, Audit found
54 cases in Bengaluru, Chennai, Delhi, Hyderabad - II and Kandla where time barred
claims, were admitted and drawback to the tune of हैं 1.19 crore was made. Worse, in
474 claims filed in ACC Shamsabad under Hyderabad - II, the Department had
neither affixed receipt stamp nor issued acknowledgement in any of these cases. The
Minigtry had conceded that such instances may have arisen from lesser than desired
diligence. The Ministry had also informed that necessary instructions had been
issued directing field formations to, inter-alia, ensure due diligence in the application
of the aforesaid Rule 5. While urging for meticulous compliance of the instructions to
avoid further instances of time barred claims, the Committee had urged the Ministry

to periodically review the effectiveness of the extant Rules and Instructions in this
regard so that the system would be able to evolve itself and meet the emerging
challenges. The Committee had further desired the Ministry to recover the drawback
payment made on time barred claims and take suitable corrective action in the

matter.
13

12. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:

"() The provisions of Rule 5 of Re-export of Imported Goods Rules, 1995
do not réquire any change. To ensure due diligence in application of this Rule;
it was also clarified vide Circular No. 35/2013-Customs dated 05.09.2013 that
“the speaking order to be issued by Assistant Commissioner in Section 74
cases must invariably cover the aspect how the provisions of said Rule 5 had
been satisfied or not satisfied.

(ii) It is ascertained that between November 2011 and October 2014, 4205
speaking orders were passed by Assistant Commissioner w.r.t. Section 74 of
Customs Act. Of this, 138 decisions were in the nature of rejection in which 40
involved the ground that provisions of Rule 5 were not complied. !n addition,
17 decisions were reviewed by Commissioner and ordered for filing of appeal
in which 2 decisions were such where Commissioner held the view that Rule 5
had been incorrectly held as complied. हु



,7
(ii) | Accordingly, a framework that can effectively deal with the issue of
maintaining due diligence with the application of Rule 5 has been put in place

by the Ministry.

(iv) The corrective action in the 54 cases is being pursued by the field -
formations. The present status of the 54 cases is as follows:

(a) in 40 cases demands are set aside by Commissioner (Appeals),

(b) in 3 cases the show cause notices were dropped as claims were
determined to be within time,

(c) in 4 cases demand is confirmed, and

(d) in 6 cases recovery stands made

(e) in 1 case the observation was not admitted by Ministry"

13. The Committee are disturbed to note that out of 54 cases pointed out by
Audit where time barred claims were admitted and drawback to the tune of %
1.19 crore was made, recovery ‘was made in only 6 cases and demand
confirmed in only 4 cases whereas in 40 cases, demands were set aside by the
Commissioner (Appeals). This indicated that there was widespread
discrepancy in the application of the provisions of Rule 5 by the Assistant
Commissioner and the Commissioner thereby hindering smooth
implementation of ‘the Duty Drawback Scheme. The Committee desire the
Ministry to take stringent action in the matter. However, the Committee are
pleased to note that in pursuance of their recommendations, the Ministry have
now put in place a framework that can effectively deal with the issue of
maintaining due diligence with the application of Rule 5 of Re-export of
Imported Goods Rules, 1995. The Committee would, therefore, like the Ministry
to periodically review the application and effectiveness of the extant Rules and
Instructions in this regard so that the system is able to evolve itself and meet

the emerging challenges.

1५, Realisation of Export Proceeds
(Recommendation Para No, 7)

14. In their Seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha), the Committee were
concerned to note that the instruction issued by the CBEC in February 2009 for
monitoring the realization of export proceeds through the Bank Realisation Certificate
(BRC) module had not been followed by the field formations uniformly. While
- monitoring work had been initiated and Show Cause Notices were being issued to



8 डर
the defaulting exporters in six Commissionerates (Ahmedabad, Kandla, Chennai
Sea, JNCH, Mumbai, Bengaluru)CDs (Tughlakabad, Patparganj and Rajsico),
monitoring of realization through the BRC module had not been introduced in six
Commissionerates viz. Kolkata (Port), Kolkata (Airport), Hyderabad Il, Ahmedabad,
Kandla and Cochin. In Bengaluru Commissionerate, where the monitoring had been
initiated, Audit found that 150 letters issued to exporters asking for submission of
BRCs for exports involving drawback payment of 227.23 crore between 2004 and
2007, returned undelivered. In NCH, Delhi, the BRC module was unable to track
outstanding realization due to technical problems. These indicate crippling failure of
the CBEC in exercising their authority over the Commissionerates and field
formations. The Committee were apprised that a slew of measures had been taken
up by the Ministry for timely submission of Bank Realisation Certificates by all the
exporters and entering the same into the system promptly. While appreciating these
initiatives which would help proper realization of export proceeds and monitoring
thereof, the Committee recommend that corrective/punitive action be taken against
those Commissionerates and field formations which failed to comply with the
instructions of the CBEC. Besides, the cases of non-delivery of 150 letters to
exporters in Bengaluru Commissionerate should be probed and appropriate punitive
action taker! against those found guilty. The Committee further desire that all 18

Customs units/locations in the country should be computerized under an integrated :

IT network and operationalised for achieving an improved performance in realization

of export proceeds.

15. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have submitted as under.

"a) In the initial stages of introduction of the BRC module there was
variation in the pace of implementation at different locations. However,

all EDI locations including Kolkata (Port), Kolkata (Airport), Hyderabad *

i, Ahemdabad, Kandla and Cochin have implemented monitoring of
realization of export proceeds in drawback cases through the BRC
module as instructed by CBEC.

b) With respect to the Audit mentioning about the 150 letters
(asking for submission of BRCs) being retuned undelivered, it is stated
that Bengaluru Customs have reported that at. show cause notice stage
there were 107 cases that were returned undelivered and respective
Importer-Exporter codes were deactivated by DGFT. in 13 cases, the
demands were dropped as exporters produced evidence of realization



A 9. पु
of export proceeds. In 87 cases demands were confirmed and 7 cases ,
are in adjudication.

c) An integrated IT network is already in place for processing of ©
Imports and Exports data by Indian Customs EDI System (ICES). It is
the constant endeavour of CBEC to ensure that all Customs locations in
the country are brought onto EDi System at the earliest. However,
several reasons like very less volume of business, connectivity issues &
remoteness of the locations can be a hindrance, The number of
Customs EDI locations has increased from 114 to 124 between
September 2013 and April 2015. The remaining sites are being taken
up for computerization and networking, based on prioritization which is
dependent on criteria including the urgency of the requirement, impact
on revenue collection, mitigation of possibilities of fraud, cost involved,
addressing concerns of maximum stakeholders, etc".
16. The Committee recommended that corrective/punitive action be taken
against those Commissionerates and field formations, which failed to comply
with the instructions of the CBEC as well as to probe and take appropriate
action against concerned officials in the cases of non-delivery of 150 letters to
exporters in Bengaluru Commissionerate. The Committee find that the
Ministry's reply is conspicuously silent on the issue of taking punitive action
against those Commissionerates/field formations which failed to comply with
the instructions of the CBEC. The Committee feel that unless such lapses are
deait with some amount of reasonable strictness, the instructions issued by
the CBEC will not be taken seriously by the Commissioneratesifield
formations. While reiterating their earlier recommendation, the Committee once
again urge upon the Government to take punitive action against those
Commissionerates/field formations, which failed _to comply with the
instructions of the CBEC, under intimation to the Committee. The Committee
also desires to be apprised of the target date of completion and networking of
all the remaining Customs EDI locations in the country for - centralised

monitoring and timely realisation of export proceeds.

Vv. Customs Overseas Intelligence Network
(Recommendation Para No. 18)

17. In their Seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha), the Committee had noted that
the Customs Overseas Intelligence Network (COIN) of the DRI presently at 9 Indian
Missions abroad -viz. Birganj, Brussels, Dubai, Hong Kong, Kathmandu, London,



10 .

Moscow, New York and Singapore had been playing a key role in gathering
economic intelligence and interacting with the foreign administrations to obtain
investigative assistance and to strengthen the overall bilateral relations. In fact, it was
with their inputs that fraud/abuse of such a crucial scheme like the Duty Drawback
Scheme could be detected. The Committee, however, found that at present each of
the COIN officers is in charge of a large geographical area, which was not conducive
for efficient discharge of duties. Many countries had emerged as the Country's
important trade partners but COIN officers were yet to be posted there. Moreover,
with the increase in Telated party’ transactions between global arms of trans-national
corporations and Free Trade Agreements, the complex nature of frauds had acquired
new dimensions. Thus, the need for overseas enquires and external intelligence ;
feeding into the risk management system of Indian Customs was on the tise. Under
the circumstances, the additional posts for Customs officials in Indian
Embassies/Missions abroad for compliance of foreign exchange laws, and for
combating ijjicit trafficking of narcotics and prohibited/contra-band goods needed to
be reinforced by other changes like increased surveillance and use of modern
technology. While the case for expansion of COIN was a credible and persuasive
one, this should have be done in conjunction with other administrative and structural
measures with other agencies and possibilities of sharing intelligence and benefits of
using newet technologies. The Committee had desired that the action for additional
foreign offices should be expedited in a time bound manner.

18. 116 Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have submitted as under:

“”i) Greater emphasis is being laid on sharing of information and databases
among the various enforcement agencies — the CEIB is acting as the nodal
agency in this regard. Moreover, in the 27१ Regional Customs Enforcement
Conference held on 04.12.2014 the participating countries (India, Bangladesh,
Bhutan, Myanmar, Nepal and Sri Lanka) have decided to work toward sharing
the import and export data relating to top 10 commodities.

(ii) The proposal. for cteating additional COIN units overseas is pending
with Ministry of External Affairs". ~ .

19. The Committee are pleased to observe that CEIB is acting as the nodal |
‘agency for sharing of information and database and decision for Sharing

import export data among the neighbouring countries like Bhutan, Myanmar,

Nepal and Sri Lanka. At the same time, the Committee are constrained to note



हि : Wo, :
that even though there has been phenomenal increase in the country's

international trade, the Ministry are yet to expand the Customs Overseas
Intelligence Network (COIN) for gathering economic intelligence interacting
with the foreign administrations to obtain investigative assistance, strengthen
the overall bilateral relations and detection of economic frauds. The all-
important proposal for creating additional COIN units overseas is reportedly
long pending with the Ministry of External Affairs. The Committee would like
the Ministry to pursue the issue of creation of additional COIN units with the
Ministry of External Affairs on priority. The outcome of this may be intimated to
the Committee at the earliest.

Vi. Strengthening the IT Activities of the Department
(Recommendation Para No. 20)

20. In their Seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) the Committee had noted that
the Directorate of Systems in the CBEC provided the IT support for the Department.

Over the years, automation levels had been steadily increasing in tune with the multi
proliferation of revenue activities. Given the complexity of the processes, vast and
highly technical nature of IT activities under the CBEC, there was a case for hiving
these activities into a Special Purpose Vehicle under the strategic control of the
Board. This would ensure financial agility and flexibility in hiring experts in the fields
of IT and Finance Vendor Management towards achieving gréater professionalism
under the overall supervision and direction of the CBEC officers. Such a move would
also strengthen Internal Audit mechanism of the Department for better monitoring of
various schemes. The Committee had expressed the desire to have a detailed Action
Plan in this regard from the Ministry. .

21... The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have submitted as under:

"A High Powered Committee (HPC) was constituted, under chairmanship ‘of
Sh. T.V. Mohandas Pai, to recommend a strategic IT roadmap for CBEC and
its report dated 20.10.2014 contains several strategic and operational
recommendations over the short term, medium term and long term periods,
including on areas related to the governance structure for CBEC’s IT
department. Presently, the report is under consideration of 0850",

22. The Committee are happy to learn that a High Powered Committee (HPC)
constituted under the Chairmanship of Shri T.V. Mohandas Pai, to recommend
+a strategic IT roadmap for CBEC would have addressed the concerns raised by



: 12 :

the Committee for strengthening their IT activities of the CBEC. Yet, they are
pained to note that although the High Powered Committee had submitted its
report on 20" October, 2014, the same is still under consideration of CBEC.
The Committee are of the considered view that such a lethargic attitude on the
part of CBEC would certainly delay the fastrack implementation of the
recommendation of the High Powered Committee. The Committee expect the
CBEC to comprehend/understand the importance of a strategic IT roadmap for
the Department in the light of multi proliferation of revenue activities. They,
therefore, urge the Ministry to fast track the implementation of the High
Powered Committee's recommendation and the status be apprised to them
within six months of the presentation of the Action Taken Report.

Vil. Improvement in Tax Payer Services
(Recommendation Para No. 22)

23. In thejr Seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) the Committee had observed

that facilitation of trade and rendering tax payer services of assured quality was one
of the main functions of every regulatory/law enforcement agency. However, there
needed to be greater cohesion and coordination even among such agencies. It was
also important to encourage cross-agency initiatives that redressed the traders’
problems. The Committee had felt that-one of the key solutions to the challenges
posed by multiple border regulatory was single window as it enabled entities involved
in international trade to lodge standardized information and documents at a single
entry point to fulfill all import, export and transit related regulatory requirements.
Customs was in an advantageous position to develop single window since it was
almost fully automated in that 95 per cent of import and 98 percent of export volumes
and documents were handled by ICES which interacted electronically with over 15
agencies including RBI, DGFT, Airlines, Banks, DGCI&S, Apparel Export Promotion
Council etc. However, consensus building amongst agencies concerned, inter-
agency differences. in degree of automation and data requirements impeded the
development, of this initiative. The Committee, had therefore, recommended the
Government to spell out necessary mandate clearly designating the CBEC as the
lead agency for this purpose as per international practice and lay down a time bound
road map for its implementation. In providing a single window to the taxpayers, the है
Committee had suggested that the Board could consider greater outreach



+

programmes, taxpayer education, etc. so as to increase responsiveness and

13

4

compliance.

24,

25.

The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have submitted as under:

“(i) The Department concurs with the recommendation of the Committee in
regard to implementation of a Single Window in Customs. The Finance
Minister, in his Budget speech (July 2014) had also announced the
implementation of an Indian Customs Single Window Project.

(ii) The implementation of Single Window is contingent upon a number of
factors such as required degree of IT automation, interoperability with other
agencies’ systems, etc. Accordingly, an Inter-Ministerial Steering Group
(IMSG) under the Chairmanship of Special Secretary and Member (Customs),
CBEC, Department of Revenue with senior officers of the rank of Joint
Secretaries of Ministries/Departments concerned as members, has been
established with the mandate to provide policy direction for implementing the
Single Window. A Project Management Committee (PMC) has also been set
up in the CBEC and Project: Management Units (PMUs) have been
established within other Ministries/ Departments/ agencies concerned. The

- PMG/and PMUs are charged with coordinating the implementation of the
Single Window under the overall direction of the IMSG.

(ii) | While implementation of the full scale Single Window is in process, an
electronic message exchange with the Food Safety & Standards Authority of
India and Plant Quarantine authorities at JNPT and ICDs at Delhi has started
w.e.f. 01.04.2015",

The Committee appreciate the steps taken by “the Department for

implementation of their recommendation for providing a Single Service

Window in Customs. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress

made in this regard at various locations across the country.

18 Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka)

_ NEW DELHI; _ PROF. K. ५. THOMAS,
91 December, 2018 . Chairperson,

Public Accounts Committee

2 ok