38

NVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT IN -
INDIAN RAILWAYS - STATIONS, ||

the Observations)

the. Government « on

mittee contained in their Third Report

{Action Taken by
Recommendations of the Com

. (46th Lok Sabha)

MINISTRY.OF RAILWAYS
(RAILWAY BOARD)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2015-16)

THIRTY EIGHTH REPORT a :

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

1016 SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELH!



PAS NO. 2070

THIRTY EIGHTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
OES 8) | का
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT IN |
INDIAN RAILWAYS - STATIONS,
TRAINS AND TRACKS

LC 5»

‘Action Taken by the Government on the Observations! Recommendations of
the.Commitiee contained in their Third Report (16 Lok Sabha)] ©

MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(RAILWAY BOARD) os

a Presented to Lok Sabha on

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: ie
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
EW DELHI

March, 2014/ Phalguna 4937 (Saka)


GONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
+ COMMITTEE (2018-16). ---—-—

{INTRODUCTION _ oe ay

CHAPTER | Report

CHAPTER II* Observations/Recommendations which’ have _ 22
_° been accepted by Government .

CHAPTER Ill* Observations/Recommendations which the 50
पु Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the replies received from Government

CHAPTER IV¥* Observations/Recommendations in respect of 51
which replies of Government have nat been .
accepted by the Committee and which require -

+> Teiteration पे

CHAPTER ४५ Observations/Recommendations in respect of | 59

ae “which Government have- furnished — interim
_ replies : -

APPENDICES

1 Minutes of the Twenty-second sitting of Public 67
Accounts Committee (2015-16) held on 11" March,
2016 7 है

am Analysis of the Action Taken by the’ Government on 70
the Obsetvations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in‘their Third Report

(Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

* Not-appended to the éyclostyled copy of the Report


AT.

"3.

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMME

(2045-16)
Prof. K.V. Thomas - Chairperson

. LOK SABHA .

Shri 3.8. Ahluwalia
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay —

जाए Ranjit Singh Brahmpura

8

Shri Nishikant-Dubey
Shr Gajanan Kirtikar
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank"
Shri Neiphiu Rio :
Shri Dushyant Singh

Shri Janazdan Singh Sigriwal

- Dr. Kirit Somaiya
- Shri Anurag Singh Thaler

Shri Shivkumar Udasi
Dr. P. Venugopal _

RAJYA SABHA |

‘Shri Naresh Agrawal

Shri Satyaviat Chaturvedi
. Shri Anil Madhav Dave

9... Shri

20.

2k,

22.0

int Vijay Goel
hri Bhubaneswar Kalita

Ss
Shri Shantaram Naik
$

bri, Sukheniiu Sekhar Roy
SECRETARIAT

Shri AK, Singh - Additional Secretary
Shri T. Jayakumar - ° Director

‘gmt AnjuKuleeja:  - Under Secretary


“INTRODUCTION

f the. Chairperson; Public Accounts Committee (2015-16), having been.
authorized by. the Committees, do present this Thirty. Eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok___
“the Government on the. Observations/Recommendations of |

_ > 54019) 01 Action Taken:

<=

the Committee contained in -thelt_Thicd-Repurt{Sixteenttr tok Sabha) on ‘Environment =

‘Management in indian Railways - Stations, Trains and Tracks" relating to Ministry

of Railways (Railway Board).

“2.7 The Third ‘Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on

रण November, 2014. Replies of the Government to ‘all the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received. The Public
Accounts ‘Committee considered and adopted the Thirty Eighth Report at their sitting vos
held on 11 March, 2018. Minutes of the siffirig are given at Appendix I.

3. For facility of ‘reference. and convenience, the Observations — and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the

Report,

4, The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to

them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

5. An andlysis of the action taken* by ‘the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given at

‘Appendix.
: . .
NEW DELHI th PROF. K.V. THOMAS
117 March, 2016 : हि हि Chairperson,
24. Phalguna, 1837 (Saka) ह Public Accounts Committee
yo - i पु गे - vo

Be ne)


CHAPTER |

INTRODUCTORY

—This*Repo ic Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by-the

Government on the Observations and Recormmendations of the Committee contained in their
Third Report (16 Lok Sabha) on “Environment Management in Indian Railways - Stations.
Trains and Tracks" based on C&AG Report No. 24 of 2012-13, Union Government (Railways)

“Performance Audit, relating to’ Ministry of Railways

2, The Thifd Report (167 Lok Sabha}, which was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya
Sabha on 25" November, 2014, contained 21 Observations and Recommendations. Action
Taken ‘Notes in respect of all the Observations and Recommendations have been rAceived

from the Ministry of Railways and are broadly categorized as under ;

(i) , Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:

Para Nos. 1,2,7,8,13,15,16,17,18,19, 20,21 हि
: ५ Total:12°
Chapter - il

(ti) "" Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the replies received from the Government हे

Para No. NIL .
Total: NIL
~ Chapter - Ill

(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration

Para No. 9,10,11,12,14
> Total: 5
Chapter - IV

{iv}. Observations/Recommendations. in respect of which Government have fumished
interim replies

“Para. No, 3,4,5,6 .
. . Total: 4
_Chapter~V



*

2 - था

3. The Committee's examination of the subject ‘Environment Management in Indian
Raitways - Stations, Trains and Tracks’ relating to the Ministry of Railways revealed the

_ following shortcomings:

* Railway Board (RB)-had not issued any comprehensive guidelines specifically for
Ammodities like coal, iron

sidings handling and transporting the polfution intensi

. ~ ore, -sement-fertilizere-petleum etc. "The Céntral Pollution Control Board had also |

failed to issue any guidelines for the transport of these commod ities,

«The Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) ‘Act, 1981 stipulates that all sidings and *
Railway Good sheds require Consent for Operation (CFO) from the State Pollution
Control Board (SPCB) concerned, however, in majority of cases the Railway

. Administration had failed to. comply with the existing provisions of obtaining consent
for operation from the SPCB concerned, -before operating the sidings/good sheds. The
CFO was obtained only in 55 percent of the sidings: test checked. ह

« तएीक्षा Railways had neither initiated any measure to. fix standards for emissions from
. the use of diesel for traction purposes nor any system had been set up to monitor the
: emissions from diesel [७००६ and ASSESS OF Compare the extent of emissions with the
. international Standard. Further, there were no instructions to the Zonal Railways for
regular monitoring df emission 32 levels and ‘thus there was no such, monitoring पु

anywhere fh Indian Raitways, 1 .

+ The work of electrification of railway tracks was being carried out selectively for .
sections of a particular route instead of electrifying the-whole route. Patch-wise
electrification of routes had resulted in hauling of diesel engines on. electrified 10016
‘leading fo unavoidable pollution due to emission from diesef besides higher

operationat costs.

‘+ No instructions had been issued at the level of Railway Board regarding noise contro!

measures near habitation/silence zones,

* There was no system for monitoring the quality and quantum of waste. water
generated at Stations. The Railway ‘Board's instructions for installation’ of Effiuent

y
. we



Treatment Plant (ETP) at ail major stations had also not been adhered to. On an..,
average, one Effluent Treatment Plant had. been installed in éach Zone leaving most
__ of fhe major stations without any ETP. tn the absence of ETPs, effluents were being —
* - discharged from ‘major ‘stations to the nearby low lying areas/water bodies and

. municipal-drainage systems resulting in 34 contamination of surrounding surface and .

"Despite the Railway Board's instructions issued in July/August, 2006 to zones for
providing Water Recycling Plants (WRPs} at locations like Stations and sheds where
water was scarce, no action had been taked till March, 2012 for. installation of WRPs.

i Simitarly, none of the major stations in SR where shortage of water was actually felt in

summer months, has been identified for provision of WRP...

Rain Water Harvesting (RWH)} Systems had been installed at only 70 stations in five

~ . Zones.

तल Npemitice Sateen mee 7

No system had been put in place to monitor the ‘performance of level crossings
energized with sofar panels or hybrid system. Further, no system of qualification, of
हु ‘benefit accrued fo Railways as a result of implementation of solar panels/hybrid

system in electrification of level crossings had been set up.

Indian Railways had failed-to make a major progress in tapping wind-energy as only
four Wind Power Plants’ had been, sanctioned in three zones during the period
“2010 - 12. The. work of setting up of another 10.6 MW Wind Mill ia North. Wesfern -
Railways sanctioned during 2010 - 11 had not been completed due to shifting of

execution of the same from PPP model to JV model.

vs, No energy audit had been conducted in three Zones, while 48 out of 149
recommendations made by the Energy Auditors had not been implemented in seven .
Zones and partial implementation “had been noticed in’ respect of 48

recommendations.

62 elephants died during the period. 2007—1:1. due to, train hits. The majority of -

~ elephant death. occurred-in Northeast Frontier Railway (NEFR) where 43 elephants



died followed by Southern Railway (SR) where 10 elephants died. Until 2011 no
procedure had been evolved by the Ministry of Railways nor pfescribed by the Ministry

of Environment & Forests for cantrotling elephant casualties

The following shortcomings were revealed in the system of garbage disposal in 212

Stations over 17 Zones:__

{i} In 64 per cent (135) of the total stations (212) test checked in audit, centralized

dumping yard was not available within the station premises resulting in littering near

_ station premises and along tracks, Further, there weré instances when transportation

“of garbage was not being done hygienicalty i.e. covered by tarpaulin

. fil) In 105 out of 123 major stations, disposal. of garbage from stations to
Municipal/Corporation notified areas was done by engaging outside agencies. The ‘

quantity of garbage generated was, however, not assessed and incorporated in the
agreements entered into with the outside agencies in 43 out of 105 agreements.

है (ili) In the temaining 18 major stations, disposal of garbage was done in- house. The
quantity of waste generated was not estimated wherever garbage disposal was done’

departmentally, हि
(४) In 16 out of 23 contracts entered into in four zones for disposal of garbage

through outside agencies, no separate clause was incorporated for segregation of

wastes

{¥) Disposa} of garbage by outside agencies was being done either by buming or

_ dumping in-Railway premises in 37 stations (all categories) across all Zones.

_ vi} At 54 out of 212 stations the Railway Administration resorted fo disposal by

burning, dumping into adjacent canal, Jow lying areas, dumping on Railway land near

the track, thereby causing environméntaf poltution

Indian. Raiways had not finalized the technology for 'green tollets' despite two decades

है _ रण experimentation. Further, open cischarge of toilets from running trains fed to



4.
Third Report (16" Lok Sabha

contained in the Report are gi

premature renewal of 47 km of Rail (SER) and resulfed in an excess expenditure of ‘

= 35,79 crore during the period 2007-11 alone. _— / -

The Committee had accoalingly givén their Observations/Recommendations in the

().. The’ Ministry should formulate a comprehensive and more reliable environment

- poligy for controlling air pollution on the stations, yard work places etc. in coordination

with the Ceniral and various State-Poljution Control Boards. The Ministry of Raitways
should also ensure regular .and effective monitoring to ensure strict compliance with
thé Pollution Control laws/guidelines/instructions at all levels so- that advance and

corrective steps are taken to minimize the air pollution.

(i). The requisite equipment for*measuring air pollution levels should be procured
and inducted at all the Stations in a time bound manner पा
(i) Railway Board should periodically monitor the progress of. the project

undertaken by Research and Design Standard Organization (ROSO and Indian
Railway Organizations for Alternate Fuels (IROAF) so as to’ introduce LNG and Gas

Turbine based locomotives by the targeted date.

; (५). The Ministry, besides making efforts to gauge the impact of environmental

pollution due to the movement of diesel locomotives in electrified routes, should aiso

work out the feasibility of making route-wise electrification

- (०७ The’ Railway Board, in ‘consultation with the ‘Pollution Control Boards, should’

constitiite a High Powered Body with adequate technical expertise-for formulating a

. comprehensive policy to control environmental and ‘noise pollution in the Trains and

. Stations and. carrying out surprise checks fo ensure effective implementation of the :

measures. initiated to that effect.

(vi), . As regards discharging of effluents from the major Stations to the nearby ‘low

lying’ areas/water bodies, the Ministry should take up installation of ETPs at all the’

i... Railway Stations on priority basis. by stipulating a deadfine for the purpose. Stringent

4

a ¥ a



Guidelines should afsobe issued and implementation monitored by the Ministry for

scrupulous adherence by the Zonal Railways failing which responsibility be fixed

~ (vil) The Mitlistry should impress upon ‘the Zonal Railways in no uncertain terms. to
’ unfailingly adhere to the tastructions issued for instalation of Water Recycling Plants

_ and Rain Water Harvesting Systems at all the Stations

(viii) The Ministry of Railways/Raiway Board should ensure regular and effective
monitoring of the targets set for energy conservation at all levels so that they could be
completed within the stipulated time frame. The Ministry should also measure the
benefit accrued to the Railways as a result of the electrification of level crossings with

solarpanels, हु >

(90) The Ministry should set up separate Waste Management Cell in all the
Zones/Divisions and make necessary arrangements for. staff ‘in those cells who
possess adequate knowledge and skills to deat effectively with waste management.

(0). The Ministry ghoufd take effective steps for ensuring that prescribed targets for
introduction of bio-toilets in all the coaches are achieved within the specified time and

any aberration on this score be viewed seriously,

5.7... Thé Action Taken Notes furnished by the. Ministry of Railways in respect of ail the
- Observations/Recommmendations of the Committee as contained in their Third Report
(16" LS) havé been reproduced in the relevant chapters of this Report. The Committee
desire that Government: should furnish. final/conclusive action taken feplies to the
Recommendations for-which ‘interim replies have been furnished, The Committee will now
deal with the action taken by the Government on some of their
1. Observations/Recommendations made in their Third Report (1567 Lok Sabha), which’ need

. feiteration or merit comments



ordination efforts aiid ‘put

1

Action taken on the Recomm Recommendations contained in the 837 Report.(14” LS) of the contained in the 837 [२९०७४ (147 LS} of the

PAG
(Recommendation No. 2)

8) The PAC (2008-09) in their 83% Report (147 LS) on “Cleanliness & Sanitation” on

ed that the Ministry of Railways should strengthen the,co- -
fietittifionalized rechanism-at the Apex level:-frame-a-

E "Railways" had rece

in place an |

’ robust policy on Waste Management, draw up an action plan for ‘provision of adequate

_ infrastructure. for each station, and dedicated budget exclusively meant for sanitation and
cleanliness on Indian Railways etc. Upon noticing that though these recommendations were
substantially accepted by the Government, shortcomings in the collection and disposal of,
garbage has remained unresolved, implementation of green toilets in trains has not yet been
done and 10 concrete action has been taken by the IR to integrate environmental concerns ह
with their developmentai/operational policies, the Committee exhorted the Ministry fo initiate
the requisite and urgent measures 50 as to effectively address: the ever growirig menace of
environmental pollution. हु ह
7. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Note have stated as under :

“Eollowing action’measures have been initiated in cleanliness & sanitation in Indian

Rallways:
4, Cleanliness & Sanitation: Sanitation:

a. Zonal Railway have been advised vide Commercial Circular No. 45 of 2011 and
also reiterated from fime to time ‘for prompt disposal of waste arising out of catering -

services at station and in trains, inter-alia advising the procedural order for handiing
_waste and their disposal arising of pantry car services as well as static catering units.

b. in Budget Speech of 2014-15, the Hon'ble Minister of Railways has proposed fo
set up a separate Housekeeping Wing to’ have focused attention and exclusive
responsibility of maintaining cleanliness and sanitation at stations". .

2. Further as’ regards the installation of Green Toilets, in trains, the Ministry have.
stated asfollows; © * | 7 : a है
"in a pioneering effort, Indian Railways In collaboration with DRDO was successful in -
developing Bio-toilets, where the faecal matter gets digested in a reténtion tank by 8

_ group of bacteria, and after the process, as the end-product, water gets discharged
affer being treated with chlorine tablets to take care of further disinfection’ and to
control e-coli count. The first sets of bio-tollets were fitted on trial in'2010-1.

Upon-seeing encouraging resuits in their performance nd their user feedback, the

numbér of Bio-toilets fitted has progressively ingteased over the years. As on date,
Oriore than 19700 bio-toilets have been installed in more, than 7,000 coaches.

Pat +

पु



- हा
Workshops and Production Units of Indian raifways are gearing-up for fitting bio-toiteis हि
in newly, manufactured coaches and for retrofitting on existing old coaches fo the.
maximum extent possible. : हि

IR is making its best possible efforts to achieve the target of 0) Compulsorily fitting all
new coaches made by Production’ Units with environment-friendly toilet. system by
2016-17 and (ii) elimination .of direct discharge toilet system from entire fleet* of -

- coaches by 2021-22, unless unforeseen technical hurdles crop up in future.

A. Joint Working Group (JWG) of JR,s Mechanical Engineeys and DRDO's
“> Bio-techrologists; constituted for development & deployment of bio-toilets over Indian
————Railway passenger-carrying coaches: meets periodically-te-review-design issues-and—-
field performance of these Bio-toifets

8, The Committee note that as regards the cleanliness and sanitation in Indian
Railways, the Hon'ble Minister of Railways in his Budget speech of 2014-15 had
proposed for setting up a separate Housekeeping Wing to have focused attention and
exclusive responsibility of maintaining cleanliness and sanitation at stations
However, the ATN is silent as fo whether the said wing has since been set up or trot
As the cleanliness and sanitation of Indian Railways Is the critical need of the hour,
{he Committee would like to be apprised of the present status of setting up of fhe
_ Housekeeping Wing and, if set up, its objectives, action plan, if any, drawn up for
effective cleanliness and sanitation, the results achieved so far and future plan of
action. The Committee would also like to know the details regarding. the expenditure
sanctioned/incurred during the last two years on sanitation and cleanliness of Incia
Raifways and whether it was adequate enough to cafer to the needs of cleanliness of
fhe Railways.: Similarly, the Action Taken Note is silent about the dirty passenger
coaches infested. with cockroachés, rodents and mugs. There had been complaints
that the passenger compartments and its tollets were not swept, moped or disinfected
at regular intervals and many a time unwashed bedrofls and blankets were issued to
: -the passengets. Further, the system of-lighting, drinking water and sewerage. ts in a
_ totally bad shape in the peripheral villages of Raitway Stations, The Commities,
therefore, desire that as a. part of Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR), the Minisicy-
of Railways Should provide these facilities not only in the nearby Railway colonies but
also in the peripheral villages coming within a radius of O8kms of Railway stations. .
~The Committee desire’ to be apprised of the concrete action taken in this regard within
one month of the presentation of this report.
Further, in connection with installation of Green Totlets in frains, the Committee
‘ have been informed that a8 जा December 2018, more thah9,700 blo-toilets have begit
है instatied in mere than 7,000 eoaches. Indian Ratlway is-also making its best possibte

ia t


“a पु 9

efforts to achieve the target of ‘compulsorily fitting all new .coaches made by .
production units with environment - friendly toilet system by 2016-17 and elimination-

_ of direct discharge follet system from entire fleet of coaches, by 2021-22 unless -
unforeséen technical hurdles crop up in future, Ministry seems to be unsure about
achieving the fargets and hence put a rider with their said staternent. The Committee

would like -to -know ‘as to.what extent those. targets_haye beéir met so far. The’
Committee further observe that despite issuing commercial circular and Committees’.
reiteration from time to fime there has been no perceptible improvement as bio-toilets
become non-functional and inconvenience when certain passengers knowingly or
unknowingly drop plastic’ bottles or unwanted materials inside tt Hence for the
success of the ‘effective use of bio-toilets the Railways should initiate a drive fo.
educate the passengers about the correct way of use of such ‘toilets “through

announcements, T.Vs and written as wall as picture signs.

Air Pollution - हैं ८
- (Recommendation No 3} :

ae The Committee were constrained to note that the Railway Board (RB) had not issued any
comprehensive guidelines specifically far sidings handling and transporting the pollution

__ intensive commodities like coal, iron ore cement, fertilizers, petroleum etc. The Central Pollution

” Controf Board had also failed to issue any guidelines for the transport of these commodities AS
regards formulation of comprehensive environment policy in this regard, the Ministry of Railways
had claimed that they were committed to aileviate. the environment impact of carriage and
‘handling of sensitive cargo. While noticing that despite their commitment no substantive action
‘had been taken by the IR to integrate environmental ‘concerns with operational policies the
Committee, had impressed upon the Ministry to formulate a comprehensive and more reliable
environment policy for controlling. air pollution on the stations yard, work places efc. Ir
coordination with the Central and various State Pollution Control Boards. The Ministry 0
Railways should also. ensure regular and effective monitoring fo ensure strict compliance with
om _ ti Pollution Control jaws/guidelines/instructions -at all levels so that advance and corrective

steps are taken to minimize the air pollution

40.. _Intheir Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under

“——"-—-—"ni5 “ Brdéf 10 properly “corriply withthe * provisions of Air Pollution Act’1981 in:
sidings/Good Sheds of Zortal Railways, Ministry of Railways have decided .to set up.a
_ Committee consisting of 02 SAG. level officers, 01 from-EnHM Dt {as Convenor) &
-.-? the other from. Traffic/Commercial Deptt, who will study and submit a detailed report ~
on the éxtent of pollution ‘and the remedial actions to be taken ,


10

11. The Committee are aghast fo find that in order to properly comply with the

/ provisions of Air Pollution Act, 1981 in. sidings/Good sheds of Zonal Railways,
: Ministry of Railways have now decided to set up a Committee in 2018, to study and
submit @ detailed report on the extent of pollution and. the actions to be taken, हे

हि however, Ministry bavé 0० -given sketchy. defails_about_the-terms and fargets of the- पु
said ‘Committee. They have also yet to frame t _he reliable environment policy as
desired by the Committee for controlling air pollution at Railway Stations, yard, work -
places etc, The. Committee therefore, desire to be apprised about the progress
achieved in this regard fo ensure that the Committee submits Its report at the earliest *

and the time lost is compensated by the early implementation of tts suggestions.

Non-compliance with Statutory Regulations _
(Recommendation No, 4 and 5)

12. The Committee were concemed to observe that while section 21 of the Air (Prevention
and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 clearly stipulates that all sidings and Railway Geod sheds
require Consent for Operation (CFO) from the SPCB concerned in majority of cases the Railway
Administration have failed to comply with the existing provisions of obtaining consent for
operation from the SPCB concemed before operating the sidings/good sheds, The CFO was

~ obtained only in 55 percent of the sidings fest checked. In same of the cases, there was
‘inconsistent and variable understanding of issues which led some of the Zonal Railways fo
presume that consent 0 operate was not required for all sidings/goods sheds. The Ministry had
no-record of notices served by the CPCB or SPCB for noncompliance of provisions of law for
control of Air and Water Pollution, Further, the Ministry of Railways do not have any mechanism
to take action against the ‘sidings for either non adherence to the: instructions of RB ‘ar
compliance with the statufory provisions, which is rather strange and highly. deplorable.
' Deprecating the failure of the Ministry to act stermly against the sidings for violation of
Jaws/provisions, the Committee had desired that the matter vigorously pursued for investigaticin;
fixation af responsibility against the sidings and necessary follow-up action. The Committee had
also desired that the. Minisiry instead of. leaving things at.the mercy of the Zonal Railways,
should prescribe concrete guidelines for the operation of sidings/goods sheds which are to ‘be

scrupulously adhered to by the Zonaf Railways,


11

13 Further, while observing that individual Railway establishments lack the equipment as
well as expertise for measuring-and monitoting air pollution levels at the Stations, the
Committee, had recommended that the requisite-equioment for measuring air pollution levels be
procured and indictes at all the Stations in a time bound manner so as to obviate air potlutian te

the desirable level.

The Ministry of Railways ifi thelr Action Taken Note have stated as under :

“In order fo properly comply with the provisions of Air Poltution Act 1981 in sidings
&Goods sheds of Zonal Railways, Ministry of Railways have decided fo set up a
committee consisting of 2 SAG level officers, one from EnHM Dte (as convener) & the
herifrom Traffic / Corhmercial Deptt. who will study and submit a detailed report on
.the extent of pollution and the remedial attions to be taken

Q-

The committee formed will also deal the matters pointed out in this para 4 and 5."
45.. Upon noticing the failure of the Ministry of Railways fo act sternly against. the
sidings for non-compliance of .lawsfprovisions prescribed “for operating the

: sidings/goods sheds the Committee in their earlier Report had desired to. pursue the

usly for investigation, fixation of responsibility against the sidings and

atier vig
necessary follow-up action, They had also desired the Ministry to prescribe concrete
guidelines for the operation of sidings/goods sheds, Further as regards the inductioa of
equipment at all railway stations for measuring and monitoring air pollution levels, the
‘Committee had recommended for procurement and installation of such equipment at all
’ the stations in a time bound manner. However, fhe ATN of the Ministry are silent over all
these specific issues. They have rather furnished a‘routine reply. While deprecating the
callous affitude of the Ministry towards’ such important-issues the Committee reiterate
their earlier recommendations and desire to be apprised of the specific action taken

thereon within one month of the presentation. of this Report to Parliament.

Emission from Diesel-Locomotives and use ‘tf Emission from Diesel. Locomotives and Use bf Bio-Diesef :

_ {Recommendation Para Na, 6)

16. The Committee were perturbed to nate that Indian Railways had neither initiated any

teasure ‘to fix standards for emissions from the use of diesel for traction purposes nor any

_system had.been set up to monitor the emission levels from diesel locos and assess.of ©

‘compare the extent of emissions with the intemational standard.’ Further, there were no”

धर पु . : a. §
mae . : Ts - oO me ee gle
: : ) 1:


- - -used only in fi

* ; , 12
instructions to the Zonal Railways for regular monitoring of emission levels and thus there is
10 such monitoring anywhere in [ndian Rattways. The Committee were also concerned fo.
‘note that although. several initiatives were stated to had been taken by the IR for using bio- -
- diesel to help reduce emissions of many air pollutants from diesel locos, no ‘instructions had

“been issued to the field offices for using blended bio-diesel. Out of 16 zones, bio-diesel was
Zones. Further, during the period 2006-11, the production of bio-diesel over .

agencies. The Committee found that Indian Railways did not have any in-house bio-diesel
“production facility except experimental level at some plants. The plants at Chennai and
Shakurbasti had been functional in part capacity and the Kharagpur plant was not working
The ‘main constraint in their continuous operation was non-availability of. raw-material for
conversion into bio-diesel, The Committee had also observed’ that two contracts were
executed in April 204 1 and May, 2011 for setting ug of plants at Tondiarpet (5६) and Raipur
(SECR) respectively, While the work of setting up of biodiesel plant at Raipur was in

“progress, there had been no progress in respect of the plant at Tondiarpet as of March 2012
except Identification of Jand. The Committee had been informed that Indian Raitways were"
setting up two bio-diesel planis of 30 Tons per day capacity each which would be ready by -
December 2014, As the use.of bio-diesel in the Diesel locomotives is the critical need of the
hour to minimize air pollution and related public heatth risks, the Committee had desired the
Ministry to make special efforts for speedier completion of the projects for production of bio-

diesel

7. The Ministry. of Railways in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:

"1. A Mobile Emission Test Car was commissioned by IR in January 2013. This

_ test car is capable of measuring levels of various pollutants of diesel engines. So far,
emission levels of 22 locomotives including power cars of Diesel Electrical Multiple
Units have been measured at different locations on IR. Emission norms’ for dieset
locomotives are not available in India and have to be evalved, Formulation of
Emission Standards is: a. specialized and time consuming job and process for:
appointment of a ‘consultant is under process: This will be taken forward éxpeditiously
Instructions to Zonal railways. to. monitor emission levels would be issued after the
emission standard are laid down. :

2. The Hon'ble Minister for Railways, in his budget speech on 08.07.2014, stated
that IR will Start using blo-dieset upto 5% of the fotal fuel. consumption in diesel
locomotives. Action plan for implementation of 5% 8io Diesef blending in Dieset to alt


«18.

13

Zonal Railways have been issued vide Railway Board's letter No, 20107#08॥282/2/ Pt

- 1 dated 02.03.2015, and procurement is in process

3 Indian Railways has atways, promoted use of non-conventional energy sources. _
Use of bio-diesel in diesel locomotives was envisaged long before -it was even
established as a fuel for locomotives. The lindian economy and the ecosystém

_..fequited for its,.production, distribution and usage.were.not-.geared up-at that time:—
- When IR started. efforts to introduce biodiesel in 2004-02, there ७88१० established

Path-available+o-follow,-buf this did not deter IRtrom making attempts in all'directions
Raw material was not available, so plantation of trees (Jatropha) was done, a *
Memorandum of Understanding with Indian Oil Corporation was signed, pilot plants’
were set up and even purchasing from open market was attempted. ‘However
Jatropha production in the country did not take off. Even though the commitment of
Indian Railway was serious and continuous efforts were made, bio-diesel cousd not be
introduced.

३.1. Keeping these conétraints in mind, Indian Railways is setting up two bio-diesel
Plants which are multifeed plants ie. they can use a variety. of edible? non-edible
vegetable oils, by-product of oil refining process, fatty acids, animal fats, used cooking
oil ete. Thus shortage of raw-material for plant operation is not envisaged. The present |
status of these plants is as under .

{a) Raipur plant: Work has been completed upto 4" stage. out of 14 stages i.e
all Civit Engineering works of construction of office building, workshop, lab, stare ete
are completed. Contract has since been terminated on 24.09.2044, For completion of
balance works, fresh tender has been floated and is due to open on 21.04.2015

(0) Tondiarpet plant: Work has been completed up to 7" stage out of 12 stages
16. all Civil Engineering works of construction of office building, workshop, lab, store

- ETP. etc, ‘supply of chilling unit, transformer, weigh bridge, ‘storage tanks, RO saftening

system and Diesel generator are ‘completed. The plant is expected to be

‘commissioned by 307 September 2015.

3.2 Besides the bottlenecks in production of biodiesel, laws and regulatory regime

prevented free sale and use of bio diesel in India. Certain clauses in MS & HSU
controt order, 2005 and Biodiesel Purchase Policy, 2005 were restrictive. The clauses
have since been modified by the Government, In light of recent arnendments in MS &
HSD control order and Biodiesel Purchase Policy, IR 15 pursuing the. roadmap to take
forward the introduction of bid diesel on IR."

In response fo fhe observation of the Committee that the Indian Railways have~ «

| neither initiated any measure to fix standards for emissions 1001 the use of diésel for

fraction purposes nor’any system has been set up to monitor -the emissions from

' diese! locos and assess or compare the axtent of emissions with the international

-standard;the Ministry have stated that-emission norms for diesel locomotives aré not हे

- available in India and have to be-evolved, Further it has been stated by the Railways

५

5 that formulation of Emission. Standards is‘a specialized and time consuming [०9 and

1 ‘
Lo


14 oe

‘appointment of a consultant is under process. The Committee are constrained to _
observe that the Ministry of Railways have not accorded due importance to such a’

serious environmental problem of emissions from diesel locos despite being pointed

out by Audit in 2013, the appointment of Consultant for formulation of Emission

Standards is still under process and according-to the Ministry instructions to Zonal

Railways fo monitor-emissian levels would be issued after.the emission standards'are

is implies that the Government is not at all serious and no sincere efforts

“have yet been resorted ta by the Ministry in this direction. In the Committee's:

considered view, such a sertous fapse cannot brook delay and, therefore, it is .
imperative and incumbent on Government to initiate effective and immediate action to

address the problem-and keep the Committee apprised

Further, the Railways have formulated an action plan for implementation of 5%
Bio Diesel blending in Diese[ and issued the same.to all Zonal Railways vide their
letter dated 02.03.2015. As approximately one year has. already completed since
issuing of action plan to Zonal Railways, the Committee would desire to be apprised of
the tangible outcome of this measure. The Committee alsa urge the Ministry to ensure’

monthly progress -statement from Zonal Raifways which would facilitate effective

. Monitoring. Besides, keeping in view the grave health hazards poséd by alarming level.

of diesel emissions from locos contributing rampant afr pollution especially in metro
cities, the Committee would urge the Ministry to explore the possibility. of farther
increasing the level of blending of Bio-diesel in’ diesel after studying international |

'‘standatds in this regard,

As regards ‘the status of setting up Bio-Diesel. plants at Raipur and Tondiarpet,
the Committee was unhappy to observe .thaf there was no progress made by the
Railways in respect of.the work for construction of the plants at Tondiarpet, as of
March 2012, except for identification of land Now, the Railway have submitted that
Todiarpet plant was expected to be commissioned by 30" September, 2015, The
Committeé would tike to be apprised of the status of commissioning of the Tondiarget
plant ahd progress report on the work of setting up of plant at Raipur along with the

expected date of commissioning of the same.



Noise Pollution
{Recommendation No. 9 & $0)

49 The study conducted by Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) during March 2012
ad revealed that noise levels were in excess of the prescribed limit at all Stations and no

. monitoring mechanisin. had been put. in..place.by.the Railways to gauge the noise fevel

’ . Further, Audit Survey of 2435*passengers at 34 Railway Stations acfoss 17 Zones tad also

revealed that 31% of the passengers were of the view that the noise level at stations was
unbearable, RDSO had also observed that noise level in AC Coaches increased from 71 to
72 DB inside the coaches which is unbearable. The Commiftee find that in the absence of
any specific instructions either trom Pollution Control Boards or from the Railway Board,
"the Zones have not initiated ‘any remedial measure to reduce noise pollution. Further, no
_ instruction had been issued at the level of Railway Board regarding noise control measures
near ‘habitation/silence Zones. As several measures were ‘reportedly being taken by the
Ministry to réduce the noise pollution inside the coaches as well as at the Stations, the
Committee had desired that these measures ought ta be implemented eamestly आए
effectively so as to ensure eliminatina/minimizing noise pollution in the coaches and at the

« Stations.

20. The Committee had also desired: that: the Railway Board, in consultation with the
Pollution Control Boards, should constitute a High Powered Body with adequate technical”
expertise for-formulating a comprehensive policy to control environmental and noise pollution
in the Trains and Stations and carrying out surprise checks to ensure effective

implementation of the measures initiated to that effect.
-24..° The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:

“There were no values specified for noise level inside coaches when ICF design of
coaches were designed. The new design LHB AC coaches have noise tevel of less
than 68 dB specified by European specification

There are no specified values of noise level inside the non-A4C coaches. However,
RDSO and Production Units constantly endeavour to reduce noise: level inside the ..
coaches. vee * ह

22... The Committee note that fhe new design LHB AC coaches of the Railways have

noise ievel‘of less than 68 DB as specified by European specifications. However, the’ ह

here is no specified values of noise [६५७] inside

"| Committee ate: unhappy to note th

ny

5 . ‘


5 _ 16

fhe non-AC coaches. The Raifways being a means of fransport of masses, it is of ©
utmost importance to ensure a noise pollution free journey for the masses travelling in
:non-AC coaches.as well. The Committee would, therefore, like the Ministry of Railways
to study the. best practices being followed world over fo reduce Railway refated noise
pollution and would like to be apprised of their status-and feasibility of implementation

in-Indiac The Committee are again perturbed to-find that as recommended. tn-their. |

rt, no effart seéms to have been resorted: towards constituting a High
Powered Body with adequate technical expertise for formulating a comprehensive
policy to contro! environmental and noise pollution in the Trains and Stations. The
Committee are of the view that in the absence of such a body having technical
expertise the policiés framed by the Railways towards checking noise poiluton in
Trains and Stations | are” quite ineffective. While reiterating their earlier
recommendation the Committee would urge the Ministry that the desired high

poweréd ‘body be set up expeditiously so as fo suggest ways and means fo obviate

noise pailution to the desirable level in trains and stations.

~ Effluent Treatment
(Recommendation No. 11)

23, The Committee were constrained to observe that there was no system fof monitoring
the ‘quality and quantuin of waste water generated at Stations. The Railway Board's
instructions for installation of Effluent Treatment Plant (ETP) at all major stations had also not
‘been adhered fo: On an averagé, one Effluent Treatment Plant had been installed in’ each :
Zone leaving most of the major stations without any ETP In the absence of ETPs, effiuents
ate being discharged from major stations to the nearby low lying areasiwater bodies and
municipal drainage systems resulting in 34-contamination of surrounding suiface and ground
water, The Committee had further noted that out of 17 ETPs sanctioned over five Zones, 14
ETPs have been installed. in three Zones fill March, 2012. Considering the fact’ thet
हु ‘discharging of effluents from the major Stations to the nearby low lying areasiwater bodies ‘is .
harmful fo the environment, as well as public health, thé Committee had recommended that
the Ministry should fake up installation of ETPs at all the Railway Stations on priority basis by
stipulating 3 deadline fot the purpose. Stingent Guidelines were also required to be issued
_and implementation monitored by the Ministry for scruputous adherence by the Zonal

Railways failing which responsibility be fixed हु
. Met rn ae


47. - : हि

24... The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Note have stated ag under.

“Applicability & Availability of pollution control equipment like Effluent Treatment Plants
(ETPs) -in functional state, it's regular use and monitoring of related pollution
parameters is an integral part of ISO 14001 certification. All the six established PUs
_ aie certified: under-ISO 14001:- Most--of the mechanical workshops “have also

aehieved IMS vartification of which ISO 14001 \certification, isan’ integral part. Thé___
remaining few mechanical workshops-arealready in the process __ of abtainingtit'S—
certification whicl is tentatively targeted.to be completed 86001." _

25, In their earlier Report, ‘the Committee had_ recommended for installation of
--Efftuent Treatment Plant (ETP) at all major Railway Stations on priority basts by
stipulating a deadline for the purpose. Instead, the reply submitted by the Ministry of |
Railways is silent about installation of ETPs at Raitway Stations but merely mentioned -
about the existence of ETP at six Production Units (PU) and Mechanical Workshops of
the Railways by virtue of their being ISO 14001 certified. The Committee deprecates
the nonchalant approach of Indian Railways towards the matter. The Committee, thus,
again reiterate that the Ministry should take up installation of ETPs at all majar Railway
Stations in the first instance-on priority basis by. stipulating a deadline for the purpose
along with penal measures for non adherence to the’ instructions ‘issued by the
Railway Board as imptementation of measures to ‘check environment health of the
-country cannot be leff as a matter of option to the Zonal Railways. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the substantive actions initiated to get the ETPs installed
at alt major stations with names and number of defaulting stations under each zone of
the Railways on urgent basis. The Ministry may also consider withholding of financial
5 assistance to the defaulting zanes pending installation of ETPs. The Committee desire
fo be informed of. present status of obtaining IMS Certification by remaining

thechanical workshops at the earliest.

- Use of Renewable Energy at Manned Level Crossing Gates Renewable Energy at Manned Level Crossing Gates

(Recommendation No. 14) 7

26. - The Committee had noted that. the Zonal Railways were directed in March; 2007 te
install solar based Jighting systém at ail manned level crossings. But, the overall achievement .
of the Indian Railways in the electrification of level crossings with. solar panel was far below.
the target set for the period 2007. fo 2011. ‘The Committee had found that no system has:

4 . web. on हु

' Tye COR a



. 18 है . “ cna
been ‘put in place to monitor the performance of level crossings energized with solar panels
or hybrid system. Further, no system of qualification of benefit accrued to Railways as a
result of implementation of solar panelefhybrid system in electrification of level crossings, had

been set up. As, the system of monitoring of instructions by the RB or Ministiy had proved to
be deficient, the Committee had recommended that the Ministry of Railways/Railway Board

- ~ should ensure regular and effective monitoring of the targets set fo Qy conservation at है
Fall levels ४० that they Gould be completed within the stipulated time frame. The Ministry
should also measure the benefit accrued to the Railways as a result of the electrification of ,

levef crossings with solar panels. As the Ministry, had assured that solar panels at 2000

stations would be implemented in the next two years, the Committee had desired to be

. | -
apprised of the periodical present Progress of the matter. ~ -

’ 27. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:

“As per the policy fetter dated 08.03 2007, Solar based lighting system were to be

provided at manned LC gates which are not electrified, Thereafter in 2008, Action

plan targets were issued ‘for provision’ of. solar panel at LC gates. The progress of .

this item is regularly discussed in CESE/CEGE meetings held time to time and in

~ the monthly PCDOs. Further, Railways have fixed annual energy target for non
traction-energy. Due to vigorous Monitoring the elécirical energy consumption in noa

. traction application, inspite of increase in load is negligible ‘dustng- the last
04 years, Further DG/BEE vide their etter has also mentioned that Raitways have
been achieving annual reduction of about 2% in electric traction and about 2.8% per
year in non. traction applications. As on date, 4406 LC gates has been Provided with
solar based lighting system.” : :

“e

28, The Committee are happy to note that the electrical energy consumption in
non traction application, inspite of increase in load is negtigible during the last 04
years and the Railways have been achieving annual reduction of about 2.8% per year
_ in non traction applications. However, the data on energy conservation targets set by
each Zonal Railways and the éxtent to which such tatgets have been achieved have
not been provided by the Railways. The Min istry of Railways have. also not mentioned
as to whether instructions have been issued to Zonal Railways to duly Maintain such.
data fowards energy. conservation. The Committee, therefore, would like to be
informed of status of such data being maintained by Zonal Railways and in absence of
“such practice, the corrective action taken ‘by the Railways fo monitor the timely.
completion of targets-set for energy conservation by Zonal Railways. The Committee
are unhappy fo nate that though as per letter dated 8/3/2007, Solar Panels were to-be

. Bo, x

Lou 7 voy



= ~s--Energy Audit

“19
installed at 2000 Railway Stations within a period of 2 years. Little progress seems io
have been achieved as action faken notes are silent both on implementation and
7 benefits achieved td india Railways. Since energy conservation is extremely vital for

financial health of Indian Railways, ‘the Committee desire that a-plan, of action be

drawn up-for time bound-provisioning of solar panels at Railway Stations

(Recommendation No. 16)

29. The Committee had observed that the progress of energy audit conducted in 17 Zones
revealed that no energy audit had been conducted in three Zones, while 48 out of 149
recommendations made by the Energy Auditors had not been implemented in seven Zones
and partial implementation had been noticéd in respect of 18 recommendations. Further.
recommendations: given: in case of 12 Traction Sub-Stations had either been partially ~
implemented or no targets had been fixed for implernentation of the same. While observing
that there had also been no effective system of monitoring energy audit and implementation
of their recommendations at Railway Board level, the Committee had desired to be furnished
. With a detailed réport indicating the recommendations given by the Energy Auditors ,
implemented/not implemented by the Ministry along with the reasons for non-acceptance and

remedial/corrective action taken on the recommendations accepted by them. |
30, The Ministry of Railways, in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:

“Zonal Railways havé been advised to carry out energy audit of all buildings having
more than” 100 KW and:the same was reiterated vide ‘Board's letter no
* 2007/Elect8G)/152/2. dated 18.07.2008. It was also stated that Zonal Railways can
_ uadertake. by IRIEEN trained Officials छि this purpose of eriergy audit. During the
_ year 2014-15, 448 energy audits have been done. In addition, 66 Energy Audits have,
“also been carried out during 2015-16 (up to 1४०४-15), For implementation of energy”
‘-audit seport. Zonal Railways was advised to’ work out a small. action plan vide
Board's letter no, 2007/Elect9G}/152/2 dated 30.3.2015 and feed back. of the same
be given on Rail saver website. Due to achievement in energy conservation, IR has -
bagged 86 National Energy Conservation Award during the period fram 2010 - 2015

Further, MoUs have been signed ‘with Ministry of Power, Bureau’ of Energy Efficiency ;
(BEE) for enhancing co-operation in the areas of energy conservation over-tR."

“34, In. their earlier Report, the Committee had. asked. the Railways to ‘furnish 8
detailed: repert indicating the recommendations given by. the Energy Auditors,

implemented/not ‘implemented by the -Ministry aléng with the, reasdns for’

*
| ve


a 20

noa-acceptance and remedial/corrective action taken on the recommendations
However, the Raifways have not supplied the said information and the figure of energy
audit as reported by the Ministry shows a. eclining trend with only 66 energy audits
‘done in 2015-16 as comparéd.to 448 in 2014-45 (upto November 2015), highlighting the हु
lackadaisteal approach of. the Railways towards energy audit. The ‘Committee,

. therefore, strongly desire the Ministry of Railways to put utmost importance on.duly__:

getting ig energy—audit onducted in all Zonal Railways to identify the areas of
improvement and present to the Committee efatus of energy audit of all eligibie
facilities alohg with details of non complying facilities/stations in the-concerned Zonal
* Railways. The Committee also reiterate that a detailed report indicating the
recommendations given by the Energy Auditors, implementedinot implemented by the

Mintstry along with the reasons for non-acceptance and remedialicorrective action

faken on the recommendations may be furnished fo the Committee ai the earliest,

32... The Committee note that in pursuance of their recommendations, the Ministry of:
Railways have fnitiated several measures to make the “environment management
system in indian” Railways - Stations, Trains and “Tracks more effective in future,
however, in several cases the work was far from completion titl December, 2015, The

details of such cases as Provided by the Ministry are given as under:
@) Balance works ‘of Raipur plant are yet to be completed.
, (ti) Commissioning of Tondiarpet Plant is further delayed.
(iif). Introduction of bio-diesel in indian Railways ts stilt at roadmap State,

(vy Tenders. for Natural Gas based Alco engine for locomotives are yet to he

. awarded, है
(४) . .. The Gas Turbine: based locomotives, RDSO is ‘stilt at discussion stage with

है Water recycling pliant at Raipur Station is yet fo be set up.

(vi)’ ° Setting: up of Water Recycling Plant (WRP} subject to techno-economic viabitity
at major water consumption centres is still being assessed, if has been planned
to'take up work of WRPs at 32 major stations (A-1 and A Category} including 9

stations-on Southern Railway during 2045-16,

. - ok ne, .
. D . - 1 -t L “Of
4 ac Se : :
६ : oa


af

{vil} For the year 2045-16 total 326 Rain Water Harvesting (RWH) systems have been
है planned, to be set up on various Zonal Railways, out of which 146 have been

completed till September, 2015.

{viii} . Indian Railways has planned to set up additional 168 MW of

(ix) “Andjan_Railways-is-striving fa achieve-the-target-of-fitment of 10500- - toilet a

in the passenger codches during the financtal year 2014-15

. While noting the aforesaid steps inifiated by the Ministry of Railways, the
Committee would like to be apprised of the tangible outcome of these measures and
also fhe present status of aforesaid works already in process, and targets achieved till
‘February, 2016 in respect of sefting up of RWH, Water Recycling Plants, Wind Mill
Plants, fitment of 90 toilets, etc. The Committee would also impress upon the’
Government’ to intensify the measures initiated and make more conceited ‘efforts
towards cleanjiness.in stations and trains, curbing emission from Diesel Jocomatives
regulating. NoiseMWater Pollution, Electrification of tracks, conservation of water and

energy and wasfe management in Indian Railways.

a vs Reef, Kev. THOMAS
WED BELT / ह ' - Chait porter
th ae :
a Maseh els _ 10001... Accourcla Comittee :
A thalguna, 981(Sata)