101

SHARED MOBILE INFRASTRUCTURE SCHEME

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their 64" Report (16 Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS (DEPARTMENT OF
TELECOMMUNICATIONS)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2017-18)
HUNDRED - FIRST REPORT

—_ eee

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI :


PAC NO._2135

HUNDRED-FIRST REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2017-18)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

SHARED MOBILE INFRASTRUCTURE SCHEME

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their 647 Report (16" Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS (DEPARTMENT OF
TELECOMMUNICATIONS)

Presented to Lok Sabha on.

Laid in Rajya Sabha on:

March, 2018 /Chaitra, 1940 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2017-18)

INTRODUCTION

CHAPTER |
CHAPTER II*

CHAPTER IIl*

CHAPTER IV*

CHAPTER V*

Report ................- "लत न हल न

Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ..........-.::::eeee

Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
replies received from the Government ..............-+
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration ............... ee ceeseeeee eee हल ह हर 5

Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which the Government have furnished interim
T=) | (oS

APPENDICES*
Minutes of the 22" sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2017-18) held on
23" March, 2018.

Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their Sixty-fourth
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

*Not appended to the cyclostyled copy of the Report

eee

“Gill


४ ९7०७ 9४७ 7० # YW २

eee
AR BBE S

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.

22.

3.

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
. (2017-18)
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge - Chairperson
MEMBERS हे
LOK SABHA

Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
Shri Nishikant Dubey

Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Smt. Riti Pathak

Shri Neiphiu Rioh”

Shri Abhishek Singh

Prof. Ram Shanker

Dr. Kirit Somaiya

Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi

Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Naresh Agrawal

Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Shri Mohd. Ali Khan’

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy?
Shri Ajay Sancheti ह

Shri Bhupender Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri A.K. Singh - Additional Secretary

Shri T. JayaKumar  - Director
Smt. Anju Kukreja- Under Secretary

* Ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon acceptance of his resignation from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 22

February, 2018. a

1 Elected w.e.f. 29 December, 2017 in lieu of vacancy caused due to retirement of Shri Shantaram Naik.
+ ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 18 August, 2017 and

- re-elected w.e.f. 29 December, 2017.

(१)


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2017-18), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Hundred-first Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Sixty-fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on “Shared
Mobile Infrastructure Scheme" relating to Ministry of Communications (Department of

Telecommunications).

2. The Sixty-fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on
170. March, 2017. Replies of the Government to all the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received. The Public
Accounts Committee considered and adopted the Hundred - first Report at their sitting
held on 23" March, 2018. Minutes of the sitting are given at Appendix I.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the © Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Sixty-fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given

at Appendix-ll.

NEW DELHI; MALLIKARJUN KHARGE
x ‘T_March, 2018 Chairperson,
6 Chaitra, 1940 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

(५)


REPORT
PART -।

This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations and Recommendations contained in their 647" Report (16" Lok Sabha)
on the subject "Shared Mobile Infrastructure Scheme" based on Para No. 2.2 of
C&AG Report No. 17 of 2014 related to. Ministry of Communications (Department of
Telecommunications).

2. The Sixty-fourth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on
47" March, 2017. It contained 10 observations/Recommendations. Action Taken
Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations have been received from
the Ministry of Communications (Department of Telecommunications) and these have
been categorized as under:

(i) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee which have been
accepted by the Government:

Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9& 10

Total: 10
Chapter - Il
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to

pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:

Para Nos. -NIL-

Total: NIL
Chapter - Ill
(iii) | Observations/Recommendations ‘in respect of which replies of the

Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

Para Nos. NIL

Total: NIL
Chapter — IV


(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:

Para Nos. NIL

Total: NIL
Chapter -V

3. In their 64" Report which was presented to Lok Sabha on 17" March, 2017, the
Committee have dealt with the various issues such as defective subsidy support with
Universal Service Providers (USPs), non — provisioning of mobile services in uncovered
areas, non-recovery of penalty for non-provisioning of mobile services, ineffective penal
clauses in Service Level Agreement, non-existence of clauses to safeguard Department
of Telecommunications against defaulting Infrastructure providers (IPs) and Universal
Service Providers etc.

4, The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Communications —
(Department of Telecommunications) to each of the Observations/Recommendations of

the Committee contained in their Sixty-fourth Report have been reproduced in the

relevant chapters of this Report. In the succeeding paragraphs, the Committee have

dealt with the action taken by the Government on some of their

Observations/Recommendations.

A. Non-provisioning of mobile services in 252 sites

(Recommendation Para No. 3)

5. Upon noticing that no mobile services were provided by a single USP in 252 sites
even after the agreements signed with the bidders expired on 30.11.2013, the
Committee recommended that immediate necessary steps may be taken to attract
service providers to those 252 sites so that radiation and provision of mobile services
can be commenced at these sites without further delay.


6. The Ministry of Communications (Department of Telecommunications) in their
Action Taken Notes have stated as under:

“The scheme was to provide financial support for setting up infrastructure which
would enable a faster roll out of mobile services in the remote and rural areas.
Keeping in view the fact that the area to be covered was very large and that the
ultimate objective was to provide telecom services at affordable and reasonable -
prices and also that the infrastructure to be set up was highly capital intensive,
overall expenditure was to be kept at a low level through sharing of the
infrastructure. The scheme had two components: -

Part ‘A’: Setting up and managing infrastructure sites (land, tower, power,
security, civil and electrical works) by Infrastructure Providers (IPs) with subsidy
support as a percentage of capital recovery for setting up the infrastructure.

Part 'B': Provisioning of mobile services by Universal Service Providers (USPs)
by installation of Base Trans-Receiver Stations (BTS) on towers/ infrastructures
with subsidy support as a percentage of capital recovery for providing the
equipment at the infrastructure sites.

Two separate agreements were signed with IPs and Telecom Service Providers.
The subsidy disbursements were done as per terms and conditions of the
Agreement. The ownership of the assets rests with the IPs and TSPs as per the
Terms & Conditions of agreement. The sites were made ready by the IP and the
subsidy was released to them on the basis of the terms and conditions of the
Agreement. Under this scheme, 1831 towers were installed by IPs and the
claims preferred by them were settled after receipt of completion certificate and
commissioning of BTS. Out of total amount of = 404 crore disbursed from USOF
under this scheme, an amount of % 383 crore has been disbursed to IPs for
installation of towers as per agreement in Part ‘A’. However the TSPs could not
provide the Mobile services in time on ready sites.-In order to get the mobile
services from these tower locations, rigorous persuasion at the highest level was
done. Regular meetings were held amongst all stake holders. The various
reasons cited by TSPs for non-commencement of services were as under:

i) Sites were in most remote areas of rural India, inaccessible by roads.

ii) Many of the sites were in disturbed areas affected by terrorism, forest
areas, hilly terrain, snow bound with no transport facilities and involving
head road etc.

iii) Active monsoon in NE region, HP, UP (East), Gujarat, Odisha: and
Uttarakhand.

iv) State of Bihar experienced one of the worst floods bringing the work to
halt.

v) J&K experienced disturbances during the peak working season..

vi) Some sights were located in forest/tribal areas.


vil) Forest department stopped the work claiming that installation and
radiation tower will endanger life of forest creatures.

In spite of all these hurdles, it was the regular persuasion from USOF that the
project was completed to a great extent [about 97%] in the most difficult locations
of the country.

TSPs preferred the claim of & 27 crore for provisioning of mobile services. After
scrutiny of the claim in detail, the amount of = 20 crore only was passed for
disbursement of subsidy from USOF and rest of the amount has been disallowed
/ withheld. In the agreement of Part B, USO Fund did not provide any financial
support to TSPs who quoted zero and negative subsidy. On the other hand, TSP
gave the revenue to USOF for negative bidding clusters.

Department is examining the various options for providing mobile services in

those left out 252 locations. As part of its mandate, USOF is committed to

provide mobile services in the remote and rural areas of the country.”
7. The Committee are concerned to note that Ministry is still examining
various options for providing mobile services in the left out 252 remote locations
of the country. No time frame has been provided by the’Ministry to ensure timely
completion of mobile services in those locations. Ministry also did not provide
information about the steps taken to attract service providers to those locations.
Since the agreements signed with the bidders expired on 30.11.2013, the
Committee desire to know as to whether any further agreements were signed by
the Ministry for providing mobile services at those locations. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the date of signing of the agreements, steps taken so
far to provide mobile services at those locations and target date for completion of
the same.

B. Provisioning of mobile services in left out remote areas

(Recommendation Para No. 5)

8. Having observed that the objective of providing wireless or mobile services to
uncovered areas including rural, remote, hilly and tribal areas had been achieved only
to the extent of 72 percent and services from 6026 sites were not rolled out as on
October, 2012, the Committee recommended the Ministry to come up with better


system of ‘planning coordination between different implementing agencies and
execution.

9. The Ministry of Communications (Department of Telecommunications) in their
Action Taken Note have stated as under:

“The project under reference was the result of the ७507 initiative of providing
mobile services in the uncovered/ inaccessible areas to benefit the society. The
project was aimed to provide the mobile services in uncovered areas including
tural, remote, hilly and tribal areas, where the services were not provided by the
TSPs as there was no business case for them to provide the services. USOF
sought to cover these areas through viability gap funding.

The recommendations of the Committee for incorporation of suitable clauses in
future tenders are being implemented. Universal Service Obligation Fund
(USOF) has called bids for provisioning of mobile services in uncovered villages
and along the national highways of the North Eastern region from TSPs only and
not from both IPs &TSPs. All appropriate clauses are being incorporated in the
tender’s/ contract agreements. so as to ensure timely and prompt provisioning of
mobile services as well as imposition of penalties against defaulting parties.”

10. The Committee in their Sixty-fourth Report (167 Lok Sabha). had desired the
Ministry to come up with better system of planning, coordination amongst
different implementing agencies and execution for providing wireless or mobile
services to uncovered areas including rural, remote, hilly and tribal areas. In
response thereto, the USOF has called bids for provisioning of mobile services in
uncovered villages and along the national highways of the North Eastern region
from TSPs. All appropriate clauses are also being incorporated in the
tender’s/contract agreements so as to ensure timely and prompt provision of
mobile services. While appreciating the steps taken by the Ministry in this regard,
the Committee would desire to know as to what extent such measures are helpful
in achieving the objective of providing mobile services in uncovered areas,
Considering the importance of providing mobile services in
uncovered/inaccessible areas to benefit the society, the Committee exhort the
Ministry to look into this vital aspect and take necessary corrective steps for


ensuring that the objective of providing wireless or mobile services in uncovered
areas including rural, remote, hilly and tribal areas is achieved.

८. Recovery of Penalty for interruptions/downtime of Penalty for interruptions/downtime

(Recommendation Para No. 7) हे
11... ॥ their 64" Report (16" Lok Sabha), the Committee were disappointed to find
that recovery of penalty of हैं 9.62 lakh had not been effected from M/s Bharti Airtel
Limited (BAL) of Odisha Circle. They had, therefore, recommended for expeditious
recovery of the penalty amount, along with the admissible interest from the aforesaid
USP. Further, upon noticing about the sub-judice case of non-recovery of penalty for
interruptions/downtime of service viz ₹ 27.10 crore on M/s IDEA in Madhya Pradesh
Telecom Circle, the Committee had desired that the Infrastructure Providers (IPs)
should be held responsible for all infrastructure related failures and penalties be
imposed accordingly. The Committee had also desired to be apprised of the latest
status of the cases pending in the court seeking recovery of penalty from M/s IDEA of
CCA, Madhya Pradesh. Further, to avoid such litigations in future, the Committee
recommended that while signing the Service Level Agreement, DoT should ensure that
clauses, denoting clear-cut responsibilities of the USPs and IPs are incorporated in the
_ agreement not only to facilitate efficient and quality mobile services but also to ensure
fixation of responsibility and empower DoT to take the guilty party to task without any
delay.

12. The Ministry of Communications (Department of Telecommunications) in their

Action Taken Note have stated as under:

"It may be highlighted that the M/s Bharti Airtel Limited (BAL) had submitted a
negative bid against the tender for Part 8 of the scheme viz. provisioning of the
mobile services. Accordingly, in accordance with the provisions stipulated in the
tender, no Performance Bank Guarantee was taken from M/s BAL. However,
M/s BAL was responsible, as per the terms and conditions of the Part -B
Agreement signed between USOF and M/s BAL, for paying of penalty on account
of the prolonged interruptions of service due to any reason. With regard to the
Committee's recommendation for expeditious recovery of the penalty amount,
along with the admissible interest from M/s Bharti Airtel Limited (BAL) in Odisha
Circle, it is stated that the matter is constantly being followed up with M/s BAL for


depositing the outstanding amount. The recommendations of the Committee for
incorporation of suitable clauses in future tenders are being implemented. USOF
has called bids for provisioning of mobile services in uncovered villages and
along the national highways of the North Eastern region from TSPs only and not
from both IPs &TSPs. All appropriate clauses are being incorporated in the
tender's/ contract agreements so as to ensure timely and prompt provisioning of
mobile services as well as imposition of penalties against defaulting parties. It is,
further, submitted that M/s Idea Cellular Limited filed a Writ Petition No. 9191 of
2013 against Administrator, USOF before Hon'ble High Court, Jabalpur regarding
payment of penalty & interest for interruption of Mobile Services to the tune of
& 27,10,08,835/- including interest . The case is under trial before the Hon'ble
Court. The last date of hearing in this case was 12.05.2016, which was attended
by both the parties. The next date of hearing is still awaited. However, the bank
guarantee has been withheld with CCA, Madhya Pradesh for & 27,41,87,500/- in
this regard.”

13. The Committee observe that with regard to Committee’s recommendation
for expeditious recovery of the penalty amount, alongwith the admissible interest
from M/s Bharti Airtel Limited (BAL) in Odisha Circle, the Ministry submitted that
the matter is constantly being followed up with M/s BAL for depositing the
outstanding amount. The failure of the Ministry to recover the penalty clearly
shows that the matter has not been pursued seriously by them even though three
and half years elapsed after laying of Audit Report in Parliament ie. 1% August,
2014. The Committee would, therefore, desire the Ministry that the pending
amount of penalty is recovered expeditiously from M/s BAL. The Committee
would also like to be apprised ‘of the present status of the case of payment of
penalty and interest from M/s Idea Cellular Limited for interruption of mobile
services to the tune of %27,10,08,835. |

NEW DELHI; MALLIKARJUN KHARGE
87 March, 2018 Chairperson,

6 Chaitra, 1940 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee