INDIRA AWAAS YOJANA

_ MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2015-16) «

FORTY THIRD REPORT
|

43

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI



PAC NO. 2078

FORTY THIRD REPORT.

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2015-16)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

Presented to Lok Sabhaon: 26 + A + Det g

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: हु. ०4 . 2०१६

LAK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

April, 2616 Maisakha, 1938 (Saka)


CONTENTS
1 PAGE
- COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2015-16) (iii)

COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE IV OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS {iv)
COMMITTEE (2015-16) __

INTRODUCTION (v}
REPORT
PART | ।
1 ; Introductory . ; 1
ii} Identification and selection of beneficiaries . 1
tlt Construction of houses and quality , 6
Iv Financia! Management . : 9
v Monitoritg and evaluation : 12
Vi हि Convergence of Schemes 21
Vil Schemes for Homestead Sifes है 25
PART Il
Observations/ Recommendations... ...i.cececeeeee erect eee eens 27
ANNEXURES
A. «++ Statement én“'the number of - identified,
beneficiaries, houses sanctioned and targets
achieve since 2013-14
B Minutes of the sifting of the Sub-Committee-IV :
7 of PAC (2015-16) on 1.2.2016 i
Cc Minutes of the sitting of the Sub-Committee-IV
‘of PAC (2015-16) on 21.4.2016 1
*D Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts

Committee (2015-16) on 25.4.2016

* To be appended at the time of printing


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2015-18):
Prof. K.V. Thomas "रा Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

anooak wn

2

41.
12,
13.
14.
15.

16.
47,
18,
५ 18.
20.
2A,
22.

Feb

Shri'S:S. Ahluwalia

Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay

Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura

Shri Nishikant Dubey

Shri Gajanan Kirtikar i
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank"
Shri Neiphiu Rio

Shri Dushyant.Singh

Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal

Dr! Kirit Somaiya

- Shri Anurag Singh Thakur

Shri Shivkumar Udasi
Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Naresh Agrawal

Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi

Shri Anil Madhav Dave

Shri Vijay Goel

Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita

Shri Shantaram Naik

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy ।

SECRETARIAT

Shri A.K. Singh - Additionat Secretary
Shri Tirthankar Das - Additionat Director
Shri Paotienlal Haokip - Deputy Secretary

* Shri Ashikho Alerno -

Executive Assistant


Composition of Sub-Committee - IV [Non-compliance by Ministries/
Departments in timely submission of Action Taken Notes on the Non-selected
Audit. Paragraphs (Civil and other Ministries)]: of the Public Accounts
Committee (2015-16) | :

Convenor Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Alternate Convenor Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
Members Shri Nishikant Dubey

Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi
Shri Anil Madhav Daye

ohana



4

INTRODUCTION ; 7

[, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2015-16), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Forty Third Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha) on ‘Indira Awaas Yojana’ based on C&AG Report No. 37 of 2014, Union
Government (Civil) relating to the Ministry of Rural Development.

2. The Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid on the
Table of the House on 19'" December, 2014. ;

3. The Public Accounts Committee (2015-16) took up the subject for detailed
examination’ and report. The Sub-Committee-IV of PAC fook evidence of the
representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development on the [subject at their sitting
held on 1 February, 2016: Based on the evidence a draft Report was prepared and
finalised” by the Sub-Committee and placed before the Commitlee for -their
consideration. है
1

4, The Committee considered and adopted this draft Report at their sitting held
on 25" April, 2016. Minutes of the sittings are appended to the Report. .

5. - For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part ॥ of the Report.

6. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Rural Development for tendering evidence before them and furnishing
information ह connection with the examination of the subject.

7. The ¢ ommittee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
_to them in the matter by the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. -

NEW DELHI; PROF. K.V. THOMAS
26 April, 2046 Chairperson,
06 Vaisakha, 4938 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


REPORT
PART -।

! INTRODUCTORY

C&AG presented a Performance Audit Report No. 37 of 2014 on Indira
Awaas Yojana to Parliament, which was automatically referred to the Public
Accounts Committee. Accordingly, based on the findings of Audit, the Committee
took up the subject for detailed examination.

i
2. Indira Awaas Yojana ay) is a flagship scheme of the Ministry of Rural
Development which has been providing assistance to BPL families who are
either houseless or having inadequate housing facilities, for constructing a safe
and durable shelter. IAY was introduced in June 1985 as a sub-scheme of Rural
Landless Employment Guarantee Programme (RLEGP) with the objective to help
the poor in rural areas to construct/ upgrade their dwelling units. The [AY was a
part of Jawahar Rozgar Yojana (JRY) from Aprit 1989 and implemented as an
independent scheme from January 1996. The beneficiaries under the IAY are
SC/ST, freed bonded labourers, minorities in the BPL category and other below
poverty line non-SC/ST rural households, widows and next of kin to defense
persomnel/ paramilitary forces killed in action residing in rural areas (irrespective
of their income criteria), ex-serviceman and retired members of paramilitary
forces fulfilling other conditions viz. the beneficiary should be houseless person

or have kutcha house and residing in rural area.

॥ IDENTIFICATION AND SELECTION OF BENEFICIARIES.

3. In their Report, Audit have pointed out that actual housing
shortage(essential for identification of beneficiaries) was not assessed in 14
states viz. Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Haryana, Himachal
Pradesh, Jharkhand, Kerala, Maharashtra, Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland,


< 2

Uttarakhand, West Bengal and Punjab (three districts). Audit had also observed
(audited data covering 168 districts from 27 states and four union territories for
the period from April 2008 to March 2013) that several ineligible beneficiaries
were selected. In 12 states, 36,751 non- BPL families were given assistance of
Rs.89.15 crore. In 11 states, 10,184 ineligible beneficiaries were selected and
Rs.31.73 crore was paid to them. In seven States, 33,536 beneficiaries were
selected from outside the permanent IAY waitlists and paid assistance of
Rs.138.02 crore. In eight States, 1,654 beneficiaries who received assistance of
Rs, 5.37 crore, already had pucca houses. In eight States, 5,824 beneficiaries
were selected more than once and payment of Rs.14.67 crore was made to
them. In six states, allotment of dwelling units in the name of female members of

the household was not preferred. |

4. During oral evidence, the representatives of the Ministry of Rural
Development submitted 85 follows;

“In many States, the BPL list is very old, sometimes of 2000,
sometimes of 2002. Most of the States have the list of 2002. They
have become extremely suspect now. Many people have moved up;
many people have jmoved down; and new families have been
created. So, there is'a need for revisiting the beneficiary list so as to
what should be the basis. Many States have also exhausted the
BPL list. What the Ministry has now decided is this. Now, the socio- _
economic census data is already available and it is finalised in
almost 95 per cent of the Districts. It is our decision, now, to use
SECC as the basis for identification of beneficiaries because that is
transparent; that is objective. We have set up a Committee under
the chairmanship of ‘Shri Sumit Bose, former Finance Secretary with
experts like Prof. Himanshu of JNU, Ms. Rinku Murgai of World Bank
and Prof. Mahindra Dev of Indira Gandhi Institute of Development


Research to actually give us some guidance about how we should
identify the beneficiaries because there are several deprivation
criteria in the SECC. So, they are expected to give their advice
within the next two weeks. After that, we will circulate the procedure
for identification taking SECC as the base to the States. Therefore,
from 2016-17 onwards, the Ministry will use not the old BPL list but
the SECC as the basis of beneficiary selection. Even at that stage,
we have decided that first a draft list should be made available and
then, all the stakeholders should be requested fo submit whether

there is still some inaccuracy, some wrongful exclusion, wrongful
inclusion. So, second case will be done. Also, an Appellate Forum,
will be there. In case, somebody feels that he has wrongfully been
excluded, 18: can also appeal in the Appellate Forum, So, we are
trying to address the issue of wrongful selection through this method.
We do believe that the SECC has been largely used in most States
for implementation of NFSA and their experience has been fairly
satisfactory.”

5. When asked about the seven primary deprivation criteria for SECC, the
Ministry replied as follows;

- “The seven primary deprivation criteria for identification of BPL
households in rural areas using SECC 2011, as approved by the
Union Cabinet, are listed below:-

i. Households with only one room with kutcha walls and kutcha
roof
ii. Households with no adult member between age 16 to 59
ii, Female headed households with no adult male member
between age 16 to 59 है


iv. Households with no literate adult above 25 years
v. SC/ST households
vi. Households with any disabled member and no able bodied
adult member
vii, Landless Households deriving the major part of their income

from manual casual labour”
6. The representatives of the Ministry also stated as under,

“| would like to clarify that there will be no BPL list on the basis
of SECC. For different programmes, we will use different deprivation
criteria and NFSA list is also being drawn from SECC but there will
be no BPL”

“awe may have a different beneficiary selection
procedure for different programmes. The same list need not be
applicable for all programmes. Like for housing, houselessness and
type of house ownership will be the main criteria whereas for NRLM,
Rural Livelihood Mission, we can have a more inclusive approach of
deprivation. So, that is the idea. One size fits all will not be the

approach. We will have more flexible criteria.”

7. When asked about the deprivation criteria for the identification and

selection of JAY beneficiaries, the Ministry replied as follows;

“It is proposed that identification and selection of IAY
beneficiaries will be done on the basis of parameters related to
housing and socio economic deprivation. As such, all households
which are houseless or living in zero/one/two room kutcha houses
will constitute the universe of eligible beneficiaries and be
categorised as distinct groups. Within these groups, further


prioritization will be based on automatic inclusion parameters and
cumulative deprivation scores which will be calculated on the basis
of primary deprivation parameters listed previously. Separate priority
lists will be generated Gram Panchayat wise for SC, ST and others
based on the above procedure. The proposed procedure is
undergoing review by an Expert Group and will be finalised based
upon the recommendations of the Group.”

8. When enquired about the mechanism to ensure compliance to the
guidelines and deprivation criteria for the identification and selection of IAY

beneficiaries, the Ministry-replied as follows;

"To ensure that all States. comply with the guidelines and
deprivation criteria for the identification and selection of IAY
beneficiaries, Gram Panchayat (GP) wise priority lists will be system
generated by software designed for identifying beneficiaries as per
the criteria. All MIS personnel working at state level will be trained on
the software. Simultaneously, Ministry will also develop lists using
the software to cross check the lists generated by States.

Gram Sabhas will be given the power to remove or elevate

_ héuseholds in -the-annual select list, derived from the priority fist,
after recording proper justification for the same. Once the annual
select fist is approved by the Gram Sabha, it will be widely
disseminated. A window period will be provided for raising of
objections which will be considered by an Appellate Committee set
at the district level. The final approved annual select list would be
aggregated at the State level for further monitoring. The same would
then be updated on AwaasSoft to show changes made to the
system generated priority list which would form the basis of


monitoring by the Ministry. These recommendations are under
examination by an Expert committee. Final directions will be issued

on.approval by the committee and competent authority.”

9. When asked about the latest status of finalizing the priority lists and
whether all States/ UTs have uploaded their priority lists on AwaasSoft, the
Ministry replied as follows:

“The procedure for generating priority lists based on SECC
2011 is being reviewed by an Expert Group and will be finalised
based upon. the recommendations of the Group. Finalisation of
priority list and uploading on AwaasSoft will take place

| subsequently”

10. The Ministry had also furnished latest details on the number of
beneficiaries registered since 2013-14 and number of beneficiaries identified,
targets achieved and under progress (Annexure-A).

CONSTRUCTION OF HOUSES AND QUALITY QUALITY

Ml

41. In their Report, Audit have pointed out that though the Working Group
under the Planning Commission on Rural Housing had fixed the targets of
construction of 170 lakh houses under the IAY for 2008-13, only 128.92 lakh
houses (75.84 per cent against Working Group target) were constructed during
the period. Audit also pointed out cases of delay in completion of houses beyond
stipulated time limit of two years in numerous cases. In 48 selected districts of
nine states viz. Assam, Bihar, Gujarat, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand,
Kamataka, Maharashtra, Meghalaya and Rajasthan, 61,293 houses remained
incomplete despite a lapse of more than two years which resulted in unfruitful
expenditure of Rs.150.22 crore in respect of these incomplete houses. Audit also


came across cases of IAY houses being abandoned even after receiving full
amount by the beneficiaries, cases where beneficiaries having got first instalment
neither claimed nor were paid the second instalment of the IAY assistance;
engagement of contractors in contravention of the IAY guidelines (e.g. 2188

cases in Andaman & Nicobar Islands) etc.

12. It has been stated by the Ministry that the States had reported that 34.63
lakh houses were under construction. Out of these, 22.35 lakh were houses
sanctioned in 2013-14 and 2014-15. These houses had to be completed within
the next six months to one year, by which time the maximum prescribed time for.
completion expires. Another 12:28 lakh, sanctioned prior to. 2013-14 were yet to

be compieted ;

13. When asked about the latest status of the completion of 22.35 lakh houses
that were sanctioned in 2013-14 and have to be completed during the 2014-15
and 12.28 lakh houses that were sanctioned prior to 2013-14, the Ministry replied
as follows:

“As per figures reported by States on IAY-MIS,; out of all
houses sanctioned in 2013-14, 11.01 lakh houses are co no as
on 26.02.2016. The actual figures of houses completed] on ground
could be ‘much higher jin view of reporting gaps and ‘inability of
States to upload data on AwaasSoft. The Ministry has directed all
States to update progress pertaining to financial year 2013-14 and
2014-15 on AwaasSoft by 31.03.2016. Most States have informed
that majority of houses sanctioned prior to 2013-14 have been

completed on ground.” :
|

14. To keep track of available vacant sites and various stages of construction
of houses and ensure quality materials being used for construction, the Ministry
had developed an android based mobile application — ‘AwaasApp’ and hosted on


several platforms including Google Piaystore for wider access. The app is
currently being used by thirteen States to carry out inspections. To plug the
loophole of transmission connectivity deficit in rural area the Ministry are working
towards-improving the functionality in future versions of the App by developing
offline modules for data capture and transmission.

15. In regard to ensuring the construction of houses as per the IAY guidelines
and use of quality materials for construction, the Ministry replied as follows:

“As per IAY guidelines, the State government should put in
place a system of quality monitoring to guide and assist the
beneficiary in achieving satisfactory quality of house construction.
States have been facilitated to employ Technical experts at the state
level by allowing the use of administrative funds for the same. The
Ministry only plays the role of a facilitator in ensuring the State has
adequate wherewithal at its disposal to ensure quality houses are

being constructed under the scheme.”

16. The Ministry have stated that in an effort to improve construction of houses
and housing designs, they are bringing a catalogue of designs appropriate for
different locations. The Ministry had also started a 4198 mason training
programme in collaboration with the State Governments. Keeping in mind the
diverse traditional and cultural sensitivities, the Ministry, in collaboration with
UNDP and IIT, Delhi had initiated an exercise to catalogue locally appropriate,
cost effective technologies and housing typologies for different zones in 18 states
of India. The zoning for respective States was done based on climate,
topography, cultural and traditional housing practices land vulnerability to
disasters. The State-wise compendiums, which have designs, drawings and
estimates appropriate fo each region are being developed in consultation with

local officials, beneficiaries and Panchayati Raj functionaries. The Ministry have


stated that they are also developing a curriculum for the mason training program

‘to comply with the requirements of National Sector Skills Council, which do not
allow for variations. However, in future additional curriculum would be developed
to ensure that relevant local context and traditional housing practices are
preserved. The Ministry further stated that Design catalogues had been
developed for three States viz; Tripura, Meghalaya and Maharashtra and
catalogues for the remaining states would be developed after completion of the
documentation exercise and due vetting by local people, administration and
Technical Institutes, The catalogues for all 18 states are expected to be finalized
and ready for release by December 2016.

iV FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT

hE

17. The IAY is funded on cost-sharing basis between the Central Government
and the State Governments in the ratio of 75:25 However, in the case of North-
Eastern States, funding is in the ratio of 90:10 whereas to Union Territories, the
entire funds are provided by the Central Government.
48. Audit observed that due to slow pace of utilization/ underutilization of funds
by the States, there was deduction of Rs.2,451.84 crore from their due Central
allocation oresponding States’ share on account of Central share deduction
hich would have been contributed by them worked out to be Rs.810.08 crore
This resulted in denial of assistance to 7.25 lakh targeted beneficiaries. ‘Audit
also poinfed out that multiple bank accounts were operated in selected districts
blocks and Gram Panchayats in Bihar, Jammu & Kashmir, Manipur, Punjab,
Rajasthan pnd Uttar Pradesh for keeping the IAY funds against the provision of
maintaining an exclusive separate saving account in nationalized/scheduled or
cooperative bank or a post office. Audit further highlighted diversion of IAY funds
of Rs.37.12 crore towards other schemes/programmes ॥ 13 states and two UTs
and expenditure of Rs.2,20 crore on inadmissible items in seven states, cases of


10

misappropriation of Rs.4.91 crore in Assam, Bihar and Jharkhand and suspected
cases of misappropriation of Rs.9.76 crore in nine states, unauthorised deduction
of Rs.139.37 crore on account of administrative charges, non-construction/non-
installation of smokeless chufhafsanitary latrine/lAY logo, etc. from payment due
to beneficiaries in three states and under payment of Rs.19.07 crore in six states
and double/excess payment of Rs.7.16 crore to the IAY beneficiaries was
observed in three states.

19. When asked about the action taken against those beneficiaries who have
misused IAY funds and erring officials who have released funds |to ineligible
beneficiaries, the Ministry replied as follows

“The State Government has the option of blacklisting such
beneficiaries on AwaasSoft so as 10 ensure that the beneficiary does
not receive further financial assistance. Further, the State is also
advised to recover the amount from the beneficiaries wherever it is
possible to do so. In case of erring officials, the State Governments
are advised to take departmental actions for recovery of the amount.
The State is entrusted with the responsibility for taking action against
erring officials in accordance with prevalent rules and regulations
and bepending upon the gravity of the case, criminal proceedings

are initiated against the officials.”

20. Diversion of JAY fund to other Schemes amounting to Rs, 37.12 crore in 13
States was reported by Audit, out of which, Rs.28,40 crore was reported to have
been recovered. An amount of Rs.9.72 crore was remaining at the time of Audit
and an amount of Rs. 9.37 crore have since been recouped to IAY account by 9
States. Recovery of the remaining amount had been taken up with the States of

Rajasthan, Assam, Jharkhand and Madhya Pradesh.


ह॥ i

21. When asked about the latest status on the recovery of IAY funds, which
were diverted to other Schemes, from the States of Rajasthan, Assam,
Jharkhand and Madhya Pradesh, the Ministry replied as follows:

“State Governments of Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh have
intimated that amount worth 1.33 cr and 0.02 cr respectively, have
been recovered from !AY funds which were previously diverted. The
State government of Jharkhand has informed that while 0.18 cr has
been recovered by DRDA, Ranchi, an amount worth 0.12 cr is yet to
be recovered from East Singhbhum District. However, ‘the State has
instructed the District to.take concrete action against diverted funds.
Reply has also been received from the State Government of Assam
intimating that funds have been recovered in four, while action is

underway in the remaining districts." |

22. The Ministry submitted the following reasons for low absorption of JAY
funds; i) After taking first installment, the beneficiaries delay the start of the
house and do not become eligible for further instaliment, 1) beneficiaries utilize
the funds for short terms consumption and thus do not qualify for 20 installment.

23, Jn regard to ensuring that timely commencement of construction of the
houses aftérthe funds were released, the Ministry replied as follows:

“The Ministry has been working towards strengthening the
monitoring mechanism and providing requisite technical facilitation to
ensure that beneficiaries do not delay construction once funds are
released, States have been facilitated to employ. dedicated
personnel for monitoring and technical support at various levels
through enabling guidelines which allow administrative funds to be
used for the same. States have also been advised to tag houses toa

grass root level functionary who is responsible for tracking and


12 |

facilitating its construction. Some states have started providing
incentives to field functionaries and beneficiaries to ensure timely
completion of houses after receipt of grants.

The accuracy of data uploaded is ensured by corresponding
uploading of photograph of each stage of house construction on
AwaasSoft after verification by the inspector. The inherent checks in
the software do not allow Fund Transfer Orders (FTOs) to be
generated for further installments fill the inspection for the previous
stage is completed and supported by photographs. Inspection
through the mobile App further ensures that the photographs are

geo referenced and time stamped.

Also under IAY guidelines, State Governments have been
advised to randomly inspect 10 % of houses at block level and 2% at
the district level to allow cross verification of data being uploaded on
AwaasSoft.”

Vv MONITORING AND EVALUATION

24. Audit in their Report has observed that Monitoring at the Central as well as
States level was deficient against the stipulated norms. Regular monitoring at the
Central !evel through National Level Monitors (NLMs) could not cover all the
districts of the country in the years 2008-09 to 2012-13 where the IAY was being
implemented and there was also ineffective follow up action on NLM reports. The
Ministry launched a web-based management information system (MIS) called
AwaasSoft to capture beneficiary-wise data to monitor the JAY. This tool was
meant for management, reports generation, keeping tracks of funds released,
progress in construction of houses and convergence of all the envisaged benefits
but not made fully functional. Further, there was no specific mechanism to verify


1 43

the authenticity of data uploaded at GP/block/DRDA |४४७|. Moreover, stipulated
State Level Vigilance and Monitoring Committees (SLVMCs) meetings were not
held and in contravention of [AY guidelines, in 22 states, social audit of the IAY
was not conducted to monitor the implementation of IAY at the ground level.

25. During oral evidence the representatives of the Ministry had stated the
Ministry do not have the capacity to undertake detailed follow-up action review of
all 648 District Vigilance and Monitoring Committee across the country.
Respective State Governments follow it up with the district and take necessary ,
action. The Ministry only intervene in exceptional cases that were brought to their
notice. The Ministry however informed the Committee that monitoring at a State- -

level is a feasible option.

26. When asked about the role and involvement of Central Government in
monitoring and vigilance mechanism, the Ministry replied as follows:

“The Ministry has a system of deputing NLMs to the districts
for review of overall progress of RD programmes at regular intervals
which include IAY also. (n addition to that, officials from the Ministry
designated as Area Officers visit the States/UTs at regular intervais!
to review the progress of implementation of RD programmes. In
reported cases of misappropriation of funds or action contrary to
scheme: guidelines, special teams are deputed for further
investigation. Additionally, to encourage active public participation in’
ensuring accountability, social audit has also been made mandatory
under IAY for which 1% of the administrative expenditure has been

earmarked for the purpose.” |

हसन Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) has been introduced in
IAY from the current financial year to cut down on leakages,

inefficiencies and delays in payment of assistance. Payment to


14

beneficiaries’ sanctioned houses under IAY is being credited directly
to beneficiaries’ account from the State nodal account through the
AwaasSoft-PFMS platform to ensure faster and seamless transfer of
funds electronically. This has led to greater financial control and
improved tracking of funds by reducing the number of intermediaries
involved. The issue of funds being parked at various levels of

administration has been largely resolved.

Further, in addition to online monitoring, National level
Monitors and Area Officers of the Ministry are also required to visit
IAY houses during the field visits, to the extent possible. Based on ~
their findings, actionable points are taken up with the States. The
Ministry facilitates the States to set up robust monitoring
mechanisms: by allowing the Use of administrative funds for bearing
expenses related to monitoring, hardware/software procurement and
hiring personnel for MIS, etc.”

27. When asked about the monitoring mechanism in place to ensure proper
utilization of funds released for construction of houses under the Scheme, the

Ministry replied as follows:

“As per IAY guidelines, all data regarding beneficiaries,
progress of construction and release of funds including photographs
and inspection reports shall be placed on AwaasSoft and would form
the basis for follow up on both the financial and physical progress of
the scheme. The physical progress in construction would be
monitored through the photographs which are to be uploaded every
quarter. This would allow tracking of progress and ensure that funds
are being utilised for house construction. However, due to lack of


15

inspection staff at the field level and poor online connectivity,
quarterly uploading of photographs has not been possible. To
facilitate the same, a mobile app — ‘AwaasApp' has been developed
and the Ministry is working towards improving the functionality in
future versions of the app by developing offline modules for data
storage and transmission which would operate even with limited
bandwidth. In order to reduce the delay in inspections, states have
been advised to tag houses fo a grass root level functionary who is
responsible for tracking the construction of the house and bear the
expenses for, the same from administrative funds. MIS is also used
by officials in Central Government to monitor progress in states.

Further, under IAY guideline, the State Government has been
advised 0 randomly inspect 10 % of houses at the block level and
2% at the district level to effectively monitor progress. National level
Monitors and Area Officers of the Ministry are also required to visit
IAY houses during the field visits, to the extent possible.
Performance Review Committee meetings of the Ministry are held at
regular intervals wherein policy makers interact with the Ministry and
discuss various issues related to implementation of the programmes.
In addition to this, nodal officers designated for implementation of
IAY also meet at regular intervals under the Chairmanship of senior
officers of the Ministry to review the progress of the programme,
Video conferencing with the State Governments is done at regular
intervals to review the financial and physical progress of the

programme.”


16

28. The Ministry had also stated that poor online connectivity, lack of training
on the software, multiple systems of reporting and unwillingness to hire dedicated
staff for data entry in IAY are the reasons behind the slow pace of data
uploading. However from this year onwards no manual reports would be

‘accepted. It is expected that States would take necessary measures to overcome
these constraints and data would be captured regularly as all transactions will
happen online on AwaasSoft. Audit also pointed out that, the State of Arunachal
Pradesh was not using AwaasSoft.

29. When asked the reason behind the hon-usage of AwaasSoft by the State
of Arunachal Pradesh and the measures taken for compliance by al! States, the
Ministry replied as follows:

“From 1st April, 2015 AwaasSoft has been made the sole
platform for reporting and monitoring of progress under IAY. Further,
the introduction of Direct Benefit Transfer (OBT) through the
AwaasSoft PFMS platform has ensured that most States have come
on board AwaasSoft for implementation of the scheme, Existing
constraints at the Centre in scaling up the programme have been
addressed through main of server capacity. States have
been facilitated to employ dedicated personnel for MIS officials entry
at the Block, District and State level through enabling advisories,
which allow administrative funds. to be used for the same. Regular
training of State officials handling the MIS are organized when
demanded by the State government and at times based on
assessinent by the Ministry on |capacity constraints in the State.
Additionally, data entry workshops are being held in States which
require assistance in uploading data for previous years. However
some States, especially in hilly regions in North Eastern states have

constraints in uploading data. They have been advised to upload


17

data from District Level instead of block tevel till connectivity

improves.”

“The non-usage of AwaasSoft in the State of Arunachal
Pradesh has been due to capacity constraints and connectivity
challenges in rural areas. Further, the State had requested that the
software be customized to meet operational requirements such as
capturing payments to vendor for procurement of CG] sheets. The
software has since been customized to meet the requirements of the
State. In order to address capacity constraints, a two day training
workshop was held in NIRD&PR, NERC, Guwahati on 21-22"
January, 2016 to provide MIS and data entry officials from Arunachal
Pradesh hands on training for effectively using the MIS. Since then
considerable progress has been made by the state in registering and
sanctioning beneficiaries on AwaasSoft during the current financial
year. The State has been advised to take up data entry at the district
Headquarters to overcome connectivity challenges.”

When asked whether training programmes were conducted on the use of

the software, the Ministry replied as follows:

“The Ministry has conducted training workshops in ‘most
States to build capacity among the state MIS officials and data entry
operators fo effectively use the MIS and realize its potential.”

In regard to the verification mechanism in place to ensure the accuracy of
data is uploaded via AwaasSoft, the Ministry replied as follows:

"The accuracy of data uploaded is ensured by corresponding
uploading of photograph of each stage of house construction on
AwaasSoft after verification by the inspector, The inherent checks in


18

the software do not allow Fund Transfer Orders (109) to be
generated for further installments til! the inspection for the previous
stage is completed and supported by photographs. Inspection
through the mobile App further ensures that the photographs are
geo referenced and time stamped.

Also under IAY guidelines, State Govemments have been
advised to randomly inspect 10 % of houses at block level and 2% at
the district level to allow cross verification of data being uploaded on
AwaasSoft.” |

32... On scrutiny of the ‘replies of the Ministry, the Committee found shortfalls
like inadequacy of unit assistance poor quality of workmanship affecting the
durability of houses, lack of technical facilitation, weak monitoring mechanisms,
opaque mechanism for selection of beneficiaries, exhaustion of BPL lists in some
states, Jack of enthusiasm for DRI loans and absence of holistic habitat planning
etc. in the smooth and efficient implementation of IAY

33. When enquired about the remedial measures/actions initiated to mitigate
the ७०७ and expedite the implementation of the Scheme, the Ministry
replied as follows:

“In 2015-16, some of the major initiatives which have been
introduced in IAY to check loopholes and expedite implementation of
the Scheme are described below:-

i) Leveraging e-governance solutions for improving
_ Implementation

End to end e- governance solutions are being used to
effectively monitor physical and financial progress under IAY.


19 1

* Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) has been implemented in
IAY to cut down on leakages, inefficiencies and delays in
payment of assistance. Payment to beneficiaries’
sanctioned houses in 2015-16 is being credited directly to
beneficiarfes' account from the State nodal account
through the AwaasSoft-PFMS platform to ensure faster
and seamless transfer of funds electronically. This has led
to greater financial control and improved tracking of funds
by reducing the number of intermediaries involved. The
issue of funds being parked at various levels of
administration has been largely resolved.

e An android enabled mobile application for inspection of

‘houses has been launched and hosted on several
platforms for wider access. The application empowers
citizens to capture and upload geo referenced and time
stamped photographs of the house at various stages of
construction thereby reducing time lags in verification,
ii) Increasing transparency in beneficiary selection
The process of evolving comprehensive guidelines for
use of SECC data for selection of IAY beneficiaries has been
initiated. This will be a game changer in terms of transparency
and will reduce scope for discretion in selection. The
procedure devised will mark a paradigm shift from the
concept of BPL and expand coverage to include all families

suffering from housing deprivation. ह

iii} Enhancing employability of Rural Masons through
Skill Development
Concerted efforts have been made towards developing

a framework for certification and assessment of Rural


20

Masons. The process of incorporating competencies required
for the job profile of a Rural Mason into the National Skills
Qualification Framework is currently underway. Apart from
enhancing employability and career growth, certification will
signal quality and provide incentive for rural youth to consider
masonry as a viable occupation.
iv) Enabling convergence with schemes

Real time link between IAY-MIS and MIS of other
flagship schemes has been developed to facilitate
convergence and enable the beneficiary to access additional
resources for house construction. This has helped in
synergizing complementary provisions of different welfare

schemes.”

34. The Ministry further stated that they are in the process of conducting a

concurrent Evaluation and Impact Assessment Study of Indira Awaas Yojana

(IAY) and the terms of reference for the study are under finalization.

35. When asked whether socio-economic impact assessment of the [AY was

ever conducted, the Ministry replied as follows:

“National level evaluation study on the implementation and

impact of Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY) was undertaken by the
Department of Social Work, University of Delhi on behalf of the
Planning Commission, Government of India, in-2009. Data has
been collected from selected 12 states. Primary data was collected
from the IAY beneficiaries, non-beneficiaries, village officials, block
Officials, district level officers (DRDA). and state level. Focused
group discussions were also conducted at village level for qualitative
data collection.


॥ 21

In recent years, an impact assessment study of Saranda
Action Plan has been carried out by IIM, Ranchi and submitted to
the Ministry in March, 2014. The study reveats that impact of houses
constructed under IAY on the standard of living of villagers in
Saranda forest is very significant. 1 provides them a sense of
security, more space of living, and comfort with visit of guest/
relatives, improved social status etc. and now they can focus on
other issues like education of children, heaith problems and other

social commitments.

A study was published by NIRD in 2015 for houses allotted to
minority community and its major findings is that apart from the
sense of ownership of a housing structure, the same gives a special
status to the beneficiary. A sense of pride was conspicuous with
most of the beneficiaries because of increased social status,
improved relationship with neighbours. and their kith and kin and
increased privacy for women folk in a beneficiary household. A
housing structure also reduced the drudgery of the beneficiary and
his family members which gave ample time. for participation in social

activities.”

VI “CONVERGENCE OF SCHEMES

36. IAY envisaged convergence activities with other Government of India
schemes, i.e. Total Sanitation Campaign for construction of sanitary latrines in
the IAY houses; Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidhyutikaran Yojana for providing
electricity; National Rural Water Supply Programme for providing] drinking water;
Differential Rate of Interest scheme for avaifing loan facility; Insurance Policies
for rural BPL families and rural landless families and job cards under Mahatma
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme, so that the possible


| 22

.

benefits under these schemes could be extended to the IAY beneficiaries, Audit
noted that sanitary latrines were constructed only in 25.48 lakh (23.68 per cent)
out of 107.58 lakh houses for the entire country during the period 2009-10 to
2012-13 leaving a shortfall of 76.32 per cent. Audit also noted that in 21 states,
the IAY was not converged with RGGVY for providing free electricity
connections. In 24 States/UT, [AY beneficiaries were deprived of the benefits of
convergence with National Rural Water Supply Programme (NRWSP). Loan
facility under DRI scheme was not availed by beneficiaries in 13 states due to
lack of initiatives by states/DRDAs to co-ordinate with financial institutions to
make available the credit facility to beneficiaries. In 21 states/UTs, convergence
of the insurance schemes Janshree Bima with the IAY for rural BPL families and
Aam Aadmi Bima for the benefit of rural landless families was not ensured.

37. When asked about the action taken in regard to convergence with
Differential Rate of Interest Scheme for the beneficiaries, the representatives of
the Ministry stated as under:

“This is again a very good point that you have raised. Even
after the inadequacy of the Central and State grant for the h Suse, we
should find a method so that the beneficiary can access ५० loan at
an affordable rate for better quality house. We have had some
discussion with the Secretary, Department of Financial Services. We
are working out some arrangements by which upto Rs.20000 bank
loan should be available to these beneficiaries at an affordable cost.
To what extent the rate will be worked out. We are still in discussion
in this regard. But the National Housing Bank has evinced interest.
Even HUDCO is supportive of this initiative. Hopefully, for 2016-17,
supplemental funding to the extent of Rs.20000 will be available to
the beneficiaries from banks.


23

As was mentioned that the amount that is given is not
adequate so they have to arrange some finance. To help them out,
we had a discussion with the National Housing Bank. The National
Housing Bank had convened a meeting of the banks and housing
finance companies and discussed it with them. We asked them as to
why they are not able to give loans. They gave a few reasons for it.
Then, we met with the State Governments. Now, we are trying to
arrange meetings between the National Housing Bank and State

|
Governments,”
The Ministry further replied as follows;

“OnlyiSC and ST’s are eligible to avail loans under the DRI
scheme. Further, it is-the responsibility of the banks to undertake
due diligence in accordance with their established procedure to
assess the beneficiaries repayment capacity before loan is
disbursed.”

38. During the oral evidence the representatives of the Ministry submitted that
under the Deen Dayal Upadhayana Gram Jyoti Yojana no fresh household
connection is given in |electrified villages. Though the Ministry was unable to
provide household connection houses built under Indira Awaas Yojana in the
electrified villages, a list of the beneficiary was made available to Discoms.

39. When asked about the steps taken to bring about efficient convergence of
IAY and Deen Dayal Upadhayaya Gram Jyoti Yojana in future, the Ministry

replies as follows: {

नह Ministry is currently in discussion with the Ministry of
Power for working out the modality for enabling convergence with
Deen Dayal Upadhaya Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY). As a


24

beginning the list of beneficiaries from 2012-13 to 2014-15 has been
shared with the Ministry of Power to be passed on to Discoms who
are participating in the DDUGJY.”

40. In regard to the plan of action to plug the loopholes pointed out by Audit
with regard to convergence of IAY with other Central Schemes ie Total
Sanitation Campaign for construction of sanitary latrines, National Rural Water
Supply Programme (NRWSP) for providing drinking water, Insurance Policies for
rural BPL families and rural landless families and job cards under MNREGS for
18४ beneficiaries, the Ministry replied as follows |

“To ensure post facto monitoring of convergence with Swachh
Bharat Mission Grameen- SBM (G), the SBM unique ID numbers are.
being captured on AwaasSoft, wherever available, during the time of
registration of beneficiary. From 1* April, 2015, seeding of NREGA!
job card number has been made mandatory for sanction of [AY
house in AwaasSoft. Real time web link has been developed with
NREGASoft (the MGNREGA MIS) to allow creation of a NREGA
work against each IAY house sanctioned. This has ensured that a
beneficiary is able to claim his/her entitlement of 90/95 days of paid
unskilled labour |
with MGNREGA. In respect of National Rural Water Supply
Programme (NRWSP) the modalities of convergence are still being

for construction of IAY house under convergence

worked out. To ensure that rural BPL families are able to reap the
benefits of insurance coverage extended under Pradhan Mantri Jan
Dhan Yojana (PMJDY), an advisory has been issued to all States /
UTs to undertake a drive to get PMJDY accounts opened for all
those beneficiaries who do not have a bank account in a nearby

bank branch.”


25 |

Vii +=SCHEMES FOR HOMESTEAD SITES

41. As part of the IAY, a scheme for providing homestead sites to those rural
BPL households who neither possessed agriculture [and nor a house site, was
launched in August 2009. Against the proposed Central allocation of Rs.1,000
crore, Rs.347.47 crore was released to nine states based on the proposals sent
by these states to the Ministry. Audit found that this scheme was not
implemented in 17 states/UTs viz. Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Haryana,
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram,
Nagaland, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Uttarakhand, Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Dadra
& Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu land Lakshadweep during 2009-13, Funds were
- released to Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Rajasthan
and Uttar Pradesh under the scheme without identification/possession of land by

the states.
।

42. During ora! evidence, the representatives of the Ministry had reasoned that
non-implementation of the scheme was due to the low unit cost. And the Ministry
had moved a Cabinet note for revision of the current unit cost of Rs.70,000 for
plain areas and Rs.75,000 for hilly areas with 60:40 funding ratio between centre
and State.

43. When asked about the remedial actions taken-in this regard, the Ministry

replied as follows:

“The Homestead scheme is a demand driven scheme and the
funds under this scheme are released only to those States which
demand the same by submitting proposals in this regard along with
requisite documents/certificates as per the scheme guidelines. The
reason for non-operation of the Homestead scheme is its low unit
cost. The State Governments say that Rs.20,000/- is insufficient for
purchase of a pfot of land required for construction of an IAY house.”


26

The Ministry had further stated that;

“The request for enhancement of unit assistance is under the
consideration of the Cabinet.”


PART-1!
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS i

The Committee, while examining the performance of the government
with regard to the Indira Awaas Yojana scheme of rural housing based on
the C&AG Report No. 37 of 2014 found that there have been serious
shortcomings in areas such as identification and selection of benefictaries
of the scheme, construction and quality of work, financial management,
monitoring and evaluation, convergence with other schemes, etc. where
further improvements are required and remedial action needs to be taken.
The Committee express their displeasure over the fact that although IAY
was introduced in 1985 as part of RLEGP and implemented as an
independent Scheme in 1996, when C&AG conducted a performance audit,
many inefficiencies and shortcomings in the implementation of the scheme
are left largely unattended. The Committee, therefore, observe that there is
an-imperative need to revise the parameters of assessment of performance
executive functionaries of the central government from the existing tilt
towards timely utilization of budgetary grants to one of efficient and
effective utilization of whatever amount ufilized, thereby encouraging a
system under which outcomes determine rating of performance rather than
outgo. Keeping this as a backdrop, the Committee have made certain

observations and recommendations on the following major aspects.

4. \DENTIFICATION OF BENEFICIARIES

The Committee are extremely disappointed to note that the IAY,
launched as far back as 1985, was still lacking a proper basis for
identification of target beneficiaries. Moreover, the fact that assessment
has not been made about the actual housing shortage in 14 States even

after the scheme had been running for almost 30 years portrays a serious


28 1

lapse and absence of planning and coordination with states by the
Ministry. What is even more disturbing for the Committee to note is that
several ineligible beneficiaries were selected to reap the benefit. The
Committee further note that after the presentation of C&AG report, seven
primary deprivation criteria for identification of BPL households in rural
areas using Socio-Economic Caste Census, 2011, is being considered to
identify deserving persons. The Committee note that a prioritized
beneficiary list for the scheme based on the relevant deprivation
parameters of the seven deprivation criteria is going to be used for
implementing the scheme soon. The Committee desire that the drawing up
of the beneficiary list as planned should be expedited with maximum
leverage of IT (AwaasSoft) for transparency. The Committee, ‘therefore,
recommend that the Ministry should, over and above the planned
transparency mechanisms, consider opening an online complaint facility to
receive reports of deserving but deprived beneficiaries, undeserving
beneficiaries, delay in disbursal, etc. not only while finalizing the list of
beneficiaries receiving benefits, but during the course of the
implementation of the scheme as well, so that inaccuracies in the list is
open to scrutiny always. Action taken in this regard be intimated to this
Committee.

2. SELECTION OF BENEFICIARIES

The Committee note with disdain that the Gram Sabha’s powers are
often exercised in part by the Sarpanch in matters of addition to aid
deletion from Beneficiary lists of the Scheme, and desire that efforts
should be made to ensure that only the Gram Sabha and the village
communities in the Sixth Schedule areas as a collective body exercise
such right and no intervention should be made by any functionary. The _
Committee note that selection of beneficiaries under the new scheme of



29

things will already be partly taken care of during identification of
beneficiaries of the scheme, since the identified beneficiaries would
already appear in order of priority decided by their level of relevant
deprivation, and shall be system generated. While this is believed to
minimize human intervention, the Committee feel that in the reality of
limited budgetary provisions in a given year, it may still be possible for
implementing authorities to favour of a particular region or district during a
particular year and deprive some other regions. The Committee therefore
desire that while generating Gram Sabha-wise/ village community wise
priority lists for use as the basis of prioritizin award of schemes, the
Ministry should ensure that benefits are distributed to those at the top of
the priority lists of al! Gram Sabhas in a particular State, uniformly moving
down the priority lists of all Gram Sabhas, and covering as many in each
list as possible within the grant amount available or allocated to that state
for that year. This will ensure equal distribution of benefits across all

geographical regions.

3. CONSTRUCTION OF HOUSES UNDER IAY

The Committee are constrained to ०४० that actual complete
construction of houses under IAY falls far short of the number of houses
sanctioned and grants released. While the Ministry had informed during
evidence that most States had informed them about most of the ‘houses
sanctioned prior to 2013-14 having been completed, they submitted that
42.28 lakh houses, sanctioned prior to 2013-14 were yet to be completed.
Further, given that 22.35 lakh houses were sanctioned in 2013-14 and 2014-
15, the figure of 12.28 lakh houses sanctioned prior to 2013-14 and yet to
be completed is huge and implies serious gaps in implementation. The
Committee note that ‘AwaasApp’ had been: developed to enable inspection

of progress in construction which is being used by 13 States. The


' 30

Committee recommend that ‘AwaasApp’ should be made mandatory in all
States /UTs as a too! of inspection. The Committee also recommend that
the Ministry should look into improving the mobile application to enable
recording of GPS location of proposed housing sites which can be used to
monitor actual construction later on after sanction and release of
installments to check forged imagery of progress of construction. The
Committee further recommend that the Ministry should take effective steps
to strengthen monitoring of construction of houses so that the
construction of houses under [AY do not fali short against the sanctioned

number of houses.

4, EXPEDITIOUS COMPLETION OF CONSTRUCTION OF SANCTIONED
HOUSES

On scrutiny of the replies of the Ministry, the Committee find that out
of all houses sanctioned in 2013-14 under JAY, 11.01 lakh houses are
completed as on 26.02.2016 and majority of houses sanctioned prior to
2013-14 have been completed on ground. The Ministry, however, have
stated that the actual figures of houses completed on ground could be
much higher in view of reporting gaps and inability Of the States to upload
data on AwaasSoft. The Ministry have directed /all States to update
progress pertaining to financial year 2013-14 and 2014-15 on AwaasSoft as
on 31.03.2016. The Committee are disappointed to find that despite the
lapse of atleast 2-3 years and the introduction of AwaasSoft for uploading
of updated data on the implementation of IAY, the Ministry have neither
completed the target set nor furnished a clear status of the implementation
of IAY. They feel that since the houses under the IAY are constructed for
the marginalized sections of society, any delay in completion of
construction of these houses will result in consequent denial of benefits to
the poor and the deserving, who need them for bare minimum survival. The


34

Committee, therefore recommend that the Ministry expedite the completion
of all houses sanctioned in 2013-14 and prior to 2013-14 and desire to be

apprised of the status of the implementation of IAY.

5. QUALITY OF CONSTRUCTIONS

The Committee note that the Ministry have taken steps to develop
catalogues of cost effective housing designs appropriate for specific areas
or states to ensure quality of the houses that are built for the beneficiarles
of the scheme. The Committee desire that efforts in that direction should
be boosted and that the National Institute of Rural Development should be
engaged to develop more housing designs which are of good quality, using
locally available materials, and affordable, and to provide expertise to state

|
governments.

6. INCORPORATION OF A SYLLABUS ON CULTURAL AND AESTHETIC AESTHETIC
TRAITS IN MASON TRAINING CURRICULUM

The Committee note that the current curriculum for the: mason
training |program being developed in the country to comply with the
स्पा ent of National Sector Skills Council, do not allow for variations.
The Committee are of the view that given the dynamics of cultural,
traditional and regional diversity in the country , enforcing a uniform
curriculum for the mason training program across the country is not ideal.
The cultural and traditional sensitivity of the region/ community need to be
taken into consideration while formulating the curriculum. The Committee,
therefore, desire that, apart from the uniform curriculum, being developed
as per the National Sector Skills Council, the Ministry may seek the advice
of local masons and cultural experts and formulate a separate subject on
cultural, traditional housing practices and aesthetic traits specific to the


1 32

हर

region and introduce the subject alongside the implementation of the
uniform curriculum in the region. Action taken, in this regard may be

intimated to the Committee.

7. PRO-BENEFICIARY APPROACH IN FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT

The Committee note that after the first installment, the beneficiarles
delay construction of the house or utilize the funds for short term
consumption and thus become ineligible for second installment The
Committee also note that State Governments have the option to blacklist
the beneficiaries in AwaasSoft, for misuse and misappropriation of IAY
fund to avoid further release of funds to these beneficiaries. The
Committee are of the view that blacklisting the beneficiaries will only
aggravate the already dire economic situation that had compelled these
beneficiaries to use the funds for short term consumption. The Committee
further observe that the Scheme envisages that construction be carried out
by the beneficiary and the Government departments or agencies can give
technical assistance or arrange for coordinated supply of material such as
cement, steel or bricks or arrange for prefabricated componertts only if the
beneficiary desires. The Committee recommend that rather than taking a
radical stance and barring the erring beneficiaries from nel serene, the

Ministry need to take a pro-beneficiary approach on the matter, wherein
such misuse of fund is avoided and the beneficiaries continue to reap the
benefits of the Scheme. The Committee desire that the Ministry fix a time
period, within which the beneficiaries are mandated to start the
construction work. On expiry of the stipulated period, concerned
_ Government departmentfagencles can engage contractors and begin

construction work.


33 |

8. REMEDIAL MEASURES ON MISUSE OF FUNDS MISUSE OF FUNDS

As pointed out by Audit, the Committee note several cases of
operation of multiple bank accounts, diversion of IAY funds towards other
schemes/programmes expenditure of funds on inadmissible items,
misappropriation and suspected cases of misappropriation, unauthorised
deduction of funds on account of administrative charges, non-
construction/non-installation of smokeless chulha/sanitary latrine/AY logo,
under payment lof funds to beneficiaries and double/excess payment of
funds to the IAY beneficiaries, in contravention of the guidelines and
provisions of the Scheme. The Committee express displeasure at such
blatant violations of IAY guidelines. The Committee wish to impress upon
the Ministry to initiate immediate necessary remedial measures and initiate
disciplinary action against the responsible officials under the rules. The
Committee further recommend the recovery of funds, wherever applicable,
and desire to be apprised on the status of recovery of misappropriated
funds, action taken against the officials and measures taken for strict

compliance in future.

9. MONITORING AND EVALUATION,

ON Sn eee eee

The Committee note that in as many as 22 States stipulated State
Level Vigilance and Monitoring Committee (SLVMC) meetings were not
held and in contravention of |AY guidelines, social audit of the [AY was not
conducted to monitor the implementation of 18४ at the ground level. The
Committee also note that the Ministry has left monitoring and evaluation
largely to the concerned State governments, while prescribing Social Audit

in the scheme guidellnes and while engaging National Level Monitors and


i 34

Area Officers to monitor implementation of the scheme. They also note the
introduction of Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) and AwaasSoft to check
parking and pilferage of funds and monitor physical progress of
construction with geo referencing and time stamping features. The
Committee, while appreciating ‘the efforts, feel that the Ministry should
examine ways and means to further strengthen central monitoring of the
scheme, such as, requiring inspection reports of states to be attested by
concerned Community-based organizations or recognized Non-
governmental Organizations operating in the concerned areas, increased
leverage of IT for rea! time monitoring by adding more features in the
AwaasSoft, launching scheme specific online complaints system, etc. This,
the Committee feel, will result in objective assessment of cases of

implementation and will give a definite boost to monitoring and evaluation.
|

410. ACTIVE CENTRAL MONITORING MECHANISM

The Committee note that the State Government plays the primary role
in the putting in place a system for quality monitoring to gulde and assist
the beneficiary In achieving satisfactory quality of house construction
while the Ministry only play the role of a facilitator in ensuring the State } as
adequate infrastructure at Its disposal to ensure quality houses are being
constructed under the scheme. The Committee also note that District
Vigilance and Monitoring Committee is responsible for ground level
monitoring,_To facilitate efficient monitoring over quality construction and
tracking of fund flow, the Committee recommend setting up ofa central.
monitoring cell under the charge of a senior officer in the Ministry for
overall review and monitoring of all State level projects. They further desire
that Central Monitoring Cell (CMC) should monitor and ensure ‘that
Vigilance and Monitoring Committee meetings are held regularly both at


' 35

the State and District levels and the CMC should also monitor the outcome
of these meetings and follow-up the recommendations made by the

concerned Committee.

41. CONCURRENT EVALUATION

The Committee are pleased to note that the Ministry is currently in the
process of conducting a concurrent Evaluation and impact Assessment
Study of Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY) for which the terms of reference are
under finalization. The Committee desire that the process may be expedited
and a time frame of not more than 18 months be given for a country-wide
evaluation and Impact assessment, based on which further interventions
through thé scheme can be chalked out. |

|
42. CONVERGENCE OF JAY WITH OTHER SCHEMES WITH OTHER SCHEMES

The Committee note that [AY envisaged convergence activities with
other Government of India schemes, i.e. Total Sanitation Campaign for
construction of sanitary latrines in the [AY houses; Rajiv Gandhi Grameen

Vidhyuttkaran Yojana for providing electricity; National Rural Water Supply

Programme for providing drinking water; Differential Rate of Interé st
scheme for availing !oan facility; Insurance Policies for rural. BPL families
and rural landless families and Job cards under Mahatma Gandhi National
Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme, so that the possible benefits under
these schemes could be extended to the IAY beneficlaries. The Committee
also note that desired level of convergence has not been achieved. The
Committee feel that the task of achieving desired level of convergence
rests almost entirely and equally on the concerned central Ministries. 80,
while noting that the Ministry of Rural Development alone cannot take the

blame for low level of convergence of scheme benefits to beneficiaries, the


36

Committee desire that as the nodal Ministry for rural progress, the Ministry
must take more pro-active steps to engage other concerned
Ministries/Departments to achieve maximum convergence of scheme
benefits for the purpose of obtaining larger overall impact.

13, - PLAN OF ACTION ON HOMESTEAD SCHEME SCHEME

The Committee note that the current funding of the unit cost is
Rs.70,000 for plain areas and Rs.75,000 for hill states which is inadequate
in the current economy. Injthis regard, a cabinet note for revision of the
unit cost is under consideration. The Committee recommend the Ministry
to put a plan of action in place regarding the percentage of funds to be
allocated for acquiring land sites and obtaining other building materials
and disburse the fund in a staggered manner accordingly when the new
revised unit cost is approved for implementation. This will facilitate timely
commencement and completion of construction and will get rid -of any
possible attempt towards misappropriation of fund, misuse of fund and
procurement of inadmissible items. The Committee desire to be apprised of
the action taken by the Ministry in this regard.

414, REMEDIAL MEASURES ON THE MISMANAGEMENT Or ieee MISMANAGEMENT OF HOMESTEAD
SCHEME

The Committee note that the Homestead scheme is a demand driven
scheme. Funds under this scheme are released only to those Sfates on
demand after submission of proposals along with requisite
documents/certificates as per the scheme guidelines. The Committee,
however, observe that funds are released to Andhra Pradesh, Bihar,
Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh under the
scheme without identification’ possession of land by the States. The


37

Committee are appalled at the gross violation of the Scheme guidelines
and recommend the Ministry to constitute an Enquiry Committee to
investigate the reasons for diversion from the Scheme guidelines and
impose stringent penalty against the responsible officials. The Committee
also desire that the Ministry issue a circular to all concerned officials for

strict adherence and compliance to the guidelines in future.

NEW DELHI; ‘ PROF. K.V. THOMAS, .
26 April, 2016 Chairperson,
6 Vaisakha, 1938 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.


38 ॥

Annexure -A

Number of beneficiaries registered since 2013-14 and number of
beneficiaries identified, targets achieved and under progress

FY Beneficiaries Targets Houses Houses

{ Identified sanctioned | completed

2013-14" 27,82,179 24,80,715 18,91,447 | 15,92,367

| . .

2014-154 24,53,087 25,18,978 | 20,54,240 | 16,52,737

2015-16" || 32,75,234 20,79,146 | 19,68,352 | 8,50,346
7 {| |

Total ~ 85,10,500 70,78,839 | 59,14,039 | 40,95,450

* Figures are as provided by States through online MPR/MIS*

* Figures are for IAY new construction as reported by States on AwaasSoit
as on 25.02.2016



Annexure-B
CONFIDENTIAL

MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-IV [(NON
COMPLIANCE BY MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS IN TIMELY SUBMISSION OF
ACTION TAKEN NOTES ON THE NON-SELECTED AUDIT PARAGRAPHS
(CIVIL AND OTHER MINISTRIES)] OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2015-16) HELD ON 1°" FEBRUARY, 2016.

The Sub-Committee sat on Monday, the 1° February, 2016 from 1130 hrs
to 1300 hrs in Committee Room No. '139', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT
॥
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab Convenor
LOK SABHA oo
4. Shri Nishikant Dubey Member
2. Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi Member
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT.
4. Shri Paolienlal Hackip Deputy Secretary

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT RURAL DEVELOPMENT

1. Shri J.K Mohapatra Secretary

2. Shri Amarjeet Sinha Additional Secretary
3, Smt. Seema Bahuguna AS & FA

4. Shri Rajeev Sadanandan Joint Secretary


* 40

2.. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the representatives of the Ministry
of Rural Development to the sifting of the Sub-Committee-IV convened to take
oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development on non-
compliance by the Ministry in timely submission of Action Taken Notes on non-
selected Audit Paragraphs/Reports and Audit Report No.37 of 2014 on ‘Indira
Awaas Yojana’ (IAY). The Convenor then sought fo be apprised of the existing

mechanism for timely submission of ATNs and efforts made in the recent years

by the Ministry fo ensure compliance in timely submission of remedial/corrective

ATNs on Audit observations/recommendations:

3. In regard to the Audit Report No! 37 of 2014 on ‘Indira ‘Awaas Yojana’
(IAY), the Convenor highlighted the findings of the Audit vis-a-vis selection of
ineligible beneficiaries of AY Scheme, weak financial management, diversion of
fund and its recovery, inadequate monitoring and quality assessment of houses
constructed under the Scheme, lack of awareness on convergence of the

scheme, irregularities in the implementation of homestead scheme etc.

4. "The Secretary, Ministry of Rural. Development, in consonance with the
Audit findings, conceded that there have been shortfalls like selection of ineligible
beneficiaries of IAY scheme, misappropriation of fund and its recovery. The
Committee were also apprised that from 2016-17, instead of using the 2002 87.
lists, Socio-Economic & Caste Census (SECC) data, which is being finalized, will

be used for the identification of IAY scheme beneficiaries and an Appellate


41

Forum will be set up for appeals against any inaccuracy, wrongful
exclusion/inclusion in the beneficiary list. For better financial management, a
State level account has been put in place to tid of multiple accounts and ensure
flow of funds directly to the account of the beneficiary. In regard to the monitoring
mechanism, the Members of the Sub-Committee were informed that the web-
based monitoring system has been strengthened and Awaas Software has
become more operational and uploading of photographs via AwaasSoft has been
made mandatory for release of second and subsequent instalments. The
Committee were further apprised of the commitment of the Ministry towards
ensuring quality, better design and cost-effective housing, efficient convergence
of schemes, availability of bank loan at affordable costs for gap finance, fool
proof data verification system, etc. The Members of Committee then offered
suggestions on correct identification of beneficiaries, effective monitoring system,
efficient convergence of schemes, enforcing stringent punishment for erring

officials, etc.

5. The Convenor thereafter, thanked the representatives of Ministry of Rural

Development for active participation and furnishing valuable information.

The witnesses then withdrew.

A copy of the'verbatim proceedings was kept on record.

The Sub-Committee then adjourned.


Ad

OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2015-16) HELD ON 21. OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2018-16) HELD ON 277
APRIL, 2016. |

MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-V

The Sub-CommitteeIV of PAC sat from 1030 hrs. to 1115 hrs. on 21% April,
2016 in Room No. “51”, Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT
Shrl Bhartruhari Mahtab - Convenor

MEMBERS
LOK SABHA,
2... Shri Gajanan Kirtikar

3... Shri Nishikant Dubey

RAJYA SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

41. Shri 1. Jayakumar - Director

2.  . Shri Tirthankar Das - Additional Director |
3. Shri Paolienlal Haokip - Deputy Secretary
4. ShriAK. Yadav - Deputy Secretary

REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND
‘AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA

4. Shri Rakesh Jain - Deputy C&AG (RC)
2. Shri Mukesh P Singh - D.G (Ole DGACE)
3. ShriL.S. Singh - Principal Director (RC)

2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the
Committee and apprised the Members that the sitting had been convened for
consideration and adoption of the draft Report on the subject “Indira Awaas Yojana”
based on C&AG Report No.37 of 2014. Thereafter, the Committee took up the draft

Report for consideration.


3. The Convenor invited suggestions of the Members on the above mentioned
draft Report. After discussing the contents of the draft Report, the Committee
suggested minor changes/modifications in the draft Report.

4. The Committee, then, authorized the Convenor to finalise the Report in the light
of the discussion and consequential changes arising out of factual verification by the
Audit and present the same to the full Committee for consideration and adoption.

The Committee then adjourned. Commities then adjourned.