28

EXCESSES OVER VOTED GRANTS AND CHARGED
APPROPRIATIONS (2011-12) ;

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Ninety - Second Report (157 Lok Sabha)]

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2015-16)

TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT
/

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

+

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI है



४ PAC NEG, 2060

»
?

WEN TS FIGHT REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
ह (2015-16):

‘

(SIXTEENSH: LOK SABHA)

| EXCESSES OVER VOTED GRANTS AND
| CHARGED APPROPRIATIONS (2041-12)

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recornmendations of the
Committee contained in their Ninety - Second Report (15" Lok Sabha)]

खत्पमैव जयदे

Presented to Lok Sabha on: (Qa. 2४०७
Laid in Rajya Sabha on: AGN2- 2015

-LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

December, 2015 /Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka)



CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
. GOMMITTEE (2015-16) ~

INTRODUCTION .............- जल RSE OES SESS SET EESERSESOSS

CHAPTER |

CHAPTER ॥#

CHAPTER IIl*

CHAPTER ५४

/

CHAPTER V*

Report ..

Observations/Recommendations which have been
“accepted by the Government ..........................
Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
- teplies received fromthe Government ................
- .Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been

accepted by the Committee and which require .

Teiteration ............................०५५५००००--०--५-- Le eeeeaee

Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which the Government have furnished interim
TEPHOS ............ ... ७५०० cee rer see tereneeteneenseeeees

APPENDICES*

Minutes of the 14" sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2015-16) held on
9" December, 2015 हि

Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the, Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their Ninety -
Second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)

“Nof appended fo the cyclostyled copy of the “Nof appended to the cyclostyled copy of the Report 777



Prof, K.V. Thomas - Chairperson

CON FAs wn

ARSRAS"

20.
21.
22,

OOND

LOK SABHA
Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura

Shri Nishikant Dubey

Shri Gajanan Kirtikar

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank”
Shri-Neiphiu Rio
5
5
D
5

hri Dushyant Singh

hri Janardan Singh Sigriwat
t. Kirit Somaiya

hri Anurag Singh Thakur
hri Shivkumar Udasi

A

-Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Naresh Agrawal

Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
Shri Anil Madhav Dave
Shri Vijay Goel

Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Shri Shantaram Naik

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy

SECRETARIAT
Shri A.K. आधी - Additional Secretary
Shri T.Jayakumar = + Director

, Smt, Anju Kukreja’ “- Under Secretary

IMTS COMMITTEE



INTROSUCTION

I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2015-16), having -been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Twenty, Eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok
हि Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained ‘in their Ninety-- Second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Excesses Over Voted Grants and Charged Appropriations (2011-12)" relating to

various Ministries/Departments concerned.

2. The Ninety - Second Report was presented to Lok Sabhallaid in Rajya Sabha on .

eh February, 2014, Replies of the . Government “to all the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received. The Public
Accounts Committee considered and adopted the Twenty Eighth Report at their sitting
held on 9" December, 2015. Minutes of the sitting are given at Appendix |. --

fo
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the

Report.

4, The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

5, An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Ninety - Second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is

given at Appendix-il.

के
NEW DELHI - _ PROF. K.V. THOMAS,
08"December,2015 Chairperson,

18 Agrahayana, 1837 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee. |



CHAPTER |
INTRODUCTORY

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the .
Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in their -
Ninety-second Report (15" Lok Sabha) on "Excesses over Voted Grants and Charged
Appropriations (2011-12)". - .

2. The Ninety-second Report (157 Lok Sabha), which was presented to Lok Sabhattaid in
Rajya Sabha on 06" February, 2014, contained 17 Observations and Recommendations.
Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations and Recommendations have been
received from the Ministries/Departments concerned are broadly categorized as under :

(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:

Para Nos, 1-17
Total: 17
_ Chapter - ll

(i) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire fo pursue in view
है of the replies received from the Government:

Para No. NIL
Total: NIL.
Chapter - ill

Gil) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government have’ not
"been accepted by the Committee ahd which'tequire reiteration: - . +

> Para No. NIL
| Total: NIL
Chapter - IV

‘(iv) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished
interim replies:

Para No. NIL
Total: Ni.
Chapter — V



2

3 The Ninety-second Report (15 Lok Sabha) dealt with cases of those

Grants/Appropriations where money had been spent in excess of the amount authorized by

#ie-Parliament for specified services/ purposes during-the year 2011-12. The Committe
examination of the four Appropriation Accounts of the Union Government relating to Civil,

Defence Services, Postal Services and Railways for the financial year 2011-12 had revealed

that a total excess expenditure of % 8563.14 crore was incurred in 14 cases of 11

Grants/Appropriations operated by various Ministries/Departments during the year 2011-12

{as against ¥ 11046.93 crore during the last year ie. 2010-11), The Committee was: ~

astonished to find that bulk of the excess expendifure had been recorded under two Grants -

ie. Grant No, 21- Defence Pensions (% 3569.10 crore) operated by the Ministry of Defence
and Appropriation No. 34 ~ Interest Payments (% 2947.58 crore) operated by the Ministry of

Finance, which accounted for over 76.10 percent of the total excess expenditure incurred

during the year under review. Other shortcomings as-observed by the Committee during the

course of examination of excess expenditure incurred during the year 2011-12 were excess
expenditure despite having huge amount of Supplementary Grants, excess expenditure of
more than 5% of the budgeted provision, recurring phenomenon of excess expenditure under
several Grants/Appropriations and misclassification of excess expenditure under excess
registering Grants/Appropriations operated by the Ministry of Railways etc. The Committee
had, accordingly given their Observations/Recommendations in their 927 Report (457 Lok

Sabha), The gist of important Observations/Recommendations as contained in the Report

are given as under : है

(i) The Ministry of Financé should impress upon all the Departmental Heads concerned
to strictly observe the instructions issued under the financial rules so as to ensure that
no expenditure fs incurred in excess of the authorized limits.

(ii). The Ministry of Finance should initiate a study of the best International Practices’ on
the modalities for ensuring greater conformity of expenditure to the budgetary
provisions..Based on other fiscal federal models the Finance Ministry should evolve
modalities and a framework which will enable the sanctity of budgetary provisions
ensuring the reach and superintendence of Parliamént on appropriation outgoes.

(iii) | The'Ministries / Departments should impress upon their budget controlling authorities

‘fo thoroughly examine the proposal for additional funds with due farsightedness and
ensure ‘proper review and scrutiny of the proposals for Supplementary demands



(vi)

(vii)

(willy

40

before presenting the same to-.Parliament so that additional provisions are
commensurable with the actual requirement of funds.’
The Government should earnestly undertake case studies of the instances where

expenditure had persistently exceeded the budgetary allocations during the last five

“years: and streamline and strengthen the extant mechanism so as to tighten the-

financial and budgetary control to effectively-check the. unabated trend of excess
expenditure. : : _

The Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure), the coordinating Ministry should
take suitable measures to ensure timely submission of explanatory notes in future. As
a systemic check, the Ministry of Finance in consultation with the Comptroller and

- Auditor General of India should: put in place a centralized computerized networking

monitoring system to check the Status of the preparation of Explanatory Note at every
stage by various Ministries/Departments so that any delay on this count is avoided.
The Ministry of Defence should take effective measures fo precisely anticipate and

assess {he actual requirement of funds at various stages of budgeting process so as

10 bridge the gap between the budget provision and actual expenditure.

The Ministry of Railways, should look into the recurrent lapses on incurring excess
expenditure, with a view to fixing responsibility at the appropriate level.

The Ministry of Railways should enquire into the reasons and circumstances for
preparing such defective accounts, leading to misclassification of expenditure, identify
the individual officers responsible for such mistakes as also the ambiguity in the
tules/instructions Jeading to misclassification and initiate suitable prophylactic and
punitive measures to ensure proper upkeep and maintenance of books of accounts so

that the propensity for misclassifications / wrong booking of expenditure are detected

in time ahd rectified accordingly.

The Action Taken Notes furnished: by the Ministries/Departments concerned have

been reproduced in the relevant chapters of this Report. The Committee will now deal with

the Action Taken by the Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations made

in the Ninety-second Report, which need reiteration or merit comments.



Status of definitive measures by various MWinistries/Depariments_to_ contain, to_confain

unremitting excess-expenditure expenditure
(Recommendation Para No. 4) ;
5. The, ‘Committee's examination of the four Appropriation Accounts of the Union
Government relating fo Civil, Defence Services, Postal Services and Railways for the
financial year 2011-12 had revealed that a total excess expenditure of ¥ 8563.14 crore was
incurred in 14 cases of 11 Grants/Appropriations operated by various Ministries/Departments
during the year 2011-12 (as against हैं 11046.93 crore during the last year i.e. 2010-11), The -
defaulting Ministries were Ministry of External Affairs (Grant: No. 31); Ministry of Finance
(Appropriation No. 34-interest Payments); Ministry of Home Affairs (Grant No. 97-Chandigarh
and Grant No. 100-Lakshadweep); Ministry of Defence [2 Grants i.e. Grant No. 21-Defence
Pensions (Civil) and Grant No. 24-Defence Services-Air Force]; Ministry of Communications
_and. Information Technology (Department of Posts (Grant, No. 13-Postal Services) and
Ministry of Railways (6 cases under 4 Grants/Appropriations ie. Grant No. 12 -
Miscellaneous Working Expenses, Grant No. 13-Working Expenses - Provident Fund,
Pension and Other Retirement Benefits, Appropriation’ No. 3-Working Expenses-General
Superintendence and Services and Appropriation No. 7-Working Expenses-Repairs &
Maintenance of Plant and Equipment), The Committee further found that during the year
2011-12 while a marginal decline of excess expenditure was registered under the Grants
operated by the Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Railways, it had shown an increasing
-trend with regard to Grants/Appropriations operated by the Civil Ministries / Departments and
the Department of Posts. “An analysis of -the explanations given by the
Ministries/Departments concerned had revealed that, as in the past, defective estimation of
requirement of funds,-absence of a continuous watch over the flow of expenditure, lack of
timely review of financial requirements and failure fo properly anticipate the requirement for
additional funds continue to be the main reasons for excesses. The fact that the same
causes for the excesses persist year after year is a pointer that the matter has not been
accorded due import by the Ministries/Departments concerned. The Committee had,
therefore, once again urged the Ministries/Departments to put in place a robust mechanism
and embark upon definitive measures so 88 fo ensure greater financial discipline and contain

expenditure within the prescribed limits.



6.

under :

+ 5
In this regard, the Ministry of Defence in their Action Taken Note have submitted ds
"Out of total excess expenditure of < 8563.14 ‘crore in 14 cases of 41

Grants/Appropriations, an expenditure of ¥ 3569.10 crore गाए _ was incurred in
excess under Grant No.-21, Defence Pensions during the year 2041-12. ° :

' The approved BE under Grant No.21-Defénce Pensions for the FY 2011-12 was हैं

34000 cr. and at - RE 2011-12 stage, an amount of हैं 37547 cr. was projected under
the Grant as proposed by the user Department i.e. PCDA(P) Allahabad, however, the
projected RE figures were not approved by Min of Finance. No Supplementary over

and above BE 2011-12 under Revenue (Voted) portion was given and only a ©
Supplementary of 0.29 lakh, was provided in the Financial Year 2011-12. This led to
an excess expenditure of € 3569.10 crore over and above the approved budget during
the financial year 2011-12, which is 10.50% of the total budget. In this regard, kind
attention is drawn towards the fact that the actual expenditure incurred-under the
Grant was %37,569 crore which was very much in fine with RE ‘projection of ¥ 37547
crore submitted by the Ministry to MoF. However, this Ministry was not allotted funds
by MoF as per the projections submitted and since the payment of pension to the
Defence Pensioners is a committed expenditure and cannot be stopped for want of
funds, hence, it resulted into excess expenditure.

AS already highlighted’ above, the actual expenditure under Grant No.-21 De ence
Pensions for FY 2011-12 was very much in line with projections, however, as a
measure of control, the Ministry of Defence have been advising the budget estimating

_ authorities of Defence Pensions to prepare their budget with utmost caution and

accuracy while estimating requirement of funds and the budgetary projections be
made after an accurate and realistic assessment of the requirements and visualization
of the actuaVanticipated expenditure. In this regard, Instructions have been issued
from time to time vide MoD(Fin) ID no. 2(6)/MO/2009-10/721 dt. 29.06.2010,
MoD(Fin) ID No (6/MO/2010. 41/911 dt 11/7/2011, MoD(Fin) ID No.
2(6MO/2010/1617 dt.9" Dec. 2011. The instructions issued by the Ministry of
Finance, Department of Economic Affairs, for fiscal and expenditure management
have also been ‘circulated vide this Division ID No. (s) (i) MoD (Fin) ID no
4(9\/Fin(MO)/201 1-12/708 dated 07.06.2011 & (if) ID no. 1(9)/Fin(MO)/201 1-2012/933
dated 21.07.2011

Subsequently, instructions have also been issued to PCDA(P) Allahabad and
O/o the CGDA, New Delhi vide ID No. 2(6)/MO/2011 at. 12/7/2012 for adopting e-
governance model to utilize the inforrnation technology/tools so as fo establish a
centralized data base of Pensioners and networking of all the banks so as to arrive at
‘a correct estimation of pension liability and expenditure in a particular year. O/o the
CGDA vide their letter No. A/B/I/ 0107/AA-DP/10-11 dt. 6/6/2012 have informed about
various measures initiated to promote .e-governance model and use of IT . The latest
instructions have been issued vide MoD (Fin) ID No. 2(6)/MO/2013-14/656 dt.
30/09/2013 :
Also, as per the directions of Min of Finance, an Internal Audit was conducted by 0/0
the CGDA to.Review the existing arrangement of Reporting and Accounting of
Defence Pensions, - and a brief report was furnished vide’ letter No. A/B//9130-Study
Report/2012, dated 11/5/2012 wherein various measures 0 improve the sysiem were



fon)

suggested by O/o the CGDA. The report was forwarded to Min of Finance vide this
Office ID No.2(8)/REBE/MO/2009/187 dt. 19/6/2012. in accordance with the
हि recommendations contained in the report, following measures/actions have been
aken :-
The issue ‘of incorrect or invalid PPO Nos. missing details in the scrolls have
been taken up with banks specifically with SBI, the‘largest PDA.

छठ

‘a PCDA(P), Allahabad has been asked to take into account pending scrolls of the
‘previous years while estimating budget for the next years. —

° An exercise named ‘Project Sangam’ has been undertaken in order to create
an up-to-date Pensions database in collaboration with PCDA(P), Allahabad and

have’been enrolled under Defence Pensions and out of these details of about 15°
lakhs pensioners have been computerized and the remaining 8 lakhs pensioners are
in the process of computerization. Recently, it is informed by PCDA(P) Allahabad that
the remaining 8 lakh pensioners’ are in the process of computerization. It is assessed
that out of 8:00 lakh, about 4.5 lakh PPOs were issued manually before the year of

various pension disbursing agencies. Under the Project, about 23 lakh Pensioners «

computerization which began in the year
data from the banks is awaited for whic!

988. For about 3.5 lakh PPOs the correct
h the EDP centre of the user Department

(ie. O/o CGDA) is interacting with the concerned banks. At present 3.13 lakh cases.

are in hand with PCDA(P) Allahabad, ou
captured using physical copies of PPOs
manually issued PPOs is a laborious and

of which 2.87 lakh cases need to be data
kept in the binders. Digitization of these
time consuming task as the basic data need

to be captured manually. Taking into consideration the pace of work, itis assessed by

PCDA(P) Allahabad that the work may ge’

completed by the end of September 2014.

Apart from “Project Sangam’, a new web based application for “Pension
Accounting System” has also been developed, which is under trial running process. As
per the latest development intimated by PCDA(P) Allahabad, it is mentioned that the
user Department of Defence Pensions ie. PCDA(P) Allahabad successfully
processed e-scrolls, received from State Bank of India. The classification of pension
expenditure and preparation of related PM have been done by-using the automated
system. Some of the banks are still not forwarding the e-scrolis in the correct format
with whom PCDA(P) Allahabad are interacting closely. By 2014, the user Department
ie, PCDA(P) Allahabad would be in a position to compile the e-scrolls using
automated pension accounting system to the extent of about 72% of the total RBI
amount. Further progress made in this aspect will be intimated to audif/PAC soon. The
data received through e-scrolis will be used as an important input for budget

- preparation and projection of fund under Grant No.-21-Defehce Pensions. The project
once implemented will give a more accurate database for monitoring the pace of ”
expenditure and will be very useful while predicting the future requirement of funds

The Grant no. 21- Defence Pensions has now been covered under Cash Management .
System from FY 2013-14 in accordance with instructions issued by MoF vide OM no
- F. 24(1)/PD/2005-Vol-li dated 30.07.2012. As per the aforesaid OM, this Ministry has
to prepare and send Monthly Expenditure Plan (MEP) and Quarterly Expenditure
Allocations (QEA) to the cash Management cell for better monitoring and compliance
~.of the guidelines of thé Ministry of Finance regarding the expenditure management.



7

The same instructions have been circulated in user department of Gr.No.-21 vide this
division [D no, 2(6)/M/2012-13/702 dt 12.09.2012 and for strict compliance and
necessary action. The Monthly expenditure plan, and Quarterly Expenditure allocations
of Grant no. 21 in prescribed format has been incorporated in Detailed Demands for
Grants for FY 2048-14."

7. The Committee are deeply anguished to nofe that Grant No, 21 - Defence

Pensions had been registering excess expenditure of more than ~ 1000 crore for the
past five years with the same contributory reasons, despite developing "Project
Sangam", "Pension Accounting System" and covering the Grant under “Cash
Management System". The Committee are of the’ view that the budgetary process of
Ministry of Defence has inherent flaws which should be rectified at the earliest so that
recurrence of excess expenditure under this Grant is obviated. The Committee are
surprised to note that the instructions have been issued every year for fiscal and
expenditure management without achieving any tangible results. 1 is, therefore,
imperative that more robust and innovative measures are taken for strict enforcement
and compliante so as fo avoid the perennial problem of excess expenditure under this
Grant. The Committee also desire that the Ministry of Defence should devise effective
measures and make it incumbent upon Financial Advisers and the budget controlling
authorities to ensure that no excess expenditure under this Grant takes place in
future. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Defence have also mentioned about
creation of an up-to-date pension database for 23 lakh pensioners. Out of which the
details of 8 lakhs pensioners was in process of: computerization, pending details of 3.6

_ lakhs PPOs (Pension Payment Orders) awaited from the banks and 4.5 lakhs PPOs,
manually issued, which needs to be computerized. The Ministry had set the deadline
of September, 2014 for digitization of manually issued PPOs. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the status of the completion of task and pending work, ff any,
along with reason thereof. Further, another application viz. ‘Pension Accounting
System’ has been developed by the Ministry and is stated to be under frial running
process. The Committee are perturbed fo note that in their explanatory note fo the
excess expenditure incurred under this Grant during the year 2012-13, the Ministry
had submitted the same reply that the “Pension Accounting system" is under trial run.
The Committee, therefore, desire to be apprised about the reasons for inordinate delay
in completion of the trials and target dates for tts completion.



8

8. In this regard, the Ministty of Extemal Affairs in their Action Taken Note, submitied a:
under : : , ,

“The Ministry scrupulously follows थी the instructions issued by the Ministry of Finance
for ensuring that expenditure remains within the grant. The Ministry of External Affairs
also undertakes periodic review of expenditure, wherein all'the Division Heads explain
the fast/slow pace. of expenditure in each quarter. Further, the Ministry always
scrupulously follows all the instructions of Ministry of Finance issued from time to time
such as 33% expenditure ceiling in the last quarter, 15% expenditure ceiling in the.
month of March etc., which are also circulated to all concerned to be followed
conscientiously. :

In view of the mandate of the Ministry, the funds requirements have been registering
an increase year after year but the allocations of funds particularly on Non-Plan side,
have not kept pact. Therefore, Heads of Divisions are advised, during the quarterly
expenditure review meetings, to-contain expenditure strictly within the allocations.
During 2011-12, the excess expenditure was incurred under the ‘Capital Outlay on
Public Works/Housing heads, which involved execution of numerous
purchase/construction/renovation projects in Indiafabroad. In those projects involving
payment of foreign currency, vagaries of exchange rate also created uncertainty in
estimating the final expenditure. . .

‘ Nevertheless, it is acknowledged that these challenges are no justification for incurring
expenditure in excess of allocation. The proposed upgradation of the Indian Mission
Accounting Software (IMAS) is expected to facilitate sharing of expenditure details in
real time, which will greatly reduce recurrences of such excess expenditure. This
process {s‘estimated to take about 12-18 months." ह

9. The Committee note that the Ministry of External Affairs in their reply have
mentioned about upgradation of the Indian Mission Accounting Software (IMAS) in
about 12 to 18 months which is expected to facilitate sharing of expenditure details in
real time and reduce the recurrence of excess expenditure. The Committee would like
fo be apprised of the details of the substantive progress made in this regard along
with elaboration on how and to what extent the same will curtail overshooting of
expenditure,

Excess expenditure of more than five percent over the budgeted provision ercent over the budgeted provision

(Recommendation Para No. 4)

40. The Committee found that the percentage of éxcess expenditure over the total Grant
ranged between 0.03 percent (Grant No. 13- Postal Services) and 894.82 percent
(Appropriation No. 03-Working Expenses - General Superintendence and Services). In six
cases the percentage was more than five per cent over the original Grants/Appropriations viz.

4

4 y P x



9

894.82 percent in Appropriation No. 3-Working Expenses-Genesal Superintendence and
Services; 52.86% in Revenue: charged section of the Grant No. 21-Defence Pensions; 21.53
percent in Grant No. 97-Chandigarh; 10.50 % in respect of Grant No. 21-Defence Pensions
in Revenue-Voted section; 6.98 percent in Appropriation No. 13-Working Expenses-Provident
Fund, Pension ‘and: other Retirement Bénefits and 6.77 percent in Grant No. 12-
Miscellaneous Working Expenses. Expressing serious displeasure over persistent excess
expenditure despite obtaining Supplementary Grants/Appropriations, the Committee, had
exhorted the Ministries/Departments to be’ more careful both in estimation and in spending so
as to bridge the variation between the allocations approved and the expenditure incurred,
The Committee had also desired the Ministry of Finance to initiate a study of the best
International Practices on the modalities for ensuring greater conformity of expenditure to the
budgetary provisions. The Supplementary budget should normally be for unexpected items of
expenditure or schemes taken up for compelling public interest. Based on other fiscal federal
models, the Committee had recommended that the Finance Ministry should evolve modalities
and a framework which will enable the sanctity of budgetary provisions ensuring the reach

and superintehdence of Parliament on appropriation outgoes.

11. In this regard, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) in their Action
Taken Notes, submitted as under:

"The General Financial Rules (GFRs) 2005, do put the onus on Controlling Officers in
respect of Budget allocation to ensure that {he expenditure does not exceed the
budget. allocation. It also casts the responsibility for control of expenditure against
budget on the Departments of the Central Government through their Heads o
Departments and other Controlling Officers, if any, and Disbursing Officers
subordinate to them. Rule 55 of the GFR also states, infer alia, that the authority
administering a Grant/Appropriation is ultimately responsible for the control ०|
expenditure against the Grant/Appropriation. Secretary of a Ministry/Department,
who, as the Chief Accounting Authority of that Ministry/Department has certain duties
and responsibilities vested upon them

2. Ministry of Finance (Budget Division) as a nodal Ministry has taken several
steps to ensure that such incidence of in-appropriate re-appropriation does not recur.
The same is brought out as follows

(a) Ministry of Finance (Budget Division) vide letter No. F.7(7)-S(SD)/2013 dated

~ 7.1.2014 has once again reiterated that it is incumbent upon the Secretaries of

Ministry/Department as Chief Accounting Authority of their respective

Ministry/Department, to ensure that constitutional and financial provision are

strictly observed. Further they have been directed that these rules are rigidly
followed



40.

(9) All the Ministries/Departments are regularly advised to consider taking the
following immediate remedial measures with a view to minimize/eliminate the
incidence of such irregularities in the judiclous management of budgetary
provisions and to ensure that expenditure is within the original/supplementary
appropriation or valid re-appropriation as the case may be. All the
Ministries/Depariments have been suggested to take following steps >

(i) Preparation and circulation of Monthly Financial Review Analysis to the
Administrative Heads for monitoring the progress of expenditure, and
also to enable them to take remedial action wherever required;

(ii) Convening regular internat meetings with all spending units for effective
expenditure control;

(ii) Ensuring realistic projection of Budget Estimates/Supplementary
Estimates and also ensuring that expenditure incurred is within the
Budget as envisaged in General Financial Rules, 2005 so that there is
no occasion for incurring excess expenditure;

(iv) Putting in place/reviewing/strengthening systems for monthly monitoring

) of the flow/trends of expenditure so as to avoid recurrence of excess

expenditure.

(c) Office of CGA has developed software for recording the expenditure and
availability budgetary provisions are done concurrently to avoid overshooting of
Budgetary provisions upto the. Object Head level.

(०) A new initiative has been taken up by this Department which envisages
development of software to process Re-appropriation proposals, for approval of
Competent Authority. Necessary checks with respect to rules are being built in
the proposed software, so that re-appropriation is correctly done. The
necessary software is in the conceptual stage and shall be implemented in due
course. :

(e) As per Rule 60 of the GFR, 2005, if savings are not available within the Grant to
hich the payment is required to be debited, or if the expenditure is on "New
vA Service" or "New Instrument of Service" not provided in the budget, necessary
Supplementary Grant or Appropriation in accordance with Article 115(1) of the
Constitution should be obtained before payment is authorized. The necessity
for obtaining’ Supplementary Grants approved by Parliament is therefore
envisaged in the Constitution of India also, given the vasi/complex nature of
Public Expenditure. Also, Budget for the ensuing financial year is formulated in
advance, the process of which is initiated from the month of October of previous
year. Therefore flexibility to inter change budgetary provisions within the
Revenue/Capital/Voted/Charged Section of the Grants, besides expenditure on
-New Service/New Instrument of Service should be made available, as
enshrined in the Constitution of India. हु



11

(f) Ministry of Finance shall continue to discharge its function in overseeing that
the expenditure incurred by various Ministries/Departments remain within the
Budgetary provisions and would also ensure that the excess expenditure is
brought to minimum, if not avoided.”

12. Taking into consideration the large scale excess expenditure incurred by the
Ministries/Departments concerned during the year 2011-12 despite obtaining the
Supplementary Grants on three occasions in a financial year, the Committee in their
earlier Report had desired the Ministry of Finance to initiate a study of the best
International Practices on the modalities for ensuring greater conformity of
expenditure to the budgetary provisions. The Committee are inclined to conclude that”
no corrective measures in accordance with the Committee's recommendation have
been taken by the Ministry of Finance. The Committee are also constrained to point
out that instead of taking the action as desired by them, the Ministry of Finance have
furnished routine replies. The Ministry of Finance have once again submitted similar
replies and reitérated that it is incumbent upon the Secretaries of Ministry/Department
as Chief Accounting Authority of their respective Ministry/Department, to ensure that.
constitutional and financial provision are strictly observed. Further, it has been
contended that the GFR, 2005, do put the onus on controlling officers to strictly follow
the principles of budget allocation. All the Ministries/Departments have also been
suggested to take several measures to contain the excess expenditure. If these
measures are adequate enough to eliminate the excess expenditure altogether, the
Committee find it difficult to comprehend as to why the large amount of excess
expenditure continue fo recurr year after year. While appreciating the Ministry's
suggestion for flexibility to inter change budgetary allocation the Committee feel that
the same should be resorted to in extreme cases with adequate justification, in each
case. The Committee, therefore, while reiterating their earlier recommendation, to
initiate a study of the best international practices to contain the expenditure under the
budgetary provisions now desire that.the Ministry of Finance should also devise some
_effective and stringent measures including- penal measures against the responsible
Financial Advisors and the budget controlling authorities in all ‘the
Ministries/Departments fo overcome the recurring phenomenon of excess expenditure
in future. Examination of the excess expenditure incurred during the last five years
may also be conducted by the Ministry of Finance.



42

Persistent excess expenditure incurred by Ministry of Railways Railways

- (Recommendation Para No. 6) :

13. The Committee found that the incurring of excess expenditure was a recurring
phenomenon in all the sectors of the economy viz. Civil, Defence Services, Postal Services
and Railways. The “scrutiny of excess expenditure incurred by various
Ministries/Departments during the last ten years revealed that in all the sectors the
excess expenditure which was reduced to a considerable extent during the year 2007-08
had again showed an upward trend during the years. 2008-09 to 2010-11. However,
during the year under review, ie. 2011-12, while the excess expenditure under Civil and
Postal services had increased, it had shown a downward trend in case of Defence Services
and Railways. Ainilarly, overall excess expenditure had also been reduced from
%11046.93 crore in 22 Grants/ Appropriations during 2010-114 10 %8563.14
crore in 11 Grants/Appropriations in the fiscal 2011-12. Further, from the scrutiny of
excess registering Grants/Appropriations for the last five years period i.e. from 2007-08 to
2011-12 the Committee found that in 12 Grants/Appropriations (Grant No. 21- Defence
Pensions, Grant No. 13-Postal Services, Grant No. 22-Defence Services- Army and
Grants/Appropriations No. 3,4,5,6,8,12,13,15 and 16 operated by the Ministry of Railways,
persistent excesses occurred in at least three years out of the five years. It had further been
observed that the Ministry of Defence under Revenue-Voted Section of Grant No. 21-
Defence Pensions, had incurred excess expenditure recurringly for the last four years ie.
from 2008-09 to 2011-12. Out of this, excess expenditure for the years 2009-10 to 2011-
12 was more than 71000 crore (€8999.54 crore in 2009-10, €3336.31 crore in 2010-11 and
%3568.81 crore in 2011-12). Similarly, the Department of Posts under Revenue Voted
Section of Grant No.-13 ‘had ‘incurred excess expenditure of more than %300
crore recurring for the last three years ie. from 2009-10 to 2011-12 (= 818.13 crore in
2009-10, €366.63 crore in 2010-11 and %400.04 crore in 2011-12). Further, in case of
Grants/Appropriations operated by the Ministry of Railways the Committee observed that
out of 16 Grants/Appropriations nine Grants/Appropriations had witnessed excess
expenditure consecutively for a period of three years or more. While observing that

" adequate and serious attention was not being paid by the Ministries/Departments concerned
in the implementation. of an effective mechanism to curb the phenomenon, the Committee

recommended that the Government should earnestly undertake case. studies of the



13

‘last five years and streamline and strengthen the extant mechanism so as to tighten the

financial and budgetary control to effectively check the unabated trend of excess

expenditure.

14,

15.

In this regard, the Ministry of Railway in their Action Taken Note, submitted as under :

"The para brings out the Grant-wise factual position of excess expenditure incurred by
various central ministries including the Railways. The Committee have expressed
displeasure on the persistent excess in certain grants in the last 5 years. In this
regard, it is submitted that the instance of persistent excess on Railways has come -

- down drastically in 2011-12: Further, the instance of excess expenditure on Railways

both in term of number of instances’ and total ammount involved have registered
noticeable decline in 2011-12. However, it may be mentioned that the excess incurred
under Grant No. 12 & 13 is mainly due to adjustment of more compensation debits,
more number of compensation claims, more expenditure towards private caterers and
clearance of outstanding bills of IRCTC, clearance of heavy outstanding liabilities and
more materialization of claims and adjustment of debits under MAR(other), more
debits from various pension disbursing authorities on account of implementation of
MACP and increase of DA, finalization of more DCRG cases and more contribution for
newly defined contributory pension scheme. The concern of the Committee is noted

nonetheless:" ~

During the.course of vetting of above-said Action Taken Notes, the Audit have made

the following observation:-

16.

‘The PAC has desired to undertake case studies of the instances where expenditure
had persistently exceeded the budgetary allocations during the last five years and
streamline/strengthen extent mechanism to contro! effectively the trend of excess
expenditure. Ministry of Railways is requested to intimate whether any such case
study undertaken as suggested by the PAC.” *

The comments of the Ministry on the aforesaid Audit observation are as follows:-

"Yes. As per the study, undertaken, persistent excess during the five years (with 2011-
12 being the last year) has occurred only in cases of Grant No. 12 and 13 during the
period from 2009-10 to 2011-12 and Charged.Appropriation No.3 during 2008-09 to
2011-12 and No.7 during 2010-11 & 2011-12.

In. this regard, it is submitted that the instance of persistent excess expenditure on
Railways, both in terms of number of instances and total amount involved, have
registered noticeable decline in. 2011-12. However, it may be mentioned that the
excess incurred under Grant No. 12 & 13 is mainly due fo ‘adjustment of more
compensation debits, more number of compensation claims, more expenditure
towards private caterers and clearance of outstanding bills of IRCTC, clearance of



44 हैं

heavy outstanding liabilities and more materialization of claims and adjustments oi
debits under MAR(other), more debits from various pension disbursing authorities art
account of implementation of MACP and increase of DA, finalization of more DCORG
cases and more contribution for newly defined contributory pension scheme. A letter
has been sent to the Zonal. Railways to ‘take immediate action as desired by the
Committee to curb the instances of excess.expendifure."

17. While not accepting the above-said reply of the Ministry the Audit have made further
comments which are given as under : हु

“The persistent excess during the last five years indicates the ineffective control over
the expenditure by the spending units and failure in maintaining financial discipline by

" the Zonal Railways. Practice of incurring of expenditure excess to the budget
provision/allocation needs to be strictly avoided.”

18, Final comment of the Ministry on the above-said Audit observations are as follows :-

"The Audi's observation is noted for strengthening the existing mechanism and
1 control, A tetter to the Zonal Railways has already been sent in this regard."

19. The cémmittec note that in pursuance of their recommendation the Ministry of

Railways has undertaken case study of the instances where expenditure had
persistently exceeded the budgetary allocations during the last five years. As per the ह
study persistent excess during the five years (with 2011-12 being the last year) has
occurred only in cases of Grant No. 12 and 13 during the period from 2008-10 to 2041-
42 and Charged Appropriation No.3 during 2008-09 fo 2011-12 and No.7 during 2010-14
& 2011-12. However, it seems that the Ministry have not taken any steps fo streamline
and strengthen the existing mechanism to contro! the trend of excess expenditure
except issuing a routine letter as in the past to the Zonal Railways. Keeping in view the
persisting trend of excess expenditure in the Grants/Appropriations operated by the
Ministry of Railways during the years 2012-13 and 2013-14 also, the Committee feel
that extant system of monitoring of expenditure in the Ministry ts awfully deficient and
‘there is a utter failure on the part of the Zonal Railways in maintaining financial
, discipline. While reiterafing their earlier recommendation, the Committee strongly
desire that the Ministry should initiate some concrete measures to revamp their
- existing monitoring mechanism to avoid excess expenditure in future.



15

” Delay in Submissign of Explanatory Notes

(Recommendation Para No. 8)

20. | The Ministries/Departments are required to- submit to the Committee Explanatory
Notes in respect of the excess registering Grants / Appropriations immediately after the
presentation of refevant Appropriation Accounts to the House. The Committee found that the
Explanatory Notes in respect of excess registering Grants/Appropriations pertaining to Civil
Ministries/Departments were due for submission to the Committee on or before 43" August
2013, but the same were received with a délay ranging rom 10 days to more than two
months. The Ministry of External Affairs and Defence had furnished their Explanatory Notes
after a delay of 40 days, and 21 days respectively, white the Ministry of Home Affairs
submitted their ‘Explanatory Note pertaining to Grant No. 97-Chandigarh and Grant No-100-
Lakshadweep after a delay of more than two months. While taking a serious view of such
delays on the part of the Ministries/Departments concerned in furnishing the Explanatory
Notes, the Committee had desired the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure), the

coordinating Ministry, fo look into the matter and take suitable measures to ensure timely
submission of explanatory notes in future. As a systemic check, the Ministry of Finance in
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor General of India should put in place a
centralized computerized networking monitoring system to check the status of the
preparation of Explanatory Note at every stage by various Ministries/Departments so that any
delay on this count is avoided.

21. — In this regard, the Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure, in their reply have
stated as under : |

"Department of Expenditure has issued instructions to all the Ministries/Departments
to ensure timely submission of Explanatory Notes to the PAC. हि

|
. The Ministry have also requested the Comptroller and Auditor General, as suggested
by PAC, to provide necessary advice in developing a module/solution to monitor
submission of Explanatory Notes of the Ministries/Department.

The PAC would be informed as soon as the module is developed and incorporated in _
APMS portal." ह



a
ao

22, The Committee ace pleased fo note thet the Witnistry of Finance (Bepariment ७

Expenditure) in consultation with the Comptroller & Auditor General have initiated the |
process of development-of a aiechanismimodule: to monitor the submission of

explanatory notes. on excess expenditure by vartous Ministries/Departmenis ,
However; @resitN_of the Ministry is sitent about the time period by when the said
module would be-developed and miade operational. Keeping in view the fact that the
delay in submission, of explanatory nofes to PAC thwarts the process of finalization of
Report on excess over Voted Grants and Charged Appropriations which ultimately
results into delay in regularization of excess expenditure for that year, the Committee

_ would like the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) to take up the process

of development.of this module in right earnest and incorporate it in-the APMS porta!

onurgentbasis.  - : :

eee

PROF. K.V. THOMAS
Chairperson,’
Public Accounts Committee

NEW DELHI;
09 December,2015
18 Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka)