1 
 
105 
 
 
CREATION OF TOURIST INFRASTRUCTURE IN 
ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  


2 
 
PAC NO.   2139 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTH REPORT 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(201 8-19) 
 
 
( SI XTEENTH LO K S ABH A)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS  
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on:  
Laid in Rajya Sabha on:  
 
         LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NE W  D E L H I  
July, 2018 / Ashadha, 1940 (Saka) 
 
CREATION OF TOURIST 
INFRASTRUCTURE IN ANDAMAN & 
NICOBAR ISLANDS 
 

3 
 
CONTENTS 
  PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2017-18)  
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-V OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
COMMITTEE (2017-18) 
(iii) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2018-19)   
INTRODUCTION ……………………………... ……………………..   (v) 
REPORT 
PART  I 
I 
 
Introductory 
 
1 
II 
 
Unfruitful expenditure of ` 18.45 lakhs on uninitiated project 
 
2 
III Assignment of work without ensuring adequate resources  4 
IV Wasteful expenditure on outlived vessel  7 
V Wasteful expenditure of ` 39.80 lakh towards yacht marina 
and luxury boats  
8 
VI Violation of financial rules and financial propriety resulting in 
poor implementation of projects  
10 
PART II 
Observations/ Recommendations…………………………..            16 
ANNEXURES 
A Minutes of the sitting of the Sub -Committee-V of 
PAC (2017-18) on 15.11.2017 
 
B Minutes of the sitting of the Sub -Committee-V of 
PAC (2017-18) on 04.04.2018 
 
C Minutes of the sitting of PAC (2017 -18) on 
10.04.2018 
 
D Minutes of the sitting of PAC (2018 -19) on 
04.07.2018 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2017-18) 
 
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge   - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra 
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey 
6. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar   
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
8. Smt. Riti Pathak 
9. Vacant1 
10. Shri Abhishek Singh 
11. Prof. Ram Shanker 
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi 
15. Dr. P. Venugopal 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Vacant2 
17. Vacant3 
18. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
19. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan4 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy5 
21. Vacant6 
22. Vacant7 
 
 
                                                           
1 Shri Neiphiu Rioh Ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon acceptance of his resignation from Lok 
Sabha w.e.f. 22 February, 2018.  
2 Shri Naresh Agrawal ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 
2 April, 2018 
3 Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi  ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent up on his retirement from Rajya 
Sabha on 2 April, 2018 
4 Elected w.e.f. 29 December, 2017 in lieu of vacancy caused due to retirement of Shri Shantaram Naik.   
5 ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 18 August, 2 017 and 
re-elected w.e.f. 29 December, 2017. 
6 Shri Ajay Sancheti ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 2 
April, 2018 
7 Shri Bhupender Yadav ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement f rom Rajya Sabha 
on 3 April, 2018 

5 
 
Sub-Committee – V [Infrastructural Projects other than Railways]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Convenor                 : 1. Shri  Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
Alternate Convenor : 2. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra 
Members                 : 3. Shri Abhishek Singh                      
 4. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
 5. Shri  Satyavrat Chaturvedi  
 6. Prof. Ram Shanker 

6 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
 (2018-19) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge   - Chairperson 
 
 M E M B E R S  
 
L O K  S A B H A  
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria  
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra 
5.    Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar   
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
7. Smt. Riti Pathak 
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank” 
9. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
10. Shri Abhishek Singh 
11. Shri Gopal Shetty 
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya  
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
15. Dr. Ponnusamy  Venugopal 
 
 
 
R A J Y A  S A B H A  
 
16. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda 
17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
18. Shri Shwait Malik 
19. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
21. Vacant 
22. Vacant 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri T. JayaKumar - Director 
3. Smt. Anju Kukreja - Under Secretary 
4. Shri Ashikho Alemo -          Sr. Executive Asst. 

7 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2018-19), having been authorised 
by the Committee, do present this  One Hundred and Fifth (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Creation of tourist infrastructure in Andaman & Nicobar Islands ’ based on Para 
No.2.1 of the C&AG Compliance Report No. 2 4 of 2016 pertain ing to the Ministr y of 
Home Affairs.  
 
2.  The Report of the Comptroller and Auditor Genera l of India was laid on the Table 
of the House on 12th August, 2016.  
 
3.  The Public Accounts Committee (201 7-18) took up the subject for detailed 
examination and report. T he Sub-Committee-V was constituted under the Convenorship 
of Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy, M.P  and Member of PAC that took evidence of the 
representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs on the subject at their sitting held on 15th 
November, 2016. Accordingly, a draft Report was prepared and adopted by the Sub -
Committee on 4 th April, 2018. The Report was also considered and adopted by the 
Public Accounts Committee (2017 -18) on 10 th April, 2018. As the Report could not be 
presented to the Parliament during the last tenure of the Committee (2017 -18), the 
Report was considered again and adopted by the Public Accounts Committee (2018 -19) 
during their sitting held on 4 th July, 2018.  Minutes of the sittings are appended to the 
Report.  
 
5.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part II of the Report.  
 
6.  The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministries of Home Affairs for tendering evidence before them and furnishing information 
in connection with the examination of the subject.  
 
7.  The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to 
them in the examination by the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                     MALLIKARJUN KHARGE        
 July, 2018                        Chairperson, 
 Ashadha, 1940 (Saka)         Public Accounts Committee 
 
 

8 
 
 
REPORT  
PART – I 
I INTRODUCTORY 
This Report is based on Para No.2.1 of the C& AG Compliance Report No. 
24 of 2016. Based on the findings of Audit in respect of the expenditure sector in 
the Union Territories and tourism being a major revenue generating industry in 
the Union Territory of Andaman & Nicobar Islands and a major source o f 
livelihood for the people of these islands, the Committee took up Para No.2.1 on 
the subject, ‘Creation of tourist infrastructure in Andaman & Nicobar I slands’ on 
the aforementioned C&AG Report for detailed examination. 
2. The Sub-Committee –V of Public Accounts Committee (2017 -18) selected 
the subject for detailed examination and took oral evidence of the representatives 
of the Ministr y of Home Affairs and the Union Territory  of Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands and obtained written replies on the subject. Based  on the oral evidence 
and written replies, the Sub-Committee examined the subject in detail. 
3. The Committee found that i n the aftermath of the devastating Tsunami of 
December, 2004, A & N Administration had identified various projects for 
implementation under the Tsunami Rehabilitation Programme (TRP), UT Plan 
and under the Central Schemes of Ministry of Tourism to revive the tourism 
sector of A&N Islands and to push up the tourist footfalls to these Islands. 
Considering that tourism is a major revenue ge nerating industry in the Union 
Territory (UT) of Andaman & Nicobar Islands (ANI) and also a major source of 
livelihood for the people of these Islands, it was important for the 
Ministry/Department to initiate new tourism projects so as to boost the economi c 
activity in the sector. Initially, the Ministry identified 26 projects/major works. 
However, Audit observed that as of March 2016, only six out of the 26 major 
works were completed; two of the works were in progress; and the remaining 18 

9 
 
major works were  either dropped or were not taken up at all. Of the six 
completed works three were either not utilized or partially commissioned. 
A. Unfruitful expenditure of ` 18.45 lakhs on uninitiated Project 
4. In their report, Audit observed that the Tourism Department engaged (May 
2009) the Indian Tourism Development Corporation Ltd. (ITDC) as consultant for 
preparing the Detailed Project Report (DPR) for development of the tourist circuit, 
“Port Blair -Neil-Havelock-Baratang” under Ministry of Tourism (MoT) s cheme, 
“Product/Infrastructure Development for Destinations and Circuits (PIDDC)”. MoT 
refused sanction (October 2010) in the absence of Coastal Regulation Zone 
(CRZ) /environmental clearances. Thereafter, the Department awarded 
(December 2011) the work of  preparation of Environment Impact Assessment 
(EIA) report for CRZ clearance to the National Institute of Ocean Technology 
(NIOT). The work of development of tourist facilities at Baratang was, however, 
excluded, citing various environment and tribal issue s. The NIOT submitted the 
draft EIA reports for Port Blair, Havelock and Neil Islands on 27 December 2012, 
31 May 2013 and 20 November 2013 respectively and requested ANI 
Administration for site -wise details such as project layout, technical justification,  
technical design, etc., for inclusion in their final report. However, even after three 
years, ANI Administration has not provided the information. As a result, MoT has 
not finally approved the project, but has tentatively allocated an amount of ` 5.00 
crore under the PIDDC scheme in 2014 -15. Thus, lack of follow up by ANI 
Administration rendered unfruitful the expenditure of ` 18.45 lakh on the 
preparation of DPR and EIA reports. 
5. When asked the reasons behind the failure of the ANI administration to 
collect and submit information on site -wise details such as project layout, 
technical justification, technical design, etc. from Port Blair Municipal Council and 
Andaman Public Works Department, to NIOT for inclusion in its final report, the 
Ministry of Tourism stated as under:- 

10 
 
“In September, 2015, while giving reply to the audit the Department of 
Tourism, A&N Administration had stated that the requisite information is 
awaited from Port Blair Municipal Council and Andaman Public Works 
Department. From the rec ords, it is found that the DPR submitted by the 
Consultants was based on the plinth area and did not provide the actual 
exact quantities of construction material as was sought by the NIOT. It was 
only after the Ministry of Tourism had approved the proposed  work that 
any of the executing agencies could have been directed by the 
Administration to prepare a ‘detailed estimate’ based on the site 
conditions. It is only after this stage that the further details which were 
sought by the NIOT could be made availabl e by the relevant executing 
agencies. It will not be out of context to point out here that all the executing 
agencies in the A&N Islands have very limited manpower and are barely 
able to meet the deadlines & requirements of various departments of this 
Administration. In spite to these limitations, our executing agencies like the 
Andaman Public Works Department ( APWD) & Port Blair Municipal 
Corporation (PBMC) could prepare the required estimates after visiting all 
the sites and then provide the Tourism Department with the required 
information. The Tourism Department coordinated with these agencies and 
the required inputs were then collected and provided to NIO T on 
11/12/2015 (Annexure VIII). The NIOT submitted final EIA Reports in 
respect of Havelock & Neil Island on 18/05/2016.  The final EIA Report on 
Port Blair (Carbyn’s Cove) was submitted by NIOT on 21/07/2016 duly 
incorporating the requisite inputs from the PBMC and APWD. 
It would not be out of context to highlight here that unlike the mainland 
States/UTs of India, the A&N Islands have limited resources to meet up the 
huge burden of expectation of growth & development thrust upon it. In this 
scenario, the competing demands of various departments, limit the 
availability of appropriate resources for all the works at any given point of 
time. The delay in the instant case was on account of limited or constraint 
capacity and not due to deliberate default or delinquency on the part of any 
particular functionary. Thus, in this particular case, it will not be appropriate 
to fix responsibility for the delay on any particular executing agency or a 
particular individual.” 
B. Assignment of work without ensuring adequate resources 
6. In their report Audit had highlighted on the defective implementation of the 
Canopy Walkway Project at two sites namely, Chidiyatapu and Mount Harriet 
simultaneously by the ANI Administration, without ensuring availability of Padauk 
Timber and the consequent abandonment of these projects. 

11 
 
7. The Audit observed that the Planning Commission sanctioned ` 2 crore in 
2006 under the TRP for the setting up of Canopy Walkway (CW) 10 in ANI. 
Subsequently, the Forest Department identified (September 200 8) Chidiyatapu 
and Mount Harriet (MH). Though the Forest Department suggested that the CW 
at Mount Harriet be taken up after gaining experience from the CW at 
Chidiyatapu, the Chief Secretary approved (December 2008)  and entered into  a 
consultancy agreement (May 2009) with a private firm for both the sites. The 
evaluation committee accepted (September 2009) the DPR submitted by the 
consultant, and the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Mumbai, ratified 
(February 2010) the structura l designs. The Standing Finance Committee (SFC) 
cleared (February 2010) the proposal for setting up of CWs at Chidiyatapu and 
Mount Harriet at `3.61 crore and `2.22 crore respectively. Though the Forest 
Department expressed its inability (24 March 2010) to  supply the full requirement 
of 364.44 cum of padauk timber, the Tourism Department withdrew ` 1.60 crore 
(31 March 2010) and paid it to the Forest Department, as advance (April 2010). 
The payment of 100 per cent advance by the Tourism Department for suppl y of 
timber violated Rule 159 of the General Financial Rules which stipulates that, 
ordinarily, payments should be released only after the services have been 
rendered or supplies made, and in any case, advances cannot exceed forty per 
cent even to Government agencies or entities without the approval of the Central 
Government in consultation with the Financial Adviser. This irregular transaction 
resulted in artificially inflating the capital expenditure of the Tourism Department. 
The Forest Department, in tu rn, supplied only 20 cum of padauk timber from its 
own resources, and deposited (23 April 2010) the entire amount of `1.60 crore 
into Government account under the head “Forest Revenue” thereby, artificially 
inflating the revenue receipts of the Forest Depa rtment for 2010 -11. A local firm 
was assigned (April 2011) the work for ` 6.72 crore  to be completed by April 
2012. As part of the project, the contractor delivered (June 2011) materials 
including steel reinforcement bars (TMT) at the site and was paid (Fe bruary 
2014) ` 0.52 crore. The Forest Department once again expressed (January 
2012) its inability to supply the requisite quantity of timber. The Chief Secretary 

12 
 
decided (29 February 2012) to use hot dip galvanized steel instead, and after 
revised designs were submitted by the consultant and ratified by the IIT Mumbai, 
the cost was revised (September 2012) to ` 13.77 crore. The Chief Secretary  
however, decided that the project should be completed as per original 
specifications. In May 2013, the Chief Secretary decided to transfer the projects 
to APWD without citing any reasons, but the work was transferred only in April 
2014, and is yet (May 2016) to be taken up by APWD. The Administration 
thereafter decided (May 2016) to execute the project through the And aman 
Lakshadweep Harbour Works (ALHW). The work is yet to commence. In the 
meantime, in March 2014, the Chief Secretary  decided to keep the project at 
Mount Harriet on hold (which was finally dropped in August 2015) and ordered 
that the materials stocked t here be transferred to the other project at 
Chidiyatapu. An amount of ` 5.62 crore had already been incurred which 
included pending payment of ` 1.29 crore to the contractor. Thus the Audit 
observed that the injudicious decision of the Tourism Department t o take up the 
construction of Canopy Walkways at two locations simultaneously contrary to the 
assessment of the Forest Department regarding insufficient availability of timber, 
and vacillation regarding the implementing agency, resulted in blockage of ` 4.33 
crore. 
8. The Ministry of Tourism had stated that the Department, taking into 
account the due procedure , appointed a private consultant (December, 2008) to 
prepare a Detailed Project Report (DPR) for setting up of the canopy walkway at 
two sites Chidiyatapu and Mount Harriet identified by the Forest Department. The 
DPR submitted by the consultant was subsequently accepted (September, 2009) 
by the evaluation committee chaired by Secretary (Tourism) with Deputy 
Commissioner (South Andaman), Conservator o f Forest (Wildlife), Director 
(Tourism), General Manager, Andaman & Nicobar Islands Integrated 
Development Corporation (ANIIDCO), Director (Finance), Superintendent 
Engineer, Construction Circle -1, Andaman Public Works Department (APWD), 
Sr. Architect, APW D as membe r. The structural design submitted by them was 
also got ratified from IIT Mumbai (February, 2010). The Standing Finance 

13 
 
Committee (SFC) chaired by the Chief Secretary cleared (February, 2010) the 
proposal for setting up of canopy walkway at Chidi yatapu and Mount Harriet at 
`3.61 crore and ` 2.22 crore respectively. It was decided that the entire timber 
(Padauk) required for both the Canopy walkways will be provided by Department 
of Environment & Forests and an amount of ` 1.60 crore was transferre d to 
Department of Environment & Forest by Tourism Department on 21.04.2010 as 
100% advance for timber. M/s Ravi Constructions, Port Blair was selected as the 
Contractor for the project through open tenders invited by Tourism Department. 
Agreement was sign ed with M/s Ravi Constructions on 21.04.2011 with a time 
schedule of one year stipulated for completion of the projects. Forest Department 
provided very little quantity of timber as against the full requirement and later 
expressed inability in providing large sections of Padauk timber for towers on 
27.01.2012 (after a delay of 21 months of receiving the entire money for timber) 
due to which the projects got delayed. As an alternative, it was decided to use 
structural steel in place of timber for towers an d the proposal was approved by 
Hon’ble Lt. Governor on 29.02.2012. Revised designs for using steel prepared by 
the Consultant and approved by IIT were submitted by the Consultant on 
21.04.2012. 
 Subsequently, the Canopy walkways project was again reviewed during 
various meetings held under the chairmanship of Chief Secretary on 27.11.2012, 
16.01.2013, 26.02.2013, 04.03.2013 and 17.04.2013 and it was decided that the 
designs of the Canopy Walkways should be checked for safety by APWD before 
proceeding furthe r with the project. APWD examined the designs and sought 
some clarifications from Consultant. However, the Consultant in spite of repeated 
reminders did not submit the requisite additional information. The Consultant was 
showing very casual attitude and di d not respond to the queries raised by APWD 
due to which APWD was not being able to cross check the designs. The issues 
were not cleared by the Consultant which had badly delayed the project. It was 
later observed that it may not be safe to construct a wal kway at the height of 
around 15-20 mt. It was decided to realign the Chidiyatapu Canopy walkway by 
reducing its height and also to drop the Mount Harriet walkway project. Presently, 

14 
 
the Department in consultation with Andaman Lakshadweep Harbour Works 
(ALHW) is in the process of redesigning the project by utilizing the existing 
materials so that safety is ensured. The rest of the material available at the site 
shall also be used judiciously by the department in the proposed redesigned 
canopy walkway project. 
9. On being asked as to why the ANI Administration decided to execute the 
work through ALHW instead of APWD and what was the reason behind the delay 
in the decision making process, the Ministry submitted as follows; 
“It was decided by the then LG/ Chief Secretary that the said work would 
be taken over by the APWD. However, from records, it appears that since 
the APWD had not executed any projects of this nature in the past and 
sought various clarifications on the safety aspects before taking the project 
forward and which were otherwise not coming forth from the consultant, 
delaying the project, the Administration roped in the ALHW to take the 
work forward in the best interest of the project. Further, from the records it 
appears that this decision was taken  only upon the assurance given by the 
ALHW to the Administration that they can take up this work and also 
complete the same. All the above presumably took some time and may 
have delayed the process of decision making.” 
10. On the present status of the execution of Canopy Walkway Project, the 
Ministry stated as follows: 
“ALHW has submitted an estimate for  ` 798.20 lakhs (later revised to  ` 
923 lakh on account of applicable GST and rise in minimum wages) for 
construction of Canopy Walkway at Chidiyatapu , as per the new approved 
alignment and the same was placed before the State Finance Committee 
(SFC) on 23/11/2017. After detailed deliberations by the SFC on all the 
pertinent aspects including project risk, cost benefit, internal rate of return, 
change i n the Tourism landscape etc. it was felt by SFC that taking into 
account the current status of the project, the amount already spent on the 
said project viz a viz the cost escalation that is likely to take place by the 
time the said project gets completed and ultimately making a cost benefit 
analysis of this project, it would be prudent for the Administration not to go 
ahead with the same and altogether drop the said project at this stage 
itself. Simultaneously, all efforts may be made to utilize all the ma terials 
that have been already procured for this project appropriately for any of the 
ongoing or proposed projects/works of the Administration and to request 
the Forest Department to explore the possibility of using the foundations 

15 
 
already constructed for this project in some innovative manner/ way or the 
other.” 
C. Wasteful expenditure on outlived vessel 
11. The Audit observed that shipping vessel M.V. Ramanujam operated by the 
Directorate of Shipping Services (DSS) was withdrawn from service in May 2009 
on expiry of its certificates and surrendered to the owners, Shipping Corporation 
of India (SCI), in October 2009. Without conducting any techno economic 
feasibility study, the Tourism Department proposed (July 2010) to operate the 
outlived vessel as a floating restaurant. SCI agreed (November 2010) to the 
transfer, and ` one crore was paid14 to SCI. At the request (April 2011), of the 
Tourism Department, SCI cont inued manning the vessel and claimed (August 
2012) ` 2.39 crore till it was handed over to DSS in April 2012 who manned the 
vessel on behalf of Tourism Department. Meanwhile, two tenders invited by the 
Tourism Department (in April 2011 and October 2011) fo r designing, renovation, 
operation and maintenance of the vessel as a floating restaurant, failed to 
fructify. The vessel was transferre d (February 2012) to ANIIDCO , who informed 
the Tourism Department (August 2012) that they had also failed to finalise a 
bidder. A technical committee appointed by the DSS opined (November 2012) 
that the vessel required extensive repairs and fresh certifications and instead 
recommended disposal of the vessel. Consequently, the Chief Secretary ordered 
(January 2013) disposal of the vessel and SCI was requested (February 2013) to 
take the vessel back for disposal. After four attempts by SCI to dispose the 
vessel by e-auction between 23 April 2013 and 31 October 2013 also failed, SCI 
recommended (December 2013) that the vessel b e beached at Port Blair itself. 
ANI Administration however, took nearly a year to transfer the ownership of the 
vessel (10 November 2014) to the Director (Tourism) and beach the vessel (23 
November 2014) at Panighat, Port Blair. During the entire period (A pril 2012 to 
23 November 2014), the DSS incurred an expenditure of ` 0.78 crore ( ` 2.45 
lakh per month) for manning the vessel, which could have been reduced by `0.29 
crore had the Administration acted expeditiously on the SCI’s recommendation 
on beaching the vessel. Till date (May 2016), the environmental clearance for 

16 
 
ship breaking is pending, and neither the vessel nor its contents have been 
disposed of. Thus, hasty and erroneous decision of the Tourism Department 
without any techno economic feasibility study, towards procurement of an 
outlived vessel led to wasteful expenditure of ` 1.23 crore and an additional 
liability of ` 3.34 crore. 
12. When asked as to why the Tourism Department had proposed to operate 
an outlived vessel as a floating restaurant wi thout conducting any techno -
economic feasibility study, the Ministry replied as under; 
“It was a PPP project conceived at that point of time in the Islands, wherein 
a vessel was proposed to be purchased by the Administration and then 
leased out to any Private Player for its conversion into a “Floating 
Restaurant”. It appears that at that point of time, the Administration had 
only 2 options for such a concept of a “Floating Restaurant” to fructify: 
a. Either to procure a new vessel for the said purpose or 
b. To go in for an ‘old vessel’ which is still in the workable 
running condition and which could be refitted or refurbished to 
work as a ‘Floating restaurant’. 
At that point of time, presumably the Administration felt that the 
second option was a financi ally sound & a beneficial option.  M.V. 
Ramanujam, a vessel of the Shipping Corporation of India (SCI) 
which was then already plying between Port Blair and Havelock 
before being decommissioned by the Department of Shipping 
Services, was at that point of ti me being returned by the DSS to the 
SCI and it was assessed that it was an economical deal to procure 
this particular vessel for the said project rather than going in for a 
new vessel. However, it would be in the fitness of the things to 
mention here that all efforts were indeed made by the Administration 
not once, twice or thrice but four times to rope in a ‘private player’ 
through a bidding process to set up & run a “floating restaurant” on 
the said vessel. However, all the efforts by the Administration p roved 
futile despite four consecutive tenders in this regard floated in April 
2011, October 2011, April 2012 and August 2012.  
Nevertheless, it is a fact that no techno -feasibility study was done 
which otherwise could have been done by the Administration b efore 
going ahead with such a project. It is important to emphasize here 
that at present all projects of the Administration invariably involving 
very high investments ar e not taken up without doing a f easibility 
Study.” 

17 
 
13. On the matter of expenditure inc urred as ‘manning charges’ and the 
present status of environment clearance for ship breaking, the Ministry of Home 
Affairs stated as follows; 
“It is submitted that as the Tourism Department does not have the 
technical manpower and capability to man a ship of this size, and therefore 
this responsibility was entrusted to the Directorate of Shipping Services of 
A&N Administration using its own internal resources without incurring any 
additional expenditure. Thus, it would not be correct to say that an amount 
of ` 0.29 crore would have been saved had the vessel been beached 
earlier as per the recommendation of SCI. There was neither any physical 
transfer of any funds to DSS nor has the DSS incurred any additional cost 
on this account. In response to the request for ship breaking which was 
sent through the Port Management Board ( PMB), a specific undertaking 
from the Tourism department for the grant of permission for ship breaking 
in the islands was sought by the Ministry of Environment & Forest and the 
same has since been given and the said clearance is still awaited.” 
D. Wasteful expenditure of `39.80 lakh towards yacht Marina and luxury 
boats 
14. In their report Audit also observed that in 2006, the Planning Commission 
allocated `26.50 crore under TRP for development of one 50 unit yacht marina 
and procurement of one 35 room luxury boat and two mechanized luxury boats. 
Tourism Department engaged (November 2008) a private consultant, and paid 
`23.12 lakh between March 2009 and Febru ary 2012.The site for development of 
marina at “Command Point and Viper Island” was selected and ‘No Objection 
Certificate (NOC)’ was obtained (June 2009) from the Defence authorities in ANI.  
The Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) that approved the propos al for 
`52.64 crore (February 2010) also recommended that the project be  bifurcated 
(as yacht marina and luxury boat separately). The luxury boat  project was finally 
dropped (November 2012). After the first request for proposal (RFP) under Public 
Private Partnership (PPP) mode for the marina failed to fructify (May 2010), fresh 
RFP was invited (September 2010), based on which, the SFC approved (January 
2012) the financial bid of the selected firm subject to Environmental/ CRZ 
clearances. The Director (Tour ism) entrusted the firm with whom the agreement 
was signed (July 2012) to procure the necessary clearances. This was irregular 

18 
 
since the securing of such clearances should precede the signing of the 
agreement to execute the works. In the meantime a private  party approached 
(March 2013) the Circuit Bench of the Calcutta High Court against the project. 
While refusing to stay the implementation of the project, the High Court directed  
(April 2013)  that the fact of clearances from the Ministry of Environment and  
Forests and Ministry of Defence be ensured. The local Defence Authorities, 
however, withdrew (May 2013) the clearance given earlier, without assigning any 
reasons. The contractor also failed to furnish the performance guarantee, which 
in terms of the agre ement was to be furnished by November 2012, and therefore 
the site was not handed over to the contractor which ultimately led to the failure 
of the project to fructify after incurring an expenditure of 
 39.80 lakh o n 
consultancy and advertisement charges. 
15. On enquiry as to why necessary Environment/CRZ Clearances as per the 
MoEF’s norms were not obtained prior to award of work s, the Ministry stated as 
under:- 
“The Yacht Marina project was a PPP project, wherein the Administration  
had floated an RFP for the construction of a Yacht Marina and the 
successful bidder was selected on the basis of highest revenue share 
offered to the Administration. At that point of time, the Administration was 
neither provided with any details of the pr oject to be executed by the 
successful bidder nor was expected to spend any fund at that stage. 
Hence, in absence of any tangible details of the said project, the 
Administration could not have applied for clearances mentioned above. On 
the contrary, as per  records, it is the “successful bidder” who had to apply 
for the said clearances, being the ‘user agency’ as per Clause 4.1.2 of the 
RFP document duly approved by the Ministry of Tourism. Thus, it was the 
responsibility of the “successful bidder/user agenc y” to apply and seek all 
the required clearances before commencing any work at the site. Hence, it 
was neither legally nor procedurally required of the Tourism Department to 
apply &obtain Environment/CRZ clearances before signing of the 
Agreement for awarding of this project. The successful bidder walked in to 
the project with its eyes open and it was its responsibility to obtain the 
requisite CRZ/Environment clearances required for the project.” 
16. When asked as to why the A & N Administration failed to i mplement the 
penalty clauses against the contractor, the Ministry replied as under; 

19 
 
“It would be appropriate to highlight here that with the withdrawal of NOC 
by the Defence Authorities, the Administration was not in a position to go 
ahead with the said pr oject. Thus, as there was no contractual failure on 
the part of the said contractor, holding him responsible for the failure of the 
project for reasons beyond his control and the invocation of the penalty 
clauses against the said contractor, would not be l egally tenable strictly 
going by the terms of the RFP." 
E Non issue of work order resulting in abandonment of work 
17. Audit found that the MoT identified two integrated tourism circuits to be 
developed in Andaman &  Nicobar Islands in two phases in the Twelfth Five Year 
Plan 2012 -2017. Consequently a tripartite agreement was signed between the 
Ministry of Tourism, Tourism Department and a private firm (consultant) 
developing two integrated tourism circuits during the  12th Five Year Plan. For 
preparation of DPRs, the Ministry of Tourism released ` 20 lakh as advance of 
towards consultancy fee to the Department, who, however, failed to identify the 
various components of the project. Consequently, no work order was issue d to 
the consultant.  The MoT withdrew from the agreement in May 2014 and Tourism 
Department refunded ` 20 lakh (July 2015). Thus, tardiness of the Tourism 
Department resulted in non-utilization of ` 20 lakh and led to abandonment of the 
project for development of the integrated tourism circuits in ANI. 
18. In response to the audit observations, the Department stated (September 
2015) that the M inistry of Tourism (MoT)  withdrew from the agreement when it 
was in process of issuing the work order for the DPR. The reply of the Ministry 
was not acceptable to the Audit, since t he Tourism Department failed to shortlist 
various components of the project (January 2014), due to which, no work order 
could be issued to the consultant for preparation of the DPR.  
F Unfruitful expenditure due to contravention of orders and violation of 
financial rules 
19. Audit also found that d espite the poor financial position of ANIFPDCL and 
in violation of financial rules, the Tourism Department paid an advance of ` 8.87 
crore to ANIFPDCL without entering into any agreement for development of two 

20 
 
camps of 20 eco -friendly cottages each in ANI to provide amenities of 
international standards for high end tourists. After a delay of more than two years 
ANIFPDCL submitted the project pro posal with a final estimate of ` 12.22 crore 
along with the consultancy charge of ` 1.46 crore. However, ANIFPDCL being on 
the verge of closure, the Chief Secretary transferred the project to the Forest 
Department with a revised concept. Though the Tourism  Department requested 
(July-August 2015) ANIFPDCL to refund the advance paid, ` 8.60 crore had 
already been diverted for payment of salary to its employees and ` 26.05 lakh 
was spent on consultancy and other charges, and consequently, the advance 
remains un-refunded as on May 2016. 
20. In response to the audit observations, the Department stated (August 
2015) that the project had been transferred to the Forest Department. The  
Department further stated that the Forest Department could revive the contract  
with the consultant. The fact remains that the advance of  ` 8.87 crore paid to 
ANIFPDCL remained unfruitful and the infrastructure has n ot been created even 
after more than nine years. 
21. On the issue of violation of GFRs by the Tourism Department by entrusting 
the work of developing the releasing funds to ANIFPDCL in advance without 
entering into any agreement, the Ministry stated as follows; 
"This decision was made by the Administration and by those at the helm of 
affairs at that relevant point of time. The specific reason, why such a 
decision was arrived at and as to why 100% advance payment was 
released to the said Corporation even without any agreement or an MOU 
cannot be exactly ascertained from the records available." 
22. When asked whether the  recovery of the amount of ` 8.60 crore has been 
effected by the Tourism Department, the Ministry stated as follows; 
"The A&N Administration is in the process of recovering ` 2.21 crore from 
the ANIFPDCL, which has not been diverted towards payment of sala ries 
but is still lying with the Corporation. For recovery of the balance amount 
along with interest, the Administration has already laid its claim/ rights of 
first refusal on the properties of the ANIFPDC, in the event of disposal of 
any of its assets, in view of the closure of the said Corporation" 

21 
 
G Violation of norms of financial propriety 
23. In their report Audit found that in contravention of Rule 181 of the GFR 
which stipulates that advertised tender enquiry should be adopted for 
procurement of goods with an estimated value of ` 25.00 lakh or more, the 
Director (Tourism), executed (September 2010) an agreement with Indian 
Tourism Development Corporation (ITDC) for up-gradation, without change in the 
original script, of the Light and Sound (L&S) show at Cellular Jail at a total cost of 
` 1 crore without tender enquiry and despite the fact that the incumbent annual 
maintenance contractor quoted a rate of ` 65.50 lakh for the work. The work was 
to be completed by 31 March 2011. Without initiating the work, and without 
providing cost break -up details, ITDC proposed (July 2011) additional scope of 
work, at a cost of ` 85 lakh. Despite the shortcomings of the ITDC pr oposal the 
Chief Secretary accepted (August 2011) the revised cost which was paid to 
ITDC, as advance. Such payment of full advance violated Rule 159 of the GFR 
which states that advances to Public Sector Undertakings should not exceed 
forty per cent of th e contract value, except in consultation with the Financial 
Advisor of the Central Government Ministry or Department.   
24. When asked as to why the Tourism Department executed an agreement of 
`1 crore with ITDC for upgradation of equipment of Light and So und Show 
without tender enquiry in violation of GFR and the reason behind the release of 
`1 crore when the incumbent annual maintenance contractor had quoted an 
amount of ` 65.00 lakh for the same work, the Ministry stated as follows; 
"The Light & Sound sh ow at Cellular Jail has been an important attraction 
for tourist visiting the Andaman & Nicobar Islands. Considering the 
technological advancements in the field, it was decided to upgrade it and 
make it more attractive. Only for the purpose of preliminary assessment of 
the cost of up gradation of the show, an estimate was obtained from the 
AMC Contractor M/s DD Electronics Pvt. Ltd., who had quoted an amount 
of ` 65 Lakh for the said purpose. 
 However, since originally ITDC had set up the project, it was 
 decided to award the up - gradation work to ITDC on “Nomination 
 Basis” under the provisions of Rule 184 of GFR 2005 based on the 
 following justification: 

22 
 
• During a meeting held in New Delhi on 4.8.2008, Joint Secretary, 
Ministry of Tourism, GOI, had informe d that the Sound and Light 
projects financed by MoT are implemented/maintained by ITDC. It was 
also advised that the A&N Administration may like to follow the same 
model for such projects of Sound and Light show after taking the 
approval of the competent authority.  
• ITDC is a public sector undertaking under Ministry of Tourism, 
Government of India and also has vast experience in such sound and 
light projects for Ministry of Tourism, Government of India, as well as for 
various State Tourism Departments.    
• The Sound and Light show system at Cellular Jail was installed by ITDC 
on turnkey basis in Oct.1990.  
However, ITDC in turn followed Rule 181 and selected the executing 
agency through open tende r. As such, the contention of audit that Rule 181 
of GFR 2005 has not been followed appears to be misleading, as in this 
case the department had in fact followed Rule 184 (Outsourcing by Choice) 
with the approval of the competent authority and in consultation with the 
Financial Department and then ITDC followed Rule 181 which implies that 
the final price was discovered only through Rule 181. Hence, relevant 
portion of GFR 2005 has been followed at that point of time for  sanctioning 
the work for upgradation of Sound and Light projects at Cellular jail." 
25. In their r eport Audit further noted that though the up -gradation was 
completed (September 2013) at a total cost of ` 169.96 lakh, the sound and light 
programme continues to run as per the original script and the equipment valued 
at around ` 85 lakh purchased to meet  the requirements of the additional scope 
of work remains unused. Further, ITDC did not refund the balance of ` 0.15 crore 
till it was pointed out by Audit (August 2015). However, the interest of ` 2.92 
lakh, is yet to be recovered. Moreover, though ITDC completed the project after 
30 months from the scheduled date of completion (March 2011), and the 
agreement specified levy of liquidated damages (LD) of up to ` 5 lakh for delay in 
implementation, no  LD has been recovered (May 2016). In reply to the audit 
observations, the Department (February 2016) stated that the equipment 
purchased for additional scope of work was lying idle as the screen/projections 
were not aesthetically matching with the concept  and the show was running with 
the original script. However, in May 2016, the Department stated that laser 
machine along with screen and fog machine was utilized on two occasions. This 
reply was not acceptable  to Audit , since the sound and light show where  the 
equipment is to be used performs six days a week all through the year. 

23 
 
26. On the issues of recovery of liquidated damages for delay of 30 months in 
completion of the project and recovery of interests of `2.92 lakh from the ITDC, 
the Ministry stated as follows; 
"Liquidated damages to the tune of 
 5 Lakhs have indeed been recovered 
from ITDC. The Tourism department has not recovered  any interest as 
mentioned above, as of now. However, the Department will recover the 
said amount from the pending bills of ITDC which are yet to be settled. " 
 
 
PART-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
NEED FOR BETTER EXECUTION OF PROJECTS  
The Committee note that out of the 26 major works identified by the 
Administration of Andaman & Nicobar Islands under the Tsunami Rehabilitation 
Programme (TRP) and various schemes of the Ministry of Tourism, 18 projects 
were either dropped or not taken up at all and out of the remaining 8 projects 2 
projects were further dropped at different stages of implementatio n. The 
Committee also note that out of the 6 completed works 3 were either not utilized 
or partially commissioned. The Committee are perturbed to find the dismal record 
of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands  Administration in execution of projects . The 
Committee are of the view that lack of foresight and proper planning are the 
reasons behind the delays in project implementation, non -fruition of projects and 
the consequent loss and unfruitful expenditure . The Committee, therefore , 
recommend that he nceforth the Andaman & Nicobar Islands Administration 
should follow a systemic planning and effective decision making and take into 
consideration all variables like availability of resources, credibility of 
implementing agency based on past performances, t imeframe for completion of 
projects, maintenance and economic viability of the project etc . at the planning 
stage of any project. 

24 
 
UNFRUITFUL EXPENDITURE OF `18.45 LAKH ON UNINITIATED PROJECT 
2. The Committee note that the Tourism Department had engaged in May 
2009, Indian Tourism Development Corporation Ltd. (ITDC) as consultant for 
preparing Detailed Project Report (DPR) for development of the tourist circuit, 
‘Port Blair Neil Havelock Batarang’ “Product/Infrastructure Development for 
Destinations and Circuits (PIDDC) under the scheme of Ministry of Tourism ”. The 
Ministry of Tourism sanction ed and the work of preparation of Environment 
Impact Assessment (EIA) report  in October, 2010. Subsequently, CRZ clearance 
was awarded in December2011 to the National I nstitute of Ocean Technology 
(NIOT). The Ministry of Tourism awarded the work of preparation of EIA 
study/CRZ clearance to the NIOT in December, 2011. The work of development of 
tourist facilities at Baratang was, however, excluded, citing various environm ent 
and tribal issues. The NIOT submitted the draft EIA reports for Port Blair, 
Havelock and Neil Islands on 27 December 2012, 31 May 2013 and 20 November 
2013 respectively and requested A &NI Administration for site -wise details such 
as project layout, tec hnical justification, technical design, etc., for inclusion in 
their final report. However, even after three years, the Administration had not 
provided the requisite information. As a result, the project was not approved by 
the MoT, but they had tentatively allocated an amount of ` 5.00 crore under the 
PIDDC scheme in 2014-15. Thus, lack of follow up by ANI Administration rendered 
unfruitful the expenditure of ` 18.45 lakh on the preparation of DPR and EIA 
reports. The Committee, therefore, desir e to be apprise of the reasons behind the 
delay of three years in providing the requisite details for inclusion in the fina l 
DPR and recommend that stringent disciplinary penalty may be  imposed against 
officials who we re responsible for the delay . The Comm ittee also desire to be 
apprised of the present status of the project. 
ASSIGNMENT OF WORK WITHOUT ENSURING ADEQUATE RESOURCE 
AND VIOLATION OF GFR 
3. The Committee find that the erstwhile Planning Commission sanctioned ` 2 
crore in 2006 under the Tsunami Rehabilitation Programme (TRP) for setting up of 
Canopy Walkway (CW) in A ndaman & Nicobar Islands (A&NI). Subsequently, the 
Forest Department suggested in September 2008 Chidiyatapu and Mount Harriet  

25 
 
for CW . The Committee observe that though the Forest Dep artment suggested 
that the CW at Mount Harriet be taken up after gaining experience from the CW at 
Chidiyatapu, the Chief Secretary approved the proposal in December 2008 a nd a 
Consultancy agreement signed in May 2009 with a private firm for both the sites. 
The Committee are unable to understand as to why the Chief Secretary approved 
consultancy agreement for both sites and what were the reasons for ignoring the 
Forest Department’s suggestion in this regard whi ch resulted in blockage of ` 
4.33 crore. The Committee, therefore, desire that responsibility may be fixed 
against the Chief Secretary concerned for this injudicious decision and apprise 
the Committee of the action taken in this regard within three months of the 
presentation of this Report to Parliament. 
The Committee a re appalled to note that in violation of the GFR, the 
Department of Tourism had transferred `1.60 crore to the Department of 
Environment & Forests as 100% advance for timber for the canopy wa lkways 
project at Chidiyatapu and Mount Harriet despite latter expressed their inability to 
supply the full requirement of 364.44 cum of Padauk timber. The Committee 
desire to be apprised of the reasons behind releasing 100% fund in advance for 
procurement of timber. The Committee further desire that the Ministry of Home 
Affairs take immediate steps to penalize those personnel responsible for release 
of 100% fund in advance. 
The Committee further note that the CW project was allotted to Andaman 
Public Works Department (APWD) though the Department had not executed any 
projects of this nature in the past leading to delay in the implementation of the 
project. The ANI administration then roped in the Andaman Lakshadweep 
Harbour Works (ALHW) to take the work forw ard. However, the project was 
dropped after incurring an expenditure of ` 5.62 crores on consultancy work, civil 
works & materials etc. The Committee are dismayed at the nonchalant and 
noncommittal attitude of the A&NI Administration in the implementation and 
completion of the project. The Committee recommend that a thorough enquiry 
may be conducted on the planning and decision making process, assignment of 
the project to APWD, delay in initiation of the project, engagement of ALHW and 
cancellation of the project. The Committee desire that responsibility may be fixed 
and stringent action taken against officials responsible for these lapses.  

26 
 
EXPENDITURE ON OUTLIVED VESSEL 
4. The Committee note that the Tourism Department envisioned a floating 
restaurant and procured an outlived vessel namely M.V. Ramanujam, from the 
Shipping Corporation of India (SCI) at a cost of ` 1 crore without undertaking any 
techno economic feasibility survey of the project. However the project could not 
materialized as the Department w ere unable to attract private bidders to 
undertake for designing, renovation, operation and maintenance of the vessel. 
The Committee find that a technical committee opined in November 2012 that the 
vessel required extensive repairs and fresh certifications  and instead 
recommended disposal of vessel. The Committee are again constrained to 
observe that during the period April 2012 to 23 November, 2014, the Directorate of 
Shipping Services ( DSS) incurred an expenditure of ` 0.78 crore (` 2.45 lakh per 
month) for manning the vessel, which could have been reduced by ` 0.29 crore 
had the Administration acted expeditiously on the SCI’s recommendation on 
beaching the vessel. The Committee thus observed that till May 2016, the 
environment clearance for ship breaking  was pending and neither the vessel nor 
its contents had been disposed of. The Committee are of the view that the 
Department of Tourism ought to have undertaken a survey on the functional and 
the economic viability of procuring a decommissioned passenger v essel before 
undertaking the project. Moreover , the Committee are of the view that the 
Department ought to have sought potential interested players prior to 
procurement of the vessel. The Committee further opine that keeping in mind the 
deterioration of th e unused vessel, the Department ought to have beached the 
vessel at the earliest so as to slow down the pace of deterioration and undertake 
repairs and redesigning for use. Noting that lack of proper planning and hasty 
decision of the officials of the Depa rtment of Tourism  without any techno 
economic feasibility study, the Committee desire that responsibility may be fixed 
and necessary action may be taken against the incompetent officials. The 
Committee also recommend that in future necessary surveys and researches may 
be undertaken by competent and experienced officials/experts before 
undertaking any such project. 
 

27 
 
WASTEFUL EXPENDITURE OF ` 39.80 LAKH TOWARDS YACHT MARINA  
AND LUXURY BOATS 
5. The Committee note that in 2006 the Planning Commission allocated ` 
26.50 crore under Tsunami Rehabilitation Programme (TRP) for develop ment of 
one 50 unit yacht marina  and procurement of a 35 room luxury boat and two 
mechanized luxury boats. The Tourism Department engaged a private consultant 
in November 2008 and paid ` 23.12 lakh between March 2009 and February 2012. 
In June 2009 the Department obtained a N o Objection Certificate from the 
Defence authorities in ANI for site development of marina at “Command Point and 
Viper Island”. In the meantime a private party approached the Circuit Bench of the 
Calcutta High Court against the project and the local Defence Authorities, 
withdrew the clearance given earlier without assigning any reasons . The 
contractor also failed to furnish the performance guarantee, which in terms of t he 
agreement was to be furnished by November 2012 which ultimately led to the 
failure of the project to fructify after incurring an expenditure of `39.80 lakh in 
consultancy and advertisement charges. The Tourism Department stated (August 
2015) that there was no possibility to undertake the work of the Yacht Marina due 
to non-submission of performance guarantee by the contractor and withdrawal of 
clearance by the Defence auth orities. However, Audit observed  that the ANI 
administration had not pursued with the Ministry of Environment and Forests and 
the Ministry of Defence  for securing clearances  after May, 2013. Further, ANI 
Administration has not implemented the penalty clauses in the agreement with 
the contractor. The Committee are extremely unhappy with the state of affairs n 
A&NI Administration and desire an enquiry may be instituted to fix responsibility 
and eventually award stringent punishment to the guilty officials. The Committee 
also recommend that Departmen t of Tourism take necessary steps in ensuring 
that requisite clearances are obtained prior to awarding of work and explicit 
clause to this effect may be incorporated in all future Request For Proposal 
(RFP). 
 
 
 

28 
 
NON-ISSUE OF WORK ORDER RESULTING IN ABANDONMENT OF WORK 
6. The Committee note that the Ministry of Tourism, Tourism Department and 
a private firm (consultant) entered into a tripartite agreement for developing two 
integrated tourism circuits during the 12th Five Year Plan. The Ministry of Tourism 
released an amount of ` 20 lakh as advance towards consultancy fee to the 
Tourism Department. The Tourism Department, however failed to identify various 
components of the project and no work order was issued to the consultant for 
preparation of the DPR. The Min istry of Tourism then withdrew from the 
agreement and the Tourism Department refunded the unutilized ` 20 lakh leading 
to the abandonment of the project. The Committee are unable to comprehend the 
rationale behind signing a tripartite agreement without ide ntifying the 
components of the project. The Tourism Department ought to have envisioned 
and identified project components prior to entering into the tripartite agreement. 
The Committee deplore the tardiness of the Tourism Department in identifying 
various components of the project which ultimately led to the abandonment of 
the project. Pointing out the non -committal attitude of the Tourism Department 
towards completion of the project, the Committee recommend that the Ministry of 
Home Affairs take necessary measures to revamp the Department and penalize 
the officials responsible for failure to identify project components. The 
Committee further recommend that the Tourism Department take a more 
proactive role in conceptualizing tourism projects, identifying pro ject 
components, preparation of project proposals, implementation of projects etc. in 
future.  
VIOLATION OF FINANCIAL RULES 
7. The Committee note that the Tourism Department paid an advance of ` 8.87 
crore (March 2012) to Andaman &  Nicobar Islands Forest and Plantation 
Development Corporation Limited (ANIFPDCL), despite the poor financial state of 
ANIFPDCL, without entering into any agreement for development of two camps of 
20 eco -friendly cottages each in ANI to provide amenities o f international 
standards for high end tourists. The Committee are constrained to find that 
ANIFPDCL submitted the project proposal after a delay of more than two years. In 
July 2014, however, the Chief Secretary noted that ANIFPDCL was on the verge of 

29 
 
closure and the work could not be executed by them, the project was transferred 
to the Forest Department  with a revised concept though the Tourism Department 
requested (July-August 2015) ANIFPDCL to refund the advance paid ` 8.60 crore 
had already been diverted for payment of salary to its employees and ` 26.05 lakh 
was spent on consultancy and other charges, and consequently, the advance 
remains un-refunded as on May, 2016 and the infrastructure has not been created 
even after more than nine years. The Committee are again perturbed to find that 
no specific approval had been accorded by the Tourism Department, A&N 
Administration to the ANIFPDCL for expenditure towards consultancy for the said 
project. The Committee take a seri ous view on the advance payment made by the 
Tourism Department to ANIFPDCL without entering into any agreement. The 
Ministry of Home Affairs ha ve also failed to provide the reason as to why 100% 
advance payment was released to the said Corporation without any agreement or 
an MOU.  The Committee are of the view that the inability of the Ministry to 
ascertain the reasons behind the violation of financial rules indicates serious lack 
of monitoring and vigilance at the central level. The Committee, therefore des ire 
that the Ministry of Home Affairs conduct an enquiry into the reasons for the 
blatant violation of the financial rules and penalize the officials responsible for 
the lapses. The Committee also desire that a strong central monitoring committee 
may be se t up to oversee the financial flow and project implementation in the 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands. The Committee have now been informed that the ANI 
administration is in the process of recovering ` 2.21 crore from the ANIFPDCL, 
which has not been diverted tow ards payment of salaries but is lying with the 
Corporation. For recovery of the balance amount along with interest, the 
Administration has already laid its claim / rights of first refusal on the properties 
of the ANIFPDC, in the event of disposal of any of  its assets, in view of the 
closure of the Corporation. The Committee desire that the administration fix a 
deadline to recover the amount of ` 2.21 crore and apprise of the latest status on 
the recovery at the earliest. 
  
 
 

30 
 
VIOLATION OF NORMS OF FINANCIAL PROPRIETY 
8. The Committee note that the Tourism Department engaged the Indian 
Tourism Development Corporation (ITDC) for up-gradation of the Light and Sound 
(L&S) show at Cellular Jail at a total cost of ` one crore without tender enquiry 
and despite the fact that the incumbent annual maintenance contractor quoted a 
rate of ` 65.50 lakh for the work in the preliminary assessment of the cost of 
upgradation. Without initiating the work, and without providing c ost break -up 
details, ITDC proposed for additional scope of work at a cost of ` 85 lakh. Despite 
the shortcomings of the ITDC proposal the Chief Secretary accepted (August 
2011) the revised cost which was paid to ITDC, as advance. Such payment of full 
advance violated Rule 159 of the GFR which states that advances to Public Sector 
Undertakings should not exceed forty per cent of the contract value, except in 
consultation with the Financial Advisor of the Central Government 
Ministry/Department. The Committee also note that equipment valued at around ` 
85 lakh purchased to meet the requirements of the additional scope of work 
remained unused. However, in May 2016, the Department stated that laser 
machine along with screen and fog machine was utilised on two occasions. The 
Committee cannot accept the reply of the Ministry since the sound and light show 
where the equipment is to be used performs six days a week all through year.  
Unable to comprehend the rationale behind the procurement of equipments worth 
` 85 lakh and keeping it unused, the Committee desire to be apprise of the 
reasons behind the non-utilisation of equipments and recommend that the 
Tourism Department undertake necessary measures to upgrade the sound and 
light show to accommodate the unused equipments and fully utilise them without 
any further delay.  
The Committee also note that ITDC completed the upgradation work on the 
sound and light show after a delay of 30 months. The upgradation work cost ` 
169.96 lakh out of the ` 185 lakh. While the balance amount of ` 0.15 crore and an 
amount of ` 5 lakh have been recovered from ITDC as liquidated damages for the 
delay, the Tourism Department is yet to recover an amount of ` 2.92 lakh, as 
interest on the balance amount from the I TDC. The Committee , therefore, desire 
that the interest amount of ` 2.92 lakh may be recovered from ITDC without any 
further delay and apprise the Committee of the same. 

31 
 
 HOLISTIC SCRIPT FOR THE SOUND AND LIGHT SHOW 
9. The Committee note that the sound and light programme continues to run 
as per the original script even after completion of upgradation of the light and 
sound show. The Committee feel that the script of the show does not display a 
complete picture of the na tion's history and the struggle for independence. The 
Committee, therefore desire that a research team may be constituted so as to 
collect patriotic feats and contributions of different communities/personalities 
from all corners of the country imprisoned there and incorporate the same in the 
script of the show and present a holistic view on the history of the country. The 
Committee also desire to be intimated of the action taken in this regard. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                    MALLIKARJUN KHARGE  
July, 2018                            Chairperson, 
Ashadha, 1940 (Saka)              Public Accounts Committee 