DISASTER PREPAREDNESS IN INDIA
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2015-2016
TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT
SIXTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
25

TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2015-2016)
(SIXTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
DISASTER PREPAREDNESS IN INDIA
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
Presented to Lok Sabha on 10.12.2015
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 10.12.2015
LOK   SABHA   SECRETARIAT
NEW   DELHI
December, 2015/Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka)

PAC No.  2057
Price:  ` 115.00
© 2016 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by the General Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGES
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2015-16)...................... (iii)
COMPOSITION OF  THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2014-15)..................... (v)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2013-14)...................... (vii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (ix)
REPORT
PART-I
I. Introductory ................................................................................... 1
II. Legislative and Institutional Framework ........................................ 3
National Executive Committee........................................................ 4
III. Planning of Disaster Preparedness................................................. 4
(i) Absence of National Plan for Disaster Management............ 4
(ii) State Plan for Disaster Management..................................... 5
(iii) National Disaster Management Guidelines........................... 8
(iv) Demarcation of roles and responsibilities............................. 9
IV . National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) ...................... 10
(i) Delay in constitution of Advisory Committee of NDMA ..... 10
(ii) Implementation of projects by NDMA ................................. 10
(iii) Manpower Management  in NDMA ..................................... 13
V. Resource and Funding Arrangements............................................ 14
(i) State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF) ................................. 14
(ii) National Disaster Response Fund (NDRF) ........................... 16
(iii) National Disaster Mitigation Fund (NDMF) ......................... 17
(iv) National Disaster Response Reserve (NDRR) ...................... 18
VI. Communication System for Disaster Preparedness........................ 19
(i) National Database for Emergency  Management  (NDEM)........ 19
(ii) Airborne Laser Terrain Mapping and Digital Camera (ALTM-DC)
 System ................................................................................. 19
(iii) Disaster  Management  Synthetic  Aperture  Radar (DMSAR)..... 20
(iv) Satellite  based  Communication  network  for  Disaster
Management ......................................................................... 20

(v) Doppler Weather Radars ....................................................... 22
(vi) Other Communication Networks........................................... 24
VII. Response System in Disasters ....................................................... 25
( i ) National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) & State
Disaster Response Force (SDRF) ......................................... 25
(ii) Regional Response Centre.................................................... 27
(iii) Civil Defence and Fire Service .............................................. 28
(iv) Medical Preparedness .......................................................... 29
VIII. Capacity Building........................................................................... 30
(i) National Institute of Disaster Management (NIDM) ............ 31
(ii) Pilot  project  on  capacity  building  in  Disaster Management ... 33
IX. Disaster Specific Observations ...................................................... 33
(i) Earthquakes .......................................................................... 33
(ii) Floods ................................................................................... 35
(iii) Cyclones and Tsunami.......................................................... 38
(iv) Droughts ............................................................................... 43
(v) Forest Fire ............................................................................. 45
(vi) Chemical Disaster................................................................. 47
(vii) Biological Disasters .............................................................. 48
(viii) Radiological and Nuclear Emergencies ................................. 50
(ix) Heatwave Condition ............................................................. 52
PART-II
Recommendations/Observations ................................................... 55
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Fourth sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
(2013-14) held on 01st  July, 2013................................................ 71
II. Minutes of the Eleventh sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2014-15) held on 09th December, 2014...................... 75
III. Minutes of the Eighth sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2015-16) held on 07th September, 2015..................... 78
IV . Glossary ...................................................................................... 82
(ii)
PAGES

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2015-16)
Prof. K.V . Thomas — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
4. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey
6. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank"
9. Shri Neiphiu Rio
10. Shri Dushyant Singh
11. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
14. Shri Shivkumar Udasi
15. Dr. P. Venugopal
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Naresh Agrawal
17. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
18. Shri Anil Madhav Dave
19. Shri Vijay Goel
20. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
21. Shri Shantaram Naik
22. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
S
ECRETARIA T
1.  Shri A.K. Singh — Additional Secretary
2.  Shri A.K. Yadav — Deputy Secretary
(iii)

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2014-15)
Prof. K.V . Thomas — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
4. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey
6. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank"
9. Shri Neiphiu Rio
10. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
11. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
12. Shri Jayant Sinha
13. Dr. Kirit Somaiya
14. Shri Anurag Thakur
*15. Vacant
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
17. Shri Vijay Goel
18. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya
19. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
20. Shri Shantaram Naik
21. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
22. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
* V acant vice  Dr. M. Thambidurai who has been chosen as Hon'ble Deputy Speaker,
Lok Sabha and has since resigned from the membership of the Committee.
(v)

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2013-14)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Ramen Deka
5. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
6. Dr. M. Thambi Durai
7. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
8. Shri Jayaprakash Hegde
9. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
10. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
12. Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam
13. Shri Ashok Tanwar
*14. Shri Ajay Maken
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Prakash Javadekar
†18. Shri Ashwani Kumar
19. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
#20. Dr. V . Maitreyan
21. Shri N.K. Singh
22. Smt.  Ambika Soni
* Elected w.e.f. 14th August, 2013 vice Dr. Girija Vyas appointed as Minister of Housing,
Urban Development & Poverty Alleviation w.e.f. 17th June, 2013.
† Elected w.e.f. 3rd September, 2013 vice Dr. V . Maitreyan ceased to be a Member upon his
retirement as a Member of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 24th July, 2013.
# Elected w.e.f. 3rd September, 2013 vice Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan appointed as
Minister of State for Commerce and Industry  w.e.f. 17th June, 2013.
(vii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2015-16) having been authorised
by the Committee, do present this Twenty Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on
'Disaster Preparedness in India' based on C&AG Report No. 3 of 2013 (Performance
Audit), Union Government related to the Ministry of Home Affairs.
2. The above-mentioned Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
was laid on the Table of the House on 23rd April, 2013.
3. The Public Accounts Committee (2013-14) took up the subject for detailed
examination and report. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Home Affairs on the subject at their sitting held on 1st July, 2013. As the
examination of the subject could not be completed due to paucity of time, the Public
Accounts Committee (2014-15) re-selected the subject to continue the examination
and took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs at their
sitting held on 9th December, 2014. As the Report on the subject could not be
finalised, the PAC (2015-16) reselected the subject to continue the examination and
present a Report based on the earlier evidences taken by their predecessor
Committees. Accordingly a Draft Report was prepared and placed before the
Committee for their consideration. The Committee considered and adopted this
Draft Report at their sitting held on 7th September, 2015. The Minutes of the Sittings
are appended to the Report.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type and form
Part-II of the Report.
5. The Committee thank their predecessor Committees for taking oral evidence
and obtaining information on the subject.
6. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Home Affairs for tendering evidence before them and furnishing the
requisite information to the Committee in connection with the examination of the
subject.
7. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. K.V. THOMAS,
09th December, 2015 Chairperson,
18 Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(ix)

REPORT
PART I
I. Introductory
1. A disaster is an event or series of events, which give rise to casualties and
damage or loss of property, infrastructure, environment, essential services or means
of livelihood on a scale that is beyond the normal coping capacity of the affected
community. Disasters disrupt progress and destroy the developmental efforts, often
pushing nations, in their quest for progress, back by several decades. Thus, efficient
management of disasters, rather than mere response to their occurrence, has received
increased attention both within India and abroad.
2. The Disaster Management Act, 2005 defined disaster as a "catastrophe,
mishap, calamity or grave occurrence in any area, arising from natural or manmade
causes, or by accident or negligence which results in substantial loss of life or
human suffering or damage to, and destruction of, property, or damage to, or
degradation of, environment, and is of such a nature or magnitude as to be beyond
the coping capacity of the community of the affected area". Thus, Disaster
Management (DM) is a continuous and integrated process of:—
• Planning, organizing, coordinating and implementing measures which are
necessary or expedient for prevention of any disaster;
• Mitigation or reduction of any disaster or its severity or consequences;
• Capacity building to deal with any disaster;
• Prompt response to any threatening disaster situation or disaster;
• Assessing the severity or magnitude of any disaster;
• Evacuation, rescue and relief; and
• Rehabilitation and reconstruction.
3. Disaster Preparedness includes organizational activities which ensure that
the systems, procedure and resources required to confront a disaster are available
in order to provide timely assistance to those affected, using existing mechanisms
wherever possible e.g. training, creation of awareness, establishment of disaster
plans, evacuation plans, pre-position of stocks, early warning mechanism,
strengthening indigenous knowledge, etc. In recent years, the concept of Disaster
Preparedness had emerged as an umbrella concept including risk assessment, disaster
prevention and disaster mitigation. It also involves analysis of disaster response as
it provides a useful testing of preparedness.

2
4. India is one of the most disaster prone countries in the world. This is
largely due to its geo-climatic conditions combined with high population density
and other socio-economic factors. India is vulnerable, in varying degrees, to a large
number of natural as well as man-made disasters. The risk of excessive damage of
lives and property in the event of disaster is high due to spread of population and
tendency of people to go back to areas prone to such disasters. Increased
vulnerability to disaster risks can be related to expanding population, urbanization
and industrialization, development within high-risk zones, environmental
degradation and climatic changes. Increase in terrorism around the globe has also
contributed to higher risks.
5. According to the Audit Report, the world over Disaster Preparedness or
Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) is becoming the most prominent theme for Disaster
Management. It is not possible to eliminate the possibility of disasters. However,
with due care and proper preparation, the risk and damages from disasters can be
reduced considerably. India is prone to various natural and manmade disasters.
The country has faced several devastating disasters including earthquakes,
tsunamis and river floods in recent years. Accordingly India was one of the pioneering
countries to establish a three level disaster management institutional set up.
Considerable time has elapsed since the enactment of the DM Act in 2005.
Governments at the Central and State level have initiated various mitigation projects.
There are also several internationally aided projects for disaster risk reduction
being carried out in the country. Institutional set ups at the national, State and
district levels have been formed. The nodal Ministries responsible for DRR work
have been designated for various man-made and natural disasters. Therefore, it is
the right time to assess the level of preparation in the country to manage disasters.
6. The C&AG of India had decided to carry out a performance audit of the
disaster preparedness with a view to assessing the level of preparation in the
country to manage disasters covering period from May 2012 to September 2012.
The C&AG Report No. 5 of 2013 on the subject was laid in Parliament on 23.04.2013.
7. The Audit has found that despite considerable progress in setting up
institutions and creating funding arrangements, there are critical gaps in the
preparedness level for various disasters and concluded that the system, which
came into effect post the DM Act, 2005 is yet to achieve its desired impact. The
National Disasters Management Authority which was conceived as the apex
planning and supervising body, was found ineffective in its functioning in most of
the core areas. It neither had information and control over the progress of work at
the State level nor was it successful in implementation of various projects.
Coordination between NDMA and nodal Ministries for various disasters needed to
be improved. Roles and responsibilities amongst the apex bodies at the national
level also needed to be clearly specified.
8. Against the above backdrop, the Public Accounts Committee (2013-14)
selected the subject for detailed examination and report. They took evidence of the
representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs and obtained background note and

3
post-evidence replies from the Ministry. The examination of the subject could not
be completed due to lack of time. Meanwhile many disasters took place in the
country. Therefore, the PAC (2014-15) reselected the subject and took further
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs. Based on the
written and oral deposition by the Ministry, the Committee further examined the
subject and discussed significant issues as enumerated in the succeeding
paragraphs.
II. Legislative and Institutional Framework
9. Following the UN General Assembly declaration of the decade of 1990s as
'International Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction' a disaster management cell
was established under the Ministry of Agriculture. In 1999 a High Powered Committee
(HPC) was constituted to review the existing arrangement for preparedness and
mitigation of natural disasters. In 2002, the disaster management division of Ministry
of Agriculture was shifted to Ministry of Home Affairs. The HPC submitted its
report in October, 2001. Following this report the Government enacted the Disaster
Management Act on 23rd December, 2005. The Act laid down institutional, legal,
financial and coordination mechanisms at the National, State and District levels
which led to a paradigm shift in disaster management. Prior to DM Act, at State
levels 'Gujarat State Act, 2003' and 'Odisha State Disaster Management Policy (2005)'
were created by the respective State Governments.
10. The DM Act provided for setting up of a National Disaster Management
Authority (NDMA) under the Prime Minister, State Disaster Management
Authorities (SDMAs) under the Chief Ministers and District Disaster Management
Authorities (DDMAs) under the Collectors/Districts Magistrate/Deputy
Commissioners. The Act also provided for the constitution of different execution
Committees at national and State levels. The National Institute of Disaster
Management (NIDM) for capacity building and the National Disaster Response
Force (NDRF) for response purpose were set up. In accordance with the DM Act,
National Policy on Disaster Management was prepared by NDMA and approved
by Cabinet in October, 2009.
11. According to present institutional arrangements, in addition to three tier
institutional structure, the National Crisis Management Committee (NCMC) (under
Cabinet Secretary as Chairman) and High Level Committee (HLC) headed by Finance
Minister continue to function. Also, a Crisis Management Group headed by Home
Secretary and comprising of senior officers from various Ministries and concerned
Departments is constituted by Ministry of Home Affairs at the national level. National
Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) is responsible for laying down policies
and guidelines to be followed by all concerned for disaster risk reduction. It is also
to lay down guidelines to be followed by the State Authorities in drawing up the
State Plans. NDMA is a central nodal agency to deal with all type of disasters
except certain specific emergencies viz. law and order situation, serial bomb blasts,
highjacking, forest fires etc. which continue to be handled by NCMC of the earlier
set-up.

4
National Executive Committee
12. The Audit observed in their report that National Executive Committee
(NEC), the executive committee of the NDMA to assist in the discharge of its
functions, was constituted in September 2006 and chaired by the Home Secretary
with 14 Secretaries of Government of India and Chief of Integrated Defence Staff as
its members. NEC was to coordinate the response in the event of any disaster
situation or disaster. It was also responsible for preparing the Nation Plan for D.M.
and to monitor guidelines issued by NDMA. As per NEC Rules 2006, NEC was to
meet as often as necessary but at least once in three months. However, Audit found
that NEC met on three occasions (08.01.2007, 18.05.2007 and 13.05.2008) since its
inception in September, 2006, although the country faced many disasters
subsequently. This affected the progress of implementation of the national policy,
national plan, guidelines and evaluation of the preparedness at all Government
levels. The Committee desired to know the reasons for not holding the sittings of
the NEC. The Home Secretary, during evidence stated as under:—
"I would like to submit before this hon. Committee that based on my experience
after holding a series of meetings of National Executive Committee, the position
has improved substantially."
13. When asked to give reasons for NEC not meeting at regular intervals as
provided for in the DM Act, the MHA in their reply to post evidence question
furnished as under:—
"One factor that deterred the regular meetings of NEC was the lack of clarity
as to who would provide the secretarial support to the NEC. There was some
confusion on whether NDMA would provide the necessary secretarial
support. In the meeting of the NEC held on 18.5.2007, it was decided that
NDMA would provide the necessary secretariat support to the NEC. Another
factor was the very process of inter-ministerial consultations, which were
essential to prepare the draft National Disaster Management Plan. NEC did
not formually meet between May, 2008 and December, 2012, but disaster
management activities were under close watch by the meetings that were
conducted under the chairmanship of the Home Secretary to review response
and coordination measures in various natural disasters. They were de facto
meetings of the NEC,  but were not formally convened or minuted as the
meetings of the NEC. Post Uttarakhand disaster, the NEC has met six times,
i.e. on 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 8th and 10th July, 2013 and on 2nd September, 2013."
III. Planning of  Disaster  Preparedness
(i) Absence of National Plan for Disaster Management
14. NEC was to prepare the National Plan for disaster management of the
country and this was to be approved by NDMA. The plan was to be then circulated
to the Ministries and Departments which were to draw their own plans in accordance
with it. However, Audit found that neither NEC nor MHA had developed the National

5
Plan even after a lapse of more than six years of the enactment of the DM Act. The
national guidelines developed by NDMA were not adopted and applied by the
nodal agencies and State Governments. As the Committee desired to know the
reasons for such an inordinate delay in finalization of National Plan for DM, the
MHA in a written reply stated that the national plan for disaster management
necessary requires inter-Ministerial consultation that has taken time. MHA is trying
to expedite this process.
15. In reply to another query of the Committee regarding national guidelines
developed by NDMA which were not adopted and applied by the nodal agencies
and State Governments, the MHA funished as under:—
"As per Section 10 (2) (g) of the Disaster Management Plan, 2005, NEC has
the responsibility to monitor the implementation of the guidelines laid down
by the NDMA for integrating of measures for prevention of disaster and
mitigation by Ministries or Departments in their development plans and
projects. To translate the guidelines of NDMA into Schemes and projects is
a process of governance in which each Ministry is required to play its role."
16. During evidence, the Home Secretary while replying to the queries raised
and concern expressed by the Members of the Committee, regarding delay in
preparation of national plan and its present status, submitted as under:—
"I would like to submit two-three things for your consideration. The hon.
Member mentioned that it had 20 meetings since 2007. At present we are in
2014. So, the average is three meetings. But, the reality is a little different. The
reality is that till 2012, the number of meetings that were held was abysmally
low. In fact, the frequency of the meeting started only after I took over as
Home Secretary. I think I have had more than 10 meetings since I have taken
over. The National Executive Committee is a robust committee, which meets
at every necessary opportunity. The Committee has finalized and
recommended the National Disaster Management Plan and sent it to the
National Disaster Management Authority for further action. The moment,
that is approved, that will be the national plan that will be put in operation
throughout the country."
(ii) State Plan for Disaster Management
17. Section 23 of the DM Act provides that there should be a disaster
management plan for every State. The State plans were to be prepared by the State
Executive Committees (SECs) in conformity with the guidelines to be issued on
related matters by SDMAs. The State plans prepared by SECs were to be approved
by the respective SMDAs. As per the Act, NDMA was also to lay down guidelines
to be followed by the State Authorities in drawing up the State plans.
18. NDMA has issued guidelines for preparation of State Disaster Management
Plan in July 2007. However, the Audit has commented that there were no provisions
to make the National Guidelines binding on States in preparation of the State plans.

6
Till May, 2012 only 14* States had shared their draft or final State Disaster
Management Plans (SDMPs) with NDMA. The Committee desired to know the
reasons for guidelines not binding on States. The MHA in a written submission
stated as under:—
"As per DM Act, 2005, Section 6(2)(d) and (e), the National Authority may
without prejudice to generality of the provisions contained in sub-section (1),
the National Authority May:
• lay down guidelines to be followed by the State Authorities in drawing up
the State Plan;
• lay down guidelines to be followed by the different Ministries or
Departments of the Government of India for the purpose of integrating the
measures for prevention of disaster or the mitigation of its effects in their
development plans and projects.
The above Section does not make the NDMA Guidelines binding on the
stakeholders for adherence.
NDMA had been circulating various National Guidelines since April, 2007
but there was no information as to whether these were being adopted and
used by Ministries, Departments and State Governments.
As per section 23 of the Disaster Management Act, 2005, the State Disaster
Management Plan (SDMP) is to be prepared by the State Executive Committee
(SEC) having regard to the guidelines laid down by the NDMA."
19. The NDMA decided (February, 2009) to introduce a new scheme to release
grants-in-aid for preparation of Disaster Management Plans to all the States. UTs,
Ministries and Departments. The proposal for release of grants-in-aid of
` 4.99 crore to 35 States/UTs and 16 Ministries and Departments were approved by
Vice Chairman, NDMA in June, 2009. NDMA sanctioned grants-in-aid of
` 3.52 crore to all States and UTs in October, 2009. Funds were released in January
and February, 2010. The beneficiary States, UTs, Ministries and Departments could
not complete and publish their plans. They asked MHA to clarify if release of
grants-in-aid to States be tied with compliance of NDMA guidelines. In this
connection, the MHA in a written reply submitted as under:—
"The Ministry of Home Affairs releases financial assistance to the State
Governments under National Response Fund. The assistance for capacity
building as per 13th Finance Commission award are released to the State
Governments. Assistance under National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project, at
present being implemented in the States of Andhra Pradesh and Odisha, is
released through NDMA. However, it may not be a correct approach to deprive
the people of the State due to delay on part of the State Governments. We are
therefore now contemplating the issue of release of financial assistance with
*Till 2014, 20 States had done so.

7
the compliance of the State Governments to NDMA guidelines. However, in
a small way, a beginning is being made to consider the progress of preparation
of State Disaster Management Plan in the process of release of assistance
under NDRF, as this item will be one of the points on which the Inter Ministerial
Central Teams has been asked to examine and comment."
20. In reply to a query of the Committee relating to reason for States not
preparing their State Disaster Management Plan (SDMP) despite availability of
funds and resources, the Ministry informed as under:—
"As per section 23(2) of the Disaster Management Act, 2005 the State Disaster
Management Plan (SDMP) is to be prepared by the State Executive Committee
(SEC) having regard to the guidelines laid down by the National Authority
and after such consultation with local authorities, district authorities and the
people's representatives as the SEC may deem fit. Further, as per section 18(2)
of Disaster Management Act, 2005 the State Disaster Management Authorities
are required to approve the SDMP in accordance with the guidelines laid
down by the National Authority.
As per the available information, the State Governments of undivided
Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Nagaland,
Punjab, Mizoram, Sikkim, Odisha, Karnataka, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand,
Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, Bihar and West Bengal, Union Territories of
A & N Islands, Chandigarh and Lakshadweep have finalised their Disaster
Management Plans. The remaining State Governments and Union Territories
are in the process of finalising their SDMPs.
The guidelines of NDMA are not mandatory. The preparation of SDMP requires
to take into consideration various factors like topography, socio-economic
conditions, demography, hazard and vulnerability profile etc., which varies
from district to district and State to State. This requires a good deal of study
and analysis. No uniform solution can be adopted in view of the fact that
India has immense geographical diversity and a variety of hazard vulnerabilities.
The federal policy of our constitutional structure needs to be noted. The
Ministry of Home Affairs as well as NDMA have been pursuing constantly
with the remaining State and Union Territories. The broad guidelines were
issued by NDMA on the preparation of SDMP. Funds have been sanctioned
to support preparation of SDMPs as below:
States & UTs of Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Gujarat,
Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala,
Maharashtra, Mizoram, Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Odisha, Sikkim,
Tamil Nadu, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Andaman & Nicobar
Islands, NCT of Delhi and Puducherry have been provided a sum of `10,62,500
each. States & UTs of Chhattisgarh, Goa, Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, Rajasthan,
Tripura, Chandigarh, Dadar & Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu and Lakshdweep
have been provided a sum of ` 8,62,500 each."

8
(iii) National Disaster Management Guidelines
21. As per the DM Act, NDMA was to prepare guidelines on various aspects
of disaster management to be followed by the different Ministries and Departments
of the Government of India. NDMA formulated and issued 17 National Guidelines
on various types of disaster and related issues (October, 2012). NDMA had been
circulating various National Guidelines since April, 2007 but there was no information
as to whether these were being adopted and used by Ministries, Departments and
State Governments. The Committee desired to know whether the National Guidelines
on various activities of Disaster continuum have been finalised by NDMA. The
MHA in their written submission stated as under:—
"As the subject of Disaster Management is a new evolving subject with a
multi-sectoral issue having cross cutting dimensions in which every person
and institution has a role to play, improvement in disaster management
techniques/strategies is a continuous process in governance.
NDMA has formulated 17 guidelines so far in accordance with the
section 6(e) of the Disaster Management Act, 2005 for the purpose of
integrating the measures for prevention of disaster or the mitigation of its
effects in their development plans and projects. These guidelines are on the
following disasters:—
1. Guidelines on Earthquakes
2. Guidelines on Management of Tsunamis
3. Guidelines on Cyclones
4. Guidelines on Flood
5. Guidelines on Management of Urban Flooding
6. Guidelines on Drought Management
7. Guidelines on Landslide
8. Guidelines on Nuclear and Radiological Emergencies
9. Guidelines on Chemical Disaster (Industrial)
10. Guidelines on Chemical (Terrorism) Disaster
11. Guidelines on Medical Preparedness and Mass Casualty Management
12. Guidelines on Biological Disaster
13. Guidelines on Psycho-Social Support
14. Guidelines on Formulation of State DM Plans
15. Guidelines on Incident Response System
16. Guidelines on National Disaster Management Information and
Communication System.

9
17. Guidelines on Scaling, Type of Equipment and Training of Fire Services.
Besides above, NDMA has also published following reports:
Sl. No. Detail
1. Revamping of Civil Defence
2. NIDM's Functioning
3. Pandemic Preparedness Beyond Health.
4. Strengthening of safety and security for transportation of POL tankers
5. Threats to Municipal Water Supply and Water Reservoirs
6. Management of Dead in the Aftermath of Disaster
7. Training Regime for Disaster Response
8. Hand Book for Training and Capacity Building of Civil Defence and Sister
Organisations
Part I
Part II
The above-mentioned guidelines and reports are available on the website of NDMA,
i.e., www.ndma.gov.in."
(iv) Demarcation of  Roles  and Responsibilities
22. As per section 75 of the DM Act, the Central Government was to make
rules for carrying out the provisions of the Act. In order to formulate and notify
various rules as envisaged in the DM Act, 2005, Prime Minister Office in
February, 2006, isued directions to carry out an exercise to evolve a working
arrangement for the NDMA. The recommendation of this exercise was to be placed
before a Group of Ministries (GoM). Thereafter, MHA was required to incorporate
the guidelines as finalised by GoM. In the absence of regular NEC meetings, MHA
functioned as an executive arm of NDMA. On the other hand, MHA also acted as
an administrative Ministry, in so far as the approval of the Government was concerned
for various mitigation projects of NDMA. NDMA was in the process of framing
business rules pertaining to its internal conduct. A Task Force had been constituted
by MHA to review various issues relating to implementation of DM Act.
23. The Committee desired to know about the necessity for NDMA to engage
itself with the response, relief and rehabilitation activities. The Ministry informed
the Committee as under:—
"As per Disaster Management Act, 2005 the National Disaster Management
Authority (NDMA) has the responsibility for laying down policies, plans
and guidelines for disaster management for ensuring timely and effective
response to disaster. Further, as per the DM Act, 2005 National Disaster
Response Force (NDRF) has been raised for the purpose of specialized
response to a threatening disaster situation or disaster. The general
superintendence, directions and control of NDRF according to DM Act is

10
vested and exercised by NDMA the authority involve itself with response
and relief activities."
IV . National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA)
24. The NDMA was constituted in May, 2005 as an apex body for laying
down policies and guidelines on disaster management. Under the DM Act it was
formally constituted in accordance with Section 3 (1) of the Act on 27th September,
2006 to deal with all types of disasters, natural or man-made.
25. NDMA was constituted with the Prime Minister as its Chairperson and
nine other members. Each Member headed disaster specific division and one member
was to be designated as Vice-Chairperson. Each Member was also given the
responsibility of specified States and UTs for close interaction and coordination.
NDMA Secretariat, headed by a Secretary provided Secretariat support and
continuity.
(i) Delay in constitution of Advisory Committee of NDMA
26. DM Act provided for the NDMA constituting an Advisory Committee
consisting of experts in the field of disaster management and having practical
experience of disaster management at the National, State or District level to make
recommendation on different aspects of disaster management. The Advisory
Committee of NDMA was constituted in June, 2007, initially for 2 years period
which extended for one more year which expired on 14th June, 2010. In June, 2010,
NDMA initiated the proposal for constitution of the 2nd Advisory Committee
following the suggestion of the PMO given during the constitution of the first
Advisory Committee. However, it has not been constituted till 2014.
27. The Committee desired to know the reason for delay in constitution of the
second Advisory Committee and about maintaining coordination amongst various
stakeholders for nomination of Members for the advisory committee. The Ministry
in their reply furnished as under:—
"The Advisory Committee of NDMA generally consists of eminent experts in
various fields of disaster management. The Advisory Committee is formed
after obtaining recommendations from various Ministries, other stakeholders
and Members of NDMA, who themselves are eminent persons in their own
fields. After receiving the recommendations, names of experts are shortlisted
and the concurrence of the shortlisted experts are taken. It is a time-consuming
matter requiring involvement of various stakeholders. The process of short
listing of experts in NDMA is at the final stage of completion."
(ii) Implementation of projects by NDMA
28. The Working Group of Planning Commission (December 2006)
recommended various projects to be taken up by NDMA during the Eleventh Five
Year Plan for disaster management. The Audit found that the performance of NDMA
in terms of project implementation had been abysmal. So far, no major project taken
up by NDMA had seen completion. It was noticed that NDMA selected projects

11
without proper ground work and as a result either the projects were abandoned
midway or were incomplete after a considerable period. In many cases, NDMA
realised midway that some other agency was already executing project with similar
objectives. NDMA experimented with varying strategies to undertake projects. All
agencies appointed to execute the work, were appointed on nomination basis. The
project designs and scope were revised midway. Timelines were mostly absent and
wherever timelines were given, they were not adhered to.
29. The Committee desired to know the reason for NDMA involvement with
direct implementation of projects for disaster management even though they were
not to be mandated to do so in the DM Act. The Ministry informed as under:—
"As per Disaster Management Act, 2005 the National Disaster Management
Authority (NDMA) has the responsibility for laying down policies, plans
and guidelines for disaster management for ensuring timely and effective
response to disaster. Further, as per the DM Act, 2005 National Disaster
Response Force (NDRF) has been raised for the purpose of specialized
response to a threatening disaster situation or disaster. The general
superintendence, directions and control of NDRF according to DM Act is
vested and exercised by NDMA the authority involve itself with response
and relief activities. Section 6(2) (i) provides that NDMA may take such other
measures for the prevention of disaster, or the mitigation, or preparedness
and capacity building for dealing with the threatening disaster situation or
disaster as it may consider necessary. Further, Section 62 of the Act empower
Central Government to issue directions in writing to the Ministries or
Departments of the Government of India, or the NEC or the State Government,
State Authority, State Executive Committee, statutory bodies or any of its
officers or employees, as the case may be, to facilitate or assist in the disaster
management and such Ministry or Department or Government or Authority,
Executive Committee, statutory body, officer or employee shall be bound to
comply with such direction. Accordingly, NDMA has been mandated by
Government of India to take up National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project
(NCRMP), National School Safety Project (NSSP), National Earthquake Risk
Mitigation Project (NERMP)."
30. In reply to a query of the Committee regarding leaving some of the projects
midway, the MHA informed that the mitigation projects for which concept notes
were prepared by NDMA during the 11th Five Year Plan like National Earthquake
Risk Mitigation Project, National Landslide Risk Mitigation Scheme and National
Flood Risk Mitigation Scheme, could not be sanctioned till now except NERMP,
which as been sanctioned on 5th April, 2013 and is under implementation.
31. The Committee asked whether NDMA has taken up the work of systematic
assessment of major national projects and the status of such projects. The Ministry
informed as under:—
"NCRMP is being monitored at the national level by Project Steering
Committee headed by Secretary, NDMA with participating States of Odisha

12
and Andhra Pradesh along with NIDM as its members. Home Ministry is also
a member of this Committee through Secretary (BM) or its representative. In
addition to this, there is a Project Oversight Committee headed by the Home
Secretary for interdepartmental coordination. NDMA has so far taken only
National Earthquake Risk Mitigation Project which has been sanctioned on
5th April, 2013 which is under implementation."
32. The Committee desired to know about monitoring the performance and
functioning of the NDMA and its projects by the MHA. The MHA in their reply
stated that it monitors the functioning of the NDMA by various returns such as
utilization of budgetary provision, pendency of court cases and audit paras. Beside,
physical and financial progress of the schemes of NDMA is being monitored at
Secretary level.
33. In reply to a query of the Committee regarding no review by NDMA for
ongoing National projects and schemes to include disaster management element in
them, the MHA informed as under:—
"In order to ensure that any new scheme will meet the concerns of disaster
mitigation, Government of India in the Ministry of Finance has issued detailed
guidelines vide letter No. 37(4)/PF-II/2003 dated 19.06.2009. As per these
guidelines, the following questions are required to be replied in the Expenditure
Finance Committee Memo for Plan schemes, whenever a new Scheme is
considered by the Government of India:—
(i) What is the location of the project area? Reasons for selecting the site.
Have possible alternative sites been considered? Is the type of activity
envisaged in the area compatible with the provisions of relevant NDMA
Guidelines?
(ii) Identify the possible risks and analyze the likelihood and impact from
earthquakes, floods, cyclones and landslides due to the location of the
project sites as well as through secondary evidence.
(iii) What are the land use directives, regulations applicable? List preventive
measures enshrined in regulations which are to be complied with and
confirm compliance.
(iv) Based on the prioritization of risks, the mitigation measures being
contemplated, both structural and non-structural. Confirmation that the
implementation of the selected mitigation measures will not create new
risks.
(v) Confirmation that the design and engineering of the structure has taken
into consideration the National Building Code 2005, the appropriate BIS
Codes and the NDMA guidelines. Other sources such as Indian Road
Congress Manual, Ministry of Road Transport, Highways and Shipping
manual, Railway Board manual, Central Public Health Engineering
Organisation (Min. of Urban Development) manual, Central Electricity

13
Authority manual and Central W ater Commission manual etc. may also be
consulted where applicable.
(vi) Has the cost of disaster treatment/mitigation measures been included in
the overall project cost?
(vii) Also indicate that the whole process of risk assessment has been done
based on available information and secondary evidence and the mitigation
measure(s) are in conformity with the statutory and other regulatory
requirements and are the most viable ones in the present circumstances.
In addition to the above, it has been stipulated that while preparing Detailed
Project Report for the new schemes, the DPR format is to be revised to include
Disaster Management concerns. NDMA took the initiative for above-mentioned
changes. Further, MHA has approached Department of Expenditure to consider
issuing instruction in respect of the following kinds of projects, copies of EFC/SFC/
CNE notes may invariably sent to NDMA or to MHA for comments:—
(i) New projects involving creation/modification of structural/engineering
assets, particularly projects relating to infrastructure, hospitals and
schools; and
(ii) Revision on account of modification of structural/engineering assets
costing more than ` 50 crore."
(iii) Manpower Management in NDMA
34. As per the Cabinet Note on "Organizational Structure of NDMA" it was to
have 124 posts. However, there were 33 to 60 per cent vacancies at the end of each
financial year covered by Audit. The Committee desired to know the actual strength
and the vacancies that existed in the NDMA. The MHA informed that out of total
sanctioned strength of 155 (including VC, Members, Consultants & Secretariat
staff), 147 are filled, either through regular staff or outsourced/constractual staff.
Only 8 posts are vacant. In addition, Union Home Minister, Finance Minister,
Agriculture Minister, Dy. Chairman, Planning Commission have been associated as
permanent invitees to the meetings of NDMA, as per decision taken in NDMA
meeting dated 25.10.2007. This meeting also resolved that Cabinet Secretary and
Union Home Secretary will also be invited to attend the meetings of NDMA.
35. NDMA appointed 13 consultant in different areas of specialization, who
were attached with the concerned Members' Secretariat. The Committee desired to
know about the necessity of engaging consultant in day to day work of NDMA and
if consultants were assigned specific tasks, the mechanism to monitor their
performance. The MHA in their written submission stated as under:—
"The Consultants for 23 disciplines (field) have not been engaged in day-to-
day work of NDMA. The Junior Consultants/Consultants/Senior Consultants
are engaged on contract basis for a specific period as per task/work specified
in the Term of Reference (ToR) of the domain field. The engagement of the

14
Consultants is done on the basis of advertisement in the Employment News
and uploading the advertisement on NDMA website from time to time as per
Revised Procedures & Guidelines for engagement of Consultants in NDMA.
The performance of the Consultants is monitored by the respective Members
of NDMA with whom the Consultants are attached."
V .  Resource and Funding Arrangements
36. MHA is the nodal Ministry responsible for providing financial assistance
in the wake of natural calamities. Based on the recommendations of the Thirteenth
Finance Commission the scheme of State Disaster Response Fund and National
Disaster Response Fund were made operative for a period of five years (from 1 April,
2010 to 31 March, 2015). The guidelines for administration of the fund were issued
by MHA in September, 2010. The guidelines prescribed that these funds were to be
used only for meeting expenditure for providing immediate relief to the victims of
cyclone, drought, earthquake, fire, flood, tsunami, hailstorm, landslide, avalanche,
cloud burst and pest attack. The expenditure on disaster preparedness, restoration,
reconstruction and mitigation were not to be met from National Disaster Response
Fund but from the plan funds of States. DM Act also provide for constitution of
National Disaster Mitigation Fund (NDMF) for funding the projects geared
exclusively for disaster mitigation. The fund was to be placed at the disposal of
NDMA.
(i) State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF)
37. The State Disaster Response Fund was constituted under section 48(1) (a)
of the Disaster Management Act, 2005. All States had constituted State Disaster
Response Fund (SDRF) except Jammu and Kashmir. States were not sending the
details of utilisation and balances regularly. Details of State Disaster Response
Fund as of March, 2012 were not received in MHA from 10 States. States had not
invested unspent balances in their State Disaster Response Funds/CRFs resulting
in potential loss of interest of  ` 477.99 crore. States incurred an expenditure of
` 345.03 crore on inadmissible components in violation of the guidelines of the
State Disaster Response Fund during 2007-08 to 2011-12.
38. The Committee desired to know the status of constitution of State Disaster
Response fund in J&K and the details of various steps taken by the Ministry to
streamline the issue of delay in remittance of funds from SDRF to districts and delay
in submission of utilisation certificates by States etc. The MHA in their reply
furnished as under:—
"The State Government of J&K has consituted SDRF in October, 2012. It is
stated that allocation in the SDRF of the State is for the entire States, and it is
for the State Government concern to allocate as well as remittance of the fund
from SDRF to the affected district in the wake of natural calamities in
accordance with the magnitude of the situation through their administrative
machinery. The Scheme of SDRF provides that the State Executive Committee
is responsible to ensure that money drawn from the SDRF is actually utilized

15
for the purposes, for which the SDRF has been setup, and only on eligible
items and as per norms content in the guidelines issued by the Ministry of
Home Affairs."
39. The Audit has observed that the monitoring mechanism of SDRF
administration of MHA is not robust. The Ministry has responded as reproduced
below:—
"The Scheme of SDRF provides that the State Executive Committee is
responsible to ensure that money drawn from the SDRF is actually utilized for
the purposes, for which the SDRF has been setup, and only on eligible items
and as per norms content in the guidelines issued by the Ministry of Home
Affairs. The accounts of the Funds and the investments shall be maintained
by the Accountant General in charge of accounts of the State in the normal
course. The Comptroller and Auditor General of India would cause audit of
SDRF to be conducted every year in terms of the purposes of SDRF Guidelines.
However, the guidelines of SDRF enjoin upon MHA regarding monitoring
given as follows:—
'The Ministry of Home Affairs is the nodal Ministry for overseeing the
operation of SDRF, and shall monitor compliance with the prescribed
processes, MHA may issue directions/instructions under the provisions of
DM Act.'
What MHA under the guidelines provided in Para 11(v) can enforce is that
the instalment of central share SDRF which would accrue to the States can be
withheld, if it does not fulfils the conditions of submitting the information
relating to crediting of earlier release fund, the expenditure, and the balance
available in SDRF. It is being done. This is to further point out that SDRF is a
non-lapsable fund and if the State fulfils the above conditions the first and
second instalment of SDRF would automatically accrue to these accounts
whether they make the expenditure of the available fund in SDRF including
the balance of the previous years or not. It has been observed that collection
of expenditure details from their District Authority is time taking process,
which results in late submission of the Utilization Certificate to GoI for further
release of central contribution of SDRF. State Govt. have sufficient fund
available to meet their requirement and also aware of this fact that it is non-
lapsable fund. However, efforts will be made to ensure that the State Govt.
submit their requisite certificate to GoI in the month of April and October
every year indicating that the amount received earlier has been credited to
the SDRF along with the State's share of contribution, accompanied by a
statement giving the up-to-date expenditure and the balance amount available
in the SDRF."
40. When asked to inform about the action taken by MHA against the
States responsible for incurring expenditure on inadmissible components in violation
of the laid down provisions, the Ministry inter-alia  informed that State

16
Executive Committee are responsible to ensure utilisation of funds as per guidelines.
However, all the State Governments during annual conference of Relief Commissioners
of States/UTs in May, 2013 have been advised to be vigilant in utilizing the disaster
response fund judiciously for the purpose it is meant and as per guidelines.
(ii) National Disaster Response Fund (NDRF)
41. National Disaster Response Fund (NDRF) was consituted under Section 46
of DM Act in the Public Account of India under 'Reserve fund not bearing interest'
(September, 2010). NDRF was not made available to NEC and was operated by
MHA in contravention of the DM Act. In reply to a query of the Committee in this
regard the MHA replied as under:—
"The Government of India has now taken a corrective measure and has
constituted two sub-committees of National Executive Committee (NEC) for
scrutiny of report of the Inter-Ministerial Central Team (IMCT) on behalf of
the NEC on 17th September, 2013. As such sub-committees of NEC are involved
in the process of assessing and taking an appropriate decision in respect of
assistance to the calamity affected State, as per the NDRF guildelines, since
it is an integral part of governance system. Since the budgetary provision for
the NDRF is being made in the Demand for Grant of the Ministry of Finance,
it releases additional finance assistance to the affected States on the basis of
recommendation of sub-committee of NEC and approval of the High Level
Committee (HLC) as per the established procedure."
42. As per the guidelines, the report of the Inter-Ministerial Central Team
(IMCT) was to be examined by NEC to assess the extent of assistance and
expenditure required. Audit, however, found that the earlier arrangement continued
and the role of NEC was still performed by the Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG). The
Committee desired to know the reasons for NEC not being involved in assessing
the extent of assistance and expenditure required under NDRF. The Ministry in
their reply inter-alia stated that on receipt of Memorandum from State regarding
damage and requirement, an Inter-Ministerial Central Team (IMCT) headed by the
Joint Secretary is constituted and deputed for on-the-spot assessment of damages
and requirement of funds. The report of IMCT is considered by the sub-Committee
of NEC headed by Home Secretary for floods etc. or by Agricultural Secretary for
drought, cold wave etc. Based on the report of IMCT and recommendation of Sub-
Committee of NEC the High level Committee comprising of Agriculture Minister,
Finance Minister, Home Minister and Deputy Chairman Planning Commission
approves the assistance from NDRF. Thus, as per the MHA, it is not correct to say
that NEC was not involved.
43. An amount of  ` 654.04 crore in case of Gujarat, Assam and Goa, identified
as excess against the 'on account' release made from NCCF (now NDRF), was lying
with these States (September 2012). Out of  ` 9208.30 crore approved for release by
High Level Committee (HLC) during September 2010 to March 2012 funds amounting
to ` 3090.43 crore were provided to States for repair and restoration in various
sectors.This accounted for 34 per cent 'inadmissible' items of total approval. The

17
Committee desired to know the efforts made to restore unspent funds lying with
States to NDRF. The MHA informed as under:—
"HLC in its meeting held in May, 2010 had decided that excess amount was to
be adjusted against the requests of the States for assistance from National
Disaster Response Fund (NDRF), in the wake of calamities of severe nature,
in future, as assessed, after following the laid down procedure. Audit noted
that for future calamities of these states no funds could be released as there
were excess in SDRF accounts. Moreover, these unspent balances also could
not be adjusted or reverted back to the central fund binding the above decision
of HLC."
44. An amount of  ` 1245.78 crore was released/adjusted during 2010-11 to the
States of Gujarat, Maharashtra and Odisha for the damages due to unseasonal
rains. Damages due to unseasonal rains were not categorised as calamity to be
covered under guidelines of National Funds and thus the release was not in
compliance with the guidelines. However, Ministry of Home Affairs in their
submission stated that being a nodal Ministry to damage to crops due to natural
calamities, IMCT was constituted by Ministry of Agriculture, Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation. The Report of IMCT were considered by IMG.
However, these amounts were released in pursuance of the announcements of
Hon'ble Prime Minister keeping in view of the disaster in these States.
(iii) National Disaster Mitigation Fund (NDMF)
45. The modalities for constitution of NDMF were discussed by MHA with
MoF, Planning Commission and NDMA from time to time. The Thirteenth Finance
Commission had also recommended (December, 2009) that mitigation and
reconstruction activities should be kept out of the schemes funded through Finance
Commission grants and met out of overall development plan funds of the Centre
and States. Even after a lapse of more than six years of the enactment of the DM
Act. NDMF had not been constituted. When Committee asked the MHA about
reasons for the delay in constitution of NDMF, the Ministry informed as under:—
"The Planning Commission has supported the National Disaster Mitigation
Fund. However, the Department of Expenditure is of the view that mitigation
should be part of the Plan process, as there are already schemes targeted
towards mitigation. This Minsitry has constituted a Task Force to look into
various aspects of 'Implementation of Disaster  Management Act, 2005’. The
Task Force has analysed the implications of setting up the NDMF and
recommended that early steps should be taken to fulfil the statutory
responsibility. Based on the information given above, the Ministry of Finance,
Department of Expenditure has been requested by the Ministry of Home
Affairs to constitute the National Disaster Mitigation Fund. Steps are being
taken to prepare a Cabinet note seeking the creation of the NDMF."
46. The Committee further desired to know about the financial mechanism to
fund the mitigation related work in the absence of NDMF. The MHA in their reply
furnished as under:—
"The concerned Department/Ministry of the the Government are required to
provide for a budgetary allocation for the measures for prevention and

18
mitigation of disasters. The Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure
has also revised the format for evaluation of new plan and non-plan
expenditure by the Expenditure Finance Committee/Committee on Non-Plan
Expenditure in  order to address the concerns relating to disasters, particularly
the prevention and mitigation aspects clearly laying down that the cost
involved in prevention and mitigation of disaster (natural or manmade) would
need to be included fully in the projects cost. Thus, the cost of mitigation is
an embedded component in the new projects/schemes of the Government of
India.
In addition, the following Mitigation Specific Schemes were approved by the
Government:—
Sl. Scheme Amount
No.
1. National Cyclone Risk Mitigation ` 1497.00 crore
Project
2. National Earthquake Risk Mitigation ` 24.87 crore
Project
3. National School Safety Programme ` 48.47 crore
4. Strengthening of Fire and Emergency ` 200.00 crore
Services in the Country
Thus, the financial mechanism to fund the mitigation related work in place."
(iv) National Disaster Response Reserve (NDRR)
47. National Disaster Response Force was to provide relief to the affected
people at short notice. Thirteenth Finance Commission, in its report, in December
2009 had observed that relief material to be provided by the Force in such situations
was often required to be procured at high prices and by compromising on quality.
The Finance Commission, therefore, recommended a initial grant of  ` 250 crore in
the form of revolving fund named National Disaster Response Reserve (NDRR) to
the Force to maintain an inventory of items required for immediate relief NDMA
submitted the proposal in September, 2010 and MHA instructed (November, 2010)
that NDMA should prepare the list of inventory of equipment and material in
consultation with the Force. Audit has noted that the guidelines for procurement
and recovery of charges for items of NDRR could not be finalised even after a lapse
of more than one and half years. In reply to a query of the Committee regarding
constitution of NDRR to maintain an inventory of items for immediate relief, the
Ministry of Home Affairs informed the Committee as under:—
"The proposal for constitution of NDRR has been approved in principle by
the Ministry of Finance. An accounting procedure has been worked out. The
queries raised by the Internal Finance Division of Ministry of Home Affairs

19
are being complied by the National Disaster Respone Force. The National
Disaster Response Reserve is going to be created soon."
48. The Ministry informed about the performance of reserve duties of NDRF
particularly in the absence of the NDRR, as under:—
"The advantage of the NDRR would be that it would enable the NDRF to
procure necessary equipment and also enable NDRF to support the State
Governments as per their need. In case of the specified equipment, after
handing it over to the State Government, the procedure would enable NDRR
to recoup the funds from the State Governments so that without further
budget provisions, NDRF can go ahead with fresh procurement to replenish
their stock. In the absence of the NDRR, NDRF is managing the inventory
based on budgetary support."
VI. Communication System for Disaster Preparedness
49. With advancements in information technology and communication,
disaster forecasting and quick response have become possible. Timely deployment
and use of telecommunication resources play a crucial role in saving life, mitigating
disaster and relief operations. Department of Space (DoS) in March, 2003 started
the Disaster Management Support (DMS) Programme to harness the benefits of the
space-based technology for applications in disaster management in the country.
Under this programme, a Decision Support Centre was set up at the National Remote
Sensing Centre that monitored flood events and tracked cyclones originating in
Indian Ocean region. It also monitored prevalence and severity of agricultural
drought in 13 States during Kharif crops season every year, active forest fires on a
daily basis and all major earthquake and landslides in India and adjoining region.
(i) National Database for Emergency Management (NDEM)
50. Department of Sapce had undertaken a project to develop National
Database for Emergency Management. Project was to be completed by 2011 but it
has not become operational till July, 2012. The database implementation was delayed
as response from nodal departments was not encouraging. However, the Ministry
of Home Affairs informed that 32 central Ministries/Departments and 29 States and
Union Territories have already identified  the details of nodal officers. The data
format has been provided to various stakeholders. The data is placed on NRSC and
NDEM website which can be accessed through VPN Hub.
51. The Audit found that image of the database was to be maintained in MHA
under a team of experts located there. This could not be done as MHA was yet to
finalize the mirror site (July 2012). However, the Ministry informed the Committee
that the site for the mirror image has already been identified at Shastri Park,
New Delhi during Steering Committee meeting on 27th May, 2013.
(ii) Airborne Laser Terrain Mapping and Digital Camera (ALTM-DC) System
52. Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) formulated a programme for
creation of a digital, thematic and cartographic database for hazard zonation and

20
risk assessment. Under this programme ISRO and National Remote Sensing Agency
(NRSA) planned to cover one lakh sq. km. every year for the development of close
contour information of ground using the Airborne Laser Terrain Mapper (ALTM)
system, thereby envisaging coverage of all the priority flood prone areas (five lakh
sq. km.) in a period of five years.
53. The Ministry accepted that ALTM survey during 2004 to 2006 could not
be taken up due to non-availability of clearance from Defence Ministry, which has
now been made available.
(iii) Disaster Management Synthetic Aperture Radar (DMSAR)
54. Disaster Management Synthetic Aperture Radar (DMSAR) operating in
C-Band was used to acquire aerial radar data during natural disasters when no
satellite data coverage was available. It was used for purposes like flood mapping,
damage assessment, etc. The system was to be developed by Space Applications
Centre, Ahmedabad and operated by National Remote Sensing Agency (NRSA),
Hyderabad, The Committee desired to know if any survey was conducted using
DMSAR equipment after October, 2008. The MHA in their reply furnished as under:—
"No Sir. The Flight Model (FM) of the DMSAR was realised by Space
Application Centre, Ahmedabad and delivered to NRSC in December 2012.
Test flights using this Model are planned in this month (September, 2013).
The Development Model (DVM) developed and used for test flights in 2008
was only to verify the technological development and the performance in
terms of data collection. This model was not intended to use in operational
mode.  The data collected using DVM was analysed and modifications were
suggested by the users. The FM is developed incorporating those
suggestions."
55. Support through DMSAR under ISRO's Disaster Management Support
programme by acquiring aerial radar data during natural disaster could not be
materialised even after incurring an expenditure of  `28.99 crore and a lapse of six
years from the scheduled date of completion. National Remote Sensing Centre
suggested a triggering mechanism for DMSAR data acquisition in November 2009.
Demonstrations and training were to be provided by ISRO to State Governments to
build capacity for aerial data acquisitions. The Committee were informed that
proposed triggering mechanism for DMSAR data acquisition had not been adopted.
The flight Model DMSAR system testing is going on at NRSC, Hyderabad. After
completion of system testing and operationlisation the triggering mechanism will
be finalised based on the real scenario of data collection and data processing.
(iv) Satellite based Communication Network for Disaster Management
56. For providing emergency communication, at the behest of MHA, ISRO
was to set up a satellite based Virtual Private Network (VPN) facilitating secure data
access through a dedicated electronic network connecting all the key players of
disaster management. As regards the status of the operationalisation of VPN

21
network, one primary node at IMD Delhi was not fully operational, two of the five
monitoring nodes and two of the 20 State nodes were not operational, DMS
Communication Network which was a to become functional by December, 2005 was
not fully operational even after six years of receipt of the communication equipment
and incurring expenditure of ` 6.77 crore. However, the Committee were informed
that primary node at IMD, Delhi is reported to be functional.
57. In reply to a query of the Committee regarding operationalization of all the
monitoring and State nodes, the Ministry of Home Affairs replied as under:—
"With the support of Ministry  of  Home Affairs (MHA), ISRO had embarked
upon establishing the satellite VSAT-based satellite communication network,
by interconnecting the National Emergency Operations Centre (NEOC) at MHA,
the Prime Minister's Office (PMO), and the State Emergency Operations Centres
(SEOCs) for Ministry of  Home Affairs. The network, in the first phase, include
a hub at Samanvaya  Sadan, New Delhi, 10 Primary nodes,
5 observation nodes and 20 State Emergency Operation Centres, out of which
32 are functioning. Two nodes at Simla and Mumbai have got irreparably
damaged and the node at Prime Minister's office is being oriented to the new
satellite GSAT-12. One of the nodes at Disaster Monitoring Centre, Sachivalaya,
Dehradun was functional during the disaster period. Further, ISRO has deputed
a dedicated team to Uttarakhand and  installed 5 additional nodes in the disaster
affected areas. During the disasters, system was used successfully for video
conferencing between MHA and Dehradun as well as from Dehradun to the
remote inaccessible areas. In addition, 12 MSS-Type-D satellite phones provided
to the Uttarakhand State Government were also used extensively."
58. The Committee asked for details of various equipment procured and
installed by both IMD/ISRO for dissemination of data to stakeholders during the
last years and expenditure incurred thereon. The Ministry informed as under:—
"(i) T owards organising National Database on Emergency Management
(NDEM) and disseminating the services, computer infrastructure has been
procured and an expenditure of  ` 2.10 crore has been incurred in the last
five years.
(ii) ISRO is in the process of establishing 500 numbers of DTH based Disaster
Warning Dissemination System (DWDS) in the coastal areas in association
with IMD and Doordarshan. DWDS will help in disseminating disaster
information directly to the television sets in the affected regions through
Set-top boxes of Doordarshan. 200 DWDS systems have been delivered
to the sites for installation. An amount of  ` 1.11 crore have been spent as
advanced to Bharat Electronics Limited, Bangalore."
59. In reply to another query of the Committee regarding installation/utilisation
of equipment, the Ministry of Home Affairs informed as under:—
"S-band Doppler Weather Radars (DWR) were developed indigenously by
ISRO and productionised through BEL, Bangalore. Four DWRs were procured

22
for establishment in North-Eastern region and Himalayan region in association
with IMD and Snow Avalanche Study Establishment (SASE), Manali. Suitable
locations for establishment of these Radars could not be located other than
Cherrapunji, due to defence installation interference and non-availability of
plain land. The DWR at Cherrapunji is in the final stages of installation. Specific
Plans are being drawn for deploying the other DWRs in association with IMD."
(v) Doppler Weather Radars
60. For the surveillance and monitoring of severe weather system such as
cyclones, ISRO planned to develop and establish Doppler Weather Radars (DWRs).
These radars were to be set up jointly by India Meteorological Department (IMD)
and DOS with the available indigenous technology on data and cost sharing basis.
These radars were to be supplied, installed and commissioned by M/s Bharat
Electronics Limited, Bangalore. An amount  of  `35.64 crore spent by DOS under
DMS progamme for setting up of the five radars was blocked without yielding any
fruitful results due to lack of effective co-ordination with IMD. The Committee
desired to know the status of radars to be set-up jointly by IMD and DOS and
reasons for not taking up the delivery of four S-Band DWRs prepared by BEL. The
Ministry in their submission stated as under:—
"ISRO/DOS has established one S-Band Doppler Weather Radar in Sriharikota.
One S-Band DWR is being established at Cherrapunji, Meghalaya and one
C-Band Doppler Weather Radar at Thiruvananthpuram. Discussion are on
with Ministry of Earth Sciences for establishing two DWRs in the coastal
areas; and with Snow and Avalanche Studies Establishment (SASE), Manali
for establishing two DWRs in the Himalayan region. The Doppler Weather
Radars can pic-up signatures of development of convective system within its
range (generally 350 kms) up to 2-3 hours in advance. Efficacy of Doppler
Weather Radars in forecasting cloud burst like events is yet to be analyzed
by ISRO/DOS. As advised by Committee of Secretaries (COS), ISRO initiated
efforts to establish four indigenously developed S-Band DWRs in North-
East region in association with India Meteorological Department (IMD) and
in the Himalayan region in association with Snow and Avalanche Studies
Establishment (SASE), Manali. After extensive search for suitable sites, only
one site at IMD campus, Cherrapunji could be identified. Even though the
completion was expected in 2011, the project got delayed due to (i) delay in
realising high technology elements and (ii) delay in getting suitable sites with
clearance from defence agencies. Currently, the final integration of S-Band
DWR at Cherrapunji is progressing and is expected to be operational by
September, 2013. Establishment of C-Band DWR at TERLS
Thiruvananthapuram is also in the final stages and is expected to be functional
by December, 2013. Also, discussions are on with IMD for installation of the
S-Band DWRs realised for SASE, Manali in the coastal areas. Efforts are on
with SASE for identifying further locations for installation of C-Band DWRs
which are smaller in size for establishment in the Himalayan regions."

23
61. The Committee enquired about setting up of the Radars at Goa, Kochi,
Karaikal and Paradeep and the mechanism adopted for transmission of findings/
warnings from these Radars to the public concerned. The Ministry denied about
setting up Radars and informed as under:—
"Four Doppler Weather Radars (DWRs) originally meant for Goa, Karaikal,
Paradeep and Mumbai could not be installed due to objection of the Ministry
of Defence (MoD) in April 2010. Keeping the operational exigency and
criticality of having DWR at Mumbai on priority then, commissioning of
indigenous DWR that was meant for Kochi had been taken up at Mumbai.
Three Radars meant for Goa, Karaikal and Paradeep are lying at respective
locations in uninstalled condition. Based on the clearance given now by the
MoD on 15th April, 2013 with the fulfilment of certain preconditions for
proceeding with the installation of DWRs at civilian locations of Goa, Paradeep
and Karaikal, the security audit will have to be carried out by independent
agencies suggested by MoD at the respective sites. The security audit
protocol is under finalization by the duly constituted Committee and very
soon the said commissioning of DWRs would be completed. In the next
batch of DWR procurements, DWR for Kochi will be provisioned. Doppler
Weather Radar (DWR) network is primarily employed to improve the severe
weather surveilance capability and for operating now-casting (very short
range up to 6h in advance) service (operated for about 117 locations across
India). Further, data generated from all observing systems viz. surface and
upper air observations, satellite observations, aircraft observations, DWRs
etc. are used by various forecast models to generate most representative
initial state 3-D structure of the atmosphere and high resolution (9km grid
scale) 3-day forecasts of severe weather in advance and now-cast application
tools that generate now-casts up to 6h in advance. Fully organized protocol
exists between the IMD and the various designated disaster management
authorities at Central level (MHA and several others) and State levels for
dissemination of weather forecast warning alerts and such existing
dissemination protocol is always duly complied with by ESSO-IMD."
62. The Committee desired to know whether lack of Doppler Radars in the
higher reaches and as yet imperfect scientific models tell-tale signs of an extreme
weather event prevented the IMD from forecasting Uttarakhand's recent calamitous
cloudburst. The Ministry in their reply furnished as under:—
"The weather forecasts are issued at three levels, national level from Delhi,
North-West Region from Delhi and Local level, in this case from Dehradun.
The National Weather Bulletin based on Numerical Weather Prediction Model-
T574 (around 22 km grid) is issued four times a day, morning, mid-day, evening
and night. It gives weather forecast for next three days, and outlook for
subsequent four days. Apart from this, for severe weather, forecast is also
provided under heading "Weather Warning for next Three Days". Regional
Weather Forecast Centre provide forecast (based on WRF model, 9 km,

24
ensemble prediction system and unified model) for the NW region for next
48 hours as well as outlook for next 48 hours as an input for forecasting by
meteorological centres in the region. The local level forecasts are provided
twice a day based on above-mentioned model forecasts as well as synoptic
situation (pressure, winds, satellite and radar data). The national level forecasts
are provided to MHA and NDMA control room, NDRF as well as to print and
electronic media and is available on IMD website. The local forecasts are
provided to all State and District level functionaries. With the help of the
available observing and forecast systems, the recent disaster of Uttarakhand
was well predicted by IMD. ESSO-IMD has only issued severe weather
warnings with isolated heavy to very heavy rains (12-24 cm) for the entire
Uttarakhand region, starting from June 15, 2013 for three days including the
advice to postpone the Char Dham Yatra (Kedarnath, Badrinath, Gangotri
and Yamunotri) accordingly to designated State level authorities. Based on
the inputs received from ESSO-IMDs State Meteorological Centre-Dehradun,
the State Government issued advisories to all the concerned districts.
Announcements were made by Police personnel stationed at Kedarnath,
Rambada and Gaurikund alerting the general public. The district administration
stopped the further movement of pilgrims from Rishikesh to higher reaches.
However, it is true that as a general issue, the problem of beam blockage of
radars over high tall hill terrain region by which data is at times absent is
there. However, it is a global problem over high terrain regions. Other general
difficulties include communication for real-time dissemination of volumes of
data, power supply and support infrastructure over a remote terrain region
etc."
63. In reply to a query of the Committee regarding direction of NDMA to IMD
to make time-bound plan for monitoring and forecasting for all Char Dham pilgrimage,
the Ministry of Home Affairs informed as under:—
"Besides the efforts of the ESSO-IMD, there is constant interaction between
NDMA, ESSO-IMD and many suggestions/directions emerge thereon. ESSO-
IMD is issuing forecast for Char Dham Pilgrimage through the Meteorological
Centre in Dehradun since 2010. ESSO-IMD is planning to upgrade weather
monitoring and forecasting system for Himalayan Region including
Uttarakhand under a proposed Integrated Himalayan Meteorological Project
in 12th Five Year Plan."
(vi) Other Communication Networks
64. The Audit has observed that during a disaster, the existing terrestrial
communication networks are prone to failure. To address this risk, NDMA decided
to set up the National Disaster Communication Network (NDCN). This ambitious
communication project of NDMA to provide networking for integration of various
disaster management tools in the country was still at the preparation stage even
after a lapse of more than four years. NDMA in March, 2008 proposed to establish
the National Disaster Management Informatics System (NDMIS) for utilizing the

25
GIS platform tool in disaster management. NDMIS was to host the core database
and disaster specific database for carrying out vulnerability analysis and risk
assessment.
65. The Committee enquired about the status of ambitious project of NDMA.
The Committee were informed through a written submission  as under:—
"The NDMA submitted a stand alone project on Communication Network,
which was examined in the Ministry. A Technical Committee was constituted
under the Chairmanship of Department of Space to suggest a comprehensive
framework on disaster communication encompassing hardware and software
applications by integration of the existing communication facilities and
networks which should be an overarching framework with single point
inclusion for all the disaster managers in the country. The said Committee has
since submitted its report. The NDMA has been asked to prepare a Detailed
Project Report including execution of a pilot project in 3 States to ascertain
the functioning of communication system. Based on the findings of the pilot
project, the project on National Disaster Management Communication Centre
would be prepared for further necessary follow up."
VII. Response System in Disasters
(i) National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) & State Disaster Response Force
(SDRF)
66. National Disaster Response Force was formed in 2006 as a specialist force
with the capabilities to deal with all types of natural and man-made disasters. The
headquarters was located at New Delhi and it had 10 battalions spread over the
country by 2012. Each battalion of the NDRF was to have a strength of 1149 posts.
There was a deficiency of 3071 personnel (27%) (May, 2012), of which specialized
posts constituted 43% (1318). NDRF was constituted for disaster response with a
single chain of command. But, the inter-battalion transfers of personnel were executed
by concerned Directors General of Central Armed Police Force (CAPF) only and not
DG, NDRF. In reply to a query of the Committee regarding steps taken by DG, NDRF
and Ministry of Home Affairs in filling up the vacant posts, the MHA informed as
under:—
"NDRF is a deputationist Force with the personnel drawn on deputation from
CAPFs. A monthly report on manpower deficiency position in each NDRF
battalion is being forwarded to all CAPFs by NDRF Hqrs regularly with request
to fill up the vacant posts. MHA is also taking up with the concerned CAPF
to fill up the vacancies in the NDRF battalions. To fill up the specialist/
technical posts in NDRF battalions through deputation vide publicity was
given in Weekly Employment News as well as circulated to various CAPFs,
Central Government Department at two occasions with very limited response.
A proposal to modify the RRs is under consideration in MHA for facilitating
recruitment of technical manpower in NDRF."

26
67. In reply to a query regarding powers of the DG (NDRF) to transfer for
optimum utilisation of its personnel. The MHA informed as under:—
‘‘DG, NDRF has not been delegated the powers of transferring the NDRF
personnel of one CAPF to another CAPF Bn of NDRF as this will create
functional problems. However, as regards the inter Battalion transfer of
personnel within Bns of the same CAPF, a decision was taken during the
meeting of DG of CAPFs held at NDMA on Jan. 03, 2013 that the same will be
executed by the respective DG on the basis of recommendation of DG, NDRF
keeping operational requirement in view. It is true that NDRF does not have a
specialised training institute. Training is being imparted at the NDRF battalion
locations and other specialised Govt. and private institutions.’’
68. There were constraints in providing specialised training to NDRF
personnel. For advance courses training, NDRF personnel were sent to other
Government and private institutions. NDMA decided (2006) to establish a 'National
Institute of Disaster Response (NIDR)' to cater to the training needs of NDRF and
also other stakeholders such as SDRF, CAPFs, Civil Defence personnel etc. The
proposed Institute had not been set up so far. The Committee desired to know
about the steps taken providing adequate training slots to NDRF personnel in
Government and private institutions. The MHA in their reply furnished as under:—
‘‘Training is a continuous process and NDRF personnel are being trained by
International Experts in specialized areas of exerpertise. NDRF personnel are
being trained at different Government Institutes such as Border Security
Force Institute of Disaster Response (BIDR), Tekanpur; CRPF-Central Training
College (CTC)-II, Coimbatore; CISF-National Industrial Security Academy
(NISA), Hyderabad; ITBP-Basic Training Centre (BTC), Bhanu; Bhabha
Atomic Research Centre (BARC), Mumbai; Defence Research & Development
Establishment (DRDE), Gwalior; Institute of Nuclear Medicine & Allied
Sciences (INMS), New Delhi etc. Besides, they get also trained at private
institutes such as Sea Explorers Institute, Kolkata; Rashtriya Life Saving
Society, Kolkata; NIM, Uttarkashi; The Atal Bihari V ajpayee Institute of
Mountaineering (ABVIM), Manali; Himalayan Mountaineering Institute
(HMI), Darjeeling; Swami Vivekanand Institute of Mountaineering (SVIM),
Mount Abu; Himalayan Adventure Institute (HAI), Mussoorrie etc.
Further, selected NDRF personnel are sent abroad for special courses. As on
18th Decemeber, 2013, 119 personnel of NDRF have undergone various
courses/training in different foreign countries. Under the India Swiss
Collaboration, training of Master Trainers at NISA Hyderabad and Basic
Training Centre, Bhanu, Chandigarh is imparted. There is 186 personnel of
NDRF were trained by SWISS experts in Urban Search and Rescue and
67 dogs have been trained in canine training. Swiss Development Corporation
(SDC) has also imparted training to 118 NDRF personnel at 03rd Bn, NDRF,
Mundali.

27
Programme for Enhancement of Emergency Response (PEER) is a regional
training programme initiated by the USAID to strengthen and institutionalize
capacity in emergency and disaster response in participating member
countries. PEER has supported capacity building initiatives of Government
of India by counducting various disasters response training courses. As per
PEER report (February 28, 2011) 178 Medical First Responders (MFR) and
120 Collapsed Structure Search and Rescue (CSSR) graduates; 124 Training
for Instructors (TFI), 104 MFR instructors, 94 CSSR instructors and 59 Master
instructors have been trained under these training programmes.’’
69. The Committee then enquired about the delay in setup of NIDR, despite
availability of land. The Ministry informed as under:—
‘‘A detailed proposal for consideration of Expenditure Finance Committee
(EFC) for setting up of a National Institute of Disaster Response (NIDR) at
cost of about ` 116 crore is under consideration of MHA in consultation with
Finance Ministry. After the approval of the proposal further follow-up will be
taken.’’
70. Three out of 10 battalions were sharing accommodation with other CAPFs
and even temporary infrastructure for office, residential and storage accommodation
could not be established for them. Despite a proposal of ` 3171.58 crore being
under consideration of MHA since December, 2011, the standard infrastructure was
yet to be created for the NDRF battalions (December, 2012). NDRF headquarter was
accommodated by constructing temporary huts at the roof-top of Civil Defence
Secretariat Building. When asked about the sharing of accommodation by NDRF
and CAPFs, the MHA replied as under:—
‘‘For providing office space to HQ, DGNDRF at present two separate proposal
of NDRF are under process. Approval of NDRF for providing office space in
Paryavaran Bhawan, CGO Complex is under consideration in Ministry of
Urban Development. The second proposal of NDRF for providing office
space in August Kranti Bhawan, New Delhi is also under examination in
consultation with Integrated Finance Division, MHA.’’
71. The audit had observed that States were also required to create similar
capabilities. However, only seven States/UTs were able to form State Disaster
Response Force.
(ii) Regional Response Centre (R.C.C.)
72. MHA in 2004 sanctioned setting up of eight Regional Response Centres
(RRCs) and seven Nodal Centres (in high altitude and hilly areas.) Three RRCs at
Guwahati, Mundali and Arakkonam were manned and operated by NDRF as they
were co-located with NDRF battalions. The remaining were manned and operated
by Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs). CAPFs were authorised to purchase
40 items of identified necessary equipment (@ ` 75.24 lakh per centre) to be kept in
the RRCs to save time in carrying them to affected areas and make it  easy to
respond in case of emergency. However, CAPFs did not make their respective RRCs

28
functional, despite the sanctions issued by MHA. The equipment which were
procured and kept at respective locations were lying unused for want of proper
guidelines. CAPFs attributed (September, 2010) the non-formation of RRCs and
idling of equipment to shortage of accommodation and manpower, non-receipt of
requirements from State Governments and lack of deployment of trained personnel
of NDRF. The Committee desired to know whether guidelines for use of equipment
procured and kept at RRCs were formulated and circulated to RRCs. The MHA
replied as under:—
‘‘The concept of RRCs dates back to 2003  i.e. prior to the DM Act, 2005.
Following constitution of NDMA/NDRF, a decision has since been taken to
merge the equipment of all the RRCs with the Companies of nearest NDRF
Battalion and to be located at vulnerable locations/metro cities where these
Companies are being located.’’
(iii) Civil Defence and Fire Service
73. In 2009, MHA formulated schemes relating to civil defence and fire services
and Director General Civil Defence (DGCD) was designated as the implementing
agency. MHA proposed a scheme for revamping Civil Defence by strengthening it,
so that it could play a significant role in disaster management and assist the police
in internal security and law and order situations, while retaining its primary role.
MHA approved a proposal for up-gradation of the National Civil Defence College,
Nagpur in October, 2004. The Committee were informed that the outcome of the
scheme for revamping of Civil Defence are as follows:—
(i) Strengthening of CD set up in 100 multi-hazard districts.
(ii) Renovation of existing 17 State level training institutes.
(iii) Construction of 9 new State level training institutes.
74. The MHA also informed that the study on the fire and hazard analysis has
been completed in March 2013. The upgradation of National Civil Defence College
has since been completed on 31st March, 2013 and the requisite equipment have
been procured for the college.
75. In order of fill the alarming gaps in fire fighting and rescue capabilities, a
scheme called 'Strengthening  of Fire and Emergency services in the Country' was
sanctioned by MHA in October, 2009. The National Fire Service College (NFSC)
was established at Nagpur in 1956 to conduct training for the officers. In reply to a
query of the Committee regarding delay in upgradation of National Fire Service
College, the MHA informed as under:—
‘‘The scheme to upgrade National Fire Service College with an outlay of ` 205
crore was launched in June, 2010. Due to large scale encroachments on the
land for construction of the infrastructure for new buildings, the upgradation
scheme could not be completed by March, 2013. The encroachments have
since been removed and the construction of College building is in full swing.’’

29
(iv) Medical Preparedness
76. Medical Preparedness for disasters aims to create an institutional
mechanism and systems that would result in the coordinated working of emergency
responders, hospital managers and local and regional officials. The report of the
Working Group on Disease Burden for the Twelfth Five Year Plan had also
recommended (July, 2011) establishment of Command and Control Centre. In this
connection, the MHA submitted as under:—
‘‘At present, in the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, the disaster response
is coordinated by Emergency Medical Relief Division, with Director, Emergency
Medical Relief as the Controlling Officer. The Division has at its disposal an
Emergency Control Room for co-ordination, communication, and information
management. For example this facility was activated on 24×7 basis for the
Influenza Pandemic recent flash floods in Uttarakhand and the cyclone Phailin
that hit Odisha and Andhra Pradesh Coast in October, 2013. However, an
advanced communication and information management hub (Strategic Health
Operation Centre) with latest Information Technology has been envisaged
under the Programme "Health Sector Disaster Preparedness and Response"
in the 12th Five Year Plan.’’
77. NDMA guidelines while recognizing the lack of medical facilities for
Chemical, Biological Radiological and Nuclear disasters, emphasized the need for
specialized facilities for protection, detection, decontamination, antidote
administration along with usual care required for other injuries in case of Chemical,
Biological Radiological and Nuclear (CBRN) emergencies. The guidelines also
mentioned that medical facilities for CBRN disasters were lacking in the country.
In reply to a query of the Committee regarding setting up of CBRN medical centre in
Delhi, the MHA stated that CBRN Medical Management Centre is envisaged at
Safdarjung Hospital. Land has  been identified and the broad requirements have
been worked out. Consultant Agency has been identified to prepare detailed project
report.
78. A High Powered Committee (HPC), set up in August, 1999 on global best
practices for disaster management, in its report submitted to MHA, recommended
setting up of five to six mobile hospital units. The Committee of Secretaries approved
MHA's proposal for building specialized capabilities for rapid intervention in case
of disaster in Februay, 2005 which also included setting up of three mobile hospitals.
The Committee desired to know the reasons for delay in setting up of mobile hospitals
by MHA and MOHFW. The MHA informed as under:—
‘‘Ministry of Health and Family Welfare attempted to procure Mobile Hospital
three times in the past. The first tender floated in January, 2002 was cancelled
as bidders did not follow the bid conditions. The second tender floated in
June, 2002 was cancelled in 2003 due to non-compliance of bidding process.
The third tender floated in 2004 was cancelled in 2008 as bider failed to qualify
commercial bid conditions. In a review done in 2013, it was decided that it
would be appropriate if such container based mobile hospital is purchased

30
and maintained by agencies with requisite expertise and specialization in
disaster response/management, such as NDMA or MHA. Hence a decision
has been taken by MOHFW that NDMA/MHA may procure the mobile
hospital. MOHFW would provide the manpower, if necessary. Ministry of
Home Affairs has requested MOHFW to provide specification of the mobile
hospitals and also make available the status of mobile hospitals attached to
Dr. R.M.L. Hospital.’’
79. The Ministry further informed that the repair work of CBRN vehicles
(Hazmat Vehicle and Integrated CBRN Monitoring system) have been completed
and the vehicles are being used by the NDRF on Parliament Security duty. The
locations of these vehicles have already been finalized for Pune, Ghaziabad, Chennai
and Kolkata.
80. Training of physicians to serve effectively in emergency rooms is a
pre-requisite for management of trauma cases brought to hospital emergency
departments. However, there was no structured and accredited course for trauma
life support in the country till 2009. In reply to the queries of the Committee in this
regard, the MHA informed that Jay Prakash Narayan Apex Trauma Centre, AIIMS,
New Delhi, are running the following structured internationally recognized trauma
life support courses for Doctors, Nurses and Paramedics in India:—
1. ATLS (Advanced Trauma Life Support) course for Doctors.
2. ATCN (Advanced Trauma Care for Nurses) Course for Nurses.
3. PHTLS (Pre-Hospital Trauma Life Support) Course for Paramedics.
4. RTTDC (Rural Trauma Team Development Course) Course for Rural Centres
Doctors, Nurses an Paramedics.
81.  Apart from Delhi, these courses are also provided at different locations in
the country. As regards status of trained doctors for emergency care the MHA
informed as under:—
‘‘Till 2009, there was no MCI recognized degree course for training of doctors
in emergency care. There were some non MCI recognized courses in MD
Emergency Medicine being imparted by some private/deemed universities.
After being recognized as a distinct academic speciality in 2010, MD
(Emergency Medicine) has been intitiated in some institutions including AIIMS
(2 seats MD) (Emergency Medicine) in 2012. Further the JPN Apex Trauma
Centre, AIIMS, New Delhi has already submitted curriculum for long term
residency programme, MS (Trauma and Emergency Surgery) and M.Ch
(Trauma and Critical Care) for approval.’’
VIII. Capacity  Building
82. Effective disaster management requires trained manpower to deal with
complex situations effectively and rapidly to reduce the impact of disaster on human
life and property. It is necessary to continuously undertake measures to build

31
capacity amongst those who are handling disaster prevention, mitigation,
preparedness, response, reconstruction and also create awareness amongst the
people. In terms of the National Policy, 2009, the approach to capacity-building
includes awareness generation, education, training, research and development.
(i) National Institute of Disaster Management (NIDM)
83. The Audit found some deficiencies in the functioning of the NIDM. During
2004-05, MHA launched the National Programme for Capacity Building of Engineers
in Earthquake Risk Management (NPCBEERM) and the National Programme for
Capacity Building of Architects in Earthquake Risk Management (NPCBAERM).
The Committee enquired about the closure of the twin programmes for engineers/
architects without attaining the objective and whether any actionable programme
has been devised for the engineers/architects for future. The MHA in their reply
furnished as under:—
‘‘The twin Schemes were initially implemented by MHA and the target was to
train 250 architects and 450 engineers as faculty members who in turn were to
train 10,000 architects and 10,000 engineers respectively. The Scheme was
transferred to NIDM in 2008 and all efforts were made to achieve the targets.
Under the twin Scheme, 210 Architects were trained as master trainers against
the target of 250. Similarly, 308 engineers were trained as master trainers as
against the target of 450. Further, 1361 architects and 2528 engineers were
trained by the master trainers. The programme could not run succeessfully
due to non-availability of engineers an architects for training and therefore,
was shelved by MHA in December 2010. Out of total releases of ` 9.28 crore
made under the Schemes, Utilisation Certificates have been received except
for 
` 3.13 crore for which UCs are still pending as on 29.5.2013.’’
84. In February, 2008 MHA approved a non-Plan scheme for extending
financial assistance to the Administrative Training Institutes (ATIs) and State
Training Institutes. In the five years of its execution, percentage of shortfall ranged
from 45 to 76 per cent, with 2 to 10 A TIs not conducting any training programme at
all. The Committee desired to know the status of DMCs at various ATIs and STIs
and also of any evaluation study conducted to ascertain the extent of targeted
benefits under RTI scheme. The MHA has furnished their comments as under:—
‘‘The non-plan Scheme for financial assistance to State ATIs for operation of
Centre for Disaster Management had a total allocation of ` 25 crore for a
period of 5 years between 2007-08 to 2011-12. Under the Scheme the 30 CDMs
in State ATIs were required to conduct 20 training programme with average of
20 participants in each programme in a year. Thus, the total number of personnel
to be trained under the Scheme was 12,000 in a year making grand total of
60,000. Out of ` 25 crore earmarked for the Scheme, an amount of ` 17.59 crore
was released to State ATIs. As against the target of 60,000 persons to be
trained a total of 1,06,448 persons were trained in various aspects of disaster
management. Thus, the achievement was much more than the target under

32
the Scheme. The saving in financial allocation was mainly on account of pay
& allowances of faculty/staff members who could not be appointed by the
ATIs. Out of ` 17.59 crore released under the Scheme, all Utilization Certificates
have been received except for ` 29 lakh as on 29.5.2013.’’
85. MHA developed India Disaster Resource Network (IDRN) portal with the
support of UNDP and launched it in 2004 through National Informatics Centre
(NIC). MHA entrusted (June, 2008) NIDM with the responsibility of updating and
maintaining the portal but two posts that were created in MHA were not transferred
to NIDM. In this connection the Committee enquired about not filing up of IDRN
Posts relating to running of NIDM portal. The MHA informed as under:—
‘‘IDRN portal was handed over by MHA to NIDM for further maintenance in
the year 2008. However in the absence of dedicated persons at NIDM to
maintain the portal and providing necessary technical support to users, the
portal suffered in terms of data updating, user administration etc. Subsequently,
a dedicated computer programmer was appointed in September, 2012 on
contractual basis. The portal has now been made completely functional.
Checking and fixing of all the errors identified by NIC were carried out. At the
time of development of the IDRN portal during 2003 there were only 596
districts in India and hence the newly created districts were not able to upload
district data. New district pages were subsequently created in addition to the
596 districts. Now, the portal is fully functional and as on 5th September, 2013,
it has 1,45,105 records covering 660 districts (all States and UTs). Some new
features have also been added in the portal to make it more user-friendly.
Training programmes are also being organized region-wise, to orient State/
District level officials and provide them necessary support and technical
assistance.’’
86. The Audit had pointed out that the academic and training programmes
of NIDM had never been evaluated by an independent agency. Replying to a
query of the Committee in this regard, the MHA stated that the Institute has
already initiated the process for impact evaluation of training programmes
conducted by NIDM. Proposals from reputed Institution/Agencies have been
invited and a Committee has been constituted to evaluate the proposals. The
assignment for impact evaluation will be awarded to an agency based on the
evaluation of the proposal.
87. NIDM was sanctioned 57 posts to carry out its mandated work of capacity
building. NIDM has never functioned with its full capacity as many of the critical
posts of Professors, Associate Professors, Assistant Professors and Researchers
were lying vacant at the end of each financial year. In reply to a query of the
Committee regarding vacancies in NIDM, the MHA replied as under:—
‘‘The posts of faculty members in NIDM are lying vacant as the Recruitment
Rules of NIDM are still under consideration for approval of the Competent
Authority. Hence, after taking the approval from MHA, the vacant faculty

33
position have been filled up on short-term contract basis except one post of
Professor as no suitable candidate was found from amongst applicants.’’
(ii) Pilot project on capacity building in disaster management
88. A pilot project on "Capacity Building in Disaster Management" for
Government officials and representatives of local bodies at district level was
implemented through an MoU between Indira Gandhi National Open University
(IGNOU) and NDMA in February, 2010. Delay in implementation of this project had
also affected the future plans of capacity building in disaster management across
the country. When asked for the reasons for delay in implementation of this project
the Ministry informed as under:—
‘‘The Project on Capacity Building in Disaster Management for Government
Officials and Representatives of Local Bodies at District Level funded by
NDMA and carried out by the Faculty of Public Administration, IGNOU.
CBDM was the first capacity building Pilot Project designed by NDMA in
consultation with various institutes. As this was a pioneering work and all
stakeholders were on their learning-curve, it was but natural that for on-
course correction, several revisions and changes were introduced at different
stages from conceptualization to final execution. The work on the project is
successfully completed. In all, 16479 participants have attended the face to
face training programmes (FFTPs), against a target of 16200. Even though
there were delays in the project, tangible results could be achieved by way of
development of five booklets translated in vernacular languages. Project
reports are also available in public domain.’’
IX. Disaster specific observations
(i) Earthquakes
89. Ministry of Earth Sciences (MoES) [India Meteorological Department
(IMD)] is the nodal Ministry for the management and mitigation of earthquakes in
the country. In terms of National Disaster Management Guidelines on Management
of Earthquakes issued in April, 2007, MoES was to prepare the Earthquake
Management Plan covering all aspects including earthquake preparedness,
mitigation, public awareness, capacity building, training, education, research and
development, documentation, earthquake response, rehabilitation and recovery.
MoES did not prepare any disaster management plan for earthquakes. However, in
reply to a query of the Committee regarding status of disaster management and
mitigation plan for earthquake, the MHA informed as under:—
‘‘ESSO-IMD is only responsible for monitoring seismic activity in and around
the country and disseminates the information to all the user agencies including
the concerned State and Central Government agencies responsible for
carrying out emergency response, relief and rehabilitation measures. It is to
mention that the institutions of MoES/ESSO only deal with monitoring,
detection and warning of cyclones and tsunamis and only carry out aspects

34
of monitoring and detection in respect of earthquakes and hence have no
experience of developing and monitoring the associated components of
disaster management cycle viz., preparedness, mitigation, risk reduction,
response and relief, etc., that are all along being dealt with by different Central
and State Government authorities. Moreover, the implementation of disaster
mitigation plans also has a significant component of techno-legal and
regulatory components that are operated by various competent authorities at
different levels of governance in the country.’’
90. A project on "Optimum Seismological Network Programme" was
sanctioned in May, 2009 by the IMD at an estimated cost of ` 48 crore, which was
reduced to ` 25.17 crore. The project implementation was proposed to be carried
out in two phases spread over a period of three years from 2009-10 to 2011-12. The
objective of the project  was to strengthen and modernize the National Seismological
Network for improving the detection and location capability for earthquakes of
magnitude greater than or equal to 3.0, occurring anywhere in the mainland of the
country. The project was found by audit as still in the preliminary stages of
implementation even after expiry of three years. The MHA in their submission
about the status of OSNP stated as under:—
‘‘Earlier plan of  'Optimum Seismological Network Programme' was reviewed
in the light of recent networks established in the country by various R&D
groups. Under this approach, already 65-stations (40-seismic stations and
25-GPS stations) are operational and very soon the network would have
90 stations (50-seismic stations and 40-GPS stations) by which already medium
and low seismic intensity is successfully getting monitored and analysed in
real-time. Accordingly a new scheme was taken up for deploying a total of 78
additional State-of art broadband systems to the national seismological
network in October, 2012. Global tenders have been floated and technical
evaluation of bids received has been completed. Further action is in process
for placement of order is under progress.’’
91. MoES/IMD had set up the Earthquake Risk Evaluation Centre at Delhi, in
February, 2004. During 2007—12, IMD proposed to carry out three projects viz:—
(a) Seismic microzonation of Mumbai, Guwahati, Ahmedabad and Dehradun
on 1:10000 scale;
(b) Creation of national database for seismic hazard and regional risk appraisal;
and
(c) Impact assessment of utilization of database in planning and mitigation.
An allocation of ` 298.38 crore was made for these projects. MoES stated
(September, 2012) that the microzonation of Guwahati, Bangalore, Ahmedabad,
Dehradun and Delhi was completed. IMD initiated a project titled "Archival digitiza-
tion of seismic analog chart" in May, 2008 at an estimated cost of ` 13.50 crore

35
for two years. The duration of the project was extended from time to time and finally
till June, 2012. In their submission, the MHA furnished as under:—
‘‘Seismic data base comprises scanning and digitization of analog seismic
charts for the period 1927—1996, on-line archival of digital wave form seismic
data since 1996 in real time. The scanning of about 89,000 analog charts and
out of which digitization of about 5000 earthquake events are taken up since
2008. As things stand today, the scanning of all the charts is completed and
digitizition of events is in its final stage. Archival-digitization of seismic analog
charts is pursued till December, 2013 to complete the activity. The National
Earthquake Risk Mitigation Project (NERMP) has been approved by the
Government in April, 2013 at an outlay of  
` 24.87 crore.’’
92. NDMA had undertaken the task of preparing the upgraded hazard maps
and atlas of Indian land mass. In this connection the MHA informed that as per the
recommendations of the Working Committee of Experts (Geophysical-Hazards), NDMA
has undertaken a project through Building Materials Technology Promotion Council
(BMTPC) for upgradation of Earthquake Hazards Maps for the country at a cost of
` 76.83 lakh. Project which started in June, 2011 is yet to be completed. It is getting
delayed due to non-availability of district boundaries data from the Census of India.
93. NDMA has also taken up National Earthquake Risk Mitigation project.
This Project was still in preparatory phase after a lapse of five years. The Ministry
while furnishing the status of project stated as under:—
‘‘The Centrally Sponsored Scheme for National Earthquake Risk Mitigation
(Preparatory Phase) has been approved in April, 2013 at an outlay of ` 24.87
crore, to be implemented within a period of two years viz. 2013—15. The aim
of the project is to demonstrate the effectiveness of strategies proposed for
implementation of activities under four components namely, (i) Techno-legal
Regime, (ii) Institutional Strengthening, (iii) Capacity Building and (iv) Public
Awareness. The scheme will be implemented in 21 States/UTs that lie in
seismic Zones V & IV in the country. The scheme will inter-alia cover major
cities and districts in these States. The target vulnerable population under
the preparatory phase is 70,189,371 as per 2011 Census.
Present Status
(i) NDMA has initiated preliminary steps for implementing the scheme.
(ii) A Project Steering Committee has been constituted under chairmanship
of Member (Earthquake), NDMA and Secretary, NDMA, JS(DM), Financial
Advisor, Town & country Planner, Technical experts, representatives from
BMTPC, CPWD, NIDM etc. as members.’’
(ii) Floods
94. The total flood affected area in the country is 456.40 lakh hectares. An
average of 72.25 lakh hectare of land is affected annually by floods of which
37.89 lakh hectare is cropped area.

36
95. The Ministry of Water Resources (MoWR) was responsible for laying
down policy guidelines and programmes for the development and regulation of the
country's water resources. According to the guidelines for management of floods
issued by NDMA in January, 2008, MoWR was to prepare a detailed Action Plan for
management of floods. MoWR had not formulated actionable plan for management
of floods as per NDMA guidelines. The Committee desired to know the reasons for
delay in formulation of plan and by what time it is likely to be formulated. The MHA
informed as under:—
‘‘NDMA guidelines issued in January, 2008 envisaged many activities which
involved the roles of other agencies like States, NRSC, IMD, GSI, MHA etc.
There are many additional activities indicated in these guidelines which are
not presently carried out by the organizations of MoWR and such activities
require major overhaul including re-structuring and strengthening of the
organizations besides huge financial requirements in consultation with
Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance. Moreover, timelines indicated
in the guidelines need to be finalised in consultation with all the linked
agencies. However, MoWR has already taken action on many of NDMA's
recommendations.’’
96. The Crisis Management Plan (CMP) of 2009 identified Central Water
Commission (CWC) as the Authority responsible for sending first information
relating to flood forecasts. MoWR prepared its Ministry level CMP in March, 2011
to handle crisis related to flood forecasting and dam failures. According to CMP,
each State was required to establish a Dam Safety Organization (DSO) to address
the safety issues of large dams in the States. Only 14 States have prepared DSO
(July, 2012). CWC issued (May, 2006) guidelines for development and implementation
of Emergency Action Plan (EAP) for large dams in the States. Only eight States had
prepared EAP for 192 (4.06 per cent) large dams against 4728 large dams in 29 States
as of September, 2011. Thus, non-preparation of EAPs by the Project Authorities in
respect of 96 per cent of large dams renders huge area and property left vulnerable
to cascading effects of dam failure. In reply to a query of the Committee about
reason for non-preparation of EAP for dam and steps taken to ensure that EAPs are
prepared for all large dams, the MHA informed as under:—
‘‘Technical aspects of preparation of emergency action plan involve assessing
the likely quantum of floods, their propagation downstream and the
preparation of inundation maps. These works demand highly skilled manpower
for conducting extensive field surveys and for computer-based simulations
which are also time consuming. Also, the on-field implementation for EAP
has to be planned out in meticulous detail with the cooperation of local
administration and other departments.’’
97. The Committee desired to know about the measures taken by MoWR to
ensure that States establish Dam Safety Organisation to address the safety issues

37
of large dams. The MHA informed as under:—
‘‘As per Dam Safety procedures, each State which has significant number of
major dams shall create a Dam Safety Cell in the State. National Committee of
Dam Safety (NCDS) performs an advisory role in the matters of dam safety.
The States having significant number of large dams  i.e. Andhra Pradesh,
Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Odisha, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand,
West Bengal besides other dam owners like National Hydro Power Corporation
Limited (NHPC), Bhakhra Beas Management Board (BBMB), Damodar Valley
Corporation (DVC), Kerala Electricity Board and Kandi Area Development,
Irrigation works (Punjab) are all represented as members of NCDS which
advises them on performing the role of DSO/Cell etc. i.e. for looking after
safety aspects of large dams in their respective States/jurisdiction. They
have each formed a Dam Safety Organization/Cell/Directorate. The aforesaid
dam owners are looking after dam safety of dams under their control in the
respective States. In the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Haryana, Goa,
Meghalaya, Nagaland, Tripura, Assam, Manipur, Sikkim, Jammu & Kashmir
and Himachal Pradesh which are having fewer number of large dams as per
NRLD and not having dedicated DSO's/Cell etc., the original dam builders
like NHPC, BBMB etc. who are continuing to maintain the custody of the
dams are also responsible for dam safety of select dams under their control.
Through the proposed Central Dam Safety Bill, 2013 (Which is normally
applicable to those States adopting the Central Bill), it is sought to bring all
private/PSU owned dams under its ambit.’’
98. There were 4728 reservoirs and barrages in the country as on September,
2011. CWC provided inflow forecasts to only 28 reservoirs and barrages. Indian
Institute of Public Administration (IIPA) conducted an evaluation study on Plan
schemes for flood control. The report submitted by IIPA to MoWR in November,
2009 highlighted various deficiencies. This included (i) non-functional telemetry
stations, (ii) temporary gauge sites during the flood period, (iii) flood forecasting
stations not having dedicated communication facilities, etc. These shortcomings
had not been rectified by MoWR till July, 2012. In this regard the Ministry informed
that CWC provides the inflow forecasts on specific requests of State Governments.
In the past only 28 such requests were made. Further, CWC has in consultation with
the States, plans to expand its inflow forecast network to additional reservoirs in
the country.
99. MoWR implemented a State sector scheme, namely Flood Management
Programme (FMP) in November, 2007 to provide financial assistance to the State
Governments for undertaking flood management works in critical areas during the
Eleventh Plan period. 420 works at an estimated cost as ` 9435.45 crore were approved
with central share of ` 7739.69 crore under FMP. Out of these, 252 works were
completed during  Eleventh plan. Central assistance of ` 3566 crore (including
` 89 crore for the spill over works of Tenth plan) was released against the allocation of
` 8000 crore by Planning Commission up to 31 March, 2012. With the introduction of

38
FMP, 21.80 lakh hectares was to be protected against floods but new area of only
2.59 lakh hectares had been protected up to March, 2011.
100. The Committee asked the Ministry about the reasons of huge shortfall in
achieving the targets of protecting new areas against flood. The MHA informed as
under:—
‘‘The total flood affected area in the country was compiled by XI Plan Working
Group on Water Resources as 45.64 mha. Out of this, the area of 18.22 mha
was providing reasonable protection against floods by the end of the X plan.
Government of India launched Flood Management Programme during
XI Plan with an outlay of ` 8000 crore. Under this Programme, a target was
kept for protection of 2.18 mha. During XI Plan, 420 works were approved out
of which 252 works were completed and the central assistance of ` 3566 crore
was released till 31.3.2013. The completed works protected about 1.96 mha of
flood affected area (1.70 mha of old area restored, 0.26 mha of new area
protected) against the target of 2.18 mha. The shortfall against target of
XI Plan is only 0.19 mha. The main reasons of shortfall include late approval
of the scheme, slow execution of works by the State Government due to
available lesser working period and land acquisition problems etc.’’
(iii) Cyclones and Tsunami
101. MoES was identified as the nodal Ministry for mitigation efforts towards
disasters relating to cyclones and tsunami. As per actionable points of NDMA
guidelines on cyclone, MoES was to evaluate the vulnerability of cyclones and its
changing profile from time to time. However, MoES informed (August, 2012) that
the responsibility of the Ministry is only to provide timely warning on tsunami and
cyclones and associated storm surges to various stakeholders for taking action to
minimize the risk and damage to loss of life. Thus, no specific programmes related to
the assessment of risk, hazard, vulnerability, damage and loss were initiated by the
nodal Ministry as required under the national guidelines. However, the MHA
informed the Committee that MoES institutions of ESSO-INCOIS (Earth System
Science Organisation-Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services) along
with ESSO-IMD, ESSO-ICMAM (Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Management)
have published multi-hazard Coastal Vulnerability Atlas at a coarser resolution of
1:100000. In addition, ESSO-IMD provides all the inputs related to cyclone to Building
Material and Transport Promotion Corporation (BMTPC) of Ministry of Urban
Affairs for preparation/updation and publication of Vulnerability Atlas of India. To
study the changing profiles, ESSO-IMD carried out a study on cyclone hazard
proneness of coastal districts recently, based on the cyclone parameters during
1891-2010. The hazard proneness of a district has been defined based on an index
which takes into consideration the folloing parameters:—
(i) Frequency of total cyclones;
(ii) T otal severe cyclones;

39
(iii) Actual/estimated maximum wind strength;
(iv) Probable Maximum Storm Surge (PMSS) due to the cyclone; and
(v) Probable Maximum Precipitation (PMP).
The report on hazard proneness has been given to NDMA for publication, as
the study was carried out by a sub-Committee involving IMD which was constituted
by NDMA for the purpose.
102. MoES sanctioned (March, 2011) a project on "Multi-Hazard Vulnerability
Mapping for the Indian Coast" to Indian National Centre for Ocean Information
Services (INCOIS) at a total cost of ` 48 crore with a scheduled date of completion
by March 2013. The aim of the project was to prepare and deliver vulnerability maps
for the identified vulnerable areas of 5000 sq. km. in Coastal States of the country. In
March, 2011, MoES released ` 7 crore to INCOIS, Hyderabad for execution of the
project. INCOIS had not initiated the project as of June, 2012. MoES did not prepare
any disaster management and action plan for tsunami and cyclone management.
The Committee asked for the reasons for delay in initiation of the project by INCOIS
and the current status thereof. The MHA in their reply furnished as under:—
‘‘Ministry of Earth Sciences (MoES) has sanctioned the project in March
2011 after the mid-term appraisal. The objectives of the project are (i) generation
of multi-hazard vulnerability maps, (ii) setting up of real time coastal inundation
models, (iii) 3D GIS for selected vulnerable areas and (iv) integrated software
for display and analysis. As a part of the effort continued so far, coastal multi-
hazard vulnerability atlas publication, implementation of coastal inundation
models, 3D GIS mapping/visualization at street level for Cuddalore and
Nagapattinam etc., are completed. Development of 1:5000 scale coastal data
sets are underway and accordingly multi-hazard coastal vulnerability maps
would be updated. Mapping of multi-hazard vulnerability for entire Indian
coast involves processing large number of datasets pertaining to topography
(Airborne LiDAR Terrain Mapping data, Cartosat Digital Terrain Models),
Shoreline change (long-term multi-temporal satellite data), Sea Level (long
term historical tide gauge records) and other collateral information. Most of
these data are restricted in nature and cannot be outsourced to private
agencies. Hence, it was decided to carry out this work component at ESSO-
INCOIS by engaging exclusive consultant/project staff. These constraints
resulted in the delay. Taking guidance from the coastal multi-hazard
vulnerability maps, vulnerable coasts have been identified for taking up further
work on 3D GIS mapping and development of integrated software. This work
will be carried out through competent vendors through open tender. Two
RFPs have already been prepared and the proposals have been received from
the vendors. Technical evaluation of the proposals is in the final stages. The
execution of two work packages, 3D GIS mapping and development of
integrated software, will start soon after the selection of competent vendors
and will be completed within 2 years.’’

40
103. As per the National Policy of Disaster Management, forecasting climate
change is the most important element of disaster management. To modernize and
upgrade the existing system of weather forecasting MoES submitted a proposal for
implementation of the project in three phases. The Cabinet Committee on Economic
Affairs, in December, 2007, approved the proposal for phase-I at a total estimated
cost of  ` 920 crore with the project duration of 24 months from December, 2007. Out
of 17 projects undertaken in the modernisation scheme, five projects costing
` 84.15 crore were yet to be initiated. Another five projects costing ` 256.85 crore
were under implementation. Only seven projects, costing ` 186.90 crore were
completed. When asked to provide the status of projects undertaken in the
modernization scheme, the Ministry in their written submission inter alia furnished
as under:—
‘‘Till the beginning of the XI Plan, most of the existing instrumentation systems
are very old and do not have accuracy or connectivity (or both) for modern
forecasting system. Also, the forecast methodology is largely by synoptic
methods, making use of conventional observation. Adequate decision support
system using IT tools is non-existent.  A very limited effort started at the
beginning of the XI Plan and few types of surface equipment were procured,
although the number was only a small subset of the overall requirement. In
addition, demands of weather information by user agencies are of diversified
nature. Providing precise weather related services and their timely dissemination
is vital to almost all important sectors of national economy. All these Services
demand full automation in all meteorological observations, their efficient
communication to the analysis/forecasting centres for real-time forecasting to
cover all parts of the country. Thus, it was essential to have:—
* Replacement of old manual observation equipment.
* Networking of various observation systems to a Central Data Processing
and Information System.
* Integration of entire infrastructure & decision support system merging
model output with synoptic reasoning.
* Visualization & dissemination of processed information in real time to
users.
* To undertake the above it is required to have the Supercomputing facility
and continuous human resource development.
In order to achieve the target, the modernization scheme recommended by
the Expert Committee in phase-I planned to be completed in first two years
consisted of (i) Networking existing observation instruments of IMD as well
as new digital observation instruments (ii) Receiving, processing and
archiving of all observations in digital form at a central information processing
facility of HQ and (iii) Dissemination in real time of all processed information
in digital form to forecasters in HQ office, Pune office, all Regional Centres
and selected State capitals to value add and provide customer specific product
to different user community.

41
....Most of the projects under moderization phase-I are completed. The
residual components of modernization phase-I are included in various new
schemes of IMD for implementation during XII Plan.  A network of 550 AWS
has been established across the country during the period 2009-12. The
network uses Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA) technique for
transmission of data from field sites through DRT aboard INSAT-3A. The
sensors for parameters such as air temperature, relative humidity, atmospheric
pressure, wind, rain, global solar radiation have been interfaced with each
AWS. Sensors for additional parameters such as soil temperature, soil
moisture, leaf temperature and leaf wetness have been interfaced with
127 AWS and these stations are called Agro-AWS. Network of ARG stations
(1350 Nos.) is being established under Modernization programme Phase-I.
The National level forecasts are provided to NDMA control room, MHA
as well as print and electronic media and is available on IMD website. The
local forecasts are provided to all State and District level functionaries.
A short-term forecast of low level winds (300-2100m) is also being provided
for helicopter operations.’’
104. In another reply to a query of the Committee, the MHA informed that as
of now 1071/1350 Automatic Rain Gauges (ARGs) are commissioned and rest of
them are in the process of installation. 11 DWRs at Delhi-Palam, Patiala, Lucknow,
Patna, Mohanbari, Hyderabad, Nagpur, Agartala, Bhopal (under testing currently),
Delhi-Lodi Road, Jaipur, are made functional. DWRs at Goa, Karaikal and Paradeep
(held up due to MoD clearance—that is now given subject to Security Audit). With
the completion of security audit, the commissioning at Goa, Karaikal and Paradeep
would also be completed now. Due to unforeseen reasons, the procurements related
to airport instrumentation and wind profilers could not be successful largely due to
single tender resulting during the XI Plan.
105. IMD proposed a scheme on District Meteorological Information Centres
(DMICs) throughout the country and an allocation of 
 ` 204 crore was made in the
Eleventh Plan for the purpose. The DMICs were envisaged to provide meteorological
information at district levels. However, IMD stated (August, 2012) that no work was
taken up for setting up of the DMICs during Eleventh plan period as the scheme for
DMICs was envisaged after the completion of Modernisation Phase-I programme.
The Committee enquired if the scheme is still being implemented. The Ministry
informed as under:—
‘‘Under Gramin Krishi Mausam Seva (GKMS) scheme during XII Plan, it is
provisioned to set up District AgroMet Units (DAMUs) in the country at
Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) of Indian Centre for Agricultural Research
(ICAR) set up. The main responsibilities of DAMUs will be to prepare and
communicate weather-based agromet advisory online to the farmers in block/

42
taluka/village level for efficient ways of farm management. These centres will
also send the feedback information and also organize different awareness
programmes like roving seminars, field schools, field demonstrations, field
visits etc. Besides, these centres will also conduct farmers' training programme.
It is proposed to set up 240 DAMUs during the XII Plan, along with 130
existing AFMUs as DAMUs as well.’’
106. MoES sanctioned (March, 2010) a Forecast Demonstration Project for
severe thunderstorms over east, north-east India, fog forecasting system and in
tropical cyclones over the Bay of Bengal at an estimated cost of ` 49 crore. The
project to be implemented by IMD was scheduled to be completed in two years i.e.
by March, 2012. Audit noticed that there was no progress after October, 2010
despite incurring an expenditure of ` 1.32 crore on machinery and equipment till
2011-12. The Committee desired to know about the steps taken to complete the FDP.
The MHA informed as under:—
‘‘FDP is a research programme to improve our understanding and improve
predictions in respect of cyclones, fog and severe weather events
(thunderstorm, heavy rainfall etc.). Despite best efforts, hiring of instrumented
aircraft to organize in-situ cyclogenesis and meso-convection data over the
Bay of Bengal could not be materialized from the potential agencies who
could spare such facilities along with their manpower for India as all had
committed research campaigns elsewhere in other cyclone basins of the world.
Efforts to organize hired research aircraft based observational campaign
would, however, continue. RFPs for hiring research aircraft is already floated
during 2013-14. All other components are included in a Severe Weather
Prediction Scheme for its implementation during the XII Plan and SFC is
under the process of obtaining clearance from the Integrated Finance Division
currently and the responsibility to steer the Scheme is vested jointly with the
NCMRWF and IMD.’’
107. MoES sanctioned (May, 2008) a project on 'Development of Multi-Hazard
Early Warning Support Interfaces in support of Emergency Response Planning' to
INCOIS at a total cost of ` 20 crore. MoES released ` 3.82 crore to INCOIS for
implementation of the project during 2008-10. The centre failed to initiate the project
as no expenditure was incurred on the project up to March, 2011. Giving details
about delay, the MHA has clarified that the scheme was envisaged after the
completion of Modernisation Phase-l programme. The MHA futher submitted as
under:—
‘‘The above scheme was formulated to take advantage of real time data likely
to get collected from the commissioning of AWS, ARG and DWR data to
generate value-added products by developing appropriate early warning
support interfaces to quantify the likely to impact in association with the
meso-scale forecasts (became possible only after commissioning of HPCs).
The facilities available at INCOIS were planned to be used for building early
warning interfaces with GIS and RS interfacing of generated products but the
Scheme was formulated at MoES level. All the activities were to be executed

43
by deploying consultant groups for developing due early warning interfaces
using real time data generated form AWS, ARG and DWR networks. Currently,
the major component of storm surge component is implemented under Tsunami
and storm surges programme at ESSO-INCOIS during the Xll Plan. Other
objectives  of the programme will be fulfilled under the multi-hazard
vulnerability mapping.’’
(iv) Droughts
108. NDMA issued National Disaster Management Guidelines for management
of drought in September, 2010. The guidelines envisaged the following role and
responsibilities of Department of Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC) which were
yet to be undertaken:—
* Setting up of India Drought Management Center (IDMC)  as an
autonomous body under DAC.
* Developing specific guidelines for the use of Information and
Communication Technology for online interaction and availability of
real- time drought related information.
* Formulation of cloud seeding policy.
* Establishing a dedicated faculty in selected ATIs and organizations
exclusively for research and training in drought management by instituting
chair positions.
109. The MHA in reply to a query of the Committee regarding Drought
Management under Department of Agriculture and Cooperation and their main
activities, submitted as under:—
‘‘Department of Agriculture & Cooperation is mandated to coordinate relief
measures necessitated by drought, hailstorm, pest attacks and cold wave/
frost. Spatial Distribution and quantum of rainfall during South-West
Monsoon (June-September) mainly determines the incidence of drought in
the country, as it accounts for 75% of annual rainfall. The Department of
Agriculture & Cooperation closely monitors progress of South-West
Monsoon in the country,  in close coordination with India Meteorological
Department (IMD) and keeps watch over scanty/deficient rainfall conditions.
The role of the Government of India, of which the Department of Agriculture
& Cooperation is an integral part, is to supplement the efforts of the State
Governments in the face of the aforesaid natural calamities by way of requisite
financial and logistical support.
State Governments initiate necessary relief measures in the wake of natural
calamities including drought from State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF)
which is readily available. Contribution of SDRF is made by Central and State
Governments in the ratio 3:1 for 17 General Category States and 9:1 for
11 Special Category States (North-Eastern States including Sikkim and 3 hilly

44
States of Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Jammu & Kashmir). Additional
financial assistance, over and above SDRF is provided from National Disaster
Response Fund (NDRF) for natural calamities of severe nature as per
established procedure and extant norms.’’
110. The Audit has noted that lengthy procedures for processing the State
Memorandum had taken enormous time keeping in view of the severity of drought
disaster and its affected people. When the Committee enquired on the same, the
MHA submitted as given below:—
‘‘It is clarified that assessment and declaration/notification of drought is the
prerogative of State Governments. Drought can be declared based on criteria
outlined in Chapter-3 of Drought Manual (2009). Incidence of drought unlike
earthquake, Tsunami, Landslides etc. is a long drawn process that depends
upon many changing variables like intensity and duration of rainfall,
temperature etc. As a result, many a time drought assessment requires a
longer time-frame.
State Governments are empowered to initiate immediate relief measures from
State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF)/own resources/extant schemes and
programmes which are readily available to them. Additional financial assistance
over and above SDRF from National Disaster Response Fund (NDRF) is
given to complement relief expenditure incurred by the State.
After careful assessment of the situation, State Government declares/notifies
drought in affected districts/talukas etc. It submits relief memorandum at this
stages for seeking additional financial assistance from Central Government.
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation thereafter consitutes an Inter-
Ministerial Central Team (IMCT) which undertakes visit of the drought affected
areas after consultation with the State Government for assessment of loss/
damage to crops etc. Final assessment of relief under NDRF is made on the
basis of State Government's memorandum and IMCT's assessment.
Further, an Empowered Group of Ministers (EGoM) has also been constituted
to review the situation and take timely decisions on policy issues as well as
on other issues for effective management of drought and other related issues.’’
111. There were 15 cases of drought and hailstorm reported during the year
2009-10. In nine cases, time taken for release of assistance under National Disaster
Response Fund (NDRF) ranged between two to nine months. Similarly, during the
year 2010-11 and 2011-12, eight cases were reported and in four cases time taken for
release of assistance ranged between two to ten months. The Committee desired to
know whether any time frame has been fixed for release of assistance under NDRF.
The MHA inter-alia informed as under:—
‘‘Since the State Governments are empowered to initiate immediate relief
measures from SDRF, as such, there is no stipulation of time for reporting the
occurrence of drought etc. to the centre by the State. Further an Empowered

45
Group of Ministers (EGoM) has also been constituted to review the situation
and take timely decisions on policy issues as well as on other issues for
effective management of drought and other related issues.
National Agricultural Drought Assessment and Monitoring System
(NADAMS) was initiated by National Remote Sensing Agency, Department
of Space, with the support of IMD and various State departments of
agriculture, towards the end of 1986. All the activities of NADAMS project
starting from procurement of satellite data till dissemination of information to
user community were currently being carried out under Disaster Management
Support Programme of ISRO.’’
(v) Forest Fire
112. As per the Crisis Management Plan (CMP) of the Cabinet, Ministry of
Environment and Forests (MoE&F) was required to prepare contingency plan for
dealing with forest fires. MoE&F also had to issue detailed guidelines to the State
Governments for the preparation of local contingency plans. The Committee desired
to know about the contingency plan prepared by MoE&F and its impact on
prevention/containing forest fires. The MHA informed as under:—
‘‘Guidelines for preparation of contingency plan was issued by Ministry of
Environment and Forests vide letter No. 1-6/2006-FPD dated 29th January,
2009. The objective of the contingency plan for forest fire is to prepare a plan
to tackle forest areas since time immemorial and management and control fire
disasters if they occur and to take steps well in time so that such disasters
can be prevented.
It may be mentioned that forest fire have been occurring in forest fire is an
integral part of forest management. This activity is also provided for in the
Forest Working Plans and Wildlife Management Plans of Forest Divisions
and Protected areas respectively. As such, measures for forest fire control are
routinely taken up by the State/UT Forest Departments.
The guideline consist of formats for preparation of forest fire plan and Standard
Operating Procedures (SOPs) for forest fire.
However, as a part of the National Disaster Plan, the Ministry of Environment
and Forests is in the process of preparing a National Forest Fire Disaster Plan
and it will also guide the State Government for preparation of State Forest Fire
Disaster Plan. It has been intimated by the Ministry of Environment and
Forests that the National Forest Fire Plan would be finalised after undergoing
wider consultation and due consideration of the inputs received from various
stakeholders.’’
113. As regards preparedness of States contingency plan, the Committee was
informed as under:—
‘‘As per the guideline mentioned above, the Ministry of Environment and
Forests has received Crisis Management Plans for forest fire from the States

46
of Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Jharkhand, Kerala,
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Tripura,
Uttarakhand and Uttar Pradesh. Chhattisgarh has not prepared local
contingency plan to deal with the Forest Fire in the State. Jammu & Kashmir
has informed that the contingency plan is being finalised at the end of August
after the disaster management plan of the State is approved. The Ministry is
considering the Crisis Management Plans of States. However, in view of the
fresh guidelines/National Disaster Management Plan prepared by the MHA,
fresh guidelines will be issued to the States after the finalization of the National
Forest Fire Disaster Plan of this Ministry.’’
114. The Forest Survey of India (FSI) under MoE&F had developed an
indigenous methodology to detect forest fires from the given fire spots.The objectives
of the project were to find and report forest fires at the nascent stage and to provide
quick and reliable information to State Forest Departments (SFDs). The Committee
were informed that the magnitude of forest fire and loss due to fire is not available
on the website of FSI. At present, FSI is providing information about the location of
forest fires on its website and this information is disseminated to the nodal officers
and the registered front line staff in the State Forest Departments. The data on
forest fires as generated by FSI has been used to study the occurrence of forest
fires in the country. On the basis of these data, FSI has prepared a report titled
"Vulnerability of India's Forests to Fire". This report identifies the vulnerable areas
of the forests in India. This report has been shared with the State Forest Departments
and will be used to prepare State and local level Forest Fire Management Plans. It is
also proposed that a study similar to that done by the FSI will be done at the State
Level to identify forest fire vulunerable areas at a division level so that effective
planning can be done to take care of forest fire vulnerability of these areas.
115. MoE&F provided funds for forest fire control and management mainly
through Intensification of Forest Management Scheme (IFMS). MoE&F did not
ascertain the gaps between existing infrastructure and ideal requirement of State
Governments for which these funds were released. MoE&F was to arrange for
periodic monitoring and evaluation of the scheme. However, no such monitoring
and evaluation was done. Replying to a query of the Committee regarding mechanism
to ascertain the gaps between existing infrastructure and requirements by State
Government and its efficiency in achieving the targeted goals, the MHA furnished
as under:—
‘‘The  State Forest Departments submit annual plan proposal under IFMS to
the Ministry. These proposals are considered by the Screening Committee
appointed for the scrutiny and review of the proposals in the Ministry. The
Screening Committee is chaired by Additional Director General of Forest
(Forest Conservation). The other members of the Committee are Deputy
Inspector General of Forests NAEB, Deputy Inspector General of Forests
(Research & Training), Deputy Inspector General of Forests (Wildlife), Deputy
Inspector General of Forests (Forest protection), Director (Finance) and
Representatives of Civil Construction Unit.

47
After discussion with the representatives of the States/UTs who are also
invited to the meeting of the Screening Committee, the Committee recommends
the annual plans for the States/UTs under the scheme.’’
116. When asked to give reasons for not doing monitoring and evaluation of
IFMS by MoE&F, the Ministry replied as under:—
‘‘The scheme is being implemented by the State Forest Departments and as
such the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests is responsible for the
implementation of the scheme. The scheme is being monitored at the level of
the PCCF of the States/UTs. The Ministry had issued specific instruction for
monitoring of the implementation of the scheme and reports have been received
so far from the States of Gujarat, Goa, Haryana, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Mizoram, Sikkim, Tripura, Andaman
& Nicobar Islands and Dadra & Nagar Haveli. A third party monitoring of the
scheme is under process.’’
(vi) Chemical Disaster
117. The Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoE&F) is the nodal Minsitry
for chemical disaster as per Crisis Management Plan (CMP), 2007 of GoI. MoE&F
had notified two sets of rules namely: The Manufacture, Storage and Import of
Hazardous Chemicals Rules, 1989 and the amendment (MSIHC Rules), and the
Chemical Accidents (Emergency Planning, Preparedness and Response) Rules,
1996 [CA (EPPR) Rules]. The MSIHC rules prescribed preparation of on-site
emergency plan by the occupier and off-site emergency plan by the District Authority.
The Committee desired to know whether off-site and on-site emergency plan of all
the districts have been prepared. The MHA informed that as per the available
information the total number of district is 301 and Major Accident Hazard (MAH)
units in these districts are 1861. The on-site plan of 1814 MAH units have been
prepared and 1664 mock drills were conducted. As regard off-line plans 200 districts
have prepared their plans and plans of 42 districts were under preparation. The
Audit has also pointed out non coordination of central and State Crisis Group.
118. The Committee were informed that a draft National Action Plan (NAP) on
Chemical (Industrial) Disaster Management (CIDM) was submitted by Disaster
Management Institute (DMI), Bhopal. The draft NAP is being revised in consultation
with National Management Authority and DMI as advised by NDMA.
119. The Committee were also informed that eight emergency Response Centres
have been funded by the Ministry of Environment and Forests, five in
Andhra Pradesh (Vishakhapatnam, Hyderabad, Kurnool, Vijaywada and Kakinada),
one in Kerala (Ernakulam), one in Madhya Pradesh (Bhopal) and one in Maharashtra
(Mahad).
120. The Audit had found that only 12 Chemical incidents reported since
2009. The authorities were not reporting all the chemical accidents even those
reported in the National Chemical Disaster Database published by MoEF, to Chemical

48
Accidents Information and Regulating System (CAIRS). In reply to a query of the
Committee the MHA informed as under:—
‘‘According to NIC, based on the chemical accident information available
with Ministry of Environment and Forests, their NIC team had updated the
information into Chemical Accident Information and Reporting System
(CAIRS), a software developed by NIC. At present CAIRS is functioning.’’
(vii) Biological Disasters
121. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoH&FW) was the nodal
Ministry for coordinating the response to challenges of biological disasters. The
Emergency Medical Relief (EMR) Division of the Directorate General of Health
Services was the focal point for coordination and monitoring response for biological
disasters of national and international concern. The core function for preparedness
for biological disasters was surveillance which was undertaken through Integrated
Disease Surveillance Project (IDSP). This project was run by National Centre for
Disease Control (NCDC). IDSP was responsible for surveillance, detecting early
warning signs and informing the government. The Committee desired to know
about the biological disaster reported, including causes, effect and lessons learnt,
so far in the country. The MHA informed as under:—
‘‘Pandemic Influenza is the only biological event in recent past that was
declared to be a Public Health Event of International Concern by World
Health Organization. Member States including India followed an action plan
to mitigate its impact. India reported 47840 laboratory confirmed cases and
2744 deaths for the period May, 2009—December, 2010. The lessons learned
were that (i) there is a need for influenza surveillance to know the public
health burden on influenza, (ii) strengthening of laboratory services and
(iii) strengthening of critical care services.’’
122. In reply to a query of the Committee it was informed that a draft Public
Health (Preventive, Control and Management of Epidemics, Bio Terrorism and
Disasters) Bill is under finalisation with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
123. There is no proposal to prepare national code of practice for the
bio-security and bio-safety. However, there is an International code of practice for
bio-safety/bio security practices and the same is being followed in India also. The
Committee enquired about the mechanism adopted by NCDC to improve upon the
reporting of disease outbreaks by States and UTs to Central Surveillance Unit. The
MHA informed as under:—
‘‘Central Surveillance Unit,  IDSP is a division under NCDC, Delhi. Under
IDSP, the data is collected on epidemic prone diseases on weekly basis
(Monday—Sunday) through portal. The information is collected on three
specified reporting formats, namely "S" (suspected cases), "P" (presumptive
cases) and "L" (laboratory confirmed cases) filled by Health Workers,
Clinicians and Laboratory Staff respectively. The weekly data gives

49
information on the disease trends and seasonality of diseases. Whenever
there is a rising trend of illnesses in any area, it is investigated by the Rapid
Response Teams (RRT) to diagnose and control the outbreak. Data analysis
and actions are being undertaken by respective State/District Surveillance
Units. CSU, IDSP receives disease outbreak reports from the States/UTs on
weekly basis. Even NIL weekly reporting is mandated and compilation of
disease outbreaks/alerts is done on weekly basis. On an average, 30-35
outbreaks are reported to CSU weekly. A total of 553 outbreaks were reported
in 2008, 799 outbreaks in 2009, 990 outbreaks in 2010, 1675 outbreaks in 2011
and 1356 outbreaks have been reported and responded to in 2013 (Date up to
1st September, 2013).’’
124. Audit had found slow pace of strengthening of district laboratories. In
this regard the Committee enquired about the status of strengthening of district
laboratories. The MHA informed as under:—
‘‘Strengthening of district laboratories for diagnosis of epidemic prone
diseases namely Dengue, Chikunguniya, enteric fever, cholera, Hepatitis A
and E: 42 district public health labs have been made functional by providing
deficient equipment, trained manpower and operational funds. Overall in the
12th Plan, a total of 300 district labs are proposed to be strengthened for
diagnosis of epidemic prone diseases.
State Referral Lab Network
The existing functional labs at medical colleges are linked to adjoining districts
for outbreak investigations. A total of 85 Medical College labs in 17 States
have been linked to the adjoining districts so far. Overall in the 12th Plan,
a total of 190 Medical Colleges are proposed to be included in the State
referral lab network for investigation of outbreaks in the linked districts.
In addition, Government has approved scheme of Indian Council of Medical
Research for "Establishment of a network of Laboratories for managing
Epidemics and natural calamities" to strengthen diagnostic capabilities of
existing microbiology and virology laboratories in the country. The three tier
network includes (i) Regional Level Bio Safety Level (BSL)-3 Laboratories
(ii) State Level BSL-2 Plus Laboratories (iii) Medical College BSL-2
Laboratories. A total of 160 laboratories would be strengthened in this network
all over the country.’’
125. The Committee enquired about steps taken by the Government to
strengthen disease surveillance in the country and funding status of this project.
The Ministry in their written submission stated as under:—
‘‘Under IDSP, Surveillance Units have been established in all States/Districts.
These units have been linked through an IT network. District Surveillance
units collect data from health facilities, compile and analyze to detect and
respond to outbreaks at the earliest. Presently, about 90% of the districts

50
report weekly surveillance data through the portal. Whenever there is a rising
trend of illness in any area, it is investigated by the Rapid Response Team to
diagnose and control the outbreaks. The Rapid Response Teams and
Surveillance Officers have been trained in all States, In the 12th Plan period,
an outlay of  ` 640 crore has been approved for implementation of Integrated
Disease Surveillance Programme (IDSP) in the country. Funds are released to
the State Health Societies as GIA to support them to undertake surveillance
activities.’’
126. The Audit had found that telecommunication network for IDSP was no
functional despite incurring an expenditure of  ` 12.93 crore as on September 2012.
In this regard the Ministry have furnished the status as under:—
‘‘Surveillance Units in State/Districts under Integrated Disease Surveillance
Project has been connected through IT network established with the help
of National Informatics Centre (Broadband Connectivity) and Indian Space
Research Organization (Satellite Connectivity). IT network through
broadband connectivity is functional. However, satellite connectivity will
be available once the migration from GSAT-3 to GSAT-12 being done by
ISRO is complete.’’
(viii) Radiological and Nuclear Emergencies
127. Department of Atomic Energry (DAE) was the nodal agency for
responding to any nuclear or radiological emergency. Atomic Energy Regulatory
Board (AERB) was set up in 1983 to lay down safety standards and to assist DAE
in framing rules and regulations for regulatory and safety functions. Prior to the
establishment of AERB, radiation facilities were under the regulatory control of
BARC. AERB did not obtain sufficient data relating to radiation facilities operating
in the country when the regulatory work was assigned to it. AERB did not have an
effective system in place to ensure continuous collection and updating of its
inventory of all radiation sources. Codes for emergency preparedness plans for
NPPs and nuclear fuel cycle facilities of Department of Atomic Energy had been
framed and issued. However, no specific codes on emergency preparedness plans
for other types of radiation facilities such as industrial radiography, radiotherapy
and gamma chambers, etc. had been brought out even though the hazard potential
of these were rated as high. NDMA brought out the National Guidelines for
management of nuclear and radiological emergencies in February, 2009.
128. In reply to a query of the Committee the Ministry has informed that
AERB has brought out Safety Codes establishing the requirements related to
emergency preparedness in radiation facilities/practices and is of the view that the
present arrangement is adequately addressing the regulatory functions as well as
the intent of the recommendation. For prevention and mitigation of accidents and
emergencies in the Nuclear Power Plants/Projects (NPPs) also, AERB has specified
very elaborate requirements with respect to their sittings design and operation in
the AERB safety code.

51
129. The Committee enquired about the mechanism evolved by AERB to
ensure continuous collection and updation of inventory of radiation sources. The
Ministry replied as under:—
‘‘AERB has established regulatory requirements with respect to possession
and use of radiation sources. These include the requirement to obtain AERB's
consent, adherence to the safety requirements during their handling, use and
storage, requirements with respect to periodic reporting of safety status; and
requirements for safe disposal of the sources. AERB is maintaining a database
of the inventory of radiation sources in the country. AERB has established a
mechanism for updating of this database based on information from the
consents that are issued to the users for procurement of fresh sources, periodic
safety status reports from the users, feedback from the inspections done by
AERB consents issued for safe disposal of disused sources and the
acknowledgement received from the authorized waste management agencies
and source suppliers.’’
130. The Committee desired to know about the steps taken by AERB in
strengthening the approach to deal with issue of orphan sources. The Ministry in
their reply furnished as under:—
‘‘A radioactive source that is not under regulatory control, either because it
has never been under regulatory control or because it has been abandoned,
lost, misplaced, stolen or otherwise transferred without proper authorization,
is referred to as an orphan source. In order to deal with the issue of orphan
source, it is first necessary to have a sound and robust control over the
radioactive sources used in the country.
After the incident at Mayapuri Scrap Yard, Delhi AERB initiated various
actions to further strengthen the inventory of the sources including the
legacy sources. All the Indian source suppliers were contacted to get details
of the sources supplied by them to verify the existing inventory with AERB.
V arious Ministries like Ministry of Steel, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,
Ministry of Coal, Ministry of Power etc. and UGC were requested to issue
circulars to the units under them to come forward with details of used/disused
sources. All the universities have been individually contacted. All the users
of the sources were informed with the help of the print media to furnish
information on sources in their possession. Computerisation of updated
inventory or radiation sources has been completed.
AERB has ensured that all the licensees report immediately, any incident of
lost/theft or misplacement of sources, to AERB so as to enable prompt action
to trace/recover the sources. If the cases of lost/theft or misplacement of the
the sources are known to be due to negligence from the side of the users
(licensees), appropriate regulatory actions are initiated against the defaulters.

52
AERB is also taking measures to enhance the awareness on the above, among
the source suppliers and user institutions. The following are the major actions
taken, following the Mayapuri incident.
* Periodic advertisements issued in all leading newspapers about the need
for licensing as per Atomic Energy (Radiation Protection) Rules, 2004 and
disposal of disused sources as per Atomic Energy (Safe Disposal
Radioactive Wastes) Rules, 1987.
* Intimation to all source suppliers about the disused sources with various
radiation facilities.
* Inspections of radiation facilities, with special emphasis on facilities
possessing disused source (such as Universities, academic institutions
and other radiation facilities) has been enhanced.
* Issuance of circulars to radiation facilities, for obtaining formal licences.
* Conduct of regular awareness programmes by AERB.
Further to this, AERB has taken initiative to implement a state-of-art e-Licensing
of Radiation Application (ELORA), a web-based application for the automation
and real time management of consenting process. The proposed system will
ensure that radiation sources are effectively tracked from cradle to grave.’’
(ix) Heatwave Conditions
131. According to some news reports, in India's natural death trap, the sun is
the second biggest killer after water and its victims have increased by over 60% in
the last decade as thousands die because of ineffective heat management plans by
the Government. National Crime Records Bureau data shows a searing heat wave
has clocked the highest toll in 15 years, killing over 2,000 people. In fact, the number
of victims was more than double than that in 2003 and a long-term analysis revealed
the lives claimed by India's sizzling summers have been steadily rising. Between
2005 and 2015, the highest number of deaths was reported in 2012 when the toll was
the maximum among all natural disasters. The blazing heat was way behind floods
in its killing ability till about ten years back but has since caught up, a fact experts
blame on climate change. Global temperatures have rised by an average of 0.8
0 C in
the last century but warmer tropical regions, including south India, have witnessed
a spike of between two and four degrees, said the fifth assessment report of the
Inter-governmental Panel on Climate Change.
132. The Committee asked the MHA about the plan to declare heatwave a
natural disaster and plans undertaken for management of such disaster in the
country. The Ministry in their submission inter-alia stated as under:—
‘‘Heat Wave is a period of abnormally high temperatures, more than the
normal maximum temperature that occurs during the summer season in the
North-Western parts of India. Heat Waves typically occur between March
and June and in some rate cases even extend till July. The extreme temperatures
and resultant atmospheric conditions adversely affect people living in these
regions as they cause physiological stress, sometimes resulting in death.

53
Higher daily peak temperatures and longer, more intense heat waves are
becoming increasingly frequent globally due to climate change. India too is
feeling the impact of climate change in terms of increased instances of heat
waves, which are more intense in nature with each passing year, and have a
devastating impact on human health thereby increasing the number of heat
wave casualties.
Deaths due to heat wave/heat stroke have been reported in the past from all
over the world from areas prone to hot weather conditions.
Heat illness may be viewed as a continuum of illness relating to the body's
inability to cope with heat. It includes minor illnesses, such as edema, heat
rash, heat cramps and tetany, as well as heat syncope and heat exhaustion.
Heat stroke is most severe form of heat-related illnesses and is defined as a
body temperature higher then 41.1
0 C (106 0 F) associated with neurologic
dysfunction.
In developed countries like United States of America, heat waves claim more
lives each year than all other weather-related exposures combined (hurricanes,
tornadoes, flood and earthquakes). In 1998, in one of the worst heat waves to
strike India in 50 years resulted in more than 2600 deaths in 10 weeks. This
summer, as per media reports, more than 2000 deaths have been reported in
India across the country.
......Heat waves are now one of the deadliest reasons for loss of human lives
during summer. NDMA has prepared some do's and don't's (in English) for
heat waves which is available in their website www.ndma.gov.in. However,
the common man either does not understand English or has access to internet
as such and therefore, there is a felt need for advisories to be issued to the
State Government. NIDM has been requested on 01.06.2015 to undertake a
study and submit their recommendations about the preventive actions to be
taken by the State Governments. This may include how to publicize do's and
don't's as suggested by NDMA, what medicines to be stored and logistic
arrangement to be made by State Governments/local bodies. NIDM has also
been requested to send NIDM teams to Andhra Pradesh and Telangana to
study the economic profile of the people who reportedly died due to heat
waves. NIDM has been requested to provide their report in 2 months time.
Many of States had requested for inclusion of new disasters like heat wave,
erosion, lightning, bamboo flowering etc. in the list of disasters eligible for
assistance from State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF)/National Disaster
Response Fund (NDRF). Considering the need for flexibility in regard to
State-specific disasters, the 14th Finance Commission in its recommendation
has recommend that up to 10 per cent of the funds available under the SDRF
can be used by State Government for natural disasters that they consider to
be disasters within the local context in the State and which are not included in
the notified list of disasters of the Ministry of Home Affairs.

54
Accordingly, the Ministry of Home Affairs has revised the norms of SDRF/
NDRF vide letter dated 08.04.2015. As per revised norms, the States can use
10% of their State Disaster Response Fund for State specific local disasters,
example heat wave which are not covered in centrally notified list. However,
the State Government has to notify these local disasters and the scale of
assistance for such local disaster should not exceed the norms of SDRF/
NDRF. Thus, under the revised norms, the State Government can declare heat
wave as a local disaster if situation requires so.’’

PART II
RECOMMENDATIONS  AND  OBSERVATIONS
1. A disaster, as defined in 'The Disaster Management Act, 2005', is a
catastrophe, mishap, calamity or grave occurrence in any area, arising from
natural or manmade causes, which results in substantial loss of life or human
suffering or damage to and destruction of, property, or damage to, or degradation
of environment and is of such a nature or magnitude as to be beyond the coping
capacity of the community of the affected area. India is one of the most disaster
prone countries in the world largely due to its geo-climatic conditions combined
with the second largest population in the world and other-socio economic factors.
Since the possibility to eliminate disasters, particularly natural one, is not possible,
disaster preparedness is becoming the most prominent theme for disaster
management. The country has faced several devastating disasters including river
floods, cloudbursts, earthquake, tsunamis and stampedes  in the recent past and
due to a very high population density  suffered excessive  damage to human lives,
property, livestock and environment. Accordingly, India enacted a law for setting
up of a disaster management institution under 'The Disaster Management
Act, 2005'. In this connnection, while considering that a long time had elapsed
since enactment of said law and the Government, at Central and State level had
initiated various mitigation projects, created institutional set-ups at Central, State
and district levels, and identified nodal Ministries responsible for Disaster Risk
Reduction (DRR) work for various manmade and natural disasters, the C&AG
had conducted a performance review to assess the level of preparation in the
country to manage disasters. Based on the Audit findings, as well as information
gathered from MHA, the Committee have analysed various issues involved and
critical gaps in preparedness of disaster management and given their considered
opinions in the succeeding paragraphs.
2. Institutional set-up and less sittings of NEC
The Committee note that as a follow up of UN General Assembly declaration
of the decade of 1990s as 'International Decade for National Disaster Reduction',
a Disaster Management cell was established  under the Ministry of Agriculture.
Later, in 2002, the DM division was shifted to Ministry of Home Affairs, as
recommended by a High Powered Committee (HPC). Following the report of the
HPC submitted in October, 2001, the Government enacted Disaster Management
Act, 2005 on 23 December, 2005. The DM Act provided for three tier  institutional
arrangements for setting up of National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA)
headed by PM, State Disaster Management Authorities (SDMAs) headed by Chief
Ministers and District Disaster Management Authorities headed by Collectors/
DCs/DMs. NDMA, responsible for laying down policies and guidelines, is a central
55

56
nodal agency to deal with all types of disaster except certain specific emergencies.
The national Executive Committee (NEC), constituted in September, 2006 and
headed by the Home Secretary and 14 Secretaries of GoI and Chief of Integrated
Defence Staff as members is the executive Committee of the NDMA   to assist in
the discharge of its functions. NEC was to co-ordinate the response in the even of
any disaster situation. It was also responsible for preparing the National Plan for
DM and to monitor guidelines issued by the NDMA. The Committee note that NEC
was supposed to meet atleast once in three months. However, the audit revealed
that it met only three times. i.e., on 08.01.2007, 18.05.2007 and 13.05.2008 in
three years, since its inception in September, 2006, despite the country facing
many disasters in those years e.g. floods in West Bengal in July, 2007, floods in
Kosi river, Bihar, in September, 2008 and two major stampedes in H.P. and Rajasthan
in 2008. The Committee also note that the NEC only met more frequently during
July and September, 2013 i.e. after the Uttarakhand cloudburst disaster in
Kedarnath Shrine area. The Committee, however, wonder as to why the NEC could
not meet in earlier years of its inception, as was expected, to prepare the National
Plan on DM and consequent related preparedness at the level of Ministries/
Departments/ State Governments. The Committee, therefore, feel that the exact
role of NEC needs to be clarified to them. Further they desire to know the difficulties,
if any, in convening its meetings every three months as stipulated. They feel that
the NEC either should meet more often to perform its assigned role for disaster
management in the country of its powers need to be delegated to a suitable authority
so that preparedness of other agencies is not delayed and implementation of its
Guidelines is monitored effectively.
3. The Committee note that NEC was to prepare National Plan for Disaster
Management of the country and circulate of Ministries/Departments/States so
that they can draw their own plans in accordance with it. However, neither NEC nor
MHA prepared National Plan till 2013 when it was sent to the NDMA for further
necessary action. The Committee understand the difficulties/problems in formation
of a National Plan for a country with very diverse geo-climatic conditions. Moreover,
a number of Ministries/Departments and other agencies/Governments were
involved. Still they feel that the NEC took a very long time of 7 years i.e. from 2006
to 2013 to finalise the Plan. Quite evidently, the inadequate number of meetings
held by NEC due to lack of adequate secretarial support was one of the factors
responsible for this delay. The Committee note that in the meantime, NDMA issued
guidelines, in 2007, for preparation of State Disaster Management Plan. The
NDMA has issued 17 guidelines on various types of disasters and related issues
till October, 2012. Till 2014,  20 States had shared their plans  with NDMA. The
Government has also provided Grants-in-aid ranging between 8-10 lakh to the
States for finalisation of their Plans. The Committee, however, find that avoidable
delays took place in finalisation of National as well as States' Plans for management
of disasters. The Committee are of the firm view that delay has taken place because
the NEC and NDMA has delayed the finalisation of Guidelines and National Plan
for disaster management. As due to several natural and man-made causes, an

57
alarming rise in disasters is being witnessed in the country now, the Committee
desire that the Ministry of Home Affairs must take up the matter urgently with the
remaining State Governments/Ministries/Departments/agencies, who have not
drafted or finalised their State Disaster Management Plans and get needful done.
The Ministry should inform the latest position in this regard to the Committee
within three months from the date of presentation of this report to the Parliament.
The Committee may also be informed of the status of National Plan for disaster
management, which was statedly pending for NDMA approval.
4. Functioning of National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA)
NDMA was formally constituted in accordance with Section 3 (1) of the Act
on 27 September, 2006 to deal with all types of disasters. The Advisory Committee
of NDMA consisting of experts in the field of disaster management and having
practical experience, was to be constituted to make recommendations on different
aspects of disaster management. It was constituted in July, 2007 initially for
2 years period which was extended for one more year. The Committee note that in
June, 2010 NDMA initiated the proposal for constitution of the 2nd Advisory
Committee which could not be constituted till 2014. According  to the MHA. The
process was time-consuming as well as requiring involvement of various
stakeholders hence the delay. However the process of short listing of experts in
NDMA was stated to be at the final stage of completion. The Committee also note
that the working group of the then Planning Commission (December, 2006) had
recommended various projects to be taken up by NDMA during the Eleventh Plan
for disaster management, out of which, as per the MHA, no other project could be
sanctioned except the National Earthquake Risk Mitigation Project (NERMP) on
5 April, 2013, which is currently under implementation. Some projects were
dropped as some other agencies were already formulating those projects. The
Committee are aghast at this scenario. They futher note that the Guidelines by the
Ministry of Finance could be issued only in 2009 to ensure that a new scheme
meets the concerns of disaster mitigation. As regard manpower management in
NDMA, the Committee note from the audit Report that there were 33 to 60 per cent
vacancies at the end of each financil year in NDMA during 2008-09 to 2012-13.
However, they were informed that during 2014, out of 155, only 8 posts were vacant
and 147 are filled, either through regular staff or outsourced/ contractual staff.
The  Committee, however, still feel that the Government lacked requisite promptness
in dealing with issue critical for disaster preparedness in the country. Therefore,
while expressing their displeasure on the working of NDMA, the Committee
desire the MHA:—
(i) To take up the issue of constitution of 2nd Advisory Committee of NDMA
at the earliest and inform about the latest status.
(ii) To r eview its project execution capacity, reinforce it and fix timelines for
execution so that shoddiness is eiliminated and projects are finalised
within the prescribed time.

58
(iii) To start systematic assessment of major National projects/Schemes,
particularly those already made for landslide and floods and enhance
monitoring to ensure that these projects are finalised at the earliest and
are as per structural requirement of disaster reduction.
(iv) To ensure that all critical posts in NDMA are filled instantly.
5. Resource and fund arrangements for disaster management
The Guidelines for administration of the State Disaster  Response Fund
(SDRF) and National Disaster Response Fund (NDRF) were issued in September
2010. The funds were made operative for a period of five years (1 April, 2010 to
31 March, 2015) for use only to meet expenditure for providing immediate relief to
the victims of cyclone, drought, earthquake, fire, flood, tsunami, hailstorm,
landslide, avalanche, cloudburst and pest attack. The Committee note that as per
Audit Report, States were found to be deficient in sending  the details of utilisastion
and balances in SDRF regularly. They also incurred an expenditure of
` 345.03 crore on inadmissible components during 2007-08 to 2011-12. States
had also not invested unspent balances in their  SDRFs/CRFs resuting in potential
loss of interest of ` 477.99 crore. The MHA, however, informed that State Executive
Committee is responsbile to ensure proper utilisation of the fund. While not
agreeing with the argument put forth by the MHA, the Committee point out that as
per the guidelines, MHA is the nodal ministry for overseeing the operation of
SDRF and monitoring compliance with the prescribed processes. The Committee
therefore urge the MHA to act, as mandated, on the matter and desire them to
strengthen thier monitoring mechanism so that proper utilization of funds under
SDRF is ensured and unspent balances are regulated.
6. The expenditure on disaster preparedness, restoration, reconstruction
and mitigation were not to be met from NDRF but from the plan funds of States. DM
Act also provides for constitution of a National Disaster Mitigation Fund (NDMF),
at the disposal of NDMA, for funding the projects geared exclusively for disaster
mitigation. The NDRF however was found to be unavailable to NEC and was operated
by MHA in contravention of the Act. However, after being pointed out by the Audit,
MHA has since taken corrective measures and constituted two sub-Committees
for scrutiny of reports of the Inter-Ministerial Central Team on behalf of the NEC
on 17 September, 2013. An amount of ` 654.04 crore in case of Gujarat, Assam
and Goa, identified as excess against the on-account release made from NDRF, was
to be adjusted against the requests of the States for assistance from NDRF in
future. MHA denied utilisation of NDRF for the purpose other than the prescribed
purposes. The Committee also have been informed that the Department of
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance had expressed views against the NDMF on the
basis of the argument that mitigation should be part of the Plan process as there
are already schemes targeted towards mitigation. They also stated to have  revised
the formats for EFC evaluation of new Plan and Non-Plan Expenditures with a view
to addressing disaster concerns. Meanwhile the Task Force st up by the MHA on
Disaster Management has recommended for constitution of NDMF and accordingly

59
the Ministry of Finance has been requested by the MHA to do so. A Cabinet note on
the issue is under preparation. The Committee are perturbed to note that
substantial time has been lost in the bureaucratic tussle for a decision to constitute
the NDMF at National, State and District level. They therefore, urge the MHA to
expedite the Cabinet note with requisite promptitude as well as pursue the matter
vigorously with the Ministry of Finance for formation of the NDMF at all three
levels so that mitigation activities get a boost. The Committee desire to be apprised
of the latest status in this regard.
7. Delay in setting up Communication systems for disaster management
The Committee note that timely deployment and use of telecommunication
resources play an extremely crucial role in saving lives, mitigating disaster and
carrying out relief operations. The Department of Space (DoS) had in March,
2003, started the Disaster Management Support (DMS) Programme to harness
the benefits of the space based technology for applications in disaster management
in the country. Under this programme, a Decision Support Centre was set up at the
National Remote Sensing Centre that monitored prevalence and severity of
agricultural drought in 13 States during Kharif crops season, active forest fire
and all major earthquakes and landslides in India and its adjoining region. DoS
had undertaken a project to develop National Database for Emergency Management
(NDEM), to be completed by 2011, which, however, the audit found as not operational
till July, 2012. However, MHA informed that 32 central Ministries/Departments
and 29 States/UTs have already identified the details of nodal officers and the data
is placed on NRSC and NDEM websites. ISRO formulated a programme for creation
of a digital, thematic and cartographic data base for hazard zonation and risk
assessment and with NRSA it planned to cover one lakh sq. km. every year for the
development of close contour information of ground using the Airborne Laser
Terrain Mapper (ALTM) system thereby covering all priority flood prone areas
(five lakh sq. km.) in five years. The ALTM survey during 2004—06 could not be
undertaken due to non-availability of clearance from Defence, which, as per the
MHA, has now been made available. The Committee further note with concern that
support through Disaster Management System Aperture Radar (DMSAR) by
acquiring aerial radar data during natural disasters could not be materialised
even after incurring  an expenditure of ` 28.99 crore and the flight model DMSAR
system testing was going on at NRSC, Hyderabad till 2013. Satellite based
communication network was not fully operational even after six years of receipt of
equipment and incurring expenditure of ` 6.77 crore. Although, as per the Ministry,
32 units/systems for instance, the primary node of a dedicated electronic satellite
based network at IMD, Delhi have now started functioning. Furthermore, an amount
` 35.64 crore was spent by DoS for setting up of the five Doppler Weather Radars
for monitoring of severe weather system but those failed to reap the desired results.
Equipment are now stated to be in the process of installation. Similarly, Projects
conceived by the NDMA (i) National Disaster Communication Network and

60
(ii) National Disaster Management Informatics System are still at the stage of
planning. From the foregoing, the Committee conclude that all the projects
undertaken for strengthening the communication network for disaster
management are either delayed badly or still at the planning stage. The Committee
express their anguish over delay in such crucial projects prepared with the
involvement of the country's premier scientific departments with proven
credentials, due to reasons varying from non-availability of land/sites to non-
clearance from Defence Authorities. The Committee, therefore, desire the MHA
to pursue the matter with the respective agencies viz. Department of  Space, ISRO,
etc. to ensure completion and operationalisation of the respective communication
network projects being handled by them at the earliest. The Committee also desire
to know the progress of proposed Integrated Himalayan Meteorological Project
specially made for weather monitoring and forecasting in the Himalayan region.
8. Status of National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) & State Disaster Response
Force (SDRF)
The Committee note that NDRF was formed in 2006 as a specialist force
with the capabilities to deal with all types of natural and man-made disasters. It had
10 battalions consisting of deputationists from CAPF, spread all over the country,
with headquarters at Delhi. As per the Audit, there was shortage of 3031 personnel
i.e. 27 per cent as of May, 2012 of which specialised posts constituted 43% (1318).
The powers of the DG, NDRF has been enhanced w.e.f. 2013 on the matter of
transfer of NDRF personnel, which did not exist earlier. The Committee also note
that despite the decision taken in 2006 to establish a National Institute of Disaster
Response to cater to the training needs of NDRF and other stakeholders at the
cost of ` 116 crore, the said Institute is still at the proposal stage. Also, there are
shortage of accommodations for battalions of NDRF, which are at present sharing
accommodation with the CAPFs despite a proposal of ` 3171.58 crore under
consideration of MHA since December, 2011. The Committee are of the firm view
that performance of the NDRF can be seriously hampered due to shortage of
trained manpower, absence of required/specialised training facilities
infrastructure and equipment. Only 7 States had constituted SDRF in their
respective States. The Committee, therefore, desire the NDRF to take appropriate
action to fill the vacant posts including those of specialists in the force. They also
desire that MHA should take necessary steps to provide adequate infrastructure
for NDRF battalions and their officers by pursuing the matter with Ministry of
Urban Development, including specialised training institute at the earliest so that
the NDRF personnel remain motivated and concentrate on enhancing their
performance. The MHA should also encourage and pursue State Governments for
formation of SDRFs at the earliest.
9. Need to enhance Civil Defence, Fire Service and Medical Preparedness in
response to disaster
The Committee note that upgradation of National Civil Defence College,
Nagpur has been completed in March, 2013 so that it could play a significant role

61
in disaster management and assist police in internal security and law and order
situations in addition to its primary role. However, the scheme to upgrade National
Fire Service College which was launched in June, 2010 could not be completed
due to large scale encroachments, which have now been removed. The Committee
further note that as per the guidelines, medical facilities for Chemical, Biological,
Radiological and Nuclear (CBRN) disasters were lacking in the country. To initiate
with it a CBRN Medical Management Centre is envisaged at Safdarjung Hospital
for which detailed project report preparation is being taken up. The repair of
CBRN Vehicles have been completed and are likely to be located at Pune, Ghaziabad,
Chennai and Kolkata. Also training to medical staff/technicians and others, is
being provided at different institutes/hospitals at different locations in the country.
Also now three MCI recognised degree courses in emergency care, medicine and
surgery have been started in AIIMS. The Committee appreciate the various efforts
being made towards preparedness for medical emergencies. The Committee
however, desir e the MHA to take immediate steps for upgradation and
strengthening of National Fire Service College as Fire services were not adequately
staffed in various States to provide quick and immediate response. They also desire
MHA to review/assess the availability of training personnel to be required to deal
with the disaster situations at the requisite places at the earliest.
10. The Committee note that the NDRF, which was formed in 2006, is a
multi-disciplinary, multi-skilled high-tech force, having 10 battalions, to deal
with all types of disasters. Composed of trained personnel, it can provide specialist
search and rescue teams. The Committee also note that training is a continuous
process and NDRF personnel are being trained by International Experts in
specialise areas of expertise at Government Institutes of BSF, CRPF, ITBP, Bhabha
Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai etc. and some private institutes such as Sea
Explorers Institutes, Kolkata; NIM, Uttarkashi, Himalayan Mountaineering
Institute, Darjeeling; Swami Vivekananda Institute of Mountaineering, Mount
Abu etc. Further, 119 NDRF personnel have undergone training in different foreign
countries. Under the India Swiss Collaboration training of Trainers at NISA,
Hyderabad and Basic Training Centre, Bhanu, Chandigarh was imparted wherein
186 personnel of NDRF were trained. 67 dogs were also given training. Swiss
Development Corporation has also imparted training to 118 NDRF personnel at
3rd Bn. NDRF, Mundali. Programme for Enhancement of Emergency Response
(PEER) is a regional training programme initiated by the USAID to strengthen
and institutionalise capacity in emergency and disaster response. PEER has
supported capacity building initiative of Government of India and imported training
in Medical First Responders, Collapsed Structure Search and Rescue (CSSR)
graduates, CSSR instructors and Master instructors. The Committee are happy
to know that the good training arrangements have been made by the Government to
impart training to NDRF personnel within and outside the country. They also
appreciate the good relief and rescue work done by the NDRF after the earthquake
in Nepal and flood in Jammu and Kashmir, and feel that the force needs to be
strengthened further to perform even better in future. The Committee also desire
that coordination between Civil Defence personnel and State authorities needs to
be looked into to provide better services to the people affected by the disaster.

62
11. Capacity building for disaster preparedness
The Committee note that effective disaster management requires trained
manpower to deal with complex situations effectively and rapidly to reduce the
impact of disaster. It is, therefore, necessary to continuously undertake measures
to build capacity amongst those who are handling disaster prevention, mitigation,
preparedness, response, reconstruction and also create awareness amongst the
people. Two programmes, launched by MHA in 2004-05 and later on transferred to
NIDM in 2008, namely the National Programme for Capacity Building of Engineers
in Earthquake Risk Management (NPCBEERM) and the National Programme for
Capacity Building of Architects in Earthquake Risk Management (NPCBAERM)
were shelved in December, 2010 due to non-availability of engineers and architects
for training, after training 210 Architects as master trainers against the target of
250 and 308 engineers as master trainers against the traget of 450, who, in turn,
trained 1361 architects and 2528 engineers. However the non-plan scheme for
financial assistance of R` 25 crore to Administrative Tranining Institutes (ATI)
and State Training Institutes for operation of Centre for Disaster Management,
which was approved for a period of five years, was successful as under it, 1,06,448
persons were trained as against the target of 60,000 in various aspects of disaster
management. On the other side, India Disaster Resource Network portal which
was handed over to NIDM in 2008 for updating and maintaining the portal suffered
due to non-availability of dedicated staff. It could start maintaining data only from
2012, when a dedicated computer programmer was appointed on contractual basis.
NIDM is also lacking trainers as many posts were lying vacant since the
recruitment rules are still under consideration for approval of the competent
authority thus underutilisation of NIDM capacity. Also though there were delays
in completion of projects on Capacity Building in Disaster Management for
Government officials and representatives of local bodies and district level funded
by NDMA, in all, 16479 participants have attended their face-to-face training
programmes against the target of 16200. The Committee thus observe that the
capacity building measures have brought out results despite experiencing delays
in all the concerned projects. The Committee, however, desire:—
(i) That MHA finalise the recruitment rules of NIDM expeditiously and
take urgent steps to fill all vacant faculty posts of the institute so that it
can perform with full strength and impart training to more persons
involved in disaster management. This would ultimately increase a
specifically trained manpower to handle the disaster situations in a better
way.
(ii) To be informed about the alternative arrangements made by MHA to train
architects and engineers in view of shelving of the twin programmes viz.
NPCBEERM and NPCBAERM.
(iii) To be informed about the progress made in impact evaluation of training
programme conducted by NIDM.
(iv) The continuous uploading of data in India Disaster Resource Network.

63
12. Disaster preparedness for Earthquake
The Committee note that considering the vulnerability of the country's
landmass to the risks of earthquake, various efforts are underway to prepare for
such eventualities. It includes archival-digitisation of seismic/analogue charts
since 1996, preparation of hazards map and atlas of India etc. Also following the
Optimum Seismological Network Programme sanctioned in 2009 by the IMD,
65 stations are now operational and the capacity is being further enhanced. However,
the Project for upgradation of Earthquake Hazards Maps for the country costing
` 76.83 lakhs, which started in June, 2011, is yet to be completed due to non-
availability of district boundaries data from the Census of India. Another project
'National Earthquake Risk Mitigation', approved in April, 2013 is under
implementation during 2013-15. Considering the increased seismic activity in
the Himalayan region which has been witnessed recently, the Committee emphasis
upon an early completion of  the earthquake preparedness activities at all levels.
They desire that the MHA must take up the matter urgently with the Census
Commissioner for supply of requisite boundaries data so that the hazard atlas/
map could be completed early. The Committee hope that the preparatory phase of
the Earthquake Mitigation project would be completed this year as stipulated and
final phase would start on time. Meanwhile the MHA must strive to create maximum
public awareness on earthquakes in the Country as an essential part of disaster
preparedness.
13. Floods
The Committee note that the total flood affected area in the country is vast
i.e. 456.40 lakh hectares. An average of 72.25 lakh hectare of land is affected
annually by floods of which 37.89 lakh hectare is cropped area. Thus, floods cause
loss of livelihood of lakhs of farmers in the country too, thereby making a dent in
the economy. The Ministry of Water Resources (MoWR) was to prepare a detailed
action plan for management of floods as per NDMA guidelines on which MoWR
has taken action. However, according to MoWR there are many additional activities
indicated in these guidelines including safety issues of large dams, flood
forecasting etc. which are not presently carried out by the organisations of MoWR/
States/local administrations. The Committee have been informed that such
activities require major overhaul including re-structuring and strengthening of
the organisations besides huge financial requirements in consultation with
Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance. Time lines indicated in the
guidelines need to be finalised in consultation  with all the linked  agencies which
include States, NRSC, IMD, GSI, MHA etc. The Committee note that 14 States
have responded to establishing a Dam Safety Organisation (DSO). The Audit also
revealed that only eight States had prepared Emergency Action Plans (EAP) for
192 (4.06%) large dams as against 4728 large dams in 29 States as of
September 2011, as highly skilled manpower and extensive field survey for the
same, which require coordination with other departments also, needs a lot of time.
This has resulted in 96% of large dams rendering huge area and property

64
vulnerable to cascading effects of dam failure. Also, while there are 4728 reservoirs
and barrages in the country, the Central Water Commission (CWC) provided
inflow forecasts to only 28 reservoirs and barrages as only 28 requests were
received by CWC for such forecasts. An IIPA study report given to MoWR in 2009,
had highlighted various deficiencies in the scheme of things which included non-
functional telemetry stations and absence of dedicated communication facilities in
flood forecasting stations. As per the Ministry, under the Flood Management
Programme (FMP), it was able to implement 252 works out of 420 works and, as
against target of 2.18 mha, could protect 1.96 mha of flood affected area from the
flood. The short fall of only 0.19 mha, was due to late approval of the scheme and
slow execution by State Government due to lesser working period. The Committee,
therefore, desire that the MHA must coordinate with MoWR to :—
(i) Encourage the States and ensure that all the concerned States establish
their Dam Safety Organisation and prepare Emergency Action Plans for
large dams so that in case of any adverse situation or emergency,
immediate and corrective steps are taken for safety of people from the
cascading effects of floods. The State Governments should be encouraged
to identify all water bodies in their States, ensure their maintenance and
control the increasing instances of enroachment of water bodies,
particularly in the cities.
(ii) Ensure that deficiencies pointed out by IIPA in their study in forecasting
of floods are rectified and consult and  coordinate with the States to
expand their plan for inflow forecast network to additional reservoirs in
the country.
(iii) Implement and execute more works under the Flood Management
Programme to save people, livestock and property from the impact of the
flood.
(iv) As floods are a grave perennial problem for States like Assam, Bihar,
U.P. etc., the Committee are convinced that a well-Coordinated strategy is
required to tackle floods as National emergency, particularly in Monsoon
months, and merely the non-mandatory Guidelines of NDMA are
inadequate to handle preparedness and mitigation efforts concerning
floods. The Committee therefore feel that the MHA, MoWR, Department
of Space, IMD, Dam Owning Companies and all concerned State
Governments must come together to assess and minimize the damage
caused by floods. As some of the neighbouring countries are also suspected
to engage in building dams on rivers flowing through the Indian
Sub-continent, which impact the flood plains adversely in India, the
Committee desire that the matter needs greater attention from the PMO
and the MEA to protect the Country from any potential man-made floods
caused by such activities.

65
(v) The Ministry of Water Resources/Irrigation Departments should also
take necessary steps to manage the floor water by diverting it to water
deficit States through implementation of schemes for Inter-linking of
rivers and creating network of canals.
14. The Committee note that NDMA issued guidelines which envisaged the
role are responsibilities of Department of Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC) to
tackle drought situation. DAC is mandated to coordinate relief measures
necessitated by drought, hailstorm, pest attacks and cold wave/frost. The Committee
further note that spatial  distribution and quantum of rainfall during  South-West
Monsoon (June-September) mainly determines the incidence of drought in the
country, as it accounts for 75% of annual rainfall. The Department of Agriculture
& Cooperation closely monitors progress of South-West Monsoon in the country,
in  close coordination with India Meteorological Department (IMD) and keeps
watch over scanty/deficient rainfall conditions. As the assessment and declaration/
notification of drought is the prerogative of State Governments, the Committee
note that the role of the Government of India, of which the DAC is an integral part,
is to supplement the efforts of the State Government in the face of the aforesaid
natural calamities by way of requisite financial and logistical support State Disaster
Response Fund (SDRF), which is readily available to the State Government to
initiate relief measures during drought, has contributions made by the Central
and State Governments in the ratio 3:1 for 17 General Category States and 9:1 for
11 Special Category States. The Committee have been informed that the incidence
of drought is a long drawn process that depends upon many changing variables
like intensity and duration of rainfall, temperature etc. Therefore, many a time
drought assessment requires a longer time frame and consequently there is no
stipulation of time fixed for reporting the occurrence of Drought etc. to the Centre
by the States. An Empowered Group of Ministers (EGoM) also was stated to be
constituted to review the situation and take timely decisions on policy issues as
well as on other issues for effective management of drought and other related
issues. Also, the activities under the National Agricultural Drought Assessment
and Monitoring System (NADAMS) which was initiated in 1986 by National Remote
Sensing Agency, Department of Space, with the support of IMD and various State
Departments of Agriculture, were being carried out under Disaster Management
Support Programme of ISRO. The Committee, desire that the Department of
Agriculture & Cooperation must ensure that the drought-prone areas of the
country are be closely monitored during the South-West Monsoon period so that
additional financial assistance from NDRF could be provided to the drought affected
State Governments promptly. The Committee also desire that submission of monthly
drought reports should be ensured by all stakeholders so that the project activities
of the NADAMS could be reviewed periodically.

66
15. Delay in execution of projects undertaken for forecasting of Cyclone and
Tsunami
The  Committee note that MoES was to execute various projects to provide
timely warning on tsunami and cyclones and associated storm surges to various
stakeholders for taking action to minimize the risk and damage to loss of life.
However, all the projects have been delayed. These include the Multi Hazard
Vulnerability Mapping for Indian Coast at a Cost of  ` 48 crore, which  was
scheduled to be completed by March, 2013 by the National Centre for Ocean
Information Services, but is still incomplete/partially completed. To modernise
and upgrade the existing system of weather forecasting, Phase I was approved at a
cost of ` 920 crore for completion by December, 2009. Most of the projects under
phase I have been completed in 2012 i.e. after a delay of 2 years. Also, the Audit
found that IMD proposed a scheme on District Meteorological Information  Centres
throughout the country at a cost of  ` 204 crore made available in Eleventh Plan,
on which no work was started therefore in Twelfth Plan, it is being covered under
Gramin Krishi Mausam Seva Scheme. Further, the Forecast Demonstration Project
for severe thunder storms over East and North East India and fog forecasting
system in tropical cyclones on Bay of Bengal for ` 49 crore, which was to be
completed by 2012, had been shifted to Twelfth Plan as the requisite manpower and
instrumented aircraft could not be materialised. A project on Development of Multi-
Hazard Early Warning Support as part of Emergency Response Planning,
sanctioned in May, 2008 and to be executed by Indian National Centre for Ocean
Information Services (INCOIS) at a cost of  `  20 crore, could not be initiated till
March, 2011. The Committee have been informed that facilities and equipment
were not suitable for a modern farecasting system at  the beginning of the Eleventh
Plan hence the projects could not gather momentum. Also near-accurate weather
forecasting services demand a highly automated environment as well as full
networking and integration of entire infrastructure and decision  support system.
The Committee have now been informed about the progress of various components
which has gathered momentum during the Twelfth Plan. The Committee hope that
delays in execution of projects related to communication system for cyclone and
tsunami preparedness has now been arrested. They further hope that the Coastal
State Governments would follow the level of preparedness and alertness shown by
Odisha and AP Governments during cyclone Phailin which prevented mass scale
damage to life and property in these States.
16. Delay in finalization of contingency plan to deal with Forest Fires
The Committee note that the contingency plans for dealing with forest fires
has been received by MoE&F from thirteen States for approval. Once the said
plans are received from all States, MoE&F will finalise the National Forest Fire
Disaster Plan which will guide the State Governments for preparation of respective
State Forest Fire Disaster Plans. Meanwhile, the Forest Survey of  India (FSI) has
developed an indigenous methodology to detect forest fires from the given fire
spots through their report titled "Vulnerability of India's Forests to fire", which
identifies the vulnerable areas of the forests in India. This report has been shared

67
with the  States and it is envisaged that the same will be used to prepare State and
local level Forest Fire Management Plans. The Committee note that it is also
proposed for States to undertake a similar study to identify forest fire vulnerable
areas. They also note that MoEF provides funds under its 'Intensification of Forest
Management Scheme' (IFMS) for management of forest fires which is implemented
by the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests. As the audit had pointed towards
lack of monitoring in the scheme, the MoEF has issued necessary instructions
and accordingly has received reports from 13 States/UTs. Third Party monitoring
is statedly under process too. The Committee desire to be apprised of the progress
in the matter. Further, they desire the Ministry to urgently consider the States
contingency plans by utilising the forest fire data available with them, for giving
approval. The Committee hope that the National Forest Fire Plan would be finalised
early. The Central Crisis Group needs to play its role in monitoring post accident
situation and to suggest measures for prevention and recurrence of forest fires.
17. Preparedness to manage Chemical Disaster
Rapid industrialisation of cities and towns have increased the dangers of a
chemical disaster. In this regard, the Committee note that the National Action
Plan on Chemical (Industrial) Disaster Management (CIDM) is being revised by
the MoEF. The Committee also note that total number of districts in the country is
301 and the total Major Accident Hazard (MAH) units located in these districts
are 1861. The on-site emergency plan by the occupier and off-site emergency plan
by the District Authorities were prescribed as per the Manufacture, Storage and
Import of Hazardous Chemicals Rules, 1989 and the amendment (MSIHC
Rules).The on-site plan of 1814 MAH units have been prepared and 1664 mock
drills were conducted. As regard off-site plans, 200 districts have prepared their
plans and plans of 42 districts were under preparation. They also note that Chemical
Accidents Information and Regulating System (CAIRS) has started functioning.
The Committee, however, desire the MoEF:—
(i) To pursue the remaining States to prepare on-site and off-site Emergency
Plans in all the districts required to do so.
(ii) To make mandatory the reporting of chemical accidents to CAIRS.
(iii) Assess the need of setting up of an Emergency Response Centre in other
States having chemical industrial units.
(iv) Ensure that State Crisis Groups submit their progress reports to Central
Crisis Group for review so that their current status of preparedness is
available and necessary directions/suggestions for improvement is given,
if necessary.
18. Expanding the laboratory network to manage Biological Disaster
The core function  for preparedness for biological disaster was disease
surveillance which was undertaken through Integrated Disease Surveillance
Project (IDSP) run by the National Centre for Disease Control (NCDC). The

68
Committee note that under IDSP, surveillance units have been established in all
States/Districts and linked through an IT network established with the help of
NIC and ISRO. Satellite connectivity will be available once the migration from
existing satellite to GSAT-12 is done by ISRO. About 90% of the districts report
weekly surveillance data through the portal. The Committee also note that the
draft Public Health (Prevention, Control and Management of Epidemics, Bio
Terrorism and Disasters) Bill is under finalization by the MOH&FW. As regards
strengthening of districts laboratories for diagnosis  of epidemic prone diseases,
42 labs have become functional and 300 labs were proposed to be set up under
12th Plan. Additionally, in 17 States, 85 Medical Colleges labs have been linked to
adjoining districts so far and 190 Medical Colleges are proposed to be linked in
12th Plan in the State referral lab network. Under the scheme of Indian Council of
Medical Research for 'Establishment of a network of labs for managing Epidemics
and Natural Calamities', a three tier network of 160 labs is proposed to be set up.
The Committee are happy to note that a reasonable progress have been made in
surveillance and in setting up of laboratories. However, the pace of setting up of
laboratories needs to be accelerated in view of the density of population in the
country which makes it a potential hub for faster spread of diseases. The Committee,
therefore, desire the Ministry to step up their efforts to set up labs in the remaining
districts. The Committee may also be informed of status of the Public Health Bill
which was said to be at the drafting stage. The Committee also desire that
surveillance at National entry level point and laboratory infrastructure in the
country must be strengthened to prevent spread of diseases in the country through
these points.
19. Need to create awareness about Radiological and Nuclear Disasters
The Committee note that Atomic Energy Regulatory Board (AERB) has
brought out Safety Codes for emergency preparedness in radiation facilities/
practices and at present adequately addressing the regulatory function.  For
Nuclear Power Plants/projects also, AERB has specified  very elaborate
requirements in the safety code. AERB has also been regulating requirements
with respect to possession and use of radiation sources. After the incident of
Mayapuri Scrap Y ard, Delhi in which radioactive waste was stated to be mishandled,
AERB has initiated various actions for orphan sources with  the help  of other
Ministries/Department. AERB has ensured that all the licensees report any
incident of lost/theft of sources to it immediately so as to initiate action to take
remedial action. The proposed system of  e-licensing of Radiation Application
(ELORA) for management of consent process will ensure that radiation sources
are effectively tracked from cradle to grave. The Committee hope that steps taken
by AERB to ensure all cases of radiation, including from orphan sources, would be
effective to handle those cases appropriately with full safety. Since any leakage of
radiation can be a major disaster, the Committee emphasise  that AERB also has
responsibility to educate public and society at large about the safety measures
taken to protect them from any unfortunate incident and consequent losses to

69
them. They, therefore desire the Ministry of Home Affairs to apprise AERB of
their concern.
20. Disaster by Heat Wave
The Committee note that with an alarming increase in global warming, the
heat wave condition has become an international issue faced by many countries.
The reported death toll due to heat wave in India has reached to more than 2000
during summer of 2015. NDMA has   proposed some do's and dont's as mitigation
measures to deal with heat wave. The Ministry has further informed the Committee
that many States had requested to Government for inclusion  of new disasters like
heat wave in the list of disasters eligible for assistance from SDRF/NDRF.
Fourteenth Finance Commission had also recommended that 10% of the funds
available under SDRF can be used by States for disasters not covered in the notified
list. The MHA has accordingly revised the norms of SDRF/NDRF w.e.f.  08.04.2015
and States now can use 10% of their SDRF for State specific local disasters which
are not covered in the centrally notified list. The Committee appreciate the decision
taken by MHA. However, the Committee still feel that India's climatic conditions
are such that during summer season, most of the country's  mainland reels under
severe heat wave resulting in large scale deaths of poor and homeless people. This
calls for inclusion of heat wave under the disasters covered in NDRF. They therefore
recommend that the Ministry should actively explore this possibility. Also there is
a need to bring out specific guidelines on heat wave by the NDMA.
21. Saving the pets/animals/livestock during disaster
The Committee observe that the DM Act, 2005 has specified, among measures
which the State Government may take, the issue of evacuation of animals i.e. pets,
livestock and wild animals from an area of disaster but is silent on ensuring their
safety and rehabilitation during disaster. Livestock are economic assets for village
folks and their loss impacts them in a substantial manner. Still, whenever disaster
happens, the focus during relief work is always on people only. Pets, animals and
livestock belonging to affected people fail to get any attention from  the relief
workers. The Committee, therefore, desire that the existing guidelines on
formulation of State DM plans, issued by the NDMA should be expanded to cover
protection of animals during  disasters, since protection of animals is responsibility
of the States. Also, the Handbook for training and capacity building of civil defence
and sister organizations should include a specific chapter dedicated to evacuation,
rescue and rehabilitation  of pet animals and livestock during disasters  and
involvement of Government and State-run-Animal Welfare Organization with
proven track record in the same. The Committee further desire that the MHA
should start by preparing a list of such animal welfare organizations that can be
given task of saving pets and livestock and can be contacted by citizens for the
same during disasters. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action
taken in this direction.

70
22. Saving human lives during man-made disaster
The Committee are extremely concerned to note the increasing incidents of
stampedes taking place during religious congregations in various parts of the
country. Such man-made disasters have claimed umpteen numbers of human lives,
which could have been prevented with appropriate and timely arrangements by
local administration. An increase in such unfortunate accidents warrants that the
Government intervenes in the matter. The Committee opine that setting up a
registration counter to note details of visiting pilgrims, efficient crowd
management, presence of trained medical/paramedical personnel etc. are measures
which should be made mandatory for all large religious congregations. The
Committee feel that the Ministry needs to study the matter, devise comprehensive
preventive measures and issue advisories to  all State  Governments to instruct
their local administration accordingly. This, they feel, would go a long way in not
only preventing unnecessary deaths during stampedes but also in providing prompt
information and relief to the affected people, should such incidents happen. The
Committee also desire that a permanent unit of NDRF should be stationed at major
pilgrimage centres during festival seasons as the local administration, which
holds charge of various other matters concerning the district, may not have the
requisite capacity to handle stampedes or other such unfortunate incidents. The
Committee would desire to be apprised of the Ministry's take on this issue.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. K.V. THOMAS
09th  December, 2015 Chairperson,
18  Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

APPENDIX I
MINUTES  OF  THE  FOURTH  SITTING  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE  (2013-14)  HELD  ON  1ST  JULY ,  2013
The Committee sat on Monday, the 1st July, 2013 from 1100 hrs. to 1245 hrs.
in Room No. 'G-074', Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ramen Deka
3. Dr. M. Thambi Durai
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
Rajya Sabha
6. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
7. Dr. V . Maitreyan
8. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
9. Shri N.K. Singh
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Shri M.L.K. Raja — Deputy Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Deputy C&AG
2. Ms. Shubha Kumar — Director General
3. Shri Roy S. Mathrani — Director General
4. Shri Purshottam Tiwary — Principal Director (PAC)
71

72
Representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Anil Goswami — Home Secretary
2. Shri G.V .V . Sarma — Joint Secretary (DM)
3. Shri Bhagwan Shankar — Joint Secretary (A)
4. Shri M. Raju —  Deputy Director General, GSI Kolkata
5. Shri J. Bagchi — Suptd. Geologist
Representatives of the National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA)
1. Dr. Shyam S. Agarwal — Secretary, NDMA
2. Dr. (Mrs.) Anita Bhatnagar Jain — Advisor, NDMA
3. Smt. Archana G. Gulati — FA, NDMA
4. Ms. Preeti Banzal — JA (CBT)
Representative of ISRO
Shri Devi Prasad Karnik — Director (P&PR)
Representative of National Disaster Response Force
Shri Sandeep Rai Rathor — IG (NDRF)
Representatives of Department of Space
1. Dr. V .K. Dadhwal — Scientist & Director, National Remote
Sensing Centre
2. Dr. P.G. Diwakar — Sci./Engr. 'H' & Programme Director
Representatives of the Ministry of Water Resources
1. Shri N.K. Mathur — Commissioner (Ganga)
2. Shri G. Aranganathan — Commissioner (Indus)
Representatives of the Ministry of Mines
1. Shri Gauri Kumar — Special Secretary
2. Shri Naresh Kumar — Joint Secretary
Representative of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Shri Anshu Prakash — Joint Secretary
Representatives of Bhabha Atomic Research Centre
1. Dr. D.N. Sharma — Director (Health Safety &
Environment)
2. Dr. C.S. Hari Kumar — Scientist (G), Atomic Energy
 Regulatory Board

73
Representative of the Ministry of Urban Development
Ms. Nandita Mishra — Director
Representative of Department of Atomic Energy
Shri K.A.P. Sinha — Joint Secretary
Representatives of the Ministry of Earth Sciences
1. Shri K.J. Ramesh — Advisor
2. Dr. R.S. Dattatrayam — Scientist F (IMD)
3. Shri B. Bandopadhyay — Scientist F (IMD)
Representative of National Institute of Disaster Management (NIDM)
Dr. Satendra — ED (NIDM)
Representative of the Ministry of Agriculture
Shri A.K. Majhi — JS (DM)
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members, the representatives
of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India, the Ministry of
Home Affairs, National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) and other nodal
Ministries/Departments/Agencies to the sitting of the Committee. Apprising that
the meeting had been convened to take oral evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Home Affairs and other concerned Ministries on the subject "Disaster
Preparedness in India" based on the C&AG Report No. 5 of 2013 (Performance
Audit), the Chairperson   impressed upon the witnesses not to  disclose the contents
of the deliberations of the Committee to any outsider, especially to the members of
the Print and Electronic media.
3. The Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs and representatives of NDMA
briefed the Committee on various issues relating to Disaster Preparedness in India.
The Chairperson and the Members then raised several queries and concerns which
inter-alia included the prevailing critical gaps in the preparedness level for various
disasters, the non-achievement of desired impact of Disaster Management
Act, 2005, ineffectiveness of functioning of National Disaster Management Authority
(NDMA) in most of the core areas, absence of co-ordination between NDMA, State
Governments and various Ministries/Departments for various disasters and the
need for well-defined roles and responsibilities of the apex bodies at the national
and State level for addressing disasters. The representatives of the Ministry, NDMA
and other agencies attended to the queries  raised by the Members. The Home
Secretary candidly submitted that a lot of improvements were needed to effectively
address the issue of Disaster Preparedness in India. As some questions could not
be replied and some questions required detailed and statistical information and
documents, the  Chairperson asked the Home Secretary to furnish the same within

74
fifteen days. The Committee also decided to hold further meetings to deliberate on
the subject in detail.
4. The Chairperson, then, thanked the representatives of the Ministry and the
NDMA/various agencies for appearing before the Committee and furnishing the
available information on several issues on the subject. The Chairperson also thanked
the Members for their active participation in the discussions on the subject as well
as the Audit Officers for their assistance to the Committee.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX II
MINUTES  OF  THE  ELEVENTH  SITTING  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE  (2014-15)  HELD  ON  9TH  DECEMBER,  2014
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 9th December, 2014 from 1500 hrs. to
1730 hrs. in Committee Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. K.V.Thomas — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
3. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank"
4. Shri Neiphiu Rio
5. Shri Dushyant Singh
6. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
7. Shri Kirit Somaiya
Rajya Sabha
8. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya
9. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Director
3. Shri Jayakumar T. — Additional Director
Representatives from the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri P. Mukherjee — Dy. CAG
2. Shri S. Nandeolkar — Director General (Rlys.)
3. Shri L.S. Singh — Principal Director
4. Shri P. Tiwary — Principal Director
75

76
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the
representatives of the Office of the C&AG of India to the Committee. The Chairperson
then apprised the Members that the meeting has been convened to consider and
adopt two Draft Reports, and to take oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry
of Home Affairs on the subject 'Disaster Preparedness in India' based on C&AG
Report No. 5 of 2013.
3 . * * *
4 . * * *
5 . * * *
6. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs were called
in.
Representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri Anil Goswami — Secretary
2. Smt. Sneh Lata Kumar — Secretary (Border Management)
3. Shri R.K. Jain — Secretary (NDMA)
4. Smt. Soma Roy Barman — Financial Advisor (NDMA)
5. Shri G.V .V . Sarma — JS (Disaster Management)
6. Dr. Satendra — ED, NIDM
7. Shri  O.P. Singh — DG, NDRF
8. Shri  Sandeep Rathore — DG, NDRF
9. Shri  R. Bhattacharya — Secretary, AERB
10. Shri Anil Sanghi — JS (Mitigation)
11. Smt. Neelkamal Darbari — JS (Admin.)
12. Ms. Nisha Singh — JS (AERB)
7. The Chairperson welcomed the officials of the Ministry and observed that
National Executive Committee (NEC) is a plural body with the representation of
Secretaries of 14 Departments, mandated for implementation of the National policy
on Disaster Management, preparation of the plan, laying down guidelines and
evaluation of the preparedness at all levels and therefore coordination of duties,
which are assigned to NEC, by the Home Ministry, is not a rational stand. The
Chairperson sought specific response from the Secretary on the failure to convene
regular meetings of NEC. The Chairperson further pointed out the need to pay
special attention towards preventing the delay in finalising the National Plan for
Disaster Management, which has affected subsequent planning by the States and
non-finalisation of National mitigation plan, National Response plan and National
capacity Building plan. He sought response on the action against eight States

77
where the performance audit has highlighted a few serious and glaring financial
irregularities including diversion and non-utilisation of funds and non-submission
of utilization certificates. The Chairperson desired that the Ministry should conduct
a study on the failure to give advance warning of impending disaster in places like
Uttarakhand, need for prevention of illegal and rampant construction activities on
hilly terrains/river beds and to include cloud burst and lightning in the list of natural
calamities. The Secretary then gave a brief overview on the subject which was
followed by a power point presentation on the Ministry's response to the Audit
findings. He also highlighted the better performance of disaster management
agencies during the recent disasters in Odisha & Andhra Pradesh caused by
cyclones Hudhud & Phailin.
8. Thereafter, Secretary of the Ministry attended to the queries of the members
on the various issues relating to the need for immediate and hassle free award of
medical compensation to the victims, speeding up of overall relief, rehabilitation
and reconstruction activities; selection of projects without proper ground work;
diversion and non-utilization of funds by various States; review and study of
response of the Government to disasters, monitoring mechanism for the guidelines
issued by the NDMA and demarcation of roles and responsibilities and regular
updation of the mapping data. He apprised the Committee that replies to all the
queries raised by the Members would be forwarded to the Lok Sabha Secretariat
within 15 days.
9. The Chairperson thanked the representatives of the Ministry for appearing
before the Committee and furnishing updated information on the subject.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record.
1 0 . * * *
The Committee then adjourned.
*Not related to this Report.

APPENDIX III
MINUTES  OF  THE  EIGHTH  SITTING  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE  (2015-16)  HELD  ON  7TH  SEPTEMBER,  2015
The Committee sat from 1700 hrs. to 1800 hrs. on 7th September, 2015 in
Room No. "53", Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. K.V . Thomas — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
3. Shri Nishikant Dubey
4. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
7. Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi
8. Dr. Kirit Somaiya
9. Dr. P. Venugopal
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Naresh Agrawal
11. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
12. Shri Shantaram Naik
13. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
S
ECRETARIA T
1.  Shri A.K. Singh — Additional Secretary
2.  Smt. Anita B. Panda — Director
3.  Shri T. Jayakumar — Additional Director
4.  Smt. Anju Kukreja — Under Secretary
78

79
Representatives from the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri Arun Kumar Singh — Deputy C&AG (RC)
2. Shri Satish Loomba — Director General of Audit
(Central Expenditure)
3. Shri Manish Kumar — Principal Director (Direct Taxes)
4. Shri Manish Kumar — Principal Director (PAC)
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft Reports for
consideration:—
(i) Draft Original Report on "Disaster Preparedness in India" based on
C&AG Report No. 5 of 2013; and
(ii) Draft Action Taken Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
observations/recommendations of the Committee contained in their
Second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on "IT Applications in Income Tax
Department".
3. The Chairperson invited suggestions of the Members on the draft Reports.
After discussing the contents of the draft Reports, the Committee adopted the draft
original Report at (i) with some changes/modifications, which are appended as
Annexure. The Committee then adopted the draft Action Taken Report at (ii) without
any changes/modifications.
4. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalise these Reports in the
light of verbal discussion and consequential changes arising out of factual
verification by the Audit and present the same to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

ANNEXURE
STA TEMENT INDICATING THE CHANGES/MODIFICATIONS MADE IN
DRAFT REPORT ON “DISASTER PREPAREDNESS IN INDIA”
Sl. Para Read
No. No.
1. 10 Add at the end of Para No. 10 of draft  report
The Committee also desired that coordination between Civil
Defence personnel and State authorities needs to be looked into
to provide better services to the people affected by the disaster.
2. 13(i) Add at the end of Para No. 13(i) of draft report
The State Governments should be encouraged to identify all
water bodies in their States, ensure their maintenance and control
the increasing instances of encroachment of water bodies,
particularly in the cities.
3. 13(v) Add at the end of Para No. 13(v) of draft report
The Ministry of Water Resources/Irrigation Departments should
also take necessary steps to manage the floor water by diverting
it to water deficit States through implementation of schemes for
inter-linking of rivers and creating network of canals.
4. 14 Add after Para 14 of draft report
The Committee note that NDMA issued guidelines which
envisaged the role and responsibilities of Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC) to tackle drought situation.
DAC is mandated to coordinate relief measures necessitated by
drought, hailstorm, pest  attacks and cold wave/frost. The
Committee further note that spatial distribution and quantum of
rainfall during South-West Monsoon (June-September) mainly
determines the incidence of drought in the country, as it accounts
for 75% of annual rainfall. The Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation closely monitors progress of South-West Monsoon
in the country, in close coordination with India Meteorological
Department (IMD) and keeps watch over scanty/deficient rainfall
conditions. As the assessment and declaration/notification of
drought is the prerogative of State Governments, the Committee
note that the role of the Government of India, of which the DAC
is an integral part, is to supplement the efforts of the State
Governments in the face of the aforesaid natural calamities by
way of requisite financial and logistical support State Disaster
Response Fund (SDRF), which is readily available to the
80

81
State Government to initiate relief measures during drought, has
contributions made by the Central and State Governments in the
ratio 3 : 1 for 17 General Category States and 9 : 1 for 11 Special
Category States. The Committee have been informed that the
incidence of drought is a long drawn process that depends upon
many changing variables like intensity and duration of rainfall,
temperature etc. Therefore, many a time drought assessment
requires a longer time-frame and consequently there is no
stipulation of time fixed for reporting the occurrence of Drought
etc. to the Centre by the States. An Empowered Group of Ministers
(EGoM) also was stated to be constituted to review the situation
and take timely decisions on policy issues as well as on other
issues for effective management of drought and other related
issues. Also, the activities under the National Agricultural Drought
Assessment and Monitoring System (NADAMS) which was
initiated in 1986 by National Remote Sensing Agency, Department
of Space, with the support of IMD and various State Departments
of Agriculture, were being carried out under Disaster Management
Support Programme of ISRO. The Committee, desire that the
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation must ensure that the
drought-prone areas of the country are closely monitored during
the South-West Monsoon period so that additional financial
assistance from NDRF could be provided to the drought affected
State Governments promptly. The Committee also desire that
submission of monthly drought reports should be ensured by all
stakeholders so that the project activities of the NADAMS could
be reviewed periodically.
5. 21 Add before the last sentence of Para 21 of draft report
The Committee also desire that a permanent unit of NDRF should
be stationed at major pilgrimage centres during festival seasons
as the local administration, which holds charge of various other
matters concerning the district, may not have the requisite
capacity to handle stampedes or other such unfortunate incidents.
Sl. Para Read
No. No.

APPENDIX IV
GLOSSARY
AERB Atomic Energy Regulatory Board
ALTM Airborne Laser Terrain Mapper
ATIs Administrative Training Institutes
CAPF Central Armed Police Force
CBRN Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear
DDMA District Disaster Management Authority
DM Disaster Management
DMSAR Disaster Management Synthetic Aperture Radar
DSO Dam Safety Organization
DWR Doppler Weather Radars
EAP Emergency Action Plan
ESSO-INCOIS Earth System Science Organisation-Indian National Centre for
Ocean Information Services
ESSO-ICMAM ESSO-Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Management
HPC High Powered Committee
NCDC National Centre for Disease Control
NCMC National Crisis Management Committee
NCRMP National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project
NDCN National Disaster Communication Network
NDEM National Database for Emergency Management
NDMA National Disaster Management Authority
NDMF National Disaster Mitigation Fund
NDMIS National Disaster Management Informatics System
NIDM National Institute of Disaster Management
NDRF National Disaster Response Force/Fund
NDRR National Disaster Response Reserve
NEC National Executive Committee
NERMP National Earthquake Risk Mitigation Project
82

83
NPCBEERM National Programme for Capacity Building of Engineers in
Earthquake Risk Management
NPCBAERM National Programme for Capacity Building of Architects in
Earthquake Risk Management
RRC Regional Response Centre
SDMA State Disaster Management Authority
SDMP State Disaster Management Plan
SDRF State Disaster Response Force/Fund
SEC State Executive Committee
GMGIPMRND—3602LS(S3)—26.05.2016.

PARLIAMENTARY PUBLICATIONS CAN ALSO BE OBTAINED FROM THE
FOLLOWING  AUTHORISED  AGENTS:—
Sl.No. Name of Agent Sl .No. Name of Agent
ANDHRA  PRADESH
1. M/s. Ashok Book Centre, Benz Circle,
Vasavya Nagar, Vijaywada-520 006
(AP).
BIHAR
2. M/s. Progressive Book Centre, Zila
School, Pani Tanki Chowk, Ramna,
Muzaffarpur-842 002 (Bihar).
DELHI
3. M/s. Jain Book Agency, C-9,
Prem  House, Connaught Place,
P .B. No. 1113, New Delhi-110 001.
4. M/s. Bookwell, 2/72, Sant Nirankari
Colony, Kingsway Camp,
Delhi-110 009.
5. M/s. Rajendra Book Agency,
IV-D-50, Lajpat Nagar, Old Double
Storey, New Delhi-110 024.
(T. Nos. 26412362 & 26412131).
6. M/s. Central News Agency Pvt. Ltd.,
P-23, Connaught Circus,
New Delhi-110 001.
7. The Manager, M/s. Books India
Corporation, Publishers, Importers &
Exporters, L-27, Shastri Nagar,
Delhi-110 052.
8. M/s. Sangam Book Depot, LG-3,
Akarshan Bhawan, 23, Ansari Road,
Darya Ganj, New Delhi-110 002.
9. M/s. Biblia Impex Pvt. Ltd., 2/18,
Ansari Road, New Delhi-110 002.
(T.No. 23262515).
10. M/s. Universal Book Traders, 80,
Gokhale Market, Opp. New Courts,
Delhi-110 054 (T. No. 23911966).
11. M/s. Seth & Co., Room No. 31D,
Block-B, Delhi High Court, Sher Shah
Road, New Delhi-110 003.
12. M/s. Dhanwantra Medical & Law
House, 592, Lajpat Rai Market,
Delhi-110 006 (T. No. 23866768).
13. M/s. Jayna Book Depot, Chowk
Chhapparwala, Bank Street,
Karol Bagh, New  Delhi-110 005.
14. M/s. Standard Book Co., 125,
Municipal Market, Connaught Place,
P .B. No. 708, New Delhi-110 001
(T. No. 23411919).
15. M/s. D.K. Agencies (P) Ltd.,
A/15-17, Mohan Garden,
Najafgarh  Road, New Delhi-110 059.
16. M/s. Vijay Book Service,  C-D/123/C,
Pitam Pura, New Delhi-110 034.
MADHYA  PRADESH
17. M/s. Suvidha Law House, 28, Malviya
Nagar, Roshanpura, Bhopal-462 003.
MAHARASHTRA
18. M/s. Usha Book Depot, 585/A,
Chitra Bazar, Khan House,
P .B. No. 2621, Mumbai-400 002.
19. M/s. Jaina Book Agency (India),
649-A, Girgaum Road, Opp. 2nd
Dhobi Talao Lane, Mumbai-400 002.
PUDUCHERRY
20. Editor of Debates, Legislative
Assembly Department,
Puducherry-605 001.
TAMIL NADU
21. M/s. M.M. Subscription Agencies,
123, Third Street, Tatabad,
Coimbatore-641 012.
22. M/s. C. Sitaraman & Co., 73/37,
Royappettah High Road,
Chennai-600 014.
UTTAR  PRADESH
23. M/s. Law Publishers, Sardar Patel
Marg, P.B. No. 1077, Allahabad (UP).
24. M/s. Ram Advani Bookseller, Mayfair
Building, Hazrat Ganj,  GPO Box
No. 154, Lucknow-226 001.
PRINTED BY THE GENERAL MANAGER, GOVT. OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI.