37

1 cron oe ie rt CONSTRUCTION “| NEW LINES ON SOCIO-ECONOMIC
CONSIDERATION; (II) EXCESSIVE DELAYS IN MAINTENANCE OF
~ COCOMOTIVE: (III) FUNCTIONING OF RAIL VIKAS'NIGAM LIMITED. /

4

[Action taken by the Government on the  Observafions/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Sixty-Seventh
Report (15"" Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(RAILWAY BOARD)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2015-16)

THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA -

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI :



PAC NO. 2069
THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
: (2015-16)

न दाल चाल निज nena

* (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

Ss CONSTRUCTION te i aes NEW LINES ON SOGIO-EcoNomIC |
CONSIDERATION; ‘{ll] EXCESSIVE DELAYS IN MAINTENANCE OF. |
LOCOMOTIVE; 00 FUNCTIONING OF RAIL VIKAS NIGAM LIMITED,

‘

[Action taken by the Government onthe Observations! Recommendations of
‘the Committee contained in their Sixty-Seventh Report (157 Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(RAILWAY BOARD)

Presented to Lok Sabha ON! .........,ध

gel"

t . 7
‘Laid in Rajya Sabha on: ,...........--

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
“NEW DELHI
April 2016/ Vaisakha 1938 (Saka)


CONTENTS

PAGE

GOMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS हि (iit)

COMMITTEE (2015-16) = ४ ० ee _
क्रारए000ण"10४..................................... ............ ७६ ०0"००००0०0० {iv) ,

_ CHAPTER t REPO ................. जन जलन हनन 1

CHAPTER II* Observations/Recommendations which have been
. accepted by the Government ... we

CHAPTER II* — Observations/Recommendations which the
हु Committee do not desire to pursue in view, (18
replies received from the Government ...
CHAPTER [V* Observations/Recommendations in respect of
है which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration .................... हल ">> जलता जज...

CHAPTER ५४ Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which the Government have furnished interim
replies

APPENDICES

I “Minutes of the Twenty-second Sitting of the Public
: Accounts Committee (2015-16) held on 1" March,
2016

॥ Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the’ Public
Accounts Committee contained in their Sixty-
seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha}

“Not appended fo the cycfostyled copy of the Report


16.

17
18

19,
20,
21.
22.

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

Prof. K.¥. Thomas

MEMBERS

Shri 5.9. Ahluwalia ~

hri Ran|
hri Nishikant Dubey
hri Gajanan Kirtikar
hri Bhartruhari Mahtab

hri Dushyant Singh

ir. Kirit Somaiya

hri Anurag Singh Thakur
hi Shivkumar Udasi

Dr. P. Venugopal.

Ss
5
Ss
Si
S|
Shri Neiphiu Rio
Si
$s
D
5|
S

Shri Naresh Agrawal

Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
Shri Anil Madhav Dave
Shri Vijay Goel

Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Shri Shantaram Naik

(2045-16)

Chairpersort

“—="Shri-Sudip Bandyopadhyay
Singh Bra [11018

hri Janardan Singh Sigriwal

hri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank"

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy

Shri A.K. Singh
Shri T. Jayakumar
Shri AK. Yadav

SECRETARIAT .

-". Additional Secretary
Director
- Deputy Secretary

a

are,

2 -


INTRODUCTION

1, the Chairman Public Accounts Committee (2015-16), having been authorised ©
by the Committee, do present this Thirty-seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee ‘contained .in-their. Shty-seventh. Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘{i) —
Construction of new lines an Socio-Economic Consideration; ii} Excessive delays in,

Maintenance of Locomotive; (iii) Functioning of Rail Vikas Nigam Limited’ relating te

Ministry of Railways (RaifwayBoard),

2. The Sixty-seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 26" February, 2043
and laid in Rajya Sabha on 27" February, 2013. Replies of the Government fo the
 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received on 8" January,
2016. The Public Accounts Committee considered and adopted the Thirty-seventh
Report at their sitting held on 117 March, 2016. Minutes of the sitting are given at

Appendix-t. :

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the

Report,

4, The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendeted to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the -action faken by the Government on the Qbservations/
Recommendations contained in the Sixty-seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given

at Appendix-tt हि

NEWDELH PROF, K. ५, THOMAS;
_44" March,-2016 * . Chairperson,
21 Phalguna,.1937 {Saka} . Public Accounts Committee.


हे

CHAPTER — |
REPORT

’ This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with action taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their Sixty Seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on "(i) Construction of New Lines on
Sacio Economic Consideration; (il) Excessive “delays iv Maintenance ‘of Locomotives;
and (iii) Functioning of Rail Vikas Nigam Limited" based on Para Nos. 3.1, 4.1 and 7.2
of C&AG Report No.34 of 2010-11 Union Government - Railways .felating to the

Ministry of Railways (Railway Board).

2. The Sixty Seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) presented to Hon'ble Speaker
on 16.01.2043 and in the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha on 20.02.2013. It contained
sixteen Observations/Recommendations. Acton Taken Notes have been received from
the Ministry of Railways in respect af all the Observations/Recommendations and are
broadly categorised as follows: ‘

(i) Observation/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government
Recommendation Para Nos, 1.37, 1.38, 1.40, 1.41, 1.42, 1.43, 2.19, 2.20, 2.21,
2.22, 3.31 and 3.34. .
an Total:12
Chapter Il

(ii) Observation/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the teplies received fromthe Government

Recommendation Para Nos.3.32, and 3.33.
Total:02

Chapter Ill

(ili) Observation/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which -
require reiteration :

Recommendation Para Nos. 1.39
व Total:01
Chapter IV

(iv) Observation/Recommensations in respect of which the Government have
furnished interim replies हि

Recommendation Para Nos.3.35.

y 4

Chapter ४ :

Total:01 हे


A,

3 The Committees desire that the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) furnish
at . the earliest final/conclusive Action Taken Note on the
Observation/Recommendation No.3.35 of their 67" Report (157 Lok Sabha) in
respect of which the Ministry have furnished interim replies.

4. The detailed examination of the subjects by the Committee had revealed very.
systemic and other deficiencies which affect the construction of new lines, maintenance
of locomotives resulting in efficiency.of train services and creation of infrastructure for
Railways. The Committee had noted that many new line projects undertaken were
financially unviable, delay ogcurrecl| in completion of projects due to delay in
environment clearance/ non-availability of land leading fo further delay in execution of
the projects, lack of project schedule leading to lack of funds thus resulting in time over-
run and cost escalation.

5. The Committee had observed under-utilisation of. locomotives due to delay tn

- scheduled maintenance, non-availability of spare parts.for locomotives, lack of training

in the file of new technological developments for workshop technicians, lack of

computerisation of loco sheds, non-olyservance of codal provistons for maintenance of
locomotives. These causes were ultimately resulting in less availability and
underutilisation of locomotives thus affecting efficiency of Railways.

6. Further, examination of functioning of Rail Vikas Nigam Limited (RVNL) which
was primarily consti{uted to develop and implement varius projects to quicken the
augmentation of infrastructure on the Golden Quadfilateral and its diagonals and other
such projects covered under National Rail Vikas Yojana (NRVY) and market borrowings
revealed. that RVNL even after seven year of its inception, continued to be dependent
on the resources: of Railways. The «performance of RVNL on project execution and
management was inefficient as they were plagued by delays and cost overrun.

7, The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board)

on the .Observations/Recommendations of the Corimittee contained In their Sixty
Seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters
of this Report ‘in the succeeding paragraphs, the Commitieé will now deal with the

‘ oh


3
Action Taken by the Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations

made in the original Report which either need reiteration or merit comments.

Delay in completion of new line projects and availability of funds of funds
; {Recommendation Para No.1.37)

8. The Committee had noted that many new line projects were taken up by Indian
Railways’ 51 the “damand of “We people’s représentatives on ५ socio-economic
considerations to provide rail connectivity to backward and remote areas of the country.
Although financially unviable, still in view of their tangible benefits to the society, these
projects were considered for construction. In the Vision;-2020 document presented 10
Parliament, the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) had stated that there was huge
: shelf of 109 on-going ‘New Line Projects’ covering a roufe length of 11985 kms. out of
which only 12 were financially viable, 8 were national projects with assured funding and
“the remaining 97 projects being non-viable but sanctioned on socio-economic grounds.
Audit.examination of 50 on-going works of new lines sanctioned on socio-economic
considerations revealed that five projects sanctioned more than 20 years ago, nine
sanctioned between 15 and 20 years and 36 sanctioned between 10 and 15 years ago
- were lying incomplete as on 31 March, 2010 despite Railways having incurred
expenditure of Rs. 8549 cr. Some of the major deficiencies pointed out by Audit were
delay in preparation of detailed estimates and land acquisition, tack of coordination with
State Governments/ Ministry of Environment Forest for environment clearance, law and
order problems, militancy, insurgency'etc. and contractual failures Acknowledging that
these projects have not progressed well, the representatives of the Ministry had
conceded that resource crunch, delay in land acquisition, delay in environment
clearances were some of the major constraints for non-completion of these projects.

9. The Ministry of Railways in the ‘Action Taken Notes have submitted as under:

# All new line project including those taken up on socio-economic consideration
are funded through Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) extended by Ministry of
Finance & Planning Commission, But GBS for New Lines have been inadequate
compared to the throw forward of all pending projects and this is the primary
reason for delay in execution af projects Majority of the shortcomings stem from
this major. Constraint which Railways are facing. If funds are assured, Railway
can go whole hog in implementation of projects consequently majority of the”
deficiencies would be nonexistent except for few minor aberrations

4 4 4 g


a

Final Location Survey. (FLS), the basic preliminary work, depends upon
hordes of reasons not under the coniral of Railways such as resistance of local to
the project itself, dernand for change in alignment followed by repeated request
for minor modification .of alignment, changes suggested by state governments.

_ All these factors contribute to delay in completion of preliminary work and which
in turn delay all subsequent steps such as preparation of detailed estimates, land
acquisition, award of contracts ete. It is through regular pursuance with State
Authorities and . help of Public Representatives, persistent efforts are made to
avoid delays. : :

Other deficiency such as Land acquisition is primarily dependent upon
availability of funds. Delays cati be avoided if complete funds are assured/tie-up
as it will help in uninterrupted acquisition of land in one go. Other encumbrances
leading to delay in land acquisition such as protest by land owners, non
clearances by State Governments in handing over forest land, change of
alignment at the behest of locat public, State Government etc. are tackled by
regular meeting and follow-ups with State authorities and seeking help of Public
representatives.

॥ absence of assured funding, phased execution is planned consequently
part Detailed Estimates are prepared and land is acquired in phases for stretches
whose part Detailed Estimates have been prepared. As such there is no delay in
initiation of process for land acquisition albeit there are delays in land acquisition
of entire project. The problem has further aggravated by astronomical increase in
land price in many States. हे

Ministry of Railways have been consistently impressing upon Planning
Commission to enhance the Gross Budgefary Support commensurate with the
throwforward but it has not yielded significant dividend. Some steps initiated by
Ministry of Railways to tide up over the resource crunch are as under:-

1. Railways have been requesting the States to come forward to contribute
their bit towards bringing socially backward areas into the mainstream by.
providing rail connectivity.-To this end, Railways have been successful to
certain extent, as now some of the states have agreed to-provide land free
of cost and / or share the cost of the projects. 10 State Governments have
already ‘come forward for taking up projects on cost sharing and at present
36 projects covering a length of more than 5586 km have been taken up
on cost sharing basis with State Governments

2. Formation of project specific SPV having equity and.debt financing to
mobilize funds for the projects

3. To attract private investment, Ministry of Railways have recently
announced @ policy on Participative models for building Rail connectivity
and capacity augmentation. Details have been given, in the remarks

_ against the observation / recommendation of para 1.40

4 \ t


5
4. In consultation with Ministry of Finance, ongoing projects have been
categorized to avoid thin spread of funds

Land acquisition in most of the projects is dene by State Govts. on behalf
of Railways. To avoid delay in lend acquisition, regular meetings’ are held with
State Govts. for expeditious acquisition of land. For speedy land acquisition,
Land acquisition is also now being taken up under the Railways Amendment Act
2008 after declaring Railway projects as Special Railway Projects, accordingly,

~~--—dependency on State-Govts. -for this-critical activity, have been reduced.

To expedite foréstry clearance, Railways makes ail efforts to comply
observations/objections raised by M/o Environment. Regular meetings are being
held at higher level and Railway's case is adequately represented for early
forestry clearance

As has been brought 901, In large projects, phased execution ts planned
depending upon availability of:funds and efforts are made to execute from one
end and put to immediate use after completion as to generate stream and to
derive maximum benefit."

10. The Committee note the various factors responsible for non-completion of
many hew line projects. These factors are mainly resource crunch, delay in land
acquisition, delay in environment clearance apart from lack of cooperation from
local authorities and State Goverriments. The Committee appreciate the efforts
made by the Railways to overcome these obstacles and complete the projects in
tirrie. However, the Committee are not convinced over the fact that delays ranging
from 10 to 20 years were due to these factors alone. They feel that the Railways
should make some extra efforts to resolve the problems faced in completion of
new line projects. The Committee desire the Railways fo ensure that land
acquisition problem is pursued with State Governments in a more proactive
manner at appropriate level so that delay on th is account is minimised. They also
feel that making availability of adéquate funding is a part of planning process.
They, therefore, desire the Ministry of Railways to ensure that funds allotted
through Gross Budgetary Suppert are fully utilised in such projects. The
Committee, however, desire that the new line projects, where State Governments
have agreed to contribute their percentage of funds and tand acquisition has
been completed, should be given priority for implementation particularly in the

‘case of Jharkhand and Nagaland.


6
New Policy of freezing/shelving of socio-economic projects
(Recommendation Para No, 1.39) .
41, The Committee had found that work was not taken up in five projects which were
sanetioned in 1997-98 to’ 2000-01, Further, in four projects. the physical progress was
less than ten percent. Still, Railways intend to continue all the projects with a request to
the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance for enhancement of gross budgetary
~ support for execution of projects. In their 64% Report, the Public Accounts Committee
(147 Lok Sabha) had recommended that Ministry of Railways, Finance and Planning
should aot only lay down criteria for taking up various Railway projects but also review
all the on-going projects that were taken up on socio-economic considerations. The
Ministry in their Action Taken Note stated that the new projects were taken up based on
the demands and aspirations of local people and therefore shelving such projects would
have wider ramifications and invite ‘public criticism. The Committee in their Fourth
Report (157 Lok Sabha) had observed that while the Railways were not prepared to
shelve projects which were yet to take off, on the other hand the State Governments
were not prepared fo share the cost. Therefore, the Committee had recommended that

the projects taken up on socio-economic considerations should be reviewed so that a
fair assessment of continuing or shelving such projects was made. The Committee had
also felt that unless the concerned State Governments agree to share the cost and
provide land free of cost, Railway may-revisit the proposed construction of such projects

and also evolve a sound national policy in this behalf.

12. The Ministry of Railways in the Action Taken Notes have submitted as under:

"Since shelving of projects wherein the werk is yet to commence or
physical progress is very fow due to resource crunch would be difficult, as
mentioned in the remarks against the observation /recommendation of para 1.37,
such projects have been assigned low priority and State Govis are being
requested to come forward to share cost of the projects and in addition give land
free of cost. _ :

Recommendation of the Hon'ble Committee to evolve a policy of freezing
/shelving of such socio economic projects which were yet to take off and there is
reluctances on part of State Gavt. 00 share the cost have been noted."

i
13. The Committee are unhappy to note the casual reply of the Ministry of
Raitways in response to their recommendation for evolving a new national policy
of freezing/shelving of socio-economic projects which were yet to take off and
there is reluctance onthe part of State Governient to share the cost. The


ra . 7
Committee caution the Ministry to be more categorical while replying to the
recommendation of the Committee. The Committee would like to reiterate their
earlier recommendation and desire’ the Ministry to expedite the finalisation of a
new national policy and apprise the Committee within six months of presentation

of this Report.

Impact assessment of the improved infrastructure
(Recommendation Para No, 2.19) -

14. The Committee had noted that preventive maintenance of locomotives was

catried out at diesel sheds at specified intervals to ensure maximum availability and
- optimum utilization of locomotives. The maintenance of diesel locos of North Western
Railway was carried out by diesel ‘shed at Abu Road (ABR) and Bhagat Ki Kothi
(BGKT). Audit scrutiny revealed that failure of the Railways to carry out the
maintenance schedules of diesel jocomotives within the prescribed time led to excess
detention and consequential loss of earning capacity fo fhe tune of Rs. 92.89 crore.
Acknowledging the drawbacks, the representatives of the Ministry informed the
Committee that various corrective rneasures had been taken to improve the shed
outages which inter-alia included improved infrastructure in the diesel sheds, repairing
of sunning bays and heavy repair bays, improved training in handling of locomotives
both in the shed as well as on line to staff and introduction of microprocessor based
control system. While taking note of the remedial measures taken by the Railways, the *
Committee had desired to be apprised about the impact of these measures within three

months of the presentation of this report.

45. The Ministry of Railways in theiAction Taken Notes have submitted as under:
1

“itis clarified that depending ‘upon the holding and the number of locomotives
used on passenger carrying services and providing for scheduled and
unschéduled maintenance, a ‘target ‘outage’ is specified for each. shed. This
‘outage’ is the commitment of the shed to the user depariment, [.8., Traffic Deptt.
for utitizing in goods services. It can be seen from the table below that the actual
outage has been more than the target and statistical ineffective for repairs is
within the specified target.

This is substantiated from the figure of ineffective’ and outage of NWR given
below: हे

i

Year Ineffective | Actual ineffective | Target outage | Actual outage |
target है

५. 09-10 ६190 | 7.56 2 74.7 i 83.25



8

[
{
॥

10-41 40 8.06 [89.63 62.41
1-12 10 8.17 [62.49 64.84
12-13 Upto Oct 12 10 | 7.78. [69.29 70.69

Thus, the diesel loco stieds on NWR have actually provided almost 2.78
locamotives per day over anc above the target and have actually helped the

railway fo earn more than what had been committed in 2010-11

Improvement is a continuous process and in short term the effect of
improved infrastructure may not be reflected. Their effect can only be-seen after -

one or two years after putting them in 91808."

16. The Committee note that various corrective measures taken to improve the
shed outages which inter-alia include improved infrastructure in the diesel sheds,

repairing of running bays etc.

improvement is a continuous process and in short term, the effect of improved
infrastructure may not be reflected and their effect can only be seen after one or
two years after putting them in place. In view of this, the Committee would like to

urge the Ministry to make an impact assessment of the improved infrastructure

However, the Ministry have stated that

and apprise the Committee accordingly.

Computerisation of loco sheds
(Recommendation Para No.2.21)

17. The Committee had noted that bunching of locomotives for overhauling is
unavoidable because of varying traffic requirements on day to day basis, priority of
traffic movements for transportation of essential goods and military movements etc
When more than one locomotive enter the shed, it also lead to bunching of locos for
overhauling and other schedules. Further, the Committee had noted that over utilization
of locos were allowed ignoring the maintenance of locos in working condition. The
Committee were informed by the Ministry of Railways that since freight movement is
erratic and depends upon seasonal inputs, utilization of jocos is done by the
Department and therefore banning over utilization of diesel locomotives for carrying out

schedule repairs will not be a prattical approach. The Cammittee had, therefore,

desired that continuous sustained, efforts

ineffectiveness of the locomotives and feasibility of computerization of sheds, upgrading
the reliability of spare parts, upgrading the: infrastructure in the diesel sheds and
improving the maintenance practice in consonance with fast changing technology, may

need to be’ made to minimize the

* be examined by the Ministry and the Committee apprised. $


48. The Ministry of Railways in their action taken reply stated as under:

"Recommendation of the Hon’ble Committees on the paras has been noted.
. However, it is pertinent to mention here that the sustained efforts are being made
to keep the ineffective of locos as per the target. The action is being taken on the
advice of RDSO & DLW regarding upgradation of spare parts. The feasibility of
_computerization sheds will be studied to incorporate better management
‘information system."-7 0 ~

19. - The Ministry of Railways have noted the recommendation of the Committee
for minimising the ineffectiveness of the locomotives and assured that feasibility
of computerisation of sheds will be studied to incorporate better management
information system. However, they failed to provide any time frame for
conducting such study and its implementation. The Committee feel that this
reflects lack of seriousness on the part of the Railways. They, therefore,
recommend that the Ministry of Railways should fix a definite time frame for
accomplishing the task of implementation of computerisation of sheds so that
necessary planning process in this regard is initiated and unnecessary delay in
the computerisation is avoided. The Committee may be Informed in this regard at

the earliest.

Participative Models for Rail Connectivity and Capacity Augmentation Projects Models for Rail Connectivity and Capacit) Augmentation Projects
(Recommendation Para No.3.34)

20. The Committee had observed that the MoU entered into between Indian
Railways and RVNL does not contain any provision for release of funds to RVNL as
‘Project Advance’. Till 31 March, 2010 an amount of Rs.3355 crore stands released to
RVNL as ‘Project Advance’ without any interest liability on RVNL's part. The Committee
were informed that the money is paid as ‘Project Advance’ to RVNL to incur expenditure
involved in execution of the project which is to be transferred to the Railways on
completion of projects. The funds ate released as advance as the ownership of the
asset created by RVNL on completion lies with the Railways and RVNL does not have
an independent revenue stream for operation of asset for repayment of any funds takén
as ‘loan’. The Committee had also noted that subsequent to the formation of RVNL, 5
number of changes in the financial ‘structure and scope were made by the Ministry
which were against the: original’ objectives of formation of RVNL. In August, 2004
Ministry of Railways permitted borrowings only through Indian Railways Finance


10

Corporation (IRFC) and decided to bear full responsibility for the repayment of the
principal and cost of borrowirigs on the funds received from /RFC. The Minisiry justified

the borrowings from IRFC stating that the option was to either permit RVNL to enter the
financial markets directly and borrow or make use of its existing dedicated market
borrowing viz. [RFC. Apparently, the RVNL was largely ineffective in performing one of
its core functions |.e. generating additional resources and resource mobilization from
external sources. To enable RVNL to discharge one of its core functions, the Committee
desired that the Ministry of Railways should impress upon RVNL to make innovative
efforts to. generate additional resources in accordance with mandate given to it.

21, The Ministry of Railways in their action taken replies submitted that raising of
additional resources by leveraging market borrowing have been restricted to the loans
received from [RFC. However, RVNL. has been able to arrange Rs. 4386 cr. for its
Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) projects with RVNL's equity contribution of only Rs. 571
cr. 1.8. 13% of the total investment. Ministry of Railways has recently formulated a
policy for Participative Models for Rail Connectivity and Capacity Augmentation Projects
dated 10.12.2042. It is expected that RYNL will play a significant role in raising
additional resources for investment in rail infrastructure through this new initiative.

22. The Committee note that 1509 of Railways have formulated a policy for
Participative Models for Rail Connectivity and Capacity Augmentation Projects. It:
is also expected that RVNL wilt ‘play a significant role in raising additional
resources for investment in rail infrastructure. However, it is not known whether
this policy has already been implemented or is likely to be implemented. It is also
not known as to what amount Railways are expected to generate through this
capacity augmentation. Therefore, the Committee desire the Ministry of Railways
to intimate the Committee about the salient features of the scheme and the likely
date of its implementation afong with the quantum of additional resources likely

to be generated through it. न

NEW DELHI; PROF. K. V. THOMAS,

417 March, 2016 2. . Chairperson,
21 Phalguna, 1937 (Saka) ’ Public Accounts Committee



A PPENDIX- 1
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SECOND SITTING OF THE PUBLIC

ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2015-16) HELD ON 71° MARCH, 2016. 1045-18) HELD ON 417 MARCH, 2016,

The Committee sat from 1000 hrs..fo 1100 hrs. on 117 March, 2016 in Room

No. “51”, Parliament House; New Delhi.

PRESENT
~ Prof. K7V. Thomas =" * ~~ Chairperson 77

MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
Shri S.S. Ahluwatia
Shri Nishikant Dubey
"Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank”
Shri Neiphiu Rio ।
Shri Dushyant Singh
Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal

eNom ek ON

Dr. Kirit Somaiya
“RAJYA SABHA
9.° Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

1. ShriA. K. Singh - Additional Secretary
2. Shri T. Jayakumar : - Director

53... ShriA.K. Yadav - Deputy Secretary
4... Smt. Anju Kukreja - Under Secretary

REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER. AND
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA

4, - Shri Rakesh Jain - Deputy C&AG {RC}
2. Shri B.R. Mondal : - Principal Director (RBA)
3. Shri L.S. Singh - Principal Director (RC)

2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the
Commitfee. Thereafter, the Committee took up. the following draft Reports for

consideration:

५ है % पु पु


i
(i) KOK 060. XXX XXX

(ii) Draft Report on Action Taken on the observations/recommendations conteined
in 67" Report of PAC (15" Lok Sabha) on the subject (i) Construction of New
Lines on Socto-Economic consideration; {ii} Excessive Delays in
Maintenance of Locomotive; and {iii) Functioning of Rail Vikas Nigam

Limited,
(ll) xx KKK ३0000. XXX
3. The Chaiipérson invited’ sliggéstions of the Members on the above mentioned

draft Reports. After discussing the contents of these draft Reports, the Committee
adopted the draft Reports with some changes/modifications which are indicated in the
enclosed Annexures I-tIl,

4. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalise these Reports in the light
of verbal discussion and consecjuential changes arising out of factual verification by
the Audit and present the same to Parliament.

The Committee then adjourned. Committee then adjourned.


-|2-
ANNEXURE-I

Changes/modifications as suggested by the Members to be incorporated in Draft
Report on Action Taken on the observations/recomimendations contained in 67" Report
of PAG (150 Lok Sabha) on the subjects “(i) Construction of New Lines on Socio-
Economie consideration; (ii) Excessive Delays in Maintenance of Locomotive; and (iti)
FunctionIng of Rail Vikas Nigam Limited.”

Sl Page/Ling / *~ छठ Read ~

No, No. .

1, Page 5, Para - Add at the end of Para 10 - “The
10/LastLine ~ _ Committee, however, desire that the

new line projects, where . State
Governments have agreed to
contribute their percentage of funds
and land acquisition has been
completed, should be given priority for

. implementation particularly in the case
of Jharkhand and Nagaland.”


jy
Lo APPENDIX-H
(Vide Paragraph 5 of introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON. THE

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
CONTAINED IN THEIR SIXTY-SEVENTH REPORT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)

{i) ~ Total number of Observations/Recommendations * 16

(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the. Committee Total’: 12
which have been accepted by the Government: Percentage: 76.47%

Para Nos. 1.37, 1.38, 1.40, 1.41, 1.42, 1.43, 2.19, 2.20,
2.21, 2.22,3.3¢and3.34, ;

(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Total : 02
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of Percentage: 11.76%
the reply of the Government:
Para Nos, 3.32 and 3,33

(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of Total : 01
which repiies of the Government have not been Percentage: 5.88%
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

Para Nos. 1.39

(v)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of | Total: 01
which the Government have furnished interim replies: Percentage: 5.88%
Para No. 3.35