_ TRIBAL SUB-PLAN

MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT.
MINISTRY.OF HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE AND
~ MINISTRY OF AYUSH

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2047-18) -

EIGHTY FIFTH REPORT

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI ;



738

PAC

BEUIGHTY FIPTH. REPORT

| PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2017-18}

(8 LXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

|[_ Trpatsuperan | SUB-PLAN

MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT,
MIRISTRY OF HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE AND
MINISTRY OF AYUSH

है ६]
Presented to Lok Sabha on: 181 m4 2s tk-
Laid in Rajya Sabha on: ) 8] rt QF ©

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

December, 2017 | Agrahayana, 1939 (Saka}



’ CONTENTS -

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIG ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2016-77) * Gil}

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2017-18) tiv)

- COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITIEEIV GF PUBLIG ACCOUNTS
- COMMITTEE (2016-47 & 2047-18)

INTRODUCTION. oc sessecssececcnsceneeeeene cee ....ह................. ्से
. रा : REPORT -
. . . PART 1
| 7 Intraductory
मम Weak financial management of TSP funds
mt Non-creation of non-lapsable Central paol of TSP funds .

, a Delays in the formation of nodal units > है हा
Vv : Poor management of progranunes under TSP _ - B
VE , . Weak monitoring mechanism . 49

PART I हु
Observations! Recommendations... जज eee von ceeelecateeeeenee 7 , 23
SS " ANNEXURES!
A - . Minutes of the sitting of the Sub-Commitiee IV

7 "of PAC (2016-17) on 26.09.2016

छः Minutes of the sitting of the Sub-Carmitiee-1V
- of PAC (2016-17) on 05.01.2017

: ¢ Minutes of the sitting of the-Sub-CommitieelV¥
. "हा PAC (2017-18) on 08.06.2017

D - Minutes of the ‘sitfing of the Public Accounts
: Committee (2017-18) on 13.10:2017 -

. PAGE


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUN

COMMITTEE (2016-47)

Prof. KV. Thomas - Chaicperson
MEMBERS

LOK SABHA ~
Shi Sudip Bandyopadhyay
Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
Shia Nishikant Dubey
Prof. Richard Hay — हे
Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
Shi Bhartruhari Mahiati
8... Sut. Riti Pathak
& Shri Neiphiu Rich -
-10. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwa!
' 4t. Shri Abhishek Singh. _ . हि
42. - Dr. Kirt Somaiya .?# - a
13. . Shri Anurag Singh Thakur” eo
14. ShiShivkumarC.Udasi - 2 0” : गा
45. Or. B. Venugopal है

NQaopan -

RAJYA SABHA

46... ShriNaresh Agrawal -

47. Shri Safyavrat Chaturvedi ताल:

48... * StuiBhupender Yadav -

19. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita _- - -
20. Shri Shantaram Naik - है

21. “Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy ~

22.” Stai Ajay Sancheti _

Elected w.c£ €9.08.2016 vice Shri. Vijay Goel, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f.
05.07.2016.


COMPOSTION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS GOMMITTEE (2877-18}

Shri Mailikarjun Kharge - Chairperson
MERBERS -

LOR SABHA

2. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay हे
3... Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria . . |
4... आएं Prera Singh Chandumajra . हि
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey
6. Shri Gajanari Chandrakant Kirtikar
7. Shit Bhartruhari Mahtab
- 8. Smt. Riti Pathak
9... Shi Neiphiu Rioh- .
10. Shi Abhishék Singh
41... Prof, Ram Shanker
42. > Dr. Xt Somaiya -
13. Shri Anurag Singti Thakur ~
14. 9 Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi : See
15. छा. P. Venugopat. हु हे .

RAJYA SABHA

46.- Shi Naresh Agrawal -

17. Shei Satyavrat Chaturvedi
- 48. Shi Bhubaneswar Kalita

19. Shré Shantaram Naik*

20. Shit Sukhendu Sekhar Royt. : .
" 24. ShriAjay Sancheti दि ह .
22. ShsiBhupender Yadav

- _ SECRETARIAT *
4. _ SHRAK, Singh oan Additional Secretary
2... Shrfdaya Kumar. - = * Director हैं
- 38. Shai Paolienlat Haokip - Deputy Secretary ~
- Executive Assistant

4, Shit Ashikho Alemo

Ceased tt hea Mamber of Congnittee consequent upon his retireanent ftom Rajya Sabheon2t Taly.
20K7. .
Ceased to be aMomber of Committes consequent upou his retirement fron Rajya Sabha on 18
August, 2077:



« Fe (Gil Ministries and Non-campliensc oF tracly

Ssion af Aadion Taken MOS) 01647 & 201748) एपए77 एप

Comestzor : 4. Shri Bharirubari Mahtad
_ Alternate: Convenor = Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtker

2.
Mernbers - 3.° Shri Nishikant Dubey
“4. Dr: P. Ventigopal
§. Shri Ajay Sancheti
6

. Shi Shivkumar C. Udesi



co ; INTROBUGTION

५ + ॥, the Chairperson, Public Accounis Committee (2017-18), having been authorised by ~
‘he Committee, do present this Eighty Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) an ‘Tribal Sub-
Stan? based on Report Ne.33 of 2015 of Comptroller and Auditar General of India, Union -
Savernrnent pertaining te the Ministries of Human Resource Development, Health & Family _”
Welfare and AYUSH. ~ हि हि हि

2. "The Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of india was faid an the Table of
the House on 8" December, 2015. -

3. The Public Accounts Committee (2016-17) took” up the subject for detailed
examination and report. The Sub-Committee-IV was constituted under.the Convenorship of
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab, M.P and Member of PAC that took evidence of the representatives
of the Ministries of Human Resource Development, Health & Family Welfare and AYUSH on |
the subject at their sittings held on 20" September, 2016 and 5 January, -2017.
Accordingly, a draft Report was prepared and finalized by the Sub-Committee and placed
before the Commitiée for their consideration. : Se

4. “The Public Accounts Committee (2017-18) considered and adapted this draft Report
at their sitting held on 135 October, 2017. Minutes of the sittings are appended to the
Report.’ . . : -

5. For facility of reference and convenierice, the Observations/Recommendations of the
Commitiee have been printed in bold and form Part Il of the Report.” हि

5. . The Committee would like to express their-thanks to the representatives of the
Ministries of Human Resource Development, Health & Family Welfare and AYUSH for

tendering evidence -hefore them and furnishing information in connection with the
examination of the subject है 7 .

क्र The Cormmifiae place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered fa them
inthe matier by the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 0 -

“MEW DELHI है - SHRI MALUIKARJUN KHARGE
4December, 2017” ~ . . Chairperson,
“43 Agrahayana, 1938 {Saka} हु . है Public Accounts Gommitfce



REPORT
PART --1

! INTRODUCTORY

This Report is based on Report No.33 of 2015 of C&AG’s Performarice
Audit Report on Tribal. Sub-Plan for the year 2011-12 to 2013-14, pertaining fo
thé Ministry of Human Resource Development, -Ministry of Heallh & Family
Welfare and Ministry of AYUSH

2. The Sub-Committee -IV of Public Accounts Committee (2016-17) took up :
the subject for detailed examination and took oral evidence of the representatives
of the Ministries of Human Resource Development, Ministry of Health & Family

, Welfare and Ministry of AYUSH and obfained written replies on the subject.
Based on these oral evidences and writfen replies, the Sub-Committee examined —
the subject in detail. i

3. ‘The persistence and perpetuation of socio-economic backwardness in
spite of the development efforts had warranted 8 special and focussed strategy -
and a need for a separate policy instrument for the Scheduled Tribes (STs) fo
enable them to share the benefits of developmental growttr in a more equitable
manner. A comprehensive policy of protection, welfare and development of the
STs. was prepared by an Expert Committee set up in 1972 which finally gave
birth to Tribal Sub-Plan for Scheduled Tribes in 1976. The Tribal Sub-Plan (TSP)

was adopted for the first time inthe Fifth Five Yéar Plan (1974-79). The principal

aim of the TSP is to bridge the gap between the STs and the genera! population

with respect te alt socio-economic development indicators in a time -bound
” manner. The Tribal Sub-Plan aims to channelize the-flow of outlay and benefits
from the general sectors in the Central Ministries/Departments : for the
development of STs both in. physical and financial terms.

4


4. TSP strategy has twin objective, namely, socio-economic development of

Scheduled Tribes and proieciion of tribals against exploitation. Guidelines on ~ .

" forniutation, implementation. and monitoring of TSP have been issued by the

Planning Commission from time to time to fhe States/UTs and Central Ministries

for the formulation and effective implementation of the TSP. The last revision was
done in 2005, wich inter-alia suggested (as per guidelines issued in 2008): (i)
earmarking of plan funds in proportion to the Scheduled Caste (SC) and

Scheduled Tribe (ST) population both atthe Central and State levels: Gi) .

Scheduled Caste Sub Plan & Tribal Sub-Plan funds should be non-divertible anc

non-lapsable; (i) designing proper and appropriate developmental |

programmes/schemes/activities; (iv) Creation of sepatate budget heads/sub-
heads for different sectors; and (v) Creation of effective moniforing mechanism:
In 2010, a task force identified 28 Central Ministries/departments in terms of their
- obligation to earmark ailocation in propartion fo the population. of STs. In
accordance with these policy guidelines: 28 Central: Ministries/Departments
allocated ₹ 64399.73 crore as. TSP fund during 2011-12 to 2013-14. Further, the

guidelines also provide that the Tribal Welfare Departments will be nodal.
Departments for the formulation of the TSP in the States. The TSP conceptis not

applicable io the tibaf majority States where tribals represent more than 60 per
cent of the poputation, since the Annual Plan in these States/UTs is itself a Tribal
Pian.

5, In their Report, Audit has made the following observations on the financial _

management af TSP, implementation, monitoring and achievements of TSP.


6. In their Report, Audit revealed that the strategy for development of STs
through Tribat Sub-Plan included earmarking of Plan funds of Ceniral
Ministries/Departments into a separate head of account ie. 0796-Plan head ~
strengthening of administrative arrangement for implementing and monitoring the
TSP funds. Audit observed that no segregation of TSP funds under each scheme

- inthe 0796-Plan Head at State/distiict/block level was available. The Department:
of School Edtication & Literacy, Departnient of Higher Education and Department
of Heatth and Family Welfare had not adopted the specified earmarkinig noms

- be. 10.7 %, 7.5 %, 8.2 % and 2% respectively. There was short release of TSP
funds by $13138.05 crore during 2011-12 to 2013-14.

7. ; Audit also observed that no segregation of TSP funds and release of Tsp"
funds did not synchronise with the allocations made by-the Departments. Audit
also noticed that there was incomect release of TSP funds to tribal majority

” States, where tribals represent more than 60 per cent of the population as well as
release of TSP funds to non ST populated States- where ST population was Nit
as per Census 2011 oe oo ह

8° With regard to earmarking- of Tribal Sub Plan funds of Central
Ministries/Departments into a separate head of account and monitoring of the :
same, the Department of School Education & Literacy stated as follows:

“Earmarking of central funds is done as per the MHRD डे
Guideline for Implementation of Programmes and Schemes under —
- Scheduled Castes Sub Plan (SCSP) and Tribat Sub Plan (TSP)
which provides 20% for sc Component and 10.7% for ST
“Camponent in respect of Department of -School Education &
Literacy. 2



Ja_orderte_ensuretheuniform-and continuous availability of - —~ ---
ttinds for implementation of SSA programme, the central share is
released as ad-hoc instalment (in the beginning of the financial year
Le. April-May), balance of the 1° instalment (July-August) and 2"¢
instalment (October-November). The release of central share is
done as per fhe provisions of General Financiat Rule (GFR} and
Manual on Financial Management and Procurement (FM&P) of SSA.
After release of the ad-hoc instalment, the balance of the 1
instalment and 2™ instalment are released. affer submission of
required documents. by States ahd UTs that include provisional UCs
expenditure statement, statement showing the cumulative release of
state share, stalement on settlement of outstanding advances, audit
report, audited utilization certificate and Annexure-IX, XVI and XXV
of Manuai on FM&P, ;

"The rélease of state share is ensured by the fact that the |
central share is released only after the commensurate state share is”

. teleased by the States. The sanction leffer issued by the
Depariment also clearly mentions that.the commensurate state
share has to be released within.one month from the receipt of central _
share.

Quarterly meetings of Finance Controlfers (FCs) of State -
Impiementing Societies (SISs) are convened by the Department to
review the financial progress and financial management. This would
now, also be monitored through the SSA-SHAGUN portal developed

है for online monitoring of SSA.



Sanction orders. explicitly mention the central share &
correspanding state share fo be released immediately by State to-

State Implementing Agency. The release of funds and utilization is ;

also monitored through online Project Monitoring System (PMS) of
-RMSA. - i

' Mid Day Meal $ Meal Scheme (MDM) :

The funds are earmarked for General, Scheduled Caste Sub

Plan (5059) & Tribal Sub Plan (TSP) categories in the ratio af 69.10

%, 20.20 % & 10.70 % respectively as per the direction ‘of the o
_ efstwhite Planning Commission. The funds are released under Mid ,

. Day Meal Scheme in two instalnients in the ratio of 60:40. Tn order to.
‘ensure smooth implementation of the scheme, ihe Ist instalment is
segregated into ad-hoc release at the rate of 25 % af the 1st
instalment. The ad-hoc release is ‘made in the month of April without

insisting for any information from the State- Goverment. The हु

balance of ist instalment (35%) is released after receiving
information about the unspent balance from the releases of previous
year and matching contribution by the State against the -minimum
mandatory share for the sharable components (cooking ‘cost,
honorarium to cook-cum helpers-& construction, of Kitchen-cum
stores). The balance 40% is released atter receiving the utilisation
certificate ‘for the previous releases, experiditure statement,
confirming that the state has incurred 60% or more expenditure
against the available funds (unspent balaiice & releases under ad-

hoc as well as balance of.1st instalment), and confirmation that the



- state -hassleased_thesninimum-mandatory. share-against shacalsic
campenenis,

‘To ensure compliance, the Depasiment further stated as under:

"tt has been emphasized to all States to ensure strict
compliance on maintenance of the separate account/récord/Head for
the funds received and expenditure incurred under TSP from this:

_ Financial Year itself. wherever possible, but strictly from next

financial year. This may also be reflected in the Final Ufifization

Certificate submitted to the Department. This’ would enable. the.
‘Depariment to ensure that the expenditure Teported under the head_
0796 is actually linked with the flow of benefits to STs. This would
also be monitored through the SSA-SHAGUN portal developed for.
online Monitoring of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA). Sitnilariy, for
other schemes also, funds are released in proportion to population
है of STs in respective States.” _

The Department of Higher Education stated as under: ~

“in. Department of Higher Education funds are released. to
UGC under General, SC, SF components, which in turn releases ,
funds to Central Universities and other institutions, recognized under
29 and 128 of UGC Act, 1956, under these heads. As such there is -
no question of segregating of TSP funds at State/District/Block
fevel.”

_.During oral evidence the representatives of the Department of Higher
Education further stated that: ‘

Higher Education - unlike the other departments ~ is
insfidion-centric. We have.a network of Cenitat Universities and
ह 6


Stutes, primarily to the institutions. in that, there are established

frameworks for this; of which, the University Grants Commission is «
the key but we also -have the A -India Council for Technical ”
Education as weit as the institution, We are now almost entirely
autematized in our financial flows. But those are the flows in which
the framework is still budgetary and it consists black grants that are :

released to.the institutions and the segmentation, whichis part of the
plan, has been followed. As of now, there is a very clear
segmentation of the Tribal Sub-Plan and itis a part of the Plan,”

9. The Ministry of Health -and ‘Family Welfare have stated that all the

States/UTs have been directed to report head wise expenditure in FMR for

General, SC and ST under ‘the National Heaith Mission (NHM). Further to ensure
proper reporting of expenditure under these components under the NHM, the
Ministry with support of NIC has developed PIP software that would help in

proposing separate component wise planning and budgeting for different |

activities. This has been made operational and ait future PIPs will be. received
electronically through the P{P software.

40. With regard to release of TSP fund to tribal majority States and non-ST

populated States, the representatives of the Ministry of. AYUSH have stated as

under:

- “The issue here is again that tribal majority States do not
qualify under TSP. Somehow this clarity was not there and the

funds have been released by two of our Councils to tibal majority.

States. This mistake is acknowledged and it wilt not happen in
future.”

-- — other institutions. We—de-net follaw—er-we-da -not-release to-the———~


44, Ih veply-to-the Audit finding-of shart{nen telease-of Fee fuads _the-Ministy;——

of Health & Farnity Welfare stated aa follows:

‘Immunization programme fargets children which are eligible
for vaccination. The supplies are based on the birth: cohort in
Routine Immunization and target beneficiaries in Putse Patio
Immunization programme, irrespective of the fact. that the child
belotigs to which category. Thus, the programme addresses the
equality issue. Hence, the supplies of the vaccines are based on the .
target, so is the operational cost. The Department ‘has never
received any stock out information from the entire country including

tribal areas. | ——

ee National Programme For Prevention and Control of
Cancer, Diabetes, Cardiovascular Disease and Stroke (NPCDCS) -
and National Programme for Health Care for the Elderly (NPHCE}
have been brought under the umbrella of NHM during the F.¥.2013- ~
44. * ह

Full amount was not released for NPHCE and NPCDCS due
to high unspent balance in these programmes. However, the savings
under these programmes under TSP were utilized, for other
programmes under TSP only. Thus, there was ho overall shortfall in
uilization of TSP budget under the NHM.” है

B.  NON-CREATION OF NON-LAPSABLE CENTRAL POOL OF TSP FUND CENTRAL POOL OF TSP FUND

12. Audit, in their Report noted that as per revised guidelines, TSP funds
remaining unutifized at the end of-a financial year may be transferred info a non--
‘ lapsable poo! of TSP funds and funds from the Non-Lapsabie Centrat Pao! of
TSP fund (NLCPTF) may be allocated to Ministry of Tribal’ Affairs for

8


- __—_ implernenting-schemes exclusively fer development of STs—I he-+eearimendation --_t—
of Inter-Ministerial Committee (2013) also clarified that in case it was found that ‘
the earmarked funds for TSP in a particular year was not spent in proportion to
the share of ST population in the State, it must be ensured that the. gap was
funded suitably for providing funds fo that extend in fhe non-lapsable [2001 to be
administered by the nodal Ministry i.e Ministry of Tribal Affairs which may in turn, *

, allocate the funds.for implementing schemes éxclusively for the benefit of STs
Audit found that NLCPTF had not been formulated so far and thus, the concept
of transfer of unutiised TSP fund to NLCPTF remain a nan-starter, indicating ©
inadequate control on the management of funds by the Departments. Audit —
noticed severat deficiencies in the financiat managenient of TSP funds in. the

* selected schemes in the states such as non-maintenance of separate account of
TSP fund, shortidelay in release by Central ‘Government/State Government,
non/under utilisation of TSP fund etc.” < _

-43.. When. enquired. as to- why Non-lapsable Central. Pool of FSP fund ©
(बा 0017) was not formulated as given in the TSP guidelines, the Department of
School Education & Literacy had stated that:

“As per the Allocation of Business Rules, 1961 (amended from
time to time), the Ministry of Tribal Affairs shall be the nodal Ministry
‘for overall policy, planning and coordination of programmes of
development for the Scheduled Tribes. Accordingly, the formulation
of Nan-Lapsable Pool of TSP Fund (NLCPTF) may be explored “by
Ministry of Tribal Affairs. This Depariment will extend the ‘ful ,
7 cooperation in materializing thie formulation of NLCPTF.”



—_.- . ... Fhe Department of Higher Education -had stated the following न

“The utilization of funds for TSP are checked before releasing
further grants. Since the utilization is complete, 10 non-lapsable pool
was constituted.” :

1A. का reply to the query of the Coramittee as fo how unused TSP funds are
surrendered and tracked in the absence of a non-lapsable pool, the Departments
of School Education & Literacy and Highér Education had stated that the amount
released as. central share under SC component ST component and Generat™
Component, are utilized for incurring: expenditure for implementation of the _
approved intervention during financial year. The unspent balance as on 1st April
of the next financial year js proportionately divided between central share and
state share as per the existing funding pattern. The unspent balance on ‘st Aprif
is adjusted while releasing the central share during subsequent financial year.
The unspent balance is to be ‘used for the implementation of approved
inferventian during the next financiat year. The Department of Higher Education ..
further stated that UGC has opened separate Bank Actaunts for the unutilizedt
amount under the head-comes back into the same account

15. With regard to the current status of Non-lapsable Central Poo! of TSP fund
{NLCPTF}, Departments of Schoot Education & Literacy and Higher Education °
_ have stated that it is for the Ministry of Tribal Affairs to provide information on the
status of NLCPTF. In this regard, the Ministry of Tribaf Affairs have stated as
follows: ;

‘The issue of Non-lapsable poof of funds is being handied by
NITE Aayog (The Non-lapsable Pool of Central Resources (NLCPR)
scheme for North East region was mooted by the Planning
Commission and approved by the Union Cabinet.} ,

wy



41th November, 2016, the issue was discussed and NITI Aayog has
been asked fo examine, in consultation with relevant Ministries and
Cabinet Secretariat, if the allocations under TSP be made non-
lapsable, and recommend appropriate -action.. This Ministry has
given its-suggestions to NITI Aayog in.this regard.”

During oral evidence the representatives of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs
also sfated that the Ministry want TSP fund to be made non-tapsable and have-
suggested accardingly.

C. DELAYS IN THE FORMATION OF NODAL UNITS

16. Audit highlighted that as per the guidelines of Planning Cornmission

(2006), the TSP was 10 be implemented by constitution of dedicated unit in every _
Ministry/Depariment. The basic objective of Tribal Sub-Plan was to channelize
the flaw of outlays from central Ministries/Departments by earmarking funds for
the development of Scheduled Tribes in the ‘States, at least in proportion to their
population. Hawever, even though funds from central level were teleased under
frifurcated head Gen/SC/ST to the States and States to district implementing
agencies, the accounts for such expenditure was not maintained separately at
eact level. Audit observed that at the grass root fevel, there was no proper
earmarking of. TSP funds and hence, no assurance that the final objective of
earmarking was getting fuifitied could be derived, Though TSP was a planning ~
based strategy, allocations or earmarking were not based on tribal specific plans.
Ministry of Tribal Affairs was neither involved in the annual planning exercise-nor
there were any guidelines detailing the processes for such oversight. As per the
guidelirie, a dedicated unit was to be constituted in every Central
Ministry/Department as nodal unit for formulation and implementation of TSP

i

in a-meeting faken-by-Principal-Seeretary toPrime Ministeron~ -



Audit -noticed thatthere—wera_delays—in—fonnation of--nodal - units athe

Ministries/Departnents.

17. On enquity regarding the reasons behind the non-creation of nodal unit in
the Ministries/Depariments for formulation and implementation of FSP, the
Departments of School Education and Literacy stated as under:

“As per the Aflocation of Business Rutes, 1961 (amended from
time to time), ihe Ministry of Tribal Affairs shall be the nodal Ministry
- . ‘for overall policy, planning and coordination af programmes , of .
development for the Scheduled Tribes, A dedicated Unit (SC/ST
Cefl} exists ‘in the MHRD to formulate and implement Tribal Sub
- Plan.” ह

The Department of Higher Education stated as follows:

“There is a dedicated nodal unit viz. SC/ST cell functioning in
the Ministry of HRD. Besides, the various bodies also have a nodal
setup viz. UGC vide Order dated 26.12.2013 had constituted a
separate nodal committee to oversee the implementation of TSP
compenent in various Schemes being implemented by them. AICTE
has setup a monitoring committee on 20.41.2016 fo oversée the
implementation of TSP quidelines and for formulation of -new
schemes 0 implement the TSP nomns.

The Ministry of Tribat Affairs stated as under

“The information has been sought from concemed Central
Ministies / Departments. As soon as replies from concerned Central
Ministries f Departments are received, the Hon’ble Committee will be
apprised. In a meeting of saciat sector Ministries held on 11.1.2017
in SITE Aayog, it was suggested thai the TSP Ministries/Departments

42 हु -



——¢hauid-sét up-menitering units and-indieate-State-specift ic-atecation
. anid release for the vuinerable sections separately unde: centrally —
sponsored schemes and Céntral Sector Schemes

DD. PQOR MANAGEMENT OF PROGRAMMES UNDER TSP ~

18. Audit painted out that in Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA), implemented by
‘he Department of School Education and Literacy there were inter-alia shortfatt in *
establishment of Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidhyalaya (KGBV); non establishment ;
and non-functioning of ‘Model Cluster School for Girls’ due to non allocation of
funds: lack of basic amenities and facilities noticed in Manipur, J&K and Gujarat
school uniform had not beer. distributed as per norms in the state of,
Maharashta, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, J&K, Assam and Andhra - Pradesh; :
. deficiencies taticed in appointment of focal language native teachers and non है
availability of text books “in the state of: Madhya Pradesh, Jharkhand,
Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Assam, Maharashtra and J&K; and shortage of teachers
also naticed in the state of Chhattisgarh, Gujarat and Assam. ‘

419. With regard to shortfall.in establishment of KGBV, the Depaftment has
stated that in respect of the State of Gujarat, the Stafe has clarified that ali 89
KGBVs are operational in their own building. In the case of the KGBV in Dahod-
Khangela black, initially, the classroom and dining hall were utilized for teaching
purpose and the two dormitories were -utilized as hostel during night. Now, an
additional facility for the hostel has been provided by the State. This has made
separate space available for classroom as well as hostel.-In the case. of:
‘Maharashtra, SSA, the Department, has stated that there are 43 Educationally
Backward Blacks {EBBs) located in 10 districts of Maharashtra. As per the
provisions of the Scheme, 43 KGBVs have been sanctioned in these EBBs. The
remaining 25 districts of Maharashtra do not fulfil the criteria for establishing the
KGBVs. in respect of Doongi, Rajouri, Jarnmu and Kashmir, the State has

53



reported thaithe classes are held in the KGBV owned building, but the students
stay in rented accommodation. The buitding ‘is free from encroachment. The

- construction of the KGBV wauld be completed once adequate funds become

availabie. The KGRV under construction at Doongi, Rajouri has become -

operational and is being run in the rented buitding-where the hostel is availabie.

‘The Department has further stated that despite repeated written reminders for _
providing a compliance report, no reply has been received fram J&K, SSA so far.

20. With regard to non establishment and non-functioning of ‘Model Cluster’

School_for Girls’, the Department has stated that the National Programme for
Education of Giris at Elementary Level (NPEGEL} Scheme was discontinued
w.e-f. 01.04.2044 and the unspent balance lying with the States and UTs in their

-NPEGEL account would be utilized for implementing the approved interventions ,
under SSA. The necessary instruction.in this regard is being issued in-

consultation Internal Finance Division, MHRD:

21. With regard_fo lack of basic amenities and facilities, non distribution of
school uniforms, exclusion issues of ST students and shortage of teachers, the

Dépariment has stafed that Madhya Pradesh, SSA is tying to full the vacant”

post of teachers by. qualified residents and teachers and have been instructed to
use loca! language while teaching to bridge learning gaps in primary classes

(Class & li). Madhya Pradesh, SSA has also stated that there is no shortage of ,
text books in schools for fribal areas. The Department also stated: that —

Maharashira, SSA has developed multi-lingual books for Tribal students. Thesé
‘books are developed in ten different tribal languages. Tribal teachers are also
provided teachers guide in different tribal language from 2015-16. Maharashtra
has initiated te develcn 60 fitles in current year 2016-17. Maharashtra, SSA has

aiso issued instructions fa an Education Officer, Dhule & Nandubar fo enquire -

inta the matter of non clisiibution of school uniforms. The report is awaited. The

eperiment 3४8 sigias aspiia repeated reminders fo concemed States to

14


___provide_a campliance. reporf,.no_reply_have bees+ecelved_se far, -besides
Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra.

22. Audit also hightighied that in the National Programme of Mid-day Meat
(NPMDWM), it was, inter alia, found that in the test checked districts in eight states,
the Annual Work Pian & Budget were neither prepared with aggregated daia —
from schoolsfblocks nor there were any special plan-or projects: for ST students;
non-availability of kitchen sheds, ॥॒ incomplete infrastructure in kitchen inadequate
_- kitchen devices and insufficient drinking water, the children were exposed to
health hazards as the meals were being prepared and served in open and un-
hygienic conditions; the grievance redressal mechanism was found to be non-
existent/deficient in seven States ie. J&K, Gujarat, Andhra-Pradesh, Karnataka, -
West Bengal, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh and Tamit Nadu; and Audit noticed
that supply of food grains, cooking cost and utilisation of funds for MDM was riot
found to be’ sufficient and regular to meet the needs of the children in the
selected states of Chhattisgarh, Assam, Andhta Pradesh, Rajasthan, West
Bengal and Tripura.

23. “The representatives of the Departinent of School Education & Literary
replied as. under.

"The - releases under MDMS correspond fo. the minimum

- mandatory 10:7 percent prescribed of BE for TSP by the erstwhile
Planning Commission. Fhe sanction orders for release. of TSP or any
other category of central assistance mentions that the funds should
be utilised for that purpose only and’separate ahd proper account of
the funds received under TSP. The schools have population of all
categories of children i.e. General, SC & ST and Mid Day-Meal is ~

- provided to all students on schoo! days irrespective of their caste.

15



Nowever, MDM Division will follow all the inst uctions of atidifas and —

when received.”

Gtievancés. Public hearings are also organised in States for
grievance redressal. Prompt action is also taken by this Department
on fhe complaints received through. media/newspapers, RT}
applications etc." .

Elderly (NPHCE) there were non conducting of IEC and -mass media activities;
no health facilities Provided; deficiencies in training activities were pointed out by



)

_—_- healta_facility, non. availability -of UFWCs,—deficienciesin- hasie—training—for :

ANM/LHVs/IMPWs (Male) etc. “In Flexible Pool for State Programme
implementation. Plan (FPSPIP) and Reproductive Chitd Health Flexible Poo!
(RCHFP) there were inadequate maternal health facilities, tack of child heakh
facilities, - inadequate training for family planning and non conducting of ARSH
activities atc, : |

“During ‘ral evidence, the Commitiee highlighted shortfalis. in -the
implementation of National Health Mission (NHM) and raised concerns on

matters like ton-availability of basic health care facilities, primary heaith care ~

centres, shortage of doctors and nurses in the remote areas, inaccessibility to
basic/first aids in the far-flung areas etc. and desired to be apprised of the
measures undertaken by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare fo resolve the
shortfalls and ensure that the tribal population, especially in the remote areas can
avail basic medical assistance under NHM

26. With regard to the efforts towards addressing the concems pointed out by

the Committee, the representatives of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare

stated as under:

"We made sure that we had 184 districts identified in the
country which had a low percentile of health indicators. But for tribal
“population we said that any district which has a lower average than
the State will be selected for this and they are known as the high
priority districts and what we do with the high priority districts is that
we allocate 30 per cent additional resources to those districts so that
infrastructure can come up. We have also, under the National Health

Mission, taken special care to relax norms. For example, for asub- |
centre, the standard nonm is 5000 population, but for a tribal area it:

is 3000; for a PHC it is 30000 for a normat area, it is 20000 for the

47



————_—\_—. — - tHbal-population; and while it is- 420000 for CSC jp «normal area itis _. :

80000 for a tribal popuiation.

Many States have ‘come up with innovatians. For example,
Chhattisgarh realise that in a fafiung area, it was extremely difficult
to get any doctor ६0 serve in the PHC. They have said now that a -
doctor who gets posted to PHC goes there for two years and his
appointment order says that on this’date, he stands relieved. toa
particular post which is his choice post. That is the incentive they:
are giving. we have alkeady put in an incentive ‘that we will give
incentive of 30 per cent in PG examination if they go to rural areas.

We have now introduced a time to care approach ‘where we
have told the States that if-a person is unable fo reach a health
facility, if he walks for half an hour, thé State is entitled to additional
infrastructure. For such areas we have removed all population noms
and taken a time fo care approach. Many Siates have responded
well in this, there are other States which have not responded so well. -
This inequity, particularly in the health sector, will continue because.
there are inter-State disparities, inter-State inequities and intra-State
inequities. We are trying to address this by identifying these 184 odd
districts, | will give you another example as to how we are catering fo ©
this and how the expenditure has gone up in the tribal areas, It was
& difficult job to get a specialist in any of the tribal areas and the.
States were finding it very difficult to recruit on contractual basis. We

. had @ meeting with the States and we took a decision that for suct.*
areas there will be no Cap on the inanéy to be paid to the specialist if
he is recruited. It could be ₹ 4 fakh or it cauld be € 2 lakh.”

18-



-—EB.—-.. WEAK 1808 MORUTORING MECHANISM HANISM

2/. The TSP guideline envisaged that central Ministries/Depariments would be
responsible for monitoring compliance with “ISP comonent of Centrally
Sponsored Schemes. The Planning Commission was fo monitor the progress of
TSP -at the time of half yearly and ainual performance reviews of the ;
Ministries/Departments. The nodal dedicated unit of the respective Ministry was
fo ensure that funds were released to the concerned implementing agency timely
which in turn was to release funds to their field 16४७ implementing agencies.
Dissemination of information to STs about the schemes/programmes available
for their development was the responsibility of the nodai dedicated unit of STs in
the Ministries. The dedicated.units were also to ensure follow up of the schemes
implemented anc maintenance of proper records on assets created under TSP in
the- Ministry. Audit observed that non-functional dedicated TSP unit and non-
monitoring of Quarterly Progress Report by Planning Commission and non-
formation of Nodal Unit in the Ministry of Tribal Affairs and Ministry of Health &-
- Family Welfare. ft also noficed non-establishment of Sub Plan Research Centre
and. non-formation of Scheduled’ Tribe Education Management Information
System (SEMIS) in the Ministry of Human Resource Development.

-28. With regard to non-preparation of Annual Plans the Ministry of Tribal
Affairs have stated as follows

“There was no direct involvement of Ministry of Tribal Affairs
({MoTA) in preparation in the preparation of Annual Plans of Central
Ministries. / Departments, as Allocation of Business Rules, 4961
provided that, “in regard fo sectoral programmes and schemes of
development. of these communities policy, planning, monitoring,
evaluation etc. as also their coordination will be the responsibility of -

the concemed Central Ministries! Departrnents, State Govemments’

397 - ae



हल —__and Union Tersion Administrations” _However_MoT-hasprapanac—5-
a list of tribal majority districts, and also identified develourient gaps:

for prioritizing interventions of line Ministries.

- Conséquént upon the mandate for monitoring of (SP by thie
Ministry, the monitering of TSP-will be done through online
monitoring system. The reports will provide inputs for annual plans of

: the TSP Ministries/ Departments.”

29. With regard to the plan of action to improve the monifering of expenditure
of TSP fund and output against budget provisions, the Ministry of Tribat Affairs
Stated that

“in a meeting of social sector Ministries held on 11.1.2017 in

NITE Aayog, it was suggested that the TSP Ministries/Oepartments
should set up monitoring units and indicate State-specific allocation |

and release for the vulnerable sections separately under centrally

Sponsored schemes and Central Sector Schemes. This would

7 - facitiate ‘nodal Ministries/Oepartments for better monitoring of

expenditure, output and outcome against budget provisions made

for the weaker sections. - हु

हि PMO has taken a decision that monitoring of TSP of Central
Ministries / Departments will be done. by Ministry of Tribal Affairs.
Accordingly, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs ‘is in the process of
developing an online monitoring system for monitoring of TSP of
Centra! Ministries/ Departments. This will, inter-alia, encompass:

* - Monitoring of allocations. : .

. Monitoring of expenditure vis-2-vis allocations.

20


- Monitoring of physical performance to-assess review Output /
Achievernent againsi physical ‘targets ‘Le. scheme-wise
performance of each Ministry / Deparirment. ह

. Ouicorme monitoring in the intermediate team and long term for
each Ministry / Department, scheme-wise. Overall Monitoring.
will be quarterly, half-yearly and annual basis

_ As per the monitoring system, implementing agencies (Centrat

_ Mizistries / Departments) aré- to report their performance by 15th of
the month following the quarter / financial year. Ministry ‘of Tribal. -
Affairs is to assess and Teview both financial and physical
performance on jhe basis of the quarterly./ annual performance by -_ -
the central Ministries / Departments and publicize the review report
by 25th of the month following the quarter / financial year. Ministry i
Depariment-wise performance will also be reviewed on a half yearly
basis jointly by Ministry of Tribal Affairs and NIT! Aayog.” :

| The Department of Higher Education stated as follows:

“All schemes ending on 31% March 2017 are being evaluated
by third parties. Based on their recommendations, action would be -
taken to further strengthen the scheme implementation.”

The Depariment of School Education & Literacy stated.as under:

“To ensure effective implementation of schemes, there are
robust monitoring systems in place which includes an annual audit

by independent Chartered Accountants empanelled with the

Camptrotiet and Auditor General (CAG) of India, a regular CAG.

r

24


-_—__—#udil_e-system of concuirentinans S;-2eweil-as -regular --—;-

intemal audit, Component vise dy reviews, an annual

Educational Management Information Gystem (EMIS) and regular

meetings with State officials are also held to ensure’ effective

implementation of the programme, ‘The quarterly meeting Finance
Controllers (FCs) of State Implementing. Societies (७159) are
canvened by the Depariment to review the financial progress and ~

financial management. A Manual on Financial Management and

- Procurement also assists States in streamlining implementation and

- * finangial management.”

22


OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS

On perusal of the Audit Report, oral evidence iéndered and written
replies/submissions furnished by the Ministries of Tribal Affairs, Health and
Family Welfare, AYUSH arid Departments of School Education & Literacy
and ‘Higher Education, the Committee find a number . of
shortcomings/discrepancies in the inplementation of Tribal Sub-Pian (TSP)
like non-adoption of specific norms for earmarking and release of TSP
funds, non-creation of a non-lapsable pool for TSP funds, weak
management of programmes under TSP, delays and non-formulation of
nodal units, deficient monitoring system, non-implementation of
Information Education and’ Communication Programmes for the benefit of
the tribal people, incorrect release of TSP fund to the tribal majority States
which do net qualify. under TSP efc. Based on these findings, the
Committee have given their considered opinion in’ the succeeding
_Paragraphs for effective implementation of the Tribal Sub-Plan.

1. BETTER FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT

The strategy for development of STs through TSP includes
earmarking of Plan funds of Central Ministries/Departments into a separate
head of account to strengthen the administrative arrangements for proper
utilisation and monitoring of the TSP funds. However, the Committee find
that there has been no segregation of TSP funds under a separate Head at

- State/DistrictiBleck level. The Department of Secondary Education &
Literacy has written to all States/ UTs for strict compliance on maintenance
of separate account/record/Head. for the funds received and expenditure
incurred under TSP from the Financial Year 2016-17 wherever possible, and’
strictly from. the next financial year ie. 2047-18 and reflected in the Final
Utilization Certificate submitted to the Department. The Committee, opining
that such instructions should have been: issued much ‘earlier to the
States/UTs, recommended that the Department. should now take a more
proactive appsaach in monitoring and keeping track of fund utilisation and
progress in the implementation of the Scheme so as to ensure efficient and

. fimely achievement of targets. set under the plan. The Committee further
recommend that strict adherence to earmarking of funds into separate
head at every level be made mandatory for release of funds

23



%  HPOSITION OF PENALTY UPON ERRING OFFICIALS

‘The Gonnnittee are deeply concerned to note that TSP funds have
been released even to non-tribal populated States alongwitti tcikal majority
- States in violafion of TSP guidelines. The Ministry of AYUSH have adimitiod
to the incorrect release of funds due to lack of clarity and have assured fo .
avoid such lapses in future. The Committee are surprised that lack of.
clarity and co-ordination between. the Ministry of Tribal Affairs and Ministry
of AYUSH has resulted in inappropriate calculation of the percentage of
tribal population in a State, tribal concentrated districts, etc. leading to
incorrect release of funds. While expressing their serious displeasure over
the stafe of affairs, the Committee exhort the Ministries concerned to
‘improve upon their coordination and information showing mechanism and
take recourse to all precautionary and correctivefremedial measures
including imposition of penalty upon the erring offteials and recovery of
incorrectly released funds so as to obviate recurrence of such-
lapses/mistakes: :

3. CREATION OF A NON-LAPSABLE POOL FOR TSP. N-LAPSABLE POOL FOR TSP FUND

The Committee note that despite the revised TSP guidelines and the

recommendations of the Inter-Ministerial Committee to transfer unutilized -

- TSP. funds at the end ofa financial year into a non-tapsable pool of TSP
fund and allocation of proportionate funds from the Non-Lapsable Central
Pool of TSP fund (NLCPTF) to the Ministry of Tribal Affairs for
implementing schemes exclusively meant for development of STs, such a
modality has nat been. devised till date. The Ministry of Tribal Affairs have
informed that the issue of Non-lapsable pool of funds is being handled by

- NITI Aayog in consuitation with the Ministries concérned. The Ministry have:
simultaneously advocated the creation of a non-lapsable pool for TSP fund.
The Committee are also of the considered opinion that concerted efforts
should. be made towards optimal utilisation of the allocated TSP fund
within the given financial year and Non-lapsable pool for TSP fund be
created at the earliest to pool funds that could not he utilized due to
unforeseen eventualities and unavoidable -circumstances, within the
specific time period

24


\——4--..- BETTER PROGRAMME MANAGEMENT.

The Conimittee note that full amount was not released: for National
Programme for Health Care for the Elderly (NPHCE} and National
Programme. For Prevention and Control! of Cancer, Diabetes,
Cardiovascular Disease and Stroke (NPCDCS) due to high unspent balance
in these programmes under TSP. The Committee find that, in the case of
NPHGE, there was lack of health care and tralning facilities and the Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare have not conducted IEC and mass media
activities to inform the elders of different heaith risks and treatments. in the
éase of NPCDCS, there was flack of activities for behaviour and life style
changes, non screening of- persons for early diagnosis, deficiency in
treatment facilities and training activities, non-establishment of Tertiary.
Cancer Centres (TCCs); deficient treatment for Infant diseases etc. The
Committee are of the view that had the Ministry -of Health and Family
Welfare formulated a comprehensive plan to spend the allocated fund
under these programmes and diversify the expenditure on IEC activities, ©

‘training and health centres, health counselling camps, screening and

health check-ups, etc., there would not have been any unspent balance of
funds, and more importantly, these programmes would have ‘achieved their -
goals. The Committee, therefore recommend ‘that hence forth, while
formulating a comprehensive plan for the implementation of these: -
programmes, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare should take into
consideration IEC activities for widening the reach of these programmes. -
fthirough awaréness, trainings arid health counselling, health centres -and-
Innovative and interactive activities etc. so as to ensure effective and-
efficient utilization of the allocated funds under NPHCE and NPCDCS for
betterment of the intended beneficiaries.

5. CREATION OF NODAL ATION OF NODAL UNITS AT THE STATE/DISTRICT LEVEL

As regards creation of nodal units for the implementation of TSP, by

.the Ministries! Departments concerned, the Committee note that the
_ Departments of School Education. & Literacy and Higher Education have a. ~

dedicated Unit {SC/ST Cell} to formulate and implement Tribal Sub Plan
under the Ministry of Human Resource Development. Soth the Departments

- have stafed that as per the Allocation of Business Rules, 1964 {amended -
- from time to fime), the Ministry of Tribal Affairs is the nodal Ministry for

25



overal_pelieyplananing—and-—coordination-of programmes af developinant
tor the Scheduled Tribes. The Committee further note that NITE Aayog hac
suggested that the TSP Ministries/Departments should 5८६ up monitoring
units and indicate State-specific allocation and release for the vulnerable
sections separately under centrally sponsored sthemes anc Central Sector
Schemes. However, information regarding the creation of nodat units at the
State and Disfrict-level is awaited froni the concerned States/District. The
Committee, recommend that all Ministries/Deparinents concerned should
set up their own dedicated nodal units to ensure effective monitoring of
Tribal Sub Plan at the implementation stage. The .Commitiee further:
recommend that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs issue instructions fo all

' States to ensure timely formation of nodal units at the State and District

levels and consider withholding release of TSP funds to those States which

” Rave not created the nodal units

6 CENTRAL NODAL UNIT FOR OVERVIEW

The Cammittee note that as per fhe guidelines of Planning
Commission (2606), TSP was to be implemented by constitution of
dedicated unit in every Ministry/Department. The Committee, however, note
that that fhere were delays in formation of nodal units in the

. Ministries/Departments. Moreover, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs was neither —

involved in the annual planning exercise nor were there any guidelines
detailing the processes for an oversight. As the basic objective of Tribal
Sub-Plan is to channelize the flow of outlays from central
Ministries/Depatiments by earmarking funds for the development of
Scheduled Trikes in the States, af-least in proportion to their population;
the Committee are of the view that a central unit for oversight is an
absolute necessity. The Committee, therefore, recommend that as
suggested by NITI Aayog, fhe Ministry of Tribal Affairs should create a
central nodal unit for oversight so as to facilitaie better co-ordination and
efficient implementation of TSP through an online monitoring ‘system:

_ 26



_7, MAINTENANCE -OF_EXPENDITURE-AGGOUNTS-UNDER- SEPARATE
HEADS

The Cammittee find that even though funds from the Central
Government were released under trifurcated head Gen/SC/ST to the States
and from States to District implementing. agencies, the accounts for such
expenditure have not been maintained separately at each level. Also there
is. no proper earmarking of TSP funds at the grass root level and

‘allocations of funds have not been based on tribal specific plans. The
Committee find it absurd that expenditure of funds released under three |
heads namely, Gen/SC/ST are not earmarked under separate. head of
accounts. Sivice funds released under TSP are meant exclusively for the
tribals, it is pu¢suant to maintain separate expenditure account for each
category which would enable the Ministry to keep track of the expenditure,
targets! achievements and effective implementation of the TSP Scheme
The Committee therefore exhort the Ministry to impress upon all States and
District implementing agencies to strictly adhere to maintenance of ©
separate expenditure accounts and submit UCs under separate heads. The
Committee further recommend that the Ministry review the TSP strategy to
ensure that funds allocated are not diverted elsewhere and expenditure
reported are linked with actual accrual of benefits to STs. .

8. PENALISING NON-COMPLIANT STATESI/DISTRIGTS

The Committee find various deficiencies in the implementation of |
Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) under TSP which inter-afia include shortfall
in establishment of Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidhyalayas (KGBVs); non
establishment and non-functioning of ‘Model Cluster Schools for Girls’;
lack of basic amenities and facilities; non distribution of schoo! uniforms
aS per noms: deficiericies in appointment of local language native
teachers and non availability of text hooks and shortage of teachers. The
Department af School Education & Literacy has clarified that beside the
States of Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra, other States concerned have
not provided @ compliance .report despite repeated reminders. Taking
serious note of the brazen negligence towards efficient implementation of
SSA at the State and District tevels, the Committee, recommend that the

27



hitinishy ke a mors” pro-active approach by ‘mposing—a_dead!inefor———, -
implementation and target achievement, set a minimum standard/quality of
Jufrastructure and penalize the non-compliant States by withholding centrat

share of funds. The Committee further recommend that the Ministry
conduct orline inspections apart from periodical on the spot inspections!
verifications to ensure proper implementation of programmes as per SSA
quidelines/norms. . . : :

¢. INCLUSIVE ONLINE MONITORING SYSTEM

REL EEE

The Committee note that monitoring of TSP . of Central
Ministries/Departments would be by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs and
accordingly the Ministry is developing an online monitoring system for
Central Ministries/ Departments. The system would encompass monitoring
of fund alfocations and expenditure and achievement of physical targets
i.e. scheme-wise performance of each Ministry/Oepartment. The Committee
are of the view that in order to ensure implementation of programmes
under TSP as per guidelines and also to ensure flow of benefits to the
tribals, it is imperative for nodal units at the Central level as well as the
State level fo have real time information sharing system. The Commitfee —
are also of the view that online monitoring system. only at-the Central -
Ministries/Departments would-be incomplete and ineffective as the Ministry
is unable to gainfcoliect/gather information on the actual needs of the
tribals at the grass root level. The Committes, therefore, recommend that
nodal units at the State level as well as District level be included in the
online monitoring system being developed by the Ministry at the earliest.
The Committee desire to be. apprised of the stafus-report in this regard
within six months of the presentation of this report. .

40, COMPREHENSIVE APPROACH IN THE IMPLEMENTATION OF NHM APPROACH IN THE IMPLEMENTATION OF NHM

-The Committee find a number of deficiencies in the implementation of
Nationa! Health Mission (NHM) like non-availability of ‘basic health care
facilifids, primary health care centres, “shortage of doctors and nurses in

the jemote areas, inaccessibility to basic/first aids In the far-flung areas
etc. The Committee also note that the Ministry of Heaith and Family Welfare

28



}-—_—_aee-undertaking-innevative- concepts ike incentives io attract doctors am —____
nurses, providing mobile vans in remofe areas etc. to ensure basic medical आओ
accessibility in remote areas. While appreciating the initiatives being taken
by the Ministry, the Committee stress that funds allocated for programmes
under NHM be streamlined and utilized, keeping in mind, the varied needs
of the beneficiaries in order to ensure a more comprehensive approach in -
the implementation. of NH. The Committee, further recommend that in

_ addition ‘to the rémedial measures, the Ministry should also focus on

- preventive/precautionary measures and undertake IEC activities to educate
the tribal population on healthy living habits, benefits of sanitation, training
for basic first aid treatments, etc.

41. STRENGTHENING THE IMPLEMENTATION OF MDMs

In the implementation of Mid-Day Meal (MDM) Scheme, the Commitiee _
find that no Annual Work Plan & Budget was prepared nor was there any —
special plan or projects for ST students. The Committee also note non-
availability of kitchen sheds, incomplete. infrastructure in kitchens,
inadequate kitchen devices and insufficient drinking water, exposure of
children to health hazards as the meals were belng prépared and served in |
open: and un-hygienic conditions; absence of grievance redressal
mechanism etc. The Department of School Education & Literacy have
stated ‘that schools have population of all cafegories of children Le. -
General, SC & ST and Mid Day Meal is provided to all students on school
days irrespective of their caste. The Depariment have further submitted
that all States have public grievances redressal mechanism and
grievances, if any, are promptly resolved. The- Committee feel that the
Department has not conducted proper inspection of all concerned States/
Districts to gauge the actual state of affairs in the implementation of MDMs- ~
across the country, in terms of schools and-infrastructure being used for ~
NDEs, quality of food, construction of kitchens as per guidelines etc. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department of School Education
_and Literary should either constitute a team of its own or engage an
independent agency to conduct thorough inspection of all schools under.
MDM Scheme for requisite remedial. action wherever warranted. The -
Commitee desire to be apprised of the action taken by the Department in
this regard within six months of the presentation of this report.

29 ’



“G2. INVOLVEMENT OF LOCAL COMMUNITY IN JHE PLANNING
PROCESS

Audit have highlighted that planning for implémentation of Schemes
“was deficient as the plans were formulated without specific considerafion
of tribal boneficiaries as required under TSP. The Committee feet the need -
to strengthen the planning process with the involvement of the community
‘especially in tribal dominant blocks. The Committee opine that it is
imperative to identify and prioritize issuesiconcerns of the local community
in the planning and decision making process. The Committee therefore
recommend that inputs/suggestions of focal tribal community should be
sought ‘before finalizing the plan for implementation of any: programme
under the TSP. The Committee are of the view that this would enable the
implementing agency. to pin point issues that need special attention and
-devote additional fund, human resource and time for resolution of the same.
and ensure flow of benefits to tribal communities under the respective
programmes/schemes-

. PROMPT ACTION ON ISSUES HIGHLIGHTED BY THE COMMITTEE ACTION ON ISSUES HIGHLIGHTED BY THE COMMITTEE

The Committee note that during the sitting of the Sub-Committee IV
on 05.01.2017, the representatives of the Ministries of Tribal Affairs, Health
and Family Welfare, AYUSH and Departments of School Education &
Literacy and Higher Education were requested to furnish their written
replies and comments on some issues and points relating to their
Ministries/Departments: While. the Ministry of Tribal Affairs, Departments. of
School Education & Literacy and Higher Education and the Ministry of
AYUSH have furnished the requisite written information, the Ministry of
Health and Family. Welfare have not furnished written replies fo the relevant
points relating fo them in spite of repeated reminders. Taking a serious -
note of such aberration, the Committee caution the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare to be more’ alert and careful in. future and undertake
immediate measures to tackle issues like discrepanciesfacunae in the
implementation. of immunisation programme, shorifalls in providing
maternal heatth facilities, child health facilities etc. under the Child Health
Flexible Pool, [copholes in the implementation of Flexible Peet for State

30



Programne haplementation Pia (FPSPIF} and Reproductive Child Health |
Flexible Poot {RGHFP) etc. The Committee desire to be apprised of the

action taken by the Ministry of Health and Farnily Weliave on these issueés-
within six manths of the presentation of this report. -

NEW DELH}; SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE

4 December, 2077 Chairperson,

13 Agrahayara, 1939 (Saka) Public Accounts Cammittee

ak