Ho
25
Met

. INDIRA AWAAS YOJANA

{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their 437 Report (16 Lok Sabha))

MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2018-17)

SEVENTY-SIXTH REPORT

"SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
~NEW DELHI


SEVENTY-SIKXTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTE
~ (2046-17)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

f.INBIRAAWAAS YOuANA AWAAS YOJANA

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Forty-third Report (16" Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT

2 Presented fo Speaker, Lok Sabha on?
है Presented to Lok Sabha on: {6.3

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: (६.7. 268)

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI हु

April, 2017 Vaisakha, 1939 (Saka)



CONTERTS

. _ है PAGE
". COMPDSITIBN OFTHE १०१॥- ACCOUTTS (2a p19) - ,
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS ii}
COMMITTEE (2016-47) -
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE IV (NON COMPLIANCE) थे
OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
+

INTRODUCTION ५.6... 0५००-0० तत>ज 3 तन हल तन (५)

CHAPTER | Report .......- "लत नल 4

CHAPTER II? Observations/Recommendations which have been
oo accepted by the Government ... "००००० कि
CHAPTER II". Observations/Recommendations — which ~ the
Committee’da not desire to pursue in view of the
.. feplies received from the Government ...., .-.--००००-*६
CHAPTER Iv" Observations/Recommendations. in respect of
which replies of the Government have not beer
accepted by the Comimittee and ‘which require
~ है © peiteration ...... .....- «न cee लत ललित लि

CHAPTER ४४ Observations/Recommendations in respect of
है which the Government have furnished interim

FEPHOS sees ce लत लि eects ane लि नियत

_ APPENDICES?

॥ Minutos of the 12" Sitting of Sub-Committee IV
(Non-Compliance) of the PAC (2076-17) held on ~
“247 Aprit, 2017. ह 7. no

- Minutes of the 307 Sitting of Public Accounts
Commitee (2016-17) held on 24" April, 2017.

Ik Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public -
1 Accounts Committee contained in their Forty-third
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

*Noi appended to the eyclostyled copy of the Report



Dn Ps Bw

~

10.
11.

13.
14.
15.

16,
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
. 22.

(2117-18)
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge -. Chairperson
“MEMBERS .
LOK SABA
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

‘Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
- Shri Nishikant Dubey :
* Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar

Shri Bhartruhani Mahtab

‘Smt. Riti Pathak

Shu Neiphiu Rioh

Shi} Abhisbek Singh

Prof. Ram Shanker

Dr. Kirit Somaiya

Shri Anurag Singh Thakur

Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi

De. P. Venugopal

“RAJYA SABHA

Shri Naresh Agrawal
Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
‘Shri Shantaram Naik
Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
Shri Ajay Sancheli
Shri Bhupender Yadav


Prof. KV. Thomas
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA - हि

2. “Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay

3. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra

4. Shri Nishikant Dubey -

5. - Prof, Richard Hey

6. _ Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
7 Shri Bhartruhari Mehtab

8. Sm. Riti Pathak

9. Shri Neiphiu Rio

40, Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwat

41. Shri Abhishek Singh

412. Dr, Kirit Somaiya
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur

44, Shri Shivkumar 0. (0851
15. छा. ?. Venugopal
RAJYA SABHA

46. Shri Naresh Agrawal
47. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
48.” Shri Bhupender Yadav
49. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
20. Shri Shantaram Naik
24. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
- 22. Shri Ajay Sanchett

SECRETARIAT
4. Shri AK. Singh - Additional Secretary
2. Shri 8.0. Chaudhary ——--_— Joint Secretary
3. Shri T.Jayakummar - Director
३3... Shri Paofientat Haokip - Deputy Secretary
5.

Shai Ashiko Alemo - Committee Assistant

* Flected w.e-£ 09.08.2016 vice Shri Vijay Goel, MP appoiated “as Minister of State w.e.f. 05.07.2016,


‘GHPOSITION OF THE
COMPLIANCE OF THM

Convenor

Alternale Convenor :

_ Members

BENS

oF gn

5 ITTEE —J¥ [CIVIL MINISTRIES AND WGN
¥ SUBMISSION OF AGTION TAKEN NOTES] OF THE

PUBLIG ACCOUNTS COMBITTER (2016-47)

Shri Bhartruhari Mahiab

Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
Shri Nishikant Dubey

Dr. P. Venugopal

Shri Ajay Sanchett

Shij Shivkumar C. Udesi

‘


|, the. Chairperson, Public Accounis Coramittee (2016-17), having beer
authorised by ihe Committee, do present ihis Seventy-sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha} on Action Taken by ihe Government on ihe Ohservations/Recommendaiions ot
the Committee. contained in their Fortythird (Siteenih Lok Sabha) on ‘indire Aweaas

Yojana" relating to Minisiry pf Rural Development,

2° 118 Foriy-third Report was presenied to 10k. Sabhallaid in Rajys Sabha on 28
April, 2016. Replies of the Government io all the Observations/Recommendations
contained jn ie Report were received. The Public Accounts Committee considered and

adopted the Seventy-sixih Report at iheir sifting held on 24 Apri, 2017. Minuies of ihe

sitting are given ai Appendix |

3. For _ facility of reference © and convenience, the. Observations and
Recornmendations of the Cornmittee have been printed in thick type in the body of the

Report. .

4. “fhe Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to

“them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroiler and Auditor General of india.

5. An analysis of the aclion taken by ‘the Government on the Observations!
Recommendations contained in the Forty-third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha} is given at

Appendix-ll.

NEW DELHI: PROF. K.V. THOMAS
26 Aprit, 2016 है दर . Chairperson,

6 Vaishaka, 1939 (Saka} हैं Public Accounts Commitice


~ - a — “REPORT
PART -।
INTRODUCTORY

This Report of fhe Public Accourts Committee deals with the Action Taken
“by the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Forty Third Report (46" Lok Sabha) on “Indira
Awaas Yojana" based on C&AG Report No. 37 of 2014, Union Government
(Civid), relating to Ministry of Rural Development. ‘

2. The Forty Third Report (167 Lok Sabha), which was presented to Lok
“Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 28" April, 2016 contained 14 ‘Observations
and Recommendations. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations "५
and Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Rural .-

Development and are broadly categorized as under:

(6)... Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government: हु

Para Nos, 1-10, 12-14 :
है Total 13
Chapter -॥
ii} Observations/Recommendations which the Comrnittee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government

Para Nos. Nil

- Total: Nil

Chapter - il

{iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government
-have not been accepled by the Committee and which require reiteralion

‘Para Nos: Nit. .
हु Totat: Nil
. Chapter - IV

(iv): Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Goverment have
; furnished interim replies

Para Nos. 17 .
. Totah 1
Chapter - V


3 In their Foriy Third Report, the Committee examined ihe Indira Awaas
Yojana of the Ministry of Rural Development and highlighted various deficiencies

in the implementation of IAY, like

1) " Jnaccuracies in the identification, prioritization and selection of
beneficiaries of the Indira Awaas Yojana (AY);

ii) Delays in. the construction and completion of houses
sanctioned under lAY;

iii} Use of low quality materiat in the construction of houses; -

10. Non-adherence to guidelines of tAY in the construction of the
houses

४) Non-incorporation of a syllabus on cultural and aesthetic traits
of different regions in mason training curriculum;

a
vi) Weak financial management and misuse of (AY funds;

vil) Lack of a robust monitoring mechanism both at the Central,
State and District level; and

vill) Mismanagcment of the Homestead Scheme,

“4. . The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Rural Development in
respect of ali Observations and Recommendations of the Committee have been
reproduced. in the relevant Chapters of ihis Report. The Committee will now deal
with the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and हि

Récommendatioris made in the Original Report which either need reiteration or

merit comments.



PRINTIOUS COMPLETION GF CONSTRUCTION OF.

i ANCTIONED
HOUSES

(Recommendation Para No.4}

5. in their Forly third Repod, the Committee found that out of all houses
sanctioned 13 2013-14 under IAY, 11.01 lakh houses were completed as on
26.02.2018 and majority of houses sanctioned prior lo 2013-14 have been
‘completed on ground, The Ministry had also staled thatthe actual figures of
houses cumpleied on ground could be much higher in view of reporting gaps and हु
: inability of the'States to upload data on AwaasSoit and had directed all States to
update progress pertaining to financial year 2013-14 and 2014-15 on Awaassoft
as on 31.03.2016. The Committee were disappointed 10. ग्रात that despite the
19758 of alleast 2-3 years and the introduction of AwaasSoft for uploading of
. updated data on the implemeniation of IAY, the Ministry had neither cornpleted
the target set nor furnished a clear status of the implementation of AY. They felt
that since the houses under the [AY were constructed for the marginalised
- sections of society, any delay in completion of construction of these houses will
result in consequent denial of benefits to ihe poor and the deserving, who rieed
them for bare minimurn survival. The Committee, therefore, recommended that
the Ministry expedite the completion of all-houses sanctioned in 2013-14 and
prior to 2013-14 and desired to be apprised of the status of implementation of

HAY.

6. The Ministry of Rural Development in their Action Taken Note have stated

as under;

“The need for closure under TAY to enable a-smooth transition to
PMAY-G has been time and again impressed upon States. They have
been directed to make an assessment of the number of incomplete IAY
bouses and expedite construction of the same through resource
mobilisation, technical facifitation, peiformance incentives and robust

monitoring. To ensure that States/UTs have sufficient funds to undertake


completion of houses pertaining to previous yeers, funds have been
released to them 23 conimitied liabilities. During the presentation of the

Annual Action Plan under PMAY-G, most Stales have commited to

complete construction of pending IAY houses. by the end of FY 2016-17.

As reported by State/UTs,-18.24 lakh houses sanctioned under (AY

in year 2013-14 and 2014-15 were incomplete as on 01.64.2016
(Annexure |). Almost 4 lakh houses sanctioned in those two years have
been compicted in the. first half of the current financial year as per reports

. available on AwaiasSoft. Further, approx. 3.2 lakh houses sanctioned in

years prior to FY 2043-14 have also ‘been completed in the current,

‘financial year.

: Though AwaasSoit has been made thé sole platform for reporting
and monitoring progress under the scheme frorn 1st Aprit, 2015, ils use
has been constrained by inadequate digital infrastructure and jack of

5 capacity at the State Jevel both ‘in terms of dedicated manpower or
hardware. This has resulted in reporting gaps which arc being addressed
. by facititating States to enter data on AwaasSoft through workshops,
regular training and developrnent of user friendly modules to capture past
transactions. As on date, onty AwaasSoft reporting is acceptable and real
time reporis pertaining to progress made in completion of IAY houses are.

available in the public domain on the MIS.”

The Ministry have furnished a statement ‘on the status of incomplete

houses as of 21.10.2016 which is placed al Annexure 1

%.. The Committee note the efforts undertaken by the Ministry in

completing 11 lakh houses in the first half of financial year 2015-47. The

- Committee find that during the presentation of the Annual Action Pian

er Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana - Gramin (PHIAY-G), most of ihe Siaies

Wave combutted to completing all pending {AY houses by the end of

financial year 2016-17. The status of completion/non-complation of houses
4 हु


during 2013-16 shows that out of the fotal sanction of 68222224 houses
witile the Ministry could complete 3192856, the houses yet to be completed
(3639368. Similarly, none of the houses sanctioned during 2013-16 in
Andaman Nicobar, Haveli Daman & Diu, Lakshadweep and Puducherry
could be completed. This state of affairs depict that the success rate of the
Ministry in achieving its target is less than fifty percent and in few cases
even to an abysmal zero percent. The Committee observe with serious
- concern that the District Development Coardination and_ Monitoring .
Comnmnittees (DISHA} which are supposed to गाए at least once every
quarter have not met even once in 2016 except in the States of Jharkhan
and Rajasthan. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry to come
up with a robust mechanism to fast irack its completion of construction of
pending houses, ensure regular meeting of DISHA and strengthen the

reporting and monitoring mechanism.

QUALITY OF CONSTRUCTIONS
(Recommendation Para No, 5)

8. In their Forty Third Report, the Cornmittee noted that ihe Ministry had
taken steps to -develop.catalogues of cost effective housing designs appropriate
for specific areas or states io ensure quality of the houses that are built for
beneficiaries of the scheme. The Committee recommended in their Report ihat
efforts in thai diréction be boosted and that thé. National Institute of Rural
Development be engaged to develop more housing designs which arc of good
quality, using Jocally available affordable materials and to provide expertise to

State Governments. -

9. The Ministry of Rural Development in their Action Taken Note have stated

- under;

“To make available a wide menu of house design typologies fo

PMAY-G beneficiaries, the Ministry in collaboration. with UNDP and HT,


Nelhi has initiated en exer fogue focaity appropriate, casi

affective technologies and housing iypofagies for different zones in 18
Slates of India. In each State different House: zones have been identified
and this has been done based on climate, iopography, cultural and
traditional housing practices and vulnerability to disasters. Fhe Stato-wise -
compendiunts, which have designs, drawings and estimates appropriate to
each region are being developed in consuttation with focal officials,
beneficiaries and Parichayati Raj functionaries to ensure wide ranging
acceptability and adoptability. The sarne is béing shared on a digital
platform fo enhance outreach through the Rural Housing Knowledge
Network (RHKN) web portal. ,

Field studies have been conducted in ali the 18 states viz. Bihar,
Odisha, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Tripura, West Bengal, Assan, Uitar
Pradesh,. Madhya Pradesh, Jharkhand, Sikkim, Manipur, Chhattisgarh,
Jammu & Kashmir, Uttarakhand, Rajasthan, Himachal Pradesh and
. Mizoram. (10058 typology designs have been finalized in 12 States viz.,
Tripura, Meghalaya, Maharashtra, Rajasthan Odisha, West Bengal,
‘Assam, Jharkhand, Manipur, Chhattisgarh, Mizoram and tlimachat
Pradesh. Demonstration houses, as per the identified: house typology,
have been constructed in [he States of Tripura and Maharashtra.

Apart from the above, several States have taken their own initiative
in developing house design typatogies to increase the chaices ayailabic to

beneficiaries and optimise use of resources in the constuction of houses,

The recommendation of the Commiiice to engage NIRD to develop

- more housing designs and provide expertise lo State governmenis has
been noted for compliance. The proposat to exhibit models and Siate-wise
‘catalogues depicting different housing iypalogies within NIRD, ihereby
making NIRD the repository of all knowledge gathered during the exercise

to document design typologies, is under the consideration of the Ministry

6


40. In their updated Aclion Taken Nole, the Minisiry have stated as under:

है “Development of house design typologies and preparation of State-
wise catalogues has been taken up by the Ministry in collaboration with,
UNDP and JIT Delhi in 18 States and is expected to be completed by
December, 2016, The Siate-wise catalogues and house models will be
exhibited in NIRDasoon thereafier. In the remaining States, the exercise
will be taken-up in the future. Many Staies have taken their own inifiative in
developing “house design typologies io increase choices available 10
PMAY-G bencficiaries. NIRD is expected to serve as a repository for all

knowledge gaihered by lhe Ministry and States.”

44, The Committee note that the Ministry in collaboration with United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and HT, Dethi has initiated an
exercise to catalogue locally appropriate, cost effective technologies and
housing typologies for different zones in 18 States of India and which is
expected tobe completed by December, 2076, after which State .wise
catalogues and house models would be exhibited in National Institute of
Rural Development {NIRD). The Committee desire to be apprised whether
_the exercise of cataloguing has been completed as expected 1.७ December,
2046 and made available to the NIRD. The Committee recommend that the
Ministry should undertake the iask of cataloguing locally appropriate, cost
effective technologies and. housing typologies in the remaining States,
without any delay so as fo develop an extensive and comprehensive data
“on the efficient and cost effective housing. The Committee also 1016 that
“ many States have faken their own initiative in developing house design
typologies to Increase choices available to PMAY-G beneficiaries. The
- Committee desire that details of best adaptable house design typologies

being developed by the individual States may 3150 be incorporated in NIRD.
Lol 7 -


RPORATION OF A SYLLABUS OR CULTURAL

IN MASON TRAINING CURRICULUM

(Recommendation Para No.6)

12. In their Foriy Third Report the Commitiee noted that the current curriculum
for the mason training programme being developed in the country to comply with
the requirement of Natione! Sector Skills Council, do’ not allow the variations
the Commitiee viewed that given the dynamics of cultural, traditional and
regional diversity in the Country, enforcing a uniform curriculum for the mason
training programme across the country was not ideal. The cultural and traditional
sensitivity of the regionf community need to be taken into consideration while
formulating the curriculum, The Committee) therefore, desired that, a part from
the uniform curriculum, being developed: as per the National Sector Skills
Council, the Ministry ought to seek the advice of local masons and cultural.
experts and formulate a separate subject on cultural, traditional housing practices
and aesthetic traits specific to the region and introduce the subject alongside the
_ implementation of the uniform curriculum in the region. The Committee desired to

be apprised of the action taken in this regard

713, The Ministry of Rural Development in their Action Taken Note have stated

as under,

“The process of incorporating competencies required for the- job

: profile of a Rural Mason. into ihe National Skilts Qualification: Framework
has been completed, Qualification Pack (QP) for-'Rural Masons’ has been:
developed by the Ministry “in collaboration with Construction’ Skilt
है Development Councif of india (08081) and approved by National Skil .
7 Development Corporation (NSDC). The QP will serve as_a benchmark for

., imparting standardized training on conventionat technologies [७ rurak
masons based on National Occupational standards. ॥ is proposed by the

. Ministry that 30,000 rural masons will be trained .and certified: in

accordance with the QP in the current financial year which Wil! lead (0
. 3 ह



enhanced employability through skill development and ersurce availability
of skilled masons to accomplish ihe targets’ set under the scheme.
Moreover, certification by NSDC will facilitate career growth and provide

incentive for rural youth to consider masonry as a viable occupation.

Further, to cater to ihe requirement of the North East and other

; Staies and to incorporate cultural and aesthetic trails specific to the

_ Fegions, the Ministry is also considering development of optional National

Occupational Standards (NOS) and customizing the QP accordingly. The

Ministry in collaboration with UNDP has already initialed work on devising

, optional NOS. for bamboo and timber based construction, ‘Similarly, the
“proposal to develop optional NOS for construction of houses incorporating -

disaster resilient technologies .and practices is under the active

consideration of National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA)

14. The Committee note fhat a Qualification Pack (QP} for ‘Rural Masons
has been developed by the Ministry in collaboration with Construction Skill -

_Development Corporation of india (CSDC!), The Committec observe the

steps, being under taken by the Ministry in introducing a benchmark QP for
imparting standardised training on conventional technologies to rural
masons based on the National Occupation Standards (४005). The

Committee also note that to cater to the requirement of North East and

. other States and to incorporate cultural and aesthetic traiis specific to ihe

regions, the Ministry is also considering for development of optional
Nafional Occupation Standards. (NOS) and customizing the QP accordingly.

The Committee are of the view that for a comprehensive, successful and

Veffective implemeritation of PMAY-G, hitherto known as IAY, the optional
_ NOS and the customized QP ought to have been introduce simultaneously.

- The Cammiftee, therefore. recommend that the Ministry finalise the optional

NOS and the customized QP and introduced it alongside the NOS and the

QP within six months of the presentation of this Report.


May

F FURNES
{Recommendation Para Neo. 8)

15. — in their Forty Third Report, the Committee had observed that several cases

of operation of multiple bank accounts, diversion of AY funds “towards other

. schemes/programmes expenditure of funds on inadmissible items,

misapproptiation and suspected cases of. misappropriation, unauthorised
deduction of funds on account of administrative charges, non-construction/nen-
installation. of sriokeless chulah/sanitary lairine/AY logo, under payment of funds
to beneficiaries and doublef/excess payment af funds to the IAY beneficiaries in
contravention of the guidelines and provisions of the scheme. The Committee
expressed displeasure at the blatant violation of IAY guidelines and impressed
upon the Ministry to initiate immediate necessary.remedial measure and take

* disciplinary ‘action against the responsible officiats under the rules. The

Committee féirther recommended the recovery of funds, wherever applicable, and
desired to be apprised of the staius of recovery of misappropriated funds, action
taken against the officials and measures taken for strict compliance in future.

16. The Ministry of Rural Development in their Action Taken Noie have slated

as under;

“According to the previously furnished reply the State Governments

‘of Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh have intimated that ammount worth

ह हि Rs.1.33 cr and Rs.0.02 cr respectively, have been recovered fron IAY
_”. funds which were proviously diverted. The State, Govemment of Jharkhand
' has informed that while Rs.0.18 cr has been recovered by DRDA, Ranchi,
an amount worth Rs.0.12 cris yet to be recovered from East Singhbhurn
district. The State has instructed the District to take concrete action against

' diverted funds. Reply has also been received from the State Government
of Assam intimating thal funds have been recovered in four, white action is

है underway in the remaining districts. The updated position is being obtained

fronvthe respective States.”
30


17... 1 their updated Action Taken Note, ihe Minisizy have stated as under:

“Some ai the concrete measures introduced by the Ministry to curb

- financial malpractices and misuse of funds include:-

a) Transfer of all programme junds 10 a dedicated State Nodal
Account (SNA) to improve monitoring, tacking and timely

utilization of funds.

b) _ Introduction of Direct, Benefit Transter (OBT) by enabling

electronic transfer of assistance dircctly from the SNA to the

- beneficiary's account through generation of Fund Transfer
Order (610).

०) Payment of final instalment only after completion af house
which is to be verified through geo referenced, time stamped

an photographs captured using AwaasApp.

8) Submission of certificate by States/UTs certifying that
adrninistrative funds have only been expended on permissible

wo. : .. heads while submitiing proposal for release of . central

assistance.

e) Aadhaar seceding of bank accounts of scheme beneficiaries,

wherever possible.

However, the responsibility of taking action against erring

Officials in accordance with extant rules and regulations including

हम ; ह initiating legal proceedings lies wiih the States/UTs as they are the
Lo 7 implementing agencies of the scheme. The’ Ministry continuously
reviews cascs involving misuse of funds and pursues the matter with

Stafe/UTs for faking necessary action against erring officials.

The State’ Government of Assam has informed that in cases
involving confrrried or suspected misappropriation, funds have been

12



been initiaied in
Sonitpur, the Govt.'s order fo recover misappropriated funds in
Cachar worth Rs 0.64 crore has been stayed by the Hon'ble High

Court upon ‘filing of writ petition by the concerned BDO.

The State Government of Jharkhand has infoaned that in
cases involving confirmed or suspected misappropriation, an amount
of Rs 9.19 jakh out of Rs 9.58 lakh has been recovered -from
Deoghar- district and the recovery of remaining Rs 0.39 lakh is in
process. The fund release status of diverted amount wonh Rs 0.12,

crore in East Singhbhurn district is being tracked by the Stale.”

18. The Committee note that the Ministry have initiated action to recover
previously diverted funds from the Siate Governments of Rajasthan,
Madhya Pradesh, Jharkhand and Assam and action is being taken to
recover remaining recoverable diverted funds. The Committee observe the _
measures being taken by the Ministry to curb financial! malpractices and
misuse of funds, like transfer of ail programme funds to a dedicated State
Noda? Account (SNA} te improve monitoring, tracking and timely utilization
हु of funds, introduction of Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT}, payment of final
instalment of funds only after geo reference and time stamp verification
photographs of completion of construction, submission of certificates by
States/UTs certifying that administrative funds have only ‘been expended

on permissible heads atid Aadhaar seeding of bank accounts of scheme

beneficiaries. The Committee, however are distressed to nofe that in regard
to taking action against erring officials on the misuse of funds, the Ministry
Have stated that the responsibility of taking action against erring officials in
. accordance with extant rules and regulations including initiating legal
proceedings ties with the States/UTs as they are the implementing
agencies of the scheme. The Commitiee, while viewing that the Ministry are

12


reviewing the cases involving misuse of funds and pursuing the matter
with concerned Siates/UTs for taking necessary action againsi efring
vilicials, are of the considered opinion that if is the responsibility of ihe
Ministry to hold the implementing agency accountable, in this case
concerned States/UTs, for any misuse of fund in a centrally sponsored
scheme like !AY, and press for an expeditious settlement of afl cases and
accordingly penalise the guilty. The Committee therefore, desire that the
Ministry fix a deadline for resolution all cases under examination by the
States/UTs and vigorously pursue the States/UTs to take ‘stringent action
against the culprits to set. an example so that misuse of funds are
” prevented in PMAY They-further recommend that States/UTs that fail to
fix responsibilities for misuse of funds may be denied further assistance tH
they comply with the directions of the Ministry. The Committee desire a
report on the final status of all cases on misuse of IAY funds be submitted

within six months of the presentation of this Report

_REMEDIAL MEASURES ON THE MISMANAGEMENT OF HOMESTEAD
SCHEME ह हि

(Recommendation Para No.14)

49. In ‘heir Forty Third Report, the Committee noted thal the Homestead
--scheme is a demand driven scheme and. funds under this scheme are released
‘only fo those States on demand after submission of propo als along with
requisite documents/certificates as per the scheme guidelines. “The Commitee
however, observe that the. funds were released to Andhra Pradesh, Bihar,

Karnataka: Kerala, Maharashtra Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh under the scheme

610७ idéntification/posses ion of land by the States. The Committee were
appalled at the gross violation of the scheme guidelines and recommended the
Ministry (0 constitute an Enquiry Committee ta investigate the reasons tof
diversion from. the scheme guidelines and impose stringent penalty against the”

_ responsible officials. The Committee: also desired that the Ministry issue a
13


8 io

circuizr to all concerned official

guidelines tn future.

20. The Minisiry of Rural Development in their Action Taken Note have stated.

as under;

“The recommendation of the Committee to constitute an Enquiry’
committee to investigate the irregularities observed in the erstwhile
tlomestead scheme under [AY has been noted for compliance. Proposal

“for deputing a team of National Level Monitors (NLM) to inquire into the
“same is under the aclive consideration in the Minislry. Based on the
findings of the NLM, necessary action wilt be taken against orring officials
Once the Framework for Implementation: of PMAY-G has been finalised,
the Ministry wilt advise all concemed officials for strict adherence and

compliance of the guidelines.
a हि
21... का their updated Action Taken Noie, the Ministry have stated as under:

“The proposal for deputing a ieam of NLMs is under the
* consideration of the Ministry. It is proposed that the team will conduct the

enquiry and finalise its findings by 319 March, 2017."

22. The Committee note that in compliance to its recommendation to
conétitute an Enquiry Committee to enquire into the diversion from the
guidelines of the Homestead Scherne, the Ministry are deputing a tear of,
National Level Monitors (NLMs) io investigate into the jiegularities

observed in the crstwhite Homestead Scheme undér thé JAY. The Ministry.

“assured the Committee to conduci an enquiry and finalise their findings by

34 March, 2017 and take necessary action against the orring officials.

“Pointing out that the deadline of the commitment of the Ministry had

lansed, the Commitiee desire io be apprised of the findings of the NLMs

“and actions taken by. the Ministry against the guilty officials within tour

“months of the presentation ‘of this Report. tn order to strengihen the

3


and ensure ron-diversion from scnems g

moniforing syst
Committee further desire that the recommendations of NLiis be taken

under advisemént while implementing the new scheme, PMAY-G:

whee ES



ECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN A TED 8
THE GOVERNMENT ,

Observation/Recommendation
IDENTIFICATION OF BENEFICIARIFS

The Committee are extremely disappoinicd to note that the JAY, launched -
as far back as 1985, was still lacking a proper basis for identification -of target
beneficiaries. Moreover, the fact that assessment has not been made about the
actual housing shoriage in 14 States even affer the scheme had been running for.
almost 30 years portrays a serious lapse and absence of planning and
coordination with states by the Minisiry. What is even mofe disturbing for the
‘Commitiee io note is that several ineligible bencficiaries were selected to reap
the benefit. * The Committee further note that after the preseniation of C&AG
repon, seven primary deprivation criteria for identification of BPL households in

- rural areas using Socio Economic Caste Census, 2011, is being considered to

- identify deserving persons. The Commilice note that the prioritised beneficiary
list for the scheme based on the relevant deprivation parameters of the seven
deprivation criteria is going 0 be used for implementation of the scheme soon.
The Committee ‘desire that the drawing up of the beneficiaries list as plarined ,
should be expedited with maximum leverage of IT (AwaasSoft) for transparency.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry, should, over and above the
planned transparency mechanisms, consider opening an online complaint facility
fo receive reports of deserving but deprived beneficiaries, undeserving

. beneficiaries delay in disbursal, ctc. not only while finalising the. list of |
beneficiaries receiving benefits, but during the course of the implementation of
the scheme as well, so thet inaccuracies in the fist is open ta scrutiny always

. Action taken in this regard be intimated to ihis Coramittee.
(Para 1]

1G



Aciion Taken

In pursuance of the Cabinet decision pertaining fe ihe use of Socio
Economic and Casle Census (SECC) 2011 dala in Pradhan Mantri Awaas
Yojana Grarnin (PMAY-G), detailed instructions regarding the procedure for
identification and: selection of beneficiaries based on SECC were issued by the
Ministry lo ali State/UTs in April, 2016. The proceduré entailed use of objectively
verifiable norms and parameters to determine eligibility under the’ scheme,

thereby reducing scope for discretion in. sclection and ensuring assistance is

+ provided to genuinely deprived and deserving households. The universe of

eligible beneficiaries under PMAY-G consists of all houseless households and

households living in zero, one or two room kuicha houses es per SECC 2011.

“Within the universe, priority is assigned on the basis of parameters reflecting

housing and socio-economic deprivation, To ensure that households having the

- wherewithal tand resources to construct their own hotises are not provided

assistance under the scheme, there .is automatic exclusion of households

_ satisfying certain criteria’ (provided in| Annexure A). Meanwhile households .

belonging fo the most. deprived and marginalised gections of the saciely, also

“referred to as aulomatically included households, are elevated while assigning

priority. The priority lists, thus generated, are verified by the Gram Sabha which
is entrusted with the responsibility of removing households which are not eligible

Further, any grievance pertaining 10 unfair removal or prioritisation is dealt with

-and resolved by the Appellate Committee constituted ai the district level. After

the process of grievance redressal is concluded, the final priority list is published
and widely disseminated. Therefore, sufficient checks and salequards have been
built into the process 10 ensure that only deserving households 1.8. households
which ‘are deprived and lack basic housing amenities, are selected lo receive

assistance under the scheme

As desired by the Comittee, system gencrated priarity lists are being
used to ensure transparency in the process. of identification of eligible

beneficiarics under PMAY-G. The facility to access system generated priority
7 . :


Ses!

५

ole on AwazesSof- ine MES porial of the Rural Housi

fisis has been made a’
scheme. A separate module has been designed 10 capiure various sieps
involved in the process of verification of system generated priority lists by Gram
bhas and Grievance Redressal by the Appellate Commitiee thercon. For ihe
verification process to be considered duly completed, it is mandatory ihat the
Gram Sabha (GS) resolution be uploaded on AwaasSolt. Further, alt State/UTs
are required to enter the list of households removed by the GS during verification
along with reasons on AwaasSoft. Reports on progress made in verifying and
identifying eligible beneficiaries are available in the public domain on the MIS.

The Cornmiitee’s recommendation that an online complaint facility to
receive reports of deserving but deprived beneficiaries, undeserving
beneficiaries, delay. in disbursal, ete. not only while finalising the list of
beneficiaries receiving benefits, but during the course of the implemeniation of

the scheme gs well, so’ that inaccuracies in the list is always open to scrutiny has

been noted for compliance and is under development.

Vetting Comment

Annexure 1 was not found enclosed. Ministry may apprise the PAC the

timelines for the operationalisation of online complaint facility.
Updated reply of the Ministry

Annexure is enclosed. The Ministry is in the process of developing an online

complaint facility for PMAY-G by March, 2017. However, a link to Centratized

“Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System (CPGRAMS) has already
हि been provided in the rural housing website-where 31 such matters, as pointed out

by PAC, can be taken up:

18


Ohservation/Recommendation
SFLECTION OF BENEFICIARIES

The Committee note with disdain that the Gram Sabha’s powers are often
exercised in part by the Sarpanch in matters of addition tovand deletion from
Beneficiary lists of the scheme, and desire that efforts should be made to ensure
that only the Gram Sabha and the village cornmunities in the Sixth Schedule
areas as collective body exercise such night and no intervention; should be made
by any functionary. The Committee nole that selection of beneficiaries under the
new scheme of things will already be partly taken care of during identification of
beneficiaries of the scheme; since the identified beneficiaries would already
appear in order of priority decided by their tovel of relevant deprivation, and shall
be system generated, While this is believed 10 minimize human intervention, the
Committee feel that in the reality of the limited bud etary provisions in a given
year, it may Still be possible for implernenting aulhorities to favour of a particular
region or district during a particular year and deprive some other regions. The
Committee, therefore, desire “that while generaling Gram Sabha. wise/village
community wise piiority lists for use as the basis of prioritizing award of schemes
the Ministry should ensure that benefits are distributed [0 those at the top of the
priority fists of all Gram Sabhas, and covering as many in each list as possible
within the granl amount available or allocated to that state of that year, This will

cnsure equal distribution of benefits across all geographical regions:
[Para 2}
Action Taken

As per the instructions issued by the Ministry, the Gram Sabha (GS) is

-entrusted with (he responsibility of verifying system generated priority lists and

removing undeserving households which do not come under the. purvicw of

eligibility under the scheme. The grounds for removal of a household is to be

clearly stated in the GS resolution. The task of prioritising household tied on the

व


same cepiiveticn scores has aiso been assigned to the does nut

have tho authority to add households to the priority list. However, it may endorse

deserving bui eft out households for inclusion by recording ‘the same. in the GS

Tesolution. For the verificalion process [0 be considered duly competed, it is

mandatory that the GS resolulion containing information on deletion,
prioritisation, suggested additions and atiendance be uploaded .on AwaasSoft.
The same can be monitored and tracked through reports available in the public

domain on the MIS.

है To maintain fairness. in allocalion by ensuring that limited budgetary
resources are channelised towards the most deprived, allocation of targets under
PMAY-G is being done by giving maximum weightage to housing shortage in the
State/U'T as per SECC, 2011. In the spirit of cooperative federalism, ihe task of
distribution of districtblock/GP wise targets has been assigned to the States to
provide them with functional autonomy in distributing targets Keeping in view their
needs and challenges. However, minimum 60% of the annual target would be

earmarked for SC/ST categories. Further, all State/UTs have been directed to

1 cover houseless and landless households in the first year of implementation of -

'PMAY-G as far as possible. Secondly, instructions have been issued lo saturaie

villages identified under Sansad Adarsh Gram Yojana {SAGY), National Rurban
Mission {NRuM), Deen Dayal Antyodaya Yojana-NRLM, villages with strong

- woman SIIGs and ODF villages wilh PMAY-G houses on priorily.

Once priority lists aré finalised and Gram Panchayat (GP) wise targets
have been eniered on AwaasSoit by ihe State/UTs the Annual Select List will be
system gencrated. ॥ will automatically feature all the households which have

been ranked the highest in the priority list. As desired by the committee the

- _ annual select list will begin with (he top household in the priority list.and go down

Gill the target assigned to the GP for that particular year is reached. No flexibility

will be allowed to the State/UTs to make changes to the system generated

Annuat Select fist by shifting/umping houscholds,

20


Vailing Comment : न.
No comments.
Observation{Recommendation
_ CONSTRUCTION OF HOUSES UNDER IAY

The Committee are constrained to-note that actual corplete construction
of houses under (AY falls far short of the number of houses sanctioned and
grants released. While the Minist’y had informed during evidence that most *
States had informed them about most of the houses sanctioned prior to 2013-14
: having been completed, they submitted that 12.28 lakh houses, sanctioned prior
"jo 2013-14 were yet to be completed Further, given thal 22.35 lakh houses

were sanctioned in 2013-14 and 2014-15, the figure of 12.28 jakh houses
sanctioned prior to 2013-14 and yet to be completed in huge and implies serious
gaps im implementation. The Commitiee note that AwaasApp’ had been
developed to enable inspection of progress in construction which is being used
by 13 States. The Committee recommend that AwaasApp’ should be made
- mandatory in all states/UTs as a tool of inspection. The commitlee also
recommend that the Ministry should look into improving the mobile application to
enable recording of GPS Jocation of propased housing sites which can be used
{6 monitor actual construction jater on after sanction and release of installments
to check forged imagery of progress of construction. The Committee furlher
recommend that the Ministry should take effective steps fo slrengihen monitoring
of construction of houses so that the construction of houses under IAY do not fall

“short against the sanctioned number of houses

[Para 3]
Action Taken

The issue of completion of pending [AY houses has been taken up with all

States and is being constantly pursued and reviewed at-all levels in the Ministry.

23


_ Series of meetings have been tield with ihe Chicf Minis

s:and Chicf Scereiar

of States ic review progress and push for completion of backlog houses. A
result, more than 44 Jakh pending LAY houses have been completed in the first
half of FY 2016-17. During the presentation of the Annual Aciion’ Plan under
PMAY-G, mosi Siates have committed to complete construction of pending 1AY

houses by the end of FY 2016-17.

Yhe Committee’s recommicndation to make AwaasApp mandatory as a -

tool of inspection has been incorporated into the Framework for implementation

- of PMAY-G which is currently under finalisation. The application empowers

officials and citizens to capiure and upload geo- referenced, time and date
stamped photographs of the house at various stages of construction thereby
reducing time lags in verification. AwaasApp is accessible to all Smariphone

users and can be downloaded iree of cosi from. Google Playstore or Mobile Seva

- Appstore. Ag on dale, 16 stafes are using AwaasApp for monitoring purpose. The .

: Ministry is working towards improving the functionality in future versions of the

App based oa user feedback. .An offline moadutce for data capiure and

transmission has been developed to address concerns regarding. connectivity ©

deficit in rurat areas. Regular training on the features available in AwaasApp is

being impared to MIS oiticials from various States to increase and-oplimise

usage of the application. Further, capturing of geo-referenced photographs using

AwaasApp and uploading of the. same on AwaasSofi.has been made mandatory

under the scheme of PMAY-G for release of assistance to the beneficiaries. .

The Ministry has dixected all. State/UTs to set .up and strengthen
Programme Management Units (PMUs) by.engaging dedicated personnel and

field 1९४९ functionaries using administrative funds available under the scheme io

“ensure effective monitoring of progress of housc construction. Initiatives like

“training of rural masons, tagging of field level functionaries fo houses,

development of housc-design typologies and production of tocal materials in

convergence with MGNREGA or otherwise have also been introduced to build

sary technical facilitation to beneficiaries to

overall capacity and provide ne
7 24


expedite consiruction. It is also proposed thei ‘houses oF old and infirm

beneficiaries will get constructed during the on the job training of rural masons.
Veiting Comment
No comments.
Observation/Recommendation

EXPEDITIOUS COMPLETION OF CONSTRUCTION OF SANCTIONED
HOUSES a

हि On scrutiny of the replies of the Minisiry, the Committee find thai out of all
houses sanctioned in 2013-14 under IAY, 11 01 lakh houses are complcted a8
on 26.02.2016 and majority of houses sanctioned. prior to 2013-14 have been
completed on ;ground. The Ministry, however, have stated thal the actual figures
of houses compicted on ground could be much higher in view of reporting gaps
and inability of the Stales io upload data on AwaasSoft. The Ministry have
directed all States to updale progress pertaining 10 financial year 2013-14 and
2014-15-0n AwaasSoft as on 31,03 2016. The Committee are ‘disappointed 10
find that despite the lapse of atleast 2-3 years and the introduction of AwaasSoft
for uploading of updated data on the implemeniation of fAY, the Ministry have
neither completed ihe target set foi furnished a clear status of ihe
implementation of AY. They feel that since the houses under the JAY are
construction. for the marginalised sections of socicty, any delay in completion of
construction of these houses will resutt in consequent denial of benefits to ihe
“poor and the deserving, who necd them for bare minimum survival. “The
- Committee, therefore, recommend that the Minisfry expedite the completion ot all
“houses sanctioned in 2013-14 and prior to 2013-14 and desire to be apprised of

कु the status of implementation of LAY.

[Para 4]

23


Aetion Tak

The need for closure under [AY to enable a smoath transition 0 PMAY-G
has been time and again impressed upon States. They have been directed to
make an assessmenl of the number of incomplete WAY houses and exnedite
construction of the same through resource mobilisation, technical facilitation, -

1 performance incentives and robust monitoring. To ensure ihat States/l 15 have
sufficient funds 10 undertake completion of houses perizining io previous years,
“funds have been released to them as committed liabiities During the
presentation of the Annual Action Plan under PMAY-G, most States have
committed to complete constuction of pending IAY houses by the end of FY
2016-17

As reported by State/UTs, 18.24 lakh houses sanctioned under IAY in yeat
2013-14 and 2014-15 were incomplete as on 01.04.2016 (Annexure 2). Almost 4
lakh houses ‘safctioned in these two years have been completed in the first half
of the current financial year as per reporis available on AwaasSoft, Further
approx. 3.2 lakh houses sanctioned in years prior fo FY 2013-14 have also been

completed in the current financial year

Though AwaasSoft has been made the sole platform tor reporting and
monitoring progress under the scheme from ist April, 2015, its use has been
constrained by inadequate digital infrastructure and lack of capacity al the State
level both in terms of dedicated manpower or hardware. This has resulted in
reporting ‘gaps which are being addressed by facilitating States to enter data on

~AwaasSoft through workshops, requiar training and development of user friendly
modules io capture past transactions. AS oF date, only AwaasSoft reporting is
- acceptable and Teal time reports pertaining to progress made in, completion of:

IAY houses are available in the pubtic domain on the MIS,

24


Vetting Comment

Annexure 2 was pot found enclosed. 1 atest status of incomplete houses

sanctioned under AY may be enctosed in the final reply
Updated repfy of the Ministry

‘Annexure is enclosed. Status of incomplete hauses as on 21.10.2016 is enclosed

के

{Annexure 1).
Observation/Recommendation
QUALITY OF CONSTRUCTIONS ;

The Committee note thai ihe Ministry have taken steps 10 develop
catalogues of cost effective housing designs appropriate for specific areas or

staies to ensure quality of the houses that are built for beneficiaries of the.

- scheme. The Committee desire that cfforts in that direction should be boosted

and that the National Institute of Rural Development should be engaged to

- develop more housing designs which are of good quality, using locally available

materials, and affordable and to provide experiise to slate governments.
{Para 5]
Action Taken

To make available a wide menu, of house design typologies to PMAY-G
beneficiaries, the Ministry in collaboration with UNDP and IIT, Dethi has initiated :

an exercise to catalogue locally appropriate, cost effective technologies and

- housing typelogies-for different zones in 18 states of Indfa. In each state different

House zones have been identified and this- has been done based on climaie,
topography, cultural and tradiiional housing practices’ and ~vuinerability 10
disasters. The stale wise compendiums, which have designs, drawings and

stimates appropriate to each region are being developed in consultation with

25


jocal officials, beneticiarics and Panchaveti Rej functionaries to ensure wide
ranging ecceptability and adoptabilily. Ihe same is being shared on a digital
platform lo enhance cutréach through the -Rured Housing Knowledge Network
(RHKN) web portal, :

Field studics have been conducied in alt the 18 siates viz. Bihar, Odisha
Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Tripura, West Bengal, Assam, Utiar Pradesh Madhya
Pradesh, Jharkhand, Sikkim, Manipur, “hhattisgarh, Jammu & Kashmir,
Uttarakhand, Rajasthan, Himachal Pradesh and Mizoram. House typology
designs have been finalized in 12 States viz Tripura, Meghataya, Maharashtra
Rajasthan Odisha, West Bengal, Assam, Jharkhand Manipur, Chhattisgarh
Mizoram and Hiriachal Pradesh. Demonstration houses, as per the identified

house typology, have been constructed in the States of Tripura and Maharashtra.

Apart from the above, several States have taken their own initiative in
developing Rouse design typologies to increase the choices available 10

beneficiaries and optimise use of resources in the construction of houses.

. The recommendation of the Committce to erigage NIRD to develop more
housing designs and provide expertise io stale governments has been noied for
compliance. The proposal to exhibit models and stale wise catalogues depicting

different housing typologies within NIRD, thereby making NIRD the reposilory of -

all ‘knowledge gathered during the exercise to document design typologies, is

under the consideration of the Ministry.
: Vetting Comment

PAC may bo apprised of the timeline for engaging NIRD to develop

housing design and providing expertise to state government
woes Se Updated reply of the Ministry

DOcvelopimneat of house design typologies and- preparation of state wise

catalogues has been laken up by the Ministry in collaboration with UNDP and UT

?6



Delhi in 18 States and is expected to be cornpleted by Deveriber, 2016. The
stele wise catalogues and house madels will be exhibiled in NID soon
thereafter, in the remaining States, the exercise will be taken up in the future.
Many Siales have iaken their own initiative in developing house design
-typologies to increase choices available to PMAY-G_ beneficiaries. NIRD is
expecicd {o serve as a repository for all knowledge gathered hy the Ministry and

Stales.
Observation/Recommendation .

INCORPGRATION OF A SYLLABUS ON CULTURAL AND AESTHETIC
TRAINTS IN MASON TRAINING CURRICULUM

. The Committee note thal the current curriculum for the mason training
programme being developed in the country fo comply with the requirement of-
National Secjor-Skills council, do not allow the variations. The Committee are of
the view that given the dynamics of cuttural, traditional ‘and regional diversity in
the couniry, enforcing a uniform curriculum for the mason training programm -
across the country is not ideal. The cultural and traditional sensitivity of ihe
region/community need 10 be taken into consideration while formulating the
: ‘curriculum. “the Committee, therefore, desire that, apart from the uniform
curriculum, being developed as per the national Sector Skills Council, ‘the
Minisity may seek the advice of focal masons and cultural experts and formulaic
a soparate subject on cultural, traditional housing practices and aesthetic traits
specific to the region and introduce thé subject along side the implementation of
thé uniform curriculum in the region, Action taken in this regard may be intimated

{o the corimittee.

{Para 6]

27


jon F

The process of incorporating competencies required for the job profile of a

Rural Mason into the Naiional Skills Qualification Framework fas been
completed. Quatification Pack (QP) fer ‘Rural Masons’ has been developed by
the Ministry in collaboration with Construction Skill Development Couincil of India’
(CSDCI) and approved by National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC). The
QP will serve as a benchmark for imparting standardized training on conventional
“ technologies 10 rural masons based on National Occupational standards. It is
proposed by the Ministry that 30,000 rural masons will be trained and certified in
accordance with the QP. in the current financial year which will lead to enhanced
employability through skill development and ensure availability of skilled masons
10 accornplish the largets set under the scheme. Morcover, certification by NSDC
will facilitate carcor growth and provide incentive for rural youth to consider

masonry as a viable occupation.
* :

Further, to cater to the requirernent of the North East and other States and
to incorporate cultural and aesthetic traiis specific to the regions, ihe Minisiry is
also considering development of optional National Occupational Standards
(NOS) and customizing the QP accordingly. The Ministry in coffaboration with
UNDP has already initiated work on devising optional! NOS for bamboo and
‘timber based construction. Similarly, lhe proposal to develop optional NOS for
construction of houses incorporating disaster resilient technologies and practices
‘is under the active consideration of National Disaster Management Authority. -
(NDMA)...
हु Vetting Comment

_ No-comments.

28



_ Gbservation/ weonmendation
PRO-BENEFICIARY APPROACH IN FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT

the Committee nole that after ihe first instalment, the beneliciaries delay

construction of the house or utilise the funds fhe short term consumption and.

- thus become ineligible for second instalment. The Committee also note that

State Governmenis have the option to blacklist the beneficiaries in AwaasSoft,

the misuse and misappropriation of AY fund to avoid: further release of funds to

these beneficiaries. The Cominitice are of the view that blacklisting the

न fi . - a 4 पर रे 1 a
beneficiaries will only aggravate ihe already dire economic situation that had

compelled these beneficiaries to use the funds for economic situation and had
compelled these beneficiaries to use the funds for short term consumption. The
Committee further observe that the scheme envisages that construction be
carried out by the beneficiary and the Government departments or agencies can

give technical assisiance or arrange for coordinated supply of material such as

"cement, steet or bricks or-arrange for prefabricated components only if the

beneficiary desires, The Committee recommend that rather than taking a radical

"stance and barring the erring beneficiaries from the Scheme, the Ministry need to

“take @ pro- beneficiary approach on the matter, wherein such misuse of funds ts

avoided and the beneficiaties continue to reap the benefits of the Scheme. The

“Commitiec desire thal the Ministry. fix a time period, within which the

beneficiaries are mandated to start the construction work, On expiry of the
stipulated periad, concerned Government deparmentfagencies can engage

contractors and begin construction work.
[Para 7]
Action Taken

In pursuance of the Commitiee’s recommendation to adopt a pro- |

“beneficiary approach, the Ministry has issued enabling guidelines/directives to

State/UTs to expedite completion. Firstly, all State/UTs have been advised 10.

29


iimplementaiion monitoring by setiing up and augmeriling Progre
Management Units (PMUs) by eng aging dedicated personnel and field
junctionaries using administrative funds available under the scheme. Secondly,
to ensure completion, StaieYUTs are being encouraged to tag or map field
functionaries t6 each beneficiary who will be entrusted not only with regular
monitoring of house consiruction but also facilitate the beneficiary. Thirdly,
construction of houses for beneficiaries who tack the wherewithal and are not in a
position to get the house constructed on their own may be taken up by lhe State
‘government including as a part of {he mason training program under PMAY-G.
Fourthly, local procuctioa of construction material may be taken up in
convergence with MGNREGA and made available to -beneficianes at |

~ -concessional rates.

The draft Framework for Implementation of PMAY. provides a maximum
period of 18 months from the date of sanction to completion of house
construction. Further, the State/UT governments can provide required necessary
Support services to beneficiaries to ensure completion of houses within the

defined time period
Vettin 'g Comment
No commenits. पु
हि Observation/Recommendaiion
REMEDIAL MEASURES ON MISUSE OF FUNDS

- As pointed oul by Audit, the Committee note several cases of operation of
“snultiple _ bank accounts, diversion of {AY funds towards other
schemes/piogrmmes expenditure of funds on ~ inadmissible ilerns,
“misappropriation and suspecied cases of misappropriation, unauthorised
deduction of funds on account of administrative charges, non-construction/nan- हु

“Installation of smakeless chulah/sanitary latrine/fAY 1090, under payment of funds
to beneficiaries and doublefexcess payment of funds to the [AY beneficiaries in

30



contravention of the guidelines and provisian of the scheme. Ihe Commitiee
express displeasure at such blatant violation of IAY guidelines. The Commitee
wish fo impress upon. the Minishy fo initiate immediate necessary remedial
measure and initiate disciplinary action against the responsible officials under ihe
rules. The Committee further recommend the recovery of funds, wherever
applicable, and desire to he apprised om the status of recovery of
misappropriated funds, action taken against the officials and measures taken for

strict compliance in fulure.
{Para 8]
Action Taken

According to the previcusly furnished reply the State Governments of
Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh have intimated that amount worth 1.33 cr and
0.02 ci respgctively, have been recovered from JAY funds which were previously
diverted. The State government of Jharkhand has informed that while 0.18 cr has

been recovered by. DRDA, Ranchi, an amount worth 0.12 cf is yet to be

"recovered from East Singhbhum district. The State has instructed the District io

take concrete action against diverted funds. Reply has also been received from
the State Government of Assam intimating that funds have been recovered in
four, while action is underway in the remaining districts. The updated position is

being obtained from the respective Slates.
Vetting Comment

Ministry has not addressed PAC’s recommendation regarding initiating

action against the erring officials-and the concrete measures to be taken for sliict

‘compliance in future

Further, latest status of state-wise. recovery done as on dale.and recovery

yet.to be done, with the reasons thereof, ray be included in the final rcply.

35


Some of thie concrete measures intoduced by the Ministry ie curb financial

malpractices and misuse of funds include:

1) Transfer of all programme lunds toa dedicated State Nodal
Account (SNA) to improve monitoring, tracking and timely

ulllization of funds.

2) Introduction of Direct Benefit Transfer (08) by enabling
electronic transfer of assistance directly from the SNA to the
beneficiary's account through generation of Fund Transfer
Order (710).

3) Payment of final instalment only after cornpletion of house
which is to be verified through geo réferenced, time stamped

photographs captured using AwaasApp,

4) Submission -of ceftificate by State/UTs certifying _that
administrative funds have only becn expended on permissible
= ; heads while submiiling proposal for release of central

assistance,

5} Aadhaar seeding of bank accounts of scheme beneficiaries,

whcrever possibic.

However, the responsibility of taking action against erring ‘officials in =
accordance .with extant rules and: regulations including: initiating 10691
‘proceedings fies with the State/UTs as they are the implementing agencies of the
scheme, The Minisiry continuously reviews cases involving misuse of funds and
- 7 pursues ihe matler with State/UTs for taking necessary action against erring

‘officiais, oe दि -

The Slate Government of Assam has informed that in cases involving
. Confirmed or suspected misappropriation, funds have been recouped/recovered

32



‘the

from all disiricis except iwo Le. Sonitpur and Cacher, While recoupment
proceedings have been initiated in Sonitpur, ‘the Govi.’s order to recover

misappropriated funds in Cachar worih Rs 0.64 crore has becn stayed by the

, lfon'ble High Court upon filing of wrii peiition by the concemed BDO.

The State Government of Jharkhand ‘has informed that in cases involving
confirmed or suspected misappropriation, an amount of Rs 9.19 lakh out of Rs

9.58 fakh has been recovered from Deoghar distfict and the recovery of

* remaining Rs 0.39 jakh is,in process. The fund release status of diverted amouni -

worth Rs 0.12 crore in East Singhbhum district is being tracked by the State. -
Observation/Recommendation

MONITORING AND EVALUATION

‘the Commitlee note that in as many as 22 Stlaies stipulated State Level
Vigilance afd “Monitoring Cominitiee (SLVMC) meetings were not held in
contravention of JAY. guidelines, social audit of ihe 187 was not conducted 10.7
monitor the implernentation of [AY at ihe ground level.. The Committee also note
that the Ministry has left monitoring and evaluation largely to the concerned State
governments, while prescribing Social Audit in ihe scheme guidelines and while
engaging National: Level Monitors and Area officers to monitor implementation of
the scheme. They also note the introduction of direct Benefit Transier (081) and
AwaasSoft to check parking and pilferage of funds and monitor physical progress
of. construction with geo referencing and time stamping features. , The
Committee, while appreciating the citorts, feél that ihe Ministry should examine

ways and means to further sirengihen ceniral monitoring of the scheme, such as

requiring inspection reports of States to be attested hy concerned Community-

based organisations or recogniscd Non-governmental Organisations operating in ,

ncerned areas, increased leverage of fT for real tine. monitoring by adding

more features in ihe Awaassoi, faunching schemes spécific online complaints

system, etc. This, the Committee, fcel will result in objective assessment of the

- 33


es of implemeritation and will give a ig bousl io monilicring and

evaluation,

{Para 3}
Action Taken

The Cormmitiee’s ‘suggestion that the Minisiry examine ways and means lo

; further strengthen ceniral monitoring of the scheme is being actively pursucd.
The Ministry. is in the process of -constituting a National Technical Support
Agency (NTSA) for the Rural Housing Scherne on the lines of National Rural
Roads Development Agency {NRRDA) consiiiuted io provide technical facilitation
to Pradhan Mantri-Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY). Along with providing technicat
inputs for improving administration of the schsme, the agency will have the
mandate for strengthening the central monitoring mechanism under the scheme
of PMAY-G. It will ‘be the nodal agency for coordinating the efforts towards
- effective e governance solutions for augmenting the present system of on field
verification. Secondly, a dashboard to provide customized information for
monitoring, tracking and reporting of house construction by various stakeholders
involved in the implementation of the scheme ‘is currently under development,
The module is being designed to provide data on key parameters in an
accessible and user friendly manner through effective data visualization, Future
development of the dashboard would involve integrating it with the geographical
information system developed on the basis of geo referenced data made
available through: ‘AwaasApp’. Thirdly, the provision to engage IIT/NIT of any
other institute of repute’as Slate Technical Suppii Agency, conduct assessment

and evaluation studies, provide service charges to Community Based

- Organisations afid recognised Non government Organisations for reviewing and

monitoring quality of construction using administrative funds available under the .

scheme has been incorporated into the Framework for Implementation of PMAY-

“|G. Lasily, the outline and coritours of an online eormplaint facility have already —"

34


been conceptualised and the proposal to develop the facility through a third pariy

is urider the active consideration of the Ministry.
Vetiing Comment

Ministry may apprise the PAC of the timeline of constitution of NISA and

operationalization of dashboard as well as online complaint Facility.
Updated reply of the Ministry
_ The NTSA is expected to be constituted by June, 2017.
Dashboard is expected io be developed by November, 2016.

The Minisiry is in the process of developing an online complaint facility for
PMAY-G by March, 2017, However, a link to Centralized Public Grievance
Redress and Monitoring System (CPGRAMS) has already been provided in the
rural housing website where all such matters, as pointed cut by PAC, can: be

taken up.

Observation/Recommendation
‘ ACTIVE CENTRAL MONITORING MECHANISM

The Committee note thai ihe State Government plays the primary role in
the: putting in place a system for quality monitoring. to guide and assist the
beneficiary in achieving satisfactory quality of house construction while. the
Ministry onty play ihe role of a faciitator-in ensuring ihe Staie has adequate

_ infrastructure at its disposal 10 ensure quality houses are being construction
te - under the scheme. The Commitiee also note that the district Vigilance and.
Monitoring Committee is responsible for ground level monitoring. ‘fo facilitate
-efficient monitoring. over quality construction and tracking of fund flow, the

Committee recorrmend setling up of a central monitoring cell under the charge of
a senior officer in the Ministry for overall review and monitoring of all Siaté level
projects. They further desire that-Central Monitoring Celi {CMC} should monitor

and ensure that the Vigilance and Monitoring Committee meetings are held
3S



regulacly both at the Staie and Disirict levels aad the CMC shout moniter

the Guicome of these meetings and follow up the recommendation made by the
concerned Committee.
[Para 10]
Action Taken

Vigilance and Monitoring Committee (VMC) is restructured as District
Development Coordination and Monitgring Committee (DISHA) fulfilling the
objective of ensuring a beiter coordination among all the elected representatives
in Parliament, State Legistatures and Local Governments (Panchayati Raj
institutions/Municipatl Bodies) for efficient and’ tirne-bound development and for
effective monitoring (Guidelines Attached). The dates of conducting DISHA
meetings हि districts have been pre-fixed at Ihe Ministry's level to ensure that

meetings are timely conducted.
.
.. A separate Monitoring Celt already exist in the Ministry for monitoring and

ensuring that the Vigilance and Monitoring Committee {VMC), renamed DISHA,
meetings are held regularly at the State and District leveis and there is necessary

follow up on the recommendations made thercin,
Vetting Comment
Guideline mentioned in the reply was not found attached,

Ministry stated that- dates of conducting DISHA meeting in ‘distticts had
been prefixed at the Ministry's level Ministry tay further apprise the PAC of the

. following
a) What is the maximum gap between two meeting of DISHA

b) Are the dates of meeting pre-fixed for each and every district

scparately by Ministry?

36



c) Are ihe mecting held sisicily according to dates provided by the
Ministry?

Ministry may provide a list of actuat meeting held belween January and

March 2016 in twodistricts each from Rajasthan, Assam and Jharkhand.
Updated reply of the Ministry

Guidelines have been attached (Annexure 1४).

The Ministry has constituted District Development Co-ordination and

Mohitoring Commitice (DISHA) in June 2016 replacing the District and Vigilance

and Monitoring Commitiee. As per DISHA guidelines, meetings shouid be held at

हे least once in every Quarter. The amended guidelines suggest.that the meeting
+ may be arranged on any day during third week of April, July, October and

February.

: ao

’ {tis further submitted that in case of erslwhile District Level Vigilance and
Monitoring Committee (VMC}, fixed days were prescribed for meetings. As per
tho guidelines, Districi Level VMC meetings were to be held on fixed days as

= a mentioned below: -
a} Last Saturday of May
b) Last Saturday of August
©) Last Saturday of November
d) Last Saturday of February

A statement indicating details of meetings of District Level Vigilance and
Monitoring Gormnittee held between January 2016 and March, 2046 jin the State
=. + .ofRajasthan and Jharkhand is enclosed (Annexure V). During the period District

level VMC-meeting has not beer reported from the State of Assam.

37



Observation/Re

CONVERGENCE OF IAY WITH OTHER SCHEMES

The committee note that AY envisaged convergence activities with other -
; Government of India schemes, i. e. Total Sanitation Campaign for construction of
Sanitary latrines in the IAY houses; Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidhyutikaran Yojana
for providing electricity; National Rural Water Supply Porgramme for providing
drinking water, Differential Rate of Interest scheme for availing loan facilities
Insurance Policies for rural BPL families and rurat landless famities and job cards
under Mahatma Gandhi National rural employment Guarantee Scheme, so that
the possible benefits under these schemes could be exiended to the SAY
beneficiaries. The Commitiee also note that desired level of convergence has
“not been achieved. The Committe feel that the task of achieving desired level
of convergence rests almost entirely and equally on the concerned central
Ministries. So, while noting that ihe Ministry of Rural Development alone cannot
- fake.the blame for low level convergence of scheme benefits 10 beneticiaries, the
Committee desire that as the nodal Ministry for rural progress, the Ministry must
take more pro-active steps.to engage vihcr concemed Minisiries/Departments to
achieve maximum convergence of scheme benefits for the purpose of obtaining |

larger overall impact.

[Para- 12] ,
! Action Taken

Under the scheme of PMAY-G convergence with MGNREGA (tor
Providing support of 90 person days in plain areas and 95 person days in hilly
‘States difficull areas and JAP districts) and convergence with SBM (5) or any

other dedicated source of funding for construction. of toilet has been. made
“tmandatory Accordingly, ihe Ministry has introduced various measures to
| + aperationatise benefits envisaged under convergence by cifectively leveraging

"digital solutions. Real time web tink has been developed with NREGASOIL to

38


Se

attaw creation of a NREGA work againsi.cach IAY/PMAY G house ‘sanctioned,
This will ensure that ध beneficiary is able io clairn his/her eritiflement of 96/95
days of paid unskilled labour for consiruction of PMAY-G house under
convergence: with MGNREGA. To enable post facto, manitoting of convergence
with Swachh Bharat Mission Gramin- SGM (G), ihe SBM unique [0 numbers are
being captured on AwaasSoll, wherever available, during the tine of registralion
Of beneficiary. During the presentation of iheir Annual Action शिक्षा for FY 2016: *

17, mosi States have commitied to construct Individual Household Latrines

* (IHHEs) in al PMAY-G houses through convergence with SBM or MGNREGA.

The Ministry is also ‘encouraging Staie/UTs to take up praduction of construction
matcrial, including mud and 19५ ash blocks, in convergence with MGNREGA by
including the same in the labour budget so that material for construction may be

made available to PMAY-G beneficiaries at concessional rates. .

Further convergence is proposed with schemes implemented by different है

Ministries for providing the basic amenities which are as follows:

|, National Rurat Drinking Water Prograrame (NRDWP) of Ministry of

Drinking Water and Sanitation for access to safe drinking water.

ii. ; Deen Dayal Upadhyay Gram Jyoli Yojana (DDUGJY), Ministry of

Power for electricity connection.

iii, “Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana (PMUY) of Ministry of Petroleum and

Natural Gas for Gas connections.

iv. Schernes of Ministry of New and’ Renewablé Energy for Solar
Lantems, Sofar Home -Lighting Systems, Solar Street lighting
systems and the National Bio-Mass Cooksioves Programme (NBCP} पु

; for farnily size bio-gas plants.

v Swachh Bharat Mission (G) or any other scheme of the State

Government for Solid and J iquid Waste management.

39


The Ministry is taking.up the issue of convergence proectively with other
Ministries. The Minisiry is werking on the modalities for enabling convergence
with National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP), Deen Dayal
Upadhyay Gram ‘Jyoti Yojana (DDUGSY) and Pradhan Mantr Ujjwala Yojana

(PMAUY} in constitation wiih ihe concemed Ministries/Departments.

' Besides, the status of convergence with aiher schemes is captured on
AwaasSoft as entered by the State Governments. The Annual Action Plan
prepared by the Siates/UTs under PMAY-G, contain the component of ensuring

we है

7 convérgorice of the other schemes.
Vetting Comment -

No comnients. |
Observation/Recommendation

PLAN OF ACTION ON HOMESTEAD SCHEME

The Commiltiee note that the current funcling of the unit cost is Rs. 70,000
for plain areas and Rs. 75,000 for hill states which is inadequale in the current
economy. In this ‘regard, a cabinet note for revision’ of the unit cost is under
consideration. The committee recommend the ‘Ministry to put a pian of action in
place regarding ihe percentage of funds to be allocated for acquiring land sites
and obtaining other building materials and disburse the fund in a staggered
manner accordingly -when the nacw revised unit cost is approved for
, implementation. This will facilitate timely commencement ‘and completion of
construction and will get rid of any possible attempt towards misappropriation of
fund, misuse of fund and procurement of inadmissible items. The Commitee

desire-to be apprised of the action taken by the Ministry in this regard,

[Para 13]

40



Aciion Taken

The Committee is apprised that the crsiwhile scheme of IAY has been
restructured into Pradhan Mant’ Awaas Yojana Gramin (PMAY-G) with ‘effect
irom 1st April, 2016. PMAY-G has been inkoduced with a view to realise the

vision of ‘Housing For All by 2022" through 8 robust delivery, and monitoring

- mechanism and improved scheme architecture. [he mandate of PMAY-G entails

construction of 1 crore houses in rural India at enhanced unit assistance of Rs
4.2 lakh in plain areas and Rs 1.3 lakh in difficult areasshilly slates/AP disiricts in

3 years, 1.8. by 2018-19... +

है In addition to the unit assistance of Rs 1.2 lakh in plain areas and Rs 1.3
lakh in difficult areasfhilly staiesMAP districts, the beneficiary is entitled fo receive
Rs 12,000 for construction of a toilet under convergence with SBM (G) and is
also entitled to 90/95 days of paid unskilled labour for construction of PMAY

house undef convergence with MGNREGA. This efiectively increases the

assistance provided under the ‘scheme to approximately Rs 1.5 lakhf/unit

हे depending on the prevailing MGNREGA wages for unskilled labour. Moreover,

the restructured scheme also has a provision for production ‘of construction
material including mud! fly ash blocks, using funds from MGNREGA, for PMAY
(G} beneficiaries. It is expected that the above rneasures will address this issue

.of inadequate unit assistance to a large extent.

The Homestead Incentives available for purchase of house site for

fandiess beneficiaries under AY is discontinued under PMAY-G, Under the

_ téestructured scheme, no provision has been made for providing assistance to
“beneficiaries ‘for purchase “of homestead. Instead State/UTs have been
 Sniriisted with the responsibility of ensuring tend [0 landicss beneficiaries before”

. Sanétionifig” houses to’ eligible bencficiaries under PMAY-G. During the

presentation of the Annual Action Plan for FY 2016-17 most States have agreed
to provide land to houseless households and landless beneficiaries on a priority

basis. Further, uploading of photographs. of the vacant site along wilh GPS

a


“coordinates has bee;

2 mandatory under PMAY-G whist

Of progress made by Stato/U I's ia this direction.
Vetting Comment

Ministry had noi addressed the PAC recommendation regarding disbursal

of funds ina staggered menner.
‘Updated reply of the Ministry.

_ Fhe Government of India is.releasing funds 10 the State/UTs in iwo
instalments under PMAY-G. The draft Framework for Implementation allows
_Slate/UTs to disburse assistance to the beneficiaries in instalments linked to pre

defined stages ef house construction.
Observation/Recommendation

REMEDIAL MEASURES ON THE MISMANAGEMENT OF HOMESTEAD
_, SCHEME ,

The Committee note thai the Homestead scheme is a demand driven
scheme. Funds under this-scheme are released only to those Siaics on demand
after submission of proposals along with requisite docurnents/certificates as per

the scheme guidelines. The Committee, however, observe that.the funds are

eleased to Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Karnalaka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Rajasthan
and Uttar Pradesh under the scheme without identilication/possession of land by
‘the States. ‘The Coramiltee are appalled at the gross violation of the scheme

guidelines and recommend the Ministry to constitute an Enquiry Commiitee to

‘investigate the reasons for diversion from the scheme guidelines and impose

“s ringent penalty against the responsible officials. ‘lhe Carniiriitee also desire

- that the Ministry issuc a circular to all concerned officiats for strict adherence and

compliance to the guidetines in future.

[Para 14]

42



Action Taken

116 recommendation of the Commiliee to constiiute an Enquiry committee
lo investigate the irregularities: observed in the crstwhile }omesiead scheme
under IAY has been noted for compliance. Proposal for deputing a team of
National Level Monitors (NLM} 10 inquire into lhe same is under the active
consideration in the Ministry, Based on the findings of the NLM, necessary action
will be taken agains! erring officials. Once the Framework for Implementation of
PMAY-G has been finalised, the Ministry wil| advise all concerned officials for

strict adherence and compliance of the guidelines.
Vetting Comment

‘The exact timelines for constitution of Enquiry Committee may be inchuied

in the final reply.

“a Updated reply of the Ministry

The proposal for deputing a tear of NLMs is under the consideration of
the Ministry. It is proposed that.the team will conduct the enquiry and finalise its
findings by 317 March, 2017.

43


CHAPTER Uff

OBSERVA TIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 00 NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF TEE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE
~ GOVERNMENT ;

- “NH -

=
bh



_ CHAPTER IV -

OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDA' IONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 7
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION

yee

जा"

45



OBSERVATIONSIRECOMMENDATIONS. IN RESPECT OF WHICH
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES

Observation/Recommandation
CONCURRENT EVALUATION

The Committee are picased to note that the: Ministry is currently in the
process of conducting a concurrent Evaluation and tmpaci Assessment Study of

Indira Awaas Yojana (JAY) for which the terms of reference are under finalisation

- The Committee desire ihat the process may be expedited and a time frame of not

more than 18 months be given for a country-wide evaluation and impact

assessment, based on which further interventions through the scheme can be

chalked ou, '
[Para 11]
' Action Taken

The Terms of References of the “Process Evaluation Study of JAY" has

been finalized and ihe process of award of study is in progress.
Vetting Cormment

As the. action is siill under progress, no comments.

~NEW DELHI: . PROF. K.V. THOMAS

26 Aprit, 2046 Chairperson,
6 Vaishaka, 1939 (Saks) Public Accounts Committee

AG


APPENDIX It
(Vide Para. 5 of Iniroduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
CONTAINED IN THEIR FORTY-THIRD REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

(i) Total number of Observations/Récommendations 12

{ii} Observations/Recommendations of the Commitiee Total: 68
' which have been accepted by the Government Porcentage:92.85 %
Para Nos. 1-10 and 12-14

(ii) | Observations/Recommendations which the Total: a2 |
Commitiee do not desire to pursue in view of Percentage: 0 %
the reply of the Government: :

ParaNos. -NIL- |

{iv) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of Total: 92
which the replies of the Government have not been Percentage: 0 %
accepted by the Commitiee and which require
~ feiteration.
Para Nos. —NIL-

(५) Observations/Recommendations in respect of Total: 0 पु
-. which the Government have fumished interim replies Percentage: 7.14 %

Para Nos, 14