1 
 
47 
 
 
HYDROCARBON PRODUCTION SHARING 
CONTRACTS 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2015-16) 
 
 
FORTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
               
                      
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


2 
 
 
 
 
PAC NO. 2079 
 
 
F O R T Y- S E V E N T H  R E P O R T 
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(2015 -16)  
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                              
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
 
 
                                         
                                                                                          
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on: 28.04.2016 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on:28.04.2016 
 
 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
April, 2016 / Vaisakha 1938 (Saka)  
 
 
HYDROCARBON PRODUCTION 
SHARING CONTRACTS 
 

3 
 
CONTENTS 
           
   PAGES 
 
 Composition of the Public Accounts Committee (2015-16)  
 Composition of the Public Accounts Committee (2014-15)  
 Composition of the Public Accounts Committee (2013-14)  
 Composition of the Public Accounts Committee (2012-13)  
 Composition of the Public Accounts Committee (2011-12)  
 Composition of Sub -Committee-VIII(Hydrocarbon Production Sharing Contracts) 
of the Public Accounts Committee (2015-16) 
 
 Introduction  
  REPORT 
PART- I 
 
I BACKGROUND 1-2 
II INTRODUCTORY 
 
2-16 
 A. Investment Multiple (IM)/ Pre-Tax Investment Multiple (PTIM) 16-26 
 FINDINGS RELATING TO KG-DWN-98/3 21 
 B. Non-relinquishment of the contract area 26-37 
 C. Deficiencies in pre-qualification process  37-38 
 D. Irregular selection of AFP  38-41 
 E. Proposal for Declaration of Commerciality (DoC) 41-47 
 F. Policy on Testing Requirements for discoveries in NELP blocks  47-48 
 G. Viability of Optimized Field Development Plan (OFDP)  48-52 

4 
 
III GRANT OF CONCESSIONS AGAINST CONTRACTUAL TERMS 52-72 
 A. Contract for Engineering, Procurement, Installation and Construction of 
offshore facilities. 
 
52-62 
 B. Contract for chartering FPSO 
 
62-65 
 C. Increased cost for expediting deliveries and early mobilization of 
commissioning team and extension of date of first production of oil and gas  
 
65-69 
 D. Fabrication and installation of living quarters 
 
70-72 
IV IRREGULAR PAYMENTS  72-79 
 A. Construction of OT INR 22.7 million to M/s Larsen & Toubro (L&T) Ltd  
 
72-74 
 B. Payment of INR 1110.90 million as compensation on Free Issue Material 74-77 
 C. Classification of Start-up and Production Bonuses as part of recoverable 
costs 
77-79 
V AWARD OF CONTRACT 79-85 
 A. Piece-meal hiring of drilling rig “Deepwater Frontier” from M/s. Transocean – 
US$ 88.77 million.  
79-83 
 B. 
Bonus paid for time saved during rig movement 
 
83-85 
 
 PANNA-MUKTA AND MID & SOUTH TAPTI FIELDS 86-120 
VI INTRODUCTION 86 
VII DEVELOPMENT OF PANNA-MUKTA AND TAPTI FIELDS: 86-87 
VIII ISSUES AND HIGHLIGHTS OF AUDIT FINDINGS 87-91 
 A. REPORT NO. 19 OF 2011-12 87-88 
 B. REPORT NO. 24 OF 2014 88-91 
IX ISSUES UNDER ARBITRATION 91-96 
 A. Report No.19 of 2011-12 91-92 

5 
 
 B. Report No. 24 of 2014. 92-96 
X NON-SIGNING OF CRUDE OIL SALES AGREEMENT 96-98 
XI 
COST RECOVERY OF UNCONSUMED PRODUCTION INVENTORY  
99-101 
XII AWARD OF CONTRACT FOR INSTALLATION OF PLATFORMS 101-103 
XIII PETROLEUM OPERATIONS 103-108 
 A. Delay in Water Injection (WI) project in Panna field resulting in 
declining production 
103-108 
XIV SALE OF GAS BY ONGC AND TWO JV PARTNERS (RIL AND BGEPIL) IN 
CONTRAVENTION TO MOPNG'S DIRECTIVES. 
108-118 
 A. Loss of US$ 9.92 million due to sale of gas in contravention to MoPNG 
directives and GSPA 
110-115 
 B. Loss of government revenue of US$ 0.52 million due to sale of Panna -
Mukta gas in contravention to PSC 
115-118 
XV  DELAY IN NON -FIXATION OF TRANSPORTATION LOSSES OF 
CONDENSATE 
118-120 
  RJ-ON-90/1 BLOCK 121-137 
XVI INTRODUCTION 121 
XVII OBJECTIVE 121 
XVIII AUDIT REVIEW  122 
XIX EXPLORATION AND APPRAISAL ACTIVITIES  122-126 
 A. Delayed Relinquishment  of Area 122-123 
 B. Extension of Appraisal Period  124-125 
 C. Discoveries made during/after Exploration Period  125-126 
XX COMPLIANCE ISSUES 126-131 
 A. Delay in submission of Work Programme and Budget (WP&B) 126-128 

6 
 
 B. Short Payment of Profit Petroleum to GoI-Adjustment of Shipping Cost 
beyond delivery point 
128-130 
 C. Delay in approval of Optimizing Concept 130-131 
XXI NON-LIFTING OF CRUDE OIL BY NOMINATED GOI REFINERIES 131-133 
XXII NON-FIXATION OF PRICE OF RJ CRUDE DESPITE PRODUCTION FROM 
 THE CONTRACT AREA SINCE AUGUST 2009 
133-136 
XXIII AWARD OF CONTRACT BEYOND PSC PROVISIONS 136-137 
 PART - II  
 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 138-173 
 APPENDICES  
I Minutes of the Sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2015-16) on 26th 
April, 2016* 
 
II Minutes of the Sitting of Sub-Committee-VIII on 25th April, 2016*  
III Minutes*  
 
                                            
* Will be appended at the time of printing. 

ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2015-16) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prof. K.V. Thomas  - Chairperson 
  
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura 
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey 
6. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar  
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
9. Shri Neiphiu Rio 
10. Shri Dushyant Singh 
11. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
15. Dr. P. Venugopal 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Naresh Agrawal 
17. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
18. Shri Anil Madhav Dave 
19. Shri Vijay Goel 
20. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
21. Shri Shantaram Naik 
22. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
  
 SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri T. Jayakumar - Director 
3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary 

iii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2014-15) 
                                            
† Vacant vice Dr. M. Thambidurai who has been chosen as Hon'ble Deputy Speaker, Lok Sabha and has 
since resigned from the membership of the Committee.  
 
Prof. K.V. Thomas  - Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura 
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey 
6. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar  
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
9. Shri Neiphiu Rio 
10. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
11. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
12. Shri Jayant Sinha 
13. Dr. Kirit Somaiya 
14. Shri Anurag Thakur 
15†. Vacant 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
17. Shri Vijay Goel 
 
18. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya 
 
19. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
 
20. Shri Shantaram Naik 
 
21. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
 
22. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh 
 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2014-15) 
                                            
‡ Vacant vice Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy who has been appointed as Minister w.e.f.  9th November, 2014. 
§ Vacant vice Shri Jayant Sinha who has been appointed as Minister w.e.f.  9th November, 2014. 
** Vacant vice Dr. M. Thambidurai who has been chosen as Hon'ble Deputy Speaker, Lok Sabha and has 
since resigned from the membership of the Committee.  
 
Prof. K.V. Thomas  - Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura 
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey 
6. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar  
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
9. Shri Neiphiu Rio 
10‡. Vacant 
11. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
12§. Vacant 
13. Dr. Kirit Somaiya 
14. Shri Anurag Thakur 
15**. Vacant 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
17. Shri Vijay Goel 
 
18. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya 
 
19. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
 
20. Shri Shantaram Naik 
 
21. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
 
22. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh 
 

v 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2014-15) 
 
                                            
†† Elected w.e.f. 3rd December, 2014 vice Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy who has been appointed as Minister 
w.e.f.  9th November, 2014. 
‡‡ ‡‡ Elected w.e.f. 3rd December, 2014  vice Shri Jayant Sinha who has been appointed as Minister 
w.e.f.  9th November, 2014. 
§§ §§ Elected w.e.f. 3rd December, 2014  vice Dr. M. Thambidurai who has been chosen as Hon'ble 
Deputy Speaker, Lok Sabha and has since resigned from the membership of the Committee.  
 
Prof. K.V. Thomas  - Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura 
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey 
6. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar  
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
9. Shri Neiphiu Rio 
10††. Shri Dushyant Singh 
11. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
12‡‡. Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi 
13. Dr. Kirit Somaiya 
14. Shri Anurag Thakur 
15§§. Dr. P. Venugopal 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
17. Shri Vijay Goel 
18. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya 
19. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
20. Shri Shantaram Naik 
21. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
22. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh 

vi 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2013-14) 
 
                                            
*** Elected w.e.f. 14 th August, 2013  vice Dr. Girija Vyas  appointed as Minister of Housing, Urban 
Development & Poverty Alleviation  w.e.f.  17th June, 2013. 
 
††† Elected w.e.f. 3 rd September, 2013 vice Dr. V. Maitreyan ceased to be a Member upon his retirement 
as a Member of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 24th July, 2013. 
 
‡‡‡ Elected w.e.f. 3 rd September, 2013 vice Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan  appointed as Minister of 
State for Commerce and Industry w.e.f.  17th June, 2013. 
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  - Chairman 
 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
  2. Shri Anandrao Adsul 
  3. Dr. Baliram 
  4. Shri Ramen Deka 
  5. Shri Sandeep Dikshit 
  6. Dr. M. Thambi Durai  
  7. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan  
  8. Shri Jayaprakash Hegde 
  9. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
10 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee 
12. Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
13. Shri Ashok Tanwar 
***14. Shri Ajay Maken 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee 
17. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
†††18. Shri Ashwani Kumar 
19. Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
‡‡‡20. Dr. V. Maitreyan 
21. Shri N.K. Singh 
22. Smt. Ambika Soni 

vii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(2012-13) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  - Chairman 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
  2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul 
  3. Dr. Baliram 
  4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit 
  5. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
  6. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan  
  7. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
  8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
  9. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
10 Shri Shripad Yesso Naik 
11. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana 
12. Shri Ashok Tanwar 
13. Dr. Shashi Tharoor 
14. Dr. Girija Vyas 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee 
17. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
18. Shri Satish Chandra Misra  
19. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
20. Shri J.D. Seelam 
21. Shri N.K. Singh 
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz 

viii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2012-13) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                            
§§§ Elected w.e.f  6th December, 2012 vice Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana appointed as Minister on 28th 
October, 2012. 
**** Elected w.e.f  6th December, 2012 vice Dr. Shashi Tharoor appointed as Minister on  
28th October, 2012. 
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  - Chairman 
 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
  2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul 
  3. Dr. Baliram 
  4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit 
  5. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
  6. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan  
  7. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
  8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
  9. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
10 Shri Shripad Yesso Naik 
§§§11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee 
12. Shri Ashok Tanwar 
****13. Shri Takam Sanjoy 
14. Dr. Girija Vyas 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee 
17. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
18. Shri Satish Chandra Misra  
19. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
20. Shri J.D. Seelam 
21. Shri N.K. Singh 
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz 

ix 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2012-13) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                            
†††† Vacancy occurred  vice Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana appointed as Minister on 28 th October, 2012. 
‡‡‡‡ Vacancy occurred  vice Dr. Shashi Tharoor appointed as Minister on  
28th October, 2012. 
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  - Chairman 
 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
  2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul 
  3. Dr. Baliram 
  4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit 
  5. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
  6. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan  
  7. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
  8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
  9. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
10 Shri Shripad Yesso Naik 
††††11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee 
12. Shri Ashok Tanwar 
‡‡‡‡13. Shri Takam Sanjoy 
14. Dr. Girija Vyas 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee 
17. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
18. Shri Satish Chandra Misra  
19. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
20. Shri J.D. Seelam 
21. Shri N.K. Singh 
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz 

x 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2011-12) 
 
 
 
 
                                            
§§§§  Elected w.e.f. 29th August 2011 vide the vacancy occurred vice Smt. Jayanti Natarajan appointed 
 Minister w.e.f. 12th July, 2011. 
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  - Chairman 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
  2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul 
  3. Dr. Baliram 
  4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit 
  5. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
  6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
  7. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik 
  8. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
  9. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
10 Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao 
11. Shri Adhi Sankar 
12. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh 
13. Shri K. Sudhakaran  
14. Dr. M. Thambidurai 
15. Dr. Girija Vyas 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Tariq Anwar 
17. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee 
18. Shri Naresh Gujral 
19. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
20. Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
§§§§21. Shri J.D. Seelam 
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz 

xi 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE-VIII(HYDROCARBON 
PRODUCTION SHARING CONTRACTS) OF THE PUBLIC 
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2015-16) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy   - Convenor 
                        Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi                       -  Alternate Convenor 
  
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
3. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
5. Dr. P. Venugopal 
  
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
6. Shri Naresh Agrawal 
7. Shri Vijay Goel 
8. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 

xii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the  Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2015 -16), having been authorised by the 
Committee, do present this Forty -seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Hydrocarbon Production 
Sharing Contracts’  based on C&AG Report Nos. 19 of 2011 -12 (Performance Audit) and 24 of 2 014, 
Union Government relating to Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas.  
 
2. The Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India were laid on the Table of the House 
on 8th September, 2011 and 28th November, 2014 respectively. 
3. C&AG Report No.19 of 2011 -12 (Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon Production Sharing 
Contracts) was selected by the Main Committee of PAC for examination in 2011 -12 and thereafter the 
Report continued to be examined during the entire term of the Committee in 15th Lok Sabha. Du ring 16th 
Lok Sabha, PAC (2014-15) took up C&AG Report No.19 of 2011-12 and on laying of C&AG Report No.24 
of 2014 on "Hydrocarbon Production Sharing Contracts" in the Parliament, the same was selected for 
examination.  Subsequently, a Sub -Committee under the convenorship of Shri Sukhendu Shekahar Roy, 
MP and a Member of PAC was constituted for an in-depth examination of the two reports simultaneously. 
4. Public Accounts Committee during 15th Lok Sabha held five sittings wherein briefing/oral 
evidences of t he Ministry of Petroleum &Natural Gas and one of the Operators viz. Reliance Industries 
Ltd. were taken. During 16th Lok Sabha, PAC (2014 -15)  called the Ministry for evidence on the Report 
No. 19 of 2011-12 twice followed by a briefing by C&AG on Report No.24 of 2014.  
 
5. The Sub-Committee-VIII held four sittings to examine the subject. Reliance Industries Ltd. who 
had requested to be heard on the issues pertaining to them tendered their evidence on 16th February, 
2016 and 10th March, 2016 followed by the  oral evidence of Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Ltd. 
(ONGC), Directorate General of Hydrocarbons (DGH) and Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas on 21st 
March, 2016.The Sub -Committee-VIII considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 25th 
April, 2016 and thereafter, the Public Accounts Committee (2015 -16) considered and adopted this Report 
at their sitting held on 26th April, 2016. Minutes of the Sittings form Appendices to the Report.  
 
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the Obser vations and Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold and form Part II of the Report. 
 
7. The Committee thank the Predecessor Committees and Sub -Committee for taking oral evidence 
and obtaining information on the subject as well as finaliz ing and placing the Draft Report before the main 
Committee. 
 
8. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of Ministry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas, DGH, ONGC and Reliance Industries Ltd.  for tendering evidence before them and 
furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in connection with the examination of the subject.  
 
9. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to them in the 
matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.  
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                          PROF. K.V.THOMAS 
26th April, 2016                                                                                                                      Chairperson, 
6 Vaisakha  1938 (Saka)                                                                              Public Accounts Committee. 
        

-1- 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT 
PART – I 
 
I. BACKGROUND 
 In November, 2007, the Secretary, MoPNG requested the C&AG of India to 
conduct a special audit of the PSCs for eight blocks viz. Ravva, Panna -Mukta, Tapti, 
KG-DWN-98/3, RJ-ON-90/1, Hazira, KG-OSN-2001/3, and PY-3, for which regular audit 
had already been c arried upto 2003 -04/2004-05.  The Ministry's request was made in 
the context of larger stakes of the Government in the form of royalty and profit 
petroleum, and concerns voiced in some quarters about the capital expenditure being 
incurred by some contractors in the development projects awarded under the NELP.  
2. In March, 2008, the C&AG agreed to the Ministry's request for audit, indicating 
that Audit would be covering, in the first instance, five blocks – Panna Mukta, Tapti, KG-
DWN-98/3, Hazira and PY -3 – out of the eight blocks for which special audit was 
requested by the Ministry, with the audit of the remaining three blocks to be taken up 
subsequently in a phased manner. 
 
3. The responses/comments furnished by the Ministry as well as by the operators 
were dul y and appropriately considered and incorporated in the Audit Report 19 of 
2011-12 which was finally laid in Parliament on 08.09.2011. 
 
4. The MoPNG, in April 2010, had requested C&AG to undertake audit of 20 
fields/blocks for the FYs 2007 -08 and 2008-09. The request was accepted by C&AG in 
February 2012 agreeing to audit 8 blocks and the balance 12 blocks to be audited by 
Chartered Accountants. 
5. Audit of four blocks, viz. PY -1, PY -3, Kharsang and CB -ON-7, was conducted 
during February to September 2011 for the years 2007-09 at the premises of DGH and 
the Operator.  
6. Audit initiated (May 2012) a Performance Audit of the implementation of 
Hydrocarbon PSCs at the MoPNG and DGH with respect to Blocks KG -DWN-98/3, 

-2- 
 
 
 
Panna-Mukta, Tapti and RJ -ON-90/1. At the Operators’ p remises for these blocks, 
C&AG undertook the financial and propriety audit. While audit at the Operator’s 
premises for RJ-ON-90/1 block commenced in July 2012, audit for KG -DWN-98/3 block 
and for Panna-Mukta, Tapti blocks commenced in January 2013 only.  
7. The observations emanating from the performance audit at the MoPNG and the 
DGH as well as the results of the financial and propriety audit conducted at the 
Operators have been presented in report No.24 of 2014. 
 
8. C&AG Report No.19 of 2011 -12 (Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon Production 
Sharing Contracts) was selected by the Main Committee of PAC for examination during 
15th Lok Sabha in 2011 -12 and thereafter the Report continued to be examined during 
the entire term of the Committee of 15th Lok Sabha. 
 
9. During 16th Lok Sabha, the Main Committee of PAC in its term (2014 -15) 
continued to examine the same C&AG Report No.19 of 2011 -12.  Meanwhile on laying 
of C&AG Report No.24 of 2014 on "Hydrocarbon Production Sharing Contracts" in the 
Parliament, the same was brought under the subjects selected for examination by the 
Main Committee of PAC.   
  
 Afterwards it was felt that a Sub -Committee on matters related to Hydrocarbons 
may be formed to have an in -depth examination.  Thus, Sub -Committee VIII on 
Hydrocarbon Production Sharing Contracts has carried out examination of aforesaid two 
reports simultaneously. 
 
II. INTRODUCTORY 
  
10. Hydrocarbon refers to any of a group of compounds of Hydrogen and Carbon 
that are found in petrol coal and natural gas.  Petroleum covers Hy drocarbons in liquid 
form viz. crude oil as well as in gaseous form viz. natural gas.  While Hydrocarbon fields 
primarily contain either crude oil or natural gas, they also include associated natural gas 
i.e. natural gas produced in association with crude oil as well as condensate i.e. liquid 
Hydrocarbons segregated from natural gas. 
 

-3- 
 
 
 
11. Petroleum Exploration and Production (E&P) operations are also referred to as 
upstream operations.  Downstream operations include refining of crude oil and 
marketing of petrol eum and gas products while midstream operations (which are often 
included under downstream operations) include storage, transportation and related 
activities.  The E&P operations i.e. the upstream operations can be broadly grouped into 
three categories 
(i) Exploration; 
(ii) Development; and 
(iii) Production. 
 
12. The first phase in the process for extraction of petroleum is Exploration i.e. the 
search for oil and gas deposits beneath the earth's surface.  Such deposits could either 
be onshore or offshore.  Exploration inter-alia consists of several sub -phases like Initial 
Surveys, Seismic Survey, Exploratory well, Appraisal wells and Commercial Discovery. 
 
13. The next phase in the extraction of petroleum is the development of field which 
first involves the drawing up of a field development plan to ensure the most efficient, 
beneficial and timely extraction of petroleum keeping in view the engineering, economic, 
safety and environmental considerations.  Development then inter-alia includes drilling 
of production and injection wells, installation of offshore platforms, separators, 
tankages, pumps etc. 
 
14. The last phase is production which inter-alia involves operati ons and 
maintenance of the existing fields, workovers, plugging and abandonment of wells, 
improved oil recovery and site restoration etc. 
 
15. The Exploration & Production (E&P) activities in India started in 1955, when the 
Government of India decided to devel op the oil and natural gas resources in various 
regions of the country as part of the Public Sector development.  With this objective, an 
Oil and Natural Gas Directorate was set up towards the end of 1955, as a subordinate 
office under the Ministry of Natu ral Resources and Scientific Research.  In April 1956, 
the Government of India adopted the Industrial Policy Resolution which placed mineral 

-4- 
 
 
 
oil industry among the schedule 'A' industries, the future development of which was to 
be the sole and exclusive re sponsibility of the State.  In August 1956, the Oil and 
Natural Gas Directorate was raised to the status of a 'Commission' with enhanced 
financial and administrative powers to function efficiently, though it continued to remain 
under the Government.  In Oc tober 1959, the 'Commission' was converted into a 
Statutory Body by an Act of Parliament, which further enhanced the powers of the 
Commission.  In the same year viz. 1959, Oil India Ltd. (OIL) was incorporated to carry 
out the exploration activities in Assam. 
 
16. Thus, the E&P activities in India were carried out predominantly by the two 
National Oil Companies (NOCs) viz. Oil and Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC) and Oil 
India Ltd. (OIL) by grant of Petroleum Exploration Licenses (PELs) and the Mining 
Lease (ML) by the Government of India, on nomination basis under the Oil Field 
Regulation and Development (O&RD) Act, 1948 and the Petroleum and Natural Gas 
(P&NG) Rules, 1959.  The Petroleum Exploration Licenses (PELs) for exploration and 
exploitation and Mining Lea se (ML) for development of Oil and Gas are granted by the 
Central Government in respect of offshore areas and by the State Governments 
concerned for onshore areas.  
 
17. Although the exploration efforts made by the ONGC and OIL helped to upgrade 
the geological  reserves, the need for further augmenting the reserves and increasing 
the drilling density prompted the Government to open the oil and gas blocks to foreign 
oil companies through several licensing rounds to supplement the efforts of the NOCs.  
In fact, efforts to involve foreign private companies in the E&P activities of gas and oil in 
India began as early as 1973, followed by three rounds of bidding between 1980 and 
1986 which did not yield any concrete results. 
 
18. The Ministry, therefore, appointed a Commi ttee to consider and identify the 
blocks which could be offered in the fourth round of bidding.  The Committee, so 
appointed, submitted its Report in August 1989 which almost retained the terms and 
conditions of the third round of bidding while increasing the scope to also include the 
private sector domestic companies in the bidding process. 

-5- 
 
 
 
 
19. In 1991, the Government, as part of the economic reform programme and 
liberalization process in the oil and gas sector, formulated an exploration policy to invite 
both foreign and Indian companies with a view to attracting investment and technology.  
As per this policy, further exploration and exploitation in India, which was already in 
huge deficit, was to be done by a proper system of Joint Venture.  The liberalized 
economic policy thus sought to deregulate and de -license the core sector, including the 
Petroleum Sector, with partial disinvestments of Government equity in the PSUs and 
other related measures.  As a consequence thereof ONGC was reorganized as a limited 
company in February, 1994 under the Company's Act, 1956. 
 
20. In 1993, the Government introduced a policy of round -the-year bidding for the 
exploratory blocks.  In all, a total of nine rounds of bidding were held the details of which 
are as under: 
(i) One round for medium-sized discovered/producing fields; 
(ii) Two rounds for small-sized discovered fields; and 
 
(iii) Six rounds for pre-NELP exploratory blocks. 
  
21. Panna-Mukta, Tapti, Raava and Kharsang fall under medium -sized blocks and 
Hazira, Amguri and Kanwara under small-sized blocks. 
 
22. In view of the need for evolving a strategy to enable the Public Sector and 
Private Companies to compete for exploration acreages on equal terms and award of 
blocks to those companies which offer the best in terms of fiscal package and  work 
commitments, the exploration policy was reviewed and a New Exploration Licensing 
Policy (NELP) was formulated, got the approval of the Cabinet in 1997 and made 
operational in January, 1999.  Under the NELP, suitable fiscal incentives were provided 
for deepwater areas and also broad contractual and fiscal terms for offering blocks for 
exploration of oil and gas in the country.  One of the important parameters of the NELP 
was that the NOCs i.e. ONGC and OIL were required to compete with the Private 
players under equal contractual and fiscal framework to acquire exploration acreages.  
The NELP was aimed at: 
 

-6- 
 
 
 
(i) Attracting the much needed investment as well as infusion of new 
technologies in the E&P Sector for bringing more and more unexplored 
areas under exploration; 
 
(ii) Augmenting the level of exploration activity in the country to find new 
sources of oil and gas for bridging the gap between demand and supply; 
 
(iii) Providing greater incentives to attract private investments in the E&P 
Sector; 
 
(iv) Providing a level pla ying field to all the investors including the NOCs and 
the domestic and foreign private companies. Grant of exploration licenses 
through international competitive basis; and 
 
(v) Supplementing the efforts of the NOCs through increased participation by 
the Private Sector. 
 
23. The fiscal incentives provided to the Contractors under the NELP were as under: 
(i) International pricing for crude oil and market driven prices for Natural gas; 
 
(ii) No Oil Industry Development Cess; 
 
(iii) No signature, discovery o r production bonuses.  Production Sharing 
Contracts (PSCs) with the Government based on pre -Tax Investment 
Multiple; 
 
(iv) No custom duty on imports for petroleum operation; 
 
(v) No ring-fencing of expenditure and income for Income Tax purposes; 
 
(vi) Special concessions for deepwater blocks (5 per cent royalty payable on 
oil and gas for the first seven years); 
 
(vii) Full repatriation of projects; 
 
(viii) Fiscal stability as part of the contract; 
 
(ix) Low to moderate royalty rates ranging between 5 per cent and 12.5 per 
cent; 
 
(x) Liberal se t off of losses and carry forward provisions for Income Tax 
purposes including 7 year Corporate Tax holiday from the date of 
commencement of commercial production of mineral oil; 
 
(xi) Tax incentives for Site Restoration Fund Scheme (SRFS); and 

-7- 
 
 
 
 
(xii) An Empowered Co mmittee of Secretaries consisting of the Secretary, 
MoPNG, Finance Secretary and Law Secretary would consider the bid 
evaluation criteria, conduct negotiations with the bidders, wherever 
necessary and make recommendations to the Cabinet Committee on 
Economic Affairs (CCEA) on award of blocks. 
 
24. Thus, there was a gradual shift in the E&P policy, from nomination acreage to 
competitive bidding, first under the pre -NELP regime (both for exploration blocks and 
discovered fields) and subsequently under the NELP regime to promote investment, 
efficiency and entrepreneurship.  The process of award of contracts under the NELP 
rounds is broadly as under: 
 
(i) Preparation of data package and basis information docket (Data package 
contains seismic data, navigation data, relevant maps and well log data for 
the individual block.  Basin information docket is for the basin as a whole 
and less detailed than the data package); 
 
(ii) Road shows for publicizing the NELP round; 
 
(iii) Publishing of bid document; 
 
(iv) Purchase of bid document and da ta package/basin information docket by 
the contractor; 
 
(v) Submission of bids, evaluation thereof, and award of blocks; and 
 
(vi) Signing of Production Sharing Contracts (PSCs). 
 
25. The evaluation of bids is carried out on weightages based on technical and 
financial capabilities, proposed exploratory work programme and fiscal packages 
offered.  The bidder offering the highest Government Net Present Value (NPV) at 10 per 
cent discount factor is given the maximum points and other bidders are rated 
proportionately.  The bidder getting the highest points in all the criteria is considered to 
be the highest bid for award of the blocks.  
 
26. Substantial weightage is given to exploration work as part of the bidding criteria 
so as to incentivise an aggressive exploration programme  with better prospects for 
discovery of new national oil and gas resources.  The exploration programme, which 

-8- 
 
 
 
includes both seismic surveys as well as drilling of exploration wells, is to be carried out 
in a phased manner within clearly defined timeframes and similarly phased 
relinquishment of portions of the contract area.  At the end of the exploration period, the 
entire area (except for areas where oil and gas has been discovered or is being 
developed) is to be returned to the Government which can then r e-offer it to other 
parties through a bidding process, the idea being to prevent hoarding/accumulation of 
the exploration acreage. 
 
27. The Production Sharing Contract (PSC) was considered as the appropriate 
regime to attract global players to bring in risk in vestment as well as technology and 
entrepreneurship.  The Government signed PSCs under three separate regimes as 
below: 
(i) PSCs signed against bidding rounds prior to the approval of NELP in 
which NOCs are licensees and they are required to pay royalty to the  
State Government/Central Government in case of commercial discovery 
and production; 
 
(ii) PSCs signed for the discovered fields in which NOCs have 40 per cent 
participating interest for medium size fields and no interest for the small 
size fields; and 
 
(iii) PSCs signed under NELP in which NOCs also participate in the bidding 
process. 
  
28. The position of PSCs awarded/signed under different fiscal regimes was as 
under: 
Discovered/ Producing fields rounds – 29 
Pre-NELP Exploration Rounds – 28 
NELP Rounds (I to IX) – 249 
 
29. The three key features under the PSC fiscal regime are Cost Recovery, Profit 
Petroleum and Investment Multiple. 
 

-9- 
 
 
 
30. The Cost Recovery Factor (CRF) which is the percentage of revenue that the 
contractor is entitled to take in a year to recover his explor ation development and 
production cost, is a biddable item.  Higher the CRF, the earlier the cost can be 
recovered, but in such a situation, the contractor's fiscal package will be relatively 
unattractive as part of the bid evaluation. 
 
31. Profit Petroleum is the available petroleum after the recovery of Cost Petroleum, 
which is the amount of cost recoverable from the revenues.  Profit Petroleum is divided 
between the Government and the Contractor. 
 
32. The basis on which the share of the Government in Profit Petroleum is decided is 
called Investment Multiple, to be precise Pre -tax Investment Multiple (PTIM) achieved 
by the companies in the previous year.  PTIM is the ratio of cumulative net cash income 
to the cumulative exploration and development cost.  In ar ithmetical terms, PTIM is as 
under: 
 
PTIM =   Cumulative Net Cash Income 
    Cumulative Exploration and Development Cost 
 
33. In addition to Profit Petroleum, the Government also receives other statutory 
revenues in the form of Royalty/Dead Rent, Cess, Petroleum Exploration License (PEL) 
fees and Mining Lease (ML) fees. 
 
34. In order to ensure that the expenditure proposed to be incurred as well as 
actually incurred by the operator does not adversely affect the Government's revenue 
interests, the PSC contemp lates a Management Committee which has two 
representatives from the Government of India and one each from the Companies.  The 
Management Committee, Chaired by a GoI representative remains responsible for 
approving field development plans as well as annual work programmes and budgets for 
development and production operations.  However, operational control of the E&P 
activities would vest with the Operating Committee, consisting of the representatives of 
the contractors. 
 

-10- 
 
 
 
35. Under the PSC, procurement decisions are taken by the contractors who invest 
their capital.  However, the Government has the right to disallow any cost considered for 
profit computation, if substantiated as irregular procurement.  In case of deviations from 
the procurement procedure, PSC stip ulates that the Operator should obtain approval of 
the Management Committee. 
 
36. In a nutshell, the PSC was considered as the appropriate regime to attract global 
players for bringing in risk investment as well as technology and entrepreneurship.  
Though it i s called a PSC regime, Royalty regime is also built into a hybrid system 
wherein the licensee assures a guaranteed royalty on production even before the 
contractor starts making any profit.  PSC facilitates to increase Government share of 
profit at an incr easing scale as compared to the flat rate that exists in the royalty 
scheme. 
 
37. The representative of the Ministry during oral evidence submitted that 
"At this stage, I would submit before the hon. Committee that the 
exploration licensing contracts have evol ved over a period of time. First 
we had, as we all know, the nomination regime. Thereafter, the pre -NELP 
bidding rounds were done. Then, NELP had various rounds. So, this has 
been evolved over a period of time. But in case of successive contracts, 
there may be slight variations depending upon the experience in previous 
contracts. Now, the Government has recently come out, after the 
experience of various NELP rounds, with a new policy – first, for the small 
fields and then, for the uniform licensing policy. Whatever problems have 
been faced in earlier rounds, we have tried to address them.  
 
In the earlier contract, because of the various very tight timelines, this 
work can be done and this work cannot be done etc. all those issues were 
there. All those issue s were clubbed together and we went to the Cabinet 
and got some timelines like suppose if it is not done, then what is to be 
done and how to remove those anomalies or abnormalities which are 
being created because of these strict timelines or some activity is not to be 
done and whether that activity should be allowed or not. Based on those 
experiences, this policy has come. ...we have been learning over the 
process right from the pre-NELP stage.... Before this, we did not have any 
deep or an ultra -deep field . First, there was nomination which has no 
timeline. We brought timelines because somebody should not be squatty 
over our resources for too long. Earlier there were three phases. Now, 
there are only two phases. In the present NELP, we have extended it from  
eight years to ten years. We have also said that exploration can be done 

-11- 
 
 
 
throughout the contract period because ten years period is only for the 
minimum works programme, but he can carry on its production even 
throughout. 
 
Earlier, as a result of even the  experience of relinquishment, we later on 
found that it was not paying dividends to the cause of the hydrocarbon 
exploration. So, from VII NELP onwards, we have done away with 25 per 
cent – 25 per cent relinquishment. So, it is a fact that it has been a 
learning process. Sir, 7 th, 8 th and 9 th does not have the concept of 
relinquishment, which was there of 25 per cent after phase – I and 25 per 
cent after phase – II.  
 
Similarly, the last issue about which you were talking, we found that there 
is a lot of rigidity in the timelines and in many cases there was no way 
forward. What do we do? Suppose, I tell him that you complete this work 
in three years and if he is not able to do it in three years, then there has to 
be some mechanism so that further time is g iven. Now, what we do is that 
something that is not provided in the production sharing contract, namely, 
we take it to a Committee called the Empowerment Committee of 
Secretaries where there is Finance, Secretary; Petroleum, Secretary and 
Law, Secretary. W e take a special dispensation so that we do not get 
stuck. Basically, the 9-point reforms came to find a way forward because a 
lot of discoveries were not moving forward. 
 
Yes, Sir. In fact, today also, a lot of people feel that perhaps production -
sharing contract is a better regime because it is  less risky to the investor. 
But our experience, over so many years of NELP, has seen that today 90 
per cent of problems, which we are facing, and all arbitrations and 
litigations, are basically related to cost reco very. For example, when you 
were talking about procurement, now procurement whether he has done a 
single tender or competitive or non -competitive, if it would have been 
competitive, then how much less cost would have been there. How do we 
quantify this? So , there have been a lot of problems that had arisen 
because of cost recovery. Even though, some people are not too happy 
with the revenue -sharing model, we, after a lot of deliberations and after 
talking to a lot of investors, have done it. They say that w e are not such 
much concerned about what model but what is more important is how you 
implement it. So, considering the ease of doing business, we have gone 
for it. It is a fact that we have done a lot of improvement over a period of 
time based on the exper ience....... Sir, we will think about it, but usually 
whatever legislation is there has a prospective effect. Even if you see 
Report 19 and Report 24, C&AG in the first Report said that all those 
discoveries that have been made after the exploration phase should be 
disallowed for the cost recovery and Report 24 says that whichever 
successful wells has resulted into a discovery should be allowed for cost 
recovery. So, even C&AG over two Reports have realised that perhaps 

-12- 
 
 
 
there was need for certain relaxation in the larger interest of exploitation of 
oil and gas........ Sir, the problem would be about prospective as well as 
retrospective effect.  
 
Sir, the attempt of the Government is always to make the ease of doing 
business on the part of industries and to b e away from micro -
management. We give more freedom to the operators to operate and we 
are concerned with the end -result as to how much production he is doing 
and with the production related whatever Government’s stake is there, that 
should come. He should not be able to do any mischief in that and our 
attempt is to ensure this. 
 
With this view, as I have mentioned, we have already brought in a new 
policy where we have moved away from the production -sharing to 
revenue-sharing contract where we will not look at the day -to-day 
management like cost recovery and other things. We are only interested 
as to how much production he is doing; how much revenue he is getting; 
and out of which how much he will share with us. This he has to declare 
upfront in a formula whi le bidding and that will be followed. We will not be 
entering into their day -to-day operations, so we hope that there will be 
much less scope for arbitration or court cases or disputes. Even within the 
disputes also, we always prefer the alternative disput e resolution 
mechanism instead of we going to the court straightaway. But our 
experience has been that the arbitrations have also gone ahead for quite 
longer time. So, I think that we will have to see as to how best we can do". 
 
38. The Ministry of Petroleum a nd Natural Gas (MoPNG) are inter-alia responsible 
for the exploration and production of natural gas, including the administration of the 
Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Act, 1948.  The Ministry are assisted by the 
Directorate General of Hydrocarbons  (DGH), which was established in April, 1993 with 
the objective of promoting sound management of Indian petroleum and natural gas 
resources having a balanced regard for the environment, safety, technological and 
economic aspects of petroleum activities. 
 
39. According to the Audit,  the MoPNG and DGH have very specific responsibilities 
in their roles. MoPNG is a party to PSC. MoPNG is mandated to take measures for 
exploration and exploitation of petroleum resources, production, supply, distribution, 
marketing and pricing of petroleum and formulation of policies on these matters. DGH is 
responsible for regulating and overseeing upstream activities in the Petroleum & Natural 
Gas (P&NG) sector and to advise GoI in these areas. DGH has been entrusted with 

-13- 
 
 
 
responsibilities like implementation of NELP, matters concerning PSCs, monitoring E&P 
activities etc.  The effectiveness of their actions in these roles will depend upon the 
timely implementation of stipulated provisions and proper functioning of the monitoring 
mechanism.   Audit, observed that the monitoring mechanism at MoPNG / DGH was far 
from being effective as it had not been able to ensure compliance with some of the PSC 
provisions. 
 
40. MoPNG in its reply state that Monitoring of the PSC has been done in letter & 
spirit. In order to facilitate the E & P operations to achieve energy security of the nation, 
holistic approach has been adopted. Adequate precautions and steps have been taken 
to ensure that controls are in place and E&P operations are carried out as inten ded. In 
general, Ministry has taken steps for streamlining the Management Committee 
functioning such as procedure for scheduling the meetings, timely disposal of 
resolutions etc.  
 
41. Audit recommended that the functions currently discharged by the DGH should  
be clearly demarcated.  
• The technical advisory and related functions should be discharged by a 
body under MOPNG  
 
• Regulatory functions (review of hydrocarbon reserves and reservoir 
management, laying down of norms for declaration of discoveries,  laying 
down safety and related norms and conducting safety inspections /  audits 
etc.) should be discharged by an autonomous body 
 
42. MoPNG replied that: 
"Regulatory functions is demarcated & laid down by way of contract terms, 
Act and Rules. DGH role is ensuring compliance of regulations by 
Contractors. 
Roles of technical advisory is discharged by DGH under the direct control 
of MOP&NG.   
A separate study by BCG  was done by MOP&NG, before taking further 
course of action 
 
Under the PSC, there are different timeline s specified for carrying out 
exploration, development and production operations that are required to 
be followed by the contractor. There are more than 250 PSCs in operation 
in the country that are being monitored by the MoPNG/DGH. There are 

-14- 
 
 
 
two representative of the GoI one from the MoPNG and the other from the 
DGH in the Management Committee (MC). When asked whether the said 
representative were not fully equipped to protect GoI interest at every 
stage of E&P, be it exploration, development or production, which have 
not been justified thereby affecting the GoI’s share of profit and the steps 
have been taken by the Ministry to strengthen the monitoring of the PSC 
at the level of MoPNG and DGH 
 Reply:  
Directorate General of Hydrocarbons (DGH) is the technica l arm of 
MOP&NG having expertise in technical matters such as Geology, 
Geophysics, Logging, Drilling, Production, Environment, Pipeline, Legal 
and Finance matters. Most of the officers in DGH with above background 
are having more than 20 - 25 years of expe rience in respective fields. 
They are also given exposure by deputing them in various related 
trainings and National/ International conference. DGH has its own state of 
the art work centre including Virtual Reality Centre, different software with 
facilities to evaluate all kind of Geological and reservoir parameter of 
proposals.  
 
Most of the non compliance of PSC provisions related to notification of 
potential commercial interest, appraisal programmes and submission of 
Field Development Plans etc. has occu rred as there is no provision in 
PSC for extension/ relaxation of these timelines. At the same time, if 
discoveries are not agreed based on non adherence to the PSC 
provisions, the explored reserves can not be monetised.  
 
In view of above, Government has recently approved policy framework,  
for relaxations, extensions and clarifications at the development and 
production stage under the PSC regime for early monetisation of 
hydrocarbon discoveries   where MC / DGH have been authorized to 
condone the delays a nd extension of timelines to certain extent after 
paying pre defined fee. This will help in regularizing such unintended 
delays in notification of potential commercial interest, appraisal 
programmes and submission of Field Development Plans etc. in 
accordance with the PSC.  
 
During the exploration phase of the blocks, the associated work are mainly 
related to exploration activities and thus Government has kept the 
provision for keeping both the MC members from DGH, one being the 
Chairman and the other the D eputy Chairman of the MC. Once any 
discovery is made in the block, one MC member from Exploration division 
of Ministry is appointed in the MC.  As soon as the production starts from 
the block/ field, one member from IFD division of Ministry is kept in MC. 
Generally the Chairman is from the Ministry and the Deputy Chairman in 
the MC is from the DGH.  

-15- 
 
 
 
 
All the proposals submitted to Management Committee are examined in 
depth for its technical, commercial evaluation and legal implications in 
DGH before considering it for MC review/ approval. DGH also hires 
outside international experts/ consultancy firms as and when required.  
The issues are then taken up in MC after evaluation of proposals to take 
care of Government interest. 
All the matter requiring th e approval of the MC shall be approved by a 
unanimous vote of the members of the MC. However if unanimity is not 
achieved the decision of the MC may be approved by the majority 
participating interest of 70% or more with the Government having a 
positive vote in favor of the decision. Hence any business which requires 
MC approval can be approved only when it has the approval of the 
Government i.e. the Government having a veto power for approving a 
resolution. In this way the claim of the Ministry is substantiated". 
 
43. The views of Ashok Chawla Committee (Committee on allocation of natural 
resources) are as under: 
 In petroleum, the allocation process under NELP is seen as a benchmark 
for transparency in the natural resources sector. It is undeniable that the 
NELP model is distinctly ahead of the methods of allocation seen in other 
sectors.  
 
 Creation of a National Data Repository has been an issue which affects 
the degree of interest in exploration. 
 
 The bid parameter of pre-tax investment multiple does provide possibilities 
for gaming during the pendency of the contract. 
 Concerns are enhanced that there is significant circulation of personnel 
between state-owned operators and oversight bodies which enhances the 
perception of conflict of interest. 
 
 Transparency i n the management of contracts and associated 
considerable financial implications should be enhanced by increasing the 
independence of the regulatory mechanism, clarifying the separation of 
the policy maker, regulator and the operator and bringing the decis ion 
making process into the open. 
 
 A complete unshackling of the natural gas market, without restrictions on 
utilization and pricing, development of gas pipelines and re -gasification 
terminals and transparent regulatory oversight appears to be most optimal  
framework for allocation of gas. 
 

-16- 
 
 
 
MoPNG in its reply on implementation of the recommendations of Chawla 
Committee stated that "The Government has decided to adopt a revenue 
sharing model contract for future rounds of bidding in place of the present 
profit sharing model. A National Data Repository is in the final stage of 
completion in DGH to promote data viewing by global E&P companies. 
The Government has already initiated steps to provide marketing and 
pricing freedom to natural gas in a calibrated manner . Some of the 
important decisions in this regard are introduction of marketing and pricing 
freedom for the gas to be produced from the difficult areas such as deep 
water, ultra deep water, high pressure and high temperature reservoirs 
with a upper cap on p ricing, introduction of pricing and marketing 
freedoms for the fields to be auctioned under the Discovered Small Fields 
Policy and blocks to be offered under new Hydrocarbon Exploration and 
Licensing Policy".  
 
44. Article 25 of PSC stipulates 2 levels of audit by independent auditors. 
1. Appointed by the Management Committee 
2. Appointed by the Government  
 CAG did the 2 nd level PSC audit in Contractor’s premises for blocks 
selected by CAG since 2006-07 
3. Report no 19: on 20 PSCs for years 2006-07 to 2007-08  
4. Report no 24: on 4 PSCs for years 2008-09 to 2011-12 
 
45. Against the above backdrop, the Public Accounts Committee took up the subject 
for examination and report.  In the process, the Committee obtained Advance 
Information, Written Reply and Post Evidence Information from the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas.   The Committee also took oral evidences of the Ministry and 
the operators i.e. Reliance Industries Limited (RIL) and their Joint Venture partners and 
ONGC besides obtaining written clarifications from the Operator.  The Committee had 
an interactive session on the subject with the then C&AG and his team of officers.    
Based on all t he aforesaid written and oral depositions, the Committee have discussed 
the prominent issues in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
A. Investment Multiple (IM)/ Pre-Tax Investment Multiple (PTIM) 
 
46. As stated earlier, the basis on which the share of the Government i n Profit 
Petroleum is decided is called Investment Multiple (IM), to be precise Pre -Tax 
Investment Multiple (PTIM), achieved by of cumulative net cash income to the 

-17- 
 
 
 
cumulative exploration and development cost. The Ashok Chawla Committee on 
'Allocation of N atural Resources' has observed that the IM -based profit sharing system 
"gives incentive (to an operator) to increase his investment, or front -end his work plan in 
order to see that the threshold where Governments' profit take rises rapidly is not 
reached."  Citing the example of KG -DWN-98/3, the Committee has stated that "the 
relationship between the pre -tax IM and the share of contractor profit petroleum 
changes dramatically once the pre -tax IM crosses 2.5, with the Government's share 
increasing from 28 per cent to 85 per cent.  It is useful to remember that this schedule is 
bid by the operator, and not determined by the Government."   The Ashok Chawla 
Committee has further observed that "a high share of some pre -tax IM will help to win 
the bid, depending on  the financial mode of evaluation used, but it does raise concerns 
that such a radical change would provide very strong incentives for any operator to 
adopt all investment and strategies possible to ensure that the pre -tax IM stays within 
the 2.5 limit." 
 
47. When asked about the views of the Ministry on the suggestion of the Audit 
regarding removal of IM linkage with the profit sharing formula and would it reduce the 
incentive for skewed volume and timing of capital expenditure resulting in very low GOI 
share of Petroleum Profit or Does the Ministry have any other formula under 
consideration, the Ministry replied as under: 
"In the PSC the Contractor’s profitability is measured by computing IM or 
the return on his investment (ROI). The calculations of profit pet roleum 
based on the IM based formula has been contested by many experts 
including the Ashok Chawla Committee, Dr Rangarajan Committee and 
C&AG".  
 
48. MoPNG further stated that "After examination of the recommendations of the 
Ashok Chawla Committee, C&AG repor t and Dr C Rangarajan Committee report and 
further consulations with the stakeholders, the Government has decided to  adopt 
revenue sharing model for future bidding round, where the Government take will be a 
percentage of the total revenue linked to the da ily production rate and petroleum prices. 
Thus the new revenue model will do away with the necessity of considering cost and 

-18- 
 
 
 
investment multiple and will be in tune with governments policy of minimum government 
maximum governance.  
49. When asked about the obs ervation of the Audit on gas pricing, MoPNG stated 
that "Govt. is of the opinion that Indian gas market can be developed with full potential 
only if competitive equivalent gas pricing mechanism is in place. In line with the same 
objective, Govt. announced “The New Domestic Natural Gas Pricing Guidelines,  2014”  
wherein price of domestically produced natural gas is linked to prices of four important 
international hubs. 
 
50. The Government has already initiated steps to provide marketing and pricing 
freedom to na tural gas in a calibrated manner. Some of the important decisions in this 
regard are introduction of marketing and pricing freedom for the gas to be produced 
from the difficult areas such as deep water, ultra deep water, high pressure and high 
temperature reservoirs with a upper cap on pricing, introduction of pricing and marketing 
freedoms for the fields to be auctioned under the Discovered Small Fields Policy and 
blocks to be offered under new Hydrocarbon Exploration and Licensing Policy.     
 
51. When asked how does the Ministry / DGH determine the authenticity of the 
development and exploration cost projected by the contractor to ensure that the actual 
expenditure vis -à-vis the committed expenditure does not increase manifold, the 
Ministry stated as under: 
"Under the Production Sharing Contracts, the Contractor commits to 
undertake exploration operations such as 2D and 3D seismic survey, 
drilling of exploratory wells etc. during the exploration phases. This 
commitment is in the form of completion of physical activities and not in 
the form of monetary targets. All the activities duly approved by operating 
committee are presented to management committee for review/approval in 
the form of annual work program and budget. Review/approval of annual 
work program and budget is first level of control where the exploration 
activities to be carried out in a year are reviewed/approved vis -a-vis 
minimum work program and development activities are approved vis -a-vis 
the  approved Field Development Plan (FDP).  
 
The operator then carries out necessary procurement of goods and 
services at arm’s length in line with the provisions laid down in the 
procurement procedure of Acquisition of Goods and Services of the PSC. 

-19- 
 
 
 
In case of affiliated transactions, the profit ele ment is to be excluded from 
cost as per the PSC provisions. These laid down procedures in the PSC 
acts as a second level of control.  
 
MC appointed auditor then carries out audit as per pre -defined broad 
guidelines provided by C&AG and any discrepancies ar e notified in the 
audit report. Moreover, the audit conducted by the MC appointed audited 
acts as the  third level of control.  
 
Finally, the Govt. auditor appointed by DGH/MoP&NG audits the accounts 
of the contractor and submits final audit report based o n  which Govt. 
notifies audit exceptions to the contractor and disallows any cost which 
are not allowable as per the provisions of the PSC.  It is pertinent to 
mention that there is no bid commitment on the Contractor for 
development operations which actua lly depends on the success of the 
exploration operations. 
 
For the purpose of computation of Profit Petroleum that is shared between 
the Government and the Contractor, the actual expenditure incurred by 
the Contractor as per the books of accounts duly audi ted by the two levels 
of auditors becomes the basis of computation. In some of the large blocks, 
the audit is done by CAG also. No notional cost or cost estimate of the 
Contractor is accounted for the purpose of Profit Petroleum".  
  
52. On being asked what steps have been taken by the Ministry/DGH to ascertain 
that the cost being incurred by the contractor is reasonable and correct, the Ministry 
replied as under: 
"No notional cost or cost estimate is allowed to be accounted for the 
purpose of Profit Petroleu m. Only the actual expenditure duly supported 
by documents evidencing the incurrence of such expenditures is allowed 
to be accounted in accordance with the Accounting Standards.  
 
Section  3.1.8 of the Accounting Procedure of the PSC states that so far 
as is practicable and consistent with efficient and economical operation, 
only such material shall be purchased or furnished by the contractor for 
use in the petroleum operations as may be required for use in the 
reasonably foreseeable future and the accumula tion of surplus stocks 
shall be avoided. Material and equipment held in inventory shall only be 
charged to the accounts when such material is removed from inventory 
and used in petroleum operations cost shall be charged to the accounting 
records and books based on the “First – in – First – Out method”.  
 
Further every model PSC has a separate Appendix on procurement of 
goods & services clearly mentioning therein the Objectives, Principles & 
Procedure for acquisition of Goods & Services. The PSC provides a 

-20- 
 
 
 
mechanism for acquiring goods at arm’s length and then audit by the 
Government.  
 
As stated earlier, management committee reviews the annual work 
program and budget in consonance with approved field development plan 
or minimum work program (MWP). The contractor follows the procurement 
procedures laid down in the PSC for acquisition of goods and services 
which are required for the work to be conducted for exploration and 
development operations reviewed/approved by the management 
committee.  
  
The expenditures  are audited by independent auditors appointed by the 
Management Committee followed by audit by auditors appointed by the 
Government. DGH has laid down extensively the scope of verification to 
be done by the auditors during the audit of the accounts. In or der to 
ensure the correctness and reasonability of cost, only the expenditure 
actually incurred by the Contractor based on audited financial statements 
is considered as Contract Cost.   
 
Any affiliated transaction of the Contractors is checked and profit e lement 
in the affiliated transactions is disallowed as per the provisions of the 
PSC".  
 
53. When asked what corrective and remedial measures have the Ministry taken to 
ensure that the cost being depicted in the PSC accounts by the contractor especially for 
the procurement of goods and services that critically affect the determination of profit 
petroleum and the Government share therein are correctly and competitively 
determined, the Ministry submitted as under: 
"Procurement process stipulated in PSC is considered to be adequate to 
ensure that procurement is done at arm’s length at reasonable and 
prevailing market rates. Cost that are not allowed as per the PSC 
provisions are specifically mentioned in Section 3.2 of Accounting 
Procedure of PSC for disallowance.  
Government draws comfort on reasonableness of cost based on the 
business model that Contractor does not stand benefitted by paying a 
higher price in an arm’s length procurement. A higher procurement cost 
will hurt Contractor’s profitability more, unless it is an affiliated transaction. 
Management committee also reviews the activities planned during any 
year based on work program and approved field development plan. The 
procurement of goods and services are done based on the approved work 
program and budget following the accounting and procurement 
procedures. Nevertheless, in the opinion of Audit, any specific cost 
accounted as Contract Cost in the financial statements of JV is to be 

-21- 
 
 
 
disallowed on the ground o f unreasonableness, appropriate remedial 
action are considered. 
Cost used for computation of Profit Petroleum and Government share of 
Profit Petroleum is ensured to be based on audited actual expenditure 
incurred by the Contractor.  The expenditures are al lowed to be 
recognized in the books of accounts in accordance with the Accounting 
Standards of ICAI. 
 
The books of accounts are audited in accordance with the Audit 
Standards. There are two level of audit prescribed under each PSC.  In 
case of the block KG -DWN-98/3 the 2nd audit was carried out by CAG. 
Any incorrect reporting of costs is disallowed for the purpose of profit 
petroleum computation. 
 
Procurements from affiliated parties that may adversely impact the cost 
are verified during the audit. Profit e lement, if any, in any affiliated 
transactions is excluded from Contract Cost as per the provisions of PSC". 
 
Findings relating to KG-DWN-98/3 (Operator - RIL) as per 19 of 2011-12 
 
(i) The Contractor was allowed to enter the second and third phases of 
exploration without relinquishing 25 per cent each of the total contract 
area at the end of Phase-I and Phase-II as against Articles 4.1 & 4.2 of the 
PSC.  Subsequently in February, 200 9, the Government of India also 
conveyed approval to treat the entire contract  area of 7645 sq. k.m. as 
'Discovery Area', thus enabling the operator to completely avoid 
relinquishment of area. 
 
(ii) The operator's views at different points of time clearly attempted to 
confuse potential/prospectivity with actual discovery of hydrocarbons.  The 
operator's difficulties in hiring ultra -deepwater rigs for the deep water area 
of the block (essentially the SW part, where no discoveries had been 
made) had no linkage with the contractual provisions for discovery area 
and relinquishment. 
 
(iii) In violation of the PSC provisions, in the case of 13 out of 19 Discoveries 
between October 2002 and July 2008, the operator had without first 
furnishing the initial particulars of the discoveries in writing to the 
Management Committee and the Government, directly given written 
notifications regarding potential commerciality of the Discoveries. 
 
(iv) Most procurement activities were undertaken late in line with the 
schedules of the Initial Development Plan of May 2004.  By contrast, 
activities in respect of items in the Addendum to the IDP (AIDP) were 
initiated even before the submission/approval of the AIDP.  Clearly, the 

-22- 
 
 
 
development activities of the operator were guided by AIDP, rather than 
IDP. 
 
(v) Payments made during 2006 -07 and 2007 -08 revealed instances of huge 
procurement contracts where Audit could not derive assurance as to the 
reasonableness of the costs incurred, primarily due to lack of adequate 
competition-award on single financial bids; major revisions in 
scope/quantities/specifications; post -price bid opening ; substantial 
variation orders-with consequential adverse implications for cost recovery 
and the GoI's financial take. 
(vi) Particularly in case of MA oilfield, Audit found that well before submission, 
let alone approval, of the Field Development Plan (FDP) and Mining Lease 
(ML) application, the operator had placed orders for various critical items 
required for development activities/production facilities from 2006 itself. 
 
(vii) Several instances were noticed where multiple vendors were pre-qualified, 
but when technical bids were received, all vendors (except one) were 
rejected and the contract was finally awarded on a single financial bid. 
 
Findings relating to KG-DWN-98/3 (Operator - RIL) as per 24 of 2014 
Regulatory and control issues 
 In none of the four year s' audit period was the  annual Work Programme 
and Budget (WP&B) approved before start of the FY. The WP&B is one of 
the most important tools available with the MC to exercise monitoring and 
control over the operations of the block. Since MC did not effectively utilize 
this tool, there was inadequate budgetary / financial control over 
operational activities leaving the expenditure open-ended. 
 Expenditure amounting to US$ 160.81 million incurred on account of three 
appraisal wells was not eligible for cost re covery and had been disallowed 
by MoPNG. However, even after the MoPNG communicated its decision, 
the Operator continued to claim the cost recovery, as seen in the final 
accounts for the year ended 2013. As of June 2014, the MoPNGhadbeen 
unable to enforce its decision. 
Approvals for petroleum operations  
 MoPNG did not review determination of the entire contract area as 
‘discovery area’ strictly in terms of Articles 4.1 and 4.2 at the end of the 1 st 
and 2 nd exploration phases before issuing relinquishment or der under 
Article 3.11 in October 2013. 
 MoPNG / DGH did not insist that the Contractor carry out only appraisal 
activities in the ‘discovery area’ till July 2009. Audit is of the opinion that 
further exploration activities in the ‘discovery area’ (which in cluded drilling 
of eight exploration wells and six appraisal wells of discoveries resulting 
from these exploration wells at an expenditure of US$ 427.03 million) was 

-23- 
 
 
 
improperly carried out at the risk of revenue of the commercial discoveries 
made in the block. 
 As per PSC provisions, the review of DoCin respect of three discoveries, 
viz. D 29, D 30 and D 31, was to be completed by MC by August 2010. 
However, due to lack of adequate production testing data, DGH rejected 
the DoC proposal.  Nonetheless, despite  technical advice of the DGH to 
the contrary, the issue has been reopened after almost three years from 
the date when it was rejected by DGH and has not been finalised as yet. 
 The degree of uncertainty and substantial changes in the recoverable gas 
reserves estimates raises questions on the process of examination, 
consideration and acceptance of gas estimates by the DGH. 
 The Operator was required to drill, connect and put on stream 22 wells 
under Phase I of approved AIDP.  However, the Operator drilled, 
completed and connected only 18 wells. Gas production started declining 
in August 2010. While production level achieved in 2010 -11 was 90 per 
cent of approved production profile, this figure decreased to 57 per cent in 
2011-12 and 26 per cent in 2012-13.The Operator failed to adhere to the 
approved AIDP in terms of numbers of producer wells to be drilled and 
connected. 
 The Operator created facilities to handle gas production of 80 mmscmd.  
As of March 2012, the Operator had  incurred expenditure of US$ 5.76 
billion on the development of D1 -D3 gas fields as against the MC 
approved cost of US$ 5.20 billion.  The facilities created by the Operator 
remained underutilized / unutilized due to declining trend in gas production 
and non-drilling of wells as per the approved AIDP. 
 
 DGH approved Optimized Field Development Plan (OFDP)  for four 
satellite discoveries.  Initially, the OFDP was not techno -economically 
viable; however, it was made marginally viable by devising different 
scenario and changing assumptions, e.g. e xclusion of royalty as 
expenditure, variation in capex etc. 
Expenditure related issues 
 Engineering, Procurement, Installation and Construction (EPIC) contract 
of offshore facilities was awarded to M/s Allseas Marine Contractors 
(AMC) at a lump sum and  provisional price of Euro 699.09 million and 
Euro 64.99 million respectively. Due to various factors attributable to 
Operator, AMC and its sub -contractors, AMC could not achieve the 
milestones. Concessions of Euro 200 million approximatelygivento AMC 
by th e Operator in order to expedite completion of the works were not 
allowable for cost recovery as the concessions were not in line with EPIC 
contract including provisions relating to ‘change in contract price’; and 
were in violation of Section 3.2 (ix) of Ap pendix C to the Accounting 

-24- 
 
 
 
Procedure to PSC which states that, “ amounts paid with respect to non -
fulfilment of contractual obligations are not recoverable and not allowable”. 
(Para 2.7.1.1) 
 Within four months from the date of signing the agreement, the Operator 
requested the FPSO vendor to extend the dry docking life of the FPSO 
from ten to fifteen years for a one -time compensation of US$ 17.36 
million.Since the FPSO was charteredfor 10 years only, extension of dry 
docking to fifteen years is not justifi ed and the cost recovery of US$ 17.36 
million may be disallowed. 
 
 Despite the FPSO vendor being unable to meet its contractual obligations, 
the Operator re -scheduled the date of first production of oil (DFPO), 
without imposing any penalty. In addition, though there was no provision in 
the agreement which entitled the vendor to any compensation or incentive 
for expediting deliveries, the Operator paid compensation of US$ 45 
million to the vendor for early mobilization of the vendor’s commissioning 
team and e xpediting deliveries of top side modules etc., which may be 
disallowed. 
 
 The FPSO has been leased for ten years. However, the Operator 
refurbished the existing living quarters and fabricated and installed 
additional living quarters,  at a cost of US$ 15 mil lion with the intention to 
purchase the FPSO at a later date.  Audit recommends that the cost 
recovery of US$ 15 million may be disallowed. 
(Para 2.7.1.2.1, 2.7.1.2.2 and 2.7.1.2.3) 
 
 As per the Onshore Terminal (OT) construction contract, no compensation 
was payable to the vendor on account of Plant and Equipment (P&E) 
provided by RIL in case the vendor was unable to mobilize the P&E. 
However, an amount of INR 22.7 million was paid to the vendor as 
compensation charges for Cranes which were hired by RIL by a mending 
the contract to exclude these cranes. 
(Para 2.7.2.1) 
 
 In four cost -plus contracts relating to construction of OT awarded by RIL, 
in general, payment of compensation was to be made to the vendors only 
on the ‘cost’ incurred by them. However, these c ontracts also provided for 
payment of mark -up to the vendor as a percentage of the value of free - 
issue material of some categories supplied by RIL such as cement, steel, 
etc. RIL incurred an expenditure of INR 1110.90 million on payment of 
such compensation.  
 Start-up and Production bonuses of US$12.48 million were paid to 
employees from the revenue earned from the Block. Since the Start -Up 
and Production Bonus are one -time and of an ad hoc  nature, in Audit 
opinion, these bonuses should not be paid from th e revenue earned from 
the sale of gas. 

-25- 
 
 
 
 Despite having adequate drilling prospects and keeping in view the poor 
response received from the vendors for provisioning of the rigs indicative 
of the scarcity of deep -water drilling rigs, the Operator did not cons ider it 
prudent to consider the option of long -term hiring of the drilling rigs and 
availing the firm rate advantage of such long -term hiring.  This resulted in 
additional expenditure of approximately US$ 88.77 million in piece -meal 
hiring of deepwater dri ll ship “Deepwater Frontier” from M/s Transocean 
Offshore International Ventures Limited. 
 Operator paid bonus for time saved during the rig movement between 
wells with hanging Blow Out Preventor (BOP).  As per the contract clause, 
any bonus payment was to take into account the sum total of time saved 
for all the operational activities for completion of a well rather than a single 
activity. Therefore, payment of bonus for rig movement with hanging BOP 
was not justified and resulted in additional expenditure of US$ 2.83 million. 
 The Operator paid uptime bonus of US$ 13.37 million to M/s. Aker 
Contracting FP AS, Norway (ACFP), which resulted in additional benefit to 
the vendor, as normally bonus payments are extra payments given as a 
reward or incentive for earlier completion of work or increase in production 
level, not for performing their contractual obligations. In this case, ACFP 
was contractually bound to make available FPSO during the charter 
period. 
Revenue issues 
 The pricing mechanism for Crude from MA oilfield has not been finalized 
and approved by MoPNG. The sales (under COSA) are being treated as 
provisional by the MoPNG. However, the Operator is treating the sales as 
firm and final. Marker has not been fixed so  far leaving scope for 
ambiguity in pricing.  
 The pricing and sale of Condensate has not yet been approved by the 
Government. It is being sold at a discount value below Dated Brent. The 
difference between the sale value of Dated Brent and KG -DWN-98/3 
Condensate amounted to US$ 33.93 million during the period July 2010 to 
March 2012. 
 Operator is charging the gas price at the rate of US$ 4.340 mmbtu which 
includes 0.135 US$/mmbtu towards marketing margin from its consumers. 
Marketing margin is not being consi dered as revenue for the purpose of 
Cost Petroleum, Profit Petroleum and Royalty while Contractor has 
collected an amount of US$261.33 million on this account for the period 
2009-10 to 2012-13. 
Accounting issues 
 Parent Company Overhead (PCO) charged by the  Operator for cost 
recovery up to the financial year 2007 -08 under Section 2.6.2 of 
Accounting Procedure of PSC was disallowed by MC while adopting the 

-26- 
 
 
 
Accounts for the year 2008 -09, on the ground that Operator (RIL) has no 
parent company. However, Contrac tor has reclassified and claimed these 
expenditures amounting to US$ 101.41 million (upto 2011 -12) under 
Corporate Office Support (COS). Such expenditure cannot be vouched by 
Audit in the absence of documentary evidence and by placing reliance 
only on the basis of a certificate of a Company Auditor appointed by RIL or 
a certificate given by the JV Auditor appointed by MC who in turn had 
relied upon the certificate given by the Company Auditor. 
 Closing stock of crude and condensate had not been accounted for  in the 
books of the JV. Consequently, cost recovery of US$ 12.80 million 
towards the value of closing stock had not been adjusted for the years 
2008-09 to 2012-13 and there was a short remittance of US$ 0.14 million 
of Profit Petroleum of closing stock for the years 2008-09 to2012-13". 
 
B. Non-relinquishment of the contract area 
54. Audit scrutiny revealed that in the case of KG -DWN-98/3 the contractor was 
allowed to enter the second and third phases of exploration without relinquishing 25 per 
cent each of the  total contract area at the end of Phase -I and Phase -II as against 
Articles 4.1 & 4.2 of the PSC.  Subsequently, in February, 2009 the GoI also conveyed 
approval to treat the entire contract area of 7645 sq. km. as 'Discovery Area', thus 
enabling the contractor to completely avoid relinquishment of area. 
55. Audit further pointed out that though DGH initially objected to the contractor's 
view that it was not in a position to identify any area for relinquishment and advised RIL 
to relinquish 25 per cent area, it  allowed the contractor to proceed from Exploration 
Phase-I to Phase-II without such relinquishment (while continuing to debate and discuss 
the question of relinquishment).  By April/May 2005, DGH undertook an about -turn, 
indicating that 'It would be prude nt to acquire and interpret the 3D seismic data in the 
remaining part of the block on a fast track basis', and subsequently, the relinquishment 
area could also be worked out in a proper manner.  Meanwhile, RIL gave notice for 
moving from the 2 nd to the 3 rd phase without any relinquishment.  By July 2006, after a 
presentation made by RIL, DGH informed the Ministry that the MC had permitted to 
enter the next phase without any relinquishment, even when a 'small portion of the area' 
remained to be covered by 3D  seismic.  The Ministry raised pertinent questions as to 
whether the coverage of well was over the entire block for DGH to reach the conclusion 
of discovery extension, but failed to pursue this aspect further.  Instead, they chose to 

-27- 
 
 
 
focus on getting a cer tification from DGH that the contractor's claim was correct, and 
thereafter on timelines for appraisal of discoveries premised on the MC's approval of the 
entire contract area as discovery area on 11 July 2006.  After concerns expressed by 
the Minister, PNG as to the consistency with the PSC provisions, the case was referred 
to a Committee under the Additional Secretary, MoPNG and then finally approved by 
the Minister in July 2008, but communicated to DGH in February 2009 only. 
 
56. In Audit Report No. 19 of 2011 -12, C&AG had pointed out that, contrary to PSC 
provisions, the Contractor was allowed to enter the second and third Exploration 
Phases without relinquishing 25 per cent each of the total Contract Area and to retain 
the entire  Contract Area by treating it as ‘discovery area’ at the end of Phase I and 
Phase II.  Such retention was allowed by the MC in July 2006 and later by MoPNG in 
July 2008.   
 
57. Accordingly, Audit recommended that the MoPNG should review determination of 
the en tire Contract Area of KG -DWN-98/3 as ‘discovery area’ strictly in terms of the 
PSC provisions and delineate the stipulated 25 per cent relinquishment area at the time 
of the conclusion of the 1 st and 2nd exploratory phases, and then correctly delineate the  
‘discovery area’, linked to well or wells drilled in that part, without considering any 
subsequent discoveries (which are invalid on account of non -compliance with PSC 
provisions). After deliberation, in October 2013, MoPNG issued an order for immediate 
relinquishment of 6198.88 sq. km. out of the total 7645 sq.km., allowing the Contractor 
to retain 1148.12 sq. km. relating to the Petroleum Mining Lease (PML) area in respect 
of four gas / oil fields.  The October 2013 order also mentioned that in respect o f three 
other discoveries, i.e. D 29, 30 and 31, the matter was being considered separately and 
the GoI reserved the right to take any further action as deemed fit.  However, the 
Contractor was allowed to retain 298 sq. km. under tentative Petroleum Explor ation 
Licence (PEL) pertaining to these three discoveries. According to Audit, MoPNG had 
not reviewed the determination of the entire contract area as ‘discovery area’ strictly in 
terms of Articles 4.1 and 4.2 at the end of first and second Exploration Pha se. Instead, 
the decision regarding relinquishment had been taken on the basis of Article 3.11 of the 

-28- 
 
 
 
PSC, which states that “if at the expiry of the exploration period a plan for development 
of a commercial discovery is under consideration by the Manageme nt Committee or an 
application for a lease is under consideration by Government pursuant to Articles 10.11 
and 21 respectively, this contract and the license shall continue in force with respect to 
that part of the contract area to which the application fo r the lease relates, pending a 
decision on the proposed development plan and the application for the lease, but shall 
cease to be in force and effect with respect to the remainder of the contract area ”. In 
Audit view, MoPNG / DGH had taken the decision und er Article 3.11 after considering 
the status of all the 19 discoveries made in the Block till the end of Exploration Phase III 
instead of delineating the stipulated 25 per cent relinquishment area at the time of the 
conclusion of Exploration Phases I and I I in June 2004 and June 2005, as 
recommended in the previous audit report.   
58. It may be noted that the Audit contention that the entire contract area was not a 
discovery area at the end of first and second phases and the related Audit 
recommendation were fu rther supported by the fact that in July 2007, the Contractor, 
while submitting the Appraisal Programme for D29, 30, 31 and 34, had demarcated the 
entire area of 7645 sq. km. indicating separate discovery/appraisal and development 
areas for the discoveries  made as on that date upto D 34 discover. However, based on 
the Contractor’s claim regarding the entire block area as discovery area (which is 
incorrect, as detailed in the C&AG Report No. 19 of 2011 -12), the MC accepted that the 
entire Block area was a discovery area in July 2006.   
59. Further, MoPNG approved, on 31 July 2008, acceptance of the entire contract 
area of the KG-DWN-98/3 Block as discovery area subject to the following: 
a) The operator may be allowed retention of entire contract area of the 
block KG -DWN-98/3 as discovery area in the 2nd and 3rd 
exploration phase. 
b) The timeline for appraisal of the Discoveries may be reckoned from 
11th July 2006. 
c) Since the entire Block area was accepted as the Discovery Area, 
the Block Area, therefore, must be appraised within time frame of 
three (3) years, commencing from the above date.  
d) Other terms and conditions of the PSC would remain unchanged.  

-29- 
 
 
 
 
60. Audit, howev er, noted that MoPNG / DGH did not insist that the Contractor 
adhere to the conditions set forth in its approval and carry out only appraisal activities.  
In this regard, Audit noted that the DGH interpretation regarding ‘discovery area’ was 
not in line wi th PSC provisions according to which “ discovery area means that part of 
the contract area about which based upon discovery and the results obtained from a 
well or wells drilled in such part..... ” thereby clearly implying that a discovery area will 
correspond to a particular discovery In the background of the MoPNG decision and its 
non-enforcement, Audit re -visited the extant PSC provisions regarding exploration and 
appraisal. It may be noted that: 
 PSC provides for step -wise development of a discovery and th e 
related discovery/ development area.  
 If, pursuant to Article 10.1 (c), the Contractor notifies the MC that 
the discovery is of potential commercial interest, the Contractor 
shall prepare and submit to the MC within 120 days of such 
notification, a proposed appraisal programme with a WP&B to carry 
out an adequate and effective appraisal of such discovery designed 
to achieve both the following objectives: (i) determine without delay, 
and, in any event, within the period specified in Article 10.5, 
whether s uch discovery is a commercial discovery and (ii) 
determine, with reasonable precision, the boundaries of the area to 
be delineated as the development area;  Thereafter, the next stage 
is submission of DoC proposal (after completion of appraisal in the 
discovery/appraisal area as  per MC reviewed appraisal 
programme) under Article 21.5.4 within three years of notification of 
the discovery. 
 If no DoC proposal is submitted to the MC by the Contractor within 
the three years’ period, then  the Contractor should relinquish its 
rights to develop such discovery and the area relating to such 
discovery should be excluded from the contract area. 
 The DoC is followed by submission of development plan under 
Article 21.5.6. Once the DoC is reviewed by MC and the 
development plan is approved, that part of the discovery area 
covered by the development plan is treated as development area.  
Therefore, the remaining area should be relinquished. 
 
61. In case the Contractor does not relinquish the area and continues with 
exploration activities in such area then, contrary to the intent of the NELP, this would 

-30- 
 
 
 
result in GoI sharing the exploration risk, especially where there have been significant 
commercial discoveries in the initial exploration period. This would also delay 
subsequent recycling of the balance area where re-bidding can take place.  
62. Thus, PSC provisions as above, MC acceptance of discovery area in July 2006 
and MoPNG decision of July 2008 mean that no further exploration activity except the 
appraisal activities relating t o the discoveries made till July 2006 needed to be 
undertaken in the entire discovery area of 7645 sq. km. In the case of KG -DWN-98/3, 
the Contractor was able to do further exploration activities in the ‘discovery area’, which 
included drilling of eight exploration wells and six appraisal wells of discoveries resulting 
from these exploration wells.  
63. Therefore, non -enforcement of MoPNG decision led to continuation of 
exploration activities in the discovery area at an expenditure of US$ 427.03 million at 
the risk of revenue of the commercial discoveries, viz. D1 and D3, made in the Block.  
64. The Operator in its reply to MoPNG (June 2014) stated as under: 
"The understanding of the auditors.... with regard to the definition and 
meaning of terms such as “discovery area”, “relinquishment” and 
“appraisal” within the PSC was deeply flawed and had no basis as per the 
provisions therein….The limited purpose of Discovery Area under the PSC 
is only for determination of the area to be retained by the Contractor in the 
subsequent exploration phases for further exploration. Discovery Area is 
not determined for conducting appraisal activities as the PSC intends 
appraisal of a Particular Discovery. 
Activities of exploration and appraisal continue through the life of even a 
producing field after the development phase.  
The area was retained strictly as per the provisions of the PSC and with 
the approval of the MC and Government and the work resulted in 
discovering more reserves for the benefit of the Parties to the PSC and 
the nation". 
 
 
65. In reply (June 2014), MoPNG stated as under: 
" Article 4 of PSC deals with the Contractor’s right to retain and 
relinquish the Contract Area in phases and it permits the retention of the 

-31- 
 
 
 
‘discovery area’ by the Contractor at the end of phase I  and II exploration 
phases for further exploration and appraisal operations. Article 3.11 deals 
with retention of portions of Contract Area beyond the exploration phases 
on account of development operations. MOP&NG applied appropriate 
PSC provisions as deemed fit as per the nature of the decision taken. 
 
• The CAG’s different view on this technical issue of discovery area 
has been placed before the Public Accounts Committee, where both the 
sides have presented their views and counter views. Pending a 
recommendation of PAC to the contrary, the CAG’s opinion on the 
technical issue does not override the determination done by Government. 
 
• There has been no decision in MOP&NG to amend the provisions 
of PSC to disallow exploration in phase II and III and waiving  the 
Contractor’s liability to complete committed minimum work program, which 
are exploratory in nature. Audit appears to have mis -interpreted the 
MOP&NG letter to the effect of amending the PSC. 
 
• With regard to audit comments on GoI’s share of exploration risk, it 
is clarified that the Government does not share any risk in the functioning 
of PSC and Government earns only a share in profit and royalty on 
production. Audit’s interpretation that Government shares the exploration 
risk will have the consequence of increasing the liability of Government, 
which is not intended in the PSC. 
 
• Records do not show that any exploration other than appraisal was 
done after 15 July 2008. Article 4 permits the Contractor to retain 
discovery area in phase II and  phase III for further exploration in such 
discovery area. After entering into phase II or phase III, the Contractor is 
liable under Article 3 of PSC to carry out exploration and complete at least 
the committed minimum work program stipulated in Article 5. 3 and 5.4. 
The Contractor’s liability to complete committed minimum work program is 
not waived even if the discovery area of 1st discovery extends to the 
entire Contract Area.   
 
• Audit’s interpretations would unduly benefit the contractors to avoid 
their liabilities to carry out exploration operations during the exploration 
phases and to complete committed minimum work program under different 
phases of exploration.  
 
• Conclusion that ‘MOP&NG decision’ of February 2009 was not 
enforced is incorrect as the  exploration phase itself was over in July 2008 
i.e. much before the stated ‘MOP&NG decision’.  
 
• Audit would need to clarify if discoveries made in phase II and 
phase III are to be disallowed as suggested by CAG (paragraph 2.5.1.2 of 

-32- 
 
 
 
draft report), and as to how MA-26 discovered in phase II, which has been 
under production for 5 years and D -34 discovered in phase III, whose 
development plan has already been approved by MC, should be treated 
under the PSC as per the interpretation of CAG. 
 
66. Audit replied  to  MoPNG’s as under: 
"• MoPNG’s decision regarding the relinquishment of the area under 
Article 3.11 now (October 2013) would have been appropriate if MoPNG 
had taken the decision after reviewing determination of the entire contract 
area of KG -DWN-98/3 as ‘discovery area’, strictly in terms of the PSC 
provisions and delineated the stipulated 25 per cent relinquishment area 
each at the time of the conclusion of the 1st and 2nd exploratory phases in 
June 2004 and June 2005, and then correctly delineated the ‘ discovery 
area’ strictly based on the PSC definition, linked to well or wells drilled in 
that part. Therefore, the permission granted to hold the entire Contract 
Area as discovery area in the subsequent exploration phases without the 
stipulated relinquishment was not strictly in accordance with the provisions 
of the PSC, as claimed by MoPNG.  
• Regarding PAC’s recommendation on the matter being pending, it 
is clarified that this being a follow up, Audit has brought out the current 
position in this regard.   
• Audit had not interpreted MOPNG’s letter to have an effect of 
amending the PSC provisions, as claimed by MoPNG but highlighted the 
deficiency regarding non -implementation of its decision of July 2008 
(conveyed in February 2009) and the PSC provisions re lating to 
completion of appraisal, submission of DoC (by July 2009) and 
development plan and thereafter relinquishment of the remaining area not 
covered under the development area within the PSC stipulated timelines.  
 
 However, Article 3.5 (b) already allo ws the Contractor to avoid 
further obligation in respect of the minimum work program under 
Article 4 for any subsequent exploration phase if, at the end of 1st 
or 2nd exploration phase, the contractor opts not to proceed to the 
next exploration phase by re taining only discovery and 
development areas.  
 
• While reiterating that the delineation of the entire contract area as 
discovery area was incorrect, Audit stated that its interpretation is not 
towards helping contractors to avoid the minimum work programme 
obligations but rather to achieve the objective of PSC to efficiently 
monetize petroleum resources in an expeditious manner. This is because:  
 
a. Exploration phase includes both exploration and appraisal 
operations;  
 

-33- 
 
 
 
b. On declaring a discovery the Contractor is obliged to move 
ahead to appraise and submit DoC/development plan within the 
PSC stipulated timelines; 
  
c. As detailed in para 2.5.1.4.9 above, if, pursuant to Article 10.1 
(c), the Contractor notifies the MC that the discovery is of 
potential commercial interest, the Contractor is required to 
follow the next steps for development of the discovery and the 
discovery/ development area.  
 
d. Article 21.5.1 read with Article 4.4 clearly says that 
notwithstanding the provisions of Article 3, the C ontractor shall 
be entitled to retain the discovery area subject to the provisions 
of Article 21 – this Article provides for stage -wise development 
of a discovery and the corresponding discovery/development 
area. 
 
67. Therefore, MoPNG’s own decision of July 20 08 / February 2009 mentioning that 
since the entire block area was accepted as discovery area, the Block area, therefore, 
must be appraised within three years, substantiates Audit view that PSC provides for 
stage wise development of petroleum reserves wher ein subsequent to declaring a 
discovery the Contractor is obliged to move ahead to appraise the discovery within the 
discovery area and submit DoC / development plans and after any development area 
has been designated, relinquish all of the contract area n ot included within the said 
development area.  
• Audit understands that no exploration other than appraisal was 
done after the third exploration phase i.e. 15 July 2008. However, 
Audit has only pointed out the deficiency regarding allowing the 
exploration activities in the discovery area after July 2006 at the risk 
of revenue of KG-DWN-98/3 block. 
 
• As regards MoPNG’s reply regarding Audit’s views in the draft 
report, the anomalous situation arose only because of non -
enforcement of the PSC provisions relat ing to relinquishment at an 
appropriate time by MC/MoPNG. Incidentally, in this report Audit 
has only commented upon the exploration activities subsequent to 
July 2006 which does not include the MA -26 discovery. However, 
as was clarified in the Exit Confer ence with the MoPNG 
representatives on 11 July 2014 the main point being highlighted in 
this regard was that since MoPNG had decided in July 2008 / 
February 2009 that the entire area was a discovery area from July 
2006, the same was to be appraised upto Ju ly 2009 whereas the 

-34- 
 
 
 
Contractor had done exploration activities also in the discovery 
area after July 2006.  
 
• However, in this case the exploration was carried out in the 
discovery area which was supposed to be only appraised within a 
time frame. Therefor e, GoI was unduly made to share the 
exploration risk through the revenues from the existing commercial 
discoveries of the Block.  
 
68. Thus, in view of the PSC provisions as discussed above, MC acceptance of 
discovery area in July 2006 and MoPNG decision of Ju ly 2008 , Audit is of the opinion 
that further exploration activities in the ‘discovery area’ (which included drilling of eight  
exploration wells and six  appraisal wells of discoveries  resulting from these exploration 
wells at an expenditure of US$ 427. 03 million) was improperly carried out at the risk of 
revenue of the commercial discoveries made in the Block.  
 
69. Audit, therefore, recommended that under such a scenario, normally the entire 
amount of US$ 427.03 million would require to be disallowed for cost recovery since 
these activities were not in line with PSC provisions. However, from a pragmatic point of 
view, it has to be kept in mind that the exploration has resulted in a commercial 
discovery viz. D34 for which a development plan has already been  approved. In three 
other cases viz. D29, D30 and D31 discoveries, review of commerciality is under 
finalisation. At this stage, keeping in mind the national interest and energy security, 
Audit recommends that MoPNG should accept sharing of exploration cos t of only those 
of the above mentioned wells which resulted in a commercial discovery and disallow the 
cost recovery of US$ 118.99 million already effected by the Operator on the remaining 
wells. As regards the well cost in respect of D29, D30 and D31 disc overies, since the 
matter regarding the DoC is under consideration in MoPNG, the same may also be 
considered for disallowance in case they are not found to be commercially viable 
subsequently. 
 
70. MoPNG replied in its reply to the PAC stated that:  
"Under Art icle 4.1 and 4.2, the Contractor is allowed to retain 75% and 
50% of the Contract Area and also the ‘discovery area’ and ‘development 
area’. In the instant case, the Contractor opined under Article 1.39 of the 

-35- 
 
 
 
PSC that petroleum existed in the entire Contr act Area. Hence the 
Contractor was allowed to retain the entire area as discovery area 
 
It is pertinent to mention that finally at the end of appraisal periods the 
Contractor has been allowed to retain only the ‘development area’ for 
production of petroleu m. Remaining area other than development area to 
the extent of 6199 square kilometres has been relinquished. 
 
The PSC does not provide for the Management Committee or the 
Government to demarcate or determine the discovery area for the purpose 
of the Contra ctor’s relinquishment obligation under Article 4.1 and 4.2, as 
such determination is not possible at that stage before completion of 
appraisal. Based on the opinion of the Contractor as provided in article 
1.39 of PSC, the discovery area was allowed to be retained by the 
Contractor for a limited time period till a development plan was approved. 
There is no possibility to produce petroleum from discovery area unless 
the development area is demarcated after due appraisal activities. 
Discovery under Article 1. 38 refers to a deposit of petroleum not 
previously known to have existed which can be recovered at the surface. 
There can by multiple petroleum deposits one below / above the other in 
different horizons and finding of each deposit is technically treated as  a 
discovery. The term discovery area / development area is with reference 
to a given discovery in a particular reservoir and there can be overlapping 
laterally or vertically different discovery areas / development area 
associated with multiple discoveries . A prohibition of exploration in a 
discovery area in a different horizon would unjustifiably hinder the search 
for more and more petroleum within the country. 
Immediately after a successful discovery, the delineation of the extension 
of petroleum is not p ossible unless appraisal is completed, and definite 
timelines have been stipulated in PSC for appraisal so that the Contractor 
would not be able to prolong retention of Contract Area under the guise of 
appraisal. The PSC under Article 1.39 permits the Cont ractor to identify a 
tentative discovery area based on the discovery well and seismic studies 
which the Contractor is permitted under Article 4.1 and 4.2 to retain for a 
temporary period till further appraisal and delineation of the development 
area are done.  
 
As the Management Committee would not have adequate data for 
delineating the area holding petroleum potential until appraisal is 
completed, the PSC does not require the Management Committee to 
approve the discovery area but requires the Contractor to  obtain the 
approval of the Management Committee on the determination of 
development area under Article 6.6 (c). Discovery area is the indicative 
area identified by the Contractor based on a discovery well and seismic 
surveys. Development area is an area d emarcated by the Management 

-36- 
 
 
 
Committee based on the results of appraisal program, in respect of which 
a development plan has been proposed by the Contractor. Thus the 
Development area is determined by the results of appraisal and scope of 
development plan on which the Contractor is willing to invest his funds.  
 
Based on the technical merits the contractors in some other blocks vis RJ -
ON/6 (Operator -Focus), KG -DWN-98/2 (Operator -ONGC) have been 
allowed to retain more area after expiry of second exploration phase".  
 
71. Article 4 of the PSC provides for retention of discovery area and development 
area after the period of exploration phase -I, phase -II and phase -III.  The discoveries 
were made in exploration phase -I in Mio -pliocene zone and were extending in channe l 
levee complex. As per article 1.39, contractor was allowed to keep entire area as 
discovery area subject to conducting 3D seismic survey in all the remaining areas.  
 
72. The discoveries made in phase -II were in different stratigraphic level i.e. plio -
pleistocene zone and were in channel levee complex. The contractor was carrying out 
appraisal in these zones subsequent to making three discoveries in phase-II. 
73. In the phase-III period, the discoveries have been made in different stratigraphic 
level i.e. Pliocene and Mesozoic formations which is different  from that of the phase -I 
and phase -II. The contractor was allowed to carry out appraisal activities for these  
discoveries. The total appraisal period allowed for the gas discoveries is three years 
from the date of notification.  
 
74. Hence, all the 19 discoveries made in the block during the exploration period 
were in accordance of the PSC  and the relinquishment was  carried out at the end of 
the appraisal period. The final area retained at the end of the appraisal period of all the 
discoveries is 1446 sq. km.  
 
75. The discoveries made in phase-I were in plio-pleistocene zone and the discovery 
area demarcated is related with the plio -pleistocene stratigraphic level. However, the 
area demarcated separately in subsequent phase i.e. 5445 sq. km. is related with 
different stratigraphic level. Therefore, from above it is evident that the discovery area is 

-37- 
 
 
 
related with the discovery made at specific stratigraphic level and retention of discovery 
area was in accordance with article 1.39 of PSC. 
 
76. As explained earlier, discovery area is related with the discovery made at specific 
stratigraphic level and retention of discovery area was in accordance with article 1.39 of 
PSC. Hence, in the same block there can be different discovery area for discoveries at 
different stratigraphic level and therefore RIL retained the entire area as discovery area 
in 2004 for appraisal of mio -pliocene s trata. Subsequent discoveries were made in 
different stratigraphic level and accordingly operator proposed for retention of discovery 
area in subsequent phases. 
 
77. The objective of the appraisal program is to delineate the extent of the continuity 
of the res ervoir.  Operator has carried out seismic work and drilled exploratory wells 
which has fulfilled the objective of appraisal program.  
 
C. Deficiencies in pre-qualification process  
 
78. According to Audit, for pre -qualification of vendors for issue of Request for 
proposal (RFP) for charter hiring of Floating Production Storage and Offloading facility 
(FPSO), a VQC analysis was prepared on the basis of details of respective firms 
downloaded from the internet and sent to OC on 4 September 2006 for approval.  The 
supporting documents to this VQC analysis were not found on record, as they were not 
maintained by the operator. Aker Floating Production ASA (AFP)/Aker Group (the finally 
successful bidder) was selected for issuing Request for Proposal (RFP), despite lack  of 
any experience of operating and maintaining an FPSO.  Also there was no specific 
criterion for assessment of financial capability. 
 
79.  Audit further stated that, AFP should have been disqualified at the RFP stage, 
as it had not fulfilled many significant RFP requirements, e.g. 
 Non submission of Technical and Commercial checklists;  
 
 Non submission of preceding three financial years' audited financial 
statements; instead, AFP enclosed the Aker group's annual report 
for the last two years; 

-38- 
 
 
 
 
Aker Floating Production (AFP) was incorporated only  on 14 March 
2006, i.e. between the EOI invitation in January 2006 and VQC 
analysis in September 2006.  
 
 some vital information regarding technical competence of the 
bidder was not submitted by AFP.  This included quality plan, 
inspection and test plan, and HSE details.  Despite these, AFP was 
declared technically qualified.  
 
The operator's response (furnish ed through MoPNG in July 2011) 
on these aspects is not tenable, as explained below:  
 
 The operator's contention that the checklists were enclosed with the 
RFP mainly to ensure that the bidders were able to ensure the 
completeness of their bids, is unacceptable as the bidder, AFP, had 
not fulfilled many significant requirements as indicated in the 
checklists.  The operator obtained the checklist on 4 November 
2006, i.e. after the bid opening date.  
 
 The operator's reply that AFP had submitted the audited fin ancial 
statements for two years, which provided three years' financial 
results as required in the RFP, is incorrect and therefore 
unacceptable.  The bidder, AFP, had enclosed financial statements 
of the Aker group as a whole for two years (2004 and 2005), while 
AFP itself was formed only in 2006.  Further, against the column of 
parent company guarantee, AFP had indicated that the parent 
company guarantee would not give RIL remedies against the 
parent guarantor beyond the remedies which were available 
against the contractor under the contract.  Subsequently, AFP 
became the parent company and contracts were awarded to its 
subsidiary companies.  
D. Irregular selection of AFP   
 
80. Except for the bids of two vendors (AFP and SBM), all the other six bids received 
by 25 October 2006 were technically rejected on 2.12.2006.  We found that:  
 Technical qualification was done (6.12.2006), not of the bids 
originally received by 25 October 2006, but of the revised bids of 
AFP and SBM, submitted after discussions held with th em 
(including a meeting in Oslo in November 2006).  In addition to 
being contrary to Clause 5.6 of instruction to Bidders in the RFP, 
which clearly forbids any revision in bids after the bid due date, 
allowing changes to bids by selected (and not all) bidd ers is against 
the spirit of obtaining reasonable prices through competitive 
tendering.  

-39- 
 
 
 
 
 The operator did not fix a bid opening date in advance, nor were 
representatives of bidding firms invited for the bid opening, so as to 
ensure transparency and fairness.   
 
 we did not find the priced bids of technically unqualified bidders 
sealed or intact, so as to have assurance that these were not 
opened.  
 
 Interestingly, the priced bid of AFP bid was not was not signed by 
the bidder (as required); the possibility o f modification of priced b id 
cannot be ruled out. 
 
 The price quotes for optional items by AFP were left blank for 'open 
book' cooperation with RIL.  
 
RIL's response, furnished by MoPNG, indicated (July 2011) that, 
out of the eight bids, seven bids (including SBM - subsequently) 
were rejected on the following grounds;  
 
 Permanently moored system offered against requirement for 
disconnectable system (Nortech & SMB); 
 
 Various deliverables required as per RFP were not submitted (Fred 
Olsen);  
 DP vessel offered instead of a moored system (FPSOcean); 
 
 Silent on safe abandonment of risers in bad weather, FFP not 
offered, hull life not determined (Compass Energy EPS);  
 
 Specific details not provided, geo -technical & geo -physical studies 
not included (EMAS); and  
 
 Bidder expressed inability to comply with operator's requirement 
with regards to scope of work, responsibilities, schedule and 
commercial mechanism (Sea Production).  
81. This wholesale disqualification leads us to question the entire pre -qualification 
process.  The contention of the operator (forward ed through MoPNG) regarding 
selection of AFP over others is not tenable for the following reasons:  
 The information on availability of relevant resources, know -how and 
expertise within Aker Group was the subject of public 
announcements and part of process for Aker's qualification for 
listing on the Oslo Stock Exchange, and that the operator had 
reviewed the financial background and technical experience for 

-40- 
 
 
 
award of contracts is not acceptable, as the acceptance of 
qualifications for listing on Stock Exchang e is not related to the 
fulfillment of qualification and experience criteria specified in the 
RFQ.  
 
 ABO, a subsidiary of AFP, was also established in July 2006 for 
operating the FPSO for AFP; the contract with RIL was their first 
operation and maintenance  contract.  All other bidders, including 
those experienced in that field, were rejected during technical 
evaluation.  
 
 Operator's reply that AFP had suggested 'open book' cooperation 
for optional items on the basis that certain salient details could only 
be finalized during detailed engineering, is not tenable, as the 
approved procurement procedure does not provide for it.  In any 
case, the operator should have finalized the engineering details, 
before issuing the RFP.  
 
82. According to audit, as in terms of the PSC, the full cost is  
recoverable by the operator.  Hence, it is incumbent on the operator to ensure that a 
fully transparent, and cost -effective process is adopted which give s assurance to the 
Government that costs have indeed been minimized.  
 
83. When asked whether the Ministry reviewed indepth the award of 10 specific 
contracts based on single financial bid to Aker Group Companies, as suggested by the 
audit, the Ministry replied: 
"The review of procurement contracts i s a specialized audit function which 
cannot be executed by any other agency than audit. 
 
Ministry relies on audit review done by CAG and other auditors. 
Government relies on auditors for disallowing any expenditure for the 
purpose of determining Government Take.  MOP&NG / DGH action would 
depend on specific CAG recommendation and cannot take the role of 
auditor. In case Audit is able to report any unfair practice causing specific 
loss to Government, the loss will be reduced in the contract cost for 
computation of Government Take. CAG’s qualitative comments have been 
contested by the Contractor who has given detail replies. Therefore the 
audit exceptions should be concluded with the financial impact and such 
audit conclusion can be drawn only by the team whic h carried out the 
detailed audit". 
 

-41- 
 
 
 
84. The Ministry in their presentation made before the Committee on 21.03.2016 
have stated as under:  
• Operating Committee monitored the contract award as per Appendix F of 
PSC 
 
• CAG did not quantify any financial impact, in accordance with CAG’s 
Reporting Standards and Accounting and Audit Standard 28 of ICAI.  
 
• CAG’s Reporting Standards (Article IV) requires that the audit report, in 
cases of adverse opinion, quantifies the financial effect on the financial 
statements. 
  
• Audit and Accounting Standard 28 of ICAI stipulates: “Whenever the 
auditor expresses an opinion that is other than unqualified ..... unless 
impracticable, a quantification of the possible effect(s), individually and in 
aggregate, on the financial statements sh ould be mentioned in the 
auditor’s report” 
 
• Audit report did not find any affiliated transaction or fraud to invalidate the 
integrity of procurement". 
E. Proposal for Declaration of Commerciality (DoC) 
 
85. As required under Article 10.5 and 21.5.4 of the PSC, the Operator submitted 
(February 2010) a DoC proposal for D29, D30, D31 and D34 discoveries for MC review.   
 
86. Evaluation of DoC is a technical -cum-economic analysis based on relevant 
technical and econo mic data including estimated recoverable reserves, sustainable 
production levels, estimated development and production expenditures, prevailing and 
forecasted prices, and other pertinent technical and economic factors according to 
Good International Petrol eum Industry Practices as well as all evaluations, 
interpretations and analyses of such data and feasibility studies relating to the 
Discovery prepared by or for the Contractor.   
 
87. While appraising the proposal, DGH and the Operator deliberated on various 
issues including clarifications on reservoir, production and finance / techno -economics. 
DGH insisted on ascertainment of production profile of the discoveries. It observed that 
Modular Dynamic Test (MDT) carried out by the Operator did not provide individ ual well 

-42- 
 
 
 
testing rates in order to ascertain sustainable production levels which was necessary for 
evaluation of commerciality of discoveries. In fact, for the requirement of well test data / 
rate, the Operator himself admitted that “derivation of permeability based on MDT is not 
reliable”.  The MDT data acquired by the Operator only had reservoir pressures and 
types of fluid encountered.   As no appraisal wells were drilled in the pools of discovery 
wells to substantiate the production rates considered by the Operator in the DoC, DGH 
felt that the profile generated without considering MDT / Drill Stem Test (DST) data in 
the wells was not on a sound technical basis.  Hence, DGH observed that in the 
absence of a reliable production profile, economic analysis could not be carried out.  
Also, while clarifying on the economic viability issue raised by DGH, the Operator stated 
in a letter to DGH on 4 June 2010 that “There is no doubt that the development of these 
discoveries, which are marginal in nature, ... is not viable at US$ 4.2 / mmbtu”.  
 
88. Since the DoC did not provide individual testing rates and could not demonstrate 
sustainable production levels, in October 2010, DGH communicated to the Operator 
that the DoC for the four gas discoveries could not be review ed.  Subsequently, in 
November 2010, the Operator submitted additional test data/information.  However, this 
data related only to the D34 gas discovery.  Finally, in November 2011, based on the 
test data and subsequent meetings and correspondence, MC revie wed the DoC 
proposal for D34 discovery but in respect of D29, D30 and D31, MC re -iterated DGH 
views and stated that “in the absence of production tests which provide sustainable 
production levels from the reservoir, commerciality of discoveries D29, D30 an d D31 
could not be evaluated.”   
 
89. In May 2012, while issuing a notice for MC meeting, the Operator requested the 
MC to complete review of DoC for D29, D30 and D31.  Thereafter, in a subsequent MC 
meeting (August 2012), MC advised the Operator to generate a nd submit test data for 
these discoveries. Subsequently, the Operator submitted a proposal on 6 October 2012 
and 21 November 2012 to undertake test (DST) in only one well out of the three 
discoveries. The Operator further said that such results of DST for one well should be 
applicable to other two wells also. While DGH agreed to the Operator’s proposal to 

-43- 
 
 
 
undertake DST in one discovery well, they further asked the Operator on 27 November 
2012 to submit a plan for surface flow test for the other two discovery wells also.  
 
90. After considerable assessment, correspondence and clarifications, the DGH 
came to a conclusion that the DoC in respect of these three discoveries was not 
acceptable. The Operator insisted upon re -opening the issue and submitted a proposal 
for DST.  Yet, the Operator did not carry out the same and later argued that, as per 
PSC, (a) the DST was not mandatory, (b) Contractor has the right to determine 
requirement for DST based on its technical judgment, and (c) it was not the only test. 
Audit scrutiny in this regard disclosed the following:  
 Initially, no production test data for the three discoveries was 
provided by the Operator subsequent to the August 2012 MC 
meeting.   
 Later, the DST, as proposed by the Operator itself for one well, was 
not undertaken.  Even as of February 2014, it has not been 
undertaken.  
 In this context, it may be noted that as per PSC provisions, while 
reviewing the DoC, MC might request any other ad ditional 
information it might reasonably require so as to complete the review 
of the proposal made by the Contractor.  The PSC permitted time -
line for review of DoC expired in August 2010 but since the 
Operator re -opened the issue, it was bound to supply a ny such 
clarification as is required.  Therefore, the Operator could not have 
rejected the demand. 
 As of June 2014, review of the DoC of these three discoveries had 
not been completed by MC. 
 
91. On 15 April 2013, DGH had, while submitting the proposal for relinquishment of 
the contract area to MoPNG, also proposed that the area pertaining to these three 
discoveries be relinquished. In its proposal, DGH had re -iterated that no production test 
data for these discoveries had been provided by the Operator till that date. Further, 
DGH mentioned that since surface flow test was a PSC requirement, the DoC could not 
be reviewed by the MC. Moreover, the Operator could not keep a part of the contract 
area for an indefinitely long period in the garb of an incomplete DoC proposal. The time 
limit for submitting a valid DoC for those three discoveries was already over.  

-44- 
 
 
 
 
92. Subsequently, after examination of the case in MoPNG and holding of 
deliberations with DGH an d Contractor, the relinquishment proposal was submitted by 
Secretary, MoPNG on 30 August 2013 to Minister, PNG proposing for relinquishment of 
area related to D29, D30 and D31.  Finally, in October 2013, while deliberating on the 
proposal for relinquishment, the Minister (PNG) observed (with respect to D29, D30 and 
D31 discoveries) that “there is a clear cut difference of opinion between the Contractor 
and the DGH as to whether DST is a mandatory requirement under the PSC or not. It is 
difficult to rule out  either of these interpretations………….a fair and balanced approach 
could be to allow the Contractor to conduct DST now and review the DoC on the basis 
of outcome of these tests. Depending on the outcome, the matter may be taken up 
before CCEA (Cabinet Commi ttee on Economic Affairs)  for its information fully 
explaining the facts and circumstances of the case”. 
 
93. Thus, in October 2013, while issuing the order regarding relinquishment of 
Contract Area of KG-DWN-98/3 Block, MoPNG allowed the Contractor to retain 298 sq. 
km. contract area for D29, D30 and D31 discoveries under a tentative PEL as the 
matter was being considered separately by the GoI.   
 
94. Audit observed that this decision was in contravention of DGH technical advice 
and would have significant financia l impact as the activity and budget of DST for the 
three discoveries had been  included (December 2013) by the Operator at an 
approximate total cost of  US$ 100 million in the WP&B for FY 2013 -14 (RE) and 2014-
15 (BE).  The Operator also sought (10 January  2014) DGH approval of time for DST.  
In turn, DGH addressed the issue to MoPNG.  Final decision had not been taken, as of 
February 2014, on the issue of whether the cost of DST was recoverable or not under 
extant PSC provisions. As of February 2014, the case had not been submitted to CCEA. 
 
95. There has been inordinate delay in finalising the review of the DoC proposal in 
respect of these discoveries, which is against NELP objective of expeditious 
monetisation of hydrocarbon resources. 
 

-45- 
 
 
 
96. The Operator in its re ply to MoPNG (June 2014) stated that  “the contention of 
DGH that DST is mandatory because it is mentioned in the definition leads one to the 
obviously absurd conclusion that the Contractor cannot even notify a discovery without 
conducting a DST”. 
 
97. In this regard, Audit stated that Article 10.5 of PSC states that “the Contractor 
shall in respect of a Discovery of Crude Oil advise the Management Committee by 
notice in writing .... whether such Discovery should be declared a Commercial 
Discovery or not. Such notice shall be accompanied by a report on the Discovery setting 
forth at relevant technical and economic data including estimated recoverable 
reserves, sustainable production levels , estimated development and production 
expenditures, prevailing and forecasted prices, and other pertinent technical and 
economic factors according to Good International Petroleum Industry Practices as well 
as all evaluations, interpretations and analyses of such data and feasibility studies 
relating to the Discovery prepared by or for the Contractor, with respect to the Discovery 
and any other relevant information”. 
 Further, Article 10.2 mentions that “If the Contractor determines to conduct a drill 
stem or production test, in open hole or through perforated casing, with regard to the 
Discovery, it shall notify the Government....”. 
 
98. Thus, the issue is not of DST but that the Operator should be able to show 
adequate evidence of ‘sustainable production levels’ in whatever way agreed. The 
optional nature of DST is not being debated here. The Operator was not able to do so to 
the satisfaction of MC / DGH due to which in May 2010, DGH, in their letter to the 
Operator, asked the Operator, “to provide the details of estimation of production rates 
arrived at through MDT data”. Since the Operator was unable to provide the requisite 
data to MC / DGH, DGH while intimating (October 2010) the Contractor that the DoC for 
the four gas discoveries could not be reviewed, had mentioned that “the profile 
generated without generating/considerin g MDT/DST data in the wells may not be of 
sound technical basis”. Further, DGH had also mentioned that “As per the Article 10.5 of 
PSC the operator, is required to generate and provide data pertaining to “ sustainable 

-46- 
 
 
 
production levels’, which is essential for generating the production profile. Such data 
was not acquired by the operator in any of the wells under consideration. Hence, the 
production profile in the DOC could not be evaluated, due to lack of production testing 
data”. 
 
99. MoPNG in its reply stated  that this was a case where DGH had not considered 
the testing methods adopted by the Contractor. As the Contractor had appealed time 
and again to MOP&NG against the decision of DGH, the MOP&NG was deliberating the 
issue for resol ving the issue in a way that would enhance energy security without 
compromising the technical requirements of PSC. Time taken to settle the dispute 
should not be treated as delay. 
 
100. As per the PSC provisions, the review of the DoC was to be completed by MC by 
August 2010. However, despite technical advice of the DGH to the contrary the issue 
has been reopened after almost three years from the date when it was rejected by DGH 
and has been not finalised as yet.  
 
101. During the Exit Conference held with MoPNG/DGH on 11 July 2014 to discuss 
the draft report, Secretary, MoPNG informed that MoPNG hoped to get a decision on 
this issue soon.  
 
102. Audit, therefore, recommended that MoPNG may develop consistent and uniform 
parameters for evaluating commerciality of discoveries. 
 
103. MoPNG it its Action Taken Notes Stated that  DOC in respect of D29, D30 and 
D31 was not recommended by DGH for review for lack of DST. The Contractor 
appealed against the view to MOP&NG. The issue has been reopened for review in 
view of the petroleum p otential of the discoveries in an energy starving country. A 
decision will be taken by competent authority keeping in view of the PSC provisions and 
the interest of energy security. Government is considering a transparent policy 
guidelines regarding testing requirements for the existing and future cases. 

-47- 
 
 
 
104. When asked that how does Ministry justify the inordinate delay in finalization of 
the issue regarding DoC of D-29, D-30 and D-31 discoveries in view of NELP's objective 
of expeditious monetization of hydroc arbon resources, the Ministry replied that t he DoC 
of D-29 , D -30 and D -31 was not reviewed by Management Committee in absence of 
production tests which provide sustainable production levels from the reservoir which is 
required as per PSC. Contractor was of the different  opinion that test other tha n DST in 
deepwater which are non -conventional also provides the sufficient basis for evaluation 
of DoC. The similar contentions were also raised by other operators in different 
deepwater blocks. Due the difference of views between DGH and contractor Govt. 
considered the case and a decision in this regard is taken by CCEA wherein the 
contractors has been given relaxation for conducting DST  in these blocks by capping 
the such test cost upto US$ 15 million per test. Because of this highly techno -
commercial decision in the interest of development of discovered deepwater resources, 
it took time. The other option available with the Govt. to get these areas relinquished. 
Allowing such test is in the overall interest of development of deepwater resources 
which was also mandate of New Exploration Licensing Policy.  
 
105. Govt. has issued a policy for testing requirement. According to that policy the 
operator has opted for conducting DST. The operator has completed DST for D29 and 
D30 discoveries and has relinquished D31 discovery in accordance with policy. In terms 
of the policy the contractor has to submit revised DOC for D29 and D30 by 28 th April 
2016.  
F. Policy on Testing Requirements for discoveries in NELP blocks  
 
106. The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA), ch aired by the Prime 
Minister Shri Narendra Modi, on 29.04.2015 approved a clear policy on testing 
requirements for discoveries made under New Exploration and Licensing Policy (NELP) 
Blocks. The policy will settle the long pending issue with regards to 12 di scoveries in 
five blocks pertaining to ONGC (six discoveries) and Reliance Industries (six 
discoveries) but will also establish a clear policy for the future. The policy will also help 
in bringing out transparency and uniformity in decision making as again st case by case 

-48- 
 
 
 
approach in the past.  The approval given by CCEA would provide a way forward for 
development of these 12 discoveries with associated gas reserves of around 90 Billion 
Cubic Meter (BCM) which would be valued at over Rs.one lakh crore at the  current gas 
price of US $ 4.66 / Million British Thermal Unit (mmbtu) on Gross Calorific Value 
(GCV).  The policy approved by CCEA allows the contractors to choose one of the 
following three options with regards to discoveries which are stuck on account o f testing 
requirement:  
• Relinquish the blocks  
• Develop the discoveries after conducting Drill Stem Test (DST) with 50 
percent cost of DST being disallowed as penalty for not conducting the test on 
time. The cost recovery for carrying out DST would be capped at US $ 15 million.  
• Develop the discoveries without conducting DST in a ring fenced manner.  
 
 If the contractor does not opt for any one of these options suggested above 
within 60 days of the CCEA approval then the area encompassing these discoveries 
shall automatically be relinquished. 
 
G. Viability of Optimized Field Development Plan (OFDP)  
 
107. The Contractor submitted (July 2008) Development Plan (DP) of nine Satellite 
Gas Discoveries (SGD) for the approval of MC. The DP envisaged estimate d gas 
reserves of 2200 BCF, capex of US$ 5910 million with expected gas from mid -2013 
onwards subject to approval of the plan by January 2009. DGH after carrying out 
techno-economic study of DP at a gas price of US$ 4.20 per mmbtu, observed 
(February 2009) a negative net present value (NPV) of cash flow from the project at a 
discounting factor of 10 per cent and advised (March/April/ November 2009) the 
Contractor to re -consider the DP and submit timeline of submission of DP for the 
approval of GoI.  
 
108. The Co ntractor submitted (December 2009) an OFDP for four satellite 
discoveries   with OGIP of 1513 BCF, gas production rate of 10 mmscmd from eight 

-49- 
 
 
 
wells at an estimated capex of US$ 1.529 billion. After in -house study and 
correspondence with the Contractor, DG H carried out techno economics on the 
production profile, cost estimates and project schedule which yielded a negative NPV of 
US$ 239 million. DGH also worked out another scenario by excluding royalty as 
expenditure from revenue and phasing of capex in two  years, making the project 
marginally economically viable (with an NPV of US$ 33 million).  
 
109. Given the negative NPV and the fact that estimated capex was based on 
Contractor’s in-house estimates of 2006 without carrying out Front End Engineering &  
Design (FEED) and detailed engineering, DGH informed (August 2011) MoPNG that 
OFDP may not be techno -economically viable at a gas price of US$ 4.2/ mmbtu. 
MoPNG advised (23 December 2011) DGH to work out different economic scenarios 
with 10 per cent and 1 5 per cent (both positive and negative) variations in capex and 
break-even price/ mmbtu for each variance.  After working out four scenarios (both 
positive and negative) with 10 per cent and 15 per cent variance DGH worked out a 
break-even rate per mmbtu b etween US$ 4.34 per mmbtu and US$ 5.81 per mmbtu 
and requested (December 2011) MoPNG to take a view on the matter. The lowest 
break-even rate was higher than gas price of US$ 4.2 / mmbtu. MoPNG asked DGH (02 
January 2012) to work out the viability of the p roposed satellite fields by taking the total 
production into account at Weighted Average Price (WAP) as the gas produced from 
four SGD would be sold along with the gas produced from D1 -D3 and MA fields on the 
gas price of US$ 4.2 per mmbtu fixed by Empowered Group of Ministers (EGoM) for the 
entire contract area. Accordingly, DGH computed the WAP of gas for the entire block 
considering the producible reserves of D1 -D3 and MA fields at the rate of US$ 3 per 
mmbtu and the four SGD at the rate of US$ 5.8 per m mbtu, which varied in the range of 
US$ 3.15 per mmbtu to US$ 3.22 per mmbtu. The project was now found to be viable 
by DGH and MC approved OFDP on 3 January 2012.  
110. Audit observed that:  
• MoPNG/DGH has not fixed any norms/criteria for working out 
techno-economic analysis of a FDP. 
 

-50- 
 
 
 
• Initially, the OFDP was not techno -economically viable, however, it 
was made marginally viable by devising different scenarios and 
changing assumptions e.g. exclusion of royalty as expenditure, 
variation in capex etc.  
 
• MoPNG had directed (30 September 2011) DGH to engage a ‘third 
party for validation’ of capex of OFDP. In view of non -submission of 
earnest money/bid security and conflict of interest, DGH informed 
(19 December 2011) MoPNG that it was not possible to get the 
third party validation of capex of OFDP. However, before MoPNG 
could take any decision on the matter, MC approved OFDP in 
January 2012. Therefore, in the absence of validation of capex by 
third party, the reasonability and justification of capex and GoI 
share of PP could not be assured. 
 
111. DGH in its reply (October 2012) stated that: 
"(i) The FDP involves monetization of four satellites gas discoveries 
holding substantial reserve of 0.617 tcf of gas. The Contractor had 
evaluated techno-feasibility of project at a gas price of US$ 6 per 
mmbtu. 
 
(ii) However, when the project was evaluated in DGH at current gas 
price of US$ 4.20 per mmbtu, the project was showing negative 
NPV. Non -monetization of gas on ground of such evaluation at a 
gas price of US$ 4.2 per mmbtu would result in huge loss of gas 
production, particularly keeping in view the higher gas price paid for 
other blocks. Therefore, different scenarios were tested such as 
with shorter gestation period, excluding royalty, capex escalated/ 
depressed by 10 and 15 per cent. 
 
(iii) Royalty is Cash-in-flow to one of the stock holders that is, GoI and 
hence excluded as expenditure in one of the scenario evaluation. 
 
(iv) Capex that will be considered for cost recovery will be restricted to 
actual cash flow duly certified by auditor, including CAG. 
 
(v) In order to evaluate the range of economic feasibility of project with 
reference to possible gas prices, it was computed that the Break 
Even price was on the range of US$ 4.34 to US$ 5.81 when Capex 
was escalated by +/- 10 per cent to 15 per cent". 
 
112. MoPNG in its reply (June 2014) stated that: 

-51- 
 
 
 
• the economic viability was evaluated at different scenarios so as to 
optimize the decision making in order to avoid non -development of 
any discovery. 
• Techno-economic evaluation is guided by principles of economics 
and application of mind.  Setting separate norms for economic 
evaluation may not be possible. 
• D1 & D3 and MA were evaluated at different points of time. Hence 
different prices were used for evaluation done at differe nt points of 
time.  
 
113. Audit stated that: 
• There is no rationale for working out techno -economics after taking 
WAP at the rate of US$ 3.0 for D1 & D3 gas fields & MA oilfield gas 
and US$ 5.8 per mmbtu for OFPD, as GoI had fixed the price of 
gas of US$ 4.20 per mmbtu. 
 
• At the time of evaluation of OFDP, the prevailing gas price for KG -
DWN-98/3 was available, therefore, there was no need to use 
different prices. 
 
• OFDP estimated capex was based on Contractor’s in -house 
estimates of 2006 and the Contractor had not carried out FEED and 
detailed engineering till approval of OFDP. Hence, capex was not 
realistic and chances of cost escalation cannot be negated. 
 
• Royalty had been considered as expenditure for calculating IM, 
hence, cannot be excluded as expenditure. 
 
• WAP for economic evaluation of OFDP indicates that insufficiency, 
if any, of the OFDP would be compensated with the revenue of 
D1&D3 and MA fields, which are already producing less gas/oil 
than the approved production profile. 
 
• Carrying out financial due diligence prior to approving the plan is of 
greater importance since the Contractor is entitled to incur 
expenditure with the approval of annual WP&B and the 
responsibility of an auditor would be a post facto exercise".   
 
114. Audit recommended that MoPNG may consider fixing norms / criteria for 
working out techno-economic analysis of a FDP. 
115. MoPNG in its Action Taken Notes stated that Based on the learning of several 
discoveries over the years DGH has developed a Standard Operating Practice (SO P) 
for evaluating the FDP for discoveries. The DOC / FDP are evaluated by discounting the 

-52- 
 
 
 
entire cost and revenue at 10% and all the discoveries yielding a positive NPV are 
considered fully viable. In case of discoveries which are not fully viable, the via bility is 
evaluated based on marginal principle: discoveries yielding positive NPV considering 
future costs excluding taxes and future revenue are accepted. Globally economic 
evaluation is done based on this incremental principle. 
 The above principles are consistently followed in all cases. 
"MOPNG in its reply has stated that constituted body “Standing Committee 
on Petroleum industries practices” has submitted the guidelines on Good 
International Petroleum Industry Practices (GIPIP.  The guidelines are a 
compendium of all good practices being followed in different parts of the 
world for carrying out petroleum operations. Team constituted by MOPNG 
for framing the “Good International Petroleum Industries Practices” has 
identified the best practices being foll owed for all technical and 
commercial activities under the production sharing contract. The report 
has been submitted to the Govt. for adoption and notification 
 
116. The Ministry in their presentation made before the Committee on 21.03.2016 
have stated as under: 
• Post vendor-contractual agreements between the Operator and the 
vendor validly amended the original vendor-contract  
• Audit report did not point out any legally tenable ground for cost 
disallowance, such as 
• Affiliated transactions to the undue advantage of Contractor  
• Any incidence of fraud 
• Costs not supported by payment evidences 
 Operator’s response is that expenditures were incurred in the 
interest of Petroleum Operations" 
 
III. GRANT OF CONCESSIONS AGAINST CONTRACTUAL TERMS  
A. Contract for Engineering, Procurement, Installation and Construction of 
 offshore facilities. 
 
117. The Operator awarded contract number OG8/3611335 dated 4 October 2006 to 
M/s Allseas Marine Contractors S.A. ( AMC) for Engineering, Procurement, Installation 
and Construction (EPIC) of offshore facilities for development of D1-D3 fields for a basic 
contract price of Euro 764.08 million comprising a lump sum price of Euro 699.09 million 
and provisional price of Eur o 64.99 million.  As per the milestones specified in the 
contract, Milestone 2, i.e. “Completion of pre -commissioning and ready for start -up of 

-53- 
 
 
 
first set of 9 wells” was to be achieved by 15 May 2008 while Milestone 3, i.e. 
“Completion of pre-commissioning and ready for start -up of second set of 9 wells”, was 
to be achieved by 17 July 2008.  
118. However, as AMC was not able to achieve the above milestones, it informed the 
Operator on 20 June 2008 that various factors attributable to the Operator were 
preventing it from performing its obligations under the contract, rendering it inoperable 
both in delivery and contract administration. AMC mentioned that the delays attributable 
to Operator had escalated to the extent that the AMC’s third party contractual 
commitments were endangered. According to the AMC, all parties involved: Operator, 
AMC and its sub-contractors were responsible for respective delays on this project. The 
AMC further mentioned that if the Operator wished to change the sequence of the work 
in order to achieve an earliest possible First Gas date then the Operator should pay for 
the extra expenses to achieve the same. Moreover, the Operator would need to pay for 
the extra expenses already incurred in the past months due to deviations from the 
scheme suggested by AMC.  
119. Operator, however, refuted (25 June 2008 and 7 August 2008) the AMC’s 
assertions that delays attributable to it were preventing the AMC from performing its 
obligations and asked the AMC to acknowledge and accept responsibility for its lac k of 
performance, such as inordinate delay in mobilization of key resources, slow progress 
on almost all fronts, poor performance of vessel ‘Eclipse’, sub -optimal overall 
implementation, quality related issues, inefficient planning and management, 
inadequate manpower etc.  
 
120. After discussions with the AMC, Operator submitted a proposal before the OC of 
KG-DWN-98/3 Block on 1 September 2008 requesting it to grant some concessions 
requested by the AMC. Regarding delays and penalties, the Operator noted that the 
limit of maximum Liquidated Damages (LD) payable under the contract had been 
reached and AMC had virtually no incentive to complete the project. The Operator also 
mentioned that even though the contract stipulated that additional resources required 
for meeting the milestones were to be mobilized by AMC, i.e. at own cost, it thought that 

-54- 
 
 
 
in the interest of the project it should not take a stand which could discourage AMC to 
complete the work as such a move would prove to be counterproductive. The Operator 
reasoned in the pro posal that AMC had grounds to claim that they had considerably 
overshot their cost estimate for executing the work and, in fact, due to the delay in 
supplying of Free Issue Materials (FIM) and delay in completing CRP the Operator had 
contributed, to an ext ent, in delaying AMC’s work. Other reasons for not achieving the 
milestones were new regulations of Specific Period License (SPL) issued by Directorate 
General of Shipping (DGS) having impact on schedule and periodic intrusions by fishing 
boats in the area  of operations, etc. Thus, applying LD and forcing AMC to mobilize 
additional resources at its cost would lead to litigation at that juncture, thereby, delaying 
the project further.  
121. Based on the justification provided by the Operator, the OC agreed (2 September 
2008) to give the following concessions to AMC, the estimated impact of which was 
Euro 200 million approximately:  
• To provide additional resources required for expediting the offshore 
work without any cost to AMC or recovery from them. 
• To releas e the subsea construction vessel Helix Express and 
instead mobilize the vessel Rem Forza by paying mobilization fee. 
• To provide additional diving spread at no cost to AMC. 
• To pay additional amount of Euro 95 million to the vendor for delays 
not attributed to AMC.  
• To relax levy of LD. 
• To pay incentive to AMC for achieving first gas by specified date. 
• To provide assistance and pay for resources for expediting jumper 
fabrication. 
 
122. Subsequently, with a view to expediting completion of the works, an a greement 
was signed between AMC and Operator on 13 October 2008 containing a framework for 
resolution of contract related issues between them, including the above concessions, 
with the aim of AMC achieving Milestone 2 by 23 December 2008 and Milestone 3 by  
18 March 2009.  
 
123. Audit concluded that these concessions did not fall within the purview of the 
EPIC contract and the PSC provisions.  According to Section 3.2 (ix) of Appendix C to 

-55- 
 
 
 
the Accounting Procedure to PSC amounts paid with respect to non -fulfillment of 
contractual obligations are not recoverable and not allowable.  Therefore, these 
payments (approximately Euro 200 million) should not be recoverable from the Block.  
Detailed observations follow: 
"• Excepting the provisional part of the total price ( approximately Euro 
65 million), the contract with AMC is a lump -sum contract and all costs 
had been factored in prior to finalizing the contract.  Incidentally, detailed 
pre-bid meetings had been held with the bidders to clarify scope issues 
and the AMC ha d revised his original bid upwards . In this regard, Audit 
noted that there was no specific provision in the contract which entitled 
AMC to claim the cost overrun for the reasons for which Operator had paid 
the amount. Nonetheless, on the basis of the term s of the resolution, the 
Operator made outright payment of Euro 95 million (out of a total cost 
overrun of Euro 360 million worked out by AMC) to AMC towards its share 
of cost overrun.  
 
• In terms of clause number 9.5 of the contract, at no time prior to 
completion should the AMC substitute any marine craft used by the AMC 
in the performance of the Works without the prior written approval of the 
Operator. If the AMC wished to seek the Operator’s approval for any 
substitution, the AMC was to ensure that any  proposed substitute marine 
craft, should (a) be of an equal or higher standard and specification; and 
(b) have the same or better capability and capacity to perform the part of 
the Works for which it was to be used, than the original marine craft that it 
was replacing. Further, all and any costs associated with replacing any 
such marine craft should be for the sole account of the AMC. Additionally, 
any such substitution or replacement would be at the sole risk of the AMC 
and should not entitle the AMC to c laim for any extension of time to any 
Milestone Date or the Completion Date or any increase in the Contract 
Price.  
 
• Review of Change Order Number 11 dated 1 October 2008 
(effective from 20 September 2008), however, revealed that pursuant to 
the above cl ause, AMC sought Operator’s approval to substitute subsea 
construction vessel ‘Express’ with the vessel ‘Rem Forza’. Although ‘Rem 
Forza’ was not of equal or higher standard and specification compared to 
‘Express’ and did not have the same or better capabi lity and capacity to 
perform the part of the Works for which it was to be used, Operator 
acceded to the request of AMC, as the major part of Works to be carried 
out by ‘Express’ had been executed by then.  
 
• Although all and any costs associated with repl acing the marine 
craft were to be at the sole account of AMC, the Operator paid US$ 16.87 
million to AMC towards mobilization and demobilization costs for the 

-56- 
 
 
 
vessel ‘Rem Forza’. In Audit opinion, besides the fact that agreeing to 
AMC’s proposal to substit ute a marine craft with lower specifications was 
in contravention of the contractual terms, the reimbursement of the 
mobilization and demobilization costs was also not in order and had 
resulted in a payment of US$ 16.87 million to AMC to which he was not 
entitled. This had also resulted in excess booking which should not form 
part of cost recovery. 
 
• As per Exhibit A (Scope of Works), para 6.2.3 of the EPIC Contract 
dealing with Resource and Manpower Augmentation, the AMC should 
augment the manpower and resources including additional marine spread 
deployed as and when considered necessary to achieve the milestone 
dates without any cost and time implication to the Operator. Although 
Operator was aware that additional resources required for meeting the 
milestones were to be mobilized by AMC at its own cost, however, in order 
to avoid litigation and delay in meeting first gas, Operator proposed to 
provide the additional resources also without any cost to AMC was not as 
per contractual terms. In this case also , there should not be any cost 
recovery as it is against the contractual terms". 
 
124.  Therefore, the amount paid / committed to the AMC towards the additional 
resources against the estimated amount of Euro 200 million (which included Euro 95 
million and US$ 16.87 million) approved by the OC on 2 September 2008 should not be 
allowable for cost recovery.  
125. Giving justification for the payments, the Operator, in reply to an audit 
observation, stated (February 2014) that:  
"From the correspondence and meetings with  the AMC it was evident that 
AMC was steadily losing money on the project having reached a stage 
where it would have to obtain a loan of a few hundred million Euros to 
finance its working capital requirements.  It had already submitted an 
interim claim dis puting the levy of LD under the contract.  It was 
consequentially approaching a point where they could not have continued 
with project execution.  If pushed it would at the very least have insisted 
on following the minimal required contractual sequence for performance of 
work, without any regard for overall project requirements. 
 
Contract costs escalated due to various reasons which cannot and could 
not have been foreseen at the time of award of work. These delays further 
had the effect of pushing the insta llation into an unsuitable weather period 
for the east coast adding to the installation inefficiencies. 
 
Thus, while AMC and its subcontractor also could have been held 
responsible for some delay it was impossible to quantify the responsibility 

-57- 
 
 
 
for each en tity’s delays in a complex and mega project with innumerable 
dependencies. Any attempt to quantify and apportion would be subjective 
and could have only been settled through lengthy litigation which would 
have further delayed the project in addition to increased project costs. 
 
A number of contracts must be executed concurrently and the project 
decisions made keeping all the aspects in view – the most important 
consideration being interfaces amongst different contract timelines and the 
cascading impact of d elays of one contract on the other. Number of 
technical, logistic, regulatory and other obligations including delivery must 
be resolved/ met by the contractors under each contract in order to ensure 
success of the Project ‘as a whole’.  
 
Under the circumst ances, the options before the Operator were not only 
limited but would have carried dubious legal credibility in view of the fact 
that it could insist on imposing liquidated damages knowing fully well that 
certain reasons for delay not being on account of AMC such a decision 
would have been contested and would only have led to the AMC halting 
work on the project and getting into prolonged litigation with the Operator.  
 
The Audit Team’s opinion does not consider the practical difficulties and 
issues which led to this operational decision taken by the Operator". 
 
126. Audit responded that: 
"i. As per Clause 8.4 (A) of the contract, the AMC shall be deemed to 
have examined all aspects of this Contract and to have fully satisfied itself 
as to the sufficiency of the Basic Contract Price for the performance and 
completion of all of its obligations under, and in accordance with, this 
Contract. Any works not expressly referred to in this Contract but 
inherently necessary to complete the Works shall be carried out by the 
AMC and shall be deemed to be included in the Basic Contract Price.  
 
ii. Further, Clause 8.4 (B) provides that except as otherwise 
specifically provided for in this Contract, AMC shall not be entitled to any 
increase in the Contract Price in respect of th e obligations under this 
Contract and the Basic Contract Price shall include the performance by 
the AMC of all its obligations under this Contract and include all 
overheads, finance charges on capital employed, taxes, profit, costs, 
charges and other expen ses of every kind (except as otherwise expressly 
stated in this Contract).  
  
iii. Further, as per Clause 26.1, except in relation to fuel as provided 
for in Schedule 11 (Schedule of Prices), the Basic Price shall not be 
subject to any adjustment, escalati on or other modification (regardless of 
any fluctuations in exchange rates or the cost of Resources, materials, 

-58- 
 
 
 
Equipment, labour or any similar items) and shall be and remain fixed, 
except as specifically provided for in Clause 26. 
 
iv. Clause 15.1 of the contract stipulates that the AMC agrees that it is 
of the highest importance to the Company that the Works are progressed 
and completed in accordance with the Project Schedule, Project Execution 
Plan, Milestone Dates, Completion Date and all other schedul ing 
obligations of the AMC provided for under this Contract. The AMC shall 
commence the Works on the Effective Date and shall thereafter proceed 
to carry out and complete the Works continuously, diligently and without 
delay in accordance with the Project E xecution Plan, the Project Schedule 
and the other requirements of this Contract. If at any time during this 
Contract, the Company (Operator) is of the view that the Works are or are 
likely to be delayed for any reason whatsoever, including for any reasons 
set out in Clause 15.3 (A), the AMC shall, at its own cost and expense, 
promptly and diligently take all measures necessary to eliminate or 
minimize such delay, and shall augment and supplement adequate 
personnel and Resources as may be required in this re gard. Moreover, 
while submitting the proposal to the OC, the Operator himself had also 
mentioned that the contract stipulated that additional resources required 
for meeting the milestones were to be mobilized by AMC i.e. at own cost. 
 
v. Further, as per Cl ause 8.3 (H), the AMC confirms that it has, prior 
to the Effective Date (and in addition to its obligations under Clause 8.2 – 
this relates to inspection of the Site) completed, and kept updated, a full 
review, and on an ongoing basis upto the Completion D ate and obtained 
an understanding, of all other information (other than mentioned in Clause 
8.3 (A) to (G)) as to risks, contingencies or other circumstances of any 
nature, which a Reasonable and Prudent vendor should have anticipated 
as being likely to affect performance of the Works.  
 
vi. There is no provision (including the above provisions) in the 
contract which specifically entitled the AMC to claim the increase in the 
basic contract price on account of the delays in completion of Works for 
the reasons for which the Operator had paid him  the excess cost. 
Therefore, since the extra cost was not in consonance with the provisions 
of the contract, such costs are inadmissible.  
 
vii. Further, Operator’s reply is not supported by any provision of the 
contract which allows it to pay the excess c ost due to the reasons for 
which the Operator has paid the amount".  
 
127. AMC had won the EPIC contract, which mainly consists of lump sum price, on 
bidding basis. AMC being an experienced vendor was expected to be aware of all such 
kinds of situations and all  aspects/provisions of the contract while signing the contract. 

-59- 
 
 
 
The AMC was aware of the risks, contingencies etc. in execution of the Works. 
Therefore, since the payments made towards the increased contract price are in 
violation of the provisions of the contract, the same are not recoverable from the 
revenue of the project. 
 
128. While it is important to see the success of the project as a whole, nonetheless, 
individual transactions / contracts of high value and having separate terms and 
conditions are also re quired to be implemented.  Since additional compensation paid 
was not in line with contractual provisions, cost recovery for the same should not be 
allowed.  
129. The Operator in its reply to MoPNG (June 2014) and during the Exit Conference 
(July 2014), while reiterating its earlier views, also mentioned that: 
• commenting on commercial, operational or technical performance 
of the Contractor & advancing legal interpretation of provisions contained 
in the PSC is not appropriate and far exceeds the proper scope of an audit 
to verify charges and credits under Section 1.9 of the Accounting 
Procedure to the PSC.  
 
• the contract costs escalated due to various reasons which cannot 
and could not have been foreseen at the time of award of work. The 
delays including delay s caused by pipeline walking, weather conditions, 
delay in providing FIM and late completion of subsea wells or interruption 
of access to CRP was due to conditions beyond the reasonable control of 
the Contractor and AMC. 
  
• the Change clause in the contra ct is provided to address issues 
related to changes post award and the Contractor exercised due diligence 
in finalizing the changes to the contract, which were beyond the control of 
the parties to the contract. 
 
• the Contractor acted as a prudent contract or in taking action to 
ensure earliest Completion of overall project, mitigate delays and minimize 
any increase in cost. This was an operational decision and the Contractor 
was acting in the overall interest of the project and the Parties to the PSC. 
Thus as clearly evident, there is no violation of the terms of PSC in making 
payments to expedite the work. 
 
 
130. In its reply (June 2014), MoPNG stated that Section 3.2 (ix) of Appendix C to the 
Accounting Procedure to PSC refers to penalties, liquidated damages a nd similar 

-60- 
 
 
 
payments made by Contractor for non -fulfillment of contractual obligations of the 
Contractor to third parties. MoPNG also asked Audit to elucidate whether Operator’s 
post contractual discussions and agreements with the vendors on cost over -run would 
not amount to amendment to the original vendor -contracts and whether such 
amendments were not at arms’ length. Further, it mentioned that the conclusion that 
payment was not in consonance with contractual terms needs to be elaborated in the 
light of t he Operator’s agreement with the vendor to modify the original terms and 
conditions of contract with the vendor. 
131. In this regard, Audit observed that Section 3.2 (ix) covers all payments made by 
the Operator to vendors/third parties on account of non -fulfillment of contractual 
obligations. Operator was requested to provide the details of the exact amounts paid 
and payable to AMC on this account, however, specific reply giving exact amount 
paid/payable against the total approximate amount of Euro 200 million was not 
provided. Regarding Operator’s reply that the change clause in the contract is provided 
to address issues related to changes post award and the Contractor exercised due 
diligence in finalizing the changes to the contract, Audit observed that the re asons such 
as delay in providing FIMs, the completed wells and access to CRP by Operator to 
AMC; intrusions by fishing boats, suspension of work due to DGS circular etc. for which 
the Operator had made the excess payment are not covered under the provision s of the 
clause ‘change in contract price’ also.  
 
132. Thus, in Audit opinion these concessions granted by the Operator to the AMC: 
"• were not in line with EPIC contract including provisions relating to 
‘change in contract price’, and 
• were in violation of Section 3.2 (ix) of Appendix C to the Accounting 
Procedure to PSC which states that “amounts paid with respect to non -
fulfilment of contractual obligations are not recoverable and not 
allowable”. 
 
133. Therefore, Audit suggested that  the amount paid/to be paid  to the AMC towards 
the additional resources against the estimated amount of approximately Euro 200 
million should not be allowable for cost recovery. 

-61- 
 
 
 
134. MoPNG in its action taken notes stated that: 
The audit exception was notified to the Contractor. The issu e deals with 
additional costs / resources granted by the Operator to the vendor M/s 
Allseas Marine Contractors to mitigate delays in the execution of EPIC 
contract by way of waiving of LD, granting of additional incentives, 
assistance etc. 
 
The clarification given earlier by MOP&NG on the applicability of Section 
3.2 (ix) is again reiterated. The section disallows payments made by the 
Operator to another party by way of penalty / damages for non -fulfillment 
of contractual obligations on the part of the Oper ator towards the other 
party (e.g. take or pay damages paid to buyers of petroleum for non 
supply of petroleum or cost of unfinished work program paid to GoI for 
non completion of committed work program). Section 3.2 (ix) is not 
applicable in the instant c ase as the non -fulfillment of contractual 
obligation is on the part of the vendor and not on the part of the Operator.    
 
The audit has not found any issues as to the MOP&NG’s suggestion that 
the agreement between the Operator and vendor on enhancement of  
payment itself constituted an amendment of the vendor contract. Hence 
additional payments made by the Operator to the vendor formed part of 
the amended vendor contract. 
The break -up of details of Euro 200 million recommended for 
disallowance are also not provided in the audit report. 
 
In response to the request of MOP&NG to CAG to specifically comment 
whether any fraud or affiliated transactions causing undue benefits to the 
Operator / Contractor was noticed in these transactions, the audit has not 
reported the occurrence of any such event. 
The audit’s final view on this issue, considering the abovementioned facts 
and also the response of the operator on this audit observation, would be 
implemented as per the provisions of PSC. 
 
135. The Ministry in their presentation made before the Committee on 21.03.2016 
have stated as under:  
• Post vendor-contractual agreements between the Operator and the 
vendor validly amended the original vendor-contract  
• Audit report did not point out any legally tenable ground for cost 
disallowance, such as 
• Affiliated transactions to the undue advantage of Contractor  
• Any incidence of fraud 
• Costs not supported by payment evidences 
 Operator’s response is that expenditures were incurred in the 
interest of Petroleum Operations 

-62- 
 
 
 
 
B. Contract for chartering FPSO 
 
 The Operator entered (09 May 2007) into an agreement with M/s. 
Aker Contracting FP AS, Norway (ACFP / vendor) for chartering of a 
Floating Production, Storage and Offloading (FPSO) facility on lease 
rental basis for extraction, production, storage and offloading of oil & gas 
from MA oilfield, from the date of first production of oil (DFPO) for 3650 
days @ US$ 294580 per day. After signing the agreement, while FPSO 
was under construction by the vendor, t he Operator issued a Change 
Order on 27 July 2008 and whereby the following amendments were 
made in the contract as discussed below: 
 
 (a) Extension of Dry Docking  life  
 
 Review of the documents in connection with charter hiring and use 
of the FPSO revea led, as shown in detail below, that ten years was the 
period for which the FPSO would be required and leased.   
The approved Development Plan for MA oilfield indicates eleven years 
project life and production profile. 
Request for Proposal (RFP) issued (Sep tember 2006) for chartering of 
FPSO provided for a residual life for ten years. 
Scope of work of the agreement stipulates that during the charter period, 
i.e. for ten years, no dry-docking shall be required. 
Clause 2.2 of the agreement stipulates that the initial charter period 
would be for 1825 days or 2555 days or 3650 days from the DFPO, i.e. 
as such the maximum period of the agreement would be ten years.  
 Audit observed that within a short period (four mo nths – September 
2007) of time from the date of signing the agreement, the Operator 
requested the vendor to extend the dry docking life of the FPSO from ten 
to fifteen years for a one -time compensation of US$ 17.36 million to the 
vendor".  
 
 
 
 
136. The Operator in its reply to Audit (February / March 2014) and to MoPNG (June 
2014) stated that: 
“Upon arrival of tanker in the yard for conversion, a thorough inspection of 
the hull was undertaken. Based on the condition of hull and assessment of 
the fatigue life, the Operator explored the possibility of extension of ‘no dry 
dock’ period from 10 years to approximately 12 years and after examining 
the matter, the FPSO contractor (vendor) informed that the field life of 
FPSO without dry docking could be extended from 10 years to 15 years by 

-63- 
 
 
 
undertaking measures such as increased renewal program, increased 
redundancy and increased scope of coating & steel. 
 
• The extension of field life without dry -docking was proposed from 
10 years to 15 years considering that the renewal surveys by classification 
society are undertaken every 5 years. Normally, inspection of the hull is 
required to be carried out in a dry dock. However, the requirement of dry -
docking can be exempted based on the condition of FPSO hull and upon 
its meeting the conditions imposed by the classification society. Thus, for 
extension of field life without dry -docking beyond 10 years, the FPSO was 
to be made fit for the second renewal due in 10th year and thereafter 
FPSO could remain in the field for another 5 years. 
 
• Stipulating dry docking life of 15 years could, however, result in 
poorer response to the RFP as very limited number of hulls would be in a 
position to meet this criterion. 
 
• The works required to meet the said extension of field life without 
dry docking would have entailed cost even if it was envisaged at the RFP 
stage and Contractor had to pay for the same.  In any case, Contractor 
has paid the actual cost for extending the dry dock life and also not paid 
any mark-up on the cost. 
 
• RIL considers  that the pre -investment in the extension of dry 
docking life was a commercially sound as well as the most optimal 
decision since it not only avoided the cost of increased works that would 
have been required at the time of second renewal viz. voyage costs,  dry 
dock charges, safe shutdown and restart expenses in the tenth year but 
also avoided prolonged field shut down which would have carried with it 
the risk of losing some wells in fag end of field”. 
 
137. The Operator further stated during the Exit Conference (July 2014) that the 
decision was taken to avoid:  
• Interruption in production and closure of field for at least 8 weeks 
during the Dry Dock period (on account of disconnections, Demob, Dry 
Dock, Mob, Reconnections) at the end of 10 years. 
• Additional co st due to increased scope of work, inflation, 
mob/demob for  dry docking. 
 
• Potential loss in reserves due to uncertainty about revival of wells 
after  closure of the field for Dry Docking at the tail end of field life. 
 
• Loss in value due to deferment of production.  
 

-64- 
 
 
 
 Audit did not agree with the Operator’s reply in view of the 
following: 
 
• As per the agreement, the maximum initial charter period of FPSO 
is 3 650 days and the Operator has yet to renew the agreement after  
 September 2018.  As such, the extension of dry -docking life from 
10 to 15  years has no relevance until the agreement gets extended 
with the  vendor beyond ten years. In fact, the extension of dry -
docking may not  result in any expected benefit till the contract gets 
extension of 15 years. 
 
• The Operator has assumed that they would get a poorer response 
to the  RFP had they indicated a dry -docking life of 15 years. It is 
interesting to  note that, in the present case, out of eight bidders 
who finally responded  to the RFP in October/ November 2006, the 
Operator had evaluated only  one party viz. ACFP, as technically 
qualified. Hence, poor response was not considered as constraint for 
decision making by the Operator.   
 
• The Charter Period as per the agreement of the FPSO is upto a 
 maximum duration of ten years from the DFPO. Therefore, the pre -
 investment argument or the perceived benefit for extension of dry -
 docking life has no meaning  since the charter period remains only 
upto  September 2018. 
 
• In fact, the Operator cannot get any of the expected benefits from 
 avoiding various types of potential costs and losses (estimated by 
the  Operator now in July 2014 as: costs due to dry dock of US$ 54.4 
million  and production loss of US$ 15.8 million etc. leading to NPV 
calculation of  US$ 27.2 million) until and unless the contract gets 
extension for 15  years. Further, the basis for such estimates was also 
not clear.  
 
138. In view of above, Audit opines that extension of dry -docking period from 10 to 15 
years, while keeping the FPSO charter period to 10 years, led to higher cost recovery 
and adversely affected GoI’s share of PP. 
139. Audit, therefore, recommended that the cost recovery of US$ 17.36 m illion may 
be disallowed. 
140. MoPNG in its Action Taken Notes stated that: 
"The audit exception is that the Contractor paid an additional amount of 
US $ 17.36 million to M/s Aker for increasing the dry docking life of FPSO 
from 10 years to 15 years. Audit has recommended disallowing the entire 

-65- 
 
 
 
cost, as the charter hire was procured based on the technically accepted 
single bid and that the charter hire contract itself was for 10 years.  
The Operator had replied (as quoted by CAG): “RIL considers that the pre-
investment in the extension of dry docking life was a commercially sound 
as well as the most optimal decision since it not only avoided the cost of 
increased works that would have been required at the time of second 
renewal viz. voyage costs, dry dock charges , safe shutdown and restart 
expenses in the tenth year but also avoided prolonged field shut down 
which would have carried with it the risk of losing some wells in fag end of 
field. 
In response to the request of MOP&NG to CAG to comment whether any 
fraud o r affiliated transactions causing undue benefits to the Operator / 
Contractor was noticed in these transactions, the audit has not reported 
the occurrence of any such event.  
However, the audit’s final view on this issue, considering the 
abovementioned facts and also the response of the operator on this audit 
observation, would be implemented as per the provisions of PSC". 
 
141. The Ministry in their presentation made before the Committee on 21.03.2016 
have stated as under:  
• Post vendor-contractual agreements between the Operator and the 
vendor validly amended the original vendor-contract  
• Audit report did not point out any legally tenable ground for cost 
disallowance, such as 
• Affiliated transactions to the undue advantage of Contractor  
• Any incidence of fraud 
• Costs not supported by payment evidences 
 Operator’s response is that expenditures were incurred in the 
interest of Petroleum Operations 
 
C. Increased cost for expediting deliveries and early mobilization of 
 commissioning team and extension of date of first production of oil and 
 gas  
 
142. At the time of issue of RFP for FPSO, one of the eligibility conditions insisted 
upon by the Operator was that the DFPO be on or before 15 February 2008. This 
condition was, howe ver, changed and the final agreement stipulated  that the DFPO 
could be between 7 April 2008 and 27 April 2008.  
143. By October 2007 itself, the Operator was aware that the vendor would be unable 
to comply with the DFPO of April 2008 and that the DFPO may be p otentially delayed 

-66- 
 
 
 
upto March 2009.  Subsequently, through a change order, the agreement was amended 
and the DFPO was further extended till 30 September 2008.  
144. The vendor also communicated to the Operator that the work could be expedited 
and delivery dates  expedited by putting in place measures which would have cost 
consequences. Therefore, the vendor requested Operator to contribute towards these 
cost consequences. The Operator, as per changed order, agreed (July 2008) to 
compensate the vendor:  
• By US$ 15 million for mobilizing its commissioning team along with 
members of operations and maintenance contractor (vendor) and 
representatives of major vendors four months prior to Sailaway  date of 
the FPSO; and 
• By a one-time compensation of US$ 30 million or 50 per cent of the 
increased cost, whichever is lower, on account of expediting deliveries of 
topside modules, increasing productivity at builder’s conversion yard and 
timely installation of buoy and moorings. 
 
145. Audit observed that: 
• At the time of the change order in July 2008, the Operator was well 
aware that the MC had approved the FDP in April 2008 with DFPO on or 
before June 2009. In fact, the Operator, while submitting the MA FDP had 
itself proposed that “the commissioning of facilities is expected  by Q1 
2009 in order to be ready for production”. Therefore, there was no 
necessity for expediting deliveries. 
 
• Clause 3.4 of the Agreement stipulates that the compensation 
payable to vendor covers and includes all costs and expenses incurred by 
vendor t o provide or perform all of its obligations under the Contract 
including without limitation, the work and all procurement, design, 
modifying, refurbishing, repairing and FPSO, commissioning of the FPSO, 
transporting and mobilizing the FPSO to the designate d location, etc. 
contemplated in the contract and there shall not be any other payments to 
be made by the Operator for vendor’s provision or performance of the 
obligations including the work contemplated by the Contract. 
 
• The vendor was liable to get lea se rental for FPSO from DFPO 
only. Therefore, it was in the interest of the vendor also to achieve DFPO 
at the earliest. 
 
• There is no provision in the agreement which entitles the vendor to 
any compensation or incentive for expediting deliveries. 
 

-67- 
 
 
 
• Despite the vendor being unable to meet its contractual obligations, 
the Operator re -scheduled the DFPO between 7 April 2008 and 27 April 
2008 to between 10 September 2008 and 30 September 2008, without 
imposing any LD. 
 
Therefore, the compensation of US$ 45 million paid to the vendor for early 
mobilization of the vendor’s commissioning team and expediting deliveries 
of top side modules etc. was not justified.  
 
146. The Operator in its reply to Audit (February / March 2014) and to MoPNG (June 
2014) stated that: 
• “Target dates being natural pressure points as a conscientious 
Contractor can hardly be faulted for making all efforts to achieve first 
production of oil ahead of the target given by MC & attempting to achieve 
the overarching aim of the PSC to develop petro leum resources with the 
utmost expedition. 
 
• As a complex project the execution of MA field development, the 
execution of all the contracts was interlinked and involved significant 
interfaces involving technical compatibility of disparate individual desig ns 
at diverse manufacturing locations and scheduling of installation & logistic 
activities in synchronization with deliverables/ deliveries under each of 
several separate contracts, etc.  Delay in execution of one aspect in a 
contract could have had a casc ading impact on the schedule and 
eventually resulted in far greater additional expenditure under other 
contracts.   
 
• Efforts for early completion were necessary for avoiding infructuous 
expenditure on account of idling of marine spread for installation of subsea 
facilities and remobilization of resources. Had RIL not entered in dialogue 
with FPSO contractor (vendor) and persisted with enforcing the available 
contractual remedy in terms of levy of the liquidated damages, the delays 
arising for execution of  FPSO contract would not only have resulted in 
delayed production from the field but may also have resulted in claims 
from the other contractors (vendor).  
 
• In the instant case, since the delays could have had serious impact 
on the whole project. RIL ent ered into negotiations with the Contractor 
(vendor) to work out the way forward on the basis of reasonable cost 
sharing and risk reduction. In order to ensure that FPSO contractor 
(vendor) completes the work expeditiously, date of first projection of oil 
was extended while the FPSO contractor (vendor) was compelled to share 
the expediting cost equally.   
 

-68- 
 
 
 
• In the interest of the project and based on closer understanding of 
large number of interfaces involved in the complex subsea development, 
RIL considere d that ‘hand -on’ involvement of O&M team and the 
representatives of main packages/ equipment during installation, testing & 
stage-wise pre-commissioning would greatly benefit the smooth start -up & 
commissioning of FPSO. Finally, it must be emphasized that under the 
PSC, RIL has the right to make certain operational, technical and 
commercial decisions based on the its best judgment and it is not 
appropriate to second-guess these judgments in hindsight.   
 
• As the payments have been made on incurred cost basis, there is 
no additional expenditure involved. Additionally, there is no violation of the 
terms of PSC in making payments to expedite the work”. 
 
147. Audit reasoned: 
 • The Operator enforced target dates, which could not be adhered to 
practically and had to be extended.  
 
• The vendor in its bid had informed that they would provide their 
operation and maintenance commissioning team for carrying out the 
operations preparations as well as assistance for commissioning activities 
four to eight weeks prior to t he planned sail away of the FPSO from the 
yard. However, the Operator, after signing of the agreement, insisted that 
the O&M commissioning team and representatives of main packages / 
equipment should be available four months prior to the Sailaway date. 
Had the Operator considered the issue of time -period of four months at 
the time of finalising of the agreement then the expenditure of US$ 15 
million could have been avoided.  
 
• The delays were due to the vendor’s constraints with sub -vendors 
who were ready to supply modules / equipment with increased 
compensation / incentives, constraints of work force capacity at the 
Shipyard and with other sub -vendors for not providing vessels for 
installation activities. 
 
• The technical bid of the vendor was accepted by the Operator since 
the vendor accepted the Operator deployment schedule of DFPO, i.e. 15 
February 2008. Therefore, it was the responsibility of the vendor to adhere 
to the time schedule informed to the Operator without any additional costs 
as per the terms  of the agreement.  In fact, the Operator had reiterated 
(September 2007) to the vendor that it was “AFP’s responsibility to 
maintain the schedule”. 
  
• There is no rationale in advancing the DFPO approved by the MC, 
by way of incurring US$ 30 million on a ccount of compensation / 
incentives to sub-vendors for earlier completion of work. 

-69- 
 
 
 
• PSC stipulates that petroleum resources be developed with the 
utmost expedition. However, no PSC provision imply that the Operator 
compensate vendors by incentives in orde r to complete their contractual 
obligations / work. 
 
148. Audit, therefore, recommended that the cost recovery of US$ 45 million incurred 
by the Operator on account of compensation / incentives to sub -vendors may be 
disallowed.  
 
149. MoPNG in its action taken notes  stated that CAG has recommended 
disallowance of US $ 45 million incurred by the Operator towards incentives / 
compensation paid to sub -vendors for expediting delivery of materials / services so as 
to enable advancing of petroleum production. Details of US  $ 45 million recommended 
for disallowance are not reported in the audit report. The final audit exception has been 
notified to the Contractor and the reply is awaited. CAG has not reported any fraud or 
affiliated transactions causing undue benefits to the  Operator / Contractor noticed in 
these transactions. As cost recovery is being done in respect of the actual cost incurred 
at arms’ length by the Contractor for the petroleum operations and no undue advantage 
to the Contractor has been established. Howeve r, the audit’s final view on this issue, 
considering the abovementioned facts and also the response of the operator on this 
audit observation, would be implemented as per the provisions of PSC. 
150. The Ministry in their presentation made before the Committee o n 21.03.2016 
have stated as under: 
  
• Post vendor-contractual agreements between the Operator and the 
vendor validly amended the original vendor-contract  
• Audit report did not point out any legally tenable ground for cost 
disallowance, such as 
• Affiliated transactions to the undue advantage of Contractor  
• Any incidence of fraud 
• Costs not supported by payment evidences 
Operator’s response is that expenditures were incurred in the 
interest of Petroleum Operations 
 
 

-70- 
 
 
 
D. Fabrication and installation of living quarters 
151. As per Clause 6 (e) - Other facilities of the Exhibit -B, Part -I of the agreement 
relating to functional requirements in FPSO stipulates that the general facilities / 
requirement for operations include air conditioned living quarters with c onfiguration of 
one bed, two beds and four beds cabins to accommodate 104 people.  The contract 
price was based on creation of additional living quarters of 40 beds and re -use on an 
“as is” basis of 64 existing living quarters on the FPSO with minimum refurbishment. 
 
152. The vendor, however, on the request of the Operator, undertook extensive 
refurbishment and upgradation of the 64 existing living quarters.  Such refurbishment 
also necessitated dismantling of the existing HVAC installation with modification and  re-
design.  These modifications resulted in change orders to the contract leading to 
payment by the Operator of an additional compensation of US$ 15 million in two 
installments of US$ 8.20 million and US$ 6.80 million in November / December 2008. 
 
153.  The Operator replied that  (February / March 2014) the extensive refurbishment 
on the grounds that “the personnel working offshore are subjected to hard life and harsh 
working conditions. The conditions on a floating offshore structure, which is subjected to 
continuous roll, pitch and heave, are more severe. Provision of upgraded and 
extensively refurbished living quarters not only mitigates some of the hardships of 
personnel working on FPSO but also improves productivity, safety and alertness (e.g. 
better rest during off duty hours, improved morale, personnel retention, etc.). HVAC for 
living quarters on offshore vessels is not a luxury but an essential requirement for the 
operating personnel to work efficiently. The operational decision to upgrade and 
refurbish the living quarters for such personnel was taken in the overall interest of the 
project”.  
154. The Operator in its reply to MoPNG (June 2014) further stated that “the provision 
and consideration of purchase option of FPSO was consistent with the approved 
Development Plan. Although purchase option of FPSO has not been exercised so far, 

-71- 
 
 
 
the Operator cannot be penalized for taking decisions in line with the approved 
Development Plan and in the best interest of the field development”. 
155. Audit, noted that the exi sting design with additional 40 quarters had met the 
requirements of the FPSO Charter Contract.  Besides, the harsh working conditions 
were known to the Operator at the time of procuring the FPSO and the requirements 
ought to have been finalised at that time.   
156. As per the approved development plan for MA field the development budget 
included the purchase cost of FPSO as US$ 733 million, but instead, the Operator 
chartered the FPSO. Audit noted that the Operator was guided (vide its note dated 
3/09/2007) in the decision of extensive refurbishment of the existing quarters by the 
intention to exercise its option to purchase the FPSO at any time during the charter 
period. The Operator has not exercised the purchase option till June 2014, i.e. after 
lapse of more than four years of production. 
157. Audit observed that refurbishment of the existing living quarters and fabrication 
and installation of additional living quarters led to avoidable higher cost recovery and 
therefore, Audit recommends that the cost recovery of  US$ 15 million may be 
disallowed. 
 
158. MoPNG in its Action Taken Notes stated that  CAG has recommended 
disallowance of US $ 15 million incurred by the Operator towards refurbishment of 
existing living quarters and installation of additional living quarters in the FPSO, on the 
ground of avoidable cost. It could be seen that the Contractor  has actually incurred the 
expenditure on petroleum operations. However CAG differs with the Operator on the 
requirement of the expenditure incurred. CAG has not reported whether any fraud or 
affiliated transactions causing undue benefits to the Operator /  Contractor was noticed 
in these transactions. However, the audit’s final view on this issue, considering the 
abovementioned facts and also the response of the operator on this audit observation, 
would be implemented as per the provisions of PSC. 
159. The Minis try in their presentation made before the Committee on 21.03.2016 
have stated as under:  

-72- 
 
 
 
• Post vendor-contractual agreements between the Operator and the 
vendor validly amended the original vendor-contract  
• Audit report did not point out any legally tenable  ground for cost 
disallowance, such as 
• Affiliated transactions to the undue advantage of Contractor  
• Any incidence of fraud 
• Costs not supported by payment evidences 
 Operator’s response is that expenditures were incurred in the 
interest of Petroleum Operations 
 
IV. IRREGULAR PAYMENTS  
A. Construction of OT INR 22.7 million to M/s Larsen & Toubro (L&T) Ltd  
 
160. The contract for construction of OT was awarded on cost -plus basis to L&T Ltd 
(vendor) on 18 October 2006. As per the original contractual provisions, no 
compensation is payable to the vendor on account of the Plant and Equipment (P&E) 
provided by the Operator either owned or hired in the case of vendor being unable to 
mobilize the P&E. 
161. However, on 12 February 2008 the said clause was amended to exclude 450MT 
/ 600MT cranes from its ambit. Resultantly, despite the fact that these cranes were hired 
by the Operator and the vendor had not incurred any expenditure on hiring of these 
cranes, the Operator had to pay an amount of INR 22.7 million as compensation  
charges to the vendor, which resulted in excess booking and should not form part of 
cost recovery. Further, the approval of the OC in respect of the said amendment to the 
contract, which caused additional burden on the Operator and the cost recovery, was 
not taken.  
162. The Operator in its reply, inter alia, contended (January 2014) that: 
" During the hiring process, the suppliers of the said cranes were 
reluctant to accept the contract through L&T Ltd. due to peak demand of 
such cranes and possible delays in payments if routed through L&T Ltd. 
• Due to shortage of such cranes in the market and reluctance from 
the crane suppliers to supply through L&T Ltd., the Operator had to hire 
the cranes directly. 
• L&T Ltd. informed the Operator that top up compensation w as 
payable by the Operator like other P&M equipments supplied by L&T Ltd.  
• As these cranes require a lot of handling by L&T Ltd., the Operator 
was justified in the payment of compensation to the vendor". 

-73- 
 
 
 
 
163. The Operator in its reply to MoPNG (June 2014) ag ain contended that “as 
handling of these cranes is no different from other P&M Equipment handled by L&T for 
the project, the top -up compensation shall be payable similar to other P&M equipment. 
Additionally there is no violation of the terms of PSC in making payments”. 
164. Audit observed that: 
"• The scarcity of cranes in the market or reluctance of suppliers to 
deal with L&T cannot be a justification for amending the contract to 
exclude cranes and pay additional amount to L&T, when the principle for 
the original clause was that no compensation is payable to the vendor for 
Plant and Equipment provided by the Operator in the case of vendor being 
unable to mobilize it, i.e. regardless of the reasons for his inability to 
mobilize the P&E. 
 
• In terms of Clause 2.1 of the Exhibit ‘C’ (Price Schedule) of the 
Contract the vendor is already being paid for all the manpower utilized (i.e. 
the cost of the manpower plus 25 per cent compensation) by it in the 
project. Therefore, there was no justification in payment of any a dditional 
compensation in respect of P&E hired by the Operator on the ground that 
the cranes require lot of support while handling the operations like 
assembly/disassembly and routine maintenance.  
 
• Further, the Objectives in Appendix F (to the PSC) – Procedure for 
Acquisition of Goods and Services, inter alia, provides that “The 
Objectives of these procedures are to (a) ensure the goods and services 
acquired by the Operator for the carrying out of the Petroleum Operations 
are acquired at the optimum cost  ……..”. Any contractual clause which 
results in any additional benefit to a vendor violates the objective of 
‘optimum cost’ laid down in the Appendix ‘F’ of the PSC". 
 
165. Audit felt that the cost recovery of the additional payment of INR 22.70 million 
made to the vendor as compensation in respect of 450 MT /600 MT cranes hired by the 
Operator may be disallowed. 
 
166. MoPNG in its Action Taken Notes stated that  "CAG has recommended 
disallowance of Rs 22.70 million paid to M/s Larsen & Toubro in a cost plus contract.  
From the comments of Audit, it is seen that the expenditure was actually incurred by the 
Operator under a cost plus contract. CAG has not responded to the MOP&NG query to 
suggest the provision of PSC under which such cost can be disallowed when the 

-74- 
 
 
 
Contractor had actually paid the amount to the vendor.  The final audit exception has 
been notified to the Contractor.  CAG has not reported whether any fraud or affiliated 
transactions causing undue benefits to the Operator / Contractor was noticed in these 
transactions. However, the audit’s final view on this issue, considering the 
abovementioned facts and also the response of the operator on this audit observation, 
would be implemented as per the provisions of PSC". 
167. The Ministry in their presentation made before  the Committee on 21.03.2016 
have stated as under:  
• Post vendor-contractual agreements between the Operator and the 
vendor validly amended the original vendor-contract  
• Audit report did not point out any legally tenable ground for cost 
disallowance, such as 
• Affiliated transactions to the undue advantage of Contractor  
• Any incidence of fraud 
• Costs not supported by payment evidences 
Operator’s response is that expenditures were incurred in the interest of 
Petroleum Operations". 
 
B. Payment of INR 1110.90 million as compensation on Free Issue Material  
 
168. The Operator had awarded four contracts relating to construction of OT, 
construction of Jetty and Infrastructure facilities near the OT on cost -plus basis to L&T 
Ltd and M/s AFCONS Infrastructure Ltd (AI Ltd). 
169. In general, these cost -plus contracts provided for ‘payment of compensation at a 
fixed rate in addition to the cost incurred by the vendor for purchase or hire of material, 
supplies, manpower, etc. But, the contracts also contained provision of FIMs which 
were to be arranged by the Operator at its own cost. Various clauses of the contract, 
therefore, excluded FIMs such as Plant and Equipment hired by the Operator, free issue 
instrumentation bulks / electrical bulks / pipe fitting bulks etc., other than civi l bulks such 
as cement, steel, reinforcing bars etc. (Clause 3L of the Exhibit ‘C’ of Price Schedule) 
and High Speed Diesel (HSD)  (Sub -clause 2.4 of the Exhibit ‘C’ of Price Schedule) 
supplied by the Operator, from the purview of payment of compensation to the vendor.  
 

-75- 
 
 
 
170. Audit, however, observed that contrary to the above concept of payment of 
compensation to the vendor only on the ‘cost’ incurred by it, the above -mentioned 
contracts also provided for payment of compensation to the vendor as a percentage of  
the value of FIMs of some categories supplied by the Operator such as cement, steel, 
(referred to as ‘category -1 items’ in the contract) sand, aggregate, GI Pipes etc. 
(referred to as ‘other than  category -1 items’ in the contract) The Operator incurred a n 
expenditure of INR 1110.90 million on payment of compensation for the FIMs supplied 
by the Operator to the vendors. 
 
171. Audit further observed that the clause stipulating ‘payment of compensation at a 
fixed rate in addition to the cost incurred by the Contr actor (vendor)’ also covered all the 
labour engaged (directly or through sub-vendor).  
172. The Operator, however, contended (January 2014) that category -1 items and 
other than category-1 items were not capital items and these items related to day to day 
construction materials which require project execution skills, planning and co -ordination 
to meet construction schedule. It was, further, contended that if procurement of these 
items were kept in the Contractors (vendor) scope directly then this would have resul ted 
in double taxation with respect to VAT and Service Tax and increased compensation on 
this account. It was also clarified that as HSD was directly handled and supplied by the 
Operator to the Contractor (vendor) and as there were no additional efforts pu t in by the 
Contractor (vendor) on this, no compensation was paid to them.  
173. The Operator in its reply to MoPNG (June 2014) reiterated that “such material is 
classified as ‘Project capital material’ which requires detailed engineering skills for 
design, eng ineering & procurement which involves significant role of Engineering 
Consultant as well for issue Material requisition, bid evaluation and technical 
clarifications and recommendation before carrying out procurement”. 
174. The Operator further contended that “R eputed construction contractors for 
Process Plants generally take up turnkey contracts or entire construction including 
supply of materials. Accordingly mark -up is charged on the total construction cost 
including materials” and  that “In order to incentivi ze the contractors to bid for supply of 

-76- 
 
 
 
labour & provision of construction equipment contract, Operator had to agree for a 
reasonable mark-up on FIMs”. 
175. Audit reasoned that: 
"In respect of all FIMs, the work was to be done or material was to be 
arranged by the Operator at its own cost.  Consequently, the vendor was 
not incurring any expenditure on such items.  The vendor was expected to 
utilize those materials and do some value addition to it by utilizing / 
engaging its manpower.  Compensation for costs incu rred on account of 
such manpower engaged by the vendor was already provided for in the 
contracts (Sub-clause 2.1 of the Exhibit ‘C’ of the Price Schedule).   Thus, 
the vendor was, as such, being compensated for the cost incurred by it on 
all the manpower u tilized in the project. Therefore, there was no 
justification of payment of any additional mark -up on the ground that such 
items involve “significant role of Engineering Consultant”. Moreover, the 
Objectives in Appendix F (to the PSC) – Procedure for Acqui sition of 
Goods and Services, inter alia, provides that “The Objectives of these 
procedures are to (a) ensure the goods and services acquired by the 
Operator for the carrying out of the Petroleum Operations are acquired at 
the optimum cost ……..”. Contractu al clauses which are made to 
incentivise the vendor on the pretext that the vendors generally take up 
entire construction including supply of materials and that there was a need 
to incentivise such vendors to bid for supply of labour & provision of 
construction equipment contract and thus result in additional benefits to 
the vendor, deviate from the objective of ‘optimum cost’ laid down in the 
Appendix ‘F’ of the PSC".  
 
176. Audit, therefore, suggested that payment of markup compensation in respect of 
FIMs of c ategory-1 and other than category -1, on the ground that these materials 
required additional efforts for its management etc. is not tenable and hence, the cost 
recovery of amount of INR 1110.90 million may be disallowed.  
177. MoPNG in its Action Taken Notes sta ted that "the issue deals with the 
procurement philosophy of the Contractor not being in line with the views of audit 
officers. It is seen from the audit report that that Rs 1110.9 million was actually incurred 
by the Contractor and no affiliated transacti on or fraud causing undue benefit to the 
Operator / Contractor was reported. In such circumstances, no legally tenable ground 
could be seen to disallow the costs. However, the audit’s final view on this issue, 
considering the abovementioned facts and also the response of the operator on this 
audit observation, would be implemented as per the provisions of PSC". 

-77- 
 
 
 
178. The Ministry in their presentation made before the Committee on 21.03.2016 
have stated as under:  
• Post vendor-contractual agreements between the Ope rator and the 
vendor validly amended the original vendor-contract  
• Audit report did not point out any legally tenable ground for cost 
disallowance, such as 
• Affiliated transactions to the undue advantage of Contractor  
• Any incidence of fraud 
• Costs not supported by payment evidences 
 
Operator’s response is that expenditures were incurred in the interest of 
Petroleum Operations 
 
C. Classification of Start -up and Production Bonuses as part of recoverable 
costs 
179. During the period 2008 -09 to 2009 -10, the Operator charged US$ 15.48 million 
as Long Term Bonus (US$ 1.22 million), Productivity Linked Incentive (US$ 1.78 
million), Start -Up Bonus (US$ 9.74 million) and Production Bonus (US$ 2.74 million), 
paid to its employees in proportion to the number of hour s, the employees were 
engaged in the work relating to KG-DWN-98/3 Block. 
 
180. The Operator has been paying Long Term Bonus (LTB) as a retention bonus and 
Performance Link Incentive (PLI) to its E&P employees. In addition, the Start -Up and 
Production Bonuses were given to E&P employees on the occasion of starting first gas 
production.   
181. As per Audit,  the PSC allows recovery of eligible costs related to the 
Contractor's locally recruited employees who are directly engaged in the conduct of 
Petroleum Operations under the Contract in India and Assigned Personnel. Such costs 
include salaries, wages, and other costs which are as per the personnel policy and are 
of a regular nature. In fact payment of ‘bonus’ has been expressly provided in the PSC 
only under Section 3.1.2 (A) (b) Accounting Procedure Appendix - C for those Assigned 
Personnel who are directly and necessarily engaged in the conduct of the Petroleum 
Operations. Since the Start -Up and Production Bonus are one -time and of an ad hoc 

-78- 
 
 
 
nature, in Audit opinion,  these bonuses should not be paid from the revenue earned 
from the sale of gas.  
 
182. In reply, the Operator stated (January 2014) that: 
“The provisions of the PSC Section 3.1.2 of Accounting Procedure 
Appendix - C, make it very clear that the cost of employee  benefits, 
including bonuses are eligible for cost recovery. The payment of special 
incentives/bonuses for project completion or business start -up is a widely 
recognized and accepted human resources (HR) policy.  Whereas the 
startup bonus was paid to the e mployees relating to completion of the 
activities and operationalising the project as a performance bonus. The 
PSC nowhere stipulates such restrictions and the above opinion of the 
audit is not in line with the provisions envisaged in Section 3.1.2 of the 
PSC.  The start -up and production bonus was paid to employees as a 
performance bonus for completion of activities directly concerned with the 
project.  In addition to improving employees morale and productivity, the 
payment of such incentives to employees is an employees retention tool in 
minimising the turnover and retaining the trained resources for completion 
and operationalising the project without resource constraint.  It is pertinent 
to mention here that the New Business Start -up Award was paid linkin g to 
the performance rating of the employees. ” 
 
183. The Operator in its reply to MoPNG (June 2014) stated that “periodic review of 
employee benefits, perks, compensation levels, performance incentives and productivity 
bonuses are part of the HR best practices  in enhancing the performance level of the 
employees.  Hence, the payment of start -up and production bonus is very much 
covered under employee benefits allowable under Section 3.1.2”. 
184. Audit, however, did not agree with the Operator for the following reasons:  
"• Audit has not objected to bonuses, per se, and has not raised any 
objection on the payment of Long -Term Bonus and Performance Link 
Incentive being paid to employees regularly. 
• The Operator has been paying salaries and other benefits like Long 
Term Bonus as a retention bonus and Performance Link Incentive to its 
E&P employees for improving the morale and productivity and retaining 
the experienced employees.  Hence, to claim that talented and 
experienced human resources could be retained by paying St art-Up and 
Production Bonuses does not appear tenable. 
• The observation is limited to the provisions of the PSC.  The 
employees of E&P division of the Operator are working as per the agreed 

-79- 
 
 
 
terms and conditions of the Company, as per its HR policy, and th e 
compensation is a clearly defined package, and are incurred by the 
Operator in the conduct of Petroleum Operations pursuant to the PSC. 
The completion of activities was also not linked to payment of any such 
Start-Up and Production Bonus".  
 
185. According to Audit, booking of payment of US$ 12.48 million on Start -Up and 
Production bonuses to the revenue earned from KG -DWN-98/3 Block is not covered 
under Section 3.1.2 of Accounting Procedure Appendix - C of PSC and, therefore, 
should be disallowed from cost recovery. 
186. MoPNG in its Action Taken Notes stated that "CAG has recommended 
disallowance of US $ 12.48 million incurred on Start -Up and Production Bonus paid to 
employees engaged in the block on the ground that the bonuses were one -time 
payment of an ad hoc n ature. Being expenditure actually incurred in petroleum 
operations, cost disallowance may be  reconsidered. However, the audit’s final view on 
this issue, considering the abovementioned facts and also the response of the operator 
on this audit observation, would be implemented as per the provisions of PSC". 
187. The Ministry in their presentation made before the Committee on 21.03.2016 
have stated as under:  
• Post vendor-contractual agreements between the Operator and the 
vendor validly amended the original vendor-contract  
• Audit report did not point out any legally tenable ground for cost 
disallowance, such as 
• Affiliated transactions to the undue advantage of Contractor  
• Any incidence of fraud 
• Costs not supported by payment evidences 
Operator’s response is that expenditures were incurred in the interest of 
Petroleum Operations". 
   
V. AWARD OF CONTRACT 
A. Piece-meal hiring of drilling rig “Deepwater Frontier” from M/s. Transocean 
–  US$ 88.77 million.  
 
188. The Operator awarded charter hire of an offshore deep water drilling rig to M/s. 
Transocean Offshore International Ventures Limited (Transocean / vendor) in April 2005 
(1st Contract) for the rig “Deepwater Frontier”, with the rig deployment program starting 

-80- 
 
 
 
from June 2006 for a 24 months period at an operating day rate of US$ 0.32 million per 
24 hours. 
189. In December 2005, seven months after awarding 1st Contract, the Operator 
observed that availability of Deepwater Drilling Rigs had become scarce and in order to 
ensure continued availability of rigs beyond 2007, the O perator initiated the tendering 
process for award of Charter Hiring of offshore deep water drilling rig. 
190. The Operator, awarded (February 2006) the 2nd Contract again to Transocean 
for the same rig “Deepwater Frontier” at an operating day rate of US$ 0.48 m illion per 
day, for a 36 months firm period commencing from August 2008, i.e. after the expiry of 
the period for charter-hire under 1st Contract.  
191. The rig “Deepwater Frontier” completed its contract under the 1st Contract on 31 
July 2008 and started the wo rk under the new 2nd Contract on the same day w.e.f 
16:30 hrs. 
192. The Operator contended (January 2014) that “RIL's commercial decision to enter 
into a 2 -year contract in April 2005 following a competitive tender process and then to 
subsequently enter into a 3-year contract in February 2006 following a competitive 
tender process started in December 2005 was based on the information available to it at 
the time of each contract. RIL was acting in good faith in the best interests of the project 
and the parties to  the PSC”. It further contended that “An increasing trend in rates in 
2004 is not relevant; there was no indication that this would continue over a period of 
five years. There is, therefore, no basis for CAG's assumption that locking in prices for 
five yea rs would necessarily have achieved a lower overall spend” . The Operator 
reiterated its contention in its further reply (April 2014) and also stated that Audit 
assumes that the Operator would have been able to fix a five year contract at the same 
rates as its two year contract, which may not have been the case. The bidder(s) would 
have definitely bid a much higher day-rate for a five year tender.    
193. Audit stated that:  
• The Operator was to assess the future requirement for drilling of 
wells keeping in view the FDP approved (November 2004) for D1 -D3 
fields and plan the deployment of drilling rig(s) accordingly; 

-81- 
 
 
 
 
• The Operator was already aware of increasing trend of rates based 
on the RFQ issued in the year 2004 and poor responses received from 
vendors, for provisioning of rigs; 
 
• The Operator has entered into long -term contracts in case of other 
rigs.  In April 2008 the contract for Rig Dhirubhai Deepwater KG2 
(DDKG2) was awarded to Deepwater Pacific Inc. for 5 years at a firm 
operating day-rate of US$ 0.51  million, which is evidence of the fact that 
rigs are hired at firm rates for long term contracts. 
 
194. The Operator in its reply to MoPNG (June 2014) contended that approval for a 
critical cog i.e. laying of pipelines to evacuate & market gas was delayed by t he MoPNG 
by 17 months which unfortunately delayed the project. Considering the aforesaid 
uncertainty in execution of IDP, there is no rationale for Contactor to commit Drilling rigs 
on the basis of IDP. 
195. According to Audit the contentions of the operator ha ve to be view in light of the 
following: 
• The Operator in the previous Audit Report (page 70 of C&AG’s 
Audit Report No. 19 of 2011 -12) had admitted that ‘post IDP 
approval, the Operator had initiated work on extensive studies 
based on additional data gene rated’ and ‘during Q4 2004 and Q4 
2005, the studies brought out that the reserve base was much 
higher’. The Operator also contended in the previous Audit Report 
that “Geological and reservoir understanding keeps improving as 
additional well data, reservoir  data and production data becomes 
available; however, investment decisions are still taken on the basis 
of the then understanding”.  
 
• Thus, the contention of the Operator that there was uncertainty in 
the execution of IDP is not tenable as the reported delay in timely 
approval and receipt of statutory clearances relevant to the Project 
would impact only the time schedule of the IDP and n ot the 
“certainty of the execution of IDP”.  
 
• Further, from the chronology of events (COE) furnished by the 
Operator alongwith its reply dated 31 January 2014 to the Audit 
Observation, it is evident that the process of hiring of deep water 
rigs was initi ated after the submission of the IDP for 34 wells and 
the 1st Contract was finalised in April 2005. Immediately, after 7 
months of finalization of the 1st Contract (i.e. in December 2005), 
the Operator, reportedly, realised the scarcity of the deep-water rigs 

-82- 
 
 
 
and decided to enter into another contract and finalised the 2nd 
Contract (February 2006). Till the time of entering into the 2nd 
Contract the number of wells to be drilled remained the same (34) 
as per IDP (AIDP for 50 wells to be drilled, was submitt ed only in 
October 2006). In other words, the drilling prospects were the same 
during both the 1st Contract and the 2nd Contract.  Thus, the 
contention of the Operator that adequate drilling prospects were not 
there during the 1st Contract for a long term contract is not tenable. 
 
196. Audit, therefore, concluded that the fact remains that despite having adequate 
drilling prospect and keeping in view the poor response received from the vendors for 
provisioning of the rigs (which was an indication of the scarcity  of the deep-water drilling 
rigs and would have had an adverse impact on the day rates), the Operator did not 
consider it prudent to consider the option of long -term hiring of the drilling rigs and 
availing the firm rate advantage of such long -term hiring which resulted in additional 
expenditure of approximately US$ 88.77 million. 
197. MoPNG in its Action Taken Notes stated that "the audit exception is that the 
Operator awarded charter hire of an offshore deep water drilling rig to M/s. Transocean 
Offshore International Ventures Limited (1stContract) at an operating day rate of US$ 
0.32 million and later awarded a 2ndContract again to Transocean for the same rig at 
an operating day rate of US$ 0.48 million per day, commencing from the expiry of the 
period for charter-hire under 1stContract. It is the audit’s view that the higher rate could 
have been avoided had the 1st Contractor been entered for the required longer period. 
This can be at best considered as inadequate appreciation of requirements and lack of 
proper planning by the contractors. The contractors may not be aware of future behavior 
of market for hiring of services. Audit may reconsider this disallowance. However, the 
audit’s final view on this issue, considering the abovementioned facts and also the 
response of the operator on this audit observation, would be implemented as per the 
provisions of PSC".  
198. The Ministry in their presentation made before the Committee on 21.03.2016 
have stated as under: 
  
• Post vendor-contractual agreements between the Operato r and the 
vendor validly amended the original vendor-contract  

-83- 
 
 
 
• Audit report did not point out any legally tenable ground for cost 
disallowance, such as 
• Affiliated transactions to the undue advantage of Contractor  
• Any incidence of fraud 
• Costs not supported by payment evidences 
Operator’s response is that expenditures were incurred in the interest of 
Petroleum Operations 
B. Bonus paid for time saved during rig movement 
199. The Operator entered into two contracts (OG3/3597423 dated 24 February 2006 
and OG3/3587422 dated 29 October 2007) with M/s Transocean for hiring of deep 
water drilling rigs Deepwater Frontier (DWF) and Discoverer 534 (D534) respectively.  
Clause 20 of Exhibit A – Scope of work of the contracts states that –  
“…… Contractor (vendor) shall be responsible for in-field movement of the 
Rig.  Depending upon the weather conditions and Drilling Rig capability, 
Contractor (vendor) shall ensure in -field Rig movement with BOP (Blow 
Out Preventor) and Marine riser in hanging position and drill pipe / drill 
collar stands racked in derrick”. 
200. A review of the invoices for the above two contracts revealed that the Operator 
paid US$ 1.88 million and US$ 0.95 million respectively for DWF and D534 as bonus for 
time saved during the rig movement between wells with hanging Blow Out Preventor 
(BOP).  Audit observed that rig move with hanging BOP was mandatory as per the 
above cited clause.  As such, the payment of bonus for rig movement with hanging BOP 
was not justified and resulted in additional expenditure of US$ 2.83 million.  
201. The Operator in its reply to Audit (January 2014) and to MoPNG (June 2014) 
stated that:  
 "The in-field rig movement wit h BOP in hanging position stipulated 
in Clause no.B.20 of Exhibit A - Scope of Work is dependent on the 
weather conditions and Drilling Rig capability. This clause is a 
functional requirement, since the weather conditions and other 
parameters are not known / available upfront and a decision in this 
regard is taken on case by case basis considering the weather 
conditions and other parameters, bathymetry, duration of voyage 
etc. There is no absolute obligation to carry out in -field rig 
movement with BOP in han ging position as the Audit Team 
supposes. 
 Generally the industry practice for undertaking the in -field rig 
movement with BOP in hanging position (subject to weather and 

-84- 
 
 
 
other technical conditions) is when the Rig movement (distance) is 
short and each rig m ove with BOP suspended is evaluated and 
carried out only if the technical conditions can be met. 
 As per Contract, Contractor (vendor) is entitled to performance 
incentive in accordance with Clause no.E.2 of Exhibit A - Scope of 
Work for completing the wells ahead of the target number of days. 
 As per the contracts, there was no fixed bonus scheme and the 
incentive scheme was to be mutually agreed and payment 
modalities for payment of incentive amount were to be separately 
worked out. This was the basis and i ntention behind Contractors 
stipulation while agreeing to the bonus payments that “this is a one -
off agreement and will not be cited as precedence for future 
operations”. 
 Audit’s view that any bonus payment should have taken into 
account the sum total of t ime saved/excess time taken for all the 
operational activities for completion of well rather than a single 
activity of rig movement between well sites is not tenable since day 
rate is payable during rig movement i.e, for total time of journey 
between wells  and any time saved on this account is also to the 
benefit of the Contractor". 
202. Audit reasoned: 
 In-field rig movement with BOP in hanging position depending on 
weather condition was a standard condition included in the contract 
based on the capability of th e rig.  The Operator’s contention that 
the Audit team has supposed in -field rig movement with BOP in 
hanging position as absolute obligation is also not factually correct 
since Audit has not objected to rig movements without hanging 
BOP where weather condi tions have not permitted rig movement 
with hanging BOP. Rather, the Audit objection is on bonus payment 
for rig move with hanging BOP which was a standard condition as 
per scope of work. 
 The Operator’s contention that the vendor was paid bonus for rig 
movement with hanging BOP in accordance with Clause no.E.2 of 
Exhibit A - Scope of Work for completing the well ahead of the 
target number of days is not tenable since as per the Clause any 
bonus payment should have taken into account the sum total of 
time sav ed/excess time taken for all the operational activities for 
completion of well rather than a single activity of rig movement 
between well sites. 
 Also, while  approving bonus payment, the Operator has neither 
quoted the cited contract clause nor has a compar ison been made 
between targets fixed, if any, as per the cited clause and actual 
performance of the rig. In fact, the bonus payments have been 

-85- 
 
 
 
termed as a one-off arrangement and not to be cited as precedence 
for future operations. 
 This implies that bonus payments are not as per the terms and 
conditions of the contract for hiring of rigs". 
203. Since the bonus payments were not covered under the terms and conditions of 
the contracts, the additional expenditure of US$ 2.83 million should not be allowable for 
cost recovery.  
204. MoPNG in its Action Taken Notes stated that "the audit observation is that US $ 
2.83 million paid to M/s Transocean as bonus for efficiency achieved by rig movement 
done with the BOP in hanging position, was not allowable for cost recovery. The amount 
involved was actual expenditure incurred in petroleum operations in a transaction that 
was not reported by audit to be an affiliate transaction or transaction unduly benefitting 
the Operator / Contractor. However, the audit’s final view on this iss ue, considering the 
abovementioned facts and also the response of the operator on this audit observation, 
would be implemented as per the provisions of PSC". 
  

-86- 
 
 
 
PANNA-MUKTA AND MID & SOUTH TAPTI FIELDS 
 
VI. INTRODUCTION 
205. The Panna -Mukta (primarily an oil field) and Mid & South Tapti (gas field) are 
shallow water fields located in the offshore Bombay basin, were initially discovered and 
operated by ONGC.  Following the 1992 offering of small and medium sized oil and gas 
fields for development, GoI awarded (February 1994) the Panna -Mukta and Mid & 
South Tapti contract areas, which were discovered by ONGC, to a consortium 
comprising of ONGC (40 per cent), RIL (30 per cent) and Enron Oil & Gas India Ltd -
ENRON (30 per cent ) (tog ether called Contractor) under a production sharing 
arrangement. The PSC was signed in December 1994 between the GoI and the 
Contractor. The Contractor formed an unincorporated joint venture (JV) called PMT JV. 
In February 2002, British Gas Exploration and  Production India Limited (BGEPIL) 
acquired ENRON’s 30 per cent  stake in the JV and became a party to the PSC. 
Presently, the field is jointly operated by ONGC, RIL and BGEPIL.  
VII. DEVELOPMENT OF PANNA-MUKTA AND TAPTI FIELDS 
206. At the time of bidding, the P anna-Mukta contract area was a discovered and 
partially developed oil producing field of ONGC 17 and Mid & South Tapti contract area 
was a discovered gas field by ONGC. Both the Contract Areas were developed by the 
JV in two phases.  
 In Panna -Mukta, Initial  Plan of Development (IPOD) project was executed 
between 1995-99 wherein three wellhead platforms (PC, PF and PG) were installed. In 
the second phase of development, i.e. Expanded Plan of Development (EPOD), 
executed between 2004 and 2007 two wellhead platforms (PH and PJ) were installed. 
 Similarly, Mid & South Tapti Contract Area was developed in two phases viz., 
IPOD and New Revised Plan of Development (NRPOD). The IPOD project was 
executed during 1995 to1997 wherein JV installed three wellhead platforms  viz. STA, 
STB, STC in South Tapti field along with associated processing & transportation 
                                            
17 ONGC installed 5 wellhead platforms (viz. PA, PB, PD, PE and MA wellhead platform) for production and 
handed over to PMT JV at the time of signing of PSC (December 1994). 

-87- 
 
 
 
facilities. The NRPOD project was executed during March 2005 to August 2007 wherein 
JV installed one wellhead platform MTA in Mid Tapti field, and additional processing and 
transportation facilities for handling increased production. JV installed one wellhead 
platform STD in South Tapti field in August 2006 to maintain the plateau of production. 
VIII. ISSUES AND HIGHLIGHTS OF AUDIT FINDINGS 
A. Report No. 19 of 2011-12 
207. The C&AG in their report have scrutinised records of the Ministry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas (MoPNG) and the Directorate General of Hydrocarbons (DGH) in 
respect of a sample of 20 PSCs covering the period from 2003 -04 to 2007-08, and also 
conducted supplementa ry scrutiny of records of the operators of 4 blocks/fields 
including Panna -Mukta and Mid & South Tapti covering the two year period 2006 -07 
and 2007-08.   
208. On the issue of Financial and Operational Performance , the summary of sharing 
of profit petroleum between GoI, ONGC and the private parties from 2000 -01 to 2008 -
09 in respect of the Panna -Mukta and Mid & South Tapti fields shows that the IM in 
respect of the Panna Mukta field crossed 2.0 only in 2004 -05 (as per MoPNG's 
calculations) and moved to the second slab (GoI share moving up from 5 to 15 per 
cent), while the IM in respect of the Mid & South Tapti field still remains in the lowest 
slab (below 2.0 with GoI share of 20 per cent).  With more than 13 years of operation of 
the PSC till March 2008, the IM still remains in the first and second slabs.  In the opinion 
of Audit, the prospect of IM rising to 3.5 (resulting in GoI share of 50 per cent) over the 
remaining contract period is remote; thus further calli ng into question the 
appropriateness of the IM slab -based sharing of profit petroleum.  In the opinion of 
Audit, the delay in finalization of norms  to determine wellhead price of gas for purposes 
of royalty compelled to make observation that GoI should hav e treated the royalty 
payment from these fields as provisional, pending the finalization of norms for post -
wellhead costs.  Even if this had not been treated as provisional from the start of gas 
production in 1997/1998 (although the modalities of calculati on were reflected in the 
royalty statements submitted to MoPNG/DGH and this issue could have been flagged 
right away), GoI should have treated the royalty payment as provisional at least from 
January 2002, when DGH highlighted the problem for MoPHG's consi deration.  Further, 

-88- 
 
 
 
the Audit commented that the results of MoPNG's efforts to simplify/clarify the system 
for calculation of post-wellhead expenses and remove ambiguities therein were awaited.  
On the topic Crude oil and Gas sales, it has been observed that the key issue regarding 
pricing of gas sales from PMT is that the MoPNG and its nominee (GAIL) failed to 
comply with the terms of the PSC during 2005 -08 with regard to the pre -determined 
pricing formula.  Not honouring the PSC formula severely affects t he sanctity of the 
contract (which is to be maintained by all parties), which is highly undesirable from the 
long-term perspective of all contracting parties; on condensate loss during 
transportation, the PSC for Mid and South Tapti is silent on the treatm ent of 
condensate; and on non -signing of Crude Oil and Sales Agreement (COSA), the 
Ministry has stated that the suggestions of C&AG on COSA would be examined. This 
particular issue had been highlighted in the earlier CAG's Audit Reports of 1996 and 
2005.  The Audit has urged that a quick decision be taken, since nearly 2/3 rd  of the 
terms of the PSC is already over.  The C&AG on findings in respect of Panna -Mukta 
has observed that even after lapse of more than a decade, the JV had not completed 
many of the development activities committed under Appendix G of PSC and also 
covered aspects of cost recovery and instances of excess expenditure.  As regards 
findings in respect of Mid and South Tapti , the C&AG has found that with respect to 
non-completion of commit ted work programme and delays, there were no firm plan for 
installation of the remaining 5 wellhead platforms committed in the PSC;  on the issue of 
cost recovery in excess of Cost Recovery Limit (CRL) further progress was awaited; 
and have highlighted the  instances of excess expenditure and cost recovery.  Further, 
the C&AG has listed and briefed on the common issues of excess expenditure and cost 
recovery relating Panna -Mukta and Mid & South Tapti fields.  On the issue of Notional 
Income Tax, the Audit ha s urged that the issue of downward revision in corporate 
income tax rates and corresponding benefit to the contractors, should be highlighted 
and included in the ongoing arbitration proceedings invoked by the contractors.  
B. Report No. 24 of 2014 
209. The C&AG  in their report have covered the four years period from 2008 -09 to 
2011-12 and contains the results of the Performance Audit on 'Hydrocarbon Production 
Sharing Contracts' at the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoPNG) and the 

-89- 
 
 
 
Directorate General of Hydrocarbons (DGH) with respect to blocks/fields including that 
of Panna-Mukta and Mid & South Tapti. 
 
210. The particulars of physical and financial performance of Panna-Mukta and Mid & 
South Tapti contract areas have been detailed and have covered the contrac t cost, 
revenue and profit petroleum to the GoI during the period under review.  The PSC 
stipulates for execution of committed work programme (Appendix G of PSC) and Cost 
Recovery Limit (CRL) of US$ 577.5 million and US$ 545 million for Panna -Mukta and 
Mid & South Tapti respectively. In this regard, the JV is yet to execute the committed 
work programme of Mukta -B development in Panna -Mukta field and install 5 well 
platforms in Mid & South Tapti field.  The brief on issues relating to Arbitration inter-alia 
include arbitration notice served by the partners RIL and BGEPIL (December 2010) 
under PSC to GoI pertaining to i) Cost Recovery provisions under Panna -Mukta and 
Tapti PSC, ii) Calculation of IM, iii) Amount of royalty payable under PMT  PSC, iv) 
Amount of cess payable by Contractor to GoI, v) Amount of service tax payable under 
PSC, and  vi) Meaning and effect of Accounting and Audit provisions. 
 
211. The Audit while dealing with the chapter on Panna -Mukta and Mid & South Tapti 
have scrutinise the records of th e Operator and MoPNG/DGH and grouped their 
findings under six categories viz. (i) Recoverable costs and cost recovery - Improper 
allocation of rig mobilization/demobilization charges; Excess expenditure booking of 
US$ 0.52 million towards Mid & South Tapti  field; Cost Recovery of unconsumed 
production inventory US$ 26.15 million in contravention to PSC; Loss of revenue of US$ 
0.09 million to GoI due to recovery of inventory carrying costs on sparable drilling 
inventory; and Infructuous expenditure of US$ 0. 814 million on helideck and truss not 
used for Petroleum Operation, (ii) Deficiencies in contracting procedure and execution 
of Contracts - Extra expenditure on hiring of costlier rig DD -4 on assignment basis from 
Reliance Industries Limited (RIL) and Awar d of contract on nomination basis, (iii) 
Revenue - Petroleum saved and sold - Loss of US$ 9.92 million due to sale of gas in 
contravention to MoPNG directives and Gas Sales Purchase Agreement ( GSPA), Loss 
of government revenue of US$ 0.52 million due to sa le of Panna -Mukta gas in 

-90- 
 
 
 
contravention to PSC, Non fixation of transportation losses of condensate,  Short 
payment of royalty due to incorrect computation of wellhead value, Incorrect calculation 
of royalty on gas due to reckoning of facilities not used fo r post -wellhead activities, 
Exclusion of ONGC’s facilities for working out ratio for allocation of opex between 
wellhead and post-wellhead activities, and Short payment of royalty due to amortization 
of capex not based on upgraded reserves   (iv) Petroleum  operations - Preparation of 
Plan of Development for South West Panna without waiting for new seismic data 
resulted in abandoning of project and Delay in water injection project in Panna field 
resulting in declining production (v) Non -compliance to the PSC  provisions - Delay in 
submission and approval of Work Programme & Budget, and (vi) issues relating to 
MoPNG/DGH - Non-signing of Crude Oil and Sales Agreement (COSA) between IOCL 
and PMT JV.  
 
212. The C&AG have recommended following observations on the aforesaid issues as 
mentioned below: 
(i) Improper allocation of rig mobilisation/demobilisation charges - The 
common expenditure should be appropriately allocated to Panna -
Mukta and Tapti fields on a reasonable basis viz. actual 
expenditure identifiable to a particular contract area or in the ratio of 
expenditure on the primary activity. 
 
(ii) Cost Recovery of unconsumed production inventory US$ 26.15 
million in contravention to PSC - PMT JV may ensure that 
production inventory is charged to accounts only when such 
material is removed from inventory and used in petroleum 
operations as provided in the PSC. 
 
(iii) Non fixation of transportation losses of condensate -   PMT JV may 
expedite the fixation of transportation losses of condensate pending 
for last 8 years that has impacted the interest of ONGC. 
 
(iv) Short payment of royalty due to amortization of capex not based on 
upgraded reserves -  All facilities used for petroleum operations 
(pre wellhead and post -wellhead activities) may be considered for 
computing the wellhead value whil e arriving at royalty payable to 
GoI.  The PMT JV may also work out and remit the additional 

-91- 
 
 
 
royalty to GoI by considering the upgraded reserves (1997 to 
August 2007) for amortization of capex. 
 
(v) Non-signing of COSA - GoI may ensure the signing of COSA 
between IOCL and PMT JV by expeditiously resolving the 
contentious issues. 
 
IX.  ISSUES UNDER ARBITRATION 
A. Report No.19 of 2011-12 
213. The following issues relating to Panna -Mukta and Mid &  South Tapti are either 
under Arbitration or sub-judice and response made by the Ministry are summarised and 
submitted in concise form as below by the Ministry:-  
(i) Issue: Delay in finalization of norms to determine well head price of gas for 
purposes of royalty - Specific cases of wrong inclusion of cost elements as 
part of post wellhead cost, in Royalty computation. 
  Response: Contractor has invoked arbitration. 
 
(ii) Issue: Pricing of gas sales from PMT - GAIL (GoI nominee buying gas) 
refused to pay g as price computed as per PSC formula; GoIRoyalty and 
profit petroleum fell by Rs. 584.31 Crores. 
  Response:  Issue under arbitration. To earn Rs. 584 crores, GAIL   
  would have paid Rs. 2900 crore more as additional gas price. 
 
(iii) Issue: Notional Inco me Tax - For calculation of Investment Multiple a 
notional Income Tax rate of 50 per cent used, much more than current tax 
rate; GoI may institute consultations under Article 15.7. 
  Response: Contractor has invoked arbitration. Issue will be taken up  
  with JV for consultation through arbitration. 
 
(iv) Issue: Non -completion of Committed Work Program in Panna Mukta - 
Cost Recovery Limit (CRL) of $577.5 Million, for committed work 
programme. JV has not completed key work commitments in respect of 
the Mukta field. Consequential deferment of revenue of $ 551.03 million, 
adverse impact on IM and GoI PP and deferment of royalty/cess. JV 
substituted two infill wells drilled in 2005 from the PD platform instead of 
the two wells from PD platform indicated in the c ommitted work 
programme. 

-92- 
 
 
 
  Response: Notional cost of the unfinished work program was   
  reduced from CRL amount CRL issue is under arbitration. 
(v) Issue:  Cost Recovery in Panna Mukta - Cost recovery of US $ 62.5 
million in excess and short remittance of GoI PP. 
  Response: The reversal of cost in excess of CRL was computed by 
DGH   Recovery of profit petroleum short paid was affected through NOC. Issue 
is   under arbitration. 
(vi) Issue: Non -completion of Committed Work Programme in Mid& South 
Tapti. 
  Response: JV failed to drill wells committed in the PSC. The issue is  
  under arbitration. 
 
(vii)  Issue: Cost Recovery in excess of Cost Recovery Limit (CRL) in Mid & 
South Tapti. The PSC stipulated a Cost Recovery Limit (CRL) of $ 545 
million. An excess cost recovery of $ 324.35 million over the CRL. 
  Response: Proposal of Operator for enhancement of CRL was not   
  agreed. Operator has invoked arbitration. 
 
B. Report No. 24 of 2014. 
214. The partners RIL and BGEPIL served arbitration notice (December 2010) 
under PSC to GoI.  The claims raised by RIL and BGEPIL pertain to i) Cost Recovery 
provisions under Panna -Mukta and Tapti PSC, ii) Calculation of IM, iii) Amount of 
royalty payable under PMT  PSC, iv) Amount of cess payable by Contractor to GoI, v) 
Amount of service tax payable under PSC, and  vi) Meaning and effect of Accounting 
and Audit provisions.  
215. GoI also raised counter claim towards depressing expenditure allowance 
available under Section 42 of IT Act, accounting of inflated sales, accounting of 
Development Cost in excess of CRL, short accounting of sales revenue, income tax 
rate, non -completion of committed work programme as per Appendix -G, short 
accounting of sales, short accounting of marketing margin, short accounting under 
wrong PSC, excess cost recovery over CRL.  
216. The Tribunal (by a majority) passed a final unanimous Partial Award of 
September 2012 on Preliminary Issues holding that the arbitral tribunal has the 
jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the preliminary issues (viz. royalties, cess, service  tax 

-93- 
 
 
 
and C&AG Audit).  
217. The Tribunal also passed (December 2012) a final partial award in respect of 
Tapti PSC that 
(i) the costs incurred after the Effective Date related to the 
construction and/or establishment of such facilities as are 
necessary to produce, process, store and transport petroleum from 
within Existing Discoveries in order to enable gas production above 
the Tapti IPOD Plateau Level are fully recoverable, 
(ii) the determination of these costs should be made at the time 
approval for such work is sought or obtained from the MC, 
(iii) where direct G&A and other Service Costs, are properly allocated 
as Development Costs, they w ould be recoverable in full by virtue 
of Article 13.1.1, 13.5 and 13.6 of the Tapti PSC unless they come 
within the CRL.  All G&A costs and Service costs other than those 
which are attributable to Development Works fall outside the CRL 
and are recoverable in full, 
(iv) indirect G&A and other Service Costs (head office and 
establishment expenses), where these costs are necessary for the 
production of gas at the IPOD Plateau Level, they would come 
within the CRL. If they are not, they do not come within the limit and 
are recoverable in full as head office and establishment expenses, 
and 
(v) the CRL is lump sum.  
 
218. The Arbitral Award also stated that these findings apply mutatis mutandis, to the 
Panna-Mukta PSC. The claimants had no obligation to complete the Appendix G works 
under either the Tapti or the Panna -Mukta PSC. The Tribunal also unanimously found 
that the timelines prescribed in Appendix C, Section 1, Paragraph 1.9 of the PSCs are 
not final and binding. 
219. Present Status of Arbitration 
 Final unanimous Partial Award of September 2012 : Union of India 
(UoI) challenged the September 2012 award on issues of 
arbitrability in the High Court of Delhi.  The High Court ruled (March 
2013) in the UoI’s favour, stating that the issues of cess, royalties, 
service and C&AG Audit are not arbitrable and that Part -I of the 
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 is not expressly or impliedly 
excluded in the PSCs by the parties. This order was challeng ed by 
the Claimants (BGEPIL and RIL) in the Supreme Court vide SLP 

-94- 
 
 
 
(civil) 20041 of 2013. Supreme Court overruled and set aside the 
conclusion of the High Court and decided (May 2014) the case in 
favour of BGEPIL and RIL.  UoI has filed a review petition w ith the 
Supreme Court of India. 
 Final Partial Award of December 2012:  The award dated 10 
December 2012 on CRL issue was also challenged by UoI under 
section 34 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 in Delhi 
High Court on 02 January 2014.  
 Mandate of Mr. Peter Leaver: Considering the conduct of Mr. Peter 
Leaver, arbitrator, appointed by the PMT JV to be partial, biased 
against GoI and that he interfered with the witness of GoI during the 
arbitration hearings and in correspondence with the parties, Go I 
challenged the mandate of Mr. Peter Leaver in the Permanent 
Court on Arbitration (PCA). The PCA rejected (June 2013) the 
challenge brought against Mr. Peter Leaver, QC under Article 10(1) 
of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. The decision of PCA on 
Arbitration has been challenged by GoI in Delhi High Court (June 
2013). 
 
220. As per Audit, all the afore-mentioned issues are sub-judice as of July 2014. 
221. On being asked why ONGC recused itself from the Arbitration and to provide 
details on its non participation with the other two JV partners BGEPIL and RIL on the 
matter of arbitration; details of GoI directives to ONGC on arbitration and whether under 
PSC provisions, unanimous consent of all the JV Partners are required or Parties can 
separately invoke arbitration against GoI.  In response thereto, ONGC has submitted as 
under: 
 "The details in this regard are as under: 
• In the arbitration between PMT JV and  GAIL for non -payment of 
differential gas price to PMT JVs, MoP&NG vide letter dated 
12.06.2007 advised ONGC not to participate in the arbitration and it 
was also informed by MoP&NG that in case of an arbitral award, 
same will be applicable to ONGC also, a s a constituent of 
Contractor for both the PSCs. 
• Subsequently, MoP&NG, vide letter dated 24.12.2010, advised 
IOCL & GAIL to allocate the proceeds of petroleum lifted from 
Panna-Mukta PSC in favour of MoP&NG totaling to USD 
80,181,321 of which ONGC’s 40% share was USD 32,072,529. 
The directives of MoP&NG were complied with by IOCL & GAIL. 

-95- 
 
 
 
• M/s BGEPIL informed ONGC vide letter dated 15th December, 
2010 that   BGEPIL & RIL have served a notice of Arbitration on the 
Government of India in respect of disputes , differences and claims 
which have arisen in connection with Panna -Mukta and  Mid & 
South Tapti PSCs. 
• Later on ,  ONGC, vide letter dated 21st April, 2011, informed 
MoP&NG that prior to serving the notice of arbitration with GoI, the 
two partners ( BGEP IL & RIL) had never informed ONGC, citing 
earlier communication from MoP&NG  dates 12.06.2007 as 
mentioned above. 
• In the above letter dated 21.04.2011, ONGC submitted to MoP&NG 
that as advised by MoP&NG earlier in case of arbitration 
proceedings against GAIL, MoP&NG may like to consider that 
ONGC need not be a party to the current arbitration proceedings 
and in case of an arbitral award, the same is made applicable to 
ONGC also, as a constituent of Contractor for both the PSCs. 
• In reply ONGC’s letter da ted 21.04.2011, MoP&NG, vide letter 
dated 04.07.2011, advised ONGC not to participate in the 
arbitration initiated by RIL & BGEPIL under Pann -Mukta & Tapti 
PSCs. However, in case of an arbitral award, the same is made 
applicable to ONGC also, as a constituent of Contractor for both the 
PSCs. 
 Article 33.2 of Tapti PSC stipulates that “…..any claim arising 
between the Parties hereunder which cannot be settled amicably 
may be submitted by any Party to arbitration…..” 
 Hence, the PSC provides the right for arbitration by any Party 
individually or collectively with other JV Partners". 
222. The Ministry during the course of oral evidence have stated as under :  
"The attempt of the Government is always to make the ease of doing 
business on the part of industries and  to be away from micro -
management. We give more freedom to the operators to operate and we 
are concerned with the end -result as to how much production he is doing 
and with the production related whatever Government’s stake is there, that 
should come. He sh ould not be able to do any mischief in that and our 
attempt is to ensure this.  
With this view, as I have mentioned, we have already brought in a new 
policy where we have moved away from the production -sharing to 
revenue-sharing contract where we will not look at the day -to-day 
management like cost recovery and other things. We are only interested 
as to how much production he is doing; how much revenue he is getting; 

-96- 
 
 
 
and out of which how much he will share with us. This he has to declare 
upfront in a formula while bidding and that will be followed.  
We will not be entering into their day -to-day operations, so we hope that 
there will be much less scope for arbitration or court cases or disputes. 
Even within the disputes also, we always prefer the alternative dispute 
resolution mechanism instead of we going to the court straightaway. But 
our experience has been that the arbitrations have also gone ahead for 
quite longer time. So, I think that we will have to see as to how best we 
can do." 
 
X.  NON-SIGNING OF CRUDE OIL SALES AGREEMENT 
223. As per Article 18.1 of Panna-Mukta PSC, each constituent of the Contractor shall 
be required to offer to the GoI or its nominee all of the Contractor's entitlement to Crude 
Oil from each Field in order to assist in satisfying the na tional demand. GoI appointed 
IOCL as its nominee to purchase entire crude oil produced from the Panna -Mukta field. 
Further, Article 19.4.4 of the PSC, envisaged formulation of COSA between Panna -
Mukta JV and IOCL (GoI nominee) under terms and conditions, n ormally contained in 
international COSAs of a similar nature. However, COSA has not been signed 
(November 2013) due to non -resolution of issues on (i) delivery point, (ii) storage 
charges, (iii) dead freight, (iv) voyage loss, (v) voyage costs, (vi) termin al charges, (vii) 
measurement conversion table, (viii) dollar rupee exchange rate, (ix) lay time in 
monsoon and (x) delayed payments and interest thereon. 
 
224.   The non-signing of COSA for Panna -Mukta PSC has been commented by the 
C&AG in its previous audit reports of 1996, 2005 and 2011 and on each occasion 
MoPNG stated that agreements were likely to be finalized soon/suggestions of CAG on 
COSA would be examined. However, COSA has not been signed between JV and IOCL 
till date (November 2013). Thus, due to non -resolution of delivery point and related 
issues the COSA has not been signed even after a lapse of 19 years of signing of the 
PSC. The non-signing of COSA led to non- resolution of storage expenses -INR 724.18 
crore and voyage expenses-INR 63.56 crore and are shown as recoverable by PMT JV 
from GoI/GoI’s nominee i.e. IOCL as on 31.3.2012. Further during 1995 to 2007 IOCL 
deducted dead freight of INR 29.83 crore and voyage losses of US$ 37.03 million which 

-97- 
 
 
 
were also under dispute.  
 
225. PMT JV in its  reply to MoPNG (July 2014) stated that  JV has been adhering to 
the provisions of the Panna -Mukta PSC by selling the crude oil produced from Panna -
Mukta to IOCL and that it has also be engaging with the IOCL with the aim of reaching a 
mutual understanding to enable the signing of COSA.  
 
226. While MoPNG in its earlier reply stated (February 2014) that , COSA was not 
signed between the contractor and IOCL due to continued diffe rences between 
Contractor and IOCL despite the best efforts made by MoPNG, in July 2014 it stated 
that in the event of any disagreement between Contractor and the oil marketing 
companies, the Contractor should have resolved the disputes though appropriate 
dispute resolution mechanism.  
 
227. According to Audit, since only five years are left for the expiry of the PSC and 
considering huge impact on IM and GoI PP that may result in case of any change in 
price, MoPNG may intervene as assured in reply to previous PA s for an early resolution 
of the disputes and facilitate signing of COSA.  
228. The Audit, therefore, recommended that GoI may ensure the signing of COSA 
between IOCL and PMT JV by expeditiously resolving the contentious issues. 
229. Asked to explain on the issue of  non signing of COSA the ONGC has submitted 
as under: 
"The COSA between PMT JV and IOCL has not been signed due to non -
resolution of various issues which have commercial implications on the 
sellers and the buyer. However, as per PSC provisions, the PMT JV has 
been selling crude oil to IOCL (Government Nominee to offtake crude oil) 
since inception  while at the same making best efforts to resolve the 
issues and formulate a COSA.  
Various correspondences and meetings have been held between PMT JV 
& IOCL since the commencement of crude oil sales in 1994-95.  However, 
the issues could not be resolved. Subsequently, in 2014 a Task Force was 

-98- 
 
 
 
constituted which has so far held seven meetings, the last one being on 
08.03.2016". 
230. On the same issue, the Ministry has submitted that:- 
"The parties are yet to reach to a final agreement. The delivery point will 
impact the cost of the buyer and liabilities of the seller of crude oil. Hence 
there has been disagreement between the buyer and the seller. 
 ****  ****   **** 
MoP&NG  called a meeting on 17th October 2014 to discuss the pending 
actions emerging from C&AG Audit Report No. 6 of 2005 i.e Para No. 
3.3.4(iii) Non finalization of COSA and GSPA and Para No. 3.3.5(i) on 
Delivery Point tor crude oil.   After detailed deliberati on, the following was 
decided: 
(i) Next meeting of JV partners and IOC to be held on 31st October, 
2014 and the minutes of the meeting to be submitted to the Ministry 
by 2nd November, 2014. 
(ii) Minutes of the meeting held on 23.04.2014 to be submitted to 
Ministry before next meeting scheduled on 31.10.2014. 
(iii) All issues to be settled amicable by 30th November, 2014. 
As on date six meetings of Task force were held on 23.04.2014, 
31.10.2014 & 14.11.2014, 29.01.2015 , 20.04.2015 and 8.03.2016 to 
discuss issues related t o crude oil sales contract for crude from Panna -
Mukta contract area. 
As per the Minutes of the meeting of 5th Task Force held on 20 April 2015 
on the settlement of issue related to sale of crude oil for Panna – Mukta 
have agreed on the delivery point, stor age vessel costs, measurement 
method, voyage loss deductions, other fair weather voyage related 
deductions, other monsoon voyage related deductions, other voyage 
related deductions, settlement between parties in relation to crude sale 
and purchase and inte rest. It was also agreed that the PMT -JV shall 
prepare a draft settlement agreement on the basis of these signed 
minutes within 15 days. The PMT JV will share a draft of the more detailed 
COSA within 90 days from the date of execution of the Settlement 
Agreement. 
The Parties have agreed that post signing of the settlement agreement 
and until such time that the COSA is executed, the settlement agreement 
shall be binding agreement between the Parties and which shall be basis 
on which all future sale and purch ase of crude oil from Panna -Mukta area 
occurs. 
Final agreement between the parties has to be arrived based on the 
discussions amongst them." 

-99- 
 
 
 
XI. COST RECOVERY OF UNCONSUMED PRODUCTION INVENTORY  
231. As per section 3.1.8(a) of AP of the PSC, the material and eq uipment held in 
inventory shall be charged to the accounts only when such material is removed from 
inventory and used in Petroleum Operations. Contractor is allowed to recover interest at 
the LIBOR rate plus one per cent (1%) for reasonable inventories it carries. Costs shall 
be charged to the accounting records and books based on the average cost method’.  
 
232. However, contrary to the PSC provision, Contractor charges production inventory 
to cost recovery on date of purchase irrespective of its actual usage i n Petroleum 
Operations. As on 31 March 2012, PMT JV was holding production inventory worth 
US$ 26.15 million (accumulated since Pre -SAP, i.e. before April 2005 – US$ 4.84 
million) which was charged to cost recovery.  
 
233. Out of total inventory of US$ 26.15 mi llion as on 31 March 2012, inventory 
valuing US$ 11.03 million was not used for more than four years. The cost recovery of 
production inventory without its actual usage for petroleum operations had adversely 
impacted GoI share of PP.  
 
234. Contractor needs to reverse production inventory charged from the respective 
FYs by recovering inventory carrying cost on reasonable inventory under section 3.1.8 
(a) of Accounting Procedure to the PSC from date of purchase till its actual consumption 
for Petroleum Operations  and remit the additional PP to the GoI along with interest @ 
LIBOR plus one (1) per cent as provided under section 1.7.3 of Accounting Procedure 
to the PSC.  
 
235. PMT JV in its reply to Audit (February 2014) and to MoPNG (July 2014) stated:  
1. “Only controllable assets used for or in connection with Petroleum 
Operations such as drilling tangibles are inventory (see section 
4.2.1(a) of Appendix C). In contrast, the items referred to by the 
CAG are small value items in the nature of consumables (i .e. 
chemicals, spare valves, maintenance spares required for various 
offshore equipment, nuts and bolts, etc.) used for operations and 
maintenance. Ever since inception, the PMTJV’s accounting policy 
has been to charge the costs incurred in respect of thes e 

-100- 
 
 
 
consumable items to the accounts as Production Costs and cost 
recover them on purchase rather than on consumption.  
Accordingly, the PMTJV has not recovered any inventory carrying 
cost on these items. 
2. The PMTJV has endeavoured to ensure that such product ion 
consumable items are maintained at reasonable levels so as to 
avoid any production downtime due to non -availability of such 
items. An increase in project activities since 2005 resulted in a 
corresponding increase in consumable items of relevant 
specifications. The award of contracts to L1 bidders results in 
spares being purchased from different manufacturers. As a result, 
separate spares are often required for each make of equipment, 
which increases the number of spares being stored for ready use”. 
236. The reply to Audit was not acceptable in view of the following:  
(i) The PSC provides that inventory should be cost recovered as and 
when actually consumed and the cost recovery of the inventory on 
purchase is not correct. 
(ii) Section 3.1.8 (a) of Appendix C of PSC did not differentiate material 
as consumable or small value items and reiterates that material or 
equipment held in inventory shall be charged only when used for 
petroleum operations. 
(iii) The other PSCs, viz. KG -DWN-98/3 and Ravva, also provided for 
charging of inventory on use for petroleum operations.  
237. MoPNG, in its reply (February/July 2014) agreed that  inventory not consumed 
should not form part of contract cost and is not allowed for cost recovery. The issue was 
raised by M/s Sharp & Tannon for the years 200 5-06 and 2006 -07 which was duly 
addressed in the revised computation of the auditor and agreed to remedy appropriately 
for subsequent years. Year wise inventory included by Operator in the Contract Cost if 
provided by Audit would be corrected in the account for subsequent years also.  
 
238. The PMT JV furnished the year -wise production inventory for the years 2008 -12 
while the data for the years 2006 -08 though sought was not furnished by the Operator 
during last round of audit  and, hence, the inventory movement for the year 2008 -09 
could not be worked out.  The year-wise production inventory movement (as desired by 
the MoPNG) in respect of Panna -Mukta and Tapti Contract Area for the years 2009 to 
2012 are tabulated below.  

-101- 
 
 
 
(in US$ million) 
Year Inventory Movement 
 Panna-Mukta Tapti 
2009-10 2.64 1.59 
2010-11 3.92 0.52 
2011-12 1.49 1.22 
 
239. Audit, therefore, recommended that PMT JV may ensure that production 
inventory is charged to accounts only when such material is removed from inventory 
and used in petroleum operations as provided in the PSC. 
 
240. When asked whether PMT JV has now ensured that production inventory is 
charged to accounts only when material is removed from Inventory and used in 
petroleumoperations as provided in the PSC, the Operator replied as under :- 
" PMT JV maintains that it has been following the practices since inception 
in line with the Accounting Procedure of the PSC. Further, the items 
referred to by the CAG are small value items in the nature of consumables 
used for operation and maintenance. Th e PMT JVs accounting policy has 
been to charge the cost incurred in respect of these consumables as 
Production Costs and cost recover them on purchase rather than on 
consumption. Accordingly, the PMT JV has not recovered any inventory 
carrying cost on them. The JV has not agreed to this audit exception.    
The Government’s view has been that as per Generally Accepted 
Accounting Principles, expenditure recognition can be done only when 
inventory is consumed. There is no Accounting Procedure of the PSC 
suggesting that the inventory can be accounted as Contract Cost even 
before it is consumed." 
241. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated that "the Contractor's 
contention is not in accordance with Accounting principles and is not acceptable.  As 
suggested by C&AG, the inventory will be reduced from contract cost and GoI share of 
profit petroleum will be recomputed". 
XII. AWARD OF CONTRACT FOR INSTALLATION OF PLATFORMS 
242. Following abandonment of SWP project (as discussed in para 3.6.4.1), PMT JV 
decided to shift its facilities to the PL location. PMT JV entered into a settlement 
agreement with M/s Swiber (the existing contractor for installation of PK and SWP 

-102- 
 
 
 
platforms) for relocating these facilities on a nomination basis in March 2010. It was 
noticed that the actual cost for transportation and installation far exceeded the 
estimates.  
 
243. The cost estimate prepared in August 2008 had indicated the total cost at US$ 
15.8 million (including US$ 6.0 million for mobilization and de mobilization). Against this , 
the actual contracted price was more than double at US$ 35.98 million (including US$ 
29 million for installation and US$ 6.98 million for transportation). Besides, the award 
was made on a settlement basis with M/s Swiber rather than a tender as mandated in 
the PSC.  
 
244. PMT JV in its reply to Audit (February 2014) and to MoPNG (July 2014) stated 
that   
 The cost for transportation and installation as US$ 9.8 million is 
incorrect. This estimate comes from the PL POD which was merely 
an early estimate of the likely cost. 
 PMTJV engaged Swiber to undertake the modifications to minimize 
the time for award of contract as the material was under care of 
Swiber; there was concern that ther e might be a dispute under the 
existing contract with Swiber regarding incomplete scope and there 
was no desire to incur extensive storage costs from Swiber. 
 US$ 26.5 million would have been incurred had the PL installation 
been undertaken using the variat ion rates of the SWP -PK contract 
and the actual utilisation.  
 The contract price of US$ 29 million is reasonable compared to 
US$ 26.5 million agreed for the installation of the SWP and PK 
platforms and pipeline under a prior contract.  
245. The reply was not ac ceptable to the Audit, since the estimates for PL platform 
had been prepared in August 2008 based on the quotes received in the tender for SWP 
and PK platform. The contract for SWP -PK was awarded in September 2008 to Swiber 
whose quotes were L1. The total installation cost of US$ 26.5 million was for two 
platforms (SWP and PK) and two pipelines hence is not comparable to US$ 29 million 
for the single PL platform and pipeline. The costs incurred for the transportation and 
installation of PL was, thus, comparatively very high. 

-103- 
 
 
 
 
246. MoPNG in its reply stated (July 2014) that  the audit exception has been notified 
to the Contractor. The CAG may recommend in its final report the amount to be 
disallowed from the Contract Costs after considering Contractors’ reply, if a ny. The non-
adherence to the prescribed tendering procedure has been commented by Audit. The 
contract was awarded without competition and the rates are seen to be high on 
comparison with similar works. As there was no price discovery, Audit is unable to 
quantify the impact in the instant case.  
 
247. The Ministry in Action Taken Note has submitted that "as stated, Audit is unable 
to quantify any impact in the instant case.  The transaction with M/s Swiber not being 
termed as an affiliated transaction causing any undue benefit to the contractor". 
XIII.  PETROLEUM OPERATIONS 
A. Delay in Water Injection (WI) project in Panna field resulting in declining 
 production 
248. Oil production from a field undergoes three phases: primary, secondary and 
tertiary. Primary oil recovery is limited to hydrocarbons that naturally rise to the surface. 
With the passage of time and continuous production of oil reserve, the natural reservoi r 
pressure gets depleted and secondary recovery methods like water and gas injection 
are employed for displacing the oil and driving it to the surface.  
 
249. The reservoir pressure of Panna field which was 2550 psia 18 at the beginning 
(1986) gradually started f alling. Consequently, the production from Panna field started 
declining.  The declining rate which was 10 -12 per cent in 2003 increased to 12 -15 per 
cent in 2007-08, and to 18-20 per cent in 2010-11.  
 
250. Both DGH as well as the JV in 2003 itself was aware of  the declining production. 
                                            
18 pounds per square inch absolute.  

-104- 
 
 
 
Though the JV carried out a feasibility study for water injection 19 in Panna at that time, 
the low prevailing oil prices (US$ 18 -20/bbl) rendered the project uneconomical. The 
crude oil price subsequently increased from an average of US$ 27.69 per barrel (2003) 
to US$ 50.00 per barrel (2005) and to US$ 64.2 per barrel (20 07). The JV, however, did 
not review the feasibility for water injection. By 2007, the reservoir pressure had further 
declined to about 2000 psia. On the direction (February 2007) of DGH, the JV 
conducted studies in 2007 -08 and 2008 -09 and found water inje ction to be technically 
feasible. The returns were, however, expected to accrue only after 4 -5 years from start 
date. Since the PSC term was to expire in 2019, the JV desired for extension of the 
PSC term. In 2008 -09  DGH had also agreed for request of PSC  term by the JV and in 
the MC meeting held on 20 January 2009, DGH asked the JV to submit an outline of 
water injection proposal together with request for PSC extension. The JV, in February 
2009, informed DGH that it had prepared a detailed report on feasi bility of water 
injection but submitted the feasibility report to DGH only in September 2011.  It also 
made a request for extension of PSC term.  
 
251. DGH is yet to approve the feasibility report. DGH, however, wrote (March 2012) 
to JV stating that ‘ pressure maintenance should have been started as soon as it was 
evident that the reservoir pressure was falling below saturation point’ and that the 
Operators ‘should have proposed WI in early 2000 if they were serious about good 
operational standards and reservoir management’. As on date there is no further 
progress in the WI scheme pending approval of pre feasibility study and decision on the 
PSC extension by DGH.  
 
252. Audit observed that PMTJV and DGH recognized that delays would result in 
irreversible loss of oil re covery. Each year of delay was expected to result in loss of 
reserves of 4 -5 mmbbl.  As per the JV’s letter of April 2012 to DGH ‘any delay was 
expected to have an exponential and detrimental impact on its overall technical and 
economic viability due to pressure drop and watering out of the existing wells’.  
                                            
19 Water injection involves drilling injection wells and introducing water into the reservoir to encourage oil 
production. While the injected water helps to increase depleted pressure within the reservoir, it also helps to move 
the oil in place. 

-105- 
 
 
 
 
253. The protracted delay in submission and correspondence was, however, not 
followed by any action. With each year of delay the voidage would increase resulting in 
need for more facilities and higher cost impacting project viability. Though DGH was 
aware of the need for implementing the WI at the earliest as a technical requirement for 
enhancing the recovery of production, they failed to expedite the same mainly due to 
indecision on the extension of PSC term. Meanwhile, the reservoir health deteriorated.  
 
254. PMT JV in its reply to Audit (February 2014) and to MoPNG (July 2014) stated 
that 
(i) “PMT JV had sought an alternative method to optimize production 
level at Panna namely through drilling of development wells  and 
active reservoir management. As stated in an Operating Committee 
resolution dated 7 April 2003 ‘infill drilling in Panna along with a 
gradual relaxation of field gas rate is a robust reservoir 
management and field development strategy for a coning 
dominated reservoir like Panna B zone, both from a technical and 
economic view point.  
(ii) PMT JV did not reconsider the decision to opt for infill drilling rather 
than water injection when oil prices began to rise as the infill drilling 
and EPOD work proved to b e a robust reservoir management and 
field development strategy. 
(iii) The technical risks of water injection when compared to its 
relatively low economic value both for the PMT JV and the GoI, 
have deterred the PMT JV from performing this work. PMT JV had 
identified water injection as a marginal project as the potential 
incremental increase in production does not appear to justify the 
high upfront capital costs of US$ 2.2 billion required for water 
injection...’ ‘...  and that the project was not economicall y viable 
within the current PSC period and was only marginally 
economically viable even if an extension were granted.  
(iv) Early breakthrough of injected water reducing the anticipated 
hydrocarbon recovery has already been seen in a tracer study. 
Implementation of water injection scheme in earlier years carried 
the risk of causing an uneven movement of hydrocarbons in and 
lower ultimate recovery from Panna reservoir, where a thin oil 
column enclosed between large gas cap and an aquifer is very 
sensitive to water to any such water injection scheme. 

-106- 
 
 
 
(v) The PMT JV has diligently properly and efficiently developed the oil 
and gas fields underlying the Panna -Mukta and Tapti PSC contract 
areas in accordance with the PSC terms and best international 
practices and standards”. 
255. MoPNG in reply stated (July 2014)  that declining of production has always been 
explicitly known whereas all geological phenomena may not have technical solutions, as 
cost factor will also be a matter of significance.  
 
256. DGH raised (January, March and April 2012) the following issues: a) the proposal 
included water injection scheme for B -zone and did not include water injection for A -
zone; b) many technical queries to JV remain unanswered. In a MCM held on Jan. 04 
2013, the JV informed that they would be reevaluating the water injection project 
feasibility in view of recent geological surprises (quick recovery of tracer within two days 
from wells 2-3 kms apart after water dumping) in Panna field.  
 The PMT JV is yet to submit the modified water injection pre-feasibility reports for 
both Panna -B and A zones incorporating the present geological observation and find 
out a techno-economically viable project. The technical issue before the JV is to find out 
a techno-economically viable project to enhance the rec overy. Arresting the rate of fall 
in reservoir pressure will be one of the favourable technical outcomes expected from a 
water injection project.  
257. According to Audit, the replies need to be viewed in light of the following:  
 The reservoir pressure continued to fall and production decline 
increased from 10-12 per cent in 2003 to 12-15 per cent in 2007-08 
and to 18 -20 per cent  in 2010 -11. As per the JV the decline in 
production due to pressure depletion in 2011 alone was estimat ed 
at about 2 mmbbls of oil. Also 40  per cent of wells in Panna were 
closed due to increase in water cut.  
 DGH from time to time (January 2009, March 2010, November 
2010 and August 2011) had directed PMT JV to implement the WI 
in Panna field at the earlies t to resolve the reservoir health and to 
control the decline in pressure. DGH in March 2010 had stated 
specifically that ‘until WI started no infill wells were likely to be 
considered’. DGH however, continued approval of infill wells in 
2011-12.  
 In the va rious technical committee meetings/workshops conducted 
during March 2010 and October 2011) while the JV acknowledged 

-107- 
 
 
 
that ‘ studies over the past few years had provided a better 
understanding of the field which now allowed WI project to be 
implemented effec tively and that WI scheme was appropriate for 
implementation and reasonable ’, DGH observed ‘ Technical studies 
of WI had reached substantial maturity for it to be implemented 
now. Model refinement and project optimization would continue  but 
in parallel with WI project implementation’. DGH strongly advised to 
schedule all activities targeting start of WI from early 2014. 
 Besides, the technical scheme, incremental reserves and facilities 
cost for the B zone water injection project were also reviewed and 
endorsed by independent Auditors viz. Worley Parsons and 
Reservoir Knowledge in October-November 2010. 
 The Pre -Feasibility report submitted in September 2011 had also 
brought out that  ‘the project risks with regard to Reservoir 
uncertainties around reservoir heterogeneity, residual oil saturation, 
movement of oil into gas cap, injectivity, water injection 
compatibility with reservoir, etc. would always exist as part of 
nature and would be addressed on a regular basis as part of 
ongoing reservoir char acteristics.’ Most of the risks were stated to 
be contained and factored in the current analysis as part of model 
calibration process. 
 The PMT JV while submitting the Pre Feasibility study report 
brought out that expeditious implementation of Water injecti on 
scheme as envisaged could yield 6% incremental gain (71.6 million 
stock barrels oil and 94.9 bcf gas upto economic life of 2038). 
 DGH took six months (October 2011 to March 2012) to review the 
report and communicated its comments to the JV in piecemeal 
even though it had actively participated in the technical committee 
meetings/workshops and had also directed the JV on the studies to 
be conducted. 
 Considering that the water injection study is yet to be approved and 
a decision on PSC term is yet to be tak en and with delay having 
adverse impact on the recovery factor, it is unlikely that the WI 
scheme would be implemented in near future. 
258. As per Audit, the loss in production during 2008 -09 to 2011-12 was to the extent 
of 77282848 bbls of oil valuing US$ 661.86 million. 
 
259. The Ministry in Action Taken Replies has stated that " DGH attempted time again 
to bring in a secondary recovery project to enhance the petroleum recovery that would 
also be commercially viable to all parties. The quantum of incremental recove rable 
reserves is a complex technical issue beyond the comprehension of an audit exercise, 

-108- 
 
 
 
and depends on various factors such as technology availability and its application, cost 
structure of the Operator, contractual provisions, technoeconomic risk facto rs etc. The 
PMP JV had submitted a 'Panna B Zone Water Injection Pre -Feasibility Report' in 2011 
and subsequently a request for PSC extension till filed economic life. The proposal 
however was not found to be commercially viable. In the MCM held on January  04, 
2013, the JV informed of more geological surprises of water dumping in Panna field. A 
techno-economically viable project could not be identified to enhance the petroleum 
recovery. 
 
 Audit's loss computation represents the audit's computed value of pet roleum not 
lifted from the reservior. Theoretically only a fraction of the in place oil gets recovered 
over the field life (about 16% in Panna). As technology improves resulting in new cost 
effective methods, more and more secondary recovery methods would be applied to 
increase the petroleum recovery. The new enhanced project also is required to be 
evaluated in the light of CAG's audit report no. 19 of 2011 discouraging that leads to 
reduction in Government Take." 
XIV. SALE OF GAS BY ONGC AND TWO JV PARTNER S (RIL AND BGEPIL) IN 
 CONTRAVENTION TO MOPNG'S DIRECTIVES. 
260. As per the terms of the PSCs, Panna -Mukta reached the revised ceiling price of 
US$ 5.73 / mmbtu in February 2005 and Tapti contract area reached US$ 5.57 / mmbtu 
in June 2004.  However, GAIL, whic h was nominated by MoPNG to purchase the entire 
gas production, refused to honour the revised gas prices , and continued to pay the gas 
price at the earlier ceiling of $ 3.11 / mmbtu till March 2005. Consequently, MoPNG 
instructed (November 2004) PMT JV to  supply 6 mmscmd  (out of the total gas 
production of 10.8 mmscmd) to GAIL at $ 3.86 / mmbtu for one year, and allowed PMT 
JV to market the balance gas (4.8 mmscmd) directly at a price higher than $ 3.11 / 
mmbtu or such price as may be offered by GAIL. The  JV entered into contracts with 
private customers for the remaining 4.8 mmscmd at $ 3.96 / mmbtu for a three year 
period upto March 2008. In view of criticality of supply of PMT gas to the priority sector, 
GoI reviewed its earlier decision. At the request (March 2006) of GoI, PMT JV supplied 
5 mmscmd of gas to GAIL for the period from 1.4.2006 to 31.3.2008 at a market driven 

-109- 
 
 
 
price of US$ 4.75 / mmbtu. The additional gas in excess of 10.8 mmscmd produced by 
PMT JV was shared by the JV partners according to t heir PI and they entered into 
separate contracts at different prices ranging from US$ 4.60 per mmbtu to US$ 5.58 per 
mmbtu. MoPNG in October/November 2007 reviewed the PMT JV gas supplies and 
directed PMT JV to sell entire quantity of PMT JV gas to GAIL at  revised PSC price with 
effect from April 2008.  
 
261. In the previous Audit Report No. 19 of 2011 -12, Audit had commented vide para 
6.3.1 on the sale of entire JV gas during 2005 -2008 at different prices to different 
parties. Audit concluded that the pre -determined PSC pricing formula has not been 
adhered to which severally affects the sanctity of the contract. This was highly 
undesirable from the long term perspective of all contracting parties. In the present 
report, Audit has discussed the issues regarding sale of additional production of gas 
(over and abov e 10.8 mmscmd of gas) from the additional production of PMTJV in 
contravention to MoPNG directives and GSPA and are discussed.  
 
262. The Ministry in Action  Taken Reply have stated that " the factual position was 
under the two PSCs, gas was required to be sold to GAIL only.  The gas price was to be 
determined between GAIL and the JV sellers in accordance with a formula stipulated in 
PSC.  In view of the sudden jump in gas price payable by GAIL in 2004 -05 consequent 
to the structure of pricing formula, dispute a rose between GAIL and JV on gas price.  At 
the meeting of the Secretary on 22 April 2004, it was decided that the JV should 
amicably negotiate the price of Gas with GAIL as GAIL showed inability to purchase at 
rate more than US $ 3/mmbtu.  On 28.06.2004, t he PMT JV wrote to GAIL that th 
erevised price of gas to be US $ 5.57/mmbtu as per the formula provided in the PSC.  
On 25.10.2004, PMT JV wrote to MoPNG to intervene directly in response to GAIL 
inability to pay more than the US$3.11.  At the meeting with  the Secretary, MoPNG on 
29.03.2005, it was decided that PMT JV will directly market gas w.e.f. 01.04.2005 and 
that GAIL would pay a price of US$3.86 and the same would be applicable for sale of 
gas to other customers". 
 

-110- 
 
 
 
A. Loss of US$ 9.92 million due to sale of gas in contravention to MoPNG 
 directives and GSPA 
263. (A) GoI had decided (March 2006) that a separate meeting would take place at 
an appropriate time for dispensation of additional gas production (over and above 10.8 
mmscmd).  
 
264. However, contrary to the GoI decision, ONGC (JV partner) entered into a long 
term contract for 12 years and signed GSPA in June 2006 with TPL for supply of 0.9 
mmscmd of gas @ US$ 4.75 / mmbtu from its share of gas from PMT JV. BGEPIL and 
RIL (ot her JV partners) also sold their share of additional gas from Phase -II 
development plan to its affiliates and GSPC. Though this was contrary to GoI decision, 
the sale price of BGEPIL and RIL was US$ 5.58/ mmbtu (i.e. higher by US$ 0.01 per 
mmbtu of revised  ceiling price of Tapti field). As per contract entered with TPL, ONGC 
agreed to supply its share of gas of 0.90 mmscmd for a period of 12 years with a 
provision to review the price after expiry of 3 years from the date of first supply. ONGC 
also informed (December 2007) MoPNG that the contract with TPL was signed after 
following a tendering process and therefore, the contract should be honored by MoPNG 
/ GAIL. Subsequently, MoPNG intimated (March 2008) ONGC that the contract entered 
with TPL would be assigned to GAIL. Supply to TPL commenced from 30 May 2008 and 
continued at the lower rate of US$ 4.75 per mmbtu till May 2011. Supply to TPL was 
made at PSC price only from June 2011.  
 
265. The agreement for sale of gas entered in June 2006 to TPL was in contraven tion 
to MoPNG’s direction of March 2006.   
 
266. BGEPIL and RIL not being parties to the contract between ONGC and TPL, PMT 
JV forwarded (January 2014/July 2014) the response of ONGC. ONGC invited attention 
to MoPNG letter dated 31 March 2008 on supply of gas f rom PMT fields to TPL which 
envisaged that the Price would be reviewed, as due under the contract and the then 
prevalent PSC price shall be applicable from the date of such review. As per the 
contract Daily Committed Quantity (DCQ) and Sales Gas Price were  valid for a 

-111- 
 
 
 
minimum period of three years. The supply to TPL commenced from 30 May 2008, and 
its revisions as per terms and conditions of the contract/contractual commitments was 
applicable after May 2011. Accordingly, the PSC price was adopted for supply  to TPL 
from June 2011 onwards. In view of the above it cannot be said that sale of gas to TPL 
by ONGC is in contravention of MoPNG directives. 
 
267. Reply was not acceptable to the Audit. ONGC ignored MoPNG directives of 
March 2006 which had categorically stat ed that a separate meeting would take place at 
appropriate time regarding dispensation of additional production of gas and signed the 
GSPA with TPL in June 2006 for sale of its share of gas below the PSC price i.e. @ 
US$ 4.75 per MMTBU. Though the other tw o partners also ignored MoPNG directives, 
their share of additional gas was sold at US$ 5.58 per mmbtu, i.e. higher by US$ 0.01 
per mmbtu of Tapti PSC ceiling price. MoPNG also expressed (November 2007) its 
displeasure for non -adherence to its directives a nd directed PMT JV to sell entire 
production to GAIL at PSC price with effect from April 2008 onwards. MoPNG had to 
honour the contract of ONGC with TPL (March 2008) as the contract has already been 
concluded.  This led to loss of revenue of US$ 19.62 mill ion to PMT JV (ONGC). This 
also adversely impacted GoI Take in form of PP, royalty and income tax by US$ 9.92 
million.  
268. MoPNG in its reply stated (July 2014) that neither this report of the CAG nor the 
earlier report No. 19 of 2011 adversely commented on t he PMTJV’s supply of gas at 
prices lower than PSC price during period 2005 to 2008. In view of the CAG’s adverse 
comment on ONGC’s supply of gas to TPL at US$ 4.75 per mmbtu after 2008, it may to 
be appropriate to relook at the price charged by PMTJV for direct sale of gas (which has 
not been reported by CAG as having been sold through tendering process unlike in the 
case of ONGC) at prices less than price prior to 2008. This issue may be deliberated in 
the final report so that a uniform consistent stand is  taken in respect of the different 
prices charged by the Contractors.  In the previous Audit report for the year 2011 -12, 
CAG commented adversely on GAIL’s refusal to buy gas at PSC price but failed to 
express its views on direct sale by PMT JV at less than PSC price.  
 

-112- 
 
 
 
269. CAG may be aware that the two Companies in PMTJV invoked arbitration 
against GAIL on the pricing issue and reached at a final settlement of partial 
enhancement of the price paid by GAIL. CAG may look at the appropriateness of 
enhancement of the price which was paid by the ‘direct’ buyers in line with the 
enhancement of price obtained from GAIL. As the customers of ‘direct’ sale happen to 
be either the Companies themselves or their affiliate, reopening the pricing of gas 
should not pose any commercial complication. 
 
270. MoPNG also stated that one of the issues flagged by CAG is that the Contractor 
paid less income tax due to charging a price less than PSC price. This would be notified 
to the Income Tax Department for taking final view after audit issues its final report 
taking into consideration the reply of the contractor.  
 
271. As the PSC stipulates GAIL as the buyer of gas and provides specific terms and 
conditions on the pricing formula to be adopted by the buyer of gas, MOP&NG 
communications may not be construed as amendment to such PSC provisions. 
 
272. MOP&NG’s communications referred by CAG are the fallout of a situation where 
as per PSC the PSU nominee GAIL was required to pay a higher price but failed to pay 
the higher price in the circumstances of GAIL’s requirement to su bsidize the gas price. 
Considering CAG’s admission that the pricing by ONGC was through a tendering 
process, the issue before the CAG for consideration for final recommendation is 
whether any better option existed in the circumstances. 
 
273. The response of MoPNG may be viewed in context of the following:  
(i) The Audit Report no. 19 of 2011 -12 had pointed out the non -
adherence to PSC price which affected the sanctity of the contract 
(which is to be maintained by all parties). The differential prices at 
which 10.8 mmscmd of gas was sold by PMTJV to GAIL vis -à-vis 
its affiliates and GSPC during 2005 -08 had also been elaborated in 
the report (para 6.3.1). The present observation is regarding sale of 
additional 5.7 mmscmd of gas by the partners, the concern being 
sale of gas by ONGC at prices lower than the PSC price. 

-113- 
 
 
 
(ii) The PSC price had not been honored and hence the need for 
MoPNG intervention. Audit has commented on the non -adherence 
of all partners to MoPNG direction for sale of additional gas and its 
impact. 
(iii) While it is not disputed that ONGC went through a tendering 
process, the point being made is that ONGC was not authorized to 
do so by MoPNG and that the price at which the transaction was 
concluded was much lower than the PSC price. 
(iv) The other partners, RIL and BGEPL derived the PSC price through 
sale of their share of the gas at the same time. This points to 
existence of better option to ONGC. 
274.  Audit further observed that, GoI also directed that supply be incumbent on 
present level of production of PMT fields and in the event of decrease in the same, 
there would be a pro rata reduction in supplies to all customers, including TPL. Article 
VIII of tripartite agreement also stated that the parties agree that the supply of Gas to 
TPL under the Clause 2.3 of the Existing Contract shall be incumbent on present level 
of production from PMT fields (i.e. 17.3 mmscmd), as provided under Gas Supply 
Contract between GAIL and PMTJV and in the event of decline of the same, there 
would be pro rata reduction in su pply to TPL in accordance with the Annexure 12. 
Accordingly, the quantity review envisaged every three years under clause 2.1.b of the 
Existing Contract or stated elsewhere in the Existing Contract, shall not be applicable. 
 
275. Though there was substantial dr op in production in the Tapti and Panna -Mukta 
fields during the year 2008 -09 to 2011 -12, supply to TPL was not reduced 
proportionately by ONGC. On the contrary, ONGC sold more gas to TPL during 2009 -
10 to 2010 -11vis-à-vis 2008 -09. This resulted in a revenu e loss (net of GoI -PP and 
Royalty) to ONGC by US$ 4.17 million (which is included in revenue loss of US$ 19.62 
million).  
276. BGEPIL and RIL not being parties to the contract between ONGC and TPL, PMT 
JV forwarded (January 2014/July 2014) the response of ONGC.  ONGC argued that 
“Article VIII of Tripartite Agreement was not applicable to ONGC. As per tripartite 
agreement, GAIL shall be fully responsible for the performance of the existing contract, 
including supply of gas, adhering to the terms and condition and ONGC shall have no 

-114- 
 
 
 
obligations, liabilities whatsoever arising out of the same contract”.  
 
277. To Audit, the reply of ONGC is not convincing.  As ONGC was selling its share of 
gas to TPL below the PSC price, it was obligatory on the part of ONGC to periodical ly 
inform GAIL about drop in level of production for making proportionate reduction in 
supply to TPL in accordance with Article VIII of Tripartite Agreement, so as to protect its 
financial interest. ONGC’s failure on this account benefited the private part y, i.e. TPL 
resulting in a loss of revenue of US$ 4.17 million to itself and adversely impacting GoI 
take by US$ 1.47 million.   
278. MoPNG in its reply (July 2014) stated that the audit exception has been notified 
to ONGC and CAG may like to consider ONGC’s re sponse. Specifically it needs to be 
seen whether GAIL could have reduced the supply to TPL by virtue of the provisions 
quoted by Audit, in the light of the fact that gas was actually available for supply to TPL 
at the entire agreed quantity.  
 
279. As already brought out in para Article VIII of tripartite agreement provided for pro 
rata reduction in supply to TPL in the event of decline in gas production. As ONGC 
suffered a loss in sale of excess gas to TPL, it ought to have protected its interests 
appropriately.  
 
280. The Ministry in Action Taken Reply have stated that " the categorisation of a part 
of gas produced from the two fields as 'additional gas' is not appropriate.  The entire gas 
was entitled to be priced based on PSC formula.  Selling of gas a t prices other than that 
based on PSC formula by all the constituents of contractor impacted profit petroleum 
and royalty.  It is a matter of fact that due to the disturbance caused by GAIL's inability 
to lift gas at a higher PSC formula based price, the private companies started billing part 
of the gas at US $3.96 and part of the gas at US $ 5.58 to their affiliates.  Gail itself was 
lifting at gas prices of US $ 3.86 and 4.75.  On the other hand as noted by CAG, ONGC 
invited tender and entered into agreem ent in June 2006 with TPL for supplying gas at a 
comparably higher price of US $4.75.  As explained above, the notional revenue loss 
was on account of the fact that the PSC formula based price was above the prevailing 

-115- 
 
 
 
market price and in the absence of GAI L uplifting the entire gas quantity, the 
constituents of Contractor were allowed to sell gas at rates ranging from US $ 3.86 to 
US $ 5.58 ONGC's sale to TPL, being a price discovered through tendering stood on a 
better ground than other case. This issue ar ose mainly due to the fact that the PSC 
formula based gas price happened to be much higher than the price paid by GAIL till 
then. Currently the entire gas is lifted by GAIL at PSC formula based price".  
B. Loss of government revenue of US$ 0.52 million due to sale of Panna -
Mukta  gas in contravention to PSC 
281. While ONGC sold its share of additional 5.7 mmscmd of gas at US$ 4.75 per 
mmbtu, the other two partners (RIL and BGEPIL) sold their share of additional g as from 
both Panna Mukta and Tapti fields at US$ 5.58 per mmbtu. Audit noticed that 
14,767,436 mmbtu of gas sold was from Panna -Mukta field which was sold to private 
consumers at US$ 5.58 per mmbtu, the price being lower than the Panna Mukta PSC 
ceiling price of US$ 5.73 / mmbtu. This resulted in loss of revenue of US$ 2.22 million 
and resultantly loss of revenue to the GoI of US$ 0.52 million in the form of PP and 
royalty.  
 
282. While stating that the issue relates to pre date period being audited by C&AG 
and hence outside the scope PMT JV in its reply to Audit (January 2014) and to MoPNG 
(July 2014) stated that GoI had permitted PMTJV to market the surplus production of 
gas directly to consumers during {the Direct Gas Marketing (DGM) period)}. 
Accordingly, the gas price stipulated in the PSCs was not applicable during the DGM 
period. The gas price paid by GAIL and other buyers during the DGM period was a 
market driven price which was established on an arm’s length basis with non -affiliated 
parties such as GSPC.  As such, any loss in revenue to the GoI during the DGM period 
arose from the failure of GAIL and the GoI to comply with their respective obligations 
and not any failure on the part of the PMTJV. Upon the Government revoking its 
direction to the PMTJV to m arket gas directly, the gas price reverted to the PSC price 
with effect from 1 April 2008.  The additional gas was allocated predominately from the 
Tapti field.  Only a very minor proportion was supplied from Panna -Mukta (circa 1 % of 
sales) between Decemb er 2006 and September 2007 to maintain contractual 

-116- 
 
 
 
commitments.  From October 2007, additional volumes of gas from Panna -Mukta were 
supplied under the existing contracts which offered the highest price i.e. US$ 
5.58/mmbtu.  
283. To Audit, reply of PMT JV is not  convincing. The market driven gas price paid by 
GAIL and other buyers during DGM period was for sale of 10.8 mmscmd of gas.  In 
addition to this, PMT JV produced approximately 5.7 mmscmd of gas during the period 
2006-08 both from Panna -Mukta and Tapti con tract areas. PMT JV partners contracted 
their share of additional quantity to private customers, mostly its affiliated parties at 
different prices. BGEPIL and RIL sold their share of gas @US$ 5.58 / mmbtu. During 
last round of audit (2006 -08), in response to audit query, PMT JV stated that this 
additional gas production of 5.7 mmscmd (16.5 less 10.8 from Phase -I existing surface 
facilities) came from the Phase -II development of new surface facilities of the Tapti 
Contract area which was sold at a price of U S$ 5.58 per mmbtu i.e. US$ 0.01 / mmbtu 
higher than the revised Tapti ceiling price. Hence, there was no loss to the GoI in any 
form. However, Audit in the follow up audit of 2008 -12, verified the reply of PMT JV to 
the Audit Exception notified by MoPNG fo r 2006-08 and found discrepancy and hence 
the argument of PMT JV that the issue falls outside of scope of audit is not tenable.  
Audit observed that PMT JV also produced additional gas (14,767,436 mmbtu) from 
Panna-Mukta field for which gas price of US$ 5. 73/ mmbtu was applicable. Sale of 
Panna-Mukta gas at Tapti gas price led to loss of GoI PP and royalty of US$ 0.52 
million that needs to be paid to GoI along with applicable interest. The contention of 
PMT JV that only a minor proportion was supplied from Panna-Mukta was not 
acceptable since there were different PSC prices for Panna -Mukta and Tapti gas and 
the quantum did not have any bearing as contested by PMT JV.  
 
284. MoPNG in its reply (June 2014) stated that notwithstanding the Contractor’s 
reservation that the audit query relates to pre -date period being audited, CAG may like 
to give the financial impact of the two companies charging a price less than the PSC 
price for gas supplied to their affiliates during the entire period including for the years 
prior to period of audit. CAG may suggest the course of action that is available for 
MOP&NG, if any, as a remedial measure.  

-117- 
 
 
 
 
285. The financial impact of GoI take (Royalty and GoI PP) due to sale of gas below 
PSC price by PMTJV and its partners over the period 2005 -08 was US$ 107.66 million 
(Annexure 12). The financial impact for 2008 -11 arising from sale of gas by ONGC to 
TPL at a price lower than PSC price has been worked out at para 3.6.3.2.5 above. GoI 
may take an appropriate view of short payment of GoI PP and royalty on this account 
under PSC provisions. 
286. The Ministry in its response has stated that :- 
"It is a matter of fact that due to the disturbance caused by GAIL's inability 
to lift gas at a higher PSC formula based price, the private companies 
started billing part of the gas at US$3.96 and part of the gas at US $ 5.58 
to their affiliates.  GAIL itself was lifting at gas prices of US$3.86 and 4.75.  
On the other hand as noted by C&AG, ONGC invited tender and entered 
into agreement in June 2006 with TPL for s upplying gas at a comparably 
higher price of US$4.75. 
 As explained above, the notional revenue loss was on account of 
the fact that the PSC formula based price was above the prevailing market 
price and in the absence of GAIL uplifting the entire gas quant ity, the 
constituents of Contractor were allowed to sell gas at rates ranging from 
US$ 3.86 to US $5.58.  ONGC's sale to TPL, being a price discovered 
through tendering, stood on a better ground than other case. As 
recommended by CAG, MoPNG will take a fin al view after considering the 
response of the contractor." 
287. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated that " In the draft audit 
report, CAG observed that ONGC's sale of gas to TPL was at a price less than PSC 
formula price. In the final report CA G has computed that the price difference between 
the PSC formula price and actual price charged by JV during the years 2005 -06 to 
2007-08 worked out to US $ 234 million in Panna Mukta and US $ 252 million in Tapti 
(Annexure 12 of CAG report) causing loss o f US $ 107.66 million in Royalty and GOI 
share of Profit Petroleum. CAG has also computed a revenue loss of US$ 19.62 million 
in respect of gas supplied to TPL by ONGC during 2008 to 2011. As recommended by 
CAG, MoP&NG will take a final view after considering the response of the contractors". 
 
288. On being asked what were the views on the observation of the Audit that the 
PMT JV partners contracted their share of additional quantity of gas to private 

-118- 
 
 
 
customers, mainly their affiliates at different prices which led to loss of GoI Profit 
Petroleum and royalty of US $0.52 million needs to be paid to GoI along with applicable 
interest. ONGC replied as under: 
 "During  the year 2004-05, GAIL (Government Nominee for purchasing the 
entire JV gas) expressed inability to  honour the revised PSC price. As a 
result, for a period of three years (2005 -2008), GAIL purchased only a 
portion of gas from the fields and at a price lower than what is stipulated in 
the PSCs, and GoI permitted the PMT JV to market the surplus gas direc tly 
to consumers for which the gas price stipulated in the PSC was not 
applicable. The additional gas was mainly allocated from Tapti field with a 
very minor portion from Panna -Mukta field. It may also be noted that from 
October 2007, additional volumes of gas from Panna-Mukta  were supplied 
under the existing contracts which offered the highest price of US$ 
5.58/mmbtu. 
However, Government may not agree with the Contractor’s view that the 
gas price stipulated in the PSC is not applicable to the gas sold to 
affiliated parties as the direct sales to affiliated parties arose for the reason 
that PSC price was not paid by GAIL" 
 
XV. DELAY IN NON -FIXATION OF TRANSPORTATION LOSSES OF 
 CONDENSATE 
289. The PSC for Mid and South Tapti is silent on the disposal of condensat e, i.e. 
whether it is gas or crude oil.  PMT JV was treating the condensate as gas till December 
2005.  The transportation and processing of PMT gas was undertaken by ONGC 
through its South Bassein -Hazira offshore trunk pipeline and onshore Hazira faciliti es 
respectively and was governed by a settlement agreement of December 2005 between 
ONGC and PMT JV. In the settlement agreement, the condensate transportation losses 
from the Tapti delivery point to ONGC’s Hazira Plant were to be determined by a 
condensate expert to be jointly appointed by ONGC and PMT JV. Pending 
determination of such losses, it was agreed to treat the Tapti condensate losses 
provisionally as ‘zero’. 
 
290. The non -determination of condensate losses during transportation was 
commented vide Para graph 6.3.2 in C&AG of India (Union Government -Civil) Report 
No.19 of 2011 -12-Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs.  MoPNG in response 

-119- 
 
 
 
stated that JV had already shortlisted international agencies for assessment of 
transportation losses.  As a way forward , the JV and Institute of Oil and Gas Petroleum 
Technology (IOGPT) of ONGC were working on the simulation model to firm up the 
scope of work, results of which were to be validated by a third party expert.  It was 
observed that the condensate transportation  losses have not yet been determined 
(February 2014) even after a lapse of 8 years from the settlement agreement reached in 
2005. The PMT JV and IOGPT -ONGC had only decided (August 2012) the scope for 
determination of Tapti Condensate Transportation losses  and were to start the process 
of selection of ‘Expert’ for determination of Tapti Condensate Transportation losses.   
 
291. The delay in determination of condensate transportation losses has been 
detrimental to ONGC.   
 
 
292. PMT JV in its reply to Audit (February 2014) and to MoPNG (July 2014) stated 
that matters that arise under a settlement agreement between the PMT JV and ONGC 
are outside the scope of the present audit conducted under Section 1.9 of Appendix C 
of the Tapti PSC. Without prejudice to this, it is s tated that “the condensate loss expert 
has now been appointed and are hopeful that the matter will be resolved within the next 
few months.  The transportation losses determined by the independent expert will be 
applied retrospectively from 1 April 2005, and excess amounts paid by ONGC, if any, 
will be refunded (clause 4.4 of the settlement agreement). As such, ONGC should suffer 
no detriment”.  
 
293. MoPNG in reply (July 2014) stated that  CAG needs to consider whether 
condensate will be lost when it is transported in a closed circuit pipeline. MoPNG added 
that any transportation loss paid to ONGC will be detrimental to this PSC by reducing 
Profit Petroleum. Hence, this issue does not warrant reply under PSC audit. It may be 
appropriate to raise the issue to ONGC when ONGC’s accounts are audited.  
 
294. According to Audit, the reply needs to be viewed in light of the fact that the non -

-120- 
 
 
 
fixation of transpor tation loss of condensate was brought out in the previous Audit 
Report No. 19 of 2011 -12. While ONGC is considering internally 6 per cent  as 
transportation and processing loss from condensate, the PMT JV is considering the loss 
as ‘zero’ from 2005 which wa s commented upon.  It is also not out of place to mention 
that the ONGC was considered as a part of GoI while evaluating the bidding of PMT 
fields and the total revenue including the share of ONGC was considered as GoI share.  
In this context, the issue is appropriately raised under PSC audit in the last Audit Report 
and also in the current audit.  The fact, however, remains that the condensate 
transportation loss is yet to be determined even after a lapse of 8 years from Settlement 
Agreement. The Audit, th erefore, recommended that PMT JV may expedite the fixation 
of transportation losses of condensate pending for last 8 years that has impacted the 
interest of ONGC. 
 
295. The Ministry in Action Taken Replies have stated that " a consultant M/s Worley 
Parsons Melb ourne has already been appointed on 09.06.2014 by ONGC and the 
Companies to resolve the issue.  A draft report has already been submitted in this 
regard". 
 
296. On being asked has the transportation losses of condensate pending for fixation 
for last 8 years fixed now. The ONGC replied as under: 
"In order to resolve the issue, the technical expert (“condensate expert” as 
per settlement agreement) has been appointed by PMT JV in agreement 
with ONGC. Based on the report submitted by M/s Worley Parsons, the 
methodologies for working out the condensate loss during transportation 
have been agreed between ONGC & PMT JV and the consequential 
financial implications have also been finalized. The proposals for 
settlement are currently under the approval of the Management  of ONGC 
& PMT JV". 
  

-121- 
 
 
 
RJ-ON-90/1 BLOCK 
XVI. INTRODUCTION 
297. The RJ -ON-90/1, an on  land block is one of the pre -NELP exploration blocks 
awarded in Round IV of pre -NELP exploration rounds in May 1995 to Shell India 
Production Development (SIPD).  The PSC was signed between GoI, SIPD and ONGC 
on 15 May 1995.  Subsequently, SIPD's participa ting interest (PI) was transferred in 
three phases between September 1998 and June 2003 to Cairn Energy India Limited 
and Cairn Energy Hydrocarbons Limited (Collectively termed as "Cairn Energy").  Cairn 
Energy India Limited (CEIL) is the Operator of the b lock. The Block has 25 hydrocarbon 
discoveries (21 oil and 4 gas) made between July 1999 and November 2008.  There are 
three distinct Development Area (Das) in the block approved by the MC to include 
commercial discoveries .  Under the terms of the PSC, ON GC as the designated 
nominee of GoI, had the right, to take a PI upto a maximum of 30 per cent in each of 
three Development Areas viz. DA -I, DA-2 and DA -3.  ONGC was also the licensee of 
the Block responsible for obtaining the Petroleum Exploration Licence  (PEL), Mining 
Lease (ML) and payment of royalty/PEL/ML fees. 
XVII. OBJECTIVE 
298. The main objectives of the performance audit of hydrocarbon PSCs were to 
verify whether:- 
 The systems and procedures of MoPNG and Directorate General of 
Hydrocarbons (DGH) to monitor and ensure compliance by the 
operators and contractors of the blocks with the terms of the PSCs 
were adequate and effective; and 
 
 The revenue interests of the Government (including royalty and GoI 
share of profit petroleum) were properly protected,  and adequate 
and effective mechanisms were in position for this purpose. 
 
XVIII. AUDIT REVIEW  
299. Audit, through their reports - No. 19 of 2011 -12 (Performance Audit) and No. 24 
of 2014 on Hydrocarbon Production Sharing Contracts, have highlighted instances of 
delayed exploration and appraisal activities, scope of better monitoring to ensure 
adherence to the provisions of the PSC which relate to issues of compliance. There 

-122- 
 
 
 
were delays in finalization of minutes of the MC meetings leading to delay in 
commencement of activities. The Works Programme and Budget (WP&B) approved by 
Operating Committee (OC) wa s not submitted to Management Committee (MC) in time 
and the approval of MC was eventually delayed. The delayed submission and approval 
of annual WP&B violated the timelines prescribed in the PSC.  As per request of the 
Operator, GoI agreed to shift the de livery point from Barmer to Salaya with a condition 
that the GoI may designate multiple PSU refineries and approval for  laying of a pipeline 
from Barmer to Salaya and Salaya to Bhogat in Gujarat was granted .  The pipeline was 
delayed with a portion, Barme r to Salaya being completed after delay of about 10 
months in May 2010 and the balance Salaya to Bhogat, scheduled for completion by 
2010 being mechanically completed only in June 2014 (presently under commissioning) 
after expiry of almost four years from targeted completion. The delays contributed to 
increase in pipeline cost which rose to US$ 1108 million (March 2013) against the 
approved cost of US $ 941 million.  The PSC provided that the GOI nominated 
refineries, however, could not uplift the RJ crude and, GoI granted marketing freedom to 
the Operator to sell the remaining crude to domestic private refineries.  During the 
period of audit (2008-12), the sales to domestic private refineries from 2009 -10 to 2011-
12 ranged between 51.11 and 87.57 per cent of the total production, primarily due to the 
inability of the nominated GoI refineries to uplift the crude from the Block.  Audit noted 
that a price for the crude oil would be agreed between the Parties and would be subject 
to agreement by the GoI.  Audit,  however, observed that price of the RJ crude was yet 
to be finalized by the GoI in the absence of which sale of RJ crude was taking place at a 
provisional price agreed between the Operator and the buyers. The issues highlighted 
by the audit have been dealt with in detail in the subsequent paras. 
XIX. EXPLORATION AND APPRAISAL ACTIVITIES  
A. Delayed Relinquishment of Area 
300. The PSC stipulated an exploration  period of seven years, also  permitting an 
extension of upto three years. This extended exploration period expired on 14th May, 
2005. At this stage, the operator was required to relinquish the entire area, except for 
discovery and development areas. However, out of the original contract area of 11,108 

-123- 
 
 
 
sq. km., a total area of 6678.10 sq. km. (including e xtended area of 1708.20 sq. km) 
was retained, which comprised of the following: 
 1859 sq. km. of development area in DA-1 field; 
 
 appraisal area of 2884 sq. km. (Northern Appraisal Area); and 
 
 an additional 1935.10 sq. km. of area in the southern part, whic h 
was not designated as a discovery or development area. This area 
was irregularly retained till 7 November, 2007 (due to non -
submission of maps by the operator in time), when it was finally 
relinquished.  
 
301. Further, out of the appraisal area of 2884 sq. km. in the Northern Appraisal Area: 
 an area of 430.17 sq. km. was converted into Mining Lease [by 
Rajasthan Government for 20 years (DA -2 development area)] on 
15th November, 2006. 
 
 Out of the remaining area of 2453.83 sq. km., the contractor sought 
retention of the entire area for six months (from 15th November, 
2006), but was allowed by MoPNG to retain an area of 879.50 sq. 
km. under PEL from 8th May, 2007 till 7th November, 2007. 
 
 822.00 sq. km. of the area of 879.50 sq. km. was converted into 
Mining Lease (DA -3 development area) on 6th November, 2007; 
however, the balance area of 57.5 sq. km. was deemed 
relinquished.  
 
302. Audit has pointed out that the MoPNG in response to their observations have 
stated the following: 
 The delays in relinquishment were procedural and did not have any 
commercial implications. 
 
 No activity during delays in relinquishment had been reviewed by 
the MC, which would have an adverse material impact on the 
contract. 
 
 Further, DGH had conveyed on 14th November, 2006 to the 
operator/licensee that except for the area of 430.7 sq. km. the 
remaining block area (2453.83 sq. km.) in the Northern Appraisal 
Area stood relinquished from 15th November, 2006. 

-124- 
 
 
 
 
B. Extension of Appraisal Period  
303. MoPNG extended the stipulated exploration period of 7 years by 36 months in 
June 2002 and, in June 2005, approved another extension of 18 months (15 May 2005 
to 14 November 2006) to complete appraisal of the Bhagyam and Shakti discoveries in 
the Northern A ppraisal Area (NAA).  In December 2006, the operator requested a 
further extension of six months for completing appraisal work in the NAA to cover up the 
work which was inter alia hampered for more than three months in view of severe floods 
in Rajasthan.  DGH did not recommend further extension, since the appraisal work (for 
which the earlier 18 months extension was sought and agreed to) was already over.  
However, in May 2007, MoPNG granted a further extension of 6 months effective from 8 
May 2007.  Interestingly, the period of 6 months between 15 November 2006 and 8 May 
2007 was not formally covered by extension. 
 
304. Audit has stated that MoPNG in response to their observation have stated that 
the Government granted (8th May, 2007) six months extension on the  basis of Cairn's 
track record with regard to survey, exploration and discovery, besides the fact that Cairn 
was quite confident of making more discoveries in the Northern Appraisal Area. 
However, the fact remains that this extension was beyond the PSC provisions.  
 
305. On being asked about the rationale for giving repeated extensions to the operator 
beyond the provisions of PSC, the Ministry in their written reply stated that: 
“The exploration period of seven years as per PSC expired on 
14.05.2002. The extension for exploration Phase -III for a period of three 
years till 14.05.2005 was granted by GoI under Article 2.6 of PSC. As per 
Article 2.6 the contractor is entitled to a further exploration phase of a 
period sufficient in accordance with good interna tional petroleum industry 
practice which shall not exceed three consecutive contract years from the 
end of Phase-III. The GoI laid down a condition that any further extension 
of this block will not be sought by the contractor/operator under any 
condition, including the provisions of Article 9 which would not be 
applicable. The condition was laid down because Article 2.9 is applicable 
for extension for completing Appraisal Work on a discovery and not 
applicable for Exploration Work. 
Article 2.9 of PSC: “ Where sufficient time is not available prior to expiry 
of the Exploration Period to complete the appraisal work on a discovery, at 

-125- 
 
 
 
the request of the contractor, submitted with a Work Programme for the 
appraisal the Government shall extend the Exploration Peri od for such 
period, not exceeding thirty (30) Months, as may be required for the 
appraisal work to be carried out by the Contractor in accordance with good 
international petroleum industry practice”. 
Operator sought further extension by 18 months for Appraisal Work in 
northern extension of Shakti and Bhagyam fields. MoPNG, granted 18 
months extension beyond 14.5.2005 to complete the appraisal work in the 
northern area of the Block as per provision of A rticle 2.9 of PSC. Operator 
requested for further six months extension for appraisal of KW -2 and KW-
3 discoveries in erstwhile Northern Appraisal Area. MoPNG granted six 
month extension for appraisal of Northern Appraisal Area effective from 
date of approv al under Article 2.9 of PSC under which extension for a 
period of not exceeding thirty (30) months for completing Appraisal Work 
on a discovery can be granted.  
 Hence all the extensions were granted as per PSC provisions.” 
306. In response to a query of the Co mmittee about the steps been taken to 
strengthen the PSC provisions, the ministry in their reply have stated that the most of 
the non compliance of PSC provisions related to notification of potential commercial 
interest, appraisal programmes and submission  of Field Development Plans etc. has 
occurred as there is no provision in PSC for extension/ relaxation of these timelines. At 
the same time, if discoveries are not agreed based on non adherence to the PSC 
provisions, the explored reserves cannot be moneti sed. In view of above, Government 
has recently approved policy framework, for relaxations, extensions and clarifications at 
the development and production stage under the PSC regime for early monetisation of 
hydrocarbon discoveries where MC / DGH have been  authorized to condone the delays 
and extension of timelines to certain extent after paying pre-defined fee. This will help in 
regularizing such unintended delays in notification of potential commercial interest, 
appraisal programmes and submission of Fiel d Development Plans etc. in accordance 
with the PSC.  
 
C. Discoveries made during/after Exploration Period  
307. Audit has pointed out that the operator carried out exploration  activities and 
made new discoveries within the discovery/development areas, as summarized below:- 

-126- 
 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Discovery 
Date of 
Discovery 
Devel-
opment 
Area 
(DA) 
Remarks 
1. N-I 18.05.2006 DA-2 The exploration period ended on 14th May 
2005. Eight discoveries indicated at serial 
nos 1 to 8 were made after the exploration 
period ended, i.e. during the first appraisal 
period from 15th May, 2005 to 14th 
November, 2006. 
2. GSV 04.07.2005 DA-1 
3. N-C West 04.07.2005 DA-1 
4. N-I-North 21.11.2005 DA-2 
5. Bhagyam south 03.12.2005 DA-2 
6. N-E 09.01.2006 DA-2  
7. N-P 06.04.2006 DA-2  
8. Shakti-NE-1 21.10.2006 DA-2  
9. K-W-2 21.11.2006 DA-3 Three discoveries indicated at serial nos 9 
to 11 were made during 15th November, 
2006 to 7th May, 2007, i.e. the period 
between the first appraisal period (15th 
May, 2005 to 14th November, 2006) and 
the second appraisal period (8th May 2007 
to 7th November, 2007). 
 
10. K-W-3 13.12.2006 DA-3 
11. Saraswati-Crest-1 15.12.2007 DA-2 
12. K-W-6 20.07.2007 DA-3 This discovery was made during the second 
appraisal period from 8th May, 2007 to 7th  
November, 2007. 
13. Raageshwari-East-
1z/Tukaram 
24.11.2008 DA-2 This discovery was made during the 
development phase. 
 
XX. COMPLIANCE ISSUES  
A. Delay in submission of Work Programme and Budget (WP&B) 
308. Articles 6.7 & 9.11 of the PSC provided that the WP& B related to development 
and production operations would be submitted by the OC to the MC for approval not 
later than 31 December each year in respect of the Year immediately following.  
 
309. Audit observed delays in submission of WP&B (2008 -09 to 2011 -12) by OC to 
MC and subsequent approval by MC. 
310. The delays in submission of OC approved WP&B to MC ranged from 91 to 111 
days for the years 2008 -09 to 2011 -12. Further, these WP&B were approved by MC 
taking 70 to 239 days. Thus, delayed submission and approval of annual WP&B 
violated the timelines prescribed in the PSC besides continuance of activities envisaged 
in the WP&B without approval of the MC.   

-127- 
 
 
 
311. The Operator stated (November 2012) that FDPs were multi -year programs and 
the annual WP&B merely reflect phasing  of the expenditure on year to year basis.  In a 
typical multi-year project, what was more critical was the project sanction which existed 
by means of MC approved FDPs. Therefore, in the interest of timely project completion, 
the Operator continued with th e project execution. The Operator in its reply (July 2014) 
to the MoPNG also stated that it endeavored to adhere to the timelines specified in 
PSC. 
312. MoPNG in its reply (June 2014) stated that  PSC provides that the contractor 
should submit the annual work program and budget to the MC by 31 December of the 
previous year.  Though there is no time line for grant of approval by MC, presumably the 
MC has three months (90 days) time for approval of the annual work program and 
budget before the year commences.  Wi th this background, the time taken by MC for 
approval of the budget is not found to be materially different and the PSC timelines were 
generally adhered to.   
313. To Audit, the reply of the Operator was not acceptable as WP&B authorizes a 
particular activity w ithin the approved budget. Approval of the FDP does not preclude 
the need to adhere to the timelines prescribed in the PSC for timely approval of WP&B. 
The contention of the MoPNG that PSC timelines regarding WP&B were adhered to is 
also not tenable as there were delays both in submission of WP&B by OC to MC and in 
approval of WP&B by MC. 
314. Under the PSC, the MC generally functions on the recommendations of the OC. 
Therefore, the significance and relevance of a functioning OC need not be over 
emphasized.  The  instances referred to above were primarily governance issues which 
manifested in terms of delays with consequential impact on production and could be 
addressed when the OC and the MC discharge their functions working with the spirit of 
being collective (a nd not fragmented) units in their respective domains with an active 
(and  proactive) approach. 
315. There is a need for approval of WP&B before commencement of the year. The 
WP&B is the only document, which authorizes a particular activity within the approved 
budget. Therefore, all the stakeholders including DGH/MC should work in coordination 

-128- 
 
 
 
to ensure timely approval of WP&B as PSC mandates that MC approves the 
development and production budgets on annual basis.   
316. The Audit, therefore, recommended that MoPNG/DG H may take action for timely 
approval of the WP&B in future. 
317. The Ministry in their Action Taken Replies have stated Audit exceptions has been 
noted and Annual work programme budget will be approved by MC as per PSC 
timelines. 
318. The representative of ONGC in their presentation made before the Committee on 
21st March 2016 have stated that:  
"Audit exception has been noted and all proactive steps are taken to 
enable timely submission & approval of  WP&B. 
It is to mention that WP&B for FY 2015 -16 was endorsed by OC on 31st 
Dec 2014 and was approved by MC before 31st March 2015, in line with 
the PSC timelines. Also, WP&B FY 2016 -17 has been considered by MC 
in its meeting held on 12th March 2016". 
 
B. Short Payment of Profit Petroleum to GoI - Adjustment of Shipping Cost 
 beyond delivery point 
319. Article 27.2 of PSC, inter alia provides that the contractor would be responsible 
for all costs prior to the Delivery Point 20 and the GoI or its nominee (for evacuation of 
crude) would be responsible for all costs beyond Delivery Point.  Thus, the buyer has to 
incur expenditure beyond the Delivery Point. As an interim arrangement, the GoI 
allowed (October 2009) the Contractor to  establish an interim delivery point at Kandla 
port for transporting the crude to the GoI nominees (HPCL and Mangalore Refineries 
and Petrochemicals Limited (MRPL).  Costs incurred upto Kandla for transfer to GoI 
nominees alone would thus be cost Audit obs erved that HPCL did not take any crude 
against allocation of 0.80 MMT and the Operator transported crude from October 2009 
to June 2010to MRPL and RIL through the delivery point at Kandla (approved to be 
used for crude transportation to MRPL and HPCL only) .  Audit noticed that though the 
                                            
20 As per Article 1.23 “Delivery Point” means, except as otherwise herein provided or as may be otherwise agreed 
between the Government and the Contractor, the point at which Petroleum reaches the outlet flange of the 
delivery facility and different delivery points  may be established for purposes of sales to the Government and 
other sales. 

-129- 
 
 
 
PSC stipulates that the transportation cost beyond delivery point is to be borne by the 
buyers, yet the Operator incurred US$ 8.87 million towards shipping of crude to MRPL 
and RIL beyond designated delivery point (Kandla) and adjusted it from the revenues. 
320. The recovery of US$ 8.87 million had resulted in short payment of PP of GoI by 
US$ 1.77 million (i.e. 20 per cent of US$ 8.87 million).  
321. The Operator stated (November 2012) that since HPCL had expressed its 
inability to uplift the crude, sales to RIL (along with MRPL) were made through trucking 
and without sales to RIL, the production schedule would have suffered badly . It further 
stated that its request to GoI for regularization of sale to RIL through trucking was under 
consideration. The Operator in its reply (July 2014) to the MoPNG stated that the sale to 
RIL was an Arms -Length Sale and accordingly, the shipping costs incurred beyond 
delivery point were deducted from the sale price and thus, the adjustments done were 
as per PSC. 
322. MoPNG in its reply (June 2014) stated that  the contractor was advised by DGH 
on 29  August 2012 disallowing cost recovery of US $ 8.88 million, followed by a 
reminder on 31 January 2014. 
323. To Audit, the reply of the Operator was not acceptable as the adjustment of 
shipping cost of US$ 8.87 million beyond the GoI designated delivery point was in 
contravention of PSC provisions and resulted in short payment of profit petroleum to 
GoI. 
324. Audit therefore recommended that The Operator should carry out cost recovery 
in accordance with PSC provisions as any deviation in this regard would impact 
payment of PP to the GoI. 
325. The Ministry in their Action Taken Replies have stated that: 
"As noted by CAG, the  amount of US$ 8.88 million was disallowed as 
Contract Cost".  
326. The representative of ONGC made power point presentation before the 
Committee on 21st March, 2016 on the point and stated that: Despite allocation by GoI, 
HPCL had eventually expressed the inability to buy the crude oil and MRPL had refused 

-130- 
 
 
 
to lift the crude oil from Kandla Port. Thus sales to RIL & MRPL were made to their 
refineries through marine vessels and consequently the cost of USD 8.87 MM was 
incurred towards the shipping cost. Without t hese sales, the production would have 
suffered badly.  
327. The same expenditure has been adjusted from the revenue as per provisions of 
article 19.3 of PSC which provides for that in case of Arm’s length sales, the delivery 
point shall be the outer flange of the export terminal or the customer’s facility in India or 
as the case may be. 
328. In the event of absorbing shipping cost by the buyer, the sales price at Kandla 
would have been net of shipping charge". However, the Ministry in their presentation 
submitted that contractor has been advised of disallowance of the cost , differential profit 
petroleum will be collected. 
C. Delay in approval of Optimization Concept 
329. With the experience gained during the development of Mangala field, the 
Operator proposed (April 2010)  an optimization concept for Bhagyam Field which was 
deliberated by the MC on 20 August 2010.  MC’s final approval was communicated on 
13 December 2010. Thus, approval of optimization concept took 115 days from the date 
of MC meeting.  This resulted in delayed commencement of activities.  
330.  The MoPNG replied (June 2014) that the Bhagyam optimization concept was 
deliberated in the Management Committee (MC) meeting held on 19 July 2010 wherein 
the MC advised the Operator to formalize the concept through the Op erating Committee 
(OC).  The OC Resolution was ultimately submitted by Operator on 20 August 2010 
which was reviewed by MC.  The MC Resolution (MCR) was signed by DGH on 11 
October 2010 whereas the signing of MCR by remaining MC representatives was 
completed on 13 December 2010. It further stated that substantial deliberation took 
place after the MC meeting on the concept optimization and the minutes were signed by 
circulation without waiting for a physical MC meeting in order to expedite the decision 
making. 

-131- 
 
 
 
331. The Operator in its reply (July 2014) to the MoPNG stated that it would take up 
this point in the MC and mutually agree on the ways and means to ensure timely 
approval/sign-off of MC meetings.  
332. To Audit, the fact remained that despite deliberations on the Bhagyam concept in 
MC meeting on 20 August 2010, the minutes constituting approval of the MC for 
execution of the activities were signed only on 13 December 2010 after nearly four 
months, resulting in underutilization of the budget during 2010-11. 
333. Audit therefore recommended that, All stakeholders should ensure that the 
minutes of MC meetings are firmed up in a timely manner to avoid delays in execution 
of projects.  
334. Ministry in their Action Taken Replies stated that: 
"Audit exception has been noted and the minutes of MC will be finalized 
as per PSC timelines". 
335. The representative of ONGC in their presentation made before the Committee on 
21st March, 2016 submitted that after MC review of the proposal, the substantial 
deliberation took place on the concept optimization and the minutes were signed by 
circulation.  
XXI.  NON-LIFTING OF CRUDE OIL BY NOMINATED GOI REFINERIES 
336. The GoI decided (February 2008) to nominate multiple GoI refineries as GoI 
nominees for evacuation of RJ crude. The PSU refineries, viz. IOCL, HPCL, BPCL and 
MRPL, had also indicated (October 2008) to the GoI that they could absorb 3.5 to 4.2 
MMTPA against  estimated production of 7.5 to 8.75 MMTPA from the Block. 
Consequently, the GoI nominated (March 2009) MRPL, HPCL and IOCL to offtake part 
of the planned production during the year 2009 -10 and 2010 -11. The quantum of 
allocation of crude to GoI refineries and actual offtake from 2009 -10 to 2011-12 was as 
under: 
 (Figures in MMT) 
Year Allocation Actual offtake 
 MRPL HPCL IOCL MRPL HPCL IOCL 
2009-10* 0.20 0.30 0.20 0.20 - - 
2010-11* 0.40 0.50 1.50 0.07 - 0.42 

-132- 
 
 
 
2011-12 - - 1.50 - - 0.98 
Total 0.60 0.80 3.20 0.27 - 1.40 
 0.60+0.80+3.20=4.60 0.27+1.40=1.67 (36 per cent) 
*Upto 14 June 2010 the evacuation of RJ crude was through tankers 
 
337. Audit, however, noted that despite expressing their willingness and ability in July 
2005 and October 2008 to take and process the RJ crude, the nominated GoI refineries 
failed to uplift their allocated share of RJ crude on account of following: 
 During the year 2010 -11, MRPL did not uplift its entire share of 
allocated crude and discontinued lifting crude in June 2010 due to 
inability to process the RJ crude until the Coker unit was installed in 
its refinery.   
 HPCL did not uplift any crude during 2009 -10 and 2010-11 despite 
allocations stating that lifting of crude from Kandla (designated 
delivery point for MRPL/HPCL) was not economical for processing 
at its Vizag refinery.  
 IOCL had confirmed to uplift the allocated crude subject to 
commercial viability. 
338. Thus, the failure of the nominated GoI refineries to uplift their allocated 
share of RJ crude led to: 
 the controlled/moderated production which resulted in shortfall of 
0.41 MMT as indicated by the comparison of actual production 
(0.45 MMT) with forecast production (0.86 MMT) during 2009-10.  
 the grant of marketing freedom (October 2009) to the Operator to  
sell the unallocated portion of the crude produced from the Block to 
domestic private refineries, which took 51.11 to 87.57 per cent of 
the total production from the Block from 2009-10 to 2011-12. 
339.  MoPNG in its reply (June 2014) stated that  the crude oil produced from RJ-ON-
90/1 was heavy containing high wax which made the crude refining a tough task. 
Further, the difficulty posed by MRPL’s inability to lift crude oil as planned initially was 
overcome by MOP&NG and delay in production was halted by nominat ing multiple 
refineries including the private refineries. 
340. Audit took note of the MoPNG’s views that crude oil produced from RJ -ON-90/1 
was heavy containing high wax.  However, the fact that the PSU refineries as nominees 

-133- 
 
 
 
of GoI failed to take even the allo cated share of RJ crude (the entire quantity of which 
was mandated for evacuation by GoI nominees only under Article 18.2 of PSC) 
confirmed the lack of required preparedness. 
341. The Ministry in their Action Taken Replies have stated that: 
"Audit has noted the fact that the crude oil produced from RJ-ON-90/1 was 
highly viscous containing high wax highly viscous containing high wax 
which made the crude refining a tough task. Considering the economic 
implications in making changes in the design of the refineries,  the PSUs 
restricted the off-take to protect their economic interest" 
 
342. The representative of ONGC made power point presentation before the 
Committee on 21st March, 2016 submitted that: 
 RJ Crude is heavy containing high wax content which made the 
crude refining a tough task.  
 MRPL had to discontinue the supply because of Technical reasons. 
 Supply is being made  to IOC for their Koyali & Panipat refineries. 
 Supply to MRPL has been started again  from December 2015 after 
the commissioning of their Coker unit" 
 
XXII. NON-FIXATION OF PRICE OF RJ CRUDE DESPITE PRODUCTION FROM 
 THE CONTRACT AREA SINCE AUGUST 2009 
 
343. Article 19.2 of the PSC provides that a price for the crude oil for each calendar 
month or such periods as may be agreed between the Parties 21 would be determined in 
terms of US$ per barrel.  Article 19.6 of the PSC also provided that the calculation, 
basis of calculation and the price determined would be supplied by the Contractor 
(CEIL, CEHL and ONGC) to the GoI and would be subject to agreeme nt by the GoI 
before it was finally determined and pending final determination, the price determined 
by the Contractor would be used.  
344. As the GoI nominee refineries were not lifting the allocated quantity of crude oil 
                                            
21 ‘Parties’ means the parties signatory to this Contract including their successors and permitted assigns under this 
Contract.  Accordingly, at present, parties to this Contract are the GoI, ONGC Limited, Cairn Energy India 
Limited and Cairn Energy Hydrocarbons Limited.   

-134- 
 
 
 
allocated to them, the GoI allowed (Oc tober 2009) marketing freedom to the contractor 
to sell the remaining quantity to domestic private refineries stipulating that the net back 
crude price realized by the contractor would be as per the PSC and not be less than the 
International price for the benchmarked crude price. The Operator informed (June 2010) 
the GoI that pursuant to GoI approval, the Operator had entered into Term Sheet 
Agreements with the domestic private refineries (RIL and EOL) and the pricing for these 
refineries was based on the f ormula agreed with GoI nominees (IOCL) with additional 
US$ 0.15 per barrel for pipeline sales and US$ 0.75 per barrel for coastal supplies. 
345. Audit  observed that: 
 The price formula for working out the price of crude oil is yet to be 
agreed to by MoPNG and t he sales made to the GoI nominated 
refineries are based on the price agreed between the Operator and 
buyers which was based on the average of the daily mean values 
of the high & low price of Bonny Light (Nigerian) crude 
assessments as published in Platt’s.  Further an additional discount 
of 2.14 per cent was allowed off the benchmark crude (Bonny Light) 
on account of additional cost incurred by buyer for transferring & 
handling of crude oil at buyers refinery due to high pour point and 
high viscosity of Mangala crude. 
 The international pricing expert, engaged (September 2009) for 
determination of crude price, had submitted the draft report to GoI 
in April 2010 which was shared by the GoI with the stakeholders in 
July 2010.  Despite subsequent discussions with  the stakeholders, 
the decision of the Government regarding the pricing of RJ crude 
was not available on  record (July/August 2012).   In the absence of 
GoI agreed price, the sales were continuing based on an agreed 
pricing formula between the Operator and buyers.   
 The Term Sheet Agreements executed (June 2010) by the 
Operator with private refineries (RIL/EOL) 22 were based on agreed 
price with no provisions for revision of price with retrospective effect 
and the private sector refineries have expressed inabi lity to agree 
to a provisional pricing arrangement with retrospective impact .  The 
GoI while informing (15 June 2010) the Operator that the position 
taken by the domestic private refineries with regard to revision of 
price was not acceptable, advised (July  2010) that sales made to 
these refineries be on provisional prices until a final decision was 
arrived at by the GoI. GoI also asked the Operator to sell the 
shortfall quantities to these refineries in the year 2010 -11 only if 
                                            
22 RIL-75000 Barrels/day and EOL 30000 barrels/day. 

-135- 
 
 
 
they agreed to the pricing co nditions. Despite these directions from 
the GoI and pending finalization of pricing by the GoI, crude sales 
to these refineries took place during the year 2010-11 and 2011-12.  
346.  MoPNG in its reply (June 2014) stated that 
 Article 19 dealt with three classes  of sale transactions: a) arm’s 
length transactions, b) sale to Government/ Government nominees 
and c) other than arm’s length transaction. As per the Contractor, 
all sale transactions were considered as falling under the 1 st two 
categories.  
 Article 19.3 dealing with arms’ length transactions did not stipulate 
any specific method of pricing, as the price would be market 
determined.  Whereas Article 19.4 dealing with sale to Government 
/Government nominees stipulated a general method of pricing 
linking the price to international price of crude oil. 
 Article 19.6 stipulates that unless the Government or Government 
Company raised an objection to a price, the last established price 
would be used.  As the prices have been viewed as at arm’s length, 
Government has not objected, so far, to the prices charged by the 
Contractor. In the absence of discovering any discrepancy, the 
prices could be treated as firm for Profit Petroleum and Royalty.  
 Audit may report on the integrity of the price charged to the 
refineries, particularly whether any transaction is not at arm’s 
length. 
347.  The reply of the MoPNG was not acceptable to Audit on account of following: 
 MoPNG had indicated (July 2010) that the price charged was to be 
provisional. The PSC provisions provide that the price is subject to 
agreement of GoI. GoI (MoPNG) had communicated (July 2010) 
that the prices charged were to be provisional. In fact the pri ces 
charged has not yet been agreed to by GoI though such agreement 
is mandated in the PSC. 
 In the same communication, MoPNG had categorically stated that 
the sales to domestic private refineries were not to be construed as 
Arms’ Length Sales. The instant reply of the MoPNG appears to 
contradict this position. 
348. In view of above and the fact that pricing belonged to the domain of the GoI, it 
was difficult for Audit to comment on the integrity or otherwise of the price charged from 
refineries and whether any t ransaction was Arm’s Length Sale or not till the same was 
approved by the GoI in terms of PSC provisions. 
349. Audit accordingly recommended that GoI should promptly finalize the price for 

-136- 
 
 
 
the RJ crude so that the calculation of the PP, Royalty etc. can be made on firm basis. 
350. The Ministry in their Action Taken Replies stated that:  
"The Contractor has crude oil pricing freedom. In the absence of any issue 
of affiliated transaction, the intervention of Government is not envisaged in 
the PSC".  
351. ONGC in their prese ntation made before the Committee on 21 st March, 2016 
submitted that: 
"Basic pricing formula agreed by JV with the IOC is being used with the 
private refiners also. Formula was finalized with IOC at Arm’s length 
basis". 
352. The Ministry during the course of oral evidence in that presentation submitted 
that:  
"PSC provides for Government intervention when price is not at arms' 
length. PSC provides for Arm's Length sale of Crude Oil". 
 
XXIII.  AWARD OF CONTRACT BEYOND PSC PROVISIONS 
353. The operator awarded contracts for procurement of goods and services to 
indigenous and foreign vendors. During the course of audit, 41 contracts in respect of 
which payment valuing more than one million US$ was made during the years 2006-007 
and 2007-08 were reviewed. It was observed that: 
 In three cases, payment of US$ 89.45 million was made against 
contracts awarded on nomination or on single financial bid basis; 
 In one case, payment of US$ 1.49 million was made against the 
contract awarded without assessing reasonability of rates; and 
 In two cases, payment of US$ 20.63 million was made against 
contracts extended beyond contractual provisions, without availing 
economies of scale. 
354. In response, MoPNG stated (July 2011) that any amount assessed by audit  in 
the final report that should not be considered would be considered for appropriate action 
for deletion from contract cost. In this connection, we recommend that  MoPNG validate 
the award of contracts failing under the categories listed above, so as to d raw 
assurance that Government's interest was protected. 
355. The Ministry in their Action Taken Replies has stated that: 

-137- 
 
 
 
"Operator has been advised to provide clarification/reply on issues raised 
in the report. Amount assessed by CAG in the final report will be  
considered for appropriate action". 
356. The representative of ONGC made presentation before the Committee on 21 st 
March, 2016 and submitted that: 
"The tendering process is resorted to by the operator, however, approval 
for award of the contracts is endorsed by the OC. 
During this period initial phase of the Field Development was in progress 
with efforts to commence early production and the contracts were 
endorsed by OC in the best interest of the JV.  
In some cases, during bidding, only one bidder was technic ally qualified 
and in some cases, contracts have been extended by the operator in the 
operational interest. However, one case awarded on nomination basis was 
not agreed by MC". 
357. Further, the Ministry in their presentation submitted: 
"Operating Committee (OC ) consisting of members from ONGC and Cairn 
monitores the award of procurement contracts, whose CAG has not 
identified any affiliated transaction, undue benefit to the Contractor, 
negligence or fraud". 
 
  

-138- 
 
 
 
PART-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
 
Introductory: The Committee note that with the reforms in the economy, the 
Government decided to liberalize the framework governing the oil and gas 
Exploration and Production Sector hitherto the preserve of the Government 
Sector. In early 1990s, Government of India invited foreign and domestic Private 
Sector Companies to participate in the development of discovered oil and gas 
fields, and in some cases, fields partially developed by the National Oil 
Companies (NOCs)-Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited (ONGC) and Oil India 
Limited (OIL). During pre -NELP exploration bid round, National Oil Companies 
(NOCs) were licensees of the blocks and had right to take participating interest 
upto 30% in development phase. Government awarded small and medium sized 
discovered and producing oilfields as well as some exploratory blocks to foreign 
and domestic Private Sector Companies in this round. In 1997, the Government 
formulated a New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP) which was notified in 1999 
with the objective of not only at tracting private capital but also introducing the 
technical expertise and efficiency of global players in the field. Under the NELP 
regime, both NOCs and private companies were allowed to participate in the 
bidding of acreages on a level playing field and blocks were awarded through 
open international competitive bidding and after award, the PSC( Production 
Sharing Contract) was signed between Contractor parties and the Government of 
India . The PSCs for specific fields/ blocks laid out the roles and respon sibilities 
of all parties, stipulated the detailed procedures to be followed at different stages 
of exploration, development and production and also indicated the fiscal regime 
(cost recovery, profit sharing etc) . Though, under both pre -NELP and NELP 
regimes, period of exploration was regulated by the terms and conditions of PSC 
and Petroleum Exploration License (PEL) and petroleum mining was regulated by 
terms and conditions of PSC and Mining Lease (ML), the content of PSCs varied 
substantially among those for discovered fields, pre NELP exploratory blocks and 

-139- 
 
 
 
NELP blocks and even within different NELP rounds. The principle underlying the 
PSC (Production Sharing Contracts) model, under the NELP, involved a sliding 
scale for profit sharing between the Government of India and the Contactor based 
on the Pre Tax Investment Multiple (PTIM) i.e. an index of the accumulated net 
cash flow to the contractor relative to the accumulated expenditure on 
exploration and development activities.  The exploration risk viz. the costs 
incurred in searching for oil and natural gas, without certainty of discovery, were 
to be borne by the Contractors as they incurred capital expenditure towards the 
discoveries and it was only when hydrocarbons were discovered and assessed to 
be c ommercially viable, the Contractor had the right to recover costs from the 
revenue streams accruing from sale of oil and gas. The balance revenue , termed 
as Profit Petroleum (PP) after the Contractor had recovered all his costs was to 
be shared between the Contractor and the Government. The Government share of 
revenues became significant only when the production reached substantial levels 
and the Contractor had recovered his accumulated costs. Further, PSC also 
contemplated a Management Committee (MC), cha ired by a Government of India 
representative, with the responsibility to approve field development plans, as well 
as annual work programmes and budgets for development and production 
operations to ensure that the expenditure proposed to be incurred as well  as 
actually incurred by the Operator did not adversely affect the Government's 
revenue interests. 
 Article 25 of the PSC stipulated 2 levels of Aud it by independent auditors 
viz. a) Appointed by the Management Committee; b) Appointed by the 
Government. The C&AG undertook a Special Audit (2nd level audit) of four blocks 
viz. Panna-Mukta, Tapti, KG-DWN-98/3 and RJ-ON-90/1 out of the eight blocks on 
the request of Secretary, MoPNG made in the wake of large stakes of the 
Government in the form of royalty and p rofit petroleum, and concerns voiced in 
some quarters about the capital expenditure being incurred by some Contractors 
in the development projects awarded under NELP. The C&AG Audit included 
scrutiny of the records of the MoPNG and DGH for the period 2003 -04 to 2007-08 
and supplementary scrutiny of the records of four operators for the period 2006 -

-140- 
 
 
 
07 and 2007 -08. The findings of the C&AG Audit have been incorporated in their 
Report No 19 of 2011 -12 on ''Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon Production 
Sharing Contracts". C&AG accepted the request of MoPNG to audit 8 blocks and 
undertook Audit of four blocks PY -1, PY-3, Kharsang and CB -ON-7 for the years 
2007-09 and initiated Performance Audit of the implementation of the 
Hydrocarbon PSCs at the MoPNG and DGH and financial and propriety audit at 
the Operator's premises in respect of the rest of the four blocks viz. KG -DWN-
98/3, Panna-Mukta, Tapti and RJ-ON-90/1 for 2008-12.The observations emanating 
from the aforesaid Audit are contained in C&AG Report No. 24 of 20 14. The 
Committee took up examination of both the Reports simultaneously as these are 
based on the Audit of the same blocks over different periods. The Committee 
note that the C&AG in their first Report had not quantified the costs to be 
disallowed as per their findings under the PSC provisions by the Operators. The 
Committee further note from the submission of the Secretary, MoPNG  that in the 
absence of quantification of the deficiencies by the C&AG, it was not possible for 
them to act thereupon. However,  in their second Report, C&AG have done the 
quantifications of the costs to be disallowed wherever price discovery was 
possible. The Committee's examination of the subject and their observations/ 
recommendations on the issues raised in both the Audit Repor ts are detailed in 
succeeding paragraphs. 
2. Production Sharing Contracts and the Cost Recovery:  The Committee note 
that the basis on which the share of the Government in Profit Petroleum is 
decided is called 'Pre-tax Investment Multiple' which is the ratio o f cumulative net 
cash income to the cumulative exploration and development cost. The cumulative 
investment remains as a denominator and it helps to prevent the contractor to 
manoeuvre on annual basis i.e. by increasing the production in a year or 
increasing the cost in a year, the Contractor will not be able to take advantage.  
The Committee note that whatever revenue comes in, the Contractor will recover 
his cost out of the first 90 percent; the 10 percent which remains with him is 
called profit petroleum and the sharing formula in that 10 percent is that the 
contractor will take ` 9 (90 percent) and the Government will get ` 1 (10 percent) 

-141- 
 
 
 
i.e. the Government's profit will jump from 10 percent to 60 percent if the PTIM 
changes from 1.5 to 3.5.  But the Aud it has pointed out that Government's share 
comes down when the cumulative investment goes up and the investment 
multiple comes down.  The Ashok Chawla Committee on ' Allocation of Natural 
Resources' had highlighted that the IM -based profit sharing system "g ives 
incentive (to an operator) to increase his investment or front -end his work plan in 
order to see that the threshold where Government's profit take rises rapidly is not 
reached."   The Chawla Committee had further pointed out that once the PTIM 
crosses 2.5, the Government's share of profit increases dramatically for which the 
operator may adopt all investment and strategies possible to ensure that the 
PTIM stays within the 2.5 limit. The Ministry submitted that based on  experience, 
over so many years o f NELP, it was seen that today 90 per cent of problems, 
which it was facing, and all arbitrations and litigations, were basically related to 
cost recovery. The Committee further note from the submission of the Ministry 
that the formula has been revised keep ing in mind the C&AG's observations and 
the Ashok Chawla Committee's recommendation and its own experiences, and a 
revenue sharing model contract in place of the present profit sharing regime has 
been introduced, for future bidding rounds under new Hydroca rbon Exploration 
and Licensing Policy. The Committee while appreciating the switch over to a new 
model desire that , in case of already signed 249 PSCs, it becomes imperative 
that the contentious issues arising there from are resolved in an amicable manner 
with prospective application. 
 
3. Roles and functions of DGH : The Committee note that the roles and 
functions of DGH encompass two sets of functions with potential conflict of 
interest - an upstream regulatory function and a function of rendering technical 
advice to the GoI. Audit had, therefore, observed that technical advisory and 
related functions should be discharged by a body completely subordinate in all 
respects to MoPNG and functions of regulatory nature should be discharged by 
an autonomous body, wit h an arm's length relationship with GoI. The Committee 
note that Committee on Open and Competitive Mechanism for Allocation, Pricing 

-142- 
 
 
 
and Utilization of Natural Resources (Ashok Chawla Committee ) in its Report on 
PSCs had also observed that transparency in the management of contracts and 
associated considerable financial implications should be enhanced by increasing 
the independence of the regulatory mechanism, clarifying the separation of the 
policy maker, regulator and the operator and bringing the decisio n making 
process into the open. The Committee take note of the reply of the MoPNG that 
regulatory functions are demarcated & laid down by way of contract terms, Act 
and Rules; DGH is ensuring compliance of regulations by Contractors and role of 
technical advisory is discharged by DGH under the direct control of MoPNG and a 
separate study by Boston Consulting Group(BCG) was done by MoPNG before 
taking future course of action. The Committee observe that long delays in 
operational decision making, budget appro vals, huge administrative burden of 
conducting cost audits, disputes arising between the government and operating 
companies on matters of cost recovery, information asymmetry and the 
potentially misaligned incentives are affecting the management of the PSC s by 
the Government. The Committee are of the opinion that the first step towards 
better management and effective implementation of the provisions of the PSCs 
would be to strengthen DGH and instead of filling places with deputationists for 
3-5 years , a se parate cadre of technical experts should be constituted for the 
technical and advisory functions of DGH. Further, the Ministry will have to 
consider separating regulatory functions as technical experts cannot be strained 
to double up as regulators and also  policy makers cannot possibly be effective 
regulators. The Committee are of the opinion that the mandate of extant 
Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board (PNGRB) "to regulate the refining, 
processing, storage, transportation, distribution, marketing a nd sale of 
petroleum, petroleum products and natural gas excluding production of crude oil 
and natural gas so as and to ensure uninterrupted and adequate supply of 
petroleum, petroleum products and natural gas in all parts of the country" may be 
extended/ strengthened to include the exploration, development and production 
of crude oil and natural gas for regulating the PSCs .  The Committee opine that 

-143- 
 
 
 
since a large number of PSCs have already been signed and RSCs will be signed 
in future, the Ministry should take the  decision in this regard at the earliest. 
 
4. New gas pricing policy: The Committee note that CCEA approved a new 
gas pricing policy in 2014 based on the modification of gas pricing formula 
proposed by the Rangarajan Committee with prospective appl ication and a s per 
the formulation approved ,upward revision in gas prices would be approximately 
75% less as compared to the price arrived at using Rangarajan formula, 
approximately 80% of the additional revenue due to revision in gas price would 
go to th e Government companies and Government would get additional revenue 
of approximately Rs. 3800 crore per annum on account of higher royalty, higher 
profit petroleum and higher taxes. The Committee further note the Government is 
considering incentivizing gas production from deep -water, ultra deep -water and 
high pressure -high temperature areas, which are presently not exploited on 
account of higher cost and higher risks and a proposal is under consideration for 
new discoveries and areas which are yet to commenc e production, first, to 
provide calibrated marketing freedom; and second, to do so at a pre -determined 
ceiling price to be discovered on the principle of landed price of alternative fuels. 
The Committee while appreciating that the Government has already in itiated 
steps to provide marketing and pricing freedom in a calibrated manner  to be 
produced from the difficult areas such as deep water, ultra deep water, high 
pressure and high temperature reservoirs with a upper cap on pricing and also 
pricing and mark eting freedoms for the fields to be auctioned under the 
Discovered Small Fields Policy and blocks to be offered under new Hydrocarbon 
Exploration and Licensing Policy are of the view that care should be taken to 
ensure that gas is neither sold at very high  prices as the ceiling price is 
dependent on prices of alternative fuels and nor at very low prices to benefit 
some parties on the pretext that it is being sold below the ceiling price. 
 
 

-144- 
 
 
 
KG-DWN-98/3 Block 
 The KG -DWN-98/3(KG-D6) Block with a contract area  of 7645 sq.km., 
classified as 'deepwater block' with water depth ranging from 400 to 2700 m, was 
awarded to a consortium led by Reliance Industries Limited with a Participating 
Interest of 90% and its JV partner Niko Resources Limited(10%) in April, 2000.  In 
2011, RIL assigned its 30% share to BP Exploration (Alpha) Limited but continued 
to remain the Operator of the Block. Based on exploration activities between 2002 
and 2012, a total of 19 discoveries have been made in the Block. Out of these 19 
discoveries, one discovery is primarily an oil discovery and the remaining are gas 
discoveries.  
A. The Committee note that the Contractor has invoked arbitration on the 
following: 
 Disallowance by GOI of Cost for fall in production rate that  
under utilized the facilities; 
  
 Disallowance by GOI of three appraisal wells; 
 Inclusion of marketing margin by GOI in sales revenue for 
profit sharing; and 
 Exclusion of Parent Company Overhead and affiliated 
transactions for profit sharing. 
 
5. The Committee find that the Contractor has invoked arbitration in almost all 
the cases where Government has disallowed the costs. The Committee also note 
that the  Ministry in their submission before the Committee agreed that there were 
anomalies in the provisions and the Ministry was learning over the process right 
from the pre-NELP stage. The Committee further find that a "policy framework for 
relaxations, extensions and clarifications at the development and production 
stage under the PSC regime for early monetization of hydrocarbon dis coveries" 
was issued by the Ministry in November 2014 to rectify the anomalies noticed by 
them in practical implementation of the provisions of the PSCs. The 
representative of the Ministry, during the evidence, on a query regarding how to 

-145- 
 
 
 
reduce litigations and arbitrations stated that " under the new policy where it has 
moved away from the production -sharing to revenue -sharing contract it will not 
look at the day -to-day management like cost recovery and other things. It would 
only be interested as to how m uch production operator is doing; how much 
revenue he is getting; and out of which how much he will share with the 
Government which he has to declare upfront in a formula while bidding and that 
will be followed". The Committee while appreciating that the M inistry has learnt 
its lessons are apprehensive about the status of issues between the Government 
and the Contractors that have been lingering on due to the original provisions 
which have now been relaxed. The Committee are of the view that a strong 
dispute resolution mechanism should be put in place to address the concerns of 
both parties and further desire that the Ministry decide its course of action in 
such cases and apprise them.  
B. The other major audit observations in respect of KG-D6 block are as under: 
 Non- relinquishment and declaration of entire contract area as 
discovery area; 
 
 Award of 10 specific contracts of which 8 were awarded on the 
basis of a single financial bid; 
 
 The review of DoC in respect of three discoveries, viz. D29, 
D30 and D31, was to be completed by MC by August 2010. 
However, due to lack of adequate production testing data, 
DGH rejected the DoC proposal. The issue was reopened after 
almost three years from the date when it was rejected by DGH 
and was being considered; 
 
 DGH approved Optimized Field Development Plan (OFDP) for 
four satellite discoveries. Initially, OFDP was not techno -
economically viable; however, it was made marginally viable 
by devising different scenario and changing assumptions, e.g. 
exclusion of royalty, variation in capex etc.; and 
 
 Change orders/ post contract modifications affected by the 
Contractor. 
 

-146- 
 
 
 
6. Non- relinquishment of contract area :  The Committee note that since the 
Contractor was allowed to enter the second and third exploration phases without 
relinquishing 25 percent each of the total contract area and to retain the entire 
Contract Area by treating it as 'discovery area' at the end of Phase -I  and Phase-II, 
Audit had recommended that MoPNG should review determination of the entire 
contract area as discovery area strictly in terms of PSC provisions as contained 
in Article 4.1 and 4.2 and delineate the stipulated 25% relinquishment area at the 
time of the conclusion of the 1st and 2nd exploratory phases and then correctly 
delineate the discovery ar ea, linked to wells or wells drilled in that part, without 
considering any subsequent discoveries.  The Committee also note from the 
reply of MoPNG that it has applied appropriate provisions as deemed fit as per 
Article 4 that deals with the Contractor's r ight to retain and relinquish the 
Contract Area in phases and permits the retention of the 'discovery area' by the 
Contractor at the end of exploration phase I and II for further exploration and 
appraisal operations and  Article 3.11 that deals with retent ion of portions of 
Contract Area beyond the exploration phases on account of development 
operations . Further, MoPNG in its reply have submitted that the discoveries 
made in phase-I were in plio-pleistocene zone and the discovery area demarcated 
is related  with the plio -pleistocene stratigraphic level. However, the area 
demarcated separately in subsequent phase i.e. 5445 sq. km. is related with 
different stratigraphic level, therefore, discovery area was related with the 
discovery made at specific stratigraphic level and retention of discovery area was 
in accordance with article 1.39 of PSC. The Committee also note that Audit in its 
latest report have recommended that , pragmatically, MoPNG should accept 
sharing of exploration cost of only those of the wells  which resulted in a 
commercial discovery and disallow the cost recovery already effected by the 
Operator on the remaining wells.  The Committee  take note of the MoPNG's 
concurrence, though delayed , to the retention of the entire Contract Area as 
Discovery Area by the Contractor till the conclusion of Phase III which was based 
on 3D seismic surveys of the Block insisted upon by the DGH, which was 
technically qualified to take such decisions.  The Committee also note that 

-147- 
 
 
 
though  under NELP -I to NELP -VII, the provision of relinquishment of 25 percent 
contract area was there but from NELP -VIII onwards, the operator(s) need not 
relinquish any area. The Committee after taking into consideration the 
observations of C&AG, the submissions of the operator and the Ministry and the 
provisions of the PSC particularly Article 4.1 of the PSC which states that "..in the 
event  Development Areas and Discovery Areas exceed 75%, the Contractor shall 
be entitled to retain to the extent of Development Areas and Discovery Area s" are 
of the opinion that delineating Development and Discovery Areas require 
technical expertise and accordingly the MC and DGH on the request of the 
Contractor allowed the contractor to retain the 'Contract Area' as the 'Discovery 
Area' and ,therefore, the exploration costs incurred by the Contractor on unviable 
discoveries cannot be disallowed as the Contractor is entitled to recover Contract 
Costs out of a percentage of the total value of petroleum produced and saved 
from the "Contract Area" as per the PSC.  
 
7. Award of contracts  on the basis of a single financial bid:  Audit found that 
the payments during 2006 -07 and 2007 -08 revealed instances of huge 
procurement contracts where it could not derive assurance as to the 
reasonableness of the costs incurred , primarily due to lack of adequate 
competition i.e. award on single financial bids; major revisions in scope/ 
quantities/ specifications; post price bid opening; substantial variation orders - 
with consequential adverse implications for cost recovery and G oIs financial 
take. The Committee note the observation of the Audit that since any 
commercially prudent private acquisition would have also attempted to generate 
competition and thereby obtain ed the most competitive price which was not 
perceptible in the aforementioned process, MoPNG may carefully review in depth 
the award of 10 specific contracts (of which 8 were awarded to Aker Group 
companies) on the basis of single financial bid. The Ministry in their reply,  
however, instead of taking up any review, hav e stated that the Operating 
Committee monitored the contract award as per Appendix F of PSC and C&AG 
did not quantify the impact and also did not find any affiliated transaction or fraud 

-148- 
 
 
 
to invalidate the integrity of procurement. The Committee while takin g a serious 
view of the MoPNG's reply that in absence of any quantification, action cannot be 
taken opine that MoPNG has been vested with the resources of the country in 
fiduciary capacity and therefore has the inherent responsibility to ensure that 
they a re exploited in the interests of the country and accordingly, keeping a 
check on the outflow of resources in the form of Cost Petroleum is an inseparable 
part of that responsibility. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry 
should develop robust monitoring mechanism within the existi ng PSC framework 
to ensure that, henceforth, a fully transparent and cost -effective pro cess is 
adopted by the Operator which gives assurance to the Government that costs 
have indeed been competitive. 
 
8. Review of DoC in r espect of three discoveries, viz. D29, D30 and D31:  The 
Committee note that as required under PSC, the Operator submitted in February 
2010 a DoC(Declaration of Commerciality) proposal for D29, D30, D31 and D34 
discoveries for review by the MC and the DGH i n June 2010 informed Operator 
that the discoveries were marginal and not viable at US$4.2/ mmbtu since the 
Modular Dynamic Test carried out by the operator did not provide individual 
testing rates to demonstrate sustainable production levels. The DGH, agai n, in 
October 2010 communicated to the operator that the DoC could not be reviewed. 
However, in November 2011, DoC in respect of D34 discovery was reviewed after 
the Operator submitted related additional test data/ information. But, in respect of 
D29, D30 and D31, DGH stated that commerciality of discoveries could not be 
evaluated in the absence of production tests which provide sustainable 
production levels from the reservoir as no appraisal wells were drilled in the 
pools of discovery wells to substantiat e the production rates considered by the 
Operator. DGH felt that the profile generated without considering MDT/ (Drill Stem 
Test) DST data in the wells was not on a sound technical basis. In May 2012, the 
Operator again requested MC to complete review of D oC for D29, 30 and D31 and 
submitted a proposal in October - November 2012 to undertake DST in only one 
well out of the three discoveries and DGH while agreeing to the proposal asked 

-149- 
 
 
 
the Operator to submit a plan for surface flow test for other two discover y wells 
also. However, the Operator did not carry out the same and later argued that, as 
per PSC, a) the DST was not mandatory, b) the Contractor has the right to 
determine requirement for DST based on its technical judgment and c) it was not 
the only test  . Subsequently, DGH, in April 2013, proposed that the area 
pertaining to these three discoveries be relinquished as the Operator could not 
keep a part of the Contract Area for an indefinitely long period in the garb of an 
incomplete DoC proposal. In Octob er 2013, the matter was referred to CCEA( 
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs) for its information fully explaining the 
facts and circumstances of the case and the Contractor was allowed to retain 298 
sq km. contract area as the matter was being consider ed. The Committee note 
from the reply of the Ministry that the issue was reopened for review in view of 
the petroleum potential of the discoveries in an energy starving country for an 
appropriate decision by competent authority in terms of the PSC provisio ns and 
the interest of energy security. The Committee further note from the reply of the 
MoPNG that the CCEA has, in April 2015, given relaxation for conducting DST by 
capping such test cost recovery upto US $ 15 m per test and , accordingly, the 
operator has now completed DST for D29 and D30 discoveries and has 
relinquished D31 discovery and has to submit revised DOC for D29 and D30 by 
28th April 2016. The Committee are of the view that Government took around 5 
years in taking a decision on the issue. The Committee observe that the long 
delays in clearances and operational decision making results in huge cost 
overruns and eventually affects the Government's share of PP. The Committee 
are of the view that energy starving country needs regular supply of the 
resources which is hindered by such delays. The Commit tee while noting that the 
CCEA has relaxed the provisions by providing that Operator should either 
relinquish or carry out DST and pay penalty for delays or develop the discoveries 
on his own in ringfenced manner are of the view that a comprehensive policy may 
be brought out allowing alternative tests for confirming commerciality of the 
discoveries to ensure that the policy does not get redundant with introduction of 
new technologies. 

-150- 
 
 
 
 
9.  Optimized Field Development Plan (OFDP) for four satellite 
discoveries:The Committee note that Contractor in July 2008 submitted a 
Development Plan (DP) in respect of 9 Satellite Gas Discoveries (SGD) for 
approval of MC which was found non -viable at the gas price of US$4.2 per 
mmbtu. The Contractor submitted in December 2009, an Optimized Field 
Development Plan  (OFDP) for four satellite discoveries. Initiall y, the OFDP was 
not techno -economically viable; however it was made marginally viable by 
devising different scenarios and changing assumptions e.g. exclusion of royalty 
as expenditure, variation in capex etc and was eventually approved by the DGH. 
The Comm ittee note that MoPNG had directed DGH to engage a third party for 
validation of capex but no third party could be engaged and the MC approved 
OFDP without waiting for the decision of MoPNG in this regard. The Committee 
note that Audit had recommended that  MoPNG may consider fixing norms/ 
criteria for working out techno -economic analysis of a FDP. The Ministry in its 
reply had submitted that the economic viability was evaluated at different 
scenarios so as to optimize the decision making in order to avoid n on- 
development of any discovery and since techno economic evaluation is guided 
by the principle of economics and application of mind, setting separate norms 
may not be possible. However, the Ministry in their written replies has now 
submitted that the tea m constituted for framing the “Good International 
Petroleum Industries Practices” has identified the best practices being followed 
for all technical and commercial activities under the PSC and the report has been 
submitted for adoption and notification. Th e  Committee while appreciating that 
the Good International Petroleum Industries Practices are being identified desire 
to be apprised of the practices as soon as they are notified and further desire the 
Ministry to ensure that decisions are taken by the MC  after getting views from all 
the stakeholders, as in the instant case, in the absence of validation of capex by 
third party, the reasonability and justification of capex and GoI share of PP could 
not be ass ured. The Committee also desire that MoPNG seek  explanation of the 

-151- 
 
 
 
representative of MoPNG i.e. Chairman of MC,  and the representative of  DGH in 
the MC who did not wait for MoPNG's decision. 
 
Change orders/ post contract modifications affected by the Contractor 
 
10. Contract for Engineering, Procurement, Installation and Construction of 
offshore facilities : The Committee note that the Operator awarded contact for 
Engineering, Procurement, Installation and Construction (EPIC) of offshore 
facilities for development of D1 -D3 fields to M/s Allseas Marine Contr actors S.A. 
(AMC) in October 2006 consisting of three milestones to be achieved by July 
2008. However, AMC was not able to achieve the milestones and informed the 
Operator in June 2008 that various factors attributable to Operator, AMC and sub -
contractors were preventing it from performing its obligations under the contract, 
rendering it inoperable both in delivery and contract administration. AMC asked 
the Operator to pay for the extra expenses to achieve the earliest possible First 
Gas date and also the a dditional expenses already incurred in the past months 
due to deviations in the suggested scheme. The Committee note that the 
Operator initially refuted the claims made by AMC asserting that the AMC should 
acknowledge and accept responsibility for its lack of performance, but, eventually 
after discussions with AMC submitted a proposal before the OC requesting it to 
grant some concessions demanded by the AMC. The Committee find that the OC 
gave concessions which included providing additional resources for ex pediting 
the works without any cost to AMC, substituting  the subsea construction vessel 
by paying mobilization fee, additional diving spread free of cost, additional 
amount  for delays not attributable to AMC, relaxation in levy of LD, incentive for 
achieving first gas by specified date and assistance and paying for resources for 
expediting jumper fabrication. As per Audit, Appendix C of PSC provides that " 
amounts paid with respect to non -fulfillment of contractual obligations are not 
recoverable and not allowable" and , therefore, should not be recoverable from 
the block. As per Operator, " ..the options before the Operator were not only 
limited but would have carried dubious legal credibility in view of the fact that it 
could insist on imposing liquidate d damages knowing fully well that certain 

-152- 
 
 
 
reasons for delay not being on account of AMC such a decision would have been 
contested and would have only led to the AMC halting work on the project and 
getting into prolonged litigation with the Operator." MoPNG  in its reply has stated 
that the post vendor contractual agreements between the Operator and the 
vendor validly amended the original vendor -contract and the audit report did not 
point out any legally tenable ground for cost disallowance such as affiliated  
transactions to the undue advantage of Contractor, any incidence of fraud and 
costs not supported by payment evidences. Audit further observed that these 
concessions granted by the Operator were not in line with EPIC contract 
including provisions relating  to change in contract price' The Committee after 
carefully considering the audit opinion and the replies of both Operator and  
Ministry are of the view that to ensure transparency in post vendor contractual 
agreements, in future, the Ministry should presc ribe a threshold amount for the 
change orders above which the Operator should invariably approach it for 
clearance. 
 
11. Extension of Dry Docking life:  The Committee note that , in May 2007, 
Operator entered into an agreement with M/s Aker Contracting FP AS, N orway 
(ACFP/ vendor) for chartering of a Floating, Production, Storage and Offloading 
(FPSO) facility for ten years on lease rental basis for extraction, production, 
storage and offloading of oil & gas from MA oilfield, from the date of first 
production. However, within four months   of signing the agreement, the Operator 
requested  the vendor to extend the dry docking( a term used for repairs or when 
a ship is taken to the service yard so that the submerged portions of the hull can 
be cleaned and inspected ) life of the FPSO from 10 to 15 years for a one -time 
compensation to the vendor. The Operator reasoned that the decision was taken 
to avoid interruption in production during the dry -dock period at the end of 10 
years, additional costs due to increased sc ope of work, inflation, mob/ demob for 
dry-docking, potential loss of reserves due to uncertainty about revival of wells 
after closure and loss in value due to deferment of production. ." MoPNG in its 
reply has stated that the post vendor contractual agree ments between the 

-153- 
 
 
 
Operator and the vendor validly amended the original vendor -contract and the 
audit report did not point out any legally tenable ground for cost disallowance 
such as affiliated transactions to the undue advantage of Contractor, any 
incidence of fraud and costs not supported by payment evidences. Audit had 
observed that extension of dry -docking period from 10 to 15 years while keeping 
the FPSO charter period to 10 years, led to higher cost recovery and adversely 
affected GoIs share of PP and  since the Operator has yet to renew the agreement 
after September 2018, it may not result in any expected benefit till the contract 
gets extension. The Committee are of the view that instead of asking for any 
legally tenable ground MoPNG should ensure tha t the benefits claimed by the 
Operator are materialized by monitoring the implementation of the post vendor 
contractual agreement in letter and spirit. The Committee are of the view that the 
additional costs incurred for extending the contract to 15 years should be allowed 
to the contractor only when the utilization of FPSO exceeds 10 year under the 
PSC.  
 
12. Increased cost for expediting date of first production of oil and gas:  As per 
Audit, at the time of issue of ' Request for Proposal' RFP for FPSO, one of  the 
eligibility conditions insisted upon by the Operator was that the Date of First 
Production of Oil (DFPO) b e on or before 15.2.2008 which was changed and the 
final agreement stipulated that it could be between 7 -27.4.2008 but was 
subsequently extended to 30.9.2008 in October, 2007. In July 2008, the vendor 
communicated that the work and delivery dates could be expedited by putting in 
place measures having cost consequences which were agreed to by the Operator 
and included payment for mobilizing its comm issioning team and one -time 
compensation on account of expediting deliveries and timely installations. Audit 
observed that , in April 2008, MC had approved the DFPO on or before June 2009 
and , therefore, there was no necessity for expediting deliveries , as the vendor 
was entitled to lease rental for FPSO from DF PO, it was in his interest to achieve 
that at the earliest and  the vendor had actually missed his deadlines and was 
already working on extensions. As per the Operator, the execution of all the 

-154- 
 
 
 
contracts were inter-linked and involved significant interfaces, delay in execution 
of one aspect could have had a cascading impact on the schedules resulting in 
far greater expenditures and that under the PSC, RIL had the right to make certain 
operational, technical and commercial decisions based on its best judgment and 
it was not appropriate to second -guess these judgments in hindsight. As per the 
Ministry, the post vendor contractual agreements between the Operator and the 
vendor validly amended the origin al vendor-contract and the audit report did not 
point out any legally tenable ground for cost disallowance such as affiliated 
transactions to the undue advantage of Contractor, any incidence of fraud and 
costs not supported by payment evidences. The Commit tee are of the view that 
though the Operator is the  best judge of the operational and technical needs and 
decisions required therein , the commercial implications of such decisions 
directly affect the interests of the Government and the whole nation. The 
competitiveness  of the transactions carried out by the Operator would ,therefore, 
always be open to public scrutiny. The Committee after considering the views of 
the C&AG, Operator and the Ministry opine that a cost -benefit analysis of the 
decision taken by the Operator to expedite the first gas date may be made before 
allowing the costs. 
 
13. Fabrication and installation of living quarters : The Committee note that 
as per the agreement relating to functional requirements in FPSO, the general 
facilities / requirements for operations include air-conditioned living quarters with 
configuration of one bed, two beds and four beds cabins to accommodate 104 
people and the contract price was based on creation of additional living quarters 
of 40 beds and re use on a n as-is basis of 64 existing living quarters on the FPSO 
with minimum refurbishment. However, extensive refurbishment and upgradation 
with modifications and re -design of the 64 existing living quarters was done on 
the request of the Operator which resulted  in additional compensation to the 
vendor. The Operator explained that the personnel working offshore are 
subjected to hard life and harsh working conditions and upgraded and 
extensively refurbished living quarters would not only mitigate some of the 

-155- 
 
 
 
hardships but also improves productivity , safety and alertness. MoPNG in its 
reply has stated that the post vendor contractual agreements between the 
Operator and the vendor validly amended the original vendor -contract and the 
audit report did not point out an y legally tenable ground for cost disallowance 
such as affiliated transactions to the undue advantage of Contractor, any 
incidence of fraud and costs not supported by payment evidences. Audit 
observed that it was the responsibility of the vendor to depute personnel on the 
FPSO and the existing contract with additional 40 quarters had met the 
requirements of the FPSO charter contract and also the harsh working conditions 
were always known and could have been finalised at the time of procuring FPSO. 
The Committee also note that the development plan for the MA field included the 
cost of purchase of FPSO but the Operator chartered the FPSO. The 
refurbishment was also guided by the option of purchase at any time during the 
charter period which has not been exerci sed so far. The Committee observe that  
refurbishments could have been negotiated at the initial stages as the harsh 
conditions and existing layouts were available at that time. The Committee, 
however, are surprised to note that the Ministry, in its presen tation to them, has 
bunched all the expenditure related issues and given a single reply to all of them 
without any issue related reasoning, clarification or explanation. The Committee, 
therefore, desire to be apprised of the MoPNG's reply  on the  need, necessity and 
level of the refurbishment undertaken at the request of the Operator. 
 
14. Construction of Onshore Terminal: The Committee note that the contract 
for construction of Onshore terminal (OT) was awarded on cost-plus basis to L&T 
Ltd. (vendor) and as  per original contractual provisions " no compensation is 
payable to the vendor on account of the Plant & Equipment (P&E) provided by the 
Operator either owned or hired in the case of vendor being unable to mobilize the 
P&E. However, the said clause was am ended to exclude cranes from its ambit 
and resultantly, the Operator, in addition to incurring expenditure on hiring of 
these cranes, had to pay top up compensation on them like other P&E supplied 
by L&T. The Operator in its reply submitted that since the suppliers of the crane 

-156- 
 
 
 
were reluctant to accept the contract through L&T and due to shortage of such 
cranes in the market, it had to hire the cranes directly and as these cranes require 
a lot of handling by the L&T, the Operator was justified in the paymen t of 
compensation to the vendor. Audit had observed that the scarcity of the cranes in 
the market or reluctance of suppliers to deal with L&T could not be a justification 
for amending the contract and pay additional amount to L&T as the principle 
underlying such transactions was clear in the respect that it had already provided 
that no compensation is payable to the vendor in case of vendor being unable to 
mobilize P&E and, therefore, the cost recovery may be disallowed. MoPNG in its 
reply has stated that t he post vendor contractual agreements between the 
Operator and the vendor validly amended the original vendor -contract and the 
audit report did not point out any legally tenable ground for cost disallowance 
such as affiliated transactions to the undue adva ntage of Contractor, any 
incidence of fraud and costs not supported by payment evidences. The 
Committee desire that Ministry look into the  contract to see whether such 
amendments can validly be made which change the basic principles and whether 
such mark -ups are usually charged by the vendors in similar contracts and 
apprise the Committee thereof. 
 
15. Payment of compensation on Free Issue Materials:  The Committee also 
note that the Operator had awarded four contracts relating to construction of OT, 
construction of Jetty and Infrastructure facilities near the OT on cost -plus basis 
to L&T Ltd and M/s AFCONS Infrastructure Ltd(AI Ltd). These contracts contained 
provisions for FIMs (Free Issue Materials) which were to be arranged by the 
Operator at its own cost a nd , therefore, different  clauses of the contracts 
excluded various FIMs supplied by the Operator from the purview of payment of 
compensation to the vendor.  But, a percentage of the value of FIMs of some 
categories supplied by the Operator was included i n the payment of 
compensation to the vendor. The Operator submitted that in order to incentivize 
the contractors to bid for supply of labour & provision of construction equipment 
contract, Operator had to agree for a reasonable mark -up on FIMs and that the se 

-157- 
 
 
 
FIMs were not capital items and were related to day to day construction materials 
which require project execution skills, planning and co -ordination to meet 
construction schedule and if procurement were kept in the Contractor's scope 
directly then this would have resulted in double taxation with respect to VAT and 
Service Tax and increased compensation on this account. MoPNG in its reply has 
stated that the post vendor contractual agreements between the Operator and the 
vendor validly amended the origina l vendor-contract and the audit report did not 
point out any legally tenable ground for cost disallowance such as affiliated 
transactions to the undue advantage of Contractor, any incidence of fraud and 
costs not supported by payment evidences. The Committ ee are of the view that 
the Ministry should  call for a comparative statement of costs incurred due to 
such provisioning and costs incurred if the materials were directly procured by 
the vendor before taking a decision on the allowance of the costs. 
 
16. Classification of Start -up and Production Bonuses as part of recoverable 
costs  As per Audit, during the period 2008 -09 to 2009 -10, the Operator charged 
long term bonus(LTB), productivity linked incentives(PLI), start -up bonus and 
production bonus paid to its e mployees in proportion to number of hours they 
were engaged in the work relating to this block. The Operator has been paying 
LTB as a retention bonus and PLI to its E&P employees. In addition the start -up 
and production bonuses were given to the E&P employ ees on the occasion of 
starting first gas production. Audit had stated that PSC provides for payment of 
bonus to those assigned personnel who are directly and necessarily engaged in 
the conduct of the petroleum operations and allows recovery of eligible co sts 
related to the Contractor's locally recruited employees who are directly engaged 
in the conduct of petroleum operations under the contract in India and assigned 
personnel and includes salaries, wages and other costs which are as per the 
personnel policy and are of a regular nature. Audit had observed that since start -
up and production bonus are one -time and of an ad -hoc nature, these should not 
be paid from the revenue earned from the sale of gas. According  to Operator, the 
PSC nowhere stipulates such restrictions and the opinion of the audit is not in 

-158- 
 
 
 
line with the provisions of the PSC as it is clear that the cost of employee 
benefits, including bonus are eligible for cost recovery and the start -up and 
production bonus was paid to employees as a perfo rmance bonus for completion 
of activities directly concerned with the project to improve employees morale and 
productivity. Audit further stated that Operator has been paying LTB as a 
retention bonus and PLI to its E&P employees for improving morale and 
productivity  and retaining the experienced employees. MoPNG in its reply has 
stated that the post vendor contractual agreements between the Operator and the 
vendor validly amended the original vendor -contract and the audit report did not 
point out any legal ly tenable ground for cost disallowance such as affiliated 
transactions to the undue advantage of Contractor, any incidence of fraud and 
costs not supported by payment evidences. The Committee are of the view that 
as the disagreement between the parties in volves correct interpretation of the 
provisions of PSC, MoPNG may seek the views of Ministry of Law thereon and 
apprise the Committee thereof. 
 
17. Piece-meal hiring of drilling rig:  The Committee note that the Operator 
awarded charter hire of an off -shore dee p water drilling rig to M/s Transocean 
Offshore International Ventures Limited (Transocean/vendor) in April 2005 for 24 
months. In December 2005, seven months after awarding first contract, the 
Operator initiated the tendering process for charter hiring be yond 2007 as the 
Operator observed that availability of Deepwater drilling rigs had become scarce. 
The second contract was again awarded to Transocean for 36 month period 
commencing from August, 2008. Audit observed that despite having adequate 
drilling pr ospect and keeping in view the poor response received from the 
vendors for provisioning of the rigs , the Operator did not find it prudent to 
consider the option of long -term hiring and availing the firm rate advantage of 
such long term hiring which result ed in additional expenditure. The Operator 
submitted that approval for laying of pipelines to evacuate & market gas was 
delayed by the MoPNG by 17 months which delayed the project and considering 
the aforesaid uncertainty in execution of IDP, there was no rationale for 

-159- 
 
 
 
contractor to commit drilling rigs on the basis of IDP . MoPNG in its action taken 
notes stated that " this can be at best considered as inadequate appreciation and 
lack of proper planning by the Contractors. The Contractors may not be aware of 
future behaviour of market for hiring of services. Audit may reconsider this 
disallowance". MoPNG in its latest reply has stated that the post vendor 
contractual agreements between the Operator and the vendor validly amended 
the original vendor -contract and the audit report did not point out any legally 
tenable ground for cost disallowance such as affiliated transactions to the undue 
advantage of Contractor, any incidence of fraud and costs not supported by 
payment evidences. The Committee after taking i nto consideration the Audit 
observation, the submission of the Operator and the replies of the Ministry are of 
the view that costs cannot be disallowed as both the contracts were awarded on 
the basis of competitive tendering process in accordance with proc edure 
prescribed in the PSC , moreover, whether additional costs have actually been 
incurred by the Operator and the extent of any such extra expenditure cannot be 
assumed in absence of per day rates that would have been quoted by the vendor 
for a five year contract instead of the two year contract that was awarded in 2005 . 
However, the Committee do not appreciate the Ministry's passive role in such 
high value contracts and reiterate as recommended by them in the preceding 
paragraphs that a threshold amount for the orders/ contracts may be prescribed 
above which the Operator should invariably approach the Ministry for clearance. 
 
18. Bonus paid for time saved during rig movement:  The Committee further 
note from the observation of the Audit that the Operator paid M/s Transocean 
bonus for time saved during the rig movement between wells with hanging Blow 
Out Preventor (BWP) which were not covered under the terms and conditions of 
the contracts and hence should be disallowed. According to the Operator, the 
vendor was entitled to performance incentive in accordance with the provision of 
the contracts for completing the wells ahead of the target number of days and the 
incentive scheme was to be mutually agreed and payment modalities were to be 
separately worked out  as per the contracts. But Audit contended that the 

-160- 
 
 
 
incentive should have been accordingly paid for completion of wells rather than a 
single activity of rig movement. According to  MoPNG, the amount involved was 
actual expenditure incurred in petroleum operations in a transaction not reported 
by audit to be an affiliate transac tion or transaction unduly benefitting the 
Operator/ Contractor. The Committee are of the view that as the disagreement 
between the parties involves correct interpretation of the provisions of PSC, 
MoPNG may seek the views of Ministry of Law thereon and ap prise the 
Committee thereof. 
 
Panna-Mukta and Mid & South Tapti Fields 
 The Panna-Mukta (primarily an oil field) and Mid &  South Tapti (gas field) 
are shallow water fields located in the offshore Bombay basin, were initially 
discovered and operated by ONGC.  Following the 1992 offering of small and 
medium sized oil and gas fields for development, GoI awarded (February 1994) 
the Panna-Mukta and Mid & South Tapti contract areas, which were discovered by 
ONGC, to a consortium comprising of ONGC (40 per cent), RIL (30 per cent) and 
Enron Oil & Gas India Ltd-ENRON (30 per cent) (together called Contractor) under 
a production sharin g arrangement. The PSC was signed in December 1994 
between the GoI and the Contractor. The Contractor formed an unincorporated 
joint venture (JV) called PMT JV. In February 2002, British Gas Exploration and 
Production India Limited (BGEPIL) acquired ENRON’ s 30 per cent stake in the JV 
and became a party to the PSC. Presently, the field is jointly operated by ONGC, 
RIL and BGEPIL.  
 
 The C&AG in their Report No. 19 of 2011 -12 have scrutinised records of the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoPNG) and the Directorate General of 
Hydrocarbons (DGH) in respect of a sample of 20 PSCs covering the period from 
2003-04 to 2007-08, and also con ducted supplementary scrutiny of records of the 
operators of 4 blocks/fields including Panna -Mukta and Mid & South Tapti 
covering the two year period 2006-07 and 2007-08.  
 

-161- 
 
 
 
 The C&AG in their Report No. 24 of 2014 have covered the four years 
period from 2008-09 to 2011-12 and contains the results of the Performance Audit 
on 'Hydrocarbon Production Sharing Contracts' at the Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas (MoPNG) and the Directorate General of Hydrocarbons (DGH) with 
respect to blocks/fields including that of Panna-Mukta and Mid & South Tapti.   
 
 ONGC in their presentation have stated that the Tapti field is at the verge of 
closure due to cessation of production.  Hence, no further development activity 
can be undertaken by PMT JV in this field.   
 
 The following recommendations have been made based on the  
observations of the C&AG and the submissions of the Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas (MoPNG) and the Operator i.e. Oil and Natural Gas Corporation 
Limited (ONGC):-  
 
Non-Signing Of Crude Oil Sales Agreement (COSA) 
19. The Committee note that despite elapse of more than 21 years (since 1994), 
COSA has not been formalized by the Panna -Mukta JV with IOCL (GoI nominee) 
due to non -resolution of issues such as delivery point, storage charges, dead 
freight, voyage costs/ losses, terminal charges, measurement conversion table, 
dollar rupee exchange rate, lay time in monsoon and delayed payments and 
interests thereon.  The non-signing of COSA for Panna-Mukta PSC has previously 
also been commented and highlighte d in C&AG audit reports of 1996, 2005 and 
2011.  Thus, non -signing of COSA led to non -resolution of storage and voyage 
expenses and are shown as recoverable by PMT JV from GoI/GoI's nominee i.e., 
IOCL.  The Ministry and ONGC while deposing before the Commi ttee and in their 
written submission have stated that various correspondences and meetings were 
held between PMT JV & IOCL since the commencement of crude oil sales in 1994 -
95.  However, the issues could not be resolved. Subsequently, in 2014 a Task 
Force was constituted which has so far held seven meetings, the last one being 
on 08.03.2016.  As per the Minutes of the 5th meeting of  Task Force held on 

-162- 
 
 
 
20.04.2015, the settlement of issue related to sale of crude oil for Panna – Mukta 
have agreed on along wi th agreement that the PMT JV shall prepare a draft 
settlement agreement on the basis of these signed minutes within 15 days. The 
PMT JV were to share a draft of the more detailed COSA within 90 days from the 
date of execution of the Settlement Agreement. T he Parties have agreed that post 
signing of the settlement agreement and until such time that the COSA is 
executed, the settlement agreement shall be binding agreement between the 
Parties and shall be basis on which all future sale and purchase of crude oi l from 
Panna-Mukta area occurs.  The Committee are shocked to find that even though 
21 long years have passed, the PMT JV could not resolve the pending issues 
resulting in non-signing of COSA and loss to the exchequer.  This shows the non-
serious approach of the PMT JV as well as IOCL. The Committee also desire the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas to look into the reasons for inordinate and 
inexplicable delays and failure of the monitoring mechanism of the Ministry and 
fix responsibility by taking appr opriate punitive action against the concerned 
officials.  Accordingly, the Committee may be apprised on the matter within four 
months of the presentation of the Report. 
 
Cost Recovery of Unconsumed Production Inventory: 
20. The Committee note that Section 3.1.8 of the PSC stipulates that material 
and equipment held in inventory shall be charged to the accounts only when 
such material is removed from inventory and used in Petroleum Operations. 
However, contrary to the PSC provision, the contractor has charge d production 
inventory to cost recovery on date of purchase irrespective of its actual usage in 
Petroleum Operations. It was also seen that some inventory was not used for 
more than four years. The cost recovery made by the contractor without actual 
usage for petroleum operations had adversely affected GoI share of PP. The PMT 
JV's contention that such production consumable items are maintained at 
reasonable levels so as to avoid any production downtime due to non -availability 
of such items was contested by  the audit. Audit further pointed that PMT JV may 
ensure that production inventory is charged to accounts only when such material 

-163- 
 
 
 
is removed from inventory and used in petroleum operations as provided in the 
PSC. The Committee while deprecating the PMTJV's  violation of provisions of a 
mutually agreed PSC, desire that as agreed to by the Ministry, year wise inventory 
included by Operator in the contract cost should be corrected in the account for 
subsequent years. 
 
Award of Contract for Installation of Platforms 
21. The Committee note that PMT JV entered into a settlement agreement with 
M/s Swiber for relocating the PK and SWP platforms on a nomination basis in 
March 2010 rather than on a tender basis as mandated in the PSC. The actual cost 
for transportation and  installation far exceeded the estimates. It was astonishing 
to find that against the estimated cost, the actual contracted price was more than 
double. The PMT JV's contention that the estimate was merely on early estimate 
of likely cost was objected to by  the Audit. The Audit pointed out that the 
estimates for PL project had been prepared in August 2008 and the contract was 
awarded merely a month later in September 2008 to M/s Swiber for SWP and PK 
platforms based on quotes received in the tender for SWP and PK platform. Audit, 
therefore, concluded that the cost incurred for the transportation and installation 
under PL project was comparatively very high vis -a-vis the original estimates.  
The PMT JV in their explanation submitted that they engaged Swiber to  undertake 
the modifications to minimize the time for award of contract as the material was 
under care of Swiber and there was concern that there might be a dispute under 
the existing contract with Swiber regarding incomplete scope and also there was 
no desire to incur extensive storage costs from Swiber. 
 
 The Committee are not satisfied with the MoPNG's observation that audit 
exception has been notified to the contractor. The Committee while deprecating 
the lackadaisical attitude of the MoPNG recommend that the Ministry should look 
into the issue of award o f contract to M/s Swiber on settlement basis rather than 
on tender basis as mandated in the PSC and also see if it has adversely affected 
the GoI's share.   

-164- 
 
 
 
 
Delay in Water Injection (WI) Project in Panna Field Resulting in Declining 
Production 
22. The Committ ee are concerned to note that delay in implementing Water 
Injection (WI) in Panna field has resulted in decline in production.   The DGH as 
well as the JV were aware of the continuous fall in reservoir pressure and 
consequent decline in production from Pan na field from 2003 onwards (10 -12 per 
cent in 2003 to 12 -15 per cent in 2007 -08 and to 18 -20 percent in 2010 -11).  
Keeping in view the decline in production the PMT JV submitted a 'Panna B Zone 
Water Injection Pre -Feasibility Report' in 2011 and subsequent ly requested for 
extension of PSC term till economic life of the field.  The Committee are shocked 
to know that DGH in March 2012 in response to the JV have stated that pressure 
maintenance should have been started as soon as it was evident that the 
reservoir pressure was falling below saturation point and that the Operators 
should have proposed WI in early 2000 if they were serious about good 
operational standards and reservoir management.  The Committee further note 
that DGH is yet to approve the feasibil ity report and as on date there is no further 
progress on the decision on the PSC extension.  The fact that Pre -Feasibility 
study report submitted by PMT JV in September 2011 for expeditious 
implementation of WI scheme and DGH taking six months (October 20 11 to March 
2012) to take a decision and communicate to the JV, puts question on the DGH 
role resulting in delay in Water Injection project and consequent decline in 
production from Panna field.  The Committee desire that the Ministry to impress 
upon the D GH to complete the examination and subsequent implementation of 
the Report along with other measures to check declining trend in the production 
from Panna field. The Committee also desire the Ministry to take view on 
extension of PSC at the earliest.  
 
Sale of Gas in Contravention to MoPNG'S Directives   
23. The Committee observe that ONGC ignored MoPNG directives of March 
2006 and entered into a long term contract for 12 years and signed GSPA in June 

-165- 
 
 
 
2006 with M/s Torrent Power Limited (TPL) for supply of 0.9 mmscmd of gas at 
the rate of US$ 4.75 / mmbtu with a provision to review the price after expiry of 3 
years from the date of first supply.  At the same time, contrary to GoI decision the 
other two partners, RIL and BGEPIL, also sold gas at the rate of US$5. 58 per 
mmbtu (i.e. higher by US$0.01 per mmbtu of revised PSC price of Tapti field). 
Supply to TPL commenced from 30 May 2008 and continued at the lower rate of 
US$ 4.75 per mmbtu till May 2011 and it was made at PSC price only from June 
2011.  The gas sol d to TPL was at a price lower than the price prescribed in the 
PSC (Panna-Mukta revised PSC price of US$ 5.73 / mmbtu and Tapti revised PSC 
price of US$ 5.57 / mmbtu).  Further, the Committee observe that ONGC also did 
not reduce the sale of gas proportion ate to the decline in production in the Tapti 
and Panna -Mukta fields during the year 2008 -09 to 2011 -12 and on the contrary 
sold more gas to TPL during 2009 -10 to 2010 -11 vis-a-vis 2008-09.  The Ministry 
have submitted, since GAIL was unable to lift gas at  a higher PSC formula based 
price, ONGC entered into agreement in June 2006 with TPL.  Further, the Ministry 
have stated that the notional revenue loss was on account of the fact that the 
PSC formula based price was above the prevailing market price and in  the 
absence of GAIL lifting the entire gas quantity, the Ministry permitted the 
constituents of JV to sell gas at rates ranging from US$ 3.86 to US$ 5.58.  The 
Committee are in agreement with Audit that the argument of ONGC on Article VIII 
of Tripartite Agreement i.e. the GAIL was fully responsible for the performance of 
the existing contract is not tenable as ONGC was selling its share of gas to TPL 
below the PSC price and it was obligatory on the part of ONGC to periodically 
inform GAIL about the drop in  level of production for making proportionate 
reduction in supply to TPL. The Committee are of the firm view that the Ministry, 
should have been proactive in monitoring the dispensation of additional gas 
production (over and above 10.8 mmdcmd) by the PMT J V when it had issued 
clear instructions. The Committee strongly deprecate the casual approach of the 
Ministry in protecting the interest of the government and desire that the failure of 
ONGC first to find a buyer at PSC price and later on to curtail on pro  rata basis 
the supply of gas to TPL be enquired into and responsibility be fixed.  The 

-166- 
 
 
 
Committee also desire the Ministry to look into whether the competitive prices 
were not obtained by the other two JV partners while supplying the gas to their 
affiliates.   
 
Delay in Non-Fixation of Transportation Losses of Condensate    
24. The Committee note that although the PSC for Mid and South Tapti was 
silent on the disposal of condensate, i.e. whether it is gas or crude oil, PMT JV 
was treating the condensate as gas till December 2005. Further, the 
transportation and processing of PMT gas was undertaken by ONGC through its 
South Bassein -Hazira offshore trunk pipeline and onshore Hazira facilities 
respectively and was governed by a Settlement Agreement of December 2005  
between ONGC and PMT JV. In the Settlement Agreement, the condensate 
transportation losses from the Tapti delivery point to ONGC’s Hazira Plant were 
to be determined by a Condensate Expert to be jointly appointed by ONGC and 
PMT JV. Pending determination of such losses, it was agreed to treat the Tapti 
condensate losses provisionally as ‘zero’.  The Audit further noticed that  while 
ONGC was considering internally 6 per cent as transportation and processing 
loss from condensate, the PMT JV was considering t he loss as ‘zero’ from 2005. 
The ONGC's submission that with the appointment and submission of the report 
by the Condensate Expert (M/s Worley Parsons Consulting) both parties have 
agreed to consider a shrinkage of 3.6 per cent.  Further, the proposed amou nt 
payable to ONGC at US$7.943 million has to be adjusted against pending PMT JV 
invoices of US$13.08 million upto 30.09.2015. In view of the differential 
consideration of condensate losses ranging from 'zero' (PMT JV) to 6 percent 
(ONGC) and subsequent ca lculation of shrinkage as 3.6 percent (Condensate 
Expert) clearly shows that the validity of observation made by the Audit.  The 
Committee are of the view that the issue of fixation of transportation losses of 
condensate should not have been kept pending f or so long and therefore desire 
that the Ministry may take appropriate steps to look into the non -serious attitude 
of the PMT JV for not appointing the Expert although the Settlement Agreement 
was reached in 2005.   The Committee further desires that all i ssues related to 

-167- 
 
 
 
approvals and final settlement of the matter may be pursued expeditiously and 
the Committee apprised accordingly.    
Matters Related to Arbitration 
25. The Committee find that the two JV partners namely RIL and BGEPIL 
served Arbitration notice s to GoI and have raised claims pertaining to i) Cost 
Recovery provisions under Panna -Mukta and Tapti PSC, ii) Calculation of IM, iii) 
Amount of royalty payable under PMT  PSC, iv) Amount of cess payable by 
Contractor to GoI, v) Amount of service tax  payable under PSC, and  vi) Meaning 
and effect of Accounting and Audit provisions.    It has been further noted that on 
the directions of the Ministry, ONGC has not participated in the Arbitration and 
ONGC has agreed that they shall abide by the arbitral award.  The Committee 
further note that majority of the problems in the PSCs over the NELP regime are 
related to cost recovery.  While appreciating the Government's move for doing 
away with micro -management or day -to-day operations and moving from profit 
sharing towards the revenue sharing model, the Committee hope that this will 
help the prospective PSCs for lesser disputes and thereby early settlement of 
issues between the parties.   The Committee desire that an effective mechanism 
should be developed for speedy  resolution of cases so that the aggrieved parties 
need not spend long years for redressal of their grievances.  
 
RJ-ON-90/1 Block:  
 RJ-ON-90/1 Block ,an onland block (mainly in Rajasthan, with a small 
portion in Gujarat), was awarded in Round- IV of the Pre-NELP exploration rounds 
in May 1995 to Shell India Production And Development(BV) (SIPD) which, 
subsequently, transferred its Participating Interest(PI) to Cairn Energy India 
Limited and Cairn Energy Hydrocarbons Limited (collectively termed as  Cairn 
Energy) in three phases during September 1998 to June 2003. ONGC was the 
licensee and was responsible for obtaining the Petroleum Exploration License  
(PEL) and Mining Lease(ML) and had the right to take a PI upto a maximum of 
30% in each Development  Area (DA). ONGC acquired 30% PI in two Development 
Areas, DA -1 and  DA -2, while its decision to acquire 30% in DA -3 was under 

-168- 
 
 
 
reference to MoPNG. The major observations of Audit regarding RJ -ON Block are 
as under: 
a)  Declaration of fresh discoveries duri ng the appraisal/ development 
phases within delineated discovery/ development areas amounted to 
irregular extension of exploration activities. 
b)  Non- compliance of PSC provisions for notification of potential 
commercial interest, appraisal programme, submission of Field 
Development Plans etc. 
c)   Adjustment of costs incurred towards shipping of crude to MRPL 
and RIL beyond delivery point resulted in short payment of Profit 
Petroleum to GoI. 
d)    MRPL's inability to take RJ crude citing its characteri stics ( highly 
viscous with huge pour point and residue)  and refining capacity 
adversely affected production and evacuation of crude from the 
block. 
e)   Delay in submission of Work Programme and Budget. 
26. Delay in submission of WP&B: Audit observed that th ere were delays in 
submission of annual WP&B in each of the years from 2008 -09 to 2011-12 on the 
part of OC ranging from 91 -111 days and on the part of MC ranging from 70 -239 
days which meant that the WP&B for a financial year was actually approved after 
the beginning of the financial year and, shockingly, the WP&B for 2011 -12 was 
submitted to the MC in April 2011 and approved by MC in December 2011. The 
Committee note from the reply of the Operator that "..annual WP&B merely reflect 
phasing of the expenditure on year to year basis …what was more critical was the 
project sanction which existed by means of MC approved FDPs.." and, further, 
from the rep ly of the MoPNG that the " PSC provides that the Contractor should 
submit the annual work programme and budget  to the MC by 31st December of 
the previous year. Though there is no time limit for grant of approval by the MC, 
presumably the MC has three months (90) days for approval of the annual work 
programme & Budget before the year commences. With this background, the time 
taken by MC for approval of the budget is not found to be materially different and 
the PSC timelines were generally adhered to". The Committee are shocked to 
note that a Ministry of Government of India that is well versed with the budgeting 

-169- 
 
 
 
process and its benefits is undermining its importance. The Committee are of the 
view that it is obvious, the budgets are to be approved before the onset of the 
financial year, hence, there are no timelines prescribed in the PSC.  The 
Committee also do not appr ove the Operator's contention that budgets merely 
reflect phasing of expenditure on year to year basis and observe that besides 
estimating, as realistically as possible, the cost to be incurred in the ensuing 
year, they provide a means to  monitor  how closely the actual progress toward 
achieving the objectives is being made relative to the proposed budget. The 
Committee while appreciatin g that the WP&B for 2015 -16 was approved by MC 
before 31.3.2015  desire that the same practice be followed every year as the 
WP&B authorizes a particular activity within the approved budget. 
 
27. Adjustment of Shipping Cost beyond delivery point:  As per PSC, the 
Contractor would be responsible for all costs prior to the delivery point (DP) and 
the GoI or its nominee would be responsible for all costs beyond the delivery 
point and as an interim arrangement, the GoI had allowed delivery point at Kandla 
Port for transporting crude to HPCL & MRPL. The Committee note that as HPCL 
did not take any crude against its allocation and the Operator transported crude 
from October, 2009 to June 2010 to MRPL and RIL through the delivery point at 
Kandla and adjusted the expend iture (for oil supply beyond the DP towards  
shipping of crude to MRPL & RIL) against the revenue which resulted in short 
payment of Profit Petroleum to GoI. As per the Operator, since HPCL did not 
eventually buy crude oil and MRPL refused to lift the crud e oil from Kandla Port, 
sales to RIL and MRPL were made through marine vessels and the costs so 
incurred were charged from the revenue as per Artcle 19.3 of PSC  which 
provides that in case of Arm's length sales, the delivery point shall be the outer 
flange of the export terminal or the customer's facility in India or as the case may 
be. The Committee, however, note from the reply of the Ministry that the 
Contractor was advised by DGH in August 2012 disallowing cost recovery 
followed by a reminder in Januar y 2014. The Ministry has again in March  - April 
2016 reiterated that " the Contractor has been advised disallowance of cost and 

-170- 
 
 
 
differential profit petroleum will be collected". The Committee are not able to 
comprehend as to why after lapse of around 4 years Ministry has not been able to 
collect the differential profit petroleum when the C&AG had quantified the costs 
in 2012 itself. The Committee desire that the differential profit petroleum may be 
collected at the earliest and the Committee apprised thereof. 
 
28. Inability of Government Nominee to lift crude:  According to Audit, as per 
Article 18.2 of PSC, the GoI or its nominee is under obligation to purchase the 
entire crude from the contract area  and, accordingly, GoI designated MRPL as its 
nominee for RJ cr ude as ONGC and HPCL both had confirmed their ability to 
process the entire crude indicating that a pipeline would be laid from Barmer to 
Mundra port for taking the crude to their existing refineries viz. MRPL and HPCL. 
However, MRPL informed GoI that it c ould not take full allocation because of 
peculiar characteristics of RJ crude which resulted in nomination of multiple 
refineries by GoI for purchasing the crude; shifting of DP from Barmer to Salaya 
to Bhogat; and delaying of commencement of production fr om Q4 2007 to H2 
2009. GoI approved in April 2008 shifting of delivery point from Barmer to Salaya, 
a location suitable for nominated refineries, but in December 2008, when the work 
had already started, the Operator requested for shifting it to Bhogat in v iew of 
ecological considerations and the pipeline from Barmer to Salaya was completed 
after a delay of 10 months in May 2010 and  from Salaya to Bhogat scheduled to 
be completed in Q22010 was completed in June 2014. The Committee note that 
the delays resul ted in rescheduling of drilling of wells and sale of crude through 
tankers which caused the controlled/ moderated production during the delayed 
period. Further, the GoI nominated refineries could not lift their allocated crude as 
MRPL discontinued its off -take till the installation of its Coker unit, HPCL did not 
lift any crude and IOCL had confirmed uplifting subject to commercial viability. 
Two spur lines built to facilitate delivery of crude to IOCL also remained 
underutilized as IOCL did not lift its fu ll allocation. The Committee note that the 
inability of the refineries nominated by the GoI to lift RJ crude led to various 
delays and had huge cost implications. The Committee feel that the Ministry 

-171- 
 
 
 
should have been extra cautious while nominating other r efineries once MRPL 
failed to lift the allocated crude despite confirmation by the ONGC at the 
beginning. The Committee are also shocked to note that the Ministry only 
followed the Operator and its advice and did not take adequate measures before 
sanctioning the pipeline from Barmer to Salaya as ecological clearances should 
have been insisted upon by the Ministry itself before sanctioning the first 
pipeline. Also, since IOCL had only agreed to lift crude subject to commercial 
viability, the Ministry should have undertaken a cost -benefit analysis before 
approving the two spur lines for IOCL. The Committee while observing that the 
lackadaisical approach of the Ministry and unprofessional attitude of the PSUs 
like ONGC , HPCL etc. led to delays and cost overrun s which adversely affected 
the GoI share of Profit Petroleum and expect the Ministry to be pro -active and 
more professional in its approach in future. 
 
29. Pricing of RJ crude: As per PSC, the calculation, the basis of calculation 
and the price of crude oil determined would be subject to agreement before it was 
finally determined and pending final determination, the price determined by the 
Contractor would be used. Since the price formula for working out the price is yet 
to be agreed by the MoPNG, the term shee ts executed by the Operator with the 
private operator refineries were based on agreed price with no provision of 
revision from retrospective effect. MoPNG in June 2010 while informing the 
Operator that the position taken by private refineries with regard t o revision of 
price was not acceptable and advised that sales made to these refineries be on 
provisional prices until final decision was arrived at by the GoI.  The  Committee 
note the contention of the Operator that basic pricing formula agreed upon with 
the IOCL is being used with the private refiners also and that formula was 
finalized with IOCL at arm's length. MoPNG in their reply have stated that PSC 
provides Government intervention when price is not at arms' length. The 
Committee find that Ministry h as taken contradictory stands, firstly, it informed 
the Operator that the price charged was to be provisional and that the sales to the 
domestic private refineries were not to be construed as arms' length sales 

-172- 
 
 
 
however, in their presentation to the Committ ee it stated that Government 
intervention was not required. The Committee take serious view of the misleading 
responses given by the Ministry and desire that since the pricing of crude 
requires interpretation of the PSC, opinion of Ministry of Law may be s ought and 
the Committee apprised thereof.  
 
30. Award of contracts beyond PSC provisions:  The Committee note that 
Audit, while reviewing 41 contracts, in respect of which payment was made 
during the years 2006 -07 and 2007 -08, found that 3 contracts were awarded on 
nomination or on single financial bid basis, 1 was awarded without assessing 
reasonability of rates and in 2 cases, extensions beyond contractual provisions 
were allowed without availing economies of scale. The Operator in its reply stated 
that the tendering process is resorted to by the Operator, however, approval for 
award is endorsed by the OC and during this period initial phase of field 
development was in progress with efforts to commence early production and the 
OC endorsed contracts in the  best interest of the Contractor and also, in some 
cases only one bidder was technically qualified and some contracts were 
extended in the operational interest. MoPNG stated that OC consisting of 
members from ONGC and Cairn Energy monitors the award of pro curement 
contracts and the interests of the Government are well protected by ONGC as 
Government nominee and licensee in the consortium. Audit, however, pointed out 
that in most of the procurement cases, ONGC approval for award proposal to the 
OC came much after placement of Letter of Awards by the Operator. The 
Committee while noting the presence of ONGC as Government nominee in OC 
find that ONGC is only ratifying contracts and not involved actively while 
awarding the contracts. The Committee, therefore, de sire that, henceforth, ONGC 
be more resolute in its role as the protector of Government's interest and any 
deviation from the provisions of the PSC may be brought into the notice of 
MoPNG invariably. 
 
31. Delay in finalizing optimization concept : The Committee  note that an 
optimization concept for Bhagyam field was presented to MC in August 2010 to 

-173- 
 
 
 
which the final approval of MC was communicated in December 2010 which 
resulted in delayed commencement of the activities. The Operator reasoned that 
after MC review  of the proposal, substantial deliberation took place on the 
concept optimization and the minutes were got signed by circulation. MoPNG in 
their reply stated that the MC first deliberated on the concept in July 2010 and in 
October 2010   passed the resolut ion and it took two more months for all the 
representatives to sign the resolution. The Committee also note that due to delay 
in execution of the activities, the budget for the year also remained under utilized. 
The Committee observe that the MC took undul y long time i.e. four months in 
approving the proposal and the lackadaisical approach eventually affected the 
commencement of activities. The Committee are of the view that delays invariably 
lead to cost overruns which ultimately adversely impacts the Gove rnment's share 
of profit petroleum. The Committee desire that a time frame may be prescribed for 
signing of such resolutions of the MC and the Committee be apprised thereof. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                           PROF. K.V.THOMAS 
26th April, 2016                                                                                           Chairperson, 
6 Vaisakha  1938 (Saka)                                                   Public Accounts Committee. 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 