ULTRA MEGA POWER PROJECTS
UNDER SPECIAL PURPOSE
VEHICLES
MINISTRY   OF  POWER
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2014-2015
SEVENTEENTH  REPORT
SIXTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
17

SEVENTEENTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2014-15)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
ULTRA MEGA POWER PROJECTS
UNDER SPECIAL
PURPOSE VEHICLES
MINISTRY OF POWER
Presented to Lok Sabha on 29 April, 2015
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 29 April, 2015
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2015/V aisakha, 1937 (Saka)

PAC No. 2048
Price:  ` 75.00
© 2015 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION  OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE  (2014-15) .................... (iii)
COMPOSITION  OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE  (2013-14) .................... (v)
COMPOSITION  OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE  (2012-13) .................... (vii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................. (ix)
REPORT
PART I
I. INTRODUCTORY ............................................................................... 1
II. BID PROCESS MANAGEMENT ....................................................... 4
(a) Appointment of Bid Process Management Consultant.................... 4
(b) Bid Documentation ......................................................................... 9
(c) Change in equity holding requirement of Parent/Affiliate Company 13
(d) Reduction of normative availability and penalty ............................ 15
(e) Dilution of equity lock-in requirements for the Sponsoring Entity ... 18
(f) Lower networth requirement for bidders ......................................... 19
III. GAPS IN BID EV ALUATION............................................................. 22
(a) Non-fulfilment of qualifying criteria by the selected bidder........... 22
(b) Excess Acquisition of Land ............................................................ 28
IV. FINANCIAL BENEFIT TO PROJECT DEVELOPER IN PERMITTING
USAGE OF SURPLUS COAL ............................................................ 29
(a) Allocation of surplus coal ............................................................... 29
(b) Vitiation of the Bidding Process ..................................................... 30
V. POLICY ON USE OF SURPLUS COAL ............................................ 40
P
ART  II
Observations and Recommendations.................................................... 43

APPENDICES
PAGE
I.  Minutes of the Twenty-first Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
(2012-13) held on 22.01.2013 .............................................................. 59
II. Minutes of the Seventeenth Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
(2014-15) held on 18.02.2015 .............................................................. 62
III.  Minutes of the Nineteenth Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
(2014-15) held on 09.04.2015 .............................................................. 65
(ii)

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2014-15)
 Prof. K.V . Thomas —Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
4. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey
6. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank"
9. Shri Neiphiu Rio
*10. Shri Dushyant Singh
11. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
**12. Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi
13. Dr. Kirit Somaiya
14. Shri Anurag Thakur
***15. Dr. P.  Venugopal
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
17. Shri V ijay Goel
18. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya
19. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
(iii)
* Elected  w.e.f. 3rd December, 2014 vice Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy who has been appointed as Minister
w.e.f. 9th November, 2014.
** Elected  w.e.f. 3rd December, 2014 vice Shri Jayant Sinha who has been appointed as Minister  w.e.f.
9th November, 2014.
*** Elected  w.e.f. 3rd December, 2014 vice Dr. M. Thambidurai who has been chosen as Hon'ble Deputy
Speaker, Lok Sabha and has since resigned from the membership of the Comm ittee.

20. Shri Shantaram Naik
21. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
22. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
 S
ECRETARIAT
1.  Shri A.K. Singh —  Joint Secretary
2.  Smt. Anita B. Panda —  Director
3.  Shri S.L. Singh — Under Secretary
(iv)

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2013-14)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Ramen Deka
5. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
6. Dr. M. Thambi Durai
7. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
8. Shri Jayaprakash Hegde
9. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
10. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
12. Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam
13. Shri Ashok Tanwar
*14. Shri Ajay Maken
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
 Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Prakash Javadekar
†18. Shri Ashwani Kumar
19. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
††20. Dr. V . Maitreyan
21. Shri N.K. Singh
22. Smt. Ambika Soni
* Elected  w.e.f. 14th August, 2013 vice Dr. Girija Vyas appointed as Minister of Housing, Urban
Development and  Poverty Alleviation  w.e.f. 17th June, 2013.
† Elected  w.e.f. 3rd September, 2013 vice Dr. V. Maitreyan ceased to be a Member upon his retirement
as a Member of  Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 24th July, 2013.
†† Elected  w.e.f. 3rd September, 2013 vice Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan appointed as Minister of
State for Commerce and Industry w.e.f. 17th June, 2013.
(v)

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2012-13)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok  Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Dr. M. Thambi Durai
6. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
7. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
9. Shri Sanjay Brij Kishorlal Nirupam
10. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
*11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
12. Shri Ashok Tanwar
†13. Shri Takam Sanjoy
14. Dr. Girija V yas
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Prakash Javadekar
18. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
19. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
20. Shri J.D. Seelam
21. Shri N.K. Singh
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
* Elected w.e.f. 6th December, 2012 vice Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana appointed as Minister on
28th October, 2012.
† Elected w.e.f. 6th December, 2012 vice Dr. Shashi Tharoor appointed as Minister on 28th October,
2012.
(vii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2014-15), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Seventeenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
on 'Ultra Mega Power Projects under Special Purpose Vehicles' based on C&AG Report
No. 6 of 2012-13, Union Government (Performance Audit) relating to the Ministries
of Power and Coal.
2. The Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid on the
Table of the House on 11th May, 2012.
3. The Public Accounts Committee (2012-13), the Public Accounts Committee
(2013-14) and the Public Accounts Committee (2014-15) took up the subject for detailed
examination and report. The predecessor Committee procured written replies and took
evidence of the representatives of the Ministries of Power and Coal on the subject at
their sitting held on 22nd January, 2013. The draft Report on the subject was finalized
and approved by the then Hon'ble Chairperson. However, due to dissolution of the
Fifteenth Lok Sabha, the draft Report could not be considered for adoption by the
Public Accounts Committee (2013-14).
4. The subject was subsequently carried forward by the successor Committee
(2014-15) for examination. The Committee took further oral evidence on the subject
on 18.02.2015 and the updated draft Report which was placed before the Committee
was considered and adopted at their sitting held on 9th April, 2015. Minutes of the
sittings form Appendices to the Report.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in thick type and form Part II of the Report.
6. The Committee thank their predecessor Committee for taking oral evidence
of the Ministries of Power and Coal and obtaining the requisite information on the
subject.
7. The Committee would also like to express their thanks to the representatives
of the Ministries of Power and Coal for tendering evidence before the Committee and
furnishing information in connection with the examination of the subject.
8. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI ; PROF. K.V . THOMAS
27 April,   2015 Chairperson,
7 Vaisakha, 1937 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(ix)

REPORT
PART I
I. INTRODUCTORY
Energy is one of the most critical components of infrastructure that determines
the economic development of a country. The growth rate of demand for power is
generally higher than the GDP growth rate. Studies point that in order to have
8 per cent GDP growth per annum, power supply needs to grow around 12 per cent
annually. Against a target of 41,110 MW power generation capacity addition during
the X Plan period, the achievement was 21,080 MW only. Similarly, during the
XI Plan period, against the power generation capacity addition target of 62,374 MW,
the achievement was 54,964 MW. Therefore, a need was felt to develop large capacity
projects at the National level to meet the power requirements of a number of States
through tariff based competitive bidding. One of the main objectives of the tariff policy
was to promote competition, efficiency in operations and improvement in quality
of supply. The policy inter alia  stipulates, in line with the Electricity Act, 2003
and the National Electricity Policy, that all future requirement of power needs to be
procured competitively by distribution licensees, except in cases of expansion of
existing projects where regulators will need to resort to tariff determination based on
norms. In short, the policy aimed at introducing competition in different segments of
the electricity industry which in turn would lead to significant benefits to the consumers
through reduction in capital costs and also efficiency in operations. The XI Five Year
Plan emphasized the need for removing infrastructure bottlenecks for sustained growth.
It, therefore, proposed an investment of around `21 lakh crore (US $500 billion) in
infrastructure sectors through a mix of public and private sectors to reduce deficits in
identified infrastructure sectors. Public Private Partnership (PPP) model was introduced
to augment resource availability as well as to improve the efficiency of infrastructure
service delivery.
2. With a view to augment the power generation capacity, the Government of
India (GoI) decided in November 2005 to develop Ultra Mega Power Projects (UMPPs)
using Super Critical Technology. The UMPPs would meet the power needs of a number
of States/distribution companies located in the States and were to be developed on
Build, Own and Operate (BOO) basis through creation of Special Purpose Vehicles
(SPVs). Each UMPP was projected to have a capacity of around 4,000 MW with a
cost of  `16,000- 20,000 crore per project. This initiative aimed at delivering power at
competitive cost to the consumers by achieving economies of scale. The identification
of the Project Developer was to be done on the basis of tariff based competitive bidding
as per the "Guidelines for determination of tariff by bidding process for procurement
of power by distribution licensees" issued by the Ministry in January 2005.

2
3. An Empowered Group of Ministers (EGoM) chaired by the Minister of Power
with the Ministers of Finance, Law & Justice, Science & Technology and Earth Sciences
and the Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission as Members was constituted on
14th June, 2007 for facilitating expeditious decisions on all major issues concerning
UMPPs. While the 1st meeting of EGoM took place on 20th June 2007, the last (14th)
meeting was held on 28th April 2012 as revealed by Audit.
4. The Ministry of Power (MoP), Government of India are primarily responsible
for the development of electrical energy in the country. It is concerned with perspective
planning, policy formulation, processing of projects for investment decision and
enactment of legislation for power generation, transmission and distribution. Electricity
is a concurrent subject under the Constitution of India.
5. The MoP have a crucial role in the development of UMPPs. Some of the key
areas requiring MoP's intervention include coordination with Central Ministries/
Agencies for ensuring coal block allotment/coal linkage, environment/forest clearances,
water linkage etc. MoP designated (November 2005) Power Finance Corporation
Limited (PFC) as the nodal agency for the purpose of development of UMPPs and
Central Electricity Authority (CEA) as the technical partner.
6. The MoP prescribed the SPVs route for the UMPPs. SPV is a legal entity
(usually a limited company or a limited partnership) created to fulfil narrow, specific
or temporary objectives and are typically used by companies to isolate them from
financial risk. As per the methodology followed, SPVs acted as the 'Authorised
Representative' for carrying out the bidding process on behalf of the procurers and
facilitated preliminary activities like site identification with CEA, land acquisition,
coal block allocation (in the case of pithead stations) obtaining various clearances
relating to environment, forest etc. After the bidder was identified, the SPV was
transferred to the successful bidder on execution of the Share Purchase Agreement
and payment of the acquisition price to PFC.
7. The SPVs, being separate companies, were managed by a Board of Directors
(BoDs). The Chairmen of the BoDs were nominated by PFC from its own Functional
Directors. The day to day affairs of each SPV were looked after by its Chairman and
Chief Executive, who was also represented in the BoDs.
8. Initially, nine UMPPs were identified to be taken up and later on seven more
projects were added to the list of UMPPs. Out of the 16 UMPPs identified till
March 2012, PFC floated 12 shell companies (SPVs) as its wholly owned subsidiaries,
each with a paid-up share capital of  `5 lakh during 2005-06 to 2011-12 for development
of UMPPs at six pithead sites and six coastal sites. The six pithead sites are Sasan in
Madhya Pradesh; Tilaiya in Jharkhand; Surguja in Chhattisgarh; and Sundergarh,
Sakhigopal & Ghogarpalli in Odisha. The six coastal sites are Mundra in Gujarat;
Krishnapatnam in Andhra Pradesh; Tadri in Karnataka; Munge in Maharashtra; Cheyyur
in Tamil Nadu; and Tatiya in Andhra Pradesh. Pithead projects are envisaged to utilize
the indigenous coal whereas coastal projects are based on the imported coal. The
SPVs invited bids from prospective bidders for six UMPPs during March 2006 to
March 2012. Bidding process had been completed and contracts were awarded in

3
respect of four UMPPs viz. Sasan, Mundra, Krishnapatnam and Tilaiya. The remaining
eight UMPPs (out of 12) were yet to be awarded (March 2012). Details of the four
UMPPs awarded so far are tabulated below:—
Name of the Name of the Developer Levelised Tariff     Tarif f             Current Status
  UMPP     SPV  to whom accepted    collection
 awarded    ( ` per unit   for 25 years
of electricity)* ( `  in crore)@
Mundra Coastal Gujarat Tata Power    2.264 1,67,784 One unit of 800 MW commissioned in
4000 MW Power Limited Company February  2012 and  the  Project is
(5 x 800 MW) (incorporated Limited scheduled   to   be  commissioned  on
on 10-02-2006) 30th October 2013.
Sasan Sasan Power Reliance     1.196 87,749 Not  yet  commissioned  as scheduled
3960 MW Limited Power date  of commissioning of first unit of
(6x660 MW) (incorporated Limited 660 MW  is 31- 01-2013. The Project
on 10-02-2006) is scheduled  to be   commissioned by
30th June 2014.
Krishnapatnam Coastal Andhra Reliance     2.333 1,71,169 Not yet commissioned. Scheduled date
3960 MW Power Limited Power of  commissioning   of   first  unit  and
(6x660 MW) (incorporated Limited the Project   is  September  2013  and
on 24-08- 2006) October 2015 respectively.
However, Developer has stopped work
at  Project site citing new regulation of
Government of I ndonesia as a reason
which  prohibits  sale  of  coal  below
benchmark market price.
Tilaiya Jharkhand Reliance      1.77 1,29,862 Not yet commissioned as scheduled
3960 MW Integrated Power dates of  commissioning of first unit
(6x660 MW) Power Limited Limited and Project are May 2015 and June
(incorporated 2017 respectively.
on 02-01- 2007)
*Note: Levelised tariff is the weighted average tariff.
@Worked out on levelised tariff basis.
9. Audit conducted performance review of the implementation of the Ultra Mega
Power Projects (UMPPs) from January 2009 to March 2012 with the objectives of
assessing whether Standard Bidding Documents were comprehensive without any
ambiguity; selection of consultants for bid process was made through a transparent
system; bid process management was carried out efficiently and in transparent manner;
and land and coal linkages provided to the UMPPs were justified. The Audit review
had revealed several lapses/deficiencies in Bid Process Management, Bid Evaluation,
granting permission for diversion of surplus coal as well as undue financial benefit to
Reliance Power Limited, the project developer of Sasan UMPP. The gist of the Audit's
main findings inter alia is as under:—
(i) Though the lowest bidder (M/s ICRA) was declared technically qualified
for the consultancy assignments for Sasan and Mundra UMPPs by the bid
evaluation committee, their bid was not considered and the contract was
awarded at a higher price to M/s Ernst & Young (E&Y) on the ground that
they had advised on bid process management of a power project in
Bangladesh.

4
(ii) The Bid Documents used for calling bids in respect of UMPPs awarded
were not vetted by the Department of Legal Affairs.
(iii) Several conditions like change in the equity holding requirement of the
Parent/Affiliate Company, reduction of normative availability and penalty,
dilution of equity lock-in requirements for the sponsoring entity, lower
networth requirement for bidders etc. were compromised by the Ministry
of Power from time to time based on the feedback received from the bidders
and recommendation of the Power Finance Corporation (PFC).
(iv) Though only capital cost of the projects commissioned during the last ten
years was to be considered as project experience, Reliance Power Ltd.
(RPL) was awarded three UMPPs on the basis of additions to the fixed
assets as project experience.
(v) Excess land was allocated for Mundra and Krishnapatnam UMPPs and
the EGoM allowed the excess land to be retained by the Developers instead
of utilizing the same for other public purposes.
(vi) RPL was allowed to use surplus coal from the blocks allotted to Sasan
UMPP for its other projects where power was sold through tariff based
bidding. It resulted in financial benefit of  
` 29,033 crore with a Net Present
V alue (NPV) of  `11,852 crore to RPL.
(vii) Permission to utilize surplus coal for projects with tariff based competitive
bidding was violated since tariff for Chitrangi Project, for which such
permission was granted, was already fixed before permission was given.
(viii) The condition purportedly permitting diversion of surplus coal was not
explicitly spelt out in the bid document.
(ix) The advice of the MoP in October, 2006 that Sasan UMPP would require
an additional coal block was based on insufficient data as mining plan of
Moher and Moher-Amlohri Extension was not available.
(x) The EGoM was not provided accurate information about the adequacy or
otherwise of coal availability in the two blocks initially allocated to Sasan
UMPP leading to their decision permitting usage of surplus coal.
Against the above backdrop, the Committee selected the subject for examination
and report. In the process, the Committee obtained the requisite information/material/
written reply from the Ministry of Power. The Committee also took oral evidence of
the representatives of the Ministry. Based on the information gathered from the Ministry
and the Audit inputs, the Committee have discussed the issues in detail in the succeeding
paragraphs.
II. BID PROCESS MANAGEMENT
(a) Appointment of Bid Process Management Consultant
10. Competitive bids were invited for appointment of Consultants to assist PFC
in conducting the bid process for five UMPPs. The scope of Consultants involved

5
participation in preparation and issue of Bidding Documents (RFQ & RFP),
participation in pre-bid and post-bid conferences, evaluation of Bid documents and
assisting in finalizing the agreement with successful bidders. Audit found that the
lowest bids of M/s. ICRA of 
`54.50 lakh and `44.50 lakh for the consultancy
assignments of Sasan and Mundra UMPPs respectively were not considered though
the bidder was declared technically qualified. The work was awarded to M/s. Ernst &
Young (M/s. E & Y) at higher rates of 
 `1.28 crore each on the ground that they were
managing bid process of Anpara power project in Bangladesh. Further, ICRA had
quoted 
`54.50 lakh for Krishnapatnam UMPP. However, the consultancy job for this
UMPP was awarded to M/s. E&Y at `60 lakh as against `1.28 crore first quoted by
them. For Tilaiya UMPP, the job was awarded to M/s. E&Y at `60 lakh without inviting
any bid.
11. Audit thus pointed out that the principle of equity in public procurement as
laid down in Rule 160 of General Financial Rules (GFR) was not followed in the
appointment of Consultants which resulted in extra expenditure of 
 `1.68 crore. Audit
further noticed that PFC had to subsequently debar M/s. E & Y for a period of three
years w.e.f. July, 2011 from future assignments due to deficiencies in the Bid evaluation.
The Ministry have also issued a show cause notice to the Consultant for their omission
and commission in the evaluation of bid documents of Sasan and Mundra UMPPs.
12. In the above context, the Committee desired to know the technical parameters
on which the bidders for consultancy assignment for UMPPs were judged. In reply,
the Ministry of Power stated that the technical parameters on which the bidders for
consulting assignment for UMPPs were judged were given in the bidding documents.
The Ministry further stated that the following evaluation criteria were stipulated in the
bidding documents for consultancy assignment for UMPPs:—
(i) The Firm's relevant past experience.
(ii) Adequacy of the proposed methodology and work plan in responding the
ToR (Terms of Reference).
(iii) Qualification and competence of key personnel.
As mentioned in the bid documents: 'firms securing a minimum of 60% of marks
shall be considered technically responsive'.
13. Enquired about M/s. ICRA's previous experience in such consultancy
assignment and subsequent qualification, the Ministry apprised as under:—
"As per the bid submitted, ICRA had shown experience in the following
assignments:
• Evaluation of RFQ bids for allotment of Hydro electric plant sites
for capacity of 100 MW and above for development by private sector
firms for Uttaranchal Jal Vidyut Nigam Ltd. (UJVNL).
• Financial Advisory service for commercial and financial evaluation
of tenders for tugs and launches for Ennore Port Ltd.

6
• Further, ICRA had also shown general experience for clients viz.
Powergrid, Enercon, Airport Authority of India (AAI), IRCTC etc."
14. Asked to state the mechanisms put in place to evaluate the bid documents,
the Ministry submitted that the bid evaluation committee consisting of five officers
from PFC with three members at the level of AGM and two members at the level of
Manager evaluated the bids as per bid evaluation criteria and technical score of ICRA
as per bid evaluation report is given in the table below:—
                        Particulars Maximum T echnical Score
Technical (ICRA)
Score
The Firms relevant past experience 40 20.5
Adequacy of the proposed methodology and work 20 14
plan in responding the ToR
Qualification and competence of key personnel 40 34.67
Total 100 69.17
The Bid Evaluation Committee declared ICRA technically responsive as ICRA scored more
than  60 marks which was required for being technically responsive.
15. The Committee then called for an explanation for not awarding consultancy
assignment for Sasan, Mundra and Krishnapatnam UMPPs to M/s. ICRA which was
technically qualified and had quoted lower price. In reply, the Ministry  inter alia
stated that with regard to tender for consultancy assignment for Sasan and Mundra
UMPPs, M/s. ICRA ((formerly Investment Information and Credit Rating Agency of
India Limited) did not have enough adequate relevant experience for taking up an
assignment of this size. Further, the technical consortium partners in the assignment
were individual experts (retired professionals only) without any organizational support.
The High Level Committee constituted by the Ministry (which had representation of
State Bank of India, CEA, IDBI, IDFC and PFC) did not consider M/s. ICRA suitable
for award of the consultancy assignment, regardless of the price quoted by them. The
Ministry further stated that M/s. Ernst & Young (M/s. E&Y) had relevant experience
in managing the bid process of projects notably the bid process management for 1000
MW Anpara 'C'. Considering the above, the High Level Committee found M/s. E&Y
most suitable for the assignment for Sasan and Mundra UMPPs, and accordingly made
recommendation for the award of assignment related to Sasan and Mundra UMPPs to
M/s. E&Y.
16. Responding to a specific query, the Ministry further apprised that as per the
tender documents, there was no specific bar on the retired professionals being engaged
by M/s. ICRA for the assignment. Taking note of the Ministry's response, the Committee
further enquired the reasons for rejecting the bid of M/s. ICRA on the above ground.
In reply, the Ministry clarified that the decision was taken by the High Level Committee
on the basis of the presentation made to them. The High Level Committee observed

7
that all the technical partners were individual retired professionals and there was no
organizational support. After the presentation by the three companies, the High Level
Committee found that E&Y would be more suitable for these assignments.
17. The Committee then enquired whether the Bangladesh Power Project, for
which M/s. E&Y had rendered consultancy service, was comparable with the UMPPs
in terms of capacity and investment. In reply, the Ministry of Power submitted that the
UMPP assignment was for assistance in selection of developer through tariff based
competitive bidding. As per the bidding documents, experience in rendering consultancy
services for projects comparable in capacity and investment to UMPPs was not a
criterion. Power projects of the size of 4000 MW were being developed for the first
time in India and projects of such magnitude were being awarded through tariff based
bidding for the first time. The bids were evaluated mainly on the basis of experience
of the firms in bidding process management which meant experience in RFQ/RFP
process, PPA/financial closure, Port/coal sector, and general experience in power sector
and other areas.
18. The Ministry further submitted that as per the bid submitted by M/s. E&Y,
experience was shown for providing consultancy services to Essar Power Ltd. (EPL)
for the bidding process of a gas fired Power Project in Bangladesh on Build Own
Operate (BOO) basis at Sirajganj in Bangladesh and providing assistance for
achievement of project financial closure if the project was awarded to EPL. The
Bangladesh Project was awarded through a bidding process as in UMPPs.
19. The Committee specifically pointed out that the work of evaluation of bids
for Anpara Project was a work which M/s. E&Y had in hand when it submitted the bid
for the UMPP consultancy job and thus it was not a past experience. On being asked to
explain the basis for concluding that M/s. E&Y had relevant experience in managing
the bid process of projects, the Ministry reasoned as under:—
"PFC has informed that at the time of evaluation of E&Y's bids for award of
consultancy assignments for Sasan/Mundra UMPPs in February 2006, RFQ stage
of 2x500 MW Anpara 'C' project was over, the bidders had been shortlisted for
RFP stage, RFP documents had been approved by UPERC and the same had
been issued to bidders. This effectively was considered as relevant past experience
in managing bid process for projects.
Besides, E&Y had experience of assisting Essar Power Ltd. in the bidding process
including preparing financial model, analysis of contractual arrangements,
preparation of financial bids, etc. for Sirajganj Power Project in Bangladesh,
Tariff based advisory to NTPC including review of RFP documents, financial
modeling for estimating bid tariff preparation of bid, etc. for 550 MW project in
Sohar, Oman.
E&Y also had experience related to PPA (i) for Kudankulam project for NPCIL,
(ii) for a mini power plant in Andhra Pradesh and debt syndication for metcoke
plant of Venkatesh Coke and Power Ltd. in Tamil Nadu."

8
20. When the Committee desired to hear the view of the Secretary, MoP on the
above matter, he deposed in evidence as under:—
"There was this question of E & Y not having experience of Bangladesh project.
They did have experience of Bangladesh project; they had looked at the bid
process management. Here, what we are asking is that the potential bidder for
this consultancy should have bid process management experience; they had this
experience of Bangladesh project and that is why they were considered. The
scores and technical evaluation, the parameters for technical evaluation are
already there, were there with PFC at that point in time, those parameters were
used for assessing the technical experience of different bidders and give them
marks."
21. The Ministry further informed that for Krishnapatnam and Odisha UMPPs,
combined bidding process was carried out for selection of consultant, on the basis of
combined technical and financial scores. M/s. E&Y was the highest ranked bidder and
M/s. ICRA was the second highest ranked bidder. Therefore, the Bid Evaluation
Committee recommended to High Level Committee for award of the assignment of
Krishnapatnam and Odisha UMPPs to M/s. E&Y. The High Level Committee accepted
the recommendation of the Bid Evaluation Committee and asked M/s E&Y to match
the price bid of M/s. Deloitte (
`60 lakh each) which was the second lowest bidder
(L2) on the basis of price bids (the L1 being M/s. Feedback which quoted `54 lakh
and `57.60 lakh for Krishnapatnam and Odisha UMPPs respectively).
22. As stated above, the lowest price of  `54 lakh for Krishnapatnam UMPP was
quoted by M/s. Feedback. The Committee desired to know the reasons for not asking
the successful bidder, M/s. E&Y to match the lowest price quoted by M/s. Feedback
instead of asking the bidder to match the second lowest price of 
 `60 lakh quoted by
M/s. Deloitte. In reply, the Ministry stated as under:—
"E&Y was the highest ranked bidder, therefore the assignment was awarded to
E&Y. There was no requirement in the tender document to match the price to
the lowest quoted bidder. However, the High Level Committee comprising of
senior representatives i.e. MD-SBI, Executive Director-IDBI, MD & CEO-IDFC,
Director (Projects)-PFC and Member (Thermal)-CEA got the price reduced even
from the highest ranked bidder to match the price with the next lowest Bidder in
the combined score i.e. Deloitte."
23. On being asked to state the reasons for not calling any bids for consultancy
work for Tilaiya Project, the Ministry of Power submitted as under:—
"PFC has informed that E&Y was awarded assignment for Odisha UMPP through
a tender process. Odisha project was kept in abeyance due to delay in resolving
the issues by State Government, whereas Tilaiya UMPP was on fast track.
Therefore, E&Y was awarded the assignment for Tilaiya UMPP in lieu of Odisha
UMPP. The scope of work for both the assignments was same, they being pit-
head based UMPPs and the assignment for Tilaiya UMPP was awarded at the
same cost and terms and conditions as the Odisha UMPP wherein E&Y was the
highest ranked bidder."

9
24. When the Committee raked up the matter in evidence, the Secretary, Power
submitted as under:—
"There was also a question of the Tilaiya Project not being bid for but being
allotted. Sir, what we are looking at is allocation of consultancy work in bid
process management. At that point in time, the particular project for which this
was thought was not coming through. They were looking at Odisha Project. The
Odisha Project was slow in taking off and Tilaiya Project was coming on faster.
So, in place of the Odisha Project, Tilaiya Project was substituted. The work
involves is the same which is assisting the PFC in bid process management.
Replacing Odisha by Tilaiya is not a problem. It is fully justified because it is
just the bid process that you have to manage. It could be Tilaiya Project, it could
be Krishnapatnam Project. So, we do not believe that there has been a problem
here and this was perfectly in order and again I would refer to the High Level
Committee which looked at all this bid process management and suggested this."
25. Keeping in view the fact that M/s. E&Y was subsequently debarred for a
period of three years from future assignments due to deficiencies in bid evaluation,
the Committee desired to know the circumstances under which the officials concerned
took the decision to award the consultancy assignment to M/s. E&Y. In reply, the
Ministry of Power inter alia explained that the decision to debar M/s. E&Y was taken
due to their failure to perform in one of the assignments i.e. Sasan UMPP. The debarment
related to a subsequent development based on the performance/experience in that
assignment. PFC had debarred E&Y for a period of three years from July 19, 2011.
Therefore, the subsequent action of debarring of E&Y cannot be linked to its
appointment.
(b) Bid Documentation
26. Audit scrutiny revealed that the bid documents for the UMPPs (RFQ and
RFP) were prepared by the Consultant (M/s. E&Y) based on the ‘Standard Bidding
Documents' (SBDs) developed and notified (March, 2006) by the MOP. Audit further
pointed out that the EGoM in its meeting held on 06/07 September, 2007 directed that
the SBDs being utilized for UMPPs may be got vetted from a Solicitor/law consultancy
firm having sufficient experience in dealing with international power sector contracts.
Accordingly, two legal firms, M/s. K.L. Gates (International Law Firm) and M/s. Fox
and Mandal (Indian interface for legal vetting of the documents) were engaged for this
work but on getting their divergent view on the SBDs, the EGoM in its meeting held
on 15 January 2010 directed that the comments of the Planning Commission,
Department of Legal Affairs and Department of Economic Affairs should be obtained
on SBDs. Audit observed that bids for infrastructure projects of such huge magnitude
had, thus, been called for on the basis of bid documents which were not vetted by the
Department of Legal Affairs.
27. In the above context, the Committee enquired about the reasons for floating
bid documents without appropriate/requisite legal vetting. In reply, the Ministry stated
that Section 63 of the Electricity Act, 2003 provided for determination of tariff by
bidding process in accordance with the guidelines issued by the Central Government.

10
Accordingly, the Central Government issued Guidelines for procurement of power by
distribution licensees through tariff based competitive bidding in 2005. Para 3.1(i) of
these Guidelines provided for issuance of Standard Bid Documents by the Central
Government. Bidding in respect of UMPPs was carried under SBD for Case-2 projects.
The Ministry reasoned that the Guidelines did not provide for vetting of the SBD by
the Department of Legal Affairs.
28. On being asked about obtaining the opinion of the Planning Commission
and the Department of Economic Affairs on SBDs as advised by the EGoM in
January 2010, the Ministry stated that in the meeting of EGoM on UMPPs held on
15.1.2010 it was decided that in the light of divergent views of M/s. K L Gates and
M/s. Fox & Mandal, the comments of Planning Commission, Department of Legal
Affairs and Department of Economic Affairs should be obtained. It was also decided
that PFC might also do the consultation with stakeholders/investors/developers of
UMPP. Accordingly the comments of the Planning Commission and the Department
of Economic Affairs were obtained, examined and suitably incorporated. Based on
the comments of the said Ministries/Departments, the modified SBDs for UMPPs
were uploaded on Ministry of Power's website in February, 2012 for seeking comments
of stakeholders and a copy of the same was also forwarded to Principal Director of
Audit.
29. The Ministry further explained that to examine the comments/suggestions
of stakeholders on the documents, a Committee was constituted in the Ministry which
held a number of meetings and deliberations with stakeholders. Based on the
deliberations and decisions taken, a Drafting Committee was constituted for the purpose
of drafting of the document which had prepared a draft Model Power Purchase
Agreement for Case-2 and with the approval of Minister of Power, the same had also
been circulated on 7.9.2012 to the stakeholders including private developers, financial
institutions, State Governments/Discoms and Ministries/Departments concerned for
seeking their comments. A copy of the Draft Model Power Purchase Agreement for
Case-2 (applicable for UMPPs) was also forwarded to the Principal Director of Audit
on 7th September, 2012. In addition, an Inter-Ministerial Group had been constituted
with the representatives of Ministries of  Law & Justice, Finance, Coal, and Environment &
Forests and Planning Commission and Central Electricity Authority (CEA) to fine
tune the documents based on the comments/suggestions of the stakeholders.
30. The Ministry summed up that the SBDs for UMPPs were under revision and
being finalized and would be placed before the EGoM for finalization of the same.
31. In evidence, the Committee asked whether the bid documents for RFQs,
RFPs etc. were prepared by the Ministry themselves or they outsourced the job.
In reply, the Power Secretary submitted:—
"The bidding documents are prepared with the help of outside people and also
in consultations with a number of stakeholders. We have been holding meetings
repeatedly with a large number of stakeholders. So, a lot of people go into the
making of these documents."

11
32. The Committee asked whether certain conditions could be imposed on the
companies about the method and the format in which bidding should be done as the
Ministry were giving them coal. In reply, the Secretary, MOP submitted:—
"We can do that. That is why, when we engage the PFC to run this business, PFC
would have a consultant and tell them how the bid format should be framed and
all this will be done prior to receiving the bids. There we will mention all these
things."
33. Asked to state whether PFC had the requisite expertise to do the needful, a
representative of the PFC submitted that as far as technical requirements were concerned
all the bidders had prior information that the Statutory Auditor's certificate would be
required to be submitted.
34. Further asked to state about the authority who appointed the Statutory Auditor,
the representative of the PFC apprised:—
"The Company itself appoints the Statutory Auditor."
35. In response to another specific query, the Power Secretary submitted that
the State in which the Project was loaded was the lead procurer of power. Asked to
state whether the States had got any role in determining the tariff, the Power Secretary
responded:—
"No, the lead procurer has no role in it."
36. Further questioned to state whether the States could impose any conditions
on their tariff, the Additional Secretary of the Ministry submitted:—
"Sir, basically, there are two types of procurement of electricity, which is done
by different distribution companies. One is short-term power, and the other is
long term power."
37. Asked to state categorically whether the State could sell surplus power in the
market, they being the lead procurer, the Additional Secretary, MOP, deposed:—
"In this particular instance of the Ultra Mega Power Project, the procurers are
not the State Government; they are the distribution utilities of the State
Government. So, it is not that the State Government will procure this power and
sell it wherever they want. The distribution utilities which forms the Special
Purpose V ehicle are the recipients of this electricity."
38. The Committee then contended if the States had no role in this regard, then
whether the line 'they are the lead procurer' under the head 'Role of States' as shown in
the power point presentation, should be interpreted as there could be a large number
of lead procurers. The Additional Secretary, MOP responded:—
"I think there is a mistake here. The host State is the lead procurer. That is all."

12
39. Asked to throw more light on the role of the States in purchase and sale of
power, the Additional Secretary, MOP submitted:—
"............................ The procurement is done under the Power Purchase
Agreement. The Power Purchase Agreement is signed by all the States, including
the host State. That lays down the terms and conditions of purchase."
40. Asked to elaborate, the Additional Secretary further stated:—
"The procurement function is one, the supply function is different. Procurement
functions are governed by this (PPA); supply functions or sale functions further
on, if there is a surplus which the State cannot use and can be sold outside, is not
governed by this PPA."
41. When the Committee desired to know the checks and balances put in place
to protect the interest of the consumers against the whims of the discoms in raising the
tariff, another representative of the Ministry submitted:—
"Sir the developer does not get anything over and above his tariff quoted, except
the incentive built up under the PPA. So, the benefit of power will certainly go
to the consumers and the discoms supply that power to the consumer at reasonable
rate, which is ensured by the State Electricity Regulatory Commission. So, we
have a system in all the States, and the Electricity Act mandates that function on
the State Electricity Regulatory Commission."
42. Asked to state categorically whether the PPA provided for the share of different
States from the UMPPs and contractual obligations on the part of the project developers,
the Secretary, Power deposed:—
"The Power Purchase Agreement exactly mentions what will be the share of all
the participating States. For instance, the Power Purchase Agreement in the case
of Madhya Pradesh also provides for 1400 MW from 4000. In some other States,
the host State goes as much as 2000 MW, fifty per cent. So, the Power Purchase
Agreement says which State will get how much and the private sector developer
is tied down by that contract. He can not violate that contract. If he violates that
contract, he will face the legal consequences while ending the contract. So, if
you look at one more project, Krishnapatnam, Andhra Pradesh, out of 4000,
gets 1600 MW; Karnataka gets 800 MW; Tamil Nadu 800 MW and Maharashtra
also 800 MW. These are contractual agreements signed between the developer
and the participating States. If the contractor breaks this agreement then the
legal consequences will follow. So, that is the way it works."
43. When the Committee desired to know whether the clauses in PPA had been
made foolproof so as to prohibit the private companies to take the Government and
the people for a ride, the Secretary submitted:—
"Absolutely. To take care of this serious concern of yours, we have a regulatory
system which looks at what cost can be allowed to be passed on to the consumer
and what cannot be allowed. So, in a distribution business, if the person is saying
that he has invested so much, the regulator keeps on mind what has been invested

13
and what can be a reasonable charge which can be taken into account when the
tariff for the consumer is fixed."
(c) Change in equity holding requirement of Parent/Affiliate Company
44. As per the bid criteria, a bidding company could take 100 per cent benefit of
the technical and financial capability of a Parent or its Affiliates for the purpose of
qualification. As per the initial bid document issued in March 2006, the equity holding
requirement of such Parent/Affiliate in the bidding company was 51 per cent but after
pre-bid conference with bidders, the equity holding requirement was scaled down
from 51 per cent to 26 per cent in May, 2006. This amended criteria was made effective
in the bidding documents of all four UMPPs awarded so far. Audit pointed out that the
change which was made on the request of the bidders and advice of the Consultant
M/s. E & Y violated the basic principles of 'ownership' and 'control' given in Accounting
Standards Interpretation (ASI) 24, issued by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of
India. ASI 24 defines 'control' as 'the ownership, directly or indirectly through
subsidiary(ies), of more than one-half of the voting power of an enterprise or control
of the composition of the Board of Directors in the case of a company so as to obtain
economic benefits from its activities'. Model RFQ document of Government of India
for PPP Projects has also prescribed more than 50 per cent share holding as the criteria.
45. The recommendation for making the amendments was sent by PFC in
May, 2006. Audit found that initially the MOP had reservations about the dilution and
stated that management control should be included as a condition in addition to 26 per
cent equity holding. This view was, however, changed later on citing discussions held
with the Consultant M/s. E & Y who explained that it would be difficult to describe
'effective management control' and assured that 26 per cent shareholding meant control.
46. At the time of bid submission by RPL for Sasan, Mundra and Krishnapatnam
UMPPs, Reliance Energy Limited (REL) had an equity holding of only 26 per cent in
RPL. RPL did not have any technical or financial capability of its own and had used
that of REL.
47. In response to the Audit observations the Ministry stated (March, 2012) that
the bidders were required to submit an undertaking supported by Board Resolution
for equity commitment in the project to enable the bidding company to draw upon the
experience of the Parent/Affiliate. The Ministry further added that in all the UMPPs,
the same criteria were followed for all the bidders without having any specific Developer
in mind and that in no case, the bidder defaulted for want of financial and technical
support of the Parent/Affiliate.
48. According to Audit, the reply did not take into account the fact that
shareholding of  26 per cent would only enable an entity to block any special resolutions
requiring three-fourth majority whereas the power to pass ordinary resolutions by way
of 51 per cent shareholding was needed to draw upon the experience of the Parent/
Affiliate to execute a large project.
49. In the above context, the Committee desired to know the rationale in originally
prescribing the 51 per cent norm and then scaling down it to 26 per cent at the request

14
of the bidders though the model RFQ document of Government of India for PPP
projects required more than 50 per cent share holding. In reply the Ministry of Power
stated as under:—
"Scaling down of equity holding for being considered as the 'Parent' and 'Affiliate'
from 51% to 26% was done in the Standard Bidding Documents in May 2006,
following which the same was incorporated in the RFQ documents for UMPPs.
The amendment was carried out in the SBDs by MOP to bring in more
competition as per the feedback received by PFC from bidders for Sasan and
Mundra UMPPs.
Further, even with a holding of 26%, the entity has the right to block any major
resolution(s) which require three-fourth majority as per Companies Act.
It may be mentioned here that even with these conditions, 13 bidders could
qualify in case of Sasan UMPP and 11 in case of Mundra UMPP. Out of these
10 RFP bids were received for Sasan UMPP and only 6 were received for Mundra
UMPP.
Further, it may be noted that the process of competitive bidding through which
successful bidder were selected for UMPPs should be judged on the basis of
final outcome achieved which in the case of Sasan and Mundra UMPP was an
extremely competitive tariff especially when compared to the cost plus power
projects. It may be further noted that the bidding guidelines and the SBDs are
not static in nature and are subject to change based on the experience gathered
in the process of implementation and in the context of change in circumstances."
50. Asked whether the condition had been modified in the revised SBDs, the
Ministry of Power replied that matter was under consideration.
51. The Committee further desired to be apprised of precautions taken up to
prevent selection of bidders without desired competence to commission and manage
the UMPPs in long term following the dilution of ownership and control criteria.
In reply, the Ministry of Power apprised as under:—
"Table below shows the status of bids received for UMPPs:—
UMPP Qualified bidders at RFQ stage RFP bids received
Sasan 13 10
Mundra 11  6
Krishnapatnam 13  3
Tilaiya 11  5
Had the criterion been more stringent, the number of bids might probably have
been less and sufficient competition might not have resulted.
Further, in order to ensure that bidders not suited for the project are not selected,
minimum financial requirements like networth, turnover and Internal Resource

15
Generation were also prescribed in RFQ. The bidders were also required to
have experience of developing projects of  `3000 crores out of which one project
was required to be of atleast `500 crores as a qualifying criteria. As a result,
reputed bidders have been pre-qualified."
(d) Reduction of normative availability and penalty
52. Audit scrutiny revealed that in the original version of SBDs (March 2006),
the normative availability for UMPPs was prescribed at 80 per cent. Based on the
suggestions of CERC and the concern of the procuring States like Gujarat about the
incentive above 80 per cent availability being too liberal, the normative availability
was raised to 85 per cent in the revised Standard Bidding Documents issued in
August 2006.
53. The normative availability was however, reduced from 85 per cent stipulated
in the RFP issued in August 2006 to 80 per cent in September 2006 on the suggestion
of PFC to bring down the risk of Developers. Though penalty is used as a deterrent to
avoid any slippages in envisaged terms and conditions by the Project Developers, the
base for levy of penalty was also reduced from 80 per cent to 75 per cent before
receiving financial bids. These two amendments were made effective in the bidding
documents of all four UMPPs awarded so far. Audit observed that since the UMPPs
were meant to have higher operational efficiency, reduction of normative availability
from 85 per cent to 80 per cent as well as penalty base from 80 per cent to 75 per cent
were not in the interest of operational efficiency of UMPPs.
54. Responding to the Audit observations, the Ministry stated that as per the
SBDs, the normative availability shall be aligned to the level specified in the tariff
regulations of CERC prevailing at the time of bid process (which was 80 per cent).
The Ministry also added that there was a need to instill confidence in the Power Project
Developers since they had a higher risk perception and that high performance
parameters would generally lead to high cost and result in higher tariff.
55. According to Audit, the reply was not acceptable since as per amendment to
the Guidelines for Determination of Tariff by Bidding Process for Procurement of
Power by Distribution Licensees notified in August 2006, the normative availability
shall be higher by a maximum of 5 per cent of the level specified in the tariff regulations
of the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC) prevailing at the time of
the bid process. In view of this, the reduction of normative availability in
September, 2006 was not in accordance with the Guidelines. Moreover, while revising
the normative availability to 85 per cent in January 2009, CERC observed that the
average availability of NTPC thermal power stations for the period 2004-05 to
2007-08 having 200 MW sets and above was in the range of around 86 to 97 per cent.
56. In the above context, the Committee desired to know the reasons for deviation
in the requirement of normative availability in SBDs from the amendments to the
"Guidelines for Determination of Tariff by Bidding Process for Procurement of Power
by Distribution Licencees" notified in August, 2006. In reply, the Ministry inter alia
submitted that there appeared to be no deviation in the SBDs in August, 2006 from the
bidding guidelines amended in August 2006.

16
57. The Committee's scrutiny of the matter however revealed that from
September, 2006 onwards, SBDs were not in accordance with the Guidelines as the
normative availability which ought to have been 85 per cent (September 2006) and
90 per cent (April 2009 till now) remained at 80 per cent and 85 per cent respectively.
58. When asked to further justify the deviation in the requirement of normative
availability in SBDs from the Guidelines, the Ministry responded as under:—
"The applicable guidelines stipulated that Normative Availability may be kept
at a level higher by maximum 5% above the normative figure as laid down by
CERC. Whereas the norms for the Normative Availability in the SBDs was kept
at 80% which was the same as CERC norms applicable to cost plus projects at
that time, the penalty provisions for reduction in Normative Availability below
75% was over and above the CERC norms regarding reduction in Fixed Cost
with respect to Normative Availability. Accordingly, the SBDs were not in
contravention with either the then guidelines or CERC norms applicable for
cost plus projects at that point of time."
59. On being asked whether CERC was consulted prior to the reduction in the
normative availability, the Ministry submitted that though it was not mandatory but
consultation was done with CERC at all stages. CERC suggested normative availability
of 85% in the PPA on the ground that the incentive above 80% was too liberal.
60. The Committee then specifically sought justification for reducing normative
availability to 80 per cent when coal blocks were allocated on the basis of 90 per cent
PLF and when most of the NTPC power stations had average availability between
86 per cent to 97 per cent. The Ministry inter alia replied as under:—
"To take care of the concern of the procuring States about the incentive being
liberal and to balance the risk of developers of losing capacity charge in case
availability fell below 85%, PFC suggested reducing the normative availability
to 80% but giving the incentive only for availability beyond 85%. These changes
were agreed to and changes made in SBD in September, 2006.
The following structure was suggested:—
(i) Normative Availability would be at 80%. However, incentive would be
payable only for availability beyond 85%.
(ii) Though the incentive would be paid at the rate of 40% of the non-escalable
component of the capacity charge but it would be subject to cap of
25 paise per unit.
(iii) Availability would also include availability of adequate fuel to generate
electricity according to declared availability.
(iv) There would be pro-rata reduction in capacity charges for availability below
80%.
(v) An additional penalty of 20% would be levied if availability falls below
75%.

17
Thus, the SBDs contained the reduction in capacity charges as well as penal
provisions whereas the tariff regulations of the CERC prevailing at the time of
bid process of Sasan & Mundra UMPP did not contain any provision for penalty
over and above the proportionate reduction in capacity charges.
For the purpose of more clarity it may be mentioned that normative availability
and PLF are both performance parameters but have different connotations.
Capacity charge which is one of the bidding parameters is payable if the plant is
available for production. Whereas the PLF is the indicator of actual utilization
of the plant. When the normative availability is sought to be increased after a
point it has incremental cost in terms of investment in auxiliaries, etc. Therefore,
for the project to be bid on a competitive route it needs to be seen that the norms
are balanced because keeping it high will increase the tariff and keeping it low
will affect production of electricity. It may however be mentioned that in a fair
competition, the effect of such norms gets captured in tariff. Based on this logic
the above formulation was suggested to balance the cost of the procurer and risk
of the bidder.
No incentive or penal clause is attached to PLF which measures the actual running
of the plant. As any modern plant will normally run at more than 90% PLF, to
make sufficient coal available the norms are kept as such for allocation of captive
coal plant. Therefore, the norms for availability and for PLF are not comparable."
61. The Committee queried whether the reduction in the base from 80 per cent
to 75 per cent for the levy of penalty did not amount to unjustified concession to the
bidder. In reply, the Ministry inter alia stated that the normative availability was kept
at 80%. It was only for the penalty purposes that it was 75%. If there was reduction in
availability from 80% to 75% the proportionate capacity charge payable to the bidder
would have reduced proportionately in any case. It was only for the purpose of levy of
penalty that this limit was brought down. If there was sufficient competition in the
market in terms of bidding, the treatment to these parameters actually got reflected in
the tariffs received. For example, if this limit had been kept at 80% even for penalty
reasons, then the bidder would perceive it as a risk and will load this risk in terms of
higher tariff. Since this norm was common to all the bidders, the Ministry reasoned
that it could not be said that it caused unjustified concession to any particular person/
entity.
62. Asked to elaborate, the Secretary, MoP deposed in evidence as under:—
"The normative availability is the time period for which the plant will be available.
The CERC guidelines mention 80 per cent. The Central Electricity Regulatory
Commission's guidelines for normative availability of plant is mentioned at
80 per cent. The Ministry's guidelines say that it could be upto a maximum of
five per cent more on the CERC guidelines. This is not a mandatory stipulation.
It could be five per cent more. We need to do two things. We need to look at the
fact that whatever we said in terms of normative availability was part of the
bidding process upfront. It was not done later."

18
63. He added:—
"It was in line with the CERC guidelines. This matter of what should be the
normative availability was discussed with all the stakeholders including the CEA.
As I mentioned, these are new plants whose experience was not there before.
The country has experience of plants of 500 mw or less capacity and the country
knows what can be the normative availability. These plants are based on different
technology whose experience this country did not have."
(e)  Dilution of equity lock-in requirements for the sponsoring entity
64. Audit scrutiny revealed that equity lock-in requirement for the selected bidder
in the SPV, was reduced (September 2007) from 12 years from Commercial Operation
Date (COD) to 5 years from COD for Krishnapatnam and Tilaiya UMPPs after the
award of Sasan and Mundra UMPPs. Further, the Developers were permitted to cede
managerial control (i.e. equity holding can be reduced from 51 per cent to 26 per cent)
in all the four UMPPs after two years of commercial operation, though the quoted
tariff was valid for 25 years. A comparison of initial and revised equity lock in
requirements for UMPPs is tabulated below:—
Initial equity lock-in requirements Revised equity lock-in requirements
(a) 51 per cent up to a period of two years (a) 51 per cent up to a period of two years
after COD of the power station after  COD of the power station
(b) 26 per cent for a period of ten years (b) 26 per cent for a period of three years
thereafter thereafter
65. In response to the Audit findings, the Ministry stated that equity lock-in had
been ensured in the pre-COD phase of the project when the investment was to be
made in the project in the form of equity and debt and that the project risk was
comparatively less once the project was commissioned. The Ministry further stated
that equity lock-in provisions were changed after the approval of the EGoM based on
inputs provided by the Ministry.
66. Audit observed that UMPPs are mega projects using super critical technology
and their economic, efficient and effective operation is very important throughout the
25 years of their operation by the Developers to ensure supply of energy to consumers
at agreed rates. Thus, allowing the Developers to cede management control after
5 years of the COD may not be advisable since adequate backing of the sponsoring
entity would be lacking for SPVs during the major part of the operational period
which may adversely affect the operational performance of UMPPs resulting in non-
availability of power to consumers at agreed rates. Moreover, this does not provide
safeguard against the Developer using substandard capital equipment which may
breakdown frequently during the operational period after control is ceded.
67. In brief, some of the key conditions of the Standard Bidding Documents
were diluted citing the need for increasing competition or providing comfort to the
Developers. However, these measures decreased the maintenance safeguards for the
projects.

19
68. The Ministry of Power informed in the Exit Conference held on 21 February
2012 that the Audit concerns would be considered in the revised Standard bidding
documents which were under finalisation.
69. In the above context, the Committee sought the justification for diluting the
equity lock-in requirement in respect of Krishnapatnam and Tilaiya UMPPs vis-a-vis
the first two UMPPs viz. Sasan and Mundra. In reply, the Ministry submitted as under:—
"An Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG) was constituted in pursuance to the decision
of Empowered Group of Ministers (EGoM) meeting held on 30.7.2007. As per
the Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG) Report dated 3.9.2007 it was proposed that
'There shall be only one Lead Member, who commits at least 26% equity stake
in the Bidding Consortium, meets the technical requirement as per clause 2.1.4
and cannot be changed till 12 years of the COD of Power Station.' The report
was submitted to EGoM.
EGoM in its meeting held on 6th and 7th  September 2007 decided that 'the
present requirement of equity lock-in of the Lead Member of the Consortium
till 12 years after COD needs to be reduced to 5 years after the commissioning
of the power station.' Accordingly amended RFP of the bid documents was issued
on 21.9.2007."
70. The Committee then asked about the mechanism put in place to ensure that
the new promoters (in case of dilution of equity holding) would ensure adherence to
all the contract conditions and be capable of running the project efficiently for the
balance period of PPA. In reply, the Ministry stated as under:—
"As per the equity lock-in provisions, the Selected Bidder is required to maintain
51% holding in the project company for a period of two years after the COD of
the project and 26% for a total period of five years after COD of the project.
The PPAs are signed between the Project Company and procures. The project
company remains the same throughout term of the PPA. The contract is governed
by the terms and conditions of the PPA and there are performance based
provisions for incentives and penalties in the PPA.
The Competitive Bidding Guidelines issued by Ministry of Power require that
the minimum and maximum capacity charge (including both the non-escalable
component and the escalable component incorporating escalation as per index
being used for the purpose of evaluation) over the term of the Power Purchase
Agreement (PPA) shall not be less than 0.7 to avoid excessive front loading or
back loading during the period of contract. Such provisions ensure that the
successful bidder and also the subsequent shareholders, in case the successful
bidder exits from the project, will have interest in the operating the project and
supply power to the procurers as per the terms and conditions of the PPA."
(f) Lower networth requirement for bidders
71. As per the Ministry of Finance Guidelines for PPP projects costing `1000
crore or more, the requirement of net worth of the bidders should not be less than
15 per cent. However, in the case of UMPPs, the minimum net worth for bidders was

20
`1000 crore or equivalent USD which was around 5 per cent of Project Cost of around
`20000 crore. The Ministry of Power stated that the qualification requirements enabled
wide competition among the bidders and had a reflection in lower tariff. But Audit
observed that fixing low net worth criteria involved unwarranted risk for the UMPPs.
72. In the above context, the Committee desired to know the basis for assuming
that developers with networth of  `1,000 crore would possess adequate competence to
build UMPPs requiring investment of `16,000—20,000 crore particularly in the
background of the Ministry of Finance Guidelines of 15 per cent net worth requirement
for PPP projects costing `1,000 crore or more. In reply, the Ministry submitted that
the financial criteria for the UMPPs had been based on the following reasons:—
(i) UMPPs are capital intensive value projects with long gestation periods as
compared to DMRC or PGCIL as brought out by the Audit team also.
(ii) As private participation in power sector is relatively of recent origin and
the tariff based competitive bidding was a new concept for the power
sector, it was expected that sufficient competition was not generated in
the event of more stringent criteria as adopted by other CPSUs. To ensure
the bidding process to be fairly competitive, these criteria have been
adopted and one to one comparison with DMRC and PGCIL may not be
valid.
73. The Ministry further stated that the qualification requirements were prescribed
in the SBDs in proportion to the quantum of power proposed to be procured. Further,
the project cost of UMPPs and the project cost of DMRC and Powergrid were not
comparable ( `20,000 crores for UMPPs and about `1200 crores for DMRC and
powergrid projects) i.e. more than 16 times. With the same qualification requirements
as that of DMRC or Powergrid none of the bidders for Sasan or Mundra UMPP (except
may be NTPC) could have qualified. The absolute amount of the project cost could
not be ignored. The Ministry reasoned that thus the same percentage as for much
lower value projects could not be applied. Besides the design of the SBDs needed to
be seen in totality rather than only one condition in isolation.
74. The Ministry explained that networth was not kept as the only qualifying
criteria for UMPPs in the SBDs notified by MoP. In addition to networth the bidders
were also required to meet the minimum Turnover of  ` 2400 crore in any of the past
three years and Internal Resource Generation (IRG) of  `1140 crores computed as five
times the maximum internal resources generated in any of the last five years. Net-
worth denoted the size of the bidder but was not an indicator of liquidity available for
the project. In a project funding scenario, the ability of the developer to raise the
requisite funds depended to a large extent on his past performance.
75. Elaborating the issue, the Ministry further explained as under:—
"IRG represents the cash generation of the bidding company in any particular
year and signifies the capability of the bidding company to bring its portion of
equity in the project. A sufficient IRG will provide comfort to the lenders at the
time the project goes for debt financing. IRG reflects present/current profitability

21
of the Company resulting its capability to set aside surplus cash available for the
future growth of the company.
Turnover of a company represents the scale of operations of a company. All the
three financial criteria (i.e. Networth, Annual Turnover and IRG) are linked to
each other and minimum requirement for all the three were stipulated to ensure
a comprehensive analysis of the financial capability of the bidding company to
bring up the project.
The three criteria ensure size, liquidity and project experience. The bidders are
required to meet all the three parameters for being shortlisted.
Ministry of Finance documents specify only networth as qualifying requirement.
It specifies higher networth as compared to the SBDs but does not have any
requirement for IRG or Turnover.
The MoF guidelines are for Public Private Partnership projects on Design Build
Finance Operate Transfer (DBFOT) basis whereas SBDs are for projects on
Build Own Operate (BOO) basis."
76. Asked to state categorically the empirical basis on which the Government
concluded that diluting the criteria resulted in lower tariff, the Ministry submitted that
13 bidders had qualified for Sasan UMPP and 11 for Mundra UMPP. Out of these, 10
RFP bids were received for Sasan UMPP and 6 were received for Mundra UMPP.
Higher numbers of bidders in the RFP stage was enabled through the qualifying
requirements stated in the bidding documents for UMPPs. The Ministry contended
that the general principle was that more bidders would lead to increasing the competition
and a higher probability of discovering a competitive tariff.
77. When asked whether enhancing the minimum requirements of networth was
considered, the Ministry stated that revision of the SBDs was under process.
78. Since fixing low networth criteria involved unwarranted risk for the UMPPs,
the Committee desired to know the reasons for not following the Ministry of Finance's
Guidelines of 15 per cent networth requirement for a PPP Project costing `1,000
crore or more. In reply, the Ministry submitted as under:—
"The qualifying requirements are to be seen in terms of all the parameters i.e.
definition of parent/affiliate, Net worth, technical experience requirements,
Internal Resource Generation, Annual Turnover, Annual Audited Accounts, Board
Resolution, Certificate of Auditors and Normative availability and penalty and
not only on the basis of Net worth of `1000 crore. The qualification of the
Bidders based on all the parameters even with Net worth of `1000 crore taken
together establishes the desired competence of the prospective Bidders.
Considering the investment required for the project to be `20,000 crore, the
equity required would be `6000 crore (70:30 Debt: Equity ratio). It is not expected
that the entire `6000 crore equity will be contributed by the Bidder. Instead it is
required to be established whether the Bidder is capable of raising resources to
fulfill the total equity requirement. Moreover, the total equity is required to be

22
invested over a period of the ensuing 5 to 6 years. Therefore, any company
having net worth of `1000 crore and meeting the other criteria is considered to
be capable of raising required equity.
The qualifying requirements of  `1000 crore  net worth was stipulated to increase
competition. Had the qualifying requirements been 25% of networth as specified
in GoI Guidelines for PPP projects, hardly any bidder other than NTPC would
have qualified."
79. The Committee then specifically pointed out that though lower level of criteria
might attract more bidders, it might increase the risk of unsuitable bidders entering the
fray and asked about the precautions taken to address this risk. In reply, the Ministry
inter alia submitted that it could be seen that the list of bidders who qualified for the
four UMPPs were all reputed companies. The entire investment for the project was to
be done by the selected developer through equity and debt. There were provisions for
Liquidated Damages in the PPA in case of failure of the selected developer to operate
the power station as specified in the PPA. Moreover, the provisions of Condition
Precedent & Condition Subsequent regarding execution of Fuel Supply Agreement,
handing over the possession land, site clearance from Ministry of Environment &
Forests for coal mines, water clearance etc. and consequent default payment for non-
compliance ensured project certainty and participation of serious bidders.
III. GAPS IN BID EV ALUATION
(a) Non-fulfilment of qualifying criteria by the selected bidder
80. Audit pointed out that as per the minimum technical qualifying criteria
stipulated in RFQ document, the Bidding Company or a Consortium Member (including
Lead Member) and Affiliate must meet technical requirement of having experience of
developing projects in the last 10 years whose aggregate capital costs must not be less
than `3000 crore. Out of these projects, the capital cost of at least one project should
be equivalent to or more than `500 crore. Developing Project was defined as "successful
commissioning of a Project in which the bidder held equity stake of not less than
26 per cent at the time of commissioning".
81. Reliance Power Limited (REGL at the time of bid submission) in its bid
responses for Sasan and Mundra UMPPs, claimed an experience of `4416.60 crore
(aggregate capital cost) which also included (i) Generation, Transmission & Distribution
(T&D) Projects executed by the parent company i.e. REL, (ii) Distribution Projects
pertaining to two affiliate companies and (iii) Augmentation of T&D network of three
Odisha Distribution Companies. In case of Krishnapatnam and Tilaiya Projects, RPL
claimed an experience of `3430.21 crore and `3505.41 crore respectively which
included Generation, Transmission & Distribution (T&D) Projects executed by the
parent company.
82. Audit noted that major part of the experiences claimed by RPL was based on
additions to the fixed assets instead of capital expenditure pertaining to projects
commissioned during the last 10 years. RPL did not furnish details of such Projects.
Audit also noticed that in the case of Sasan UMPP, despite agreeing (14 June 2007) to

23
furnish the details of the commissioned Projects, RPL did not furnish the details before
issuance of LOI on 1 August 2007. The required details were neither furnished by
RPL nor asked for by the various evaluation committees in the case of Krishnapatnam
and Tilaiya Projects as well.
83. The Bid Process management consultant M/s. E&Y in its factual note on
Sasan Project mentioned that the experience of REL and affiliates pertained to ongoing
projects. Therefore, out of total experience claimed by RPL, the experience of
` 3123.88 crore (Sasan & Mundra), ` 2137.49 crore (Krishnapatnam) and ` 2254.61
crore (Tilaiya) might not conform to the stipulated qualifying requirements. Thus, the
bid evaluation process was completed and LOI issued to RPL in case of all three
projects (Sasan, Krishnapatnam and Tilaiya) without verifying the admissibility of
experience claimed by RPL.
84. In response to the Audit observations, the Ministry stated that the kind of
projects which were eligible was not specified in the Standard Bidding Document.
Land, building, plant and machinery, vehicle, furniture and fixtures, electric fittings
and apparatus, refrigerators etc. formed an integral part of the project cost and hence
they were capitalized in the books of accounts of respective companies as fixed asset
and these figures were taken (for evaluation). The Ministry also contended that it was
unlikely that the expenditure incurred in the last 10 years would pertain to projects
commissioned prior to this period, since capitalization of any project would be based
on actual expenditure incurred so far along with the liabilities/likely expenditure of
the project. Further, as a conservative approach, expenditure incurred on plant &
machinery, GIS Software and distribution system could be considered. Regarding
experiences of affiliates, the Ministry stated that expenditure incurred on transformers,
switchgears, underground and overhead cables etc. could be considered for
qualification.
85. According to Audit, the reply of the Ministry is not tenable in view of the
following:—
• In the absence of details of Projects-wise expenditure incurred by RPL
for projects commissioned during the last 10 years, the additions to fixed
assets, claimed by RPL as experience may also be due to: (i) additional
capital cost incurred on projects commissioned more than 10 years back,
(ii) individual completed assets of ongoing projects, (iii) assets not forming
part of any particular project or (iv) additional capitalizations on projects
separately considered for qualification.
• The Auditor's certificate submitted by RPL with the bid gives only project
cost incurred in generation and up-gradation of transmission and
distribution network etc. during April 1996 to March 2006 by Reliance
Energy Limited without mentioning the names of the projects which were
commissioned during the last ten years and capital costs of such individual
projects.
• Having defined, the term 'developing project', it was not proper to allow
the capital cost on account of plant & machinery, GIS Software etc. without

24
verifying whether these pertained to projects commissioned during the
last 10 years.
• Ministry's argument regarding experience of affiliates is not acceptable
since the consultants had stated that these pertain to ongoing works.
86. In the above context, the Committee specifically enquired as to the
methodology adopted by the Ministry to ascertain RPL's claim that they had met
technical requirement of having experience of developing projects by including the
ineligible non-capital expenditure pertaining to the projects. In reply, the Ministry
inter alia stated that as per the bid documents the bidder was required to submit a
certificate on project experience signed and certified as true by the Company Secretary
and Auditor appointed by the Bidding Company or Lead Member, in case of a
consortium. The Auditor must be a qualified Chartered Accountant. Against this
requirement, Reliance Power Ltd. (formerly Reliance Energy Generation Ltd.) claimed
to have experience of developing projects for ` 4416 crore and submitted the certificate
signed by Director and Auditor. [As per the evaluation report of E&Y, Director had
signed instead of Company Secretary since the Company was not statutorily required
to employ a full time Company Secretary. The director had signed the document
pursuant to an authorization by the Board resolution]. All the bidders were evaluated
on the basis of the certificates submitted by them.
87. The Ministry further stated that on the basis of the certificate submitted in
the bid by Reliance Power Ltd. (RPL), E&Y had concluded that RPL was qualified.
Based on the evaluation report of E&Y, the bid evaluation committee recommended
for shortlisting RPL and the same was accepted by High Level Committee. The Ministry
categorically submitted that no non-capital expenditure was considered in the technical
experience.
88. Drawing attention to the fact that the Auditor certificate furnished with the
bid of RPL pertained to the projects commissioned during the last 10 years, the
Committee asked whether the Ministry agreed that this certificate was in accordance
with the prescribed criteria. In reply, the Ministry apprised as under:—
"Yes, the Auditor certificate furnished with the bid of RPL, as informed by PFC,
stated that ‘the Bidding Company has experience of developing projects in the
last 10 years whose aggregate capital costs is not less than ` 3000 crore. Out of
these projects, the capital cost of at least one project is equivalent or more than
`500 crores. This Technical Requirement has been calculated as per the
instructions provided in the RFQ......’
This certificate is as per the format provided in the RFQ and shows that the
bidding company had experience of developing projects of more than `3000
crore in the last 10 years.
As informed by PFC, the Auditor certificate furnished by RPL was in accordance
with the prescribed criteria."

25
89. On being asked about the failure of the Bid Evaluation Committee and the
High Level Committee to detect the inadequacy in the Auditor certificate furnished by
Reliance Power Ltd. and its subsequent improper evaluation by E&Y , the Ministry
submitted that the PFC informed that the Auditor certificate was provided as per the
format given in the RFQ. There was no inadequacy in the Auditor certificate furnished
by Reliance Power Ltd. The auditor certificate was furnished by all the bidders in the
format prescribed in the RFQ.
90. The Committee then desired to know the reasons for issuing the Letter of
Intent (LoI) to RFL without obtaining the details of the commissioned projects which
RPL agreed to furnish in June 2007. The Ministry inter alia clarified that RPL in its
letter dated 14th June 2007 had explained that they were collating the details regarding
commissioned projects and the same would be submitted in due course. However,
pursuant to a decision taken by EGoM on 30th July 2007, LoI was issued to RPL on
1st August 2007. The Ministry further replied as under:—
"Since E&Y had confirmed that RPL is a qualified bidder, PFC did not consider
it necessary to wait for further information from RPL before issuing Lol. Further,
in accordance with the direction of EGoM, the matter was placed before the
BoD of Sasan Power Ltd. (SPL) and after approval of BoD of SPL, LoI was
issued to RPL on 01.08.2007."
91. On being specifically asked to state the rationale for issuing the Letter of
Intent to RPL when information vital to establish the qualification of RPL was pending,
the Ministry apprised as under:—
"PFC has informed that the qualification of the bidders was to be established
based on certification of the Company Secretary and Auditor appointed by the
Bidder. The certificate was submitted by Reliance Power Ltd. as per requirement.
E&Y had confirmed that RPL is a qualified bidder during the RFQ evaluation in
June 2006 and also subsequently in May, 2007 in the factual note regarding
qualification status of four bidders/members of consortium.
The additional information asked for from RPL was not necessary to establish
its qualification as RPL was a qualified bidder in the evaluation done in
June 2006 and its qualification was reconfirmed by E&Y in May 2007 in the
Factual Note giving the following conclusion regarding RPL ‘Hence, it can be
seen that even if we consider the most conservative scenario, then based on the
above methodology, it does not change the technical qualification of Reliance
Energy Generation Ltd.’
Therefore, Lol was issued to RPL — a qualified bidder on the basis of the tariff
quoted by it and decision of EGoM conveyed to Sasan Power Ltd."
92. The Committee enquired whether the EGoM was informed about the pending
information from RPL. In response, the Ministry submitted as under:—
"No, the EGoM was not informed about any information pending from RPL as
RPL was a qualified bidder. The qualification of the bidders was to be established
based on certification of the Company Secretary and Auditor appointed by the
Bidder. The certificate had been submitted by Reliance Power Ltd. as per
requirement. E&Y had confirmed that RPL is a qualified bidder during the RFQ

26
evaluation in June 2006 and also subsequently in May 2007 in the factual note
regarding qualification status of four bidders/members of consortium.
PFC has informed that the RFQ bid evaluation report submitted by E&Y in
June 2006 and the factual note submitted by E&Y in May 2007 contained the
credentials of RPL. Both the Evaluation report and the factual note submitted
by E&Y were placed before the EGoM.
E&Y in the evaluation report gave the following conclusion regarding RPL.
‘The Bidder, Reliance Energy Generation Ltd. meets the Technical Requirement
as per the terms and conditions of the RFQ.’
E&Y in the factual note gave the following conclusion regarding RPL.‘Hence,
it can be seen that even if we consider the most conservative scenario, then
based on the above methodology, it does not change the technical qualification
of Reliance Energy Generation Ltd.’
The additional information asked for from RPL was not necessary to establish
its qualification. Hence, there was no other pending information and no lapse."
93. Asked to explain about PFC allowing RPL's experience pertaining to ongoing
projects as admissible for conforming to qualifying requirements, the Ministry submitted
as under:—
"PFC has informed that the qualification of the bidders was to be established
based on certification of the Company Secretary and Auditor appointed by the
Bidder. The certificate had been submitted by Reliance Power Ltd. as per
requirement. E&Y had confirmed that RPL is a qualified bidder during the RFQ
evaluation in June 2006 and also subsequently in May 2007 in the factual note
regarding qualification status of four bidders/members of consortium.
E&Y in the factual note gave the following conclusion regarding RPL ‘Hence, it
can be seen that even if we consider the most conservative scenario, then based
on the above methodology, it does not change the technical qualification of
Reliance Energy Generation Ltd.’
All the projects which were considered for qualification requirement were
completed projects which is established from the Auditor's Certificate submitted
by the RPL.
Further, for distribution companies, the projects would be ongoing business and
project completion per se would not be terminal point. The distribution companies
capitalise value of various assets on ongoing basis and there is a provision in the
Bid Document to consider all projects. However, if distribution projects are not
considered, the distribution companies would be at a disadvantage and these
companies would get excluded from the tariff based competitive bidding process
which was not the intention of qualifying requirements. Therefore, such projects
are considered admissible for qualifying requirements."

27
94. When pointedly asked what action has been taken against the erring officers
for allowing inadmissible experience of RPL as admissible experience, the Ministry
stated as under:—
"As informed by PFC, no inadmissible experience of Reliance Power Ltd. was
considered for qualification of RPL. As per the Bid Document, the experience
of developing projects was to be submitted in the required format and certified
by the Company Secretary and Auditor appointed by the Bidding Company.
The Auditor's certificate submitted by RPL stated that it had experience of
developing projects of more than ` 3000 crore in the last 10 years. The certificate
stated value of the projects completed/capitalized during the last 10 years. As
no inadmissible experience was considered, there is no question of action against
any officers."
95. The Committee then desired to be apprised of the measures taken/
contemplated to improve the bid evaluation mechanism. In reply, the Ministry stated
that learning from the initial experience of the award of UMPPs, various steps had
been taken to improve the bid evaluation mechanism which were as follows:—
‘‘Bid Evaluation Committee
In case of first four UMPPs (Sasan, Mundra, Krishnapatnam and Tilaiya UMPPs),
Apex Evaluation Committee was constituted for evaluation of RFP bids. Based
on the experience of these UMPPs, the Apex Evaluation Committee is now
being constituted for evaluation of RFQ bids also for subsequent UMPPs.
Further, as per MOP's OM dated 03.07.2008, ‘keeping in view the different
expertise/skills required for evaluation of the RFQ and RFP bids, the composition
of members should in fact differ in respect of the different committees being set
up for evaluation of these documents. However , Chairman of both the Apex
Evaluation Committee for RFQ and RFP (set up to finally evaluate the RFQ
and RFP bids and thereafter to submit their Evaluation Reports to the Board of
the SPV for its acceptance) should be the same person who should invariably
be an outside independent expert.’
Accordingly, from Orissa UMPP onwards, the Apex Evaluation Committee is
being constituted for evaluation of RFQ responses whereas earlier the Apex
Evaluation Committee was constituted only for RFP bids.
Verification of the technical qualification requirements
Tilaiya and Orissa UMPPs
In case of first three UMPPs (Sasan, Mundra and Krishnapatnam UMPPs), RFQ
evaluation was done on the basis of certification submitted by the bidder. The
bids formats regarding financial and technical requirement were to be certified
by Company Secretary and Auditor of the bidder.
The MoP vide OM No. 23/11/2004-R&R (vol. vi) dated 03.08.2007 constituted
an Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG) in August 2007, to review the Standard Bidding
Documents being used for preparing bidding documents for UMPPs. The IMG

28
was chaired by Secretary (Power) and consisted of Additional Secretary (R&R),
MoP and representatives of Department of Legal Affairs and Department of
Corporate Affairs. IMG recommended the following in its report regarding bid
evaluation.
The IMG recommends that the (i) Statements relating to financial and technical
requirements should be required to be signed by the Managing Director/Chief
Executive Officer, being a full time Director on the Board of the company, and
the statutory auditor of the Company, (ii) In case of a Bidding Consortium,
each member shall be required to submit certified information separately at the
qualifying level as in (i) above. Further, the SBDs should contain the formats
also.
The Ministry submitted that the recommendations of the IMG were incorporated
in the SBDs in September 2007, after approval of EGoM.’’
(b) Excess Acquisition of Land
96. Audit scrutiny revealed that the CEA finalized its report on land requirements
for thermal power plants only in December 2007 though the process of UMPPs started
in 2005 itself. Audit observed that when compared to the new norms, the land agreed
for two UMPPs was in excess by 2634 acres (Mundra: 1538 acres and Krishnapatnam:
1096 acres). The issue of excess land was deliberated in the EGoM meeting held in
May 2008 wherein it was decided that since the land requirement had already been
worked out in respect of these projects, it was now up to the Project Developers
themselves to take a view on excess land thus agreed upon. Further it was decided that
land requirement for yet to be awarded UMPPs be worked out by CEA based on its
report.
97. In response to the Audit observations, the Ministry replied that land
requirement for UMPPs was estimated on the basis of prevalent norms for thermal
power projects and the CEA constituted a committee in April 2007 to optimize land
requirement for thermal power plants in view of large capacity to be added in the
XI Plan. The committee submitted its report in December 2007 and the issue was
again revisited and another report circulated in September 2010. The Ministry further
explained that extra land, if available, could be used for power generation purpose in
future.
98. Audit pointed out that as per CEA's new norms, land requirement for coastal
power plant of the size of around 4000 MW is 1530 acres. Audit therefore suggested
that the usage of excess land should be monitored to ensure usage in power projects/
benefit to consumers.
99. In the above context, the Committee enquired about the mechanism developed
by the Ministry to prevent misutilisation of the excess land by the project developer.
In reply, the Ministry submitted that land was acquired for a particular purpose and
any change in its use had to be first approved by the State Government concerned.
100. Asked to state the planning and monitoring system put in place to ensure
utilization of the excess land for the benefit of the consumers, the Ministry submitted

29
that generally land was acquired for specific project/purpose and the State Governments
permission was required for any other use. The MoP would further write to the States
to ensure that this benefited the power consumers.
101. On being asked whether there was any proposal to take back the excess
land from the project developer, the Ministry informed that there was no such proposal.
IV . FINANCIAL BENEFIT TO PROJECT DEVELOPER IN PERMITTING
    USAGE OF  SURPLUS COAL
(a) Allocation of surplus coal
102. Audit scrutiny revealed that Sasan Power Limited (an SPV created for
development of Sasan UMPP) was initially allocated (September 2006) two coal
blocks—Moher (Geological reserves of 402 million tonne) and Moher-Amlohri
Extension (Geological reserves of 198 million tonne) to meet its coal requirement. In
the Request for Proposal document for the Sasan UMPP, the bidders were informed
that coal blocks with reserves of about 700-800 million tonne would be allocated and
the project would require the development of a coal mine with production of 18-20
million tonne coal per annum. The allocation was made based on Geological reserves
and as the production from the above two blocks was considered insufficient by the
Ministry of Power, the Secretary (Power) requested (9th October 2006) the Ministry
of Coal (MOC) to allocate another block to Sasan UMPP. Accordingly, the MoC
allocated (26 October 2006) Chhatrasal coal block after de-allocating the same from
NTPC Limited prior to the opening of the financial bids (7 December 2006) for Sasan
UMPP . The total Geological reserves of the three coal blocks were estimated at
700-800 million tonne against the requirement of 16 million tonne per annum for
Sasan UMPP. At the time of allocation of coal blocks, data regarding actual availability
of coal for the project was not available in the absence of the mining plan. The Sasan
UMPP was subsequently awarded to Reliance Power Ltd. which quoted the lowest
levelised tariff for 25 years and the contract agreements were signed on 7 August 2007
for transfer of Sasan Power Limited (the SPV) to RPL.
103. In November 2007, the Chief Minister of Madhya Pradesh requested the
Prime Minister, to allow RPL to use the surplus coal from the captive blocks of Sasan
UMPP in the power plant being set up by RPL at Chitrangi tehsil in the vicinity of
these mines. The matter was referred to the EGoM and the issue was deliberated in the
two EGoM meetings held on 28 May 2008 and 14 August 2008 subsequent to which
the EGoM recommended that RPL be allowed to use the surplus coal from blocks
allotted to Sasan UMPP for its other projects where power was sold through tariff
based bidding. Accordingly, permission was accorded for use of surplus coal by
Chitrangi Project, tariff for which was already fixed. According to Audit, this decision
resulted in financial benefit of  ` 29,033 crore to RPL with a Net Present Value (NPV)
of  `11,852 crore.

30
104. As pointed out by Audit, a detailed analysis of the chronology of events
which took place in granting permission for use of surplus coal at Chitrangi Project
from the coal blocks allocated for Sasan Project is as under:
(i) It is not clear how the MoP on 9 October 2006 came to the conclusion that
initially allocated two blocks for the Sasan UMPP would be inadequate.
(ii) The basis on which MoC was prevailed upon in October 2006 itself to
allot an additional block (Chhatrasal) of coal to Sasan UMPP by
de-allocating it from the Public Sector NTPC is not clear.
(iii) Till March 2009, the MoC was taking the stand that coal from two blocks
(Moher and Moher-Amlohri Extension) was sufficient for the Sasan UMPP
and that there is no justification for allocating a third block (Chhatrasal)
to the Developer.
(iv) In March 2008, RPL maintained that there was no possibility to enhance
production beyond 12 million tonne from the two blocks of Moher and
Moher-Amlohri Extension.
(v) However, on 6 August 2008, RPL intimated of their intention to use latest
world class technology leading to increased recovery factor and higher
annual production leading to the mined coal from these three blocks
becoming surplus to the requirement of Sasan UMPP.
(vi) This indeed was the position which the Chief Minister of Madhya Pradesh
was aware of when he wrote to the Prime Minister in November 2007
itself seeking diversion of the surplus coal to Chitrangi.
(vii) This revelation by RPL, provided to the EGoM in its meeting on 14 August
2008, led to their decision that indeed surplus coal would be available and
this could be diverted to Chitrangi.
(b) Vitiation of the Bidding Process
105. Audit further pointed out that the permission to use surplus coal in other
projects of the developer vitiated the sanctity of the bidding process since it amounted
to post bid concessions to the developer having significant financial implication as
explained below:—
(i) The EGoM in its meeting held on 28 May 2008 had sought information
about structure in respect of ownership, mode of sale of power and tariff
of Chitrangi Project. Since the required information was not furnished,
the EGoM recommended (14 August 2008) granting of permission for
usage of incremental coal.
(ii) The EGoM in its meeting held on 14 August 2008 had recommended that
power generated by utilizing incremental coal from captive coal blocks of
Sasan UMPP would be sold through tariff based competitive bidding. But
RPL was granted permission by MoC (February 2010) to use the surplus
coal in Chitrangi Project the tariff of which was already accepted in

31
May 2008 at ` 2.45 per unit i.e. prior to the EGoM decision on usage of
surplus coal for Chitrangi Project. For this purpose RPL had bid along
with other bidders citing independent fuel arrangement (from Mahanadi
Coalfields Limited/112.22 million tonne of coal reserves in the Rampia
and dip-side of Rampia non-coking coal blocks in the State of Odisha)
and Government was not required to provide coal blocks/linkage.
106. In response to the Audit findings, the Ministry of Power stated that since
every qualified bidder had information about the clauses of the coal block allocation
letter prior to submission of financial bid, there was no vitiation of commercial
condition. The contention of the Ministry was not acceptable to Audit in view of the
following:—
(i) The clauses of the coal allocation letter did not explicitly state that Central
Government would indeed grant permission to the Developer to use the
surplus coal in their other projects. This fact was not disclosed upfront in
the allocation letters and in the absence of clarity on this issue, it was left
to the bidders to interpret the implication of the clauses of the allocation
letter. The relevant clauses in the allocation letter are reproduced below:—
'The coal produced from these mines would be exclusively used in the
Sasan UMPP’.— Clause (i).
'The modalities of disposal of surplus coal/middlings/rejects, if any, would
be as per the prevailing policy/instructions of the Government at the
relevant point in time and could also include handing over such surplus
coal/middlings/rejects to the local CIL subsidiary or to any person
designated by it at a transfer price to be determined by the Government'.—
Clause (vi).
`No coal shall be sold, delivered, transferred or disposed of except for the
stated captive mining purposes except with the previous approval of the
Central Government'.— Clause (xii).
(ii) A normal understanding of reading these three clauses would imply the
meaning that they were restrictive and designed to ensure non-diversion
of coal.
(iii) This seems to have been the conclusion that even NTPC came to as they
did not factor into their bid the possibility of using the surplus coal from
the captive mines of Sasan UMPP.
(iv) M/s. Tata Power Company Limited, which was also a bidder for the Sasan
UMPP had also contested the post-bid allocation of surplus coal diversion
facility to RPL as that was not their understanding either, from a reading
of the pre-bid conditions. A special leave petition filed (May 2009) by
Tata Power Limited against permission to RPL to use surplus coal from
captive coal mines of Sasan UMPP was pending in the Supreme Court of
India.

32
(v) The Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG), while deliberating on the safeguards
issue against misuse of coal mine, noted in September 2007 that the
allocation of coal mine had an explicit condition that its coal should be
used solely for the purpose of the Sasan UMPP or else the lease was liable
to be cancelled.
(vi) Since fuel cost is an important aspect of commercial consideration in
arriving at the tariff, any relaxation of condition subsequent to bidding
would vitiate the bidding process. As explicit mention of usage of surplus
coal in other projects was not unambiguously spelt out in the coal block
allocation letters, the bidders who lost out did not have equal opportunity
to bid under the relaxed condition.
107. According to Audit, the summary of conclusions that could be drawn are:—
(i) The advice of MOP in October 2006 that Sasan UMPP would require an
additional coal block was based on insufficient data as mining plan of
Moher and Moher-Amlohri Extension was not available.
(ii) The condition purportedly permitting diversion of surplus coal was not
explicitly stated in the bid document.
(iii) The EGoM evidently was not provided accurate information about
adequacy or otherwise of coal availability in the two blocks initially
allocated to Sasan UMPP leading to its decision permitting usage of surplus
coal.
(iv) Permission to utilize surplus coal for projects with tariff based competitive
bidding has been violated since tariff for Chitrangi Project, for which such
permission was granted, was already fixed before permission was granted.
108. Regarding financial impacts, the Ministry replied that costs and tariff for
two projects could not be compared. Similar views were expressed by RPL citing
variations in project structure such as point of delivery of electricity, comfort of
clearances for Sasan UMPPs and the lack of it for Chitrangi Project etc. However,
Audit were of the opinion that the comparison between Sasan and Chitrangi Projects
was not out of place since both the Projects (Sasan and Chitrangi) are (i) of 3960 MW;
(ii) located in the same vicinity; and (iii) sourcing coal from the same coal mines.
109. In the above context, the Committee desired to know the precise reasons
cited by the EGoM in allowing diversion of surplus coal for Chitrangi project.
In reply, the Ministry inter alia  explained that the EGoM in its meeting held on
28th May 2008 considered a request from the Chief Minister, Madhya Pradesh for
allowing diversion of surplus coal of Sasan UMPP for Chitrangi Project. The EGoM
observed "while there was clear consensus that coal from any coal mine allocated for
development of a tariff based UMPP should be utilized for generation of power, it was
generally agreed that in the first instance any developer should implement the UMPP
for which coal mines had been allocated. Thereafter, it should be ascertained whether
surplus coal was available from the allotted mines. It would also be appropriate to sell
any additional power generated through a tariff bidding route".

33
110. The matter was further deliberated in the EGoM meeting held on
14th August 2008 in which it was agreed that for expeditious implementation of coal
based thermal power projects, which would also increase the generation capacity of
the country, and for optimal utilization of coal reserves in the blocks allotted to UMPPs,
incremental coal may be permitted to be used by other projects of the same developer
of the UMPP subject to necessary safeguards. It must be ensured that the allotted
UMPPs and procurers from UMPPs do not suffer for lack of coal and also that
incremental coal is not misused by the developer. In terms of Ministry of Coal allotment
letter of coal blocks for Sasan Ultra Mega Power Project dated 26th October 2006, it
was noted that permission to utilize the incremental coal was granted with the previous
approval of the Central Government.
111. The Committee then enquired about the basis on which the Chief Minister
of Madhya Pradesh concluded in November 2007 itself that there was surplus coal
whereas RPL in March 2008 expressed its inability to increase projection beyond
12 million tonne per annum from the two blocks of Moher and Moher-Amlohri
Extension. In reply the Ministry apprised as under:—
"Facts have been ascertained from Government of Madhya Pradesh (GoMP).
GoMP conveyed the following vide their letter No. F-3/21/13/07 dated
3.11.2012:—
Ministry of Coal, GoI vide letters dated 13.09.2006, 26.10.2006 & 20.11.2006
allocated Captive Coal Blocks for Sasan UMPP. These allocation letters
prescribed that no coal shall be sold, diverted, transferred or disposed of except
for the stated captive mining purposes except with the previous approval of the
Central Government. The allocation letters created a possibility that surplus
coal if any from mines allocated to Sasan Project could have been allowed to be
used elsewhere by GoI at terms and conditions decided by it.
4000 MW TPP at Chitrangi, being set through MoU route was in the vicinity of
captive mines. Therefore, GoMP vide CM'S letter dated 2.11.2007 had requested
Hon'ble Prime Minister to approve use of surplus coal in Captive Coal blocks,
as per approved Mining Plan and after meeting the requirement of Sasan UMPP
for power generation in 4000 MW TPP at Chitrangi Tehsil, for which GoMP
had executed MoU on 20.09.2007. The full impact of this letter should be seen
in the light of the following facts:—
(a) The letter was written almost 13 months after the allocation of coal blocks
for Sasan UMPP. The allocation letter of coal blocks created a possibility
to use excess coal, if any, in other projects.
(b) Excess coal, if any, would have been known only after the approval of the
mining plan and accordingly, the letter mentioned that use of surplus coal,
if any, be allowed only after giving due importance to mining plan.
(c) The requirement of the coal for Sasan UMPP has priority and was clearly
emphasized in the letter.

34
(d) Chitrangi project had been planned in the close vicinity of Sasan UMPP
and, therefore, the best candidate for use of surplus coal, if any, after
meeting the full requirement of the UMPP. Madhya Pradesh was definitely
keen that this coal not be diverted to use in any other project outside the
State.
(e) The quantity of coal to be used in Chitrangi was not quantified and
conditions to be or not to be imposed for such use were entirely as per
Government of India's discretion.
Government of Madhya Pradesh and the Chief Minster have not concluded
in the November 2007 regarding availability of surplus coal but were
merely adverting to the possibility of surplus coal being available, after
the mining plan was finalized and suggesting best use thereof."
112. Asked to state categorically the basis on which it was ascertained that surplus
coal was available from the mines allotted for a particular UMPP, the Ministry submitted
that availability of surplus coal was known on the basis of approved mining plan and
stated requirement of end-use plant.
113. When queried about the specific considerations on which the EGoM decided
to allow RPL to use surplus coal of Sasan UMPP for Chitrangi Project in the absence
of the requisite information from the Government of Madhya Pradesh, as recommended
by themselves earlier, the Minister submitted as under:—
"The EGoM decided the following in its meeting of 14.8.2008:—
'It was agreed that for expeditious implementation of coal based thermal power
projects, which would also increase the generation capacity of the country, and
for optimal utilization of coal reserves in the blocks allotted to UMPPs,
incremental coal may be permitted to be used by other projects of the same
developer of the UMPP subject to necessary safeguards. It must be ensured that
the allotted UMPPs and procurers from UMPPs do not suffer for lack of coal
and also that incremental coal is not misused by the developer. It was noted that
in terms of Ministry of Coal allotment letter of coal blocks for Sasan mega
Power Project, dated 26th October, 2006, it was permitted to utilize the
incremental coal with the previous approval of the Central Government.'
Considering the above, EGoM decided to recommend to the Coal Ministry the
use of incremental coal from coal blocks allotted to Sasan UMPP, by other
projects of Reliance Power Ltd. subject to certain undertakings by the developer."
114. On being asked whether the Ministry of Coal and the Ministry of Power
were aware of the fact that the tariff of Chitrangi Project had already been fixed at
` 2.45 per unit as against ` 1.19 per unit in the case of Sasan UMPP, the Ministry of
Power stated that they were not aware of the fact that a power procurement contract
for 1241 MW was already concluded between Reliance Power and MP Power Trading
Company prior to the decision taken by EGoM on 14.8.2008.

35
115. The Central Electricity Authority was of the view that if surplus coal was
available, it would be used by the Sasan UMPP itself during its extended span beyond
25 years. In that context, the Committee asked whether the concerns of the CEA were
taken into consideration before arriving at a decision to allow RPL to use the surplus
coal in its other projects. In reply, the Ministry submitted as under:—
"On the request of using excess coal from the coal blocks allocated to Sasan
UMPP for the proposed project at Chitrangi Tehsil, MoP took the inputs from
CEA and had submitted  inter alia the following, before the EGoM's meeting
on 28.5.2008 for considerations:—
(a) Coal Ministry's allocation letters clearly state that the coal produced from
these mines would be exclusively used in the Sasan UMPP;
(b) The extractable coal reserves from Moher, Moher-Amlohri Extension and
Chatrasal Block coal blocks may be just sufficient for the Sasan UMPP
taking into account the consumption of Sasan UMPP over the already
signed PPA term of 25 years;
(c) Since mining activity at the site has not commenced as yet, therefore, at
present there is no basis to conclude that surplus coal will be available
from these blocks;
(d) If surplus coal is available, it could be used by the Sasan project itself
during its extended span beyond 25 years; and
(e) Furthermore, decision regarding disposal of surplus coal, if any, can be
taken only on the basis of the prevailing policy/instructions of the
Government at the relevant point of time as already stipulated in the
allocation letter of the Coal Ministry.
The EGoM considered the agenda note and all relevant factors before
taking the decision."
116. Replying to a related query, the Ministry of Power submitted that Condition (xii)
of the Allocation Letter for Chhatrasal coal block issued by the Ministry of Coal on
26th October 2006 clearly stated as under:—
"No coal shall be sold, delivered, transferred or disposed of except for the stated
captive mining purposes except with the previous approval of the Central
Government."
117. The Ministry further stated as under:—
"It was clarified vide Ministry of Coal letter dated 20.11.06 that ‘condition of
bank guarantee as well as all other conditions mentioned in the allocation letter
of Chhatrasal block will also apply to all other coal blocks for Sasan UMPP’.”
118. In this regard, the Secretary, MOP elaborated in evidence as under:—
"The allocation letter does not straight away mention that it can be used.
Allocation letter only says that the end use project is this and no coal from this

36
particular block can be sold, delivered or transferred except with the express
permission of Government. So, it is not an allocation letter in itself to use it
elsewhere, it can be seen as an enabling provision, that is why, the EGoM looked
at it in that light and took a decision. So, the reason why EGoM had to take a
decision was because October 2006 letter does not directly give anybody
permission to use the coal elsewhere."
119. As the EGoM recommended in August, 2008 that the power generated by
utilizing the surplus coal of Sasan UMPP would be sold through tariff based competitive
bidding, the Committee desired to know the reasons for giving permission for diversion
of coal to Chitrangi Project where the tariff had already been fixed in May 2008 and
whether the Government ensured that the benefit would be passed on to the consumers.
In reply, the Ministry inter alia submitted that the letter of RPL did not disclose that in
May 2008, they had already received Lol for 1241 MW of power from Chitrangi
Project from the Government of Madhya Pradesh.
120. Chitrangi Project, even though a tariff based project, was under case 1
tariff based bidding where land, fuel linkages and clearances were to be arranged by
the developer himself whereas Sasan was a UMPP under case 2 tariff based bidding
where land, fuel linkages and clearances were to be arranged by the SPV with the
assistance from the Government. In this context, the Committee enquired whether the
Ministry of Power examined and brought to the notice of the EGoM that granting
permission for usage of surplus coal from Sasan UMPP to Chitrangi Project would
lead to inequities in the award process of Sasan UMPP as well as Chitrangi Project
resulting in benefit to the developer and vitiating the level playing field. In reply, the
Ministry stated that the agenda notes for EGoM meetings dated 28.5.08 and 14.8.08
did not propose for grant of permission for use of surplus coal from Sasan UMPP to
Chitrangi project. In the EGoM meeting dated 28.5.2008, it was decided that the
Government of Madhya Pradesh should be asked how the proposed project has been
structured in respect of ownership, mode of sale of power and tariff. It was decided
that the above information should be obtained and placed before the next meeting of
the EGoM for its further consideration of the request made by the Chief Minister of
Madhya Pradesh. Accordingly, the GoMP were requested to provide the above
information, but the same was not received before the next EGoM meeting held on
14.8.2008 and it was stated in Agenda Note for the meeting. Moreover, the fact that
RPL had been awarded the Power Procurement Contract by MP Govt. was not known
to MoP or EGoM, when decision was taken.
121. The Committee then specifically asked whether it was not prudent on the
part of the Ministry of Power, being the nodal agency for power projects, to have the
basic information regarding power projects especially that of the Chitrangi Project
and to provide the EGoM all the vital inputs on the tariff structure of Chitrangi Project
before it took the decision. In reply, the Ministry stated that after enactment of the
Electricity Act 2003, sanction/Techno Economic Clearance (TEC) of Central
Government/CEA was not required for thermal power projects. The purchase of power
by discoms was completely within the domain of the State Government concerned and
the States were not expected to send data on power procurement through competitive
bidding to MOP or CEA.

37
122. The Committee asked whether the Ministry had made any exercise to arrive
at a transfer price in the context of clause (vi) of the coal block allocation letters which
mentioned handing over of surplus coal to the CIL/subsidiaries. In reply, the Ministry
stated that the agenda placed before EGoM were to formulate the Ministry of Power's
comments on the letter of Chief Minister, Madhya Pradesh. Hence occasion to do the
above exercise did not arise.
123. Asked whether the Ministry could claim that the Agenda Note for the EGoM
contained all the vital information required to arrive at an informed decision, the
Ministry submitted that the Agenda Note for EGoM was placed with certain suggestions
to be communicated to the MoC in response to the comments sought by them on the
letter of the Chief Minister of Madhya Pradesh. In this context, all the available and
relevant information was submitted to EGoM.
124. When enquired about the Ministry of Power's failure to link Madhya Pradesh
Chief Minister's letter of November 2007 with RPL's letter dated 6th August 2008 so
as to present a complete picture before the EGoM, the Ministry submitted that the
letter of RPL dated 6.8.2008 could not be processed in MOP before the EGoM meeting
dated 14.8.2008 as the letter was received in the division concerned only on 9.8.2008
and there was not enough time to process the letter and place it before the EGoM.
125. The Committee then enquired about the pressing reasons for allotting the
three coal blocks namely, Moher, Moher-Amlohri Extension and Chhatrasal for Sasan
UMPP before final bids and without finalizing proper mining plan. The Ministry replied
as under:—
"In case-2 (like UMPP) bidding, the blocks are indicated before the bids are
called. The developer who wins the bid prepares the mining plan. This process
was followed for all the UMPPs based on captive coal blocks. The three captive
coal blocks namely Moher, Moher-Amlohri Extension and Chhatarsal were
allocated for Sasan UMPP before final bids so that the details of allocated coal
blocks could be given to the bidders for quoting competitive price for the tariff
taking into account the coal from the allocated coal blocks."
126. Asked to mention the mechanism put in place to ensure that the coal would
not be diverted for the Chitrangi Project (having higher tariff as compared to Sasan
UMPP) to the detriment of the Sasan project, the Ministry submitted that a suitable
mechanism to monitor the safeguards stipulated by the EGoM was being developed in
consultation with the Ministry of Coal and Central Electricity Authority.
127. As per the RPL Mining Plan, Moher and Moher-Amlohri Extension coal
blocks would produce 20 Million Tonne (MT) of coal per annum against the requirement
of 16 MT coal. In this context, the Committee enquired about the reasons for not
de-allocating the excess coal block i.e. Chhatrasal which would produce 5 MT of coal
per annum. In reply, the Ministry stated as under:—
"The CAG in its follow up report dated 12.10.2011 had inter alia recommended
that the permission to use excess coal in other project should be reviewed as no
benefit on this account was passed on to the customer.

38
Ministry of Power had placed inter alia the issues related to use of surplus coal
and present status of Chitrangi project of RPL as well as audit's recommendation
before the EGoM in its meeting held on 5th December, 2011. One of the proposal
for consideration of EGoM was:—
'In case where more than one coal block has been allocated for a UMPP,
MoC to review the coal blocks allocated to the pithead UMPPs in consultation
with MoP to ascertain that a complete coal block is not becoming incremental
after meeting the requirement of the UMPP for which the block/s have been
allocated.'
EGoM directed on 5.12.2011 that proposals 'pertaining to incremental coal
be examined in detail by Ministry of Coal in consultation with the Ministry
of Power, the Department of Legal Affairs and the Attorney General of India
and the matter placed before the EGoM in its next meeting.'
EGoM in meeting on 28.4.2012 considered the agenda note dated 27.4.2012
from the Ministry of Power and noted the opinion of the Ld. Attorney General
for India in the matter wherein it was, inter alia, observed that 'the decision
taken by the EGoM on 14.8.2008 was a well considered decision'. AGI has
opined that  These blocks formed the basis of the bids... .These coal blocks were
identified and offered to the bidders... These three blocks were meant to be
available for 25 years and as repeatedly mentioned, were meant to be the very
basis on which the bids were received. In my opinion, there is no question of
any coal block becoming incremental. The allocations were final. If subsequently
a more effective mining plan is submitted, this cannot have the effect of rendering
any part of the coal blocks as having become ‘incremental’. Thereafter, the
question of any ‘review’ does not arise.
Based on AGI's opinion, EGoM on 28.4.12 decided that "the EGoM decision of
14.8.2008, to recommend to the Ministry of Coal to permit the use of incremental
coal for other projects of RPL and subsequent decisions taken by Ministry of
Coal, culminating in the notification dated 17.2.2010, notifying Chitrangi as the
end use project, were affirmed".
128. The Committee then specifically asked the Ministry to reconcile the RPL
Mining Plan of producing 20 MT of coal per annum from Moher and Moher-Amlohri
Extension coal blocks and RPL's statement of March 2008 expressing inability to
increase production beyond 12 Million Tonne per annum from the two blocks.
In reply, the Ministry submitted as under:—
"As informed by Ministry of Coal, the Mining Plan (March 2008) of Moher and
Moher-Amlohri Extension Coal Block envisaged a production capacity of 12
million tonnes per annum (MTPA) with a net geological reserve of 575 million
tonnes and extractable reserves of 470.43 million tonnes (446.91 million tonnes
considering additional 5% mining loss) with a life of 40 years. The depth of the
operation was planned upto 290 meters. This was approved by the Standing
Committee on 14/05/2008.

39
The Revised Mining Plan (September 2008) of Moher and Moher-Amlohri
Extension Coal Block envisaged a production capacity of 20 MTPA with the
same net geological reserve base i.e. 575 million tonnes and 470.43 million
tonnes of extractable reserves. The depth of operation of about 290 meters was
same, but the life of the mine was got revised to 29 years due to faster rate of
extraction. Enhancement in production capacity was possible mainly on the
strength of better layout and design of quarry and deployment of bigger size of
Heavy Equipment Mining Machinery (HEMM). The Revised Mining Plan was
approved by the Standing Committee on 9.2.2009. All the three coal blocks
namely Moher, Moher-Amlohri Extension and Chhatrasal were allotted for Sasan
UMPP before the final bids and were part of the bid documents."
129. Pointing out the Government's obligation regarding project specific fuel
arrangement for UMPPs, the Committee enquired about the system put in place to
allow diversion of surplus coal from the coal block allotted to the UMPPs to other
projects of the same developer. In reply, the Ministry replied as under:—
"Arranging fuel for pithead UMPPs is the obligation of Government/procurers.
For coastal projects, developer arranges imported coal. The coal blocks asked
by MOP were for the exclusive use of a UMPP which has been designed for
3960- 4000 MW, depending on the unit size the developer decides to go for. As
per terms and conditions of allocation letter "No coal shall be sold, delivered,
transferred or disposed of except for the stated captive mining purposes except
with the previous approval of the Central Government". Considering the above
and for expeditious implementation of coal based thermal power projects, which
would also increase the generation capacity of the country, and for optimal
utilization of coal reserves in the blocks allotted to UMPPs, EGoM on
14th August 2008 decided to recommend to Coal Ministry the use of incremental
coal from coal blocks allotted to Sasan UMPP by other projects of RPL subject
to certain safeguards."
130. In response to a query as to whether allotment of coal blocks for UMPPs
was free of cost, the Secretary, MoP deposed in evidence as under:—
"Coal blocks are allotted free of cost, including Sasan. It is not only Sasan that
gets free of cost but every other expenditure to be incurred to develop that block
is on the developer, to buy the land, to bring in the machinery and to do the
machinery, etc. all that is done by the developer and the developer also pays on
the coal royalty to the Government as per the rate fixed. So, coal blocks are
given free of cost but development cost is with the developer who gets the coal
blocks."
131. He added:—
"This is the first instance of its kind where excess coal has been given anywhere.
What we are dealing with is the first project, Sasan and the connected project of
Chitrangi. There are no other examples. Sir, you have asked as to what is our
experience, this is the first instance we are dealing with and Sasan project, like
I mentioned, is starting its first unit commissioning very soon."

40
132. In a related matter, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in its judgment dated
25th August 2014 in the Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 120 of 2012 inter alia observed
as under:—
"In some cases the Government has allowed diversion of coal from UMPP to
other end uses i.e. for commercial exploitation. Having regard to this, it is directed
that the coal blocks allocated for UMPP would only be used for UMPP and no
diversion of coal for commercial exploitation would be permitted."
V . POLICY ON USE OF SURPLUS COAL
133. Audit pointed out that coal blocks (Kerandari B & C) for Tilaiya UMPP
were also allocated with the same conditions for usage/disposal of surplus coal as
applicable to Sasan UMPP. As per the Mining Plan, the production from the coal
blocks allotted for Tilaiya Project would be 40 million tonne per annum. The
requirement for the Tilaiya UMPP would be only 16 million tonne per annum and
hence 24 million tonne per annum would be incremental coal available from the coal
blocks allotted to this Project.
134. At the time of opening of the financial bid (December 2008) for the Tilaiya
UMPP, there was a lack of clarity as to whether similar permission for use of incremental
coal would be granted to the developer by the Government of India since the earlier
(August 2008) decision of the MoC, on the recommendation of EGoM, was specific
for the Sasan project.
135. In January 2010, the EGoM agreed to the suggestion of the Coal Secretary
that a clause could be inserted in the allocation letter for coal blocks for UMPPs that
the Government of India (MoC) may allow the use of incremental coal, if available,
from the coal blocks allocated for UMPP, after legal vetting. The MoC were in the
process of obtaining legal vetting as of March 2012.
136. In March 2011, RPL which had won the Tilaiya bid as well, made a request
that permission might be granted to use the surplus coal from the Tilaiya coal blocks
to meet the demands for its other power projects.
137. On 28 April 2012, the EGoM while considering the issue of diversion of
surplus coal from Sasan Project also considered the request of RPL to use the surplus
coal from the Tilaiya Coal Blocks in its other Projects. In the meeting, the EGoM
decided to endorse the decision taken in its meeting held on 14 August 2008 for
permission of diversion of surplus coal from Sasan coal blocks to Chitrangi Project
and further decided that the permission given for use of 9MTPA incremental coal of
Sasan Coal Block for Chitrangi Power Project of RPL could not be withdrawn. The
financial impact of the permission of usage of surplus coal from Sasan and Tilaiya
Projects in other Projects of RPL as worked out in CAG's draft report issued to the
Ministry of Power on 01.03.2012 was also brought before the EGoM meeting on
28.04.2012. The financial impact of the permission was, however, not made available
to the EGoM in its meeting held in August 2008.
138. In the same meeting (28 April 2012) regarding permission of surplus coal
from Tilaiya Project, the EGoM however, decided that the application of RPL for use

41
of surplus coal from the coal blocks allotted to Tilaiya Project be processed under the
yet to be formulated new policy on surplus coal.
139. Further, the decision taken in August 2008 EGoM meeting was based on
inadequate data as the structure of the Chitrangi Project called for by the EGoM on
28 May 2008 from the Madhya Pradesh Government was not available before the
EGoM.
140. One of the conditions stipulated by the EGoM in August 2008 while
recommending permission for usage of surplus coal from Sasan Project was that the
power generated by utilizing incremental coal from these captive coal blocks would
be sold through tariff based competitive bidding. However, the tariff of Chitrangi
Project had already been fixed in May 2008, which was also not brought before the
EGoM in August 2008, as elaborated above.
141. Thus, the EGoM in April 2012 decided to uphold its decision of
August 2008, which was taken with inadequate data.
142. In the above context, the Committee enquired about the reasons for not
taking a holistic view on the request of RPL to use surplus coal from both Sasan and
Tilaiya Projects, pending framing of the policy, particularly in the background that
inequities amongst UMPP players (case II bidding for Sasan UMPP) and also players
of non-UMPP projects (case I bidding for Chitrangi Project) had arisen. In reply, the
Ministry stated as under:—
"The recommendation of EGoM to permit use of incremental coal was made on
14.8.08. Ministry of Coal (MoC) granted in principle approval to this on
18.11.2008. MoC had further approved the mining plan for Moher and Moher-
Amlohri blocks on 2.3.09 and Chhatrasal block on 30.3.09 and notified Chitrangi
as end use project for this incremental coal on 17.2.2010. Tata Power had gone
to Delhi High Court against the decision to permit use of incremental coal. The
high Court in April 2009 dismissed the case and Tata Power has filed SLP in
Supreme Court, which is pending. Reliance Power Ltd. (RPL) requested in
July 2010 and March 2011 for approval for utilization of incremental coal from
Kerandari B and C coal blocks allocated to Jharkhand Integrated Power Limited
(Tilaiya UMPP). Since the case with regard to permission to use of incremental
coal from Sasan UMPP is pending in the Supreme Court (Tata Power has gone
in appeal against the Delhi High Court's order on Sasan UMPP's incremental
coal issues), Ministry of Power decided to wait for the outcome of the above
petition before processing the request of M/s. RPL.
The CAG in its follow up report dated 12.10.2011 had inter alia recommended
that "the permission to use excess coal in other project should be reviewed as no
benefit on this account was passed on to the customer". Ministry of Power had
placed inter alia,  issues related to use of surplus coal and present status of
Chitrangi project of RPL as well as audit's recommendation before the EGoM in
its meeting held on 5th December 2011.

42
After deliberating the matter, the EGoM directed that the issue pertaining to
incremental coal be examined in detail by the Ministry of Coal in consultation
with the Ministry of Power, the Department of Legal Affairs and the Attorney
General of India and the matter placed before the EGoM in its next meeting.
MOP prepared a background note on the issues and sent them to the Ministry of
Coal for their reference to Department of Legal Affairs for the opinion of
Ld. AGI.
A request was received from Reliance Power Ltd. (RPL) dated 3.1.2012 wherein
they requested for approval to utilize incremental coal from Kerandari B&C
coal blocks allotted to Tilaiya UMPP.
The Ministry of Power (MoP) had placed both the issues for consideration of
EGoM meeting held on 28.4.12. The EGoM considered the note dated 27.4.2012
from the Ministry of Power and noted the opinion of the Ld. Attorney General
for India in the matter wherein it was, inter alia, observed that the decision
taken by the EGoM on 14.8.2008 was well considered. The EGoM decision of
14.8.2008, to recommend to the Ministry of Coal to permit the use of incremental
coal for other projects of RPL and subsequent decisions taken by Ministry of
Coal, culminating in the notification dated 17.2.2010, notifying Chitrangi as the
end use project, were affirmed by EGoM.
Further, the application of RPL to use of surplus coal from coal blocks allocated
to Tilaiya UMPP and the agenda note of the Ministry of Power were considered
by EGoM. The EGoM was also apprised of surplus coal policy being finalised
by MoC. As MoC was already under the process of finalizing surplus coal policy
with Inter Ministerial consultations, EGoM directed that the new policy will be
formulated by Ministry of Coal keeping in view the opinion given by Ld. AGI
for use of surplus/incremental coal with the approval of the Cabinet Committee
on Economic Affairs after necessary inter-ministerial consultations and after
obtaining recommendations of the Committee of Secretaries and the application
for use of surplus coal from Tilaiya mines be processed under the new policy.
The EGoM further decided that the policy will have prospective effect and will
not affect the permission already given for use of Sasan coal blocks incremental
coal for Chitrangi project of RPL."
143. On being asked whether the Government have already finalized the policy
on usage of surplus coal of captive mines, the Ministry submitted as under:—
"EGoM in its meeting held on 28.4.2012 decided that the Ministry of Coal will
formulate a policy keeping in view the opinion given by Ld. Attorney-General
for use of surplus/incremental coal with the approval of the Cabinet Committee
on Economic Affairs (CCEA) after necessary inter-ministerial consultations and
after obtaining recommendations of the Committee of Secretaries. The MoC
indicated that draft policy is to be placed before the Committee of Secretaries
for their approval."

PART II
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Introductory
1. Considering the critical role played by energy in the economic
development and expansion of the power sector in the country, the Government
of India decided in November 2005 to develop Ultra Mega Power Projects
(UMPPs) using Super Critical Technology to augment the country's power
generation capacity and sustain the high growth rate. The UMPPs would meet
the power needs of a number of States and were to be developed on Build, Own
and Operate (BOO) basis through creation of Special Purpose Vehicles. Each
UMPP was projected to have a capacity of around 4,000 MW with a cost of
` 6,000-20,000 crore per project. This initiative aims at delivering power at
competitive cost to consumers by achieving economies of scale. The identification
of the Project Developer was to be done on the basis of tariff based competitive
bidding as per "Guidelines for determination of tariff by bidding process for
procurement of power by distribution licensees" issued by the Ministry of Power
(MoP) in January 2005. The MoP have a crucial role in the development of UMPPs
which include coordination with Central Ministries/Agencies for ensuring coal
block allotment/coal linkage, environment/forest clearances, water linkage, etc.
In November 2005, the Ministry designated the Power Finance Corporation
Limited (PFC) as the nodal agency for the purpose of development of UMPPs
through Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs) and the Central Electrical Authority
(CEA) as the technical partner. An Empowered Group of Ministers (EGoM)
chaired by the Minister of Power with the Ministers of Finance, Law and Justice,
Science & Technology and Earth Sciences and the Deputy Chairman, Planning
Commission as Members was also constituted on 14th June 2007 for facilitating
expeditious decisions on all major issues concerning UMPPs. As of September
2012, bidding process had been completed and contracts were awarded in respect
of four UMPPs viz. Sasan, Mundra, Krishnapatnam and Tilaiya. While Mundra
UMPP was awarded to Tata Power Company Limited, Sasan, Krishnapatnam
and Tilaiya UMPPs were awarded to Reliance Power Limited. The Committee's
examination of the subject has revealed several glaring lapses/deficiencies in the
Bid Process Management, Bid Evaluation, granting permission for diversion of
surplus coal as well as undue financial benefit to Reliance Power Limited, the
project developer of Sasan UMPP. These lapses/deficiencies alongwith the
considered opinion/recommendations of the Committee have been dealt with in
the succeeding paragraphs.
43

44
Appointment of Bid Process Management Consultant be undermining bid
conditions
2. The Committee are seriously concerned to note the manner in which the
Ministry of Power proceeded with the appointment of Bid Process Management
Consultant in respect of Sasan, Mundra, Krishnapatnam and Tilaiya UMPPs.
The lowest bids of ICRA of ` 54.50 lakh and ` 44.50 lakh for the consultancy
assignments of Sasan and Mundra UMPPs respectively were ignored though the
bidder was declared technically qualified by the Bid Evaluation Committee and
was at the top position both in the financial score and the combined score. The
work was instead awarded to E and Y at higher rates of ` 1.28 crore each on the
ground that they had more experience and were managing bid process of Anpara
Power Project in Bangladesh. This was done pursuant to the Bid Evaluation
Committee's recommendation that "Ultra Mega Power Project being a prestigious
assignment and as there is a large variation in the technical rating and price
quoted by the consultancy firms, the first three highest ranked firms viz. ICRA,
E and Y and CRISIL be called for making presentation to the High Level
Committee". The Committee find that it was contrary to the bid conditions which
stipulated that the top 5 bidders were to be called for negotiations mainly for the
purpose of price reduction to match the lowest price quoted and the bidder who
got the highest score as per the combined technical and financial weightage
formula was to be awarded the work. There was no provision in the laid down
procedure for further screening like presentation and comparative evaluation
during the negotiation process once the ranking based on combined technical
and financial score of bidders had been done. Subsequently, the High Level
Committee constituted by the Ministry and which had representation by SBI,
CEA, IDBI, IDFC and PFC rejected ICRA and selected E and Y by observing
that ICRA had only limited experience in bid process management since they
had assisted in evaluation of RFQ bids of only 100 MW hydro-electric plants in
Uttarakhand and was having retired professionals. The reasoning of the HLC is
not tenable as having declared ICRA as technically qualified, it was not proper
to go into relative merits of the bidders since the selection process specified at the
time of invitation of bids did not envisage it. Moreover, the retired professionals
came through ICRA and not as individual experts and as per the tender documents
there was no specific bar on having retired professionals being engaged by ICRA
for the assignment, as also admitted by the Ministry. Thus, the High Level
Committee's action of disregarding ICRA's bid was erroneous. The Committee
also find that the work of evaluation of bids for Anpara Project was not completed
by E and Y on the date of bid submission for Sasan and Mundra consultancy
work. Since the bid criteria allowed consideration of successfully completed
assignments as relevant past experience, it is not fair to conclude that E and Y
had the past experience of Anpara project required to secure qualification. The
Committee further note that the other areas of experience claimed by E and Y
mainly related to bid documentation whereas in the case of UMPPs, the
significance of bid evaluation experience was more than bid documentation
experience. As such, the evidence on record does not suggest that E and Y had

45
relevant experience more than that of ICRA in managing the bid process of
projects. The subsequent developments, viz. the failure on the part of E and Y
(the consultant) to point out the shortcomings/deficiencies in the technical
experience claimed by Reliance Power Ltd. and the PFC's decision to debar E
and Y for a period of three years w.e.f. 19th July 2011 for their failure to perform
in one of the assignments i.e. Sasan UMPP, raise serious doubts about the award
of the consultancy assignment to E and Y besides reinforcing the Committee's
apprehension that the appointment of E and Y was not made in a transparent
manner. In yet another instance of irregularity, the Committee find that the lowest
price of ` 54 lakh for Krishnapatnam UMPP was quoted by Feedback but in
contravention of the bid conditions, E and Y, which emerged as the highest ranked
bidder, was not asked to match their price with the price quoted by Feedback.
The Ministry's submission that though there was no requirement in the tender
document to match the price of the lowest quoted bidder, the HLC got the price
reduced, fails to impress the Committee as E and Y was asked to match the price
of ` 60 lakh quoted by the second lowest bidder. Worse, bids for consultancy
work for Tilaiya UMPP were not called for but the work was awarded to E and
Y at a cost of ` 60 lakh based on the contention that Tilaiya UMPP was on fast
track. The Ministry claimed that the assignment for Tilaiya UMPP was awarded
at the same cost and terms and conditions as the Odisha UMPP and the scope of
work for both the assignments was same, they being pit-head based UMPPs. In
view of the fact that bids for different project may turn out to be different due to
time factor and market conditions even if the projects are of similar nature, the
Committee are of the considered opinion that the Ministry ought to have taken
matching action to ensure appointment of bid consultant for Tilaiya UMPP
through a proper tendering process instead of resorting to flimsy excuses. All the
above cited facts lead the Committee to conclude that undue favours were extended
to E and Y by flouting the bidding conditions and undermining transparency
and accountability. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the entire process
followed for the appointment of E and Y as consultant for four UMPPs be
thoroughly investigated by an appropriate agency to unearth possible
manipulations and fix responsibility. The Committee also desire that robust checks
and balances be put in place so as to ensure transparency and accountability in
any such appointment of consultants in future.
Deficient Bid Documentation
3. The Committee are perturbed to note that bids for infrastructure projects
of such magnitude as the UMPPs had been called on the basis of bid documents
not vetted by the Department of Legal Affairs, prompting the Empowered Group
of Ministers (EGoM) to direct the Ministry of Power to obtain comments
inter alia of the Department of Legal Affairs on the Standard Bidding Documents
(SBDs) developed and notified by the Ministry in March 2006 based on which
the bid documents for the UMPPs (RFQ and RFP) were prepared by the
consultant, E and Y. The Ministry defended their action by stating that the
guidelines do not provide for vetting of the SBD by the Department of Legal
Affairs. The Committee's examination of the issue has, however, revealed that
these Guidelines for procurement of power by distribution licensees through tariff-

46
based competitive bidding were notified by the Ministry of Power in January
2005 whereas the decision to establish the UMPPs was taken in November 2005.
Thus, the guidelines were framed without factoring in the changed conditions
and requirements associated with the UMPPs. As the Ministry of Power were
awarding the power projects of such magnitude for the first time and long term
commitments by way of power purchase agreement for 25 years were being
entered into with private developers, the Committee believe that getting the SBDs
vetted by the Department of Legal Affairs could have been instrumental in
protecting the Government interest. The absence of legal vetting was also taken
note of by the EGoM in its meeting held on 6th and 7th September 2007. Thus,
the guidelines were deficient to that extent. The Committee have now been
informed that pursuant to an EGoM directive, a draft Model Power Purchase
Agreement applicable for UMPPs has been prepared and an Inter-Ministerial
Group has been constituted with the representatives of the Ministries of Law
and Justice, Finance, Coal and Environment and Forests and Planning
Commission and Central Electricity Authority to fine tune the documents based
on the comments/suggestions of the stakeholders. The Ministry have further
informed that the SBDs for UMPPs were under revision and being finalized and
would be placed before the EGoM for consideration. The Committee feel that
these are belated actions, which should have been resorted to right from the time
when the UMPP initiative commenced in 2005. Nevertheless, the Committee would
urge the Ministry of Power to finalise the Model Power Purchase Agreement and
the SBDs for UMPPs with promptitude and prudence and ensure the requisite
legal vetting by the Department of Legal Affairs so that the Government interest
is duly protected.
Need for a foolproof system of bid management
4. The Committee were informed that all the bidders had prior information
that the Statutory Auditor's certificate would be required to be submitted
alongwith the bid documents. Notably, these Statutory Auditors are appointed
by the Companies themselves and there is obviously no assurance that there would
be suppression or distortion of facts and manipulation of the bid documents. The
Committee further observe that the bid documents for RFQs, RPFs, etc. are
prepared not by the Ministry alone but with the help of outside people and also
in consultation with a number of stakeholders. Under the circumstances, the
Committee are of the considered view that onus lies with the Ministry to tie up
all the loose ends in the bid preparation and submission process with special
emphasis on verifying the veracity of the certificate of the Statutory Auditors
who are appointed by the Companies/bidders themselves. As assured by the
Secretary, MoP in evidence, the Committee trust that the Ministry would impose
certain strict conditions on the bidders about the method and format in which
bidding should be done so as to ensure a foolproof system of bid management.
Scaling down of equity holding requirement of Parent/Affiliate of a bidding
company
5. The Committee are distressed to note that the Ministry of Power scaled
down the equity holding requirement of Parent/Affiliate of a bidding company

47
for UMPP projects from originally envisaged 51 per cent in March 2006 to
26 per cent in May 2006 on the request of bidders and advice of the consultant E
and Y. In the process, the basic principles of ownership and 'control' given in
Accounting Standards Interpretation (ASI) 24 issued by the Institute of Chartered
Accountants of India was violated. This was also against the spirit of Model RFQ
document of Government of India for PPP Projects which also prescribes more
than 50 per cent holding as the criteria. Such a change in equity holding
requirement of Parent/Affiliate directly benefited Reliance Power Limited which
did not have any technical or financial capability of its own to bid for Sasan,
Mundra and Krishnapatnam UMPPs but did so by using technical and financial
capability of Reliance Energy Limited which had an equity holding of only
26 per cent in Reliance Power Limited. The Committee are not convinced with
the Ministry's submission that the amendment was carried out to bring in more
competition and even with a holding of 26 per cent, the entity had the right to
block any major resolution(s) which require three-fourth majority as per the
Companies Act. The Committee are also not satisfied with the Ministry's
contention that the bidding guidelines and the SBDs were not static in nature
and were subject to change based on the experience gathered in the process of
implementation and in the context of change in circumstances. Considering that
the requirement of effective ownership and control was a significant criterion
during the time of selection of bidders, the Committee feel that allowing the
bidding company to claim technical and financial experience of another company
called the 'parent' or 'affiliate' as if such experiences were its own especially with
only 26 per cent equity holding is fraught with risks. Needless to say, with the
relaxed criteria, one of the significant and vital requirements to evaluate the
experience and competence of a bidder to execute a mega sized project was diluted.
The Committee are of the firm opinion that the level of competition depends on
various factors and cannot be solely linked to dilution of bidding criteria, therefore,
retaining earlier provision of 51 per cent equity holding would have been more
prudent since the bidding company could have full backing and support of such
parent/affiliate company to develop the project. The Committee were, however,
subsequently informed that the matter regarding modifying the relevant condition
in the revised Standard Bidding Document was under consideration. The
Committee would like the Ministry to consider in detail all the pros and cons of
such a move and effect the changes in such a way so as to ensure successful
completion, operation and sustenance of a mega project as well as to protect the
interest of the Government to the maximum extent possible. As for the UMPPs
awarded with the relaxed criteria, in the considered view of the Committee, the
onus lies with the Ministry of Power to impress upon the developers to not only
complete and operate the projects successfully but also ensure their sustenance
for the requisite period.
Reduction of normative availability and penalty
6. The Committee note that the Ministry of Power reduced the normative
availability for UMPPs from 85 per cent stipulated in the RFP issued in
August 2006 to 80 per cent in September 2006, to bring down the risk of developers.

48
Simultaneously, the base for levy of penalty , which was used as a deterrent to
avoid any slippages in envisaged terms and conditions by the Project Developers,
was also reduced from 80 per cent to 75 per cent before receiving financial bids.
The Committee find that these two amendments did not augur well for the
operational efficiency of the UMPPs since the UMPPs were meant to have higher
operational efficiency. The Ministry while claiming that there appeared to be no
deviation in the SBDs in August 2006 from the bidding guidelines amended in
August 2006, asserted that the SBDs were not in contravention with either the
then guidelines or CERC norms applicable for cost plus projects at that point of
time. The Committee, however, find that as per amendment to the guidelines for
Determination of Tariff by Bidding Process for Procurement of Power by
Distribution Licensees notified in August 2006, the normative availability shall
be higher by a maximum of 5 per cent of the level specified in the tariff regulations
of the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission prevailing at the time of the
bid process.  Against this norm, from September 2006 onwards, SBDs were not
in accordance with the guidelines as the normative availability which ought to
have been 85 per cent in September 2006 and 90 per cent from April 2009 onwards
remained at 80 per cent and 85 per cent respectively. Thus, the performance
parameters have been lowered below the benchmark mentioned in the guidelines
unduly benefiting the bidders, notwithstanding the Ministry's reasoning to the
contrary. Moreover, it was not rational to reduce the normative availability from
85 per cent to 80 per cent when coal blocks were allocated to take care of 90 per
cent PLF (since the plant would normally run at more than 90 per cent PLF) and
when the average normative availability of NTPC thermal power stations for the
period 2004-05 to 2007-08 having 200 MW sets and above was in the range of
around 86 to 97 per cent. The Committee, therefore, exhort the Ministry to revisit
their decision of reducing the normative availability for the UMPPs and take
requisite corrective measures accordingly so that efficiency of the mega power
projects and more value and benefits to the consumers are ensured.
Dilution of equity lock in requirements for the sponsoring entity
7. The Committee note that the Ministry of Power reduced in September
2007 the equity lock-in requirement for the selected bidder in the SPV from
12 years from the Commercial Operation Date (COD) to 5 years from COD for
Krishnapatnam and Tilaiya UMPPs. Further, the Developers were permitted to
cede managerial control by allowing reduction in equity holding from
51 per cent to 26 per cent in all the four UMPPs i.e.  Sasan, Mundra,
Krishnapatnam and Tilaiya UMPPs after two years of commercial operation
though the quoted tariff was valid for 25 years. Since UMPPs are mega projects
using super critical technology and their economic, efficient and effective operation
is very important throughout the 25 years to ensure supply of power to the
consumers at the agreed rates, the Committee feel that allowing the developers
to cede managerial control after 5 years of the COD would certainly result in
lack of adequate backing of the sponsoring entity for SPVs during the major
part of the operational period. It may also adversely affect the operational
performance of the UMPPs even to the extent of non-availability of power to the
consumers at the agreed rates. Moreover, this does not provide safeguard against

49
the Developer using sub-standard capital equipment which may breakdown
frequently during the operational period after control is ceded. Thus, dilution of
such key conditions of the Standard Bidding Documents as equity lock-in
requirements for the sponsoring entity on the plea of the need for increasing
competition or providing comfort to the Developers, would compromise the very
maintenance safeguards for the UMPPs. The Ministry of Power assured that the
provisions of the Competitive Bidding guidelines issued by them would ensure
that the successful bidder and also the subsequent shareholders (in case the
successful bidder exits from the project) will have interest in operating the project
and supply the power to the procurers as per the terms and conditions of the
PPA. While disapproving the questionable dilution of the equity lock-in
requirements for the sponsoring entity, the Committee, trust that the Ministry of
Power as assured, would put in place more stringent mechanisms to ensure
efficient running of UMPPs and adherence to all the contract conditions
throughout the entire life of UMPPs irrespective of any change in their ownership
or equity holding pattern.
Lower net worth requirement for bidders
8. The Committee find that against the minimum requirement of
15 per cent for PPP projects costing ` 1,000 crore or more as per the Ministry of
Finance guidelines, which state that "...net worth could be suitably reduced but
should be no less than 15 per cent of project cost", the Ministry of Power fixed
the minimum net worth for bidders of UMPPs at ` 1,000 crore (or equivalent
USD) which was around 5 per cent of project cost of approximately ` 20,000
crore. Justifying the move, the Ministry have reasoned that the lower qualification
requirements enabled wide competition among the bidders and had a reflection
in lower tariff. But, according to the Committee the level of competition depends
on various factors and cannot be solely linked to or justified on dilution of criteria.
The Ministry have further claimed that a combination of parameters such as
Internal Resource Generation, Annual turnover, etc. are assessed as a precaution
and the equity required would be around ` 6,000 crore which was not expected
to be contributed entirely by the bidder and moreover, the total equity was
required to be invested over a period of the ensuing 5 to 6 years. The Ministry
have thus contended that any company having net worth of ` 1,000 crore and
meeting the other criteria is considered to be capable of raising the required
equity. As for desisting the unsuitable bidders from entering the fray, the Ministry
insisted that the requirement of doing entire investment for the project by the
selected developer through equity and debt and provisions of liquidated damages
in the Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) would do the needful. From the Ministry
of Power's submission, the Committee find that the Ministry, while allowing lower
net worth criteria, had considered only the equity portion of the project cost
whereas the Ministry of Finance guidelines do not provide for such segregation
between debt and equity. Further, spreading the cost over the project period was
also not envisaged in the MoF guidelines while setting the minimum net worth
requirement as 15 per cent of the project cost. The Committee are also of the
considered opinion that though financial investment is that of the developer, a
UMPP being a service utility, substantial resources like land and coal blocks are

50
also provided to the developer by the Government thereby easing the burden on
the developer. Moreover, provisions relating to liquidated damages are deterrents
applicable at the project implementation and operation stage and cannot
substitute minimum selection criteria. Even if lower level of criteria attract more
bidders, they increase the risk of unsuitable bidders entering the fray as it may
not be reasonable to assume that a bidder having net worth of ` 1,000 crore
would successfully execute a project of ` 20,000 crore notwithstanding the fact
that other aspects of financial capability like Turnover and Internal Resources
Generation of the bidders are also assessed as claimed by the Ministry. While
deprecating the reduction of the net worth criterion of the bidders in contravention
of the MoF guidelines, the Committee, urge the Ministry of Power to enhance the
minimum requirement of net worth of the bidders of UMPPs to the prescribed
15 per cent of the project cost so as to ensure successful implementation and
seamless operation of the UMPPs through capable and efficient bidders.
Non-fulfilment of qualifying criteria by the selected bidder
9. The Committee are perturbed to note that the bid evaluation process of
Sasan, Krishnapatnam and Tilaiya UMPPs was completed and Letter of Intent
(Lol) issued to RPL without verifying the admissibility of experience claimed by
it. As a result, this company, which did not fulfil the minimum technical qualifying
criteria stipulated in the RFQ document, was selected as the successful bidder.
The Committee note that major part of the experiences claimed by RPL was
based on additions to the fixed assets instead of the prescribed capital expenditure
pertaining to projects commissioned during the last 10 years. In the case of Sasan
UMPP, despite agreeing on 14th June 2007 to furnish the details of the
commissioned projects, RPL did not honour the commitment. Surprisingly, such
details were not asked for by the various Evaluation Committees in the case of
Krishnapatnam and Tilaiya Projects. Even the bid process management
consultant, E and Y in its factual note on Sasan Project had also mentioned that
the experience of RPL's parent company REL and Affiliates pertained to the
ongoing projects so much so that out of the total experience of ` 4416.60 crore, `
3430.21 crore and ` 3505.41 crore as claimed by RPL in Sasan and Mundra,
Krishnapatnam and Tilaiya UMPPs respectively, the actual experience to the
tune of ` 3123.88 crore (Sasan and Mundra), ` 2137.49 crore (Krishnapatnam)
and ` 2254.61 crore (Tilaiya) may not conform to the stipulated qualifying
requirements. The Committee are constrained to find that all these deficiencies/
irregularities were overlooked by the multi-layered Evaluation Committees and
all the experiences claimed by the bidder were accepted in toto without detailed
examination. The Ministry have contended that RPL submitted an experience
certificate signed by the Director and Auditor on the basis of which E and Y had
concluded that RPL was qualified leading to its selection. The Committee, however,
find that this Auditor's certificate did not specifically indicate whether the costs
pertained to the projects commissioned during the last ten years. Worse, RPL
only indicated yearwise breakup of project cost incurred instead of projectwise
details of the commissioned projects that was required as per the qualifying criteria
specified in clause 2.1.4 of RFQ document, signifying the possibility of inclusion

51
of non-project expenditure in RPL's submission. Needless to mention, the
certificate was not in accordance with the stipulated criteria and relying on it to
establish fulfilment of the qualification criteria was improper. It was also a lapse
on the part of E and Y, the consultant, not to have pointed out the shortcomings
at the time of evaluation of RFQ and RFP. The Committee are not satisfied with
the Ministry's submission that the kind of projects which are eligible for
qualification were not specified in the RFQ as the nature of project would be
different for companies depending on their nature of business. The Ministry's
contention is not tenable since criteria required not just project completion but
commissioning as well. Moreover, every such capital expenditure especially on
land and building cannot be construed as 'developing a project' as per the
definition given in the criteria. The fact that the ongoing experiences were not
claimed by RPL for Krishnapatnam UMPP indicates inconsistencies in its stand
regarding experience in terms of commissioned projects. Interestingly, RPL in
its letter of 14th June 2007 stated that they were collating the details regarding
commissioned projects and the same would be submitted in due course. However,
the Letter of Intent was issued to RPL on 1st August 2007 without obtaining this
vital information based on a decision taken by the EGoM which conspicuously
was not informed of the pending information. Thus, the Ministry selected an
ineligible bidder for the three UMPPs. As regards remedial measures, the Ministry
claimed that learning from the initial experience of the award of UMPPs, they
had initiated certain steps to improve their bid evaluation mechanism in 2007
and 2008. However, the Committee find that this has not yielded the desired
results as RPL was declared qualified for Tilaiya UMPP and awarded the project in
February 2009 without furnishing the requisite details about the commissioned
projects. As the Ministry failed to display prudence and alacrity on more than
one occasion in obtaining the requisite details from RPL before issuing the Letter
of Intent to the Company, which may seriously compromise the intended higher
operational efficiency of the UMPPs, the Committee are of the firm opinion that
a thorough probe into the matter by an appropriate agency is highly warranted
so as to fix responsibility and plug the extant loopholes in the selection process.
The Committee are also of the considered view that it is high time the Ministry
streamlined the bid evaluation process and ensured absolute compliance to the
qualifying criteria by the prospective bidders for the UMPPs.
Allotment of excess land
10. The Committee regret to note that the Central Electricity Authority
could not finalize norms regarding land requirements for thermal power plants
especially of the larger ones in sync. with the process of UMPPs which started in
2005. Action in this regard was initiated only in April 2007 and the requisite
norms were finalized in December 2007 when the land for Mundra and
Krishnapatnam UMPPs had already been agreed upon. When compared to the
new norms, the land agreed for the two UMPPs was in excess by a whopping
margin of 1538 acres in the case of Mundra and 1096 acres in the case of
Krishnapatnam. The Committee were informed that the matter was deliberated

52
by the EGoM in their meeting held in May 2008 wherein it was decided that
since the land requirement had already been worked out in respect of these
projects, it was now upto the project developers themselves to take a view on the
excess land so agreed upon. However, the EGoM decided that land requirement
for yet to be awarded UMPPs be worked out by CEA based on its norms.
Unfortunately, the decision of the EGoM based on deficient feedback leaves
enough scope for the project developers to probably utilize the excess land in a
manner other than the purpose approved by EGoM. Besides, excess land of the
magnitude of 2634 acres is too large to be ignored and left at the mercy of private
project developers. Needless to say, permitting excess land to the project
developers was obtained based on deficient feedback given to the EGoM. Since
land was acquired by the project developers for tariff based bidding projects,
the Committee impress upon the Ministry to put in place robust checks and
balances to prevent utilization of such land for any other purpose including
creating merchant power capacity by the developers failing which excess land
allotted to the Project Developers be taken back from them wherever warranted.
The Committee also urge the M inistry/CEA to work out precisely the land
requirement for the yet to be awarded UMPPs as per the new norms prescribed
by the CEA in December 2007 so as to ensure rationale allotment of land and its
utilization for the avowed objective.
Allocation of surplus coal
11. The Committee are dismayed to observe that the Ministry of Coal do
not have a reliable mechanism for ensuring correct estimation and allocation of
coal blocks for UMPPs with the result that three coal blocks namely, Moher,
Moher-Amlohri Extension and Chhatrasal were allocated for Sasan UMPP before
final bids and without finalizing a proper mining plan leading to availability of
surplus coal which unduly benefited the private developer, RPL. Initially in
September 2006, two coal blocks—Moher (having geological reserves of
402 million tonne of coal) and Moher-Amlohri Extension (having geological
reserves of 198 million tonne of coal) were allocated for Sasan UMPP on the
estimation that the project would require the development of a coal mine with
production of 18-20 million tonne per annum. However, the Ministry of Power
considered the above two blocks insufficient and on the request of the then
Secretary (Power), the Ministry of Coal allocated in October 2006 another block,
Chhatrasal to Sasan UMPP after de-allocating it from NTPC Limited. Later it
became clear that the actual coal requirement of Sasan UMPP would be only
16 million tonne per annum whereas Moher and Moher-Amlohri Extension coal
blocks would yield as much as 20 million tonne per annum and another 5 million
tonne per annum would be extractable from Chhatrasal block thus leaving a
surplus of 9 million tonne per annum. This raises serious credibility issues as to
how the Ministry of Power in October 2006 came to the conclusion that initially
allocated two blocks for the Sasan UMPP would be inadequate and the Ministry
of Coal, which was taking a stand till March 2009 that coal from two blocks
(Moher and Moher-Amlohri Extension) was sufficient for the Sasan UMPP and

53
that there was no justification for allocating a third block (Chhatrasal) to the
developer, was prevailed upon to allot this additional block of coal (Chhatrasal)
to the project by de-allocating it from the Public Sector NTPC. The Committee
find that in March 2008 the project developer, RPL was asked to increase coal
production from Moher and Moher-Amlohri Extension blocks to 16 million tonne
per annum, the total quantity required for the Sasan UMPP but it maintained
that there was no possibility to enhance production beyond 12 million tonne from
the two blocks. Surprisingly, however, after obtaining necessary permission for
use/diversion of surplus coal in August 2008, RPL submitted in September 2008
a revised mining plan of producing the higher yield of 20 million tonne per annum.
The Committee further find that the allocation of coal block was made based on
Geological reserves and in the absence of mining plan, data regarding actual
availability of coal for the project was not available at the time of allocation of
coal blocks. Moreover, bids for UMPPs were called on the basis of coal blocks
with Geological reserves and the mineable reserves are assessed by the successful
developer by preparing the mining plan after the award of the contract. This
dependence on insufficient data is fraught with risk as there is enough scope for
connivance and manipulation leading to unwarranted exploitation of such a
critical natural resource as coal. As both the Ministry of Power and the Ministry
of Coal have failed to exercise due diligence in the matter, the Committee impress
upon them to work in unison and put in place a reliable and foolproof mechanism
which inter alia  should include preparation of appropriate mining plan before
award of the contract to ensure correct estimation and allocation of coal blocks
for UMPPs. The Committee further desire that the Ministry of Power's October
2006 conclusion that the two coal blocks of Moher and Moher-Amlohri Extension
would be inadequate for Sasan UMPP and the subsequent allocation of Chhatrasal
Coal block by the Ministry of Coal be investigated by an appropriate agency to
fix responsibility and initiate requisite penal action against all those who indulged
in misleading and corrupt practices.
Concealing of vital information
12. Under the general terms and conditions of the allocation letter issued
by the Ministry of Coal for Sasan UMPP, the coal produced from the allocated
mines would be exclusively used for that project. Even in the bid document, the
condition purportedly permitting diversion of surplus coal was not explicitly
stated. The Committee are, however, shocked to find that the Ministry of Coal in
February 2010 vitiated the sanctity of the bidding process by extending post bid
concession to RPL by permitting it to use the surplus coal amounting to 9 million
tonne per annum from blocks allotted to Sasan UMPP for its other project  i.e.
Chitrangi and in the process doled out financial benefit of ` 29,033 crore with a
net present value of ` 11,852 crore to the Company. Such a benefit was extended
to RPL pursuant to a request from the Chief Minister of Madhya Pradesh, made
in November 2007. The Ministry have submitted that the reason for allowing
diversion of surplus coal was the need for expeditious implementation of coal
based thermal power projects, which would also increase the generation capacity
of the country, and for optimal utilization of coal reserves in the blocks allotted

54
to UMPPs. But the Committee are of the view that the permission of diversion of
coal should not lead to inequities in the award process of Sasan UMPP vis-a-vis
Chitrangi Project consequentially resulting in benefit to the developer and vitiating
the level playing field. In other words, this should have been done in a transparent
and just manner by obtaining more economical tender rates and also keeping in
mind the interest of the Government and the consumers. Contrarily, the
Committee note that the EGoM in its meeting held on 28th May 2008 had sought
information about the structure in respect of ownership, mode of sale of power
and tariff of Chitrangi Project. However, it is unfortunate that due to deficient
feedback, the EGoM recommended on 14th August 2008 for grant of permission
for usage/diversion of surplus coal. While this remains an ambiguous decision,
the Committee find that the EGoM evidently was not provided with the accurate
information about adequacy or otherwise of coal availability in the two blocks
initially allocated to Sasan UMPP, leading to its decision of permitting usage/
diversion of surplus coal. To illustrate, vital information regarding status of award
of Letter of Intent (Lol) for Chitrangi Project to RPL in May 2008 (before EGoM's
recommendation permitting usage of surplus coal) as revealed in the letter of
Chief Minister of Madhya Pradesh, status of the revised mining plans for coal
blocks of Sasan UMPP as revealed in RPL letter dated 6th August 2008 were not
brought before the EGoM by the Ministry of Power. Worse, the Ministry of Power
did not take the Ministry of Coal's comments while processing the request of
RPL, nor did they ascertain/deliberate the policy of the Government or the
practice followed by the Ministry of Coal in such cases. Obviously, RPL took
advantage of the lack of communication and coordination between these
Ministries for its own gain. Secondly, when the Government of Madhya Pradesh
informed in February 2009 that the Letter of Intent for Chitrangi Project had
been issued to RPL in May 2008 i.e. before the EGoM's recommendation
permitting usage/diversion of surplus coal, there was an opportunity for the
Ministry of Power to examine and ensure extension of the benefit of surplus coal
to the consumers as final permission was yet to be given to the developer. The
Ministry of Power also failed to process RPL's letter of 6th August 2008 and
linked it with the letter of the Chief Minister of Madhya Pradesh regarding
availability of surplus coal and the proposal for its utilization in already sanctioned
Chitrangi Project. Besides, the Ministry failed to ascertain the status of the mining
plans examined and commented about the transfer price for surplus coal in terms
of clause (vi) of the coal block allocation letters before approaching EGoM for a
final decision. Even the financial impact of the permission was not made available
to EGoM. The Committee feel that denial and concealment of these vital
information might have obviously prevented the EGoM from taking an informed
decision. While expressing sheer disappointment in the matter, the Committee
recommend that the matter be investigated by an appropriate agency and
responsibility fixed on those officials concerned in both the Ministries of Power
and Coal for their abject failure in coordinating and presenting a comprehensive
and correct information to the EGoM which paved the way for a controversial
decision and the consequential loss to the exchequer. The Committee also desire
that henceforth both the Ministries should unfailingly arm the EGoM like highest

55
decision making bodies with all the requisite vital information/inputs before any
major decision is taken so as to ensure transparency and accountability as well
as to avoid recurrence of such incidents. Further, as the intended benefits did not
pass on the consumers, it is imperative that a foolproof mechanism be evolved
and firmly put in place to ensure that the benefits pass on to the consumers.
Need for de-allocating excess coal block
13. The Committee find that the EGoM in its meeting held on 14th August
2008, while permitting diversion of coal for Chitrangi Project, had recommended
that power generated by utilizing surplus coal from captive coal blocks of Sasan
UMPP would be sold through tariff based competitive bidding. This was obviously
intended to pass on the benefit of cheaper coal to the consumers. However, the
Committee are concerned to note that the tariff of Chitrangi project had already
been fixed in May 2008 at ` 2.45 per unit (as against ` 1.19 per unit in the case of
Sasan UMPP) i.e. before the permission was granted, citing independent fuel
arrangement and non-requirement for the Government to provide coal blocks/
linkage. This effectively means that the diversion of surplus coal was allowed for
a project whose tariff was already fixed based on coal linkage from costlier sources
and hence the permission given by the Ministry of Coal for diversion of surplus
coal for Chitrangi Project did not ensure that the spirit of the EGoM decision
was followed, rendering the EGoM decision ineffective. The Committee further
note that an Inter Ministerial Group constituted by the Ministry of Power on the
recommendation of EGoM to review the Standard Bidding Procurement for
UMPPs had opined in September 2007 that the allocation of coal mine had an
explicit condition that its coal should be solely for the purpose of Sasan UMPP or
else the lease was liable to be cancelled. Moreover, since fuel cost is an important
aspect of commercial consideration in arriving at the tariff, any relaxation of
condition subsequent to bidding certainly vitiates the bidding process. As explicit
mention of usage of surplus coal in other projects has not been unambiguously
mentioned in the coal block allocation letters, the bidders who lost out did not
have equal opportunity to bid under the relaxed condition. The Ministry of Power
claimed that they had proposed for reviewing allocation of the surplus coal block
to the EGoM and the matter was referred in December 2011 to Attorney General
of India who inter alia  opined that 'the decision taken by the EGoM on
14th August 2008 was a well considered decision'; 'these coal blocks formed the
basis of the bids'; there is no question of any coal block becoming incremental;
the allocations were final; if subsequently a more effective mining plan is
submitted, this cannot have the effect of rendering any part of the coal blocks as
having become “incremental.”; and thereafter, the question of any "review" does
not arise. Based on the AG's opinion, the EGoM affirmed on 28th April 2012 its
decision of 14th August 2008 permitting diversion of surplus coal from Sasan to
Chitrangi project. The Committee feel that the Ld. AG's view does not take into
account the vitiation of the level playing field in the bidding process by offering
post bid concession to RPL; inequities in the award process of Sasan UMPP and
Chitrangi Project as well as violation of the spirit of EGoM permission which
stipulates that power generated by utilizing surplus coal from captive coal blocks

56
of Sasan UMPP would be sold through tariff based competitive bidding resulting
in undue benefit to the developer. Further, the coal blocks for UMPPs were
allocated only on their geological reserves which are highly unreliable and the
Ld. Attorney General overlooked the fact that RPL suppressed the actual output
capacity of coal blocks when it wanted to garner more coal/coal blocks and shared
the actual higher output capacity when it wanted to divert surplus coal for
Chitrangi project and got the permission for the same. Besides, allowing diversion
of surplus Sasan coal for Chitrangi project is inconsistent with another EGoM
decision taken on 28th April 2012 in respect of Tilaiya Project wherein similar
request of RPL was to be processed under new policy on surplus coal. Not inclined
to agree with the opinion of the Ld. A.G., the Committee are of the considered
view that the Government need to put in place a system under which vital decision
regarding use of natural resources are not held hostage by the legal opinion of
one individual. Furthermore, the Committee find that the Hon'ble Supreme Court
in its judgement dated 25th August 2014 in the Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 120
of 2012 observed that the coal blocks allocated for UMPP would only be used for
UMPP and no diversion of coal for commercial exploitation would be permitted.
This further strengthens the Committee's views on the need for preventing
diversion of surplus coal/coal block from Sasan UMPP. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Government to de-allocate the surplus coal/coal block from Sasan
UMPP and utilize the same for sovereign national interest in consonance with
the avowed objectives of passing on the benefit of cheaper coal to the consumers.
The Committee further recommend that actual production capacity of coal blocks
allocated for other UMPPs be re-assessed as per the latest technology and yet to
be formulated new policy on surplus coal and any surplus coal/coal block found,
be de-allocated thereafter and utilized in the larger interest. The Committee
further desired that the market price of the coal diverted for commercial purposes,
be determined and recovered with interest from the defaulting companies
immediately.
Special Leave Petition in Supreme Court
14. The Committee note that Tata Power had gone to the Delhi High Court
against the decision to permit use of incremental/surplus coal from Sasan UMPP
for Chitrangi Project. Though the Delhi High Court dismissed the case in
April 2009, Tata Power has filed Special Leave Petition in the Supreme Court
against the Delhi High Court's order and the case is pending. The Committee
would like to impress upon both the Ministries of Power and Coal to make
available all the relevant information pertaining to the case to the Supreme Court
and plead the case in right earnest so that the apex Court takes an informed
decision in the larger interest of the nation.
Finalization of policy on use of surplus coal
15. The Committee note that Kerandari B & C coal blocks for Tilaiya UMPP

57
(also awarded to RPL) were also allocated with the same conditions for usage/
disposal of surplus coal as applicable to Sasan UMPP. The Committee find that
against the requirement of only 16 million tonne per annum for Tilaiya UMPP,
production from the coal blocks allotted for the project would be 40 million tonne
per annum thus leaving a surplus of 24 million tonne per annum. In March 2011,
RPL made a request that permission be granted to it to use the surplus coal from
the Tilaiya coal blocks to meet the demands for  its other  power projects. In
April 2012, the EGoM, however, decided that the application of RPL for use of
surplus coal from the coal blocks allotted to Tilaiya Project be processed under
the yet to be formulated new policy on surplus coal. The Committee feel that
permission given to RPL to use surplus coal from Sasan in Chitrangi Project was
not an appropriate decision. However, while urging for the early finalization of
the new policy on surplus coal, the Committee trust that the policy would address
all the concerns of allocation of coal blocks for UMPPs including the need for
proper assessment of the actual production capacity of coal mines as per the
latest technology and allocation of the precise coal blocks afterwards to the
successful bidder with explicit prohibition of diversion of surplus coal. A suitable
monitoring mechanism with mandated responsibility centres should also be
introduced to enforce the conditions stipulated by the new policy in the offing.
Power Purchase Agreement (PPA)
16. The Committee note that though the host States are the lead procurer
of power, they have no role in determining the tariff. That is because while
procurement functions are governed by the Power Purchase Agreement signed
by all the States including the host State, supply and sale functions are not governed
by the PPA. The Committee were informed that the PPA stipulates which State
will get how much power from the UMPP and the private sector developer is tied
down by the contract, violation of which will attract legal consequences. The
Committee were further informed that the State Electricity Regulatory
Commission set up in all the States under the Electricity Act is mandated to ensure
supply of power to the consumers by the discoms at r easonable rates. Though
there is a regulatory system which looks at what cost power can be passed on to
the consumers, as claimed by the Secretary, MoP in evidence, the Committee are
of the candid view of that the Government should consider incorporating in built
clauses in the PPA itself to enable the participating States to have their
recommendation duly considered in tariff determination of the surplus power
generated from the UMPPs. Such a move will certainly make the extant system
more foolproof for the benefit of the consumers.
Need for Studying the Best International UMPP Management Practices
17. The Committee note that the concept of UMPP is new to our country

58
and the Ministries concerned are finding it difficult to manage the issues pertaining
to the UMPPs. The Committee, however, believe that there would have been
many countries which have proved very successful in establishing/implementing
and managing UMPPs. A country like India which is new to this type of projects
needs to study their models for learning broad lessons towards ensuring
successful implementation of UMPPs in the country. The Committee, therefore,
urge the Ministries of Power and Coal to find best international benchmarks/
practices in the realm of UMPPs and suitably formulate benchmarks befitting
the national need.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. K.V . THOMAS
27 April, 2015 Chairperson,
7 Vaisakha, 1937 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIRST SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2012-13) HELD ON 22ND JANUARY, 2013
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 22nd January, 2013 from 1500 hrs. to
1730 hrs. in Room No. '53', Parliament House, New Delhi.
 PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
 2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
 3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
 4. Dr. M. Thambi Durai
 5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
 6. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
 7. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
 8. Shri Ashok Tanwar
Rajya Sabha
 9. Shri Prakash Javadekar
10. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
11. Shri J.D. Seelam
12. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri D.R. Mohanty —  Deputy Secretary
3. Shri S.L. Singh — Under Secretary
 Representatives of the office of The Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri A.K. Patnaik — Deputy C&AG
2. Shri P. Sesh Kumar — Director General
3. Shri A.M. Bajaj — Principal Director (ESM)
4. Shri P.K. Singh — Principal Director of
Commercial Audit and
Ex-Officio MAB-III
59
S-3\E\REPORT 2015 \ 805LS3(43-77)

60
Representatives of the Ministry of Power
1. Shri P. Uma Shankar — Secretary
2. Shri Ashok Lavasa — Additional Secretary
3. Shri Devendra Choudhry — Additional Secretary
4. Smt. Jyoti Arora — Joint Secretary
5. Shri I.C.P. Keshari — Joint Secretary
6. Shri Rakesh Jain — Joint Secretary and FA
7. Smt. Rita Acharya — Joint Secretary
Representatives of Central Electrical Authority
1. Shri A.S. Bakshi — Chairperson
2. Shri M.S. Puri — Chief Engineer
Representatives Of Power Finance Corporations
1. Shri Satnam Singh — CMD
2. Shri M.K. Goel — Director (Com.)
3. Shri N.D. T yagi — CEO, PFCCL
Representatives of the Ministry of Coal
1. Shri A.K. Bhalla — Joint Secretary
2. Shri D.N. Prasad — Advisor (Projects)
3. Shri A.K. Debnath — Director (Tech.), CMPDIL
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members, the representatives of
the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India and the Ministries of Power
and Coal to the sitting of the Committee. Apprising that the meeting had been convened
to have a preliminary briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of Power on the
subject "Ultra Mega Power Projects under Special Purpose Vehicles" based on the
C&AG Report No. 6 of 2012-13, the Chairman impressed upon the witnesses not to
disclose the contents of the deliberations of the Committee to any outsider, especially
to the members of the Print and Electronic media.
3. The Chairman then asked the Secretary, Ministry of Power to give a brief
account of the UMPPs and the Ministry's stance on the Audit findings. Upon a request
made by the Power Secretary, the Chairman gave permission for a Power Point
presentation on the subject.
4. The Secretary, Ministry of Power and his colleagues, accordingly, gave a
Power Point presentation on the initiative of UMPPs highlighting their implementation,
present position, experience, achievements, etc. The representatives of the Ministries

61
also attended to the various queries, raised by the Committee, which inter alia included
irregularities in the Bid Process Management, Bid Evaluation and granting permission
for diversion of surplus coal for Sasan project.
5. As some queries required detailed and statistical reply/information, the
Chairman observed that a consolidated questionnaire incorporating all those points in
addition to some other points would be sent to the Ministry seeking written reply. He
asked the Secretary, Ministry of Power to furnish the requisite reply within 15 days of
the receipt of the questionnaire. The Power Secretary assured that he would comply.
6. The Chairman thanked the representatives of the Ministries for appearing
before the Committee and furnishing the available information on several issues on
the subject.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

APPENDIX II
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2014-15) HELD ON 18TH FEBRUARY , 2015
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 18th February, 2015 from 1130 hrs. to
1430 hrs. in Room No. '62', Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. K.V . Thomas — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
3. Shri Nishikant Dubey
4. Shri Neiphiu Rio
5. Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi
6. Dr. P. Venugopal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Director
2. Shri Jaya Kumar T. — Additional Director
3. Shri S.L. Singh — Under Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri P. Mukherjee — Dy. C&AG
2. Shri P. Sesh Kumar — DG (Commercial)
3. Ms. Tanuja S. Mittal — Principal Director, MAB-III
4. Shri Purushottam T iwary — Principal Director (PAC)
Representatives of the Ministry of Power
1. Shri Pradeep Kumar Sinha — Secretary
2. Shri R.N. Choubey — Special Secretary
3. Shri Major Singh — Member (Planning), CEA
4. Shri M.K. Goel — CMD, PFC
62
S-3\E\REPORT 2015 \ 805LS3(43-77)

63
5. Dr. Pradeep Kumar — Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor
6. Shri Anil Kr. Singh — Joint Secretary
7. Shri I.C.P. Keshari — Principal Secretary (Energy),
Government of M.P.
8. Shri P.D. Siwal — Chief Engineer, CEA
9. Shri C. Gangopadhyay — CEO, PFCCL
Representatives of the Department of Coal
1. Shri Anil Swarup — Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Bhalla — Additional Secretary
3. Shri D.N. Prasad — Advisor (Projects)
4. Shri S. Bhattacharya — CMD, Coal India Ltd.
5. Shri R.K. Chopra — Director, (T/P&D), CMPDIL
6. Shri T.K. Nag — CMD, NCL
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and representatives of
the Office of the C&AG to the sitting of the Committee. Apprising that the sitting had
been convened to take further oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministries of
Power and Coal on the subject 'Ultra Mega Power Projects under Special Purpose
Vehicles' based on C&AG Report No. 6 of 2012-13, the Chairperson invited the Audit
Officers to brief the Committee on the finer points of the subject. The Audit Officers
accordingly briefed the Committee explaining various issues pertaining to the subject.
3. The representatives of the Ministries of Power and Coal were then called in.
Welcoming them, the Chairperson impressed upon those attending the sitting not to
disclose any information regarding the proceedings of the sitting to anybody else before
the Report on the subject is presented to Parliament. He then highlighted serious lapses
on the part of Ministries of Power and Coal by not providing all relevant information,
data, feed back and other background material to the highest decision-making authority
i.e. EGOM which inter alia included non-disclosure of the contract concluded between
Reliance Power Limited and Madhya Pradesh Power Trading Corporation to EGOM;
failure of the Ministry of Power to link the letter of November 2007 of the
Chief Minister of Madhya Pradesh with the RPL letter dated 14th August 2008; non-
issuing of Section VI of the Coal block allocation letter; concealing of the LoI for
1241 MW Power for Chitrangi Project from the Government of Madhya Pradesh by
RPL; concealing of information and data by the officials of the Ministries of Power
and Coal; excess acquisition of land for Mundra and Krishnapatnam UMPPs thereby
benefiting the private developers; excess allotment of 9 million tonne per annum of
coal for Moher and Moher-Amlohri extension for Sasan UMPP alongwith Chhatrasal
Coal block after de-allocation from NTPC etc. The Chairperson also drew the attention
of the representatives of the Ministries to the Supreme Court Judgment given on
25th August 2014 on Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 120 of 2012, which inter alia had some

64
implications on coal block allocation for UMPPs. Thereafter, he asked the Secretary,
Power and the Secretary, Coal to give a brief account of their Ministries' response to
the Audit findings on the subject under discussion and attend to queries from the
Committee on various issues of the subject.
4. The representatives of the Ministry of Power explained their position by giving
a powerpoint presentation on the Audit findings and the response of the Ministries
thereon. They apprised that the objective behind the UMPPs was to ensure cheaper
tariffs, catering to the needs of the States and that the projects were awarded on the
basis of competitive bidding by setting up project specific SPVs which are subsequently
transferred to the successful bidders. The Chairperson pointed out that after technically
qualifying the three firms, there should have been draw of lots before awarding the
Sasan and Mundra UMPPs to E and Y . Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministries
of Power and Coal attended to the queries of the Members, on such issues as
non-issuing of notice under section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act; violation of the
principle of equity in public procurement laid down in the General Financial Rules in
awarding the contract for the Sasan and Mundra UMPPs to E and Y , changes in the
standard bidding document favouring private companies; diversion of surplus coal
allotted to Sasan UMPP for Chitrangi project and opting of legal opinion following
the cancellation of diversion of surplus coal to UMPPs consequent upon the Supreme
Court ruling in this regard etc.
5. As some queries required detailed and statistical reply/information, the
Chairperson asked both the Secretaries to furnish the requisite written reply
expeditiously. The Secretaries assured that they would comply.
6. The Chairperson thanked the representatives of the Ministries for appearing
before the Committee and the representatives of the Office of the C&AG of India for
providing assistance to the Committee in the examination of the subject.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

APPENDIX III
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2014-15) HELD ON 9TH APRIL, 2015
The Committee sat on Thursday the 9th April 2015 from 1430 hrs. to 1700 hrs.
in Committee Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. K.V. Thomas   —   Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
  2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
  3. Shri Nishikant Dubey
  4. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
  5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
  6. Shri Dushyant Singh
  7. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
  8. Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi
  9. Dr. Kirit Somaiya
10. Shri Anurag Thakur
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
12. Shri Shantaram Naik
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Director
3. Shri  Jaya Kumar T. — Additional Director
4. Shri S.L. Singh — Under Secretary
5. Smt. Anju Kukreja — Under Secretary
65
S-3\E\REPORT 2015 \ 805LS3(43-77)

66
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Dy. CAG(RC)
2. Smt. Shubha Kumar — Director General (RC)
3. Shri Satish Loomba — Director General
4. Shri L.S. Singh — Principal Director (PAC)
Representatives of the  Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
1. Shri B.P. Sharma — Secretary
2. Dr. Jagdish Prasad — D.G.H.S.
3. Shri N.S. Kang — AS&DG (CGHS)
Representatives of  the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department
of Chemicals and Pharmaceuticals)
1. Dr. V.K. Subburaj — Secretary
2. Shri Kalyan Nag — Adviser (Cost), NPPA
Representatives of  the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)
Shri Surjit K. Chaudhary — Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the representatives
of the Office of the C&AG of India to the Sitting of the Committee. The Chairperson
then apprised the Members that during the Sitting, the Committee would take further
oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals and Chemicals
and Petrochemicals) on the subject "Procurement of Allopathic drugs in CGHS" based
on Para No. 6.3 of the C&AG Report No. 19 of 2013 in the first instance. Thereafter,
the Committee would consider three draft Reports for adoption.
3. *** *** ***
4. *** *** ***
5. *** *** ***
6. *** *** ***
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the Sitting was kept on record.

67
7. The Committee then took up the following draft Reports one by one for
consideration:—
(i) Draft Report on the subject  "Ultra Mega Power Projects under Special
Purpose Vehicles" based on C&AG Report No. 6 of 2012-13.
(ii) *** *** ***
(iii) *** *** ***
8. Giving an overview of the issues contained in the draft Reports and comments
of the Committee thereupon, the Chairperson solicited the views/suggestions of the
Members. After some discussions, the Committee adopted the two draft Reports
mentioned at Sl. Nos. (ii) and (iii) without any modifications. As regards the draft
Report mentioned at Sl. No. (i), some Members suggested certain modifications and
authorized the Chairperson to incorporate them suitably in the Report.
9. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Reports in the
light of the factual verifications, if any, made by Audit and present them to Parliament
on a convenient date.
The Committee, then, adjourned.
*** Matter not related to this Report.
GMGIPMRND—805LS(S3)—15.07.2016