65

NUTRIENT BASED SUBSIDY POLICY FOR
DECONTROLLED PHOSPHATIC & POTASSIC
FERTILIZERS

MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

SIXTY FIFTH REPORT

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2098

SIXTY FIFTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

NUTRIENT BASED SUBSIDY POLICY

FOR DECONTROLLED PHOSPHATIC &
POTASSIC FERTILIZERS

MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS

Ss y
wat
Presented to Lok Sabha on: 17.03.2017

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 17.03.2017

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

March, 2017 /Phalguna, 1938 (Saka)


CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2016-17) (iii)

COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-IV OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (५)
COMMITTEE (2016-17)

INTRODUCTION __-xivavscassincitiactexcsannennvee orearerneuseaes (v)
REPORT
PART |
1 Introductory 1
I imbalanced use of NPK proteins 2
il Decline in the production of indigenous fertilizers 4
IV Huge pendency of Proforma ‘B' 6
Vv Excess payment on lump sum freight subsidy for SSP 7
Vi Non-recovery of undue benefits on use of domestic gas 9
Vil Unreasonable fixing of benchmark price for DAP 42
Vill Quality control checks 43
IX Setting of unrealistic MSP without proper assessment 14
xX Reasonableness of MRPs fixed by fertilizer companies 15°
PART II
Observations/ Recommendations... ... ... ... «६ «० ४ ४« eee *** ee 19
ANNEXURES
A Minutes of the sitting of the Sub-Committee-IV

of PAC (2015-16) on 18.01.2016

B Minutes of the sitting of the Sub-Committee-IV
of PAG (2016-17) on 09.09.2016

Cc Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2016-17) on 10.02.2017


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2018-17)

Prof. K.V. Thomas - Chairperson.

MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2, Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
3. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
4, Shri Nishikant Dubey
5. Prof, Richard Hay
6. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
1: Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Smit. Riti Pathak
9 Shri Néiphiu Rioh

40. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal

44. Shri Abhishek Singh

42. Dr. Kirit Somaiya

43.- Shri Anurag Singh Thakur

44. Shri Shivkumar 0. Udasi
“45. Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA

46. Shri Naresh Agrawal

47. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
48. * Shri Bhupender Yadav
49,. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
20, Shri Shantaram Naik

21. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
22. Shri Ajay Sancheti

SECRETARIAT

1 Shri A.K. Singh - Additional Secretary
2. Shri S.C Chaudhary . Joint Secretary

a Shri T. Jayakumar - Director

4. Shri Paolienlal Haokip - Deputy Secretary

* Blected w.e-f. 09.08.2016 vice Shri Vijay Goel, MP appointed as Minister of State w.et.
05.07.2016.

ray)


Sub-Committee — IV [Non-compliance by Ministries/Departments in
timely submission of Action Taken Notes on the Non-selected Audit
Paragraphs (Civil and other Ministries)]_ of PAC (2०1४-72

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
Shri Nishikant Dubey

Dr. P. Venugopal

Convenor ES
Alternate Convenor :
Members

Shri Ajay Sancheti
Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi

ao छा कु 80 हुए et

(iv)

see SS


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2016-17), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Sixty Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha) on ‘Nutrient Based Subsidy for decontrolled Phosphatic & Potassic
Fertilizers’ based on Report No.16 of 2015 of Comptroller and Auditor General of
India for the year ended 31 March, 2014, Union Government (Department of
Fertilizers) Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. _

2. The Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid on the
Table of the House on 8" May, 2015.

3. The Public Accounts Committee (2016-17) took up the subject for detailed
examination and report. The Sub-Committee-IV was constituted under the
Convenorship of Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab, M.P and Member of PAC that took
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers on the
subject at their sittings held on 18" January, 2016 and 9" September, 2016.
Accordingly, a draft Report was prepared and finalized by the Sub-Committee and
placed before the Committee for their consideration.

4. The Committee considered and adopted this draft Report at their sitting held
on 10" February, 2017. Minutes of the sittings are appended to the Report.

5. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part Il of the Report.

6. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) for tendering
evidence before them and furnishing information in connection with the examination
of the subject.

ga The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India,

NEW DELHI; PROF. K.V. THOMAS
14 March, 2017 Chairperson,
23 Phalguna, 1938 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

८४)


REPORT
* PART -I

“| INTRODUCTORY

This Report is based.-on Report No.6 of- 2015 of Compiroller and
Auditor General of India for the year ended 31 March, 2014, Union
Government (Department of Fertilizers) Ministry of Chemicals. & Fertilizers

relating to ‘Nutrient Based Subsidy Policy for decontrolled Phosphatic &

Potassic Fertilizers’

2. The Sub-Committee —IV of Public Accounts Committee took up the
subject for detailed examination and took oral evidence of the representatives
of the Ministry of Chemicals and. Fertilizers and obtained written replies on the i
subject. Based on these oral evidences and written replies, the Sub-

- Committee examined the subject in detail. -

3. The Government of India (Gol) had introduced a ‘Concession Scheme
for decontrolled Phosphatic and Potassic (P&K) fertilizers’ in 4992 which
continued up to 31 March 2010, The basic objective of the Concession
Scheme was to provide P&K fertifizers to farmers at affordable prices. The
Maximum Retail Price (MRP) of P&K fertilizers was fixed by Government at a
level lower than the actual cost and the difference between the actual cost and
- MRP was reimbursed by Government to manufacturers/importers in the form
"of subsidy.
७4... - The Department of Fertilizers (DoF) notified-a-new-schéme-te: “Nutrient *
Based Subsidy” (NBS) w.e.f. 1 April 2010 in order to improve agriculture
‘productivity, ensure balanced use of fertilizers, promote growth of indigenous:
fertilizer industry and to reduce.the burden of subsidy. Under NBS Policy,
MRP of “P&K fertilizers has “been left ‘ open and the
‘manufacturers/importers/marketers are allowed to fix MRP of P&K fertilizers at -


reasonable level’, Subsidy is determined on the basis of the nutrient
contained in the fertilizers ie. 1४ (Nitrogen), ‘P Phosphate), 'K’ (Potassium)
and ‘S' (Sulphur). NBS to be paid on each’nutrient is decided annually by the

Government.

5: State Governments intimate their requirements of fertilizers’ to ihe
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC), which is conveyed to DoF
_ for arranging supplies by fertilizer companies [० the States. Distribution and -
_movement of fertilizers are monitored by DoF through the online web based

Fertilizer Monitoring System (FMS)

- 6. In their Report, Audit has made the follawing observations on the -

objectives and implementation of the Nutrient Based Subsidy policy:

A 1 IMBALANCED -USE OF NPK NUTRIENTS USE OF NPK NUTRIENTS ©

7. _ Audit has pointed out that the preferred proportion of usage of NPK
nutrients is 4:2:1, 1९ which was at 4.3 in 2009-10, jumped to 8.2 in 2012-13
as farmers preferred Urea, containing 'N’. because it was cheaper than P&K
fertilizers. Such a practice had an adverse effect on soil fertility. Thus, NBS

- Policy did not promote balanced fertilization

8. The Ministry has submitted that through the NBS Scheme, the freedom of
fixation of prices by the companies, equal subsidy for both indigenous and
imported P&K fertilizers enabled to ensure adequate availability of fertilizers in
the country. After NBS Scheme, 5 more fertilizer grades were included in
“subsidy scheme and at present 21 grades of P&K fertilizers. are provided to:
fortified with Boron and Zinc as provided under FCO are made-eligible for
additional subsidy of Rs.300/MT and Rs.500/MT so as to promote use of
micro-nutrients and ‘balanced. application of fertilizers. However, these special _
benefits extended._under NBS Policy could not help bringing in balanced
application of fertilizers particularly in some northern states, Punjab and

"Haryana and in-states of Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh

ee


nN.

The Ministry further ‘stated that one of the reasons ‘identified in
déterioration in the NPK ratio in these States is higher consumption’ of Urea
due io its low price as compared to P&k fertilizers and farmers preference for
application of Urea. The achievements of the NBS policy cannot be assessed

in isolation, without taking into consideration the refarms in Urea sector. One

- of the recommendations of the IMG was to bring Urea under the NBS policyin .

a phased manner, which has not happened.

.9. ~ When asked about the measures undertaken by the Department of

Fertilizers to ensure proportionate use of nutrients besides ensuring better soil

fertility, the representatives of the Department stated as follows

“One major initiative that we have taken is neem-coating of urea. ;
Now, all the urea that we have domestically produced or imported and
the annual consumption is in the range of about 32 million tonnes- Is
‘now neem coated, The advantages of neem coating of urea are: (1) it
increases productivity (2) it improves soil health because, as you said
the excess use of nitrogen causes damage to the soil because of
formation of nitrates. They are to a large extent arrested by the factthat _

the urea is need coated."

40. With regard to the issue of imbalance use of nutrient’, the Ministry have

ह stated as follows:

“Imbalance in soil fertility is addressed with. multiple
strategies/schemes through different - Government
Departmenis/agencies. Through NBS Policy, this is expected to be

addressed in-following ways

है i) By making available these fertilizers adequately and also.
bringing various NPK. complex grades into NBS Scheme so as to

provide wider-choice to farmers.


ii) By providing subsidy ‘on fortified subsidised fertilizers with —

Boron and Zinc.

iii) | Freedom in price fixation and business will allow the
companies to increase production arid new marketing strategies and

_pbring innovations besides providing extensive services to farmers.

- ivy Promotion of competition among the companies to ensure

reasonable prices to farmers

After implementation of NBS Scheme, the freedom of fixation of

prices by the companies, equal subsidy for both indigenous and °
imported P&K fertilizers enabled to ensure adequate availability of
fertilizers in the country. After NBS Scheme, 5 more fertilizer grades
were included in subsidy scheme and at present 24 grades of P&K
fertilizers are provided to farmers at subsidised rates. In addition, all
these subsidised P&K fertilizers fortified with Boron and Zinc as
provided under FCO are made eligible for additional subsidy of
Rs.300/MT and Rs.500/MT so as to promote use of micro-nutriénis and
balanced application of fertilizers.” ;

B. DECLINE IN THE PRODUCTION OF INDIGENEL ETT THE PRODUCTION OF INDIGENEOUS FERTILIZERS

11 udit in its Report has observed that despite the stated objective of
NBS Policy to improve growth of indigenous fertilizer industry, production of
P&K Fertilizers by the indigenous fertilizer industry declined. During the NBS
regime there was‘neither any addition in the number of fertilizer plants nor was

+.. there any increase in the installed capacity of these fertilizer plants during the:

period when NBS Policy was implemented (2010-11 to 2013 14). In fact the
number of plants, and their installed capacities, remained static since 2003-
04. Though the numiber of plants remained the same even in 2013-14

installed capacity increased marginally by 10.33 LMT and 8.49 LMT for DAP
and Complex Ferilizers, respectively, during that year. Further, there was no

incentive for the: companies to import raw material/intermediaries and produce .


finished goods, instead of importing finished products, as NBS did not
differentiate between fertilizer companies which imported raw materials to
manufacture finished products and those which imported finished products
Therefore, the fertilizer companies preferred to import the finished product.
DoF contended (October 2014) that without logistics provided ‘by Gol or
available in the country, no company would venture into fertilizer business,
when establishment -of fertilizer companies involved- large investments.
Henee, there were. no investments in P&K -fertilizer sector even after ©.
introduction of NBS Policy. As regards incentive to indigenous: industry for

_ importing raw materials/intermediaries; DoF had already taken up the matter

of reduction in customs duty for raw material with Ministry of Finance

12. The Department of Fertilizers also submitted that the NBS Scheme
allows the fertilizer companies to fix the MRP of their products at reasonable -
level as per market dynamics. With this, the fertilizer companies have the
freedom to change the MRP-based on their input price, operational expenses
profits etc and compete with otherfertilizer companies under different sectors
viz, private, Coopérative, PSUs and importers. Thus, it was expected that this
“freedom of doing business as per market dynamics would attract new
investors to the fertilizer industry. However, singe the indigenous fertilizer.
roduction involves large investments 400% dependence on imports for raw
materials the response for new investments is not encouraging. The
Department further stated that the increase in indigenous production depends
- on availability of fertilizer raw material and natural gas in the country.
However, there 18.10 known source of potash reserves in the-country and for.
quirement, Natural...

phosphate the country depends on imports fi
gas in the country is scarce and the domestic gas earmarked for fertilizer
sector has been “allocated exclusively for Urea. Production of ammonia
required for producing PaK fertilizers through imported RLNG is very costly as
compared to imported ammonia. Under the above conditions, indigenous

production of P&K fertilizers Is not always viable. Hence, mast companies

ee


deal in imports to fill the gap as the imported finished fertilizers are cheaper as

compared fo indigenous production in many cases.

- 13, In order 6 ensure long term availability of raw materials/ intermediaries
“Indian companies are encouraged to enter long-term off-take contracts at
concessional rates, Joint Ventures to acquire mines in resource rich countries
The Department of Fertilizers also stated that a large number of Single Super -
Phosphate (SSP) units have come up after NBS policy and the number of
SSP units has increased from 73 in 2008-09 to 100 in 2044-15. Even the
production of SSP has also increased from 25.34 LMT in 2008-09 to 42.14
LMT in 2014-15, The Government has been promoting the production and use
of SSP, which is a cheap source’of phosphate and can be produced by using
low grade raw material and also provides micronutrients to the soil in form of

- sulphur and calcium.

७. HUGE PENDENCY OF PROFORMA 8 OF ROFORMA ‘B’ -

14, In 8 Report Audit has highlighted that there was huge pendency of
-Proforma ‘B’, which was the basic reconciliation tool for cross verification of
information pertaining to quantity and quality of fertilizers supplied by fertilizer
‘companies with information provided in the mobile . Fertilizer Monitoring
System (FMS) by the State Government. 4112 Proforma ‘B’ were pending in
respect of P&K fertilizers, pertaining to the period 2007-08 to 2013-14, as of
31 October 2014. Out of these, 3899 related to the period when NBS Policy

was in force

45. When asked whether any critical review has been conducted on the

existing-monitorifig mechanism of fecelpt and pendency of proforma ‘B' so as

"to arrest pendency of such proforma, the Department stated as follows:

; “Pendency of Performa 8 is reviewed regularly in Department of
Fertilizers. However, as pér policy if the quantity certificate (Proforma:
B1) is not received within 30 days, then it is deemed to have been


received. Thus there is no compelling provision In policy to force State

Government to submit Proforma-B

Department of Fertilizer has regularly been taking up the matter —
with the Chief Secretary, Principal Secretary (Agriculture) - and
concerned Director (Agriculture) of all Siate Governments. Besides the -
written requests to the: State Governments concerned authorities are
also contacted over phone to expedite furnishing of Proforma-B

- certificates requesting telephonically. The matter has also been ‘taken
up by the DOF in Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers ह
Welfare in Video Conferences with State Governments. The Pendency

has come down."

16. When asked about the present status of post-NBS pending Proforma B
and whether the Department of Fertilizers has any time bound plan to clear
the long pendency of Proforma-B, the Department stated that due to
persistent efforts and close monitoring of the outstanding amount of Rs.50,587
crores of Pfoforma-B for the period 2007-08 to 2009-10, the amount has been
brought down to Rs.427.85 crores as on 05.01.2016, Further, the amount of
outstanding Proforma-B for the period from 2007-08 to 2015-16 is
Rs.23,570.80 crores as compared to outstanding Proforma-B of Rs.50,587
crores for the period from 2007-08 to 2009 40. As regards time bound
clearance of pendency of. Proforma B, the Department stated that the
résponsibility to issue the quantity certificate lies with the State Governments.
Department of Fertilizers has no other option but to pursue the matter with the
_- State Government regularly and ‘make efforts to clear the pendency of _

’ #४८ Spe

Proforma=B:

9. EXCESS.PAYMENT ON LUMP SUM FREIGHT SUBSIDY FOR SSF PAYMENT ON LUMP SUM FREIGHT SUBSIDY FOR SSP

47. Audit highlighted that prior to introduction of NBS policy for SSP, no
freight subsidy was being paid for movement of SSP reportédly due to the fact’. ©
that SSP was basically a localized product, catering to the local needs.


However, after marketing of the product by large P&K/Urea fertilizer
-manufacturers/importers in different States, SSP had started moving irom one
State to another. Resultantly, in NBS Policy, SSP was made eligiblé for
Secondary Freight subsidy. The element’of Secondary Fréight subsidy inbuilt
‘in NBS rates of SSP was Rs.104 PMT which-was being paid from May 2010
to December 2010. However, after removal of the Secondary Freight element
* from NBS Policy, on the recommendation of IMC, a lump sum freight subsidy
at the rate of Rs.200° PMT was introduced for SSP. Audit felt that when the
implication of removal of Secondary Freight subsidy was only Rs.104 PMT
additional. payment of Rs.96 PMT (Rs.200-Rs.104) was not justified and

resulted in excess payment of Rs.25.74 crore.

48. Noting that while the implication of removal of secondary Freight
subsidy was only 104 PMT, when the Committee enquired as to why a lump
sum freight subsidy at the rate of Rs.200 PMT was introduced for SSP, which
has resulted in excess payment of Rs.25.74 crore, the Department stated as _

follows:

“The lump sum freight of Rs.200/MT on SSP was reimbursed
based on the decision of the IMC and approval by the CCEA.

=, The lump sum freight of Rs.200/MT allowed for movement of SSP
from 1.1.2011 to 31.8.2011 was not in Jieu of the secondary freight
component removed from the calculation of NBS rates from 1.1 2011 as

* reported by Audit.

It is stated that there was no freight subsidy on primary __
- movement of SSP: ‘This; thé lump ’sumi freight of Rs.200/MT on SSP -

was in liéu of bath primary freight and secondary freight.

The Audit has not examined the alleged excess payment of
freight subsidy on SSP from the view point of whether the SSP -

companies, which received ‘freight subsidy, has been passed on the


benefits in the form of lower MRP of not. Hence, the conclusions drawn

by Audit are not based on substantive facts.”

- 19... Audit further pointéd out that the IMC recommended a lump sum freight
subsidy at the rate of Rs.200 PMT, although the effect of removal of _
Secondary Freight subsidy element from the ‘existing subsidy of SSP was - 7
Rs.104 PMT only. Further, in the context of the contention of DoF that freight
subsidy was not in lieu of Secondary Freight, it was observed that DoF, while
seeking views of DoE (September 2011) on the date from which recovery at
the rate of Rs.96 PMT may be made, had stated clearly that this. subsidy was
in fieu of removal of ‘Secondary Freight. Moreover, the lump ‘sum freight
subsidy for SSP at the rate of Rs.200 PMT was provided only for eight months.
ie. from 1 January 2011 to 31 August 2011 for which DoF had taken ex-post
facto approval from CCEA on 3 July 2012; One of the reasons for according
approval to above payment by CCEA was: that. lump sum freight subsidy
payments had already beer’ made fo SSP ‘industry fill 31 August 2011.
Further, removal of freight subsidy in August 2011 itself (Secondary Freight in
respect of other NPK fertilizers was withdrawn w.e.f April 2012) and no
payment on account of primary freight to SSP thereafter was indicative of the
fact that the decision to make payment of lump sum subsidy at the rate of
Rs.200 PMT instead of.Rs.104 PMT, did not have a sound basis and hence

"the reply of DoF appears to be an after-thought :

E,  NON-RECOVERY OF UNDUE BENEFITS ON USE OF DOMESTIC.
. GAS

20. ‘Audit has pointed out that ‘the cost of production of‘Ammonia (using
domestig/APM gas) was cheaper as compared to use of imported Ammonia
for production of complex fertilizers. The Empowered Group of Ministers
“ (EGoM) directed (February 2012) DoF -to finalize guidelinés for effecting”
recovery of undue benefits that had accrued to P&K manufacturing fertilizer
companies which used domestic gas. Further, Minister of State for Chemicals

& Fertilizers directed (November 2013) that pending ‘finalization of guidelines,


10

DoF should initiate ‘adhoc’ recovery which was ‘notified in January 2014,
However, DoF neither finalized the Quideliries to effect such recovery from
fertilizer companies nor made “adhoc’ recoveries even after expiry of two
years from the direction of EGoM Financial impact on account of this non-
recovery could not be worked out by Audit due to non-availability of data on

‘use of Ammonia for production of Uréa vis-a-vis P&K fertilizers.
21. Inreply to the findings of Audit; the Department have siated as follows:

“The issue of recovery of undue benefits due to use of domestic
gas is a very complex one. There are thfee issues involved in it. One is
continuation of domestic gas to the three companies, RCF, GSFC and
DFPCL: the second one is the date from which the recoveries to be
made and the last one is, the formula for recovery.
Continuation/discontinuation of gas involves survival of these
companies particularly the RCF, ‘a.PSU, which is haVing an integrated
‘ammonia plant used for both urea and P&K fertilizer production besides
production of 5019 chemicals. Any reduction in gas to RCF lead to.
operation the ammonia plant at reduced capacity and this is technically
unviable. Similar is the case of GSFC and the- company is mostly
funded by state financial institutions and headed by a senior IAS Officer
from the State Govt. of Gujarat.

The DFPCL is the only private company exclusively producing
one complex grade (24:24:0). In, respect of this company -the
Department has already discontinued supply of domestic gas. These
three companies have been supplying domestic gas: since more than 30.
years under various agreements and when there were no takers for

~ domestic gas. Discontinuation of gas supply to RCF on account of P&K
fertilizers would lead to discontinuation of its exclusive complex fertilizer
- grades papular in various regions and used for specific ctops: This may

lead to hue &.cry amongst many farmers. Alternative arrangement for


i

production of these fertilizers for RCE isa lengthy process and need

creation of infrastructure involving huge capital investment.

The three companies Broduce more than 14 LMT of complex
fertilizers per year. The effect-of discontinuation of domestic gas to
these companies on prices of other: complex grades due to loss of
production and dependence on moré imports is likely to be huge in view -
of country’s dependence on phosphatic fertilizers upto 93% and 100%
on potassic sector. Further, -there are no provisions under the NBS
policy for recoveries on account of cheap raw material supply. This has ,

legal implications.

“The ‘issue of recovery formula has varied complications due to
varied nature of the fertilizer production and different feed stocks used
by different companies All these issues need detailed examination by
stakeholder Departments etc. Further, Government is supplying cheap
APM and non-APM gas to some® industries such as steel, ceramic,
which are not subsidised and market driven Non-supply.of gas for P&K
fertilizer companies while supplying cheap domestic gas to industries
producing non-subsidised problems makes difficult for taking decision
on discontinuation of gas to the three P&K fertilizer units. The legal
issues and court directions/ proceedings also came in the way of

framing guidelines.

; During the course of framing guidelines of recovery, it “was
decided fo constitute an IMC to look into all aspects and to submit its
recommendations on the three issues of continued gas supply, recovery
formula and date of recovery. The IMC had already had five meetings
The last méeting was held on 19-1-16 and it was decided to carry outa
study through EIL to suggest recovery formula. As regards supply of
gas, the MoP&NG has issued some guidelines to GAIL for allocation of
gas to P&X fertilizer companies at different rates and the IMC noted the
_ guidelines of the MoP&NG. है


12

As regards recovery of undue benefits on ad-hoc basis, the
Department is withholding subsidies from RGF from each monthly
subsidy bill and in respect of DFPCL no subsidy has been paid. since

5 40-10-2014. In respect of GSEC no recoveries are made due to court
order restraining the Department not to-take any coercive action due to -

the ad-hoc recovery order.

- UNREASONALBLE FIXING OF BENCHMARK PRICE FOR DAP

22. Audit has highlighted that the recommended benchmark price for DAP
in November 2010 was US$ 450 PMT. The Benchmark price considered for
fixation of subsidy on DAP for 2011-12 in November 2010, was lower than the
prevailing importiprocurement rates because of which the fertilizer companies
were not. able to finalize contracts with international fertilizer suppliers.
Majority of the fertilizer companies were importing/procuring DAP, at rates
ranging between US$ 495 PMT - US$ 498 PMT during -May 2010 to
November 2010. A series of negotiations took place between DoF and :
Fertilizer Industry during February and March 2011. During the intervening
-period, the landed price for DAP rose. Finally, the benchmark price for fixation ,
of subsidy for DAP for 2011-12 was notified at US$ 612 PMT in May 2011 by
DoF. This was more tham 35 per cent higher than the benchmark rate fixed
initially, Audit’ further stated’ that by not fixing the benchmark price at
reasonable level in November 2010, Gol lost an opportunity of saving subsidy

of Rs.5555 crore हि — Bids

23; Int eply to the observations of Audit the Departmeit of Fertiizers Stated
as follows: j
__, ‘Finalisation of contracts for import of fertilizers and raw materials

is commercial decisions of the fertilizer companies whereas the priority

of the Government is to make fertilizers adequately available to farmers
न when they need the most. During 2011-12, there was upward trend in


रा

24.

13

the prices of P&K fertilizers. Despite fixation of NBS Rates2011-12 at -
the prevailing international prices; there were no contracts and imports

leading to inadequate movement of fertilizers. The reason for no

imports was high ‘international prices and -low prevailing domestic

prices. At the subsidy rates announced’ at that time, the. fertilizer
companies perhaps were not in position to sell their products at higher
MRP jin. the market and eam profits. ‘Non-contracting by fertilizer —
companies would have lead to non-availability of fertilizers to farmers.
Even if imports were taken place, the fertilizers were available to

_. farmers at much higher MRP.

The decision for revision of subsidy rates In 2011-12 twice was

‘taken by the Cabinet on the recommendations of IMC based on ihe

situation prevailing at that time and the justification for revision has been
well documented. The observations of the Audit that delayed finalization
of such contracts leading to additional subsidy burden on GO! are
based on limited focus on Govt subsidy burden and not based on other

_ factors."

QUALITY CONTROL CHECKS CONTROL CHECKS

Audit in its Report pointed out that Fertilizer Control Order, 1985 (FCO) ॥

lays down the procedure for analysis of fertilizer samples collected and time

limit for analysis, and communication’ of results. Schedule II of the FCO and

various amendments thereto contain detailed procedure for drawal of fertilizer

samples from ‘{ots/bags, big/small godowns; high stacking, etc by the

y enforcement agencies. Audit stated that there were 78 -Fertilizer_ Quality

Control Laboratories (FQCLs) located in various States including four

laboratories of Government of India at Faridabad, Kalyani (Kolkata), Mumbai
-and Chennai for testing the samples collected. Staté-wise and year-wise

figures (201 0-11 to 2013-14) of the analyzing capacity of FQCLs in vatious.. .
States furnished by DoF revealed that the analyzing capacity consistently


4

remained under-utilized in some States. whereas number of samples tested

‘was more than the capacity in other States,

25, When the Committee sought information on the measures under taken-
by the Department to ensure efficient and optimum use of the 78 FQCLs
दर across the country and improve the overall effectiveness of fertilizer quality
control mechanism, the Department Has stated that quality control of fertilizers,
is the mandate _of Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers
Welfare-and information on the measures taken for improvement of the quality

control mechanism is awaited.

SETTING OF .UNREALSITIC MSP WITHOUT ___PROPER PROPER
ASSESSMENT.

26. Audit in its Report stated that month-wise and State-wise demand of
fertilizers are assessed and projected by DAC in consultation with the State
Governments. The same is conveyed to DoF as the Department is mandated
to fulfil the requirement-of the State from available resources. Audit, however
pointed out that Monthly Supply Plan (MSP) in respect of decéntrolled P&K |
Fertilizers, as issued to fertilizer companies as well as to States, was_not
based on realistic assessment of requirements. Quantity actually supplied by
the companies was being regularized without any link with the quantity
mentioned in MSP. In some cases, higher quantities were regularized-without
even assigning any reason. Notwithstanding the fact that the ‘fertilizer
* companies and DAC intimated DoF regarding the availability and requirement
of the fertilizers in Bdvance, DoF did not work out a realistic MSP-on the basis

‘of the requirements in the field. Pee

27. When asked as‘ to why the Department has régularised quantity of
fertilizers supplied by the companies without inking the quantity mentioned in

the MSP issued to the companies, the Department stated as follows:


"28:

15 ea

हि ca
"Before the start of each season, about-1-2 months in advance,
Department of Agriculture; Cooperation & Farmers Welfare (DAC&FW)
organises conferences of all stake holders that includes all States Govi.,

Department of Railways, Fertilizers Association of India, Manufacturers

_and importers -etc. to assess requirement of fertilizers. Thus, the

demand of fertilizers for a state is assessed much in advance before the

commencement of the each season. The projection is'made on the .
basis of consumption during previous seasons, area propased to be
sown, forecast for rainfall etc. Though DAC&FW has taken various

_Measures 10: ensure the process of assessment of fertilizers more
-rational, scientific and realistic, the actual consumption ‘depends upon

- actual conditions prevailing during the season which changes the actual

demand of fertilizers by farmers on real time basis, Needless to say that"
the prime factor for assessment is monsoon,” which is itself very
unpredictable

‘Monsoon, despite being -scientifically assessed tannot be
predicted with 400%- certainty and with all the technology in service of_
IMD, the prediction itself is with some percentage variations. Therefore,
when the basic input (forecast of monsoon) cannot. be predicted with.
certainty the output ie. the requirement of fertilizers for any season
cannot be assessed precisely and thus there will be always a tendency -

to over project the requirement.”

REASONABLENESS OF MRPs FIXED BY FERTILIZER COMPANIES FERTILIZER COMPANIES

Audit pointed out that.under the NBS Policy MRP of P&K fertilizers was

left open and manufacturers/importers/marketers fix the MRP of these

fertilizers at a reasonable level. The word ‘reasonable’ was, however, neither
explained/defined in the Policy nor did DoF. issue any implementation

. guidelines. In the absence of any mandatory requirement for preparation of

cost-sheéi in respect of subsidized fertilizers, DoF did not have. any

mechanism io assure itself about necessity/reasonability of all the _


16

componenis included in the cost and several irregularities arose in the
implementation of the Policy by companies such as unreasonable fixing of
“fertilizer price, non-provision of cost sheet to audit, unreasonable loading of

* cost component on MRP, unjustified fixation of MRP etc

29. “Audit highlighted the following instances of unreasonable loading costs
in MRP
IFFCO added Rs.142 PMT as ‘loss on sale of fertilizer bond’ asa -
‘component of cost for fixing MRP. of DAP (imported) during 23
September 2011,to 30 May 2012.. Financial impact of above loading

was Rs.9.89 crore.

Increased subsidy on opening stock of imported DAP as on 1 :
April 2011, amounting to Rs.4.41 lakh, was recovered by DoF from
IFFCO which in turn, added Rs.40 PMT as ‘loss on mopping up of
subsidy’ as a cost component for fixing MRP of imported DAP. This
resulted in undue profit of Rs.2.59 crore to the Company.

Purchase cost of DAP by some companies was less than the _
benchmark price of us$ 500 PMT considered by DoF for fixation of
subsidy for the year 2010-11. In the absence of any cost sheet of the
calculation of MRPs for such products and no separate verification
“mechanism in DoF, Audit could not verify whether the benefit of. such
lower cost of purchase was passed on to farmers througn a-reduction.in

MRP.

Partial modification in NBS Policy for payment: of secondary
freight subsidy in line with ‘Uniform Freight’ w.e.f 1 January 2011,
resulted in withdrawal of inbuilt freight subsidy by Rs.300 PMT in the
case of DAP. It was, however, observed that subsequent to the said ~
noiification, Chambal Fertilizer and Chemicals Ltd. (CFCL), Indian
Potash Limited (IPL) and IFFCO increased their MRP for DAP by
Rs.800 PMT. Though no -specific reasons were’ available ‘for such


~:

17,

increase of MRP by IFFCO and IPL, CFCL had cited withdrawal of

inbuilt secondary freight subsidy as the reason.

30... In reply tothe findings of Audit én the losses on account of sale of
bonds and subsequent reimbursement, cost data analysis and
reasonableness -of MRPs fixed by the companies, the Department of.

Fertilizers stated as follows:

"The fertilizer companies incurred losses on account of sale of
bonds, which had been issued to them in lieu of cash subsidy. Based
on the decision of the Cabinet, it was decided to reimburse 50% of
losses incurred by the companies on account of bonds sold by them
within the time limit provided to them. Government has not incurred any
losses on account of buy back of bonds from the fertilizer companies.

Hence, the question of recovery of losses does not arise.

Government has already reimbursed 50% of the losses caused to
ihe fertilizer companies on sale of fertilizer bonds to Govt. The Fertilizer
Association of India has filed a writ petition in the Delhi High Court
seeking relief for-reimbursement of remaining 50% losses incurred on
account of sale of fertilizer bonds issued to them in lieu of cash subsidy
‘and for purchase of remaining fertilizer bonds held by them besides
bearing the losses on purchase of remaining bonds. The Government

is defending the case

lt has been made mandatory for the fertilizer companies to furnish
cost data in prescribed format from 2012-13 onwards. The certified Cost
“Accountants duly appointed for “analysis of cost data‘in their analysis
report certified that the MRPs fixed by the fertilizer companies for 2042- -
43 are reasonable. In respect of 2013-14, the analysis process has
‘already been initiated and reports from many Cost ecouriants have

been feceived and are under examination-


18

; lt was decided to examine the reasonableness of MRP fixed by
fertilizer companies from 2012-13 onwards. Under NBS scheme there
was no such provision for examining reasonableness of MRPs fixed by

fertilizer company prior to 2012-13.

- Ithas been made mandatory for the fertilizer companies to submit
cost data of each subsidised fertilizer on which subsidy has been
claimed for examination of reasonableness of the MRPs. The
Department has appointed Cost Accountants for analysis of cost data
submitted by the fertilizer companies to: find out. reasonableness of _

MRPs fixed by these companies.”


PART-II

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS

On perusal of the Audit Report, oral evidence tendered by the
representatives of the Department of Fertilizers and written replies
furnished by the Department, the Committee find a number of
deficiencies in the implementation of the Nutrient Based Policy (NBS)
which was introduced in April, 2010, The Committee note that the
objectives of NBS, namely to improve agriculture productivity, ensure
balanced use of fertilizers, promote growth of indigenous fertilizer
industry and to reduce the burden of subsidy have not been achieved.
On the contrary, the Committee find steep rise in the use of Urea, which
has Nitrogen (N) as its primary nutrient, leading to imbalance use of
nutrients, decline in the production of indigenous fertilizers and
deterioration of soil health. The Committee also find irregularities like
avoidable payment of subsidy, excess payment on lump sum freight
subsidy for Single Super Phosphate (SSP), non recovery of gains from
Phosphate & Potassium (P&K) manufacturing companies for using
cheaper domestic/APM gases, Sales of SSP without assessing
requirement, unreasonable loading of cost component on MRP,
unjustified fixation of MRP etc. Based on these findings, the Committee
have made the following observations/recommendations for
improvement in the overall implementation of the NBS policy.

TARGET ORIENTED APPROACH

4. The Committee note that ‘Nutrient Based Subsidy’ (NBS) Policy
was introduced in April, 2010, with the objectives to improve agriculture
productivity, ensure balanced use of fertilizers, promote growth of
indigenous fertilizer industry and to reduce the burden of subsidy. The
Committee observe that the policy has not made any significant
progress towards achieving these objectives. The Committee are of the

aes


20

view that for the successful implementation of any scheme or policy of
the Government which will have a far reaching consequences on the
welfare of the people, particularly, farmers and peasants community,
there should be a well-defined road-map for achieving the stated
objectives of the policy which may, inter-alia, indicate quantifiable
derivables and specific timelines for achieving the objectives. To their
utter surprise, the Committee find that neither was there any clear road
map nor any timelines indicated towards implementation of the said
scheme. The Committee, therefore recommend that the Department need
to adopt a target oriented approach without any further delay and set
specific timelines with a strong and in-built monitoring mechanism for
achievement of each of the objectives and ensure overall success of the

policy. The steps taken in this regard be intimated to this Committee.

IMPLEMENTATION OF AN EFFECTIVE UREA POLICY

2. The Committee note that the preferred proportion of usage of NPK
nutrients. [‘N’ (Nitrogen), 7? (Phosphate) and ‘K’ (Potassium) is 4:2:1.
The Committee further note that ‘N’ which was at 4.3 in 2009-10 had
jumped to 8.2 in 2012-13 as farmers preferred Urea, containing ‘N’
because it was cheaper than P&K fertilizers. The steep rise in the use of
Urea had not only stunted the production of indigenous P&K fertilizers
but also adversely affected .soil health and fertility, The Committee
expressed serious concern on the alarming raise in the percentage of
farmers opting for urea as the primary choice of fertilizer resulting in an
imbalanced usage of fertilizers and deterioration of soil health. The
Committee are of the view that imparting proper training and educating
farmers on the long term benefits of maintaining optimum soil health
and the importance of implementing a balanced use nutrients, would go
a long way towards arresting the rising trend in the use of urea as the
primary fertilizer. The Committee, therefore, recommend that a proper

urea policy need to be devised to ensure balanced usage of fertilizers.


21

The Committee further recommend that while the Department may
impress upon the States to conduct trainings and field demos on the
benefits of using balanced fertilizer nutrients, the Department may also
periodically organize melas, demonstrations, at the national level to
sensitise the farmers across the country regarding the benefits of using
balanced fertilizer nutrients.

PROMOTION OF INDIGENOUS FERTILIZER INDUSTRY

. 3. The Committee note that despite the stated objective of NBS
Policy to improve growth of indigenous fertilizer industry, production of
P&K Fertilizers by the indigenous fertilizer industry declined. Since
2003-04, the number of indigenous plants, and their installed capacities,
remained static. Though the number of plants remained the same even
in 2013-14, installed capacity increased marginally. The Committee are
distressed to find that in a span of ten years, no significant achievement
have been made in the growth of indigenous fertilizer plants and their
production level. This is even more distressing to note that although
NBS policy was announced in 2010, the result has been very pathetic as
production of P & K fertilizers by the indigenous fertilizer industry
declined i.e. a phenomenon which is just opposite to one of the
objections of the NBS policy. The Committee also note that in order to

- ensure long term availability of raw materials/ intermediaries, Indian
companies are encouraged to enter long-term off-take contracts at
concessional rates, Joint Ventures to acquire mines in resource rich
countries. The Committee further note that under the NBS Policy number
of Single Super Phosphate (SSP) units have increased from 73 in 2008-
09 to 100 in 2014-15 and the production of SSP has also increased. While
appreciating the efforts of the Department to promote indigenous
production of fertilizers, the Committee find it inadequate. The

- Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department take pro-active

measures to encourage/enhance investment in the fertilizer sector in


22

close co-ordination with MoF and introduce target oriented
implementation of NBS policy in an effort to increase the domestic
production of fertilizers and SSP units.

TIME BOUND CLEARANCE OF PENDIXG Eee CLEARANCE OF PENDING PROFORMA-B

4. The Committee note that the outstanding ‘amount of Rs.50,587
crore of Proforma-B for the period 2007-08 to 2009-10 has been brought
down to Rs. 427.85 crores as on 05.01.2016. Further, the amount of
outstanding Proforma-8 for the period from 2007-08 to 2015-16 is
Rs.23,570.80 crore as compared to outstanding Proforma-B of Rs.50,587
crore for the period from 2007-08 to 2009-10. The Committee, however,
find that there is no specific mechanism in place to ensure that States
furnish Proforma-B certificates in time. The Department of Fertilizers has
stated that the responsibility to issue the quantity certificate lies with the
State Governments. Department of Fertilizers has no other option but to
, pursue the matter with the State Government regularly and make efforts
to clear the pendency of Proforma-B. Though the DoF has claimed to
have taken a number of measures towards reducing the pendency of
Proforma-B, the Committee feel that the progress made is not
satisfactory especially in view of advances in IT which in this case
appear to have not been leveraged. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that a time-bound action plan may be put in place to clear
pendency of Proforma-B. The Committee suggest that the monitoring
mechanism of pendency of Proforma-B need to be strengthened and
penalty be imposed on States, in the form of reduced subsidy grant, for

any delay in the submission of quantity certificates.

FIXING RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTARL तल RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY FOR EXCESS
LUMP SUM FREIGHT SUBSIDY TA FREIGHT SUBSIDY PAYMENT

6. The Committee note that under the NBS Policy, SSP was made
eligible for Secondary Freight subsidy. The element of Secondary


23

Freight subsidy inbuilt in NBS rates of SSP was Rs.104 PMT which was
being paid from May 2010 to December 2010. However, after removal of
the Secondary Freight element from NBS Policy, on the recommendation
of IMC, a lump sum freight subsidy at the rate of Rs.200 PMT was
introduced for SSP and was provided for the period 1 January 2011 to 31
August 2011, without prior approval of CCEA. Approval for the same was
obtained ex-post facto from CCEA on 3 July 2012. Audit also pointed out
that one of the reasons for according approval to above payment by
CCEA was that lump sum freight subsidy payments had already been
made to SSP industry till 31 August 2011. The Committee feel that due
consideration has not been made by the Department while making the
decision to make payment of lump sum subsidy at the rate of Rs.200
PMT instead of Rs.104 PMT which has resulted in excess payment of
Rs.25.74 crore. The Committee are aghast at the lackadaisical approach
of the Department towards making such an important decision having
far reaching consequences. The Committee, therefore, desire to be
apprised of the level at which the decision was taken and whether
anybody has been made accountable for the excess payment of lump
sum freight subsidy made in respect of SSP. The Committee recommend
that responsibility may be fixed and necessary action be initiated
against the erring - officials without any delay andi recoveries made

whenever due.

STATUS OF RECOVERY OF UNDUE BEF eee eS

CHEAPER DOMESTIC GAS

eee

STATUS OF VERY OF UNDUE BENEFITS DUE TO USE OF

6. The Committee note that the Empowered Group of Ministers
(EGoM) have directed (February 2012) the Department of Fertilizers to
finalize guidelines for effecting recovery of undue benefits that had
accrued to P&K manufacturing fertilizer companies which used cheaper
domestic gas. Further, pending finalization of guidelines, Minister of
State for Chemicals & Fertilizers had also directed (November 2013) the


24

Depariment to initiate ‘adhoc’ recovery. The Committee are dismayed
that the Department of Fertilizers have neither finalized the guidelines to
effect recovery nor made ‘adhoc’ recoveries from fertilizer companies
for use of cheaper domestic gas till date. The Committee note that the
‘Department has been withholding subsidies in the case of RCF from
each monthly subsidy bill, stopped subsidy payment since 10.1 0.2014 in

; respect of DFPCL. In respect of GSFC no recoveries are made due to

court order restraining the Department not to take any coercive action
due to the ad-hoc recovery order. The Committee find that the measures
taken by the Department so far for recovery of undue benefits are highly
unsatisfactory. The Committee, therefore recommend that guidelines for
recovery of undue benefits accrued due to use of cheaper domestic gas
may be formulated without any further delay. Moreover the Committee
are of the view that recoveries should be effected from the date of
implementation of NBS Policy i.e 1 April 2010. The Committee also
desire to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.

REASONABLE FIXATION OF BENCHVARK FREE OF BENCHMARK PRICE FOR SUBSIDY

7. The Committee note that benchmark price US$450 considered for
fixation of subsidy on DAP for 2011-12 in November 2010, was lower
than the prevailing import/procurement rates because of which the
fertilizer companies were not able to finalize contracts with international
fertilizer suppliers. Moreover, the Government of India lost an
opportunity of saving a subsidy of Rs.5555 crore, by not fixing the
benchmark price at reasonable level in November 2010. Observing that
majority of fertilizer companies were importing/procuring DAP, at rates
ranging between US$ 495 PMT and US$ 498 PMT during May 2010 to
November 2010, the Committee are unable to understand as to why the

Department of Fertilizers have not taken into consideration the

prevailing rates while fixing the subsidy on DAP. The Committee,

therefore, recommend that before the commencement of the financial


25

year, prevailing international prices ought to have been taken into
account while fixing benchmark price to enable fertilizer companies to
enter into contracts with international suppliers for timely procurement
of their requirements. The Committee also desire that responsibility of
officials may be fixed for not conducting necessary researchlanalysis of

_ the prevailing international market trends to facilitate informed decision
making. -

CRITICAL ASSESSMENT OF ALL FQCLS AND LABs

8. The Committee note that the capacity of 78 Fertilizer Quality

_Control Laboratories (FQCLs) to analyse fertilizer samples that are
located in various States consistently remained under-utilized in some
States whereas the number of samples tested was more than the
capacity in many other States. The Committee feel that provision of
quality fertilizer not only enhances agricultural production but also is
imperative for maintaining soil health and environment. Therefore,
FQCLs are considered as pivotal variables in agriculture. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that a critical assessment of all
FQCLs and labs may be carried out based on the capacity and work load
of each existing Jab and necessary upgradation may be undertaken
wherever required. The Committee further recommend that underutilized
labs may be equipped with proper equipment/apparatuses and sufficient
scientists/staff so as to relieve the overburdened labs and allow them to
function to their full capacity and potential.

NEED FOR MORE FQCLs AND LABs

9. The Committee note that there are 78 FQCLs and 4 laboratories
across the country. The Committee are of the view that the current
number of labs is insufficient to provide proper/adequate fertilizer
quality monitoring and cater to the demands of an agrarian country like
India. The Committee also find that information regarding measures


26

taken to improve fertilizer quality and formulation of proposals for
revamping the mechanism to enforce quality of fertilizers is awaited
from the Department of Agriculiure, Cooperation and Family Welfare
(DAC&FW). The Commitee, therefore, recommend that the Department
of Fertilizers assume a more proactive role and pursue DAC&FW to
finalise the proposals for revamping the mechanism for fertilizer quality
control without much delay. The Committee also desire that the
Department of Fertilizers. undertake a survey and research on the
requirement of FQCLs based on which additional FQCLs may be
established wherever necessary to facilitate adequate fertilizer quality

control and monitoring.

IMPROVED MECHANISM FOR ASSESSMENT OF MSP MECHANISM FOR ASSESSMENT OF MSP

40. The Committee note that month-wise and State-wise demand of
fertilizers are assessed and projected by DAC in consultation with the
State Governments and the findings are conveyed to the Department of
Fertilizers as the Department is mandated to fulfil the requirement of the
State from the available resources. As pointed out by Audit, the
Committee also note that Monthly Supply Plan (MSP) in respect of
decontrolled P&K Fertilizers, as issued to fertilizer companies as well as
to States, was not based on realistic assessment of requirements.
Quantity actually supplied by the companies was being regularized
without any link with the quantity mentioned in MSP. The Department of
Fertilizers has stated that the actual consumption of fertilizer depend
upon actual conditions prevailing during the season, which changes the
actual demand of fertilizers by farmers on real time basis. Monsoon is
the prime factor for assessment of fertilizer consumption, which is very
unpredictable. While concurring with the rationale behind the argument,
the Committee recommend that a more robust mechanism of
assessment may be devised in co-ordination with all concerned

Ministries Departments and weather experts so as to bridge the gap


27

between predicted requirements of fertilizers and the actual requirement
of fertilizers. The Committee also recommend that to supplement the
strengthened mechanism, the Department also need to put in place a

contingency plan for unforeseen events and the unpredictable monsoon.

ENSURING REASONABLE FIXING OF MRPs BY FERTILIZER
COMPANIES :

41. The Committee note that under the NBS Policy, fixing of MRPs was
_left open for fertilizer companies to be fixed at a reasonable level. The
Committee note that the Department has appointed Cost Accountants
for analysis of cost data, to be mandatorily submitted by the fertilizer
companies, to find out reasonableness of MRPs fixed by the companies.
However, the Committee find that there is no provision for examining
reasonableness of MRPs fixed by fertilizer companies prior to 2012-13.
The Committee recommend that since NBS Policy was implemented with
effect from in April, 2010, the Department should extend the verification
cost data of fertilizer companies from the date of introduction of NBS
Policy and accordingly pursue the fertilizer companies to submit the
cost data sheets for the period prior to 2012-13 as well. The Committee
desire that responsibility may also be fixed for any anomaly found in the
cost data sheets and appropriate penalty may be imposed against the
erring officials. The Committee also recommend that the Department
may issue clear instructions to all fertilizer companies on the cost
components that are mandatorily required for judging admissibility for
providing subsidy so as to avoid unnecessary loading of irrelevant cost

components/data.
NEW DELHI; ~ PROF, KV. THOMAS
14 March, 2017 Chairperson,

23 Phalguna, 1938 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee