IMPLEMENTATION OF AGRICULTURAL
DEBT WAIVER AND DEBT RELIEF
SCHEME, 2008
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
of the Committee contained in their Ninety-fifth Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF  FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES)
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2014-2015
SIXTEENTH REPORT
SIXTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
16

SIXTEENTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2014-2015)
(SIXTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
IMPLEMENTATION OF AGRICULTURAL
DEBT WAIVER AND DEBT RELIEF
SCHEME, 2008
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Ninety-fifth Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 29.4.2015
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 29.4.2015
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
April, 2015/Vaisakha, 1937 (Saka)

PAC  No. 2047
Price:  `  43.00
© 2015  BY  LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager,
Government of India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE  (2014-15) ................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................... (v)
CHAPTER I Report..................... ......................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ........................................ 7
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies of
Government................................................................... 31
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration ....................... 32
C
HAPTER V Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim reply ..................... 33
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the 18th sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2014-15) held on 27 March, 2015................ 34
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations /Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their Ninety-fifth
Report (15th Lok Sabha).............................................. 36

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2014-2015)
Prof. K.V . Thomas — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
4. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey
6. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank”
9. Shri Neiphiu Rio
*10. Shri Dushyant Singh
11. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
**12. Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi
13. Dr. Kirit Somaiya
14. Shri Anurag Thakur
***15. Dr. P. Venugopal
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
17. Shri Vijay Goel
18. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya
19. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
20. Shri Shantaram Naik
21. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
22. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
(iii)
* Elected w.e.f. 3rd December, 2014 vice Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy who has been appointed as
Minister w.e.f. 9th November, 2014.
** Elected w.e.f. 3rd December, 2014 vice Shri Jayant Sinha who has been appointed as Minister
w.e.f. 9th November, 2014.
*** Elected w.e.f. 3rd December, 2014 vice Dr. M. Thambidurai who has been chosen as Hon’ble
Deputy Speaker, Lok Sabha and has since resigned from the membership of the Committee.

SECRETARIA T
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Director
3. Shri Jayakumar T. — Additional Director
4. Smt. Anju Kukreja — Under Secretary

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2014-15) having been authorised
by the Committee, do present this Sixteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Ninety-fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Implementation of
Agricultural Debt Waiver and Debt Relief Scheme, 2008' relating to the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Financial Services).
2. The Ninety-fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in
Rajya Sabha on 6th February, 2014. Replies of the Government to the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report were received on 8th October, 2013. The
Public Accounts Committee considered and adopted the Sixteenth Report at their
sitting held on 3rd March, 2015. Minutes of the Sitting are given at Appendix-I.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Ninety-fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given
at Appendix-II.
N
EW DELHI; PROF.  K.V. THOMAS
26 April, 2015 Chairperson,
7 Vaisakha, 1937 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER  I
REPORT
Introductory
This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by
the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Ninety-fifth Report (15th Lok Sabha) on “Implementation of
Agricultural Debt Waiver and Debt Relief Scheme, 2008" based on C&AG Report
No. 3 of 2013 (Performance Audit) relating to the Ministry of Finance (Department
of Financial Services).
2. The Ninety-fifth Report  (15th Lok Sabha), which was presented to Lok Sabha/
laid in Rajya Sabha on 6th February, 2014, contained 12 Observations and
Recommendations. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations and
Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Financial Services) and are broadly categorized as under:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 1-12
Total: 12
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue  in view of the replies received from the Government:
Para No. Nil
Total: Nil
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Para No. Nil
Total: Nil
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:
Para No. Nil
Total:Nil
Chapter-V

2
3. Government of India announced an Agricultural Debt Waiver and Debt Relief
Scheme (ADWDRS) for farmers in February, 2008 to provide relief to the farmers by
declogging the line of credit, to catalyze flow of credit to agriculture and to enhance
agricultural production and productivity. The debt waiver was to be completed
by 30 June, 2008 while the debt relief was extended upto 30 June, 2010.  3.69 crore
small/medium farmers accounts and 0.60 crore other farmers accounts were to be
covered under the scheme with a cash outgo of  Rs. 60.416 crore and  Rs. 7,960 crore
for the respective categories, totalling  Rs. 68,376 crore. In-depth examination of the
subject by the Committee had revealed the following irregularities in the
implementation of the Scheme:—
(i) Out of 9,334 accounts test checked across nine States, 1,257 accounts
(13.46 per cent) were those which were found in audit to be eligible for
benefit under the Scheme, but were not considered by the lending
institutions while preparing the list of eligible farmers.
(ii) Out of 80,299 accounts granted debt waiver or debt relief, in 8.5 per cent of
cases, the beneficiaries were not eligible for either the debt waiver or the
debt relief.  A proportion of such claims, amounting to Rs. 20.50 crore, was
on account of claims being admitted for ineligible purposes or claims
pertaining to periods not eligible for Scheme benefits.
(iii) A Private Scheduled Commercial Bank had received reimbursement for
loans, amounting to Rs. l164.60 crore extended to Micro Finance
Institutions (MFIs) in violation of the guidelines.
(iv) In 2,824 cases, with claims amounting to Rs. 8.64 crore, there was
prima facie evidence  of tampering, over-writing and alteration of records.
(v) In 4,826 accounts, farmers were not extended the benefits according to
entitlements. In 3,262 cases, undue benefit totalling Rs. 13.35 crore was
extended. On the other hand, in the remaining 1,564 cases, farmers were
deprived of their rightful benefits of Rs. 1.91 crore.
(vi) In violation of the guidelines, lending institutions claimed amounts related
to interest/charges which was not allowed under the Scheme. In 6,392
cases across 22 States, although the lending institutions had not borne
interest/charges of Rs. 5.33 crore themselves, they were still reimbursed
these amounts by the GoI.
(vii) DFS accepted the reimbursement claims of RBI in respect of Urban
Cooperative Banks amounting to Rs. 335.62 crores despite the fact that
even the total number of beneficiaries' accounts was not indicated.
(viii) Debt waiver/relief certificates were not issued in many cases to eligible
beneficiaries. In 21,182 accounts (out of 61,793 test checked accounts),
i.e. 34.28 per cent, there was no acknowledgement from farmers or any
other proof of issue of debt waiver or debt relief certificates to the
beneficiaries. Such certificates entitle the farmers to fresh loans.

3
(ix) The monitoring of the Scheme was also found to be deficient. The
Department of Financial Services (DFS) was completely dependent upon
the nodal agencies for monitoring the compliance of its instruction issued
from time to time in implementation of the Scheme. But, the nodal agencies
themselves were relying on certificates and data of lending institutions
without conducting independent verification of such data and certificates
to confirm the veracity of claims.
4. The Committee had accordingly given their Observations/Recommendations
in their Ninety-fifth Report (15th Lok Sabha). The gist of important observations/
recommendations as contained in the Report are given as under:—
(i) The Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) should take
prompt remedial action to fix responsibility for violating the guidelines.
(ii) The Committee deplored, that despite laudable intension the perfunctory
manner in which the scheme conceived and the shoddy manner in which
it implemented was unfortunate.
(iii) The recoveries of the amounts given to the ineligible beneficiaries be
expedited and benefits extended to the eligible beneficiaries.
(iv) The irregularities should be seriously and conclusively pursued and
stringent penal action taken against those responsible for the grave
irregularities.
(v) The inadmissible charges by the lending Banks should be thoroughly
scrutinized and the inadmissible overpayments made to the lending Banks
recovered expeditiously.
(vi) The Department of Financial Services reflect seriously and find the reasons
for the scheme failure and also to remedy the wrongs done.
5. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Financial Services) have been reproduced in the relevant chapters of this Report.
The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on their
Observations/Recommendations which either need reiteration or merit comments.
Irregularities in implementation of ADWDRS, 2008
6. The Committee in their Ninety-fifth Report had found that ADWDRS, 2008 did
not achieve the intended goals due to various reasons which include, inter-alia,
errors of inclusion and exclusion at the beneficiary level, poor and inadequate
documentation, reimbursement of loan to Micro Finance Institutions in violation of
guidelines, tampering/overwriting/alteration of records, funds lying idle with lending
institutions, non-extension of benefit to entitled farmers, non-issuing of debt waiver/
relief certificates and most importantly ineffective monitoring of Scheme. While
taking a serious view of such flagrant display of financial and administrative
indiscipline by the Department of Financial Services/Nodal Agencies/Implementing
institutions in the implementation of such a Welfare Scheme, the Committee

4
recommended that the Department of Financial Services reflect seriously and find
the reasons for the Scheme failure and also to remedy the wrongs done.
7. In response to the above said Recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Financial Services) in their Action Taken Note submitted
as follows:—
"The recommendations of Hon'ble Committee have been noted for diligent
compliance. The observations of CAG have also been noted for keeping the
deficiencies pointed out in view while formulating any such Scheme in future.
However, as regards remedial action in the instant Scheme, the Banks have
completed the re-verification exercise, except in few cases where it could not
be completed due to court cases etc. The status of the re-verification as on
May, 2014 is as follows:—
• In 1,59,545 cases amounting to Rs. 204.3 crore where benefits were granted
to ineligible persons, in 1,01,286 cases an amount of Rs. 136.59 crore has
been recovered.
• In 48,007 cases amounting to Rs. 73.8 crore where excess benefits were
extended to the beneficiaries, in 27,964 cases an amount of Rs. 36.42 crore
has been recovered.
• In 78,640 cases amounting to Rs. 19.43 crore where inadmissible charges/
interest were claimed by the lending institutions, in 66,528 cases
Rs. 13.2 crore has been refunded.
• In 78,129 cases amounting to Rs. 40.86 crore where less benefits were
extended to the beneficiaries, in 1353 cases amounting to Rs. 3.4 crore the
benefits have been released by the lending institutions.
• In 32,748 cases amounting to Rs. 68.28 crore where benefits were not
given to eligible persons, in 458 cases Rs. 0.8 crore has been released by
the lending institutions.
• In 5411 cases disciplinary action has been initiated/taken against the
staff by the lending institutions.
• In 575 cases the responsibilities of auditors have been fixed by the lending
institutions and in 4030 cases of tampering of records 22 FIRs have been
filed.
• Rs. 164.60 crore has been recovered from ICICI Bank along with penal
interest of Rs. 54.80 crore effecting a total recovery of Rs. 219.40 crore.
• The Government has also recovered Rs. 149.79 crore from NABARD on
the ground that the interest for the first instalment was outside the purview
of the ADWDRS, 2008.
• All the lending institutions were advised to deposit the entire amount to
the Government forthwith without waiting for actual recoveries. So far, a
total recovery from lending institutions has been to the extent of
Rs. 627.68 crore against Rs. 666.72 crore.”

5
8. While vetting the said ATNs, the Audit made the following comments:—
"The records of the re-verification of cases by the lending Institutions/Banks
and the details of the beneficiaries affected along with the amount paid as
well as recoveries made may be shown to PAC. The details of action taken
against the erring staff of lending Institutions/Banks may also be shown to
PAC.”
9. In their further comments to the above said audit observation, the Ministry
stated as under:—
"The Government has by and large accepted almost all the observations of
CAG in its Performance Audit Report on ADWDRS, 2008 and swiftly acted
for re-verification of all the claims immediately on receipt of feedback received
from CAG during Exit Conference on 7.12.2012. The lending institutions, on
their part, have carried out re-verification of all the claims and have recovered
the undue amount and have refunded the same to the Government. Under the
Scheme, as many as 3.73 crore farmers were covered. Based on the information
furnished by the nodal agencies i.e. RBI and NABARD an amount of
Rs. 627.68 crore has been recovered against Rs. 666.72 crore. In 5411 cases,
disciplinary action was taken against the staff by the lending institutions and
in 757 cases the responsibilities of auditors were fixed by the lending
institutions and in 4030 cases of tampering of records, 22 FIRs were filed.
However, as the branches of the lending institutions are spread across the
country, the Hon'ble Committee would appreciate that recalling all the
individual records pertaining to 3.73 crore farmers by the nodal respective
agencies for placing before the Hon'ble PAC would be a gigantic task. The
Hon'ble Committee may consider waiving such a requirement. However, the
same would be collected and produced before the Hon'ble Committee, if so
desired.”
10. The Committee note that the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial
Services) have accepted all the recommendations as contained in their 95th Report
(15th Lok Sabha) and noted the same for diligent compliance. They further note
that the Ministry have also accepted the observations of CAG regarding the scheme
and noted the same for keeping the identified deficiencies in view while formulating
any such scheme in future. As regards the remedial action taken by the Ministry
in the instant scheme, the Committee express satisfaction that the Banks have
completed the re-verification of the cases where benefits were granted to ineligible
persons, excess benefits were extended to the beneficiaries, inadmissible charges/
interest were claimed by the lending institutions, less benefits were exended to the
beneficiaries and benefits were not given to eligible persons and took suitable
actions such as making recoveries from ineligible persons and releasing benefits
to left-out beneficiaries or those who got less benefits. Further, disciplinary action
has also reportedly been initiated/taken against the erring staff by the lending
institutions, responsibilities of auditors has been fixed, FIRs have been filed for
tampering of records and recoveries have been made with penal interest from

6
ICICI Bank as well as NABARD. All the lending institutions were also advised by
the Government to deposit the entire amount to them forthwith, without waiting for
actual recoveries. The Committee have been informed that a total recovery
from lending institutions has been to the extent of Rs. 627.68 crore against
Rs. 666.72 crore.
11. However, from the Action Taken reply furnished by the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Financial Services) the Committee are perturbed to find that while
the recovery process was itself initiated on 11.01.2013 after the lapse of three
years since the closing of the Scheme and that too after being pointed out by the
Audit, full amount has since not been recovered in several cases. For instance, out
of Rs. 204.3 crore, which were granted to ineligible persons, an amount of
Rs. 136.59 crore only has been recovered. Further, out of Rs. 73.8 crore where
excess benefits were extended to the beneficiaries, only Rs. 36.42 crore could be
recovered. The Committee are dismayed to note that whereas less entitled benefits
were extended to the beneficiaries, in 78,129 cases amounting to Rs. 40.86 crore,
benefits have been released by the lending institutions to the tune of Rs. 3.4 crore
only in 1353 cases. Moreover, in 32,748 cases amounting to Rs. 68.28 crore,
where benefits were not given to eligible persons, only in 458 cases Rs. 0.8 crore
has been released by the lending institutions. The Committee, therefore, cannot
but express their dissatisfaction over the fact that despite several levels of checking
by the internal auditor of bank, Central Statutory Auditor at HQ level, Concurrent
Auditor, Senior officials from Head Office of Central Cooperative Banks (CCB)/
State Cooperative Banks (SCB) and finally at level of National Level Monitoring
Committee, the identification of beneficiaries and granting of benefits remained
faulty, and desire that those found responsible must be penalized in a time bound
manner. Though action has been reportedly taken in 757 cases concerning auditors
and in 5411 cases against erring staff, the Committee desire to know details of the
same.They also feel that the cases of tampering of records is a clear attempt
towards embezzlement of public money and feel that strict penal action must be
completed in all 4030 reported cases early. Overall the Committee expect that
urgent and time bound steps would be taken to expeditiously recover the pending
amount from the ineligible beneficiaries and extend benefits to the eligible
beneficiaries. The Committee would like to be apprised of the present status of the
same within three months of the presentation of this Report to Parliament. The
Committee also desire that the records of the re-verification cases of Rs. 10 lakh
and above by the lending Institutions/Banks and the details of the beneficiaries
affected alongwith the amount paid as well as recoveries made therein, be submitted
to them.

CHAPTER II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  WHICH  HAVE  BEEN  ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Observation/Recommendation of the Committee
1. Salient features of the Scheme
The Committee note that the Government of India, announced a debt waiver and
relief package for farmers, through Agricultural Debt Waiver and Debt Relief Scheme
(ADWDRS) in February 2008. The underlying purpose and thrust of the Scheme
was to provide relief to the farmers by de-clogging the line of credit and thereby
catalyzing flow of credit to agriculture in order to enhance agricultural production
and productivity in the country. The Scheme in respect of debt waiver was to be
completed by 30 June 2008 while the date for debt relief was extended upto 30 June,
2010. The farmers who had taken short term production loans or investment loans
and qualified for the Scheme were categorized according to the following parameters:—
(a) Marginal farmer: A farmer cultivating (as owner or tenant or share cropper)
agricultural land upto 1 hectare (2.5 acres)
(b) Small farmer: A farmer cultivating (as owner or tenant or share cropper)
agricultural land more than 1 hectare and upto 2 hectares (5 acres)
(c) Other farmer: A farmer cultivating (as owner or tenant or share cropper)
agricultural land more than 2 hectares (more than 5 acres).
Further, the debt waiver in the case of marginal and small farmers essentially
signified 100 percent waiver of the 'eligible amount' while debt relief signified waiver
of 25 percent of the 'eligible amount' under a One-Time Settlement (OTS) Scheme.
The Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) was the apex
authority for the overall implementation of the Scheme. In their note to the Cabinet
in May 2008, Department of Financial Services (DFS) had estimated that about
Rs. 3.69 crore Small/Marginal farmers accounts and about Rs. 0.60 crore other
farmers accounts would be covered under the Scheme. In the same note, the cash
outgo from Government of India towards reimbursement of the amount of waiver/
relief to the lending  institutions was estimated at around Rs. 60,416 crore for Small/
Marginal farmers and Rs. 7,960 crore for other farmers.
In-depth examination of the subject by the Committee has revealed a large number
of irregularities and deficiencies in the implementation of the scheme which have
been discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.
[Sl. No. 1; Para 1 of Part II of the Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
7

8
Action Taken
The Agricultural Debt Waiver and Debt Relief Scheme (ADWDRS) was
announced in the Union Budget 2008-09. Thereafter, based on the consultations
with various stakeholders and their suggestions, the detailed Guidelines for
ADWDRS, 2008 were issued on 28.5.2008.
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) was designated the nodal agency for the
implementation of the Scheme for the Scheduled Commercial Banks, Urban
Cooperative Banks and  Local Area Banks, while National Bank for Agriculture and
Rural Development(NABARD) was the nodal agency for Regional Rural Banks
(RRBs) and Cooperative Credit Institutions.
The guidelines issued by the Government for the implementation of the Scheme,
inter alia, prescribed procedure for preparation of lists of beneficiaries, responsibility
of the lending institutions for correctness of the details of eligible beneficiaries,
establishment of grievance redressal mechanism and statutory, concurrent or special
audit of claims as may be directed by RBI/NABARD.
All direct agricultural loans disbursed to farmers between 31.3.1997 and 31.3.2007,
overdue as on 31.12.2007 and remained unpaid until 29.2.2008, were covered under
the Scheme. Farmers cultivating agricultural land upto 1 hectare were classified as
marginal farmers and those between 1 to 2 hectares as 'small farmers'. Farmers
cultivating agricultural land in excess of 2 hectares were classified as 'other farmers'.
Full debt waiver of the eligible amount was given to 'small and marginal farmers' and
one-time settlement rebate of 25% was extended to 'other farmers' against payment
of balance 75% in not more than three instalments.
The Scheme benefited 3.73 crore farmers to the extent of Rs. 52,259.86 crore. The
Performance Audit of the Scheme was carried out by the Comptroller & Auditor
General of India (C&AG) from April, 2011 to March, 2012 which reported various
errors of inclusion and exclusion at the beneficiary level. Based on the feedback
during Exit Conference with CAG on 7.12.2012, the Government on 11.1.2013 directed
all institutions to take immediate corrective action and re-verify all the claims under
the Scheme. NABARD and RBI had issued directions to the lending institutions on
11.1.2013 and 14.1.2013 respectively to examine the cases of any irregularities and
take corrective steps, including recovery of such amounts from ineligible
beneficiaries, recovery of any excess payment and fixing responsibility of the bank
staff in appropriate cases.
The Banks have completed the re-verification exercise, except in few cases where
it could not be completed due to court cases etc. The status of the re-verification as
on May, 2014 is as follows:—
• in 1,59,545 cases amounting to Rs. 204.3 crore where benefits were granted
to ineligible persons, in 1,01,286 cases an amount of Rs. 136.59 crore has
been recovered.

9
• In 48,007 cases amounting to Rs. 73.8 crore where excess benefits were
extended to the beneficiaries, in 27,964 cases, an amount of Rs. 36.42 crore
has been recovered.
• In 78,640 cases amounting to Rs. 19.43 crore where inadmissible charges/
interest  were  claimed  by the  lending  institutions, in 66,528 cases
Rs.13.2 crore has been refunded.
• In 78,129 cases amounting to Rs. 40.86 crore where less benefits were extended
to the beneficiaries, in 1353 cases amounting to Rs. 3.4 crore the benefits
have been released by the lending institutions.
• In 32, 748 cases amounting to Rs. 68.28 crore where benefits were not given
to eligible persons, in 458 cases Rs. 0.8 crore has been released by the
lending institutions.
• In 5411 cases disciplinary action has been initiated/taken against the staff
by the lending institutions.
• In 757 cases the responsibilities of auditors has been fixed by the lending
institutions and in 4030 cases of tampering of records 22 FIRs have been
filed.
• Rs. 164.60 crore has been recovered from ICICI Bank along with penal interest
of Rs. 54.80 crore effecting a total recovery of Rs. 219.40 crore.
• The Government has also recovered Rs. 149.79 crore from NABARD on the
ground that the interest for the first instalment was outside the purview of
the ADWDRS, 2008.
• All the lending institutions were advised to deposit the entire amount to the
Government forthwith without waiting for actual recoveries. So far, a total
recovery from lending institutions has been to the extent of Rs. 627.68 crore
against Rs. 666.72 crore.
Vetted Comments of Audit
The records of the re-verification of cases by the lending Institutions/Banks and
the details of the beneficiaries affected along with the amount paid as well as
recoveries made  may please be shown to PAC. The details of action taken against
the erring staff of lending Institutions/Banks may also please be shown to PAC.
Further Comments of the Ministry
The Government has by and large accepted almost all the observations of CAG
in its Performance Audit Report on ADWDRS, 2008 and swiftly acted for
re-verification of all the claims immediately on receipt of feedback received from
CAG during Exit Conference on 7.12.2012. The lending institutions, on their part,
have carried out re-verification of all the claims and have recovered the amount not
due and have refunded the same to the Government. Under the Scheme, as many as

10
3.73 crore farmers were covered. Based on the information furnished by the nodal
agencies i.e. RBI and NABARD an amount of Rs. 627.68 crore has been recovered
against Rs. 666.72 crore. In 5411 cases, disciplinary action was taken against the
staff by the lending institutions and in 757 cases the responsibilities of auditors
were fixed by the lending institutions and in 4030 cases of tampering of records,
22 FIRs were filed. However, as the branches of the lending institutions are spread
across the country, the Hon'ble Committee would appreciate that recalling all the
individual records pertaining to 3.73 crore farmers by the nodal respective agencies
for placing before the Hon'ble PAC would be a gigantic task. The  Hon'ble Committee
may consider waiving such a requirement. However, the same would be collected
and produced before the  Hon'ble Committee, if so desired.
Sd/-
(Anurag Jain)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services OM No. 4/7/2014-AC
dated 8 October, 2014]
Observation/Recommendation of the Committee
2. Guidelines for implementation of the Scheme
The Government had on the 28th May, 2008 issued detailed guidelines for the
implementation of the Scheme. These guidelines envisaged, inter alia, that every
branch of scheduled commercial bank, regional rural bank, cooperative credit
institution, urban cooperative bank and local area bank covered under this Scheme
should prepare two lists, one consisting of 'small and marginal farmers' who are
eligible for debt waiver and the second, consisting of the other farmers who are
eligible for debt relief under the Scheme. These lists were required to include
particulars of the land holding, the eligible amount and the amount of debt waiver or
debt relief proposed to be granted in each case. These lists were also required to be
displayed on the Notice Board of the branch of the bank/society on or before
June 30, 2008. Reserve Bank of India and NABARD were the nodal agencies to
monitor the implementation of the Scheme in respect of the respective banks under
their due control. Both RBI and NABARD in their regulatory roles were required to
exercise checks on the lending institutions. Audit was to be conducted by the
concurrent auditors, statutory auditors or special auditors as directed by RBI/
NABARD. The Central Government, if satisfied and felt necessary, might direct a
special Audit in the case of any lending institution or one or more branches of such
lending institution. The Committee note that the elementary lists required to include
particulars of the land holding, the eligible amount and the amount of debt waiver or
debt relief proposed to be granted in each case were to be finalized by the respective
branches of the banks and that too within a short period of one month.  The
Committee deprecate the myopic approach on  the part of the Government in
conceiving and implementing a Scheme involving estimated financial concessions
to the tune of more than Rs. 68,000 crore. Apparently, vital lists of intended

11
beneficiaries were prepared in a cavalier manner as these were replete with
mistakes, leading to serious financial lapses. It appears that the DFS, the apex
authority responsible for administration and implementation of the Scheme turned
a mute bystander after issuing the guidelines of the Scheme in May 2008.
[Sl. No. 2; Para 2 of Part II of the Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
According to the ADWDRS, 2008, books of accounts of every lending institution
that granted debt waiver or debt relief, including the books of accounts maintained
at the branches, were subject to audit as per the process to be prescribed by RBI/
NABARD. The audit could be conducted by concurrent auditors, statutory auditors
or special auditors, as may be directed by RBI/NABARD.
The RBI guidelines issued on 30th May, 2008 also envisaged that banks were
required to prepare claims duly audited by internal auditor  at branch level. Thereafter,
claims were to be forwarded to controlling offices along with the certificate issued
by internal auditor. After consolidating claims at Head Office level, the claims were
required to be checked by Central Statutory Auditor, who was entrusted with this
as a special assignment by the banks. For this purpose, the Statutory Auditor had
to cover at least 20% of branches and accounts to verify correctness of claims.
Finally, the consolidated claims for the bank as a whole duly certified by the Central
Statutory Auditors were to be submitted for re-imbursement.
However, the detailed guidelines issued by NABARD on 2nd July, 2008 envisaged
that even before such claims are filed, the list of eligible borrowers were to be 100%
checked by the concurrent Auditors/Senior Officials from the Head Office of the
CCB/SCB. Further, before sending claims to NABARD, they were required to conduct
sample audit of account identified for waiver/relief. The banks were to identify at
least 25 percent societies under their justification and at least 50% eligible accounts
of societies/Branches for examining the books to verify that the eligible borrowers
had been categorized as SF/MF and OF correctly, as per norms prescribed in the
Scheme.
Implementing agencies were primarily responsible for inspection and monitoring.
Moreover, a National Level Monitoring Committee  was also constituted in the
Department of Financial Services, Ministry of Finance. Under the ADWDRS, 2008,
3.73 crore farmers were benefitted to the extent of Rs. 52,259.86 crore.
However, the time available for implementation of the Scheme was quite short
and many lending institutions were not on Core Banking System (CBS) when the
Scheme was implemented resulting in manual processing of the claims, resulting in
errors of exlusions and inclusions.
Vetted Comments of Audit
No comments.

12
Further Comments of the Ministry
No comment.
Sd/-
(Anurag Jain)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services OM No. 4/7/2014-AC
dated 8 October, 2014]
Observation/Recommendation of the Committee
3. Release of funds
According to provisional estimates (March 2010), the Scheme was likely to cost
the Government approximately Rs. 65,318 crore and benefit Rs. 3.69 crore farmers.
(Refer Table in para 6 of Part-I of this Report). With a view to ensure that banks had
ample liquidity for disbursing credit to farmers who became eligible for fresh credit
after benefiting under the Scheme, the Government of India created a Farmers Debt
Relief Fund (FDRF) with an initial corpus of Rs. 10,000 crore in March, 2008. Upto 31st
March, 2012, Department of Financial Services had released Rs. 52,516 crore to RBI/
NABARD between 2008-09 and 2011-12. Since ADWDRS involved a huge amount,
the objective of performance Audit conducted by the Comptroller and Auditor General
of India was to ascertain whether the management of claims for debt waiver and relief
under the Scheme was inconsonance with relevant guidelines and requirements. The
review was carried out from April 2011 to March 2012 and covered 25 States involving
field audit of total 90,576 beneficiaries/farmers accounts in 715 Branches of lending
institutions located in 92 districts. The sample included 80, 299 accounts of such
farmers, who were extended benefit under the Scheme, 9,334 accounts of such farmers
who were not selected as beneficiaries even though they had received agricultural
loans between 1 April, 1997 to 31 March, 2007, and 943 cases where complaints were
received. Detailed examination revealed errors of inclusion and exclusion at the
beneficiary level, reimbursement of loans to microfinance institutions in violation of
guidelines, tampering, over-writing and alteration of records, non-extension of benefits
to entitled farmers and deficient monitoring of the Scheme. The Secretary, DFS, in
fact, conceded that the issues largely raised by the C&AG were correct and the DFS
had no intention of disputing the veracity of the kind of points raised by the Audit.
The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to take prompt remedial action, fix
responsibility for violating the guidelines and apprise the Committee within six months
of the presentation of the Report.
[Sl. No. 3; Para 3 of Part II of the Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Based on the feedback during Exit Conference with CAG on  7.12.2012, the
Government on 11.1.2013 directed all institutions to take immediate corrective action
and re-verify all the claims under the Scheme. NABARD and RBI had issued

13
directions to the lending institutions on 11.1.2013 and 14.1.2013 respectively to
examine the cases of any irregularities and take corrective steps, including recovery
of such amounts from ineligible beneficiaries, recovery of any excess payment and
fixing responsibility of the bank staff in appropriate cases.
The banks have completed the re-verification exercise, except in few cases where
it could not be completed due to court cases etc. The status of the re-verification as
on May, 2014 is as follows:—
• In 1,59,545 cases amounting to Rs. 204.3 crore where  benefits were granted
to ineligible persons, in 1,01,286 cases, an amount of Rs. 136.59 crore has
been recovered.
• In 48,007 cases amounting to Rs. 73.8 crore where excess benefits were
extended to the beneficiaries, in 27,964 cases an amount of Rs. 36.42 crore
has been recovered.
• In 78,640 cases amounting to Rs. 19.43 crore where inadmissible charges/
interest  were  claimed by the  lending  institutions, in 66,528 cases
Rs. 13.2 crore has been refunded.
• In 78,129 cases amounting to Rs. 40.86 crore where less benefits were extended
to the beneficiaries, in 1,353 cases amounting to Rs. 3.4 crore the benefits
have been released by the lending institutions.
• In 32,748 cases amounting to Rs. 68.28 crore where benefits were not given
to eligible persons, in 458 cases Rs. 0.8 crore has been released by the
lending institutions.
• In 5,411 cases, disciplinary action has been initiated/taken against the staff
by the lending institutions.
• In 757 cases, the responsibilities of auditors has been fixed by the lending
institutions and in 4,030 cases of tampering of records, 22 FIRs have been
filed.
• Rs. 164.60 crore has been recovered from ICICI Bank along with penal interest
of Rs. 54.80 crore effecting a total recovery of Rs. 219.40 crore.
• The Government has also recovered Rs. 149.79 crore from NABARD on the
ground that the interest for the first instalment was outside the purview of
the ADWDRS, 2008.
• All the lending institutions were advised to deposit the entire amount to the
Government forthwith without waiting for actual recoveries. So far, a total
recovery from lending institutions has been to the extent of Rs. 627.68 crore
against Rs. 666.72 crore.
Vetted Comments of Audit
The records of the re-verification of the cases by the lending Institutions/Banks
and the details of the beneficiaries affected along with the amount paid as well

14
recoveries made may please be shown to PAC. The details of action taken against
the erring staff of lending Institutions/Banks may also please be shown to PAC.
Further Comments of the Ministry
The Government has by and large accepted almost all the observations of C&AG
in its Performance Audit Report on ADWDRS, 2008 and swiftly acted for
re-verification of all the claims immediately on receipt of feedback received from
C&AG during Exit Conference on 7.12.2012. The lending institutions, on their part,
have carried out re-verification of all the claims and have recovered the under
amount  and have refunded the same to the Government. Under the Scheme, as
many as 3.73 crore farmers were covered. Based on the information furnished by the
nodal agencies i.e. RBI and NABARD, an amount of Rs. 627.68 crore has been
recovered against Rs. 666.72 crore. In 5,411 cases, disciplinary action was taken
against the staff by the lending institutions and in 757 cases the responsibilities of
auditors were fixed by the lending institutions and in 4,030 cases of tampering of
records, 22 FIRs were filed. However, as the branches of the lending institutions are
spread across the country, the Hon'ble Committee would appreciate that recalling
all the individual records pertaining to 3.73 crore farmers by the nodal respective
agencies for placing before the Hon'ble PAC would be a gigantic task. The Hon'ble
Committee may consider waiving such a requirement. However, the same would be
collected and produced before the Hon'ble Committee, if so desired.
Sd/-
(Anurag Jain)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services OM No. 4/7/2014-AC
dated 8 October, 2014]
Observation/Recommendation of the Committee
4. Time frame for implementation
The Committee note that the Scheme set an unrealistic and ambitious target of
achieving debt waiver/debt relief for an estimated Rs. 4.29 crore farmer accounts in
an unrealistically short span of one month. The Scheme, which was circulated to
banks on 28 May, 2008 set a stringent deadline of 30 June, 2008 for finalizing and
displaying beneficiary lists by the lending institutions. Apart from the involvement
of a huge number of branches of the scheduled Commercial Banks, the Scheme was
also to be implemented by around one lakh Primary Agricultural Cooperative Societies
(PACS), District Central Cooperative Banks (DCCBs) and Regional Rural Banks
(RRBs) and other branches situated in remote corners of the country. From the
number and nature of serious deficiencies and irregularities subsequently detected,
it is amply clear that the lending institutions did not correctly and diligently prepare
these fundamental and basic lists of beneficiaries, which is highly regrettable. The
shortsightedness of the Government in this regard is further corroborated during

15
the State-level Exit Conference in Punjab, where the banks explicitly expressed that
the time allowed for the implementation of the Scheme was a major constraint,
which resulted in some of the irregularities detected in the performance Audit. ICICI
Bank, Canara Bank and Land Development Bank, Uttar Pradesh also held similar
views. The vital fact that the capacities of implementing agencies were varied and
many lacked adequate infrastructural facilities such as not even having one core
Banking platform, was also lost sight of. The Committee deplore, that despite laudable
intension, the perfunctory manner in which the Scheme was conceived and the
shoddy manner in which it was implemented. This is unfortunate, to say the least.
[Sl. No. 4; Para 4 of Part II of the Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
It appears true that the lending institutions did not undertake the exercise in its
true spirit as is evidenced by the irregularities and discrepancies observed by
C&AG due to the short time given for implementation of the Scheme. However,
remedial action has been taken by the Department of Financial Services and the
nodal banks i.e. RBI and NABARD to get complete re-verification and recover the
undue benefits extended to the beneficiaries.
Vetted Comments of Audit
The records of the re-verification of  cases by the lending Institutions/Banks
and the details of the beneficiaries affected along with the amount paid as well as
recoveries made may please be shown to PAC. The details of action taken against
the erring staff of lending Institutions/Banks may also please be shown to PAC.
Further Comments of the Ministry
The Government has by and large accepted almost all the observations of C&AG
in its Performance Audit Report on ADWDRS, 2008 and swiftly acted for re-
verification of all the claims immediately on receipt of feedback received from C&AG
during Exit Conference on 7.12.2012. The lending institutions, on their part, have
carried out re-verification of all the claims and have recovered the undue amount
and have refunded the same to the Government. Under the Scheme, as many as
3.73 crore farmers were covered. Based on the information furnished by the nodal
agencies i.e. RBI and NABARD an amount of Rs. 627.68 crore has been recovered
against Rs. 666.72 crore. In 5,411 cases, disciplinary action was taken against the
staff by the lending institutions and in 757 lases the responsibilities of auditors
were fixed by the lending institutions and in 4,030 cases of tampering of records,
22 FIRs were filed. However, as the branches of the lending institutions are spread
across the country, the Hon'ble Committee would appreciate that recalling all the
individual records pertaining to 3.73 crore farmers by the nodal respective agencies

16
for placing before the Hon'ble PAC would be a gigantic task. The Hon'ble Committee
may consider waiving such a requirement. However, the same would be collected
and produced before the Hon'ble Committee, if so desired.
Sd/-
(Anurag Jain)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services OM No. 4/7/2014-AC
dated 8 October, 2014]
Observation/Recommendation of the Committee
5. Exclusion and inclusion of beneficiaries
The Committee note that out of a total of 9334 accounts test checked by audit
across nine states, 1,257 accounts (13.46 percent) were those which were found to
be eligible for benefit of Rs. 3.58 crore under the Scheme, but were not considered
by the lending institutions while preparing the list of eligible farmers. This was the
figure when the Audit had examined only 25 cases of individual loan accounts in
each branch visited by them where no benefit was given to the eligible farmers.
In reality it could be that alarmingly large number of eligible farmers, might have
been eventually deprived of benefits of the Scheme due to such perfunctory approach
on the part of the lending branches in preparing the lists of beneficiaries. Further,
Audit scrutiny detected another 183 accounts, which were denied benefits to the
tune of Rs. 21.30 lakh under the Scheme though their names appeared in the list of
beneficiaries. For instance, in Punjab, debt relief of Rs. 17.87 lakh was claimed in
176 cases by three branches of Primary Co-operative Agricultural Development
Bank Ltd. from Government, but instead of crediting the same into the accounts of
beneficiaries, the amount was irregularly kept in the sundry accounts thereby
denying benefit to the concerned beneficiaries. It was also seen that in 6823 accounts
out of the total 80,299 accounts test checked i.e. 8.5 per cent of the cases amounting
to Rs. 2050 crore, the beneficiaries were not eligible for either the debt waiver or the
debt relief. According to the Department of Financial Services multiple levels of
checks and balances and also elaborate auditing mechanism were well ingrained
into the guidelines. However, the examination of the matter reveals that these have
merely remained on paper. The Committee were apprised that in pursuance of audit
scrutiny, Government has initiated action to recover the amounts given to the
ineligible beneficiaries. Action is also stated to have been initiated to extend benefits
to the eligible beneficiaries who were deprived earlier the Committee would like the
recoveries expedited and to extend benefits to the eligible beneficiaries within six
months of the presentation of this report and be apprised.
[Sl. No. 5; Para 5 of Part II of the Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]

17
Action Taken
The Banks have completed the re-verification exercise, except in few cases where
it could not be completed due to court cases etc. The status of the re-verification as
on May, 2014 is as follows:—
• In 1,59, 545 cases amounting to Rs. 204.3 crore where benefits were granted
to ineligible persons, in 1,01,286 cases an amount of Rs. 136.59 crore has
been recovered.
• In 48,007 cases amounting to Rs. 73.8 crore where excess benefits were
extended to the beneficiaries, in 27,964 cases, an amount of Rs. 36.42 crore
has been recovered.
• In 78,640 cases amounting to Rs. 19.43 crore where inadmissible charges/
interest  were  claimed by the  lending institutions, in 66, 528 cases
Rs. 13.2 crore has been refunded.
• In 78,129 cases amounting to Rs. 40.86 crore where less benefits were extended
to the beneficiaries, in 1353 cases amounting to Rs. 3.4 crore the benefits
have been released by the lending institutions.
• In 32,748 cases amounting to Rs. 68.28 crore where benefits were not given
to eligible persons, in 458 cases Rs. 0.8 crore has been released by the
lending institutions.
• In 5411 cases disciplinary action has been initiated/taken against the staff
by the lending institution.
• In 757 cases the responsibilities of auditors has been fixed by the lending
institutions and in 4030 cases of tampering of records 22 FIRs have been
filed.
• Rs. 164.60 crore has been recovered from ICICI Bank along with penal interest
of Rs. 54.80 crore effecting a total recovery of Rs. 219.40 crore.
• The Government has also recovered Rs. 149.79 crore from NABARD on the
ground that the interest for the first instalment was outside the purview of
the ADWDRS, 2008.
• All the lending institutions were advised to deposit the entire amount to the
Government forthwith without waiting for actual recoveries. So far, a total
recovery from lending institution has been to the extent of Rs. 627.68 crore
against Rs. 666.72 crore.
Vetted Comments of Audit
The records of the re-verification of cases by the lending Institutions/Banks and
the details of the beneficiaries affected along with the amount paid as well as
recoveries made may please be shown to PAC. The details of action taken against
the erring staff of lending Institutions/Bank's may also please be shown to PAC.

18
Further Comments of the Ministry
The Government has by and large accepted almost all the observations of C&AG
in its Performance Audit Report on ADWDRS, 2008 and swifitly acted for
re-verification of all the claims immediately on receipt of feedback received from
C&AG during Exit Conference on 7.12.2012. The lending institutions, on their part,
have carried out re-verification of all the claims and have recovered the undue
amount and have refunded the same to the Government. Under the Scheme, as
many as 3.73 crore farmers were covered. Based on the information furnished by the
nodal agencies i.e. RBI and NABARD an amount of Rs. 627.68 crore has been
recovered against Rs. 666.72 crore. In 5411 cases, disciplinary action was taken
against the staff by the lending institutions and in 757 cases the responsibilities of
auditors were fixed by the lending institutions and in 4030 cases of tampering of
records, 22 FIRs were filed. However, as the branches of the lending  institutions are
spread across the country, the Hon'ble Committee would appreciate that recalling
all the individual records pertaining to 3.73 crore farmers by the nodal respective
agencies for placing before the Hon'ble PAC would be a gigantic task. The Hon'ble
Committee may consider waiving such a requirement. However, the same would be
collected and produced before the Hon'ble Committee, if so desired.
Sd/-
(Anurag Jain)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services OM No. 4/7/2014-AC
dated 8 October, 2014]
Observation/Recommendation of the Committee
6.  Action against erring Bank officials
The Committee are further informed by the DFS that in respect of cases of
irregularities pointed out by C&AG relating to Public Sector Banks, disciplinary
action against the staff of concerned Banks has been initiated in 1520 cases and
responsibility of auditors fixed in 153 cases. Further, in the cases identified out of
re-verification by Public Sector Banks (other than that pointed out by audit)
disciplinary action against the concerned staff  has been initiated in 904 cases.
Similar action has also been initiated against the staff of RRBs and the Cooperative
Banks. FIRs have also been filed in 5 cases of tampering of records. The Committee
recommend that the irregularities pointed out by Audit and further detected should
be seriously and conclusively pursued and stringent penal action taken against
those responsible for the grave irregularities to obviate the recurrence of such
instances in future.
[Sl. No. 6; Para 6 of Part II of the Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Besides recovery of undue benefits extended to the beneficiaries, in 5411 cases
disciplinary action has been initiated/taken against the staff by the lending

19
institutions. In 757 cases the responsibilities of auditors has been fixed by the lending
institutions and in 4030 cases of tampering of records 22 FIRs have been filed. As the
Scheme has since been closed, the observations of the Hon'ble Committee are being
noted for future reference.
Vetted Comments of Audit
The records of the re-verification of cases by the lending Institutions/Banks and
the details of the beneficiaries affected along with the amount paid as well as recoveries
made may please be shown to PAC. The details of action taken against the earring staff
of lending Institutions/Banks may also please be shown to PAC.
Further Comments of the Ministry
The Government has by and large accepted almost all the observations of C&AG in
its Performance Audit Report on ADWDRS, 2008 and swiftly acted for re-verification
of all the claims immediately on receipt of feedback received from C&AG during Exit.
Conference on 7.12.2012. The lending institutions, on their part, have carried out re-
verification of all the claims and have recovered the undue amount and have refunded
the dame to he Government. Under the Scheme, as many as 3.73 crore farmers were
covered. Based on the information furnished by the nodal agencies i.e. RBI and
NABARD an amount of Rs. 627.68 crore has been recovered against Rs. 666.72 crore.
In 5411 cases, disciplinary action was taken against the staff by the lending institutions
and in 757 cases the responsibilities of auditors were fixed by the lending institutions
and in 4030 cases of tampering of records, 22 FIRs were filed. However, as the branches
of the lending institutions are spread across the country, the Hon'ble Committee would
appreciate that recalling all the individual records pertaining to 3.73 crore farmers by
the nodal respective agencies for placing before the Hon'ble PAC would be a gigantic
task. The Hon'ble   Committee may consider waiving such a requirement. However, the
same would be collected and produced before the Hon'ble Committee, if so desired.
Sd/-
(Anurag Jain)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services OM No. 4/7/2014-AC
dated 8 October, 2014]
Observation/Recommendation of the Committee
7. Disbursal of loans through Micro Finance Institutions
The Committee note that a private scheduled commercial Bank (ICICI Bank) had
received reimbursement for loans amounting to Rs. 164.60 crore extended to Micro
Finance Institutions in violation of the guidelines. The claim was initially assessed and
settled by the RBI. As per the Scheme guidelines, only agricultural loans disbursed to
farmers were eligible for reimbursement. The matter was taken up with the RBI, who
subsequently advised that these loans by ICICI Bank through service providers/MFIs

20
do go beyond the scope of direct agricultural loans and as such these loans were
ineligible for waiver/relief as per the provisions of the Scheme. The DFS confirmed that
the RBI had since recovered `164.60 crore from ICICI Bank and remitted the amount to
the Government. The Committee were apprised that the quantum of interest to be
charged was being considered together with the regulatory action proposed to be
taken against the Bank. The Committee would also like to know the basis for initial
acceptance of the reimbursement of the irregular claims of  Rs. 164.60 crore and also
recommend that suitable action be taken against the erring officials. The Committee
also urge the DFS to check and ensure that no such irregularities have taken place with
respect to the other beneficiaries.
[Sl. No. 7; Para 7 of Part II of the Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Rs. 164.60 crore has been recovered from ICICI Bank along with penal interest of
Rs. 54.80 crore effecting a total recovery of Rs. 219.40 crore. The matter was also taken
up with RBI to ascertain as to how the claim of ICICI Bank was allowed. The RBI has
reported that no such irregularities have taken place with respect to other beneficiaries.
Vetted Comments of Audit
The records of the re-verification of cases by the lending Institutions/Banks and
the details of the beneficiaries affected along with the amount paid as well as recoveries
made may please be shown to PAC. The details of action taken against the erring staff
of lending Institutions/Banks may also please be shown to PAC.
Further Comments of the Ministry
The Government has by and large accepted almost all the observations of CAG in
its Performance Audit Report on ADWDRS, 2008 and swiftly acted for re-verification
of all the claims immediately on receipt of feedback received from CAG during Exit
Conference on 7.12.2012. The lending institutions, on their part, have carried out re-
verification of all the claims and have recovered the undue amount and have refunded
the same to the Government. Under the Scheme, as many as 3.73 crore farmers were
covered. Based on the information furnished by the nodal agencies i.e. RBI and
NABARD an amount of Rs. 627.68 crore has been recovered against Rs. 666.72 crore.
In 5411 cases, disciplinary action was taken against the staff by the lending institutions
and in 757 cases the responsibilities of auditors were fixed by the lending institutions
and in 4030 cases of tampering of records, 22 FIRs were filed. However, as the branches
of the lending institutions are spread across the country, the Hon'ble Committee would
appreciate that recalling all the individual records pertaining to 3.73 crore farmers by
the nodal respective agencies for placing before the Hon'ble PAC would be a gigantic
task. The Hon'ble Committee may consider waiving such a requirement. However, the
same would be collected and produced before the Hon'ble Committee, if so desired.
Sd/-
(Anurag Jain)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services OM No. 4/7/2014-AC
dated 8 October, 2014]

21
Observation/Recommendation of the Committee
8. Deficiencies in documentation
The Committee note that the Audit scrutiny had also detected that in as many as
2824 cases with claims amounting to Rs. 8.64 crore, there was prima facie evidence of
tampering, over-writing and alteration of records. The implementing authorities have
confirmed that FIRs have been filed in five such cases. The Committee note yet another
serious irregularity detected as a result of performance audit. The total amount by
which a farmer would be benefited would depend upon his classification based on
landholding, the type and amount of loan taken and finally the amount outstanding as
on the prescribed dates. Audit scrutiny of test checked cases revealed that the
classification of farmers or calculation of the eligible amount was not done correctly in
terms of the Scheme guidelines. Consequently, 4826 accounts, out of the 80299 test
checked accounts of farmers, were not extended the correct benefits. It was found that
1564 accounts were extended less benefit of  Rs. 1.91 crore. Similarly, in 3262 accounts,
undue benefits to the tune of  Rs.13.35 crore was extended. In 2300 accounts, debt
waiver was extended instead of debt relief resulting in excess benefit of  Rs. 11.05 crore
in 962 accounts. Farmers were given excess benefit of  Rs. 2.30 crore because the
lending institutions claimed the entire amount of the loan despite only a part amount of
the loan being eligible under the Scheme. The Committee take a serious view of these
financial infringements and desire that the said cases should be pursued conclusively,
responsibilities fixed and the Committee apprised.
[Sl. No. 8; Para 8 of Part II of the Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
In 3,84,685 accounts involving an amount of Rs. 371.56 crore out of which
Rs. 258.49 crore had already been recovered. In 5411 cases disciplinary action had
been initiated/taken against the staff by the lending institutions. In 757 cases,
responsibilities of Auditors had been fixed by the lending institutions. In 4030 cases of
tampering of records, 22 FIRs had been filed. In 78,129 cases amounting to Rs. 40.86
crore where less benefits were extended to the beneficiaries, in 1353 cases amounting
to Rs. 3.4 crore the benefits have been released by the lending institutions. In 48,007
cases amount to Rs. 73.8 crore where excess benefits were extended to the beneficiaries,
in 27,964 cases, an amount of Rs. 36.42 crore has been recovered. In 32,748 cases
amount to Rs. 68.28 crore where benefits were not given to eligible persons, in 458
cases Rs. 0.8 crore has been released by the lending institutions. Further, Rs. 164.60
crore had been recovered from ICICI Bank along with penal interest of Rs. 54.80 crore
affecting a total recovery of Rs. 219.40 crore. All the lending institutions were advised
to deposit the entire amount to the Government forthwith without waiting for actual
recoveries. So far, a total recovery from lending institutions has been to the extent of
Rs. 627.68 crore against Rs. 666.72 crore.

22
Vetted Comments of Audit
The records of the re-verification of cases by the lending Institutions/Banks and
the details of the beneficiaries affected along with the amount paid as well as recoveries
made may please by shown to PAC. The details of action taken against the erring staff
of lending Institutions/Banks may also please be shown to PAC.
Further Comments of the Ministry
The Government has by and large accepted almost all the observations of CAG in
its Performance Audit Report on ADWDRS, 2008 and swiftly acted for re-verification
of all the claims immediately on receipt of feedback received from CAG during Exit
Conference on 7.12.2012. The lending institutions, on their part, have carried out re-
verification of all the claims and have recovered the undue amount and have refunded
the same to the Government. Under the Scheme, as many as 3.73 crore farmers were
covered. Based on the information furnished by the nodal agencies i.e. RBI and
NABARD an amount of Rs. 627.68 crore has been recovered against Rs. 666.72 crore.
In 5411 cases, disciplinary action was taken against the staff by the lending institutions
and in 757 cases the responsibilities of auditors were fixed by the lending institutions
and in 4030 cases of tampering of records, 22 FIRs were filed. However, as the branches
of the lending institutions are spread across the country, the Hon'ble Committee would
appreciate that recalling all the individual records pertaining to 3.73 crore farmers by
the nodal respective agencies for placing before the Hon'ble PAC would be a gigantic
task. The Hon'ble Committee may consider waiving such a requirement. However, the
same would be collected and produced before the Hon'ble Committee, if so desired.
Sd/-
(Anurag Jain)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services OM No. 4/7/2014-AC
dated 8 October, 2014]
Observation/Recommendation of the Committee
9.  Irregularities in implementation
The Committee find that inadmissible charges to the tune of  Rs. 5.33 crore on account
of interest on the principal amount were claimed by the lending institutions from the
Government. According to the guidelines, it was specified that all types of such interest
charges were to be borne by the lending institutions themselves. This huge amount
related to the test checked scrutiny of 80,299 beneficiaries' accounts which revealed
that in as many as 6,392 cases the lending institutions claimed the inadmissible charges.
Given such high incidences of irregularities and the amount involved therein, the
Committee are apprehensive that total errors in inclusion of inadmissible charges may

23
be alarmingly large. As per information received upto June 2013, Rs. 2.70 crore had
already been refunded by the lending institutions. In yet another cases, ICICI Bank
made a claim for reimbursement amounting to Rs. 60.26 lakh, which was in excess by
Rs. 16.13 lakh of the benefits extended by them. This amount continued to be retained
by the Bank.
The Committee further note that the Department of Financial Services had released
funds amounting to Rs. 1,934 crore to the nodal agencies i.e. Rs. 1,612 crore to RBI and
Rs. 322 crore to NABARD on account of interest on reimbursable claims under the
Scheme. The Department simply provided bank-wise interest payments amounting to
Rs. 1,612 crore without giving the details of calculations of interest reimbursed to the
lending institutions, as a result of which the veracity or otherwise of these huge
payments could not be cross-checked in audit. The Department glibly responded by
stating that the computation of interest on account of reimbursable claims has been
made by Reserve Bank of India.
The Committee also found violation of guidelines regarding debt waiver and debt
relief certificates issued by the lending institutions which was made imperative as per
ADWDRS guidelines. The Committee found that during Audit scrutiny it was revealed
that in as many as 21,182 accounts, out of 61,793 test checked accounts (i.e. 34.28 per
cent) there was no acknowledgement from farmers or any other proof of either issue or
receipt of debt waiver or debt relief certificates to or by the beneficiaries. Similarly, it
was also seen that in 12 states no records relating to requests for fresh loan, by the
beneficiaries were maintained. Further, in a State the Regional Office of NABARD, had
claimed that fresh loans amounting to Rs. 8.25 crore had been advanced to 1,001
farmers by the Cooperatives and Regional Rural Banks in the State. The Committee are
appalled to find that there were no records to indicate the number of ADWDRS
beneficiaries who had availed benefits under the Scheme had also received the benefit
of fresh loans. The Committee deplores sheer lack of scrutiny leading to claim of
inadmissible charges by the lending Banks. Inadmissible charges by the lending Banks
should be thoroughly scrutinized and the inadmissible overpayments made to the
lending Banks recovered expeditiously and the Committee apprised of the corrective
action taken to address the irregularities pointed above.
[Sl. No. 9; Para 9 of Part II of the Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Upon re-verification lending institutions identified 78,640 cases amounting to
Rs. 19.43 crore in which such claims were paid out of it. In 66,528 cases an amount of
Rs. 13.2 crore has already been refunded. Government has already advised the lending
institutions to refund such identified amount forthwith to the Government.

24
Vetted Comments of Audit
The records of the re-verification of cases by the lending Institutions/Banks and
the details of the beneficiaries affected along with the amount paid as well as recoveries
made may please be shown to PAC. The details of action taken against the erring staff
of lending Institutions/Banks may also please be shown to PAC.
Further Comments of the Ministry
The Government has by and large accepted almost all the observations of CAG in
its Performance Audit Report on ADWDRS, 2008 and swiftly acted for re-verification
of all the claims immediately on receipt of feedback received from CAG during Exit
Conference on 7.12.2012. The lending institutions, on their part, have carried out re-
verification of all the claims and have recovered the undue amount and have refunded
the same to the Government. Under the Scheme, as many as 3.73 crore farmers were
covered. Based on the information furnished by the nodal agencies i.e. RBI and
NABARD an amount of Rs. 627.68 crore has been recovered against Rs. 666.72 crore.
In 5411 cases, disciplinary action was taken against the staff by the lending institutions
and in 757 cases the responsibilities of auditors were fixed by the lending institutions
and in 4030 cases of tampering of records, 22 FIRs were filed. However, as the branches
of the lending institutions are spread across the country, the Hon'ble Committee would
appreciate that recalling all the individual records pertaining to 3.73 crore farmers by
the nodal respective agencies for placing before the Hon'ble PAC would be a gigantic
task. The Hon'ble Committee may consider waiving such a requirement. However, the
same would be collected and produced before the Hon'ble Committee, if so desired.
Sd/-
(Anurag Jain)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services OM No. 4/7/2014-AC
dated 8 October, 2014]
Observation/Recommendation of the Committee
10. Monitoring of the Scheme
The Committee are deeply anguished to note the lack of proper monitoring in such
a laudable Scheme meant for eradicating and mitigating the financial distress of farmers,
who form the backbone of India's agricultural growth projectory. As per the guidelines
issued by the Government, a National Level Monitoring Committee (NLMC) was
required to be constituted with Secretary, DFS as its Chairman to monitor the
implementation of the Scheme. The Committee held meeting on 17.06.2008 and 13.08.2008
to review the implementation of the Scheme, but the Department failed to even furnish
the agenda or minutes of these meetings. Further, Reserve Bank of India and NABARD
were made the nodal agencies for monitoring the implementation of the Scheme but

25
their monitoring was also found to be miserably inadequate. The Scheme design was
based on extensive delegation of authority to the lending institutions, who were made
sole implementing agencies. The lending institutions prepared the lists of beneficiaries.
The Committee are deeply concerned to find that even these lists were not scrutinized
independently by the nodal agencies for their accuracy in a systematic and responsible
manner. The nodal agencies merely understood their role to be restricted to issuing
guidelines and instructions and transferring funds. They simply compiled and
consolidated data and issued certificates in respect of the claims made. There were
glaring instances of reprehensible violation of guidelines by the lending institutions
and the nodal agencies had not devised any mechanism for ensuring strict compliance
of the guidelines and instructions. The Committee do not accept the reply of the
Department of Finance Services that regular reports, returns, etc. were not required
since the scheme was for a short span of time and for a specific purpose. The contention
of the Department is not tenable as the scheme was officially in operation from 28 May,
2008 to 30 June, 2010 i.e. for more than two years and needed constant and vigorous
moniroting. The Committee deprecate the casual monitoring approach of both the
Department of  Financial Services and the nodal agencies viz., Reserve Bank of India
and  NABARD which resulted in serious acts of financial omissions and commissions.
[Sl. No. 10; Para 10 of Part II of the Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As per the guidelines issued by DFS, the onus of ensuring the correctness of the
list of eligible beneficiaries who are extended the benefit of waiver/relief, rested with
the lending institutions. Further, the instructions issued by RBI/NABARD on behalf
of DFS relating to audit and submission of the claims had clearly laid down details
procedure for checking/auditing at various levels. However, as the reimbursement of
claims were primarily book-adjustments in the accounts of the lending institutions and
in view of exhaustive check and balances well-ingrained in the guidelines of the scheme,
there appeared little scope for errors. Still, as many banks were not on Core Banking
System and the time available for implementation of Debt Waiver part was very limited,
there remained errors or exclusion and inclusion.
However, based on the observations of CAG , the complete re-verification exercise
was carried out by the lending institutions and in 3,84,685 accounts involving an
amount of Rs. 371.56 crore out of which Rs. 258.49 crore had already been recovered.
In 5411 cases disciplinary action had been initiated/taken against the staff by the
lending institutions. In 757 cases, responsibilities of Auditors had been fixed by the
lending institutions. In 4030 cases of tampering of records, 22 FIRs had been filed.
Further,  Rs. 164.60 crore had been recovered from ICICI Bank along with  penal interest
of  Rs. 54.80 crore affecting a total recovery of  Rs. 219.40 crore. All the lending institutions

26
were advised to deposit the entire amount to the Government forthwith without waiting
for actual recoveries. So far, a total recovery from lending institutions has been to the
extent of  Rs. 627.68 crore against Rs. 666.72 crore.
Vetted Comments of Audit
The records of the re-verification of cases by the lending Institutions/Banks and
the details of the beneficiaries affected along with the amount paid as well as recoveries
made may please be shown to PAC. The details of action taken against the erring staff
of lending the erring staff of lending Institutions/Banks may also please be shown to
PAC.
Further Comments of the Ministry
The Government has by and large accepted almost all the observations of CAG in
its Performance Audit Report on ADWDRS, 2008 and swiftly acted for re-verification
of all the claims immediately on receipt of feedback received from CAG during
Exit Conference on 7.12.2012. The lending institutions, on their part, have carried out
re-verification of all the claims and have recovered the undue amount and have refunded
the same to the Government. Under the scheme, as many as 3.73 crore farmers were
covered. Based on the information furnished by the nodal agencies i.e. RBI and
NABARD on amount of Rs. 627.68 crore has been recovered against Rs. 666.72 crore.
In 5411 cases, disciplinary action was taken against the staff by the lending institutions
and in 757 cases the responsibilities of auditors were fixed by the lending institutions
and in 4030 cases of tampering of  records, 22 FIRs were filed. However, as the branches
of the lending institutions are spread across the country, the Hon'ble Committee would
appreciate that recalling all the individuals records pertaining to 3.73 crore farmers by
the nodal respective agencies for placing before the Hon'ble PAC would be a gigantic
task. The Hon'ble Committee may consider waiving such a requirement. However, the
same would be collected and produced before the Hon'ble Committee, if so desired.
Sd/-
(Anurag Jain)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India
[Ministry of Finance, Deparment of Financial Services OM No. 4/7/2014-AC
dated 8 October, 2014]
Observation/Recommendation of the Committee
11. Remedial action taken by the Government
As regards the action taken on the Audit findings the Committee have been apprised
by the Department of Financial Services that the irregularities had been observed in
336,516 accounts involving an amount of Rs. 230.67 crore out of which Rs. 70.08 crore
had already been recovered. In 3679 cases disciplinary action had been initiated/taken
against the staff by the lending institutions. In 449 cases, responsibilities had been
fined by the lending institutions. In 301 cases of tampering of records, 5 FIRs had been

27
filed. Further, 164.60 crore had been recovered from ICICI Bank and the RBI had been
advised to recover the penal interest due from the Bank. Besides, NABARD and RBI
had issued directions on 11th January 2013 and 14th January 2013 respectively to all
Scheduled Commercial Banks, Local Area Banks, RRBs and Cooperative Credit
Institutions to take necessary remedial action. The Committee are perturbed to note
that out of  Rs. 230.67 crore that was pointed out by Audit only  Rs. 70.08 crore had
been recovered as on 3rd September, 2013. The Committee, therefore, desire that the
recovery process be expedited and recoveries with penal interest from the defaulter
institutions only be made at the earliest. The Committee be apprised by the DFS about
the latest position of recovery within six months of the presentation of this Report.
[Sl. No. 1; Para 11 of Part II of the Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Banks have completed the re-verification exercise, except in few cases where it
could not be completed due to court cases etc. The status of the re-verification as on
May, 2014 is as follows:—
• In 1,59, 545 cases amounting to 
 Rs. 204.3 crore where benefits were granted to
ineligible persons, in 1,01,286 cases an amount of  Rs. 136.59 crore has been
recovered.
• In 48,007 cases amounting to Rs. 73.8 crore where excess benefits were extended
to the beneficiaries, in 27,964 cases, an amount of Rs. 36.42 crore has been
recovered.
• In 78,640 cases amounting to  Rs. 19.43 crore where inadmissible charges/
interest were claimed by the lending institutions, in 66,528 cases  Rs. 13.2 crore
has been refunded.
• In 78,129 cases amounting to  Rs. 40.86 crore where less benefits were extended
to the beneficiaries, in 1353 cases amounting to  Rs. 3.4 crore the benefits have
been released by the lending institutions.
• In 32,748 cases amounting to  Rs.
  68.28 crore where benefits were not given to
eligible persons, in 458 cases Rs. 0.8 crore has been released by the lending
institutions.
• In 5411 cases disciplinary action has been initiated/taken against the staff by
the lending institutions.
• In 757 cases the responsibilities of auditors has been fixed by the lending
institutions and in 4030 cases of tampering of records 22 FIRs have been filed.
• Rs. 164.60 crore has been recovered from ICICI Bank along with penal interest
of Rs. 54.80 crore effecting a total recovery of  Rs. 219.40 crore.
• The Government has also recovered Rs. 149.79 crore from NABARD on the
ground that the interest for the first instalment was outside the purview of the
ADWDRS, 2008.

28
• All the lending institutions were advised to deposit the entire amount to the
Government forthwith without waiting for actual recoveries. So far, a total
recovery from lending institutions has been to the extent of  Rs. 627.68 crore
against  Rs. 666.72 crore.
Vetted Comments of Audit
The records of the re-verification of cases by the lending Institutions/Banks and
the details of the beneficiaries affected along with the amount paid as well as recoveries
made may please be shown to PAC. The details of action taken against the erring staff
of lending Institutions/Banks may also please be shown to PAC.
Further Comments of the Ministry
The Government has by and large accepted almost all the observations of C&AG in
its Performance Audit Report on ADWDRS, 2008 and swiftly acted for re-verification of
all the claims immediately on receipt of feedback received from C&AG during Exit
Conference on 7.12.2012. The lending institutions, on their part, have carried out
re-verification of all the claims and have recovered the undue amount and have refunded
the same to the Government. Under the Scheme, as many as 3.73 crore farmers were
covered. Based on the information furnished by the nodal agencies i.e. RBI and NABARD
an amount of  Rs. 627.68 crore has been recovered against  Rs. 666.72 crore. In 5411
cases, disciplinary action was taken against the staff by the lending institutions and in
757 cases the responsibilities of auditors were fixed by the lending institutions and in
4030 cases of tampering of records, 22 FIRs were filed. However, as the branches of the
lending  institutions are spread across the country, the Hon'ble Committee would
appreciate that recalling all the individual records pertaining to 3.73 crore farmers by the
nodal respective agencies for placing before the Hon'ble PAC would be a gigantic task.
The Hon'ble Committee may consider waiving such a requirement. However, the same
would be collected and produced before the Hon'ble Committee, if so desired.
Sd/-
(Anurag Jain)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services OM No. 4/7/2014-AC
dated 8 October, 2014]
Observation/Recommendation of the Committee
12. Conclusion
The foregoing paragraphs reveal that the Agricultural Debt Waiver and Debt Relief
Scheme (ADWDRS), 2008 did not achieve the intended goals due to various reasons
which include, inter-alia, errors of  inclusion and exclusion at the beneficiary level,
poor and inadequate documentation, reimbursement of loan to Micro Finance
Institutions in violation of guidelines, tampering/overwriting/alteration of records,
funds lying idle with lending institutions, non-extension of benefit to entitled farmers,
non-issuing of debt waiver/relief certificates and most importantly ineffective monitoring
of Scheme. While taking a serious view of such a flagrant display of financial and
administrative indiscipline by the Department of Financial Services/Nodal Agencies/
implementing institutions in the implementation of such a Welfare Scheme, the Committee
recommend that the Department of Financial Services reflect seriously and find the

29
reasons for the Scheme failure and also to remedy the wrongs done as recommended
in the preceding paragraphs.
[Sl. No. 12; Para 12 of Part II of the Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The recommendations of Hon'ble Committee have been noted for diligent
compliance. The observations of C&AG have also been noted for keeping the
deficiencies pointed out in view while formulating any such Scheme in the future.
However, as regards remedial action in the instant Scheme, the Banks have completed
the re-verification exercise, except in few cases where it could not be completed due to
court cases etc. The status of the re-verification as on May, 2014 is as follows:—
• In 1,59,545 cases amounting to Rs. 204.3 crore where benefits were granted to
ineligible persons, in 1,01,286 cases an amount of  Rs. 136.59 crore has been
recovered.
• In 48,007 cases amounting to  Rs. 73.8 crore where excess benefits were extended
to the beneficiaries, in 27,964 cases, an amount of  Rs. 36.42 crore has been
recovered.
• In 78,640 cases amounting to Rs. 19.43 crore where inadmissible charges/interest
were claimed by the lending institutions, in 66,528 cases  Rs. 13.2 crore has been
refunded.
• In 78,129 cases amounting to  Rs. 40.86 crore where less benefits were extended
to the beneficiaries, in 1353 cases amounting to  Rs. 3.4 crore the benefits have
been released by the lending institutions.
• In 32,748 cases amounting to  Rs. 68.28 crore where benefits were not given to
eligible persons, in 458 cases Rs. 0.8 crore has been released by the lending
institutions.
• In 5411 cases disciplinary action has been taken initiated/taken against the staff
by the lending institutions.
• In 757 cases the responsibilities of auditors has been fixed by the lending
institutions and in 4030 cases of tampering of records 22 FIRs have been filed.
• Rs. 164.60 crore has been recovered from ICICI Bank along with penal interest
of  Rs. 54.80 crore effecting a total recovery of  Rs. 219.40 crore.
• The Government has also recovered 
 Rs. 149.79 crore from NABARD on the
ground that the interest for the first instalment was outside the purview of the
ADWDRS, 2008.
• All the lending institutions were advised to deposit the entire amount to the
Government forthwith without waiting for actual recoveries. So far, a total
recovery from lending institutions has been to the extent of  Rs. 627.68 crore
against  Rs. 666.72 crore.

30
Vetted Comments of Audit
The records of the re-verification of cases by the lending Institutions/Banks and
the details of the beneficiaries affected along with the amount paid as well as recoveries
made may please be shown to PAC. The details of action taken against the erring staff
of lending Institutions/Banks may also please be shown to PAC.
Further Comments of the Ministry
The Government has by and large accepted almost all the observations of C&AG in
its Performance Audit Report on ADWDRS, 2008 and swiftly acted for re-verification
of all the claims immediately on receipt of feedback received from C&AG during Exit
Conference on 7.12.2012. The lending institutions, on their part, have carried out
re-verification of all the claims and have recovered the undue amount and have refunded
the same to the Government. Under the Scheme, as many as 3.73 crore farmers were
covered. Based on the information furnished by the nodal agencies i.e. RBI and
NABARD an amount of  Rs.
  627.6 crore has been recovered against  Rs. 666.72 crore.
In 5411 cases, disciplinary action was taken against the staff by the lending institutions
and in 757 cases the responsibilities of auditors were fixed by the lending institutions
and in 4030 cases of tampering of  records, 22 FIRs were filed. However, as the branches
of the lending institutions are spread across the country, the Hon'ble Committee would
appreciate that recalling all the individual records pertaining to 3.73 crore farmers by
the nodal respective agencies for placing before the Hon'ble PAC would be a gigantic
task. The Hon'ble Committee may consider waiving such a requirement. However, the
same would be collected and produced before the Hon'ble Committee, if so desired.
Sd/-
(Anurag Jain)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services OM No. 4/7/2014-AC
dated 8 October, 2014]

CHAPTER  III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
—NIL—
31

CHAPTER  IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY  THE  COMMITTEE  AND
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
—NIL—
32

CHAPTER  V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
GOVERNMENT HA VE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLY
—NIL—
NEW DELHI; PROF.  K.V. THOMAS
26 April, 2015 Chairperson,
07 V aisakha, 1937 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
33

APPENDIX  I
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2014-15) HELD ON 27TH MARCH, 2015
The Committee sat on Friday, the 27th March, 2015 from 1130 hrs. to 1415 hrs. in
Room No. 53, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. K.V . Thomas — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
3. Shri Nishikant Dubey
4. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri Dushyant Singh
7. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
8. Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi
9. Dr. Kirit Somaiya
10. Dr. P. Venugopal
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Vijay Goel
12. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
13. Shri Shantaram Naik
14. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Jayakumar T. — Additional Director
3. Shri P. Haokip — Deputy Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Deputy C&AG (RC)
2. Shri Satish Loomba — Director-General (Central Expenditure)
34

35
3. Shri L.S. Singh — Principal Director (PAC)
4. Shri Atoorva Sinha — Director
5. Shri K. Mani — Director (O/o DGCE)
Representatives of the Ministry of Culture
1. Shri Ravindra Singh — Secretary
2. Shri K.K. Mittal — Additional Secretary
*** *** *** ***
5. The witnesses then withdrew.
6. The Committee thereafter took the following draft reports for consideration:—
(i) Draft report on ‘Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) Scheme' based
on C&AG Report No. 22 of 2012-13.
(ii) Draft report on the subject 'Railways Finances' based on C&AG Report
No. 12 of 2013.
(iii) Draft report on action taken by the Government on the observations/
recommendations contained in the Ninety-Fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)
on 'Implementation of Agricultural Debt Waiver and Debt Relief Scheme,
2008'.
7. However, one of the members desired that he had certain suggestions for the
draft report on Railways Finances which Hon'ble Chairperson may consider for
inclusion. Hon'ble Chairperson asked the member to give his suggestion in writing and
assured for giving due consideration to the same.
8. After discussions, the Committee adopted the three draft reports with minor
modifications as suggested by the Members. The Committee then authorized the
Chairperson to finalize the reports in the light of factual verifications, if any, made by
the Audit and present them to Parliament on a convenient date.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.
***Not related to this Report.

APPENDIX II
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR NINETY-FIFTH REPORT
(FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
(i) Total Number of Observations/Recommendations — 12
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee — T otal: 12
which have been accepted by the Government: Percentage: 100%
Para Nos. 1 to 12
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee — T otal: 0
do not desire to pursue in view of the reply of the Percentage: 0
Government:
Nil
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which — T otal: 0
replies of the Government have not been accepted Percentage: 0
by the Committee and which require reiteration:
Nil
(v) Observations /Recommendations in respect of which — T otal: 0
the Government have furnished interim replies: Percentage: 0
Nil
36
GMGIPMRND—1142LS(S3)—03.09.2015.