      119  
 
 
MAINTENANCE OF BRIDGES IN INDIAN RAILWAYS  
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their 87th Report (16th Lok Sabha)] 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
               
                      
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  


2 
 
PAC NO.  2158 
 
 
O N E  H U N D R E D  A N D   
N I N E T E E N T H  R E P O R T 
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(2018 -19)  
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their 87th Report (16th Lok Sabha)] 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD)  
 
                                          
                                                                              
 Presented to Lok Sabha on:  14.12.2018 
 
            Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   14.12.2018. 
 
 
 L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
 N E W  D E L H I  
 
 December, 2018 /Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)   
 
MAINTENANCE OF BRIDGES IN INDIAN 
RAILWAYS  
 
 
 

3 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS  
COMMITTEE (2018-19)      
(iii) 
 
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………... …………………….. 
  
(iv) 
CHAPTER I              
  
Report ………………………………………………. 1 
CHAPTER II* Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government …………………….. 
 
CHAPTER III* Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
replies received from the Government ..………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV* Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration ……………………………………………. 
 
 
CHAPTER V* Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which the Government have furnished interim 
replies ………………………………………………… 
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES* 
 
I 
 
Minutes of the 20 th sitting of the Public Accounts 
Committee (2018 -19) held on   
5th December, 2018 
 
 
II Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public 
Accounts Committee contained in their  Eighty -
seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
   
 
________________________________________________________________  
*Not appended to the cyclostyled copy of the Report

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge   - Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria  
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra 
5.    Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar   
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
7. Smt. Riti Pathak 
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank” 
9. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
10. Shri Abhishek Singh 
11. Shri Gopal Shetty 
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya  
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
15. Dr. Ponnusamy  Venugopal 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda 
17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
18. Shri Shwait Malik 
19. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
21. Shri C.M. Ramesh 
 
22. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Director 
3. Smt. Anju Kukreja - Under Secretary 

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2018 -19), having been 
authorised by the Committee, do present this One Hundred and Nineteenth Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee  contained in their Eighty -seventh 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Maintenance of Bridges in Indian Railways" based 
on Chapter -I of C&AG Report No. 24 of 2015 (Vol.II)  relating to Ministry of Railways 
(Railway Board).  
 
2. The Eighty-seventh Report was pr esented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on  
9th February, 2018. Replies of the Government to all the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received.  The Public 
Accounts Committee considered and adopted the One hundred and Nineteenth R eport 
at their sitting held on 5 th December, 2018.  Minutes of the sitting are given at  
Appendix I. 
 
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the 
Report. 
 
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to 
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Eighty -seventh Report (Sixt eenth Lok Sabha) is 
given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                               MALLIKARJUN KHARGE 
  December, 2018                                                           Chairperson, 
  Agrahayana,1940 (Saka)                                       Public Accounts Committee 
 

6 
 
REPORT 
PART – I 
 This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
their Eighty -seventh Report (1 6th Lok Sabha) on " Maintenance of Bridges in Indian 
Railways" based on Chapter - I of C&AG Report No. 24 of 2015 (Vol. II). 
 
2. The Eighty -seventh Report (16th Lok Sabha)  which was presented to Lok 
Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 9th February, 2018 , contained 1 2 Observations and 
Recommendations. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations and 
Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) 
and are broadly categorized as under: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
  Para Nos. 1-12 
          Total:     12       
          Chapter - II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
  Para Nos. NIL 
          Total:    NIL      
          Chapter - III 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
 
  Para Nos. NIL 
          Total:     NIL 
          Chapter - IV 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies: 
  Para Nos. NIL 
          Total:    NIL         
          Chapter -V 

7 
 
 
3. During the course of examination of the subject, the Committee noted several 
irregularities in maintenance of bridges in Indian Railways . These inter-alia pertained to 
delay in sanctioning the brid geworks even after identification for rehabilitation by 
Railway Board and speed restrictions, under -utilisation of funds, under -utilisation of 
modern equipments for bridge inspection, inordinate delay in execution of sanctioned 
bridgeworks, poor maintenanc e of Railway bridges within their codal life, bridge 
inspections were not carried out in many zones, inadequacy of manpower for inspect ion 
and maintenance of bridges and out of 20 modules proposed, only one module relating 
to creation of central structured Bridge Data Base was finalised. The Committee also 
observed that out of 147 bridges made of early steel/crew pile/cast Iron due to be 
phased out, 96 bridges of these typ es existed over five Zonal Railways. Further, delay 
in timely supply of steel girders by the Civil Engineering Workshops (CEWs) resulted in 
delay of rehabilitation of Railway bridges. The Committee had accordingly given their 
Observations/Recommendations i n the Eighty -seventh Report (16 th Lok Sabha). The 
Gist of these Observations/Recommendations are contained in the succeeding 
paragraphs: 
a) While viewing that speed restrictions and delaying crucial bridge work at zonal 
levels and RB level simply on monetary considerations defeats the very purpose 
of the system of identification for rehabilitation, besides compromising the safety 
of passengers as well a s train services on the bridges,  the Committee had 
desired that a strategic management system be developed fo r fast tracking 
sanction of rehabilitation/reconstruction of bridges within a time frame based on 
priority for safety. 
b) The Committee  had desired that proper planning, execution and effective 
mechanism of monitoring should be set up at both Zonal and RB levels to ensure 
optimum utilization of funds. 
c) The Committee  had desired that acco untability should be fixed at all  Zonal as 
well as RB levels agai nst the officers who have procured equipments at 
exorbitant rates which are lying underutilized. 

8 
 
d) The Committee  had recommended the Railways to set timelines for the 
execution and completion of bridgeworks  with effective planning and proper 
monitoring so a s to ensure that safety of human lives is not compromised and 
railway assets protected. 
e) Upon noticing that out of  42 bridges found to have become due for 
rehabilitation/reconstruction within their codal life (normal life), 37 of them were 
located in South Western Region alone, the Committee had urged that the matter 
may be enquired into and action taken against the officers responsible for the 
lapse. 
f) The Committee had recommended that Bridge Cells be created in the remaining 
six Railway Zones for better monitoring of inspections and execution of 
bridgeworks over IR. 
g) While viewing that such large scale vacancies exposes the lack of seriousness 
on the part of railways to carry out the much needed inspection of railway 
Bridges, the Committee had  recommended that urgent steps be taken to fill up 
vacant posts, expedite holding of DPCs and conduct the  recruitment of requisite 
manpower. 
h) As Bridge Management System (BMS) will help Ministry of Railways in keeping 
track of all kinds of maintenance and inspection issues related to Railway 
Bridges, the Committee emphasize d the imperative need for making the BMS 
system fully operational within six months of the presentation of the Report. 
i) The Committee  had desired that keeping in view the safety of passengers, 
technically obsolete bridges need to be replaced in a time  bound manner at the 
earliest. 
j) The Committee had desired that construction companies/contractors who fail to 
ensure quality and long life of bridges be debarred from participating in future 
tenders and penalized/earnest money forfeited.  The Committee had also desired 
that the officials found lacking in their duties to ensure good quality work or 
colluded with contractors be punished in an exemplary manner. 
k) While observing that delays in supply of girders by the Civil Engineering 
Workshops affect execution of the relevant bridgeworks , the Committee had 

9 
 
recommended that Railways need to modernize/ enhance the number and 
capacity of the workshops and augment advance procurement of raw materials 
to avoid the delay in supply of steel girders as it ultimately impacts the safety of 
passengers on account of non -completion of bridgeworks identified for 
rehabilitation. 
 
4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) as 
each of the Observation/Recommendation of the Committee contained in their Eight -
seventh Report have been reproduced in the relevant chapters of this Report. The 
Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of their 
observations/recommendations which either need reiteration or merit comments. 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 1) 
5. The Committee in their 87th Report (16th Lok Sabha) had found substantial delays 
in rehabilitation of identified bridges. The Committee also noticed inordinate delays in 
sanctioning/executing and monitoring of bridgeworks which resulted in unpardonable 
delays in achieving target date for completion of bridges. Thus, the Committee observed 
that the non -serious approach of the Railways leads to the possibility of compromising 
passenger safety during operation of train service on those identified bridges. 
 
6. In their Action Taken Note on the aforesaid observation of the Committee, the 
Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) stated as follows: 
"Safety of Bridges is accorded very high priority on Indian Railways. Repair/ 
rehabilitation / rebuilding / strengthening of Bridges is a continuous process and 
is being undertaken primarily on the basis of their physical condition as 
ascertained during reg ular inspections at various levels.  However, sometimes 
bridges are also rehabilitated / strengthened / rebuilt on account of increased 
loading standards/inadequate waterway/unforeseen damage due to floods etc. It 
is not true that Bridge works are sanction ed based on monetary considerations 
only. Bridge works are sanctioned keeping in view the safety aspects, existing 
throw forward, availability of funds, available time allowance without 
compromising with safety of bridges. If the corrective / remedial meas ures are 
expected to take a long duration, suitable speed restriction is imposed and such 
bridges are kept under close watch.  
 
The bridge rehabilitation works are normally carried out as Plan expenditure 
under Plan Head -32 of Demand no. 16. However, bridg es requiring urgent 

10 
 
repairs / rehabilitation are also rehabilitated under revenue to ensure safety of 
train operations. 
 
As regards to sanction of Bridge works under Plan Head -32, the bridge works of 
more than ` 2.5 Crore each are sanctioned by Railway Boa rd in Annual Budget 
every year based on proposals of Zonal railways received every year online on 
IRPSM (Indian Railways Projects Sanctions & Management), whereas works of 
less than 2.5 Crore are sanctioned by zonal railways themselves at Headquarter 
& Divisional Level.  
  
In this regard, it is stated that the works proposed for sanction at Railway Board 
level (more than ` 2.5 crores each) are examined and prioritised based on safety 
considerations. However, all the works proposed by Zonal Railways do not 
involve safety aspects. The works being proposed by field level are critically 
examined at Zonal Head Quarter level and Railway Board level and highest 
priority is accorded to works having direct bearing on safety. The works are 
accordingly sanctioned at Zo nal level/Board level. There is multi tier system of 
examining the proposals and finally the proposals required from safety point of 
view are accorded highest priority and sanctioned. The safety of train operations 
is never compromised. As already mentione d above, bridges requiring urgent 
repairs are also rehabilitated under revenue to ensure safety of train operations 
by issue of urgency certificate. 
  
During Budget 2015 -16 to 2017 -18, total of 291 Bridge works (involving 1525 
bridges) at a cost of ` 1577 crores under Plan Head -32 (PH -32) have been 
sanctioned at Railway Board level. During Budget 2018 -19, total of 193 bridge 
works (involving 1367 bridges) at a cost of ` 1751 crores have been sanctioned 
at Railway Board level. These works were proposed by th e zonal railways online 
on IRPSM about one to four months before the Annual Budget and sanctioned by 
Railway Board in the concerned Budget Year itself. Thus, the decision of 
sanctioning the bridge works proposed by the Zonal Railways is taken in the 
same year itself.  
 
For work sanctioning and monitoring, Indian Railway has developed a Web -
based Application called “Indian Railways Projects Sanctions & Management 
(IRPSM)” which allows Online Creation and forwarding of ‘New Works’ proposals 
for processing and sanctioning at various levels This reduces the processing time 
for each work and its further sanctioning subsequently" 
 
7. A perusal of the action taken note furnished  by the Ministry of Railways 
reveals that during Budget 20 15-16 to 2017 -18, total of 291 br idge works 
(involving 1525 bridges ) at a cost of ` 1577 crore under Plan Head - 32 were 
sanctioned at Railway Board level. Further, during Budget 2018 -19 total of 193 
Bridge works (involving 1367 bridges) at a cost of ` 1751 crore have been 

11 
 
sanctioned. However, the ATN is silent about the p rogress of the projects 
sanctioned during Budget 2015 -16 to 2017-18, present position and target date of 
their completion etc. The Committee have now been apprised that works 
sanctioned at Zonal Railway level are comp leted within 2 -3 years and works 
sanctioned at Board level are completed within 4 -5 years. The Committee are 
optimistic that vigorous monitoring would ensure timely  completion of the 
projects. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Monitoring Committees 
should be set up at Railway Board/every Zonal Railways level and there should be 
strict monitoring of all the projects. The re should be strict monitoring of all the 
progress to ensure their timely completion. They should also fix responsibility for 
unreasonable and unexplained delays in execution/completion of the projects. 
The Committee would also like to be apprised of the present position of 
commencement of the aforesaid projects and targetted date for their completion  
within three months. 
Under-utilisation of funds 
(Recommendation Para No. 3) 
 
8. In their 87 th Report (16th Lok Sabha), the Committee found that on the one hand, 
the Budget Grant provided was short of demand, whereas, on the other hand, the total 
average Budget Grant surrender ed per year through the process of demand for less 
final Grant across the zones was ` 58.60 crore, i.e. 17.28 percent . The Committee had, 
therefore, desired that proper planning, execution and effective mechanism of 
monitoring should be set up at both zonal and Railway Board levels to ensure optimum 
utilization of funds. 
9. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) stated as 
under:— 
"Funds are allocated for Bridge rehabilitation works under Plan Head 32 to each 
Zonal Railway keeping in view the overall availability of funds and total requirement 
of zonal railways. It is not true that there has been surrender in the funds allocated 
during 2010-11 to 2013-14, to the extent indicated in Audit’s contention. During this 
period, ` 1385.16 crores have been spent against allotment of ` 1388.31 crores. 
These are based on the final expenditure figures published by Ministry of Railways 
in the Budget documents. 
 

12 
 
It is further mentioned that the funds utilisation is monitored vigorously through 
various means such as periodical progress reports, regular meetings etc. to ensure 
that funds are not surrendered. 
 
In order to ensure adequate funds for safety related  works, in the Budget 2017-18, 
Rashtriya Rail Sanraksha Kosh (RRSK) has been created with a corpus of ` one 
lakh crore over a period of five years for carrying out safety related works which 
include Bridge works. ` 700 crores from RRSK are allotted for Bri dge 
Rehabilitation Works during 2018-19." 
 
10. In their vetting comments to the aforesaid Action Taken Note the Audit has 
observed as under: 
"In SR, during 2016-17 there was surrender of ` 14.00 crore under Bridge Works. 
In ER, actual expenditure of ` 380.88 crore was incurred against total Final Grant 
of ` 397.53 crore during the period from 2013 -14 to 2017 -18 for rehabilitation of 
bridges. In ECoR, during 2016 -17 there was surrender of ` 3.4 crore out of the 
final grant of ` 13 crore. In WR during 2017-18, ` 4.65 crore was surrendered. As 
such, surrender of funds allotted for bridge rehabilitation works still persist." 
 
11. In response to the abovesaid Audit observation, the Ministry of Railways  
(Railway Board) stated as follows: 
"Zonal Railway -wise utilization of fund may vary slightly depending upon the 
progress of various works. However, total utilization of fund for all Railways is 
within the projected grants. Efforts are always made to utilize full funds and 
Railways are suitably advised, from time to time, in this regard." 
 
12. The Committee are deeply concerned to note the instances of surrender of 
funds in SR, ER, ECoR and WR . However, the Ministry of Railways apprised that 
efforts are always made to utilize full funds and Zonal Railways are suitably 
advised, from time to time, in this regard. The Committee feel that efforts made by 
the ministry in this direction are inadequate. Since surrender of funds, speaks 
volumes for the faulty accounting information system and sheer neglige nce on 
the part of senior monitoring authorities in the aforesaid Zonal Railways, the 
Committee desire that the responsibility fixed should be fixed to avoid their 
recurrence of such lapses. 
 
Under-utilisation of modern equipments for bridge inspection 
(Recommendation Para No. 4) 
 
13. In their 87 th Report (16 th Lok Sabha) the Committee had observed that even 
though for conducting objective inspection of bridges , 290 equipments of five types had  
been procured at different zones on the recommendations of the High Level Safety 

13 
 
Review Committee headed by Shri A nil Kakodkar, their utilization was barely only 
7.07%. The Committee further observed that these equipments were procured at an 
exorbitant approximate cost of ` 12.99 crore. While observing the unjustified decisions 
of the officers of Indian Railways in procuring costly equipments without any proper 
planning, cost analysis, assessing the actual need and its effective utilisation, the 
Committee had desired that the accountability should be fixed at Zonal as well as 
Railway Board levels against the officers who have procured equipments at exorbitant 
rates which are lying underutilized. 
 
14. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Railways(Railway Board) submitted as 
under: 
 
"The NDT equipments are for the specific purpose and being used by the zonal 
railways regularly on need basis to support the visual observations to assess 
various parameters related to condition of bridge such as strength of material, 
thickness of paint, quality of welds etc. These equipments are being used as per 
requirement only. However, Railways have been advised time to time in various 
forums to use them more frequently. These equipments are procured by zonal 
railways and Research Design and Standards Organization (RDSO) regularly on 
need basis. 
 
Officials/supervisors from zonal railways are imparted training regularly at RDSO 
etc for getting acquainted with these instruments. Moreover, the following safety 
measures and mo dernization of Inspection and maintenance of Railway Bridges 
are also being taken: 
 
• Continuous water level monitoring system to monitor the water level in 
vulnerable bridges has been introduced. So far the system has been installed 
and commissioned at 117 bridges. 
• For modernizing the Bridge inspection and minimizing the human errors, 
inspection of Railway Bridges by Drones has been considered. This will help in 
capturing the Photographs / Videos of different parts of bridges including 
inaccessible parts . Zonal railways have been advised to undertake Drone 
Inspection of identified mega bridges in the first phase."  
 
15. The Committee find that the Action Taken Note is conspicuously silent on 
the issue of fixing accountability against the officers of the India n Railways for 
procuring eq uipments at exorbitant rates as  the same are lying underutilised. 
Since the under -utilization of the equipments is defeating the purpose of timely 

14 
 
strengthening of bridges, the Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation 
and would like to be apprised of the action taken against the officers responsible 
in the matter. 
 
Inordinate delay in execution of sanctioned bridge works 
(Recommendation Para No. 5) 
 
16. While observing that out of 3979 bridgeworks, sanctioned by the Railway Bo ard, 
works of 710 bridges remained to be completed as on March 2014 even after expiry of 
prescribed period of one/four years, the Committee had desired the Ministry of Railways 
to set timelines for the execution and completion of bridgeworks with effective  planning 
and proper monitoring so as to ensure that safety of human lives is not compromised 
and railway assets protected. 
17. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry  of Railways (Railway Board)  stated as 
follows: 
"Bridge rehabilitation/rebuilding works are always accorded very high priority. All 
efforts are taken to ensure that bridges are rehabilitated on time. Depending 
upon the quantum of work involved, bridge rehabilitation/rebuilding may take 
from few months up  to few year. Sometimes some delay occur due to 
complexities of the work involved, land acquisition, contractual issues etc, which 
are beyond the control of Railway administration. However, safety is never 
compromised and it is ensured all the time that bridge is safe for running of trains 
at permitted speed.   
 
In order to further ensure that bridge works get completed on time, zonal railways 
have been advised to ensure availability of all necessary requirements such as 
land, plan etc. before commencement of work, so as to complete the execution of 
work within 4 - 5 years." 
 
18. The Committee had observed that 710 bridges remained to be completed 
as on March, 2014, even after expiry of prescribed timelines and had 
recommended the Ministry to set timelines with effective planning and 
monitoring. The Committee are unhappy to note that the Ministry has failed to set 
timelines for the execution and completion of bridgeworks. The Committee are 
not satisfied with the explanation offered in this regard that depending upon the 
quantum of work involved, bridge rehabilitation/rebuilding may take from few 
months upto few years and sometime delay occur due to complexities of the 

15 
 
woks involved, which are be yond the control of Railway administration. The 
Committee, while taking a serious note of the apathy displayed by the Ministry in 
this matter, reiterate their earlier recommendation for rehabilitation/rebuilding of 
bridges and setting timelines for completion of bridge works in future. 
 
Implementation of Bridge Management System (BMS) 
(Recommendation Para No. 9) 
19. Upon noticing that implementation of Bridge M anagement System (BMS) which 
would help the Ministry in keeping track of all kinds of maintenance and inspection 
issues related to Railway Bridges , was not been completed till February, 2018 though it 
was scheduled to be completed by 2006 -07, the Committee had emphasized the 
imperative need for making the BMS system fully operational within six months of the 
presentation of PAC Report to Parliament.  
20. In their Action Taken Note on the aforesaid recommendation, the Ministry of 
Railways (Railway Board) submitted as follows: 
"The work for development of separate web enabled Bridge Management 
System (BMS) has been sanctioned for ` 9.85 crore. The work is being executed 
by CRIS. An MoU has been signed by Northern Railway with CRIS in this regard 
in 2017. A Committee has also been formed to pr ovide guidance to CRIS for 
development of this Application. The work is expected to be completed by March 
2019." 
 
21. The Committee note with regret that the Bridge Management system is yet 
to be commissioned even after a lapse of 11 years. While expressing de ep 
dissatisfaction over the failure of the Ministry to expedite the work, the 
Committee would like the Ministry to address the matter seriously and take all 
necessary effective measures to ensure that the system is com missioned without 
further delay. The Committee would like to be apprised of the present status of 
the work within a period of one month. 
 
 
 NEW DELHI;                                 MALLIKARJUN KHARGE 
  December, 2018                                                                  Chairperson, 
  Agrahayana,1940 (Saka)                                      Public Accounts Committee 
  

16 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
CONTAINED IN THEIR EIGHTY-SEVENTH REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations  12 
 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee  Total : 12  
which have been accepted by the Government:  Percentage: 100% 
 Para Nos. 1 to 12  
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the    Total : 0  
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of   Percentage: 0 
 the reply of the Government: 
 
 Para Nos.  -Nil 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of   Total : 0 
which replies of the Government have not been   Percentage: 0 
 accepted by the Committee and which require  
 reiteration: 
  
 Para Nos.  -Nil 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of   Total : 0 
which the Government have furnished interim replies:  Percentage: 0 
  
 Para Nos.    -Nil 
 
 