1 
 
  108  
 
MANAGEMENT OF VACANT LAND IN 
INDIAN RAILWAYS  
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their 93rd Report (16th Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTH   REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
              
  
                      
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 

2 
 
 
PAC NO.  2142 
 
 
O N E  H U N D R E D  A N D  E I G H T H  
R E P O R T 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(201 8-19) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their 93rd Report (16th Lok Sabha)] 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS  
(RAILWAY BOARD ) 
 
 
                                                                          
Presented to Lok Sabha on:  ………….…… 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   ………………. 
 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
August, 2018 /Shravana, 1940 (Saka) 
 
MANAGEMENT OF VACANT LAND IN 
INDIAN RAILWAYS  
 
 

3 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS  
COMMITTEE (2018-19)      
(iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………... ……………………..   (iv) 
CHAPTER  I                
 
Report ………………………………………………. 
 
1 
C H A P T E R I I *  Observations/Recommendations which have 
been accepted by the Government 
…………………….. 
 
CHAPTER III* Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
replies received from the Government ..………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV* Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration ……………………………………………. 
 
 
CHAPTER V* Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which the Government have furnished interim 
replies 
………………………………………………… 
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES*  
 
I Minutes of the 10 th sitting of the Public Accounts 
Committee (2018-19) held on 30th July, 2018. 
 
II Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government 
on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Public Accounts Committee contained in their  
Ninety-third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
________________________________________________________________  
*Not appended to the cyclostyled copy of the Report 

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
 M E M B E R S  
L O K  S A B H A  
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria  
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra 
5.    Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar   
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
7. Smt. Riti Pathak 
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank” 
9. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
10. Shri Abhishek Singh 
11. Shri Gopal Shetty 
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya  
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
15. Dr. Ponnusamy  Venugopal 
 R A J Y A  S A B H A  
 
16. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda 
17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
18. Shri Shwait Malik 
19. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
21. Vacant 
 
22. Vacant 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Additional Director 
3. Smt. Anju Kukreja  - Under Secretary 

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2018 -19), having been 
authorised by the Committee, do present this One Hun dred and Eighth Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Ninety-third Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on “Management of Vacant Land in Indian Railways”  relating 
to Ministry of Railways (Railway Board). 
 
2. The Ninety-third Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on  
28th March, 2018.  Replies of the Government to all the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received.  The Public 
Accounts Committee considered and adopted the One Hundred and Eighth Report at 
their sitting held on 30th July, 2018.  Minutes of the sitting are given at Appendix I. 
 
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and  
Recommendations of the Co mmittee have been printed in thick type in the body of  the 
Report. 
 
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to  
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
5. An analysis of the a ction taken by the Government on the Observations/  
Recommendations contained in the Ninety-third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is  given 
at Appendix. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NEW DELHI;                                                        MALLIKARJUN KHARGE 
  1 August, 2018                                                                               Chairperson, 
10 Shravana, 1940 (Saka)                                               Public Accounts Committee

6 
 
 REPORT 
PART – I 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the Acti on Taken by the Government on 
the Observations and Recommendations contained in their 93rd Report (16th Lok Sabha) 
on the subject "Management of Vacant land in Indian Railways" based on Chapter – 
IV of C&AG Report No. 24 of 2015 (Volume - II) relating to the Ministry of Railways. 
 
2. The Ninety-third  Report (16th Lok Sabha) was presented to the Lok Sabha/laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 28 th March, 2018.  It contained eight Observations/Recommendations.  
Action taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendat ions have been 
received from the Ministry of Railways and these have been categorized as under:   
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee which have been 
accepted by the Government: 
 
  Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 & 8 
           
          Total: 08           
          Chapter – II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
 
  Para Nos. NIL  
           
          Total:    NIL      
          Chapter – III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
 
  Para Nos. NIL 
          
          Total:     NIL 
          Chapter – IV 
 

7 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of whi ch Government have 
furnished interim replies: 
 
  Para Nos. NIL 
           
          Total:     NIL 
          Chapter – V 
 
 
3. In their 93 rd Report (16 th Lok Sabha), the Committee had found that Indian 
Railway owned of 4.59 lakh hectares of land (March 2014). Out of this, 47340 hectare of 
land had not been put  to any use (vacant land - 46409 hectare and encroached land - 
931 hectare). I ndian Railways requires an efficient management to ensure safe and 
effective custody of land available with them and also the land encroached by ensuring 
clear title, prevention of encroachments and early removal of encroachment of vacant 
land. This requires maintenance of accurate Land  Records. A review of the records of 
Indian Railways for the years 2011-14 revealed that out of  16 Zonal Railways, separate 
Land Management Cells (LMCs) to keep and maintain land records had not been set up 
in headquarter offices of three Zonal Railways and in 37 Divisions of 13 Zonal Railways. 
Only three Zonal Railways had LMCs in all of their Divi sions. Most of the staff posted in 
LMCs in Divisions was neither trained to deal with land issues nor exclusively deployed 
on the job resulting in deficient maintenance of land data/ records besides improper 
monitoring of vacant land.  Four per cent  of tota l land plans were missing and out of 
available land plans (16 per cent)  had not been authenticated by State Authorities and 
20 per cent land plans had not been digitised.  Out of 16 Zonal Railways, the records 
connected with land mutation were available in eight Zonal Railways only and there too, 
only 48 per cent land plans were mutated. In respect of basic records such as Land 
Record Register (LRR), Land Boundary Verification Register (LBVR) and Encroachment 
Inspection Register (EIR) to be maintained at Zon al headquarters/ Railway Divisions/ 
field units of Railway Divisions, it was observed that LRR were not being maintained in 
37 out of 68 Divisions.  The Committee also found that t he maintenance of LBVR and 
EIR was also not proper  in the Railways . Construction of boundary walls along vacant 
land to avoid encroachments was not well assessed and planned.  Details of 
encroachments were not being maintained, the process for their removal was very slow 

8 
 
and efforts made for removing encroachments, under Public Pr emises (Eviction of 
Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 were inadequate and ineffective as encroachment 
of Railway land was found to be a continuous process. The monitoring by IR and joint 
inspections by IR and State Authorities for managing encroachment was not found to be 
adequate.  
 
3. The Committee in their 93rd Report (16th Lok Sabha) on the subject had made the 
following important observations/recommendations: 
(i) The Committee had desired the Ministry of Railways to ensure setting up 
of Land Management Cells (LMCs) on priority basis and in a time bound manner 
in the remaining zonal Headquarters and Divisions.  They had exhorted the 
Ministry to take adequate and sincere measures to strengthen its land 
Management system by deputing qualified and well trained staff in these cells.  
 
(ii) The Committee had desired the Indian Railways  
a. To ensure maintenance of all essential land records at all Zonal 
Railways and  Railway Divisions on priority basis and in a time 
bound manner.  
b. To ensure the safe custody of  Railway land and prevention of the 
encroachments, MoR should evolve a strategy that such land records 
are regularly updated and verified as prescribed in the Manual.  
c. To ensure that the remaining land plans are uploaded on website, the 
outstanding land plans to be got authenticated in a timeline and court 
cases are vigorously pursued for its early verdicts. 
(iii) The Committee had inter-alia, recommended the Ministry of Railways to 
take immediate steps to 
a. streamline the system of authentication and m utation of land plan 
by regular  follow up with the concerned State Government 
authorities; 

9 
 
b. Computerize/digitize land records on priority basis and in a time 
bound manner so as  to ensure a robust and effective land 
management information system. 
(iv) The Ministry of Railways should ensure demarcation of such land with 
adequate marking on all such vacant land on priority basis and in a time bound 
manner.  The Committee had also desired that Railway should seek the 
assistance of Department of space for sa tellite mapping and monitoring of its 
vacant land. 
(v) Ministry of Railway s should hire/engage a PSU/private consultancy firm 
which can undertake a scientific study on different types of land available with 
Railways and submit proposal for use of vacant la nd, removal of encroachments 
and maintenance of various records of such land in a scientific manner as also its 
valuation and commercial exploitation. 
(vi) The Committee had  desired the Indian Railway to take up the issue of 
categorising encroached Railway  land under various sub -categories and deal 
with each category of encroachment separately for its removal by making specific 
plan for such encroachment. 
(vii) The Committee desire d Ministry of Railways to vigorously pursue the 
matter regarding removal of e xisting old/ fresh encroachments through strict 
compliance to the provisions of P ublic Premises Eviction of unauthorized 
occupants Act 1971(PPE Act) /Railways Act and ensure the reclamation of 
encroached Railway land. The Committee had                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
also desire d MoR to pursue with the Ministry of Urban Development for 
amendment in the PPE Act, 1971 at the earliest.   
 
4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Railways to each of the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Ninety-third Report 
have been reproduced in the relevant chapters of this Report.  In the succeeding 
paragraphs, the Committee have dealt with the action taken by the Government on 
some of their Observations/Recommendations. 

10 
 
 
  
A. Maintenance of land records 
 (Recommendation Para No. 3)   
5. Having noticed that 4 per cent land plans were missing in 14 Zones, area was 
not indicated in land plans of 12 Zones, some land plans had not been got 
authenticated from State revenue authorities, records of mutation were not made 
available for review by W estern Railway (W R), W est Central Railway (WCR) & North 
Central Railway ( NCR) and in six Zones no mutation of land had been done, the 
Committee had desired the Indian Railways: 
(i) To ensure maintenance of all essential land records at all Zonal Railways 
and Railway Divisions on priority basis and in a time bound manner.  
(ii) To ensure the safe custody of Railway land and prevention of the 
encroachments, MoR should evolve a str ategy that such land records are 
regularly updated and verified as prescribed in the Manual.  
(iii) To ensure that the remaining land plans are uploaded on website, the 
outstanding land plans to be got authenticated in a timeline and court 
cases are vigorously pursued for its early verdicts. 
 
6. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under: 
“A web based application called Land Management Module integrated with Track 
Management System (TMS) of Indian Railways has been developed f or 
maintaining details i.e. details of acquisition/area/usages and land plans of Land 
Bank of Indian Railways, now  most  of the  data  has been  uploaded. However, 
it is a continuous process as Railways acquire and relinquish the land on regular 
basis. Du ring the year up to Feb , 2018, 42037 land plans are uploaded and 
38014 land plans are authenticated. Authentication of Land Plan is a continuous 
process. Railway is making all efforts to reconstruct/authenticate the missing land 
plans as most of such missi ng land plans are very old i.e. before Independence.  
However, during 2017-18, 111 such plans have been got authenticated. All Zonal 
Railways are advised time to time to expedite the authentication of remaining 
land plans, mutation of land record in favo ur of Railways and upload data on 
TMS on urgent basis. Zonal Railways are also advised from time to time to 
ensure proper maintenance of the Land Record Register, Land Boundary 
Verification Register and Encroachment Inspection Register by the SSEs and 
verification of the same by the higher officers as per the provision given in 
IRWM.” 
   
7. The Committee note that a web based application called Land Management 
Module integrated with Track Management System (TMS) has been developed by 

11 
 
the Ministry of Railways for maintaining details regarding acquisition/area/usages 
and land plan s of land Bank of Indian Railways.  The Committee have also been 
informed that upto February 2018, 42037 land plan s were uploaded and 38014 
land plans were authenticated.  While appreci ating the efforts of the Ministry, the 
Committee would like to know about the details of land plans due for uploading.  
The Ministry of Railways further informed that they are making all efforts to 
reconstruct/authenticate the missing land plans as most of  such plans pertaining 
to the independence period.  The Committee desire the Ministry of Railways to 
take all necessary and effective measures to ensure 
reconstruction/authentication of missing land plans in a time bound manner.  The 
Ministry has further noticed that all zonal Railways have been advised to expedite 
the authentication of remaining land plans, mutation of land record s in favour of 
Railways and upload data on TMS on urgent basis.  Zonal Railways were also 
advised to ensure proper maintenance o f Land Record Register, Land Boundary 
verification Register and Encroachment Inspect Register by the SSEs and 
verification of the same by the higher officers.  The Committee note the measures 
initiated in this regard nevertheless, they are of the view that  mere advising the 
Zonal Railways will not suffice unless a proper monitoring mechanism is 
established to ensure effective implementation of the these measures.  The 
Committee therefore, reiterate the Ministry to take all necessary and effective 
steps to e nsure maintenance of all land records at all Zonal Railways on priority 
basis.  
   
(B) Prevention of encroachment  
(Recommendation Para No. 5) 
 
8. Having observed that there is requirement of about 3455km boundary wall 
costing about ` 2796 crore to protect  railway land at vulnerable locations from 
encroachments, the Committee were of the considered view that in order to prevent 
encroachments of the remaining vacant land there should be come kind of marking 
around the land.  The Committee had, therefore, des ired the Ministry of Railway to 
ensure demarcation of such land with adequate marking on all such vacant land on 

12 
 
priority basis and in a time bound manner.  The Committee had also desired that 
Railway should seek the assistance of Department of Space for s atellite mapping and 
monitoring of its vacant land.  
 
9. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under: 
“Railway is making sustained efforts to evict railway land from encroachers as 
well as to avoid fresh encroachment in Railwa y land. Railway is carrying out 
regular surveys of encroachment on railways land. With this sustainable effort, 
railway is able to bring down the area under encroachment on its land from 930 
Hectares in 2014-15 to 844 Ha as on Feb, 2018.  Railway has also examined the 
option of construction of boundary wall in lieu of advertisement on wall, but due 
to poor response from bidders, the model has not worked out. However, Railway 
continues the effort to protect Railway land / property by providing boundary 
walls. The progress achieved of Boundary wall construction during 2013 -14, 
2014-15, 2015-16 & 2016-17 is 128, 102, 193 & 129 kms. respectively. To target 
the huge requirement of construction of boundary wall, Rashtriya Rail Sanraksha 
Kosh (RRSK) has been set up  which has the provision to provide boundary wall 
to isolate track from surroundings. The part of 3455 kms will be constructed 
through this fund. Railways has allotted ` 200 Cr through this fund (RRSK) in this 
financial year i.e. 2018-19.  A work costing ` 36.24 crore has been sanctioned for 
mapping of all fixed Railway assets on Geographical information System of 
Bhuvan Satellite Imagery of Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) 
integrated with TMS of Indian Railways. This system is designed to provide the 
status of Railway land whether encroached or not and thus would be helpful in 
tackling the menace of encroachment.” 
 
   
10. The Committee note that with sustain ed effort, Indian Railways was able to 
bring down the area under encroachment on its land fr om 930 Hectares in 2014 -
15 to 844 Hectares as on February, 2018.  Further as regards the protecting of 
Railway land by providing boundary walls, the Committee have been informed 
that the progress achieved in construction of boundary wall s during 2013 -14, 
2014-15, 2015 -16 and 2016 -17 was 128, 102,193 & 129 kms respectively.  The 
Committee are concerned to note that the reply of the Ministry is silent about the 
targets fixed to free the land from encroachers and construction of boundary wall 
per year and whet her those targets were achieved or not.  The Committee , 
therefore, desire to be apprised of such details within one month of presentation 

13 
 
of this Report to Parliament.  In addition , the Committee would also like to know 
about the total length of the Railw ays land which requires to provide boundary 
wall to isolate track from surroundings.  The Committee also desire the Ministry 
of Railways to improve upon their coordination with all the Zonal Railways by 
periodical joint meetings to speed up the work of eviction of land from 
encroachers and construction of boundary wall.   Further, the Committee have 
been informed that to achieve the target of construction of boundary wall,   
Rashtriya Rail Sanraksha Kosh (RRSK) has been set up and the part of 3455 kms 
will be constructed through this fund.  However, the Action taken note does not 
provide the details as to when RRSK was set up and target date by when 3455 km 
will be constructed through this fund.  The Committee would also like to be 
apprised of the details of  work done till 15 July, 2018 and expenditure incurred 
thereon out of ` 200 crore allotted from this fund.   
 
(C) Categorization of encroached Railway Land  
 (Recommendation Para No. 7) 
  
11. In their  93rd Report (16th Lok Sabha) the Committee noted that as on 31.03.2017 
the area of Railway under encroachment was 861.70 ha (0.18 per cent of total land).  
Out of this, 152.4 ha. land was under encroachment in six big cities (Delhi, Hyderabad & 
Secunderabad, Chennai, Bangalore, Mumbai and Kolkata) consisting of 81414 No. of 
encroachments where 363 court cases are undergoing for settlement.  The I ndian 
Railway had not bifurcated this encroached land into various categories such as land 
grabbing, land under court cases, land under unauthorised occupation of slum s 
dwellers, land taken over by armed forces for their use, etc.  The Committee were of the 
view that if encroached land of the IR is categorised under various groups/headings it 
would be helpful in removal of encroachment in a better way.  The Committee had 
therefore, desire d IR to take up the issue of categorising encroached Railway land 
under various sub -categories and deal with each category of encroachment separately 
for its removal by making specific plan for such encroachment. 
 

14 
 
12. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Note have stated as under: 
“Different types of encroachment on Railway land has already been categorized. 
As per present system, Encroachment on Railway land are of two Types, Soft 
encroachments and Hard encroachment. Soft and H ard Encroachments are 
categorized in four Categor ies A, B, C & D as per para 814 of Indian Railways 
Works Manual (IRWM).  Soft Encroachments, if the encroachments are in shape 
of jhuggies, jhopries and squatters, the same got removed in consultation and 
with the assistance of Railway Protection Force and civil authorities. Category B, 
C&D are termed as soft encroachments. Hard encroachments are where 
permanent structures are built, and are generally old encroachments. Category A 
encroachment is of the hard type encroachments. For such hard encroachments 
where party is not amenable to persuasion, action is taken under Public 
Premises (Eviction of unauthorized occupants) Act, 1971  (PPE Act, 1971), as 
amended from time to time.  However, the recommendation of Committee for 
further categorization of encroachment has been noted, the same will be 
examined and further action will be taken to categorize the encroachment to the 
extent possible.” 
 
13. The Committee are unhappy to note that the Ministry of Railways have  not 
taken any action on the ir recommendation regarding further categorization of 
encroachment.  The Ministry has simply stated that the recommendation has 
been noted, the same will be examined and further action will be taken to 
categorize the encroachmen t to the extent possible.  The Committee view with 
disapproval the failure on the part of the Ministry of Railways in dealing the 
matter with firmness and promptitude it deserved.  The Committee while 
reiterating their earlier recommendation, in unequivoca l terms recommend the 
Ministry to take concrete action at the earliest and apprise the Committee of the 
action taken in this regard  within two months of presentation of this report.   
Such propitious action would not only help Railways in deft management o f their 
vacant land but would also obviate the encroachments in future.   
 
_______ 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                        MALLIKARJUN KHARGE 
1  August, 2018                                                                              Chairperson, 
10  Shravana, 1940 (Saka)                              Public Accounts Committee 