57

JAWARHARLAL NEHRU NATIONAL URBAN
RENEWAL MISSION (JNNURM)

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of

the Committee contained in their Eighteenth Report (16" Lok Sabha))

MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT AND
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND POVERTY ALLEVIATION

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

FIFTY SEVENTH REPORT

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO.2090

FIFTY SEVENTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

JAWAHARLAL NEHRU NATIONAL URBAN
RENEWAL MISSION (JNNURM)

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Eighteenth Report (161 Lok Sabha)}

MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT AND
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND POVERTY
ALLEVIATION —_

Presented to Lok Sabhaon: १ ave
Laid in Rajya Sabha on: ir

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

November, 2016 /Kartika, 1938 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2016-17)

INTRODUCTION
GHAPTER |

CHAPTER Ii

CHAPTER III

CHAPTER IV

CHAPTER V

Report... eee

Observations/Recammendations which have
been accepted by the Government

Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the replies received from the Government
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration

Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which the Government have furnished interim
Teplies :

APPENDICES
*Minutes of the. sitting of the Public Accounts
Commitiee (2016-17) held on
10.11.2016

Analysis of the Action Taken by fhe
Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their
Eighteenth.Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) .....

* [16 appended in the Report

PAGE
{iii)

(५)
1-18


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2016-17)
Prof. K.V, Thomas - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

87 7४ 9 छा PRON

©

11.
12.
13.
14.
45.

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
at.
22.

BOs

1 * Blected w.e.f. 09.08.2016 vice Shri Vijay Goel, MP appolnted as Minister of State wae f 05.07.2016. -

Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
Shri Nishikant Dubey

‘Prof. Richard Hay

Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Smt. Riti Pathak

Shri. Neiphiu Rio

Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal

Shri Abhishek Singh

Or. Kirit Somaiya

Shri Anurag Singh Thakur

Shri Shivkumar Udasi

Dr, P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA

_ Shri Naresh Agrawal

Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi

* Shri Bhupender Yadav
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Shri Shantaram Naik

Shri Sukhendu.Sekhar Roy

Shri Ajay Sancheti

SECRETARIAT

Shri A.K. Singh - Additional Secretary
Shri Tirthankar Das - Additional Director

Deputy Secretary
Executive Assistant

Shri Paolienlal Haokip
Shri Ashikho Alemo


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairpersen, Public Accounts Committee (2016-17), having been
authorized by the Committee, do present this Fifty Seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Eighteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Jawarharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM)’ based on C&AG's
Report No.15 of 2012-13 relating to Ministry of Urban Development and Ministry of

Housing and Poverty Alleviation.

2. The Eighteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on
29 April, 2015. Replies of the Government to all the Observations/Recommendations

“‘contained in the Report were received. The Public Accounts Gommittee considered and
adopted the Fifty Seventh Report at their sitting held on 10 November, 2016. Minutes of
the sitting are given at Appendix J.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and -
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the

Report,

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
_ them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

5, An analysis of the action’ taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given at

Appendix-t,
NEW-DELHI; © PROF. KV. THOMAS,
AS November, 2016 2016 . Chairperson,

as Kartika,; 1938{Saka) Public Accounts Committee.


1
REPORT
PART -!
INTRODUCTORY

This Report of the Public Accounts Commitiee deals with the Action Taken by
the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Eighteenth Report (160 Lok Sabha) on "Jawaharlal Nehru
National Urban Renewal Mission” based on C&AG Report No. 15 of 2012-13,
Union Government (Performance Audit), relating to Ministries of Urban Development

and Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation.

2. The Eighteenth Report (16" Lok Sabha), which was presented to Lok Sabha
and laid in Rajya Sabha on 29" April, 2015 contained 31 Observations and
Recommendations, Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations and
Recommendations have been received from the Ministries of Urban Development
and Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation and are broadly categorized as under:

(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:

Para Nos. 1-5, 7-17, 19-24, 27-31 हे Total: 27
. Chapter - Il
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:

Para Nos. Nil : . Total: Nil
ह Chapter - Ill
Gi) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:

Para Nos. 6, 18, 25 and 26 Total: 04
. : Chapter - lV
(५) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:

Para Nos. Nil Total: Nil.
: Chapter — V


2

3. In their Eighteenth Report, the Committee examined the "Jawaharlal Nehru

National Urban Renewal Mission" of the Ministries of Urban Development and

Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation and found the following shortcomings:

i)
il)
iii)

iv)

vi)
vii)

viii)
ix)

x):
xi)

xii}
xiii)
xiv)

xv)
xvi)
xvii)
xviii)

Shortfall in release of Additional Central Assistance.

Delay in completion of projects and consequential adverse impacts
Delay in establishment of Project Management Units and Project
implementation Units ;

Lapse in the conduct of elections in Urban Local Bodies (ULBs)

Failure to transfer the functions in the 42 Schedule and City Planning
functions to ULBs

Failure in implementing efficient reforms on property tax and
certification of ULBs , ;
Failure to achieve 100% cost recover in respect of water supply and
solid waste management projects

Failure to implement enactment of ‘Public Disclosure Law’
Non-commitment towards e-governance

Absence of linkage between City Development Plans and Detailed
Project Reports

Lapses in the identification of beneficiaries and implementation of
Housing Projects

Non-transparent process of tendering

Deficiencies in operating buses under the Mission

Inadequate Urban Renewal Projects and delay in release of ACA after
approval of project.

Financial mismanagement and diversion of JNNURM fund

Non-release of matching share by State Governments

Inadequate monitoring of the implementation of the Mission

Need for different system of implementation in the North Eastern and

Himalayan States.


4, The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministries of Urban. Development
and Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation in respect of all Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been reproduced in the relevant
Chapters of this Report. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations and Recommendations made in the Original
Report which either need reiteration or merit comments.

(Recommendation Para No.6)

TRANSPARENCY IN THE IMPLEMENTATION OF Treo IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MISSION

5. In their 18" Report, the Committee had noted that regular elections in ULBs
were not conducted though it was made a mandatory reform under JNNURM, in 6
States i.e. Arunachal Pradesh, Assam; Jammu and Kashmir, Jharkhand, Meghalaya
and Nagaland. In Sikkim, elections were held for the first time in 2010 Le. 5 years
after launching JNNURM. The Ministry were unable to furnish any plausible reason
for lapse and attributed even the holding of elections in these States an
achievement for JNNURM. The Committee felt that the MoUD failed to ensure
fulfilment of JNNURM mandate. As a new National Urban Renewal Mission was
likely to take off soon, the Committee recommended the Ministry of Urban
Development to sensitize the States about the need for fulfilling the JNNURM
mandate of holding regular elections in their local urban bodies and extend every
possible guidance and assistance in the matter. The Committee. also desired to be
-apprised of the present position with respect to conduct of elections in ULBs in these
States.


6... 118 Ministry of Urban Development in their Action Taken Note have stated as

under:-

“Regarding elections in ULB, State Government/ UTs were
requested fo apprise present position. In this regard eight States have
submitted the replies with respect to conduct of elections in ULBs. The
details are as below:

Tripura: Elections to Municipalities were held in the state on
_ 23.12.1995, 46.12.2000, 16.12.2005, 11.02.2010 in the JnNURM

Mission City Agartala as well as non-mission cities.

: Delhi: Regular elections are being held for Municipal
Corporations of Delhi (previously MCD) 1.9. North Deihi Municipal
Corporation, South Delhi Municipal Corporation and East Delhi
Municipal Corporation regularly by the State Election Commission. The
last election was held in the Year 2012 and next is due in the year
2017.

Sikkim: Elections for Urban local bodies in Sikkim was conducted
for the first time in May 2010 and second election would be held
sometime in the month of September — October 2015.

Meghalaya: Election of Ward Commissioners of Shillong
Municipal Board was last scheduled to be held on 25.11.2000. However
no nomination was filed Election of Ward Commissioner in Tura,
Baghmara, Wdilliamnagar & Resubeipara in Garo Hills District was
fixed in August, 2011 but election process was kept in abeyance due to
law and order problem. Election process in Jowai Municipal Board was
also kept in abeyance pending a final decision of the High Court.


J&K: State Cabinet vide its decision No. 22/05/2015, dated
06.04.2015 has approved the completion of elections to the Municipal
Corporations/ Municipal Councils/ Municipal Committees in the State of
Jammu .and Kashmir, as soon as passible, in consultation with the
office of the Chief Electoral Officer, J&K. The requisite details of ail the
Municipal Corporations/Councils/Committeés have been communicated
to the Chief Electoral Officer, J&K. Chef Electoral Officer, J&K has
already started preparatory work for conduct of elections.

Mizoram: There is only one ULB ie., the Aizawl Municipal
Council in Aizawl City having 19 Municipal Wards. Election was held in
November, 2010 and the next election is due in November, 2015 for
which necessary actions have been taken up by the State Government
and Mizoram State Election Commission (SEC).

Bihar: Elections of ULBs in mission city were held in 2012.

Daman & Diu: The elections are conducted regularly prior to

completion of present term i.e. five year.

Gujarat: Out of 162 Municipalities elections were held in 159
municipalities and three new municipalities were constituted in Feb'15."

7. In their updated Action taken nate the Ministry further stated as under:-

“Information has not been received from Arunachal Pradesh,
Assam, Jharkhand, and Nagaland.”


6

8. The Ministry updated their Action taken note as under:-

“Nagaland:- Joint Action committee on Women Reservation
(JACWR) has filed a ‘Special Leave Petition in the Hon'ble Supreme
Court seeking the Court intervention on the decision of the Government
of Nagaland regarding reservation of one-third seats to Women and the
judgment and verdict of the Hon'ble Supreme Court is awaited for

further action.”

9. The Committee note that though regular conduct of elections to Urban
Local Bodies (७0-89) was made a mandatory reform for efficient
implementation of JNNURM, the Ministry released funds even to States that
have failed to comply. In the absence of an elected focal body in these States,
the Committee express their concern on the level of transparency in the
implementation of the Mission in these States and the status of reforms which
are to be achieved by the ULBs like creation of a web-site, publication of e-
newsletter for dissemination of information regarding initiative undertaken
and work done by the ULBs. Since the term of the Mission will expire in
March, 2017, the Committee, recommend that the Ministry urge the State
Governments to constitute an expert body to assess the work done by the
implementing agencies so far and expeditiously conduct elections to ULBs
where ever necessary to ensure transparent and effective implementation of
-the successor Schemes. The Committee also desire the Ministry to consider
withholding release of funds for successor schemes to States where elections
to the urban local bodies have not been held. The Committee have also been
informed that information regarding the conduct of election to ULBs in 4
States viz Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Jharkhand and Nagaland has not been
received in the Ministry. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to issue

reminders to these States to furnish the information without any further delay.


?

(Recommendation Para No. 11]

ROBUST AND TRANSPARENT SYSTEM OF COS TRANSPARENT SYSTEM OF COLLECTION OF SERVICE
CHARGES

40. In their 18" Report, the Committee were perturbed to find that out of 39
Mission Cities selected for audit scrutiny, only 7 cities achieved the mechanisms for
collection of user charges for water supply’ and 5 cities achieved solid waste
management with the Objective to meet the cost of operation and maintenance
thereof despite these being mandatory: reforms under JNNURM. The Ministry
contended that while reforms implementation had been a challenge, most of the
smaller cities had inadequate capacity in terms of finance and human resources
which had led to slow achievement of reforms. The Committee felt that with proper |
ground work, careful planning and meticulous execution, these reforms would not be
| difficult to achieve and the Ministry erred in not foreseeing them and taking advance
action, Since levying of user charges was _ indispensable for ensuring an
uninterrupted water supply and operation of solid waste management projects, the
Committee desired the Ministry to prevail upon the States to make their ULBs
formulate reasonable user charge policy; introduce volumetricitelescopic tariff and
revise and realize tariff on time bound basis, if found necessary, towards achieving
100 per cent operation and maintenance cost recovery of the schemes/projects

concerned.

41, The Ministry of Urban Development in their Action Taken Note have stated as

under:-

“One of the reforms under AMRUT is to adopt a policy on user
charges for individual and institutional assessments in which a
deferential rate is charged for water use and adequate safeguards to
take care of the interest on the vulnerable. At least 90% billing and at

least 90% collection has been specified,”


8

42. The Committee note that out of 39 Mission Cities selected for audit
scrutiny, only 7 cities could put in place the mechanisms for coliection of user
charges for water supply with the objective to meet the cost of operation and
maintenance thereof despite this being mandatory reforms under JNNURM.
The Committee also observe that only 5 cities could put in place a system for
solid waste management. The Committee appreciate that under Atal Mission
for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT), the Ministry have
specified a differential rate of at least 90% billing and 90% collection as
service charges for services provided under the Mission. The Committee,
however, caution the Ministry to learn from the shortfalls of JNNURM and
desire the Ministry to impress upon the States to formulate a robust and
transparent method of collection of service charges to ensure timely and
invariable collection from all 500 cities under AMRUT.

(Recommendation Para No. 14)

STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF REFORMS IMPLEMENTATION OF REFORMS

13. In their 18” Report the Committee found that MoUD was unable to ensure
implementation of reforms such as Revision of building bye-laws, introduction of
computerized process of registration of land and property, Rent contro! laws and
rationalization of stamp duty to 5 percent, initiated as part of JNNURM. The
Committee further observed that 21 out of 63 ULBs/Parastatals which had
committed to implement the reform for revision of building bye-laws for streamlining
the approval process by 2010-11, failed to implement it’ Even after about 3 years,
only 58 out of 65 ULBs could achieve this reform. Similarly, 14 ULBs/Parastatals
failed introduce computerized process of registration of land and property despite
committing to implement the reform by 2010-11. The situation did not improve in the
succeeding years as only 52 out of 65 ULBs reported achievement of this reform by
2014, Further, as many as 16 States/UTs which had committed to implement the


4

reforms of Rent Control ‘Laws by 2010-11, failed to implement it. Even by March
2014, 9 States could not achieve the reform. Furthermare, 13 States/UTs could not
rationalise Stamp Duty to 5 percent even though JNNURM required this reform on
the ground that a reduction in the rate would help to develop a healthy real estate
market by providing boost to the economy, reduce the undervaluation and size of
black money and increase revenues both for the States as well as the ULBs. There
was apparent lack of communication between the Ministry and the States. While
many States were reluctant to reduce the stamp duty rates to the level of 5 percent
apprehending a fall in the States revenue, the Ministry included this reform for
implementation under JNNURM after realizing that high rates of stamp duty lead to
undervaluation of properties resulting in substantial loss of revenue to the States
and ULBs. These facts clearly revealed that no appreciable effort was taken by the
Ministry during the first few years of JNNURM to convince the States/UTs to
implement and achieve the reforms. The Committee denounced these failures in
the strongest terms. The Committee also noted that the Ministry had embarked
upon a Rapid Training Program on Governance and Reforms and more than 3800
persons had undergone training. The Committee desired to know if the aforesaid
reforms were achieved in all the Mission Cities/States/UTs concerned at the end of
the extended peried of Mission in March, 2014.

44. The Ministry of Urban Development in their Action Taken Note have stated as

under:-
“The Reform status as on March 2014:

57 cities have implemented ‘Revision of Building Bye laws -
streamlining the Approval Process.’ The remaining 8 cities are:
Porbander, Faridabad, Dhanbad, Gangtok, Agartala, Dehradun,

Haridwar and Nainital.


10

57 cities have implemented the Introduction of computerized
process of Registration of land and property. The remaining 8 cities are:
Itanagar, Raipur, Bhopal, Indore, Jabalpur, Ujjain, Aizwal and Kohima.

24 States have archived Reform in Rent Control. The remaining
states are: Assam, Bihar, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, Manipur, Meghalaya

and Orissa.
49 States have achieved the Stamp duly rationalization to 5%.

The remaining States are: Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar,
Haryana, Jammu and Kashmir, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Manipur,
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura and West Bengal"

15. In their updated Action taken note the Ministry further stated as under:

“states have undertaken reforms under JNNURM. JNNURM
ended on 31.3.2014. AMRUT has prescribed reforms to be achieved by
States / UTs within prescribed time limit.”

16. The Committee note that JNNURM which was launched in 2005, was to
end in 2012 but was extended till 31 March 2014, Thereafter when the
‘Government launched a new scheme viz “ANIRUT” in 2015, the scheme also
extended support to JNNURM projects sanctioned before 34.03.2012 subject
to 50% physical and financial progress and also to projects sanctioned during
2042-14 till 34.03.2017. Even after the lapse of the extended period of the
Mission {March 2014}, the Ministry could not ensure the implementation of
basic reforms like Revision of Building Bye jaws - streamlining the Approval
Process, introduction of computerized process of registration of land, rent
control, stamp duty rationalization to 5% in all States. The Committee while
deprecating this low performance would like to be apprised of the reasons
behind such flagrant failure and the measures taken by the Ministry to


11

address the pending reforms. Noting that AMRUT has prescribed reforms to
be achieved by States/UTs within stipulated time limit, the Committee, while
cautioning against the lapses in the implementation of JNNRUM, urge upon
the Ministry to take pro-active steps to ensure that the prescribed reforms
under the new scheme are achieved by the States/UTs within the given

timeframe.

{Recommendation Para No. 17)

EXPEDITIOUS IDENTIFICATION OF BENEFICIARIES OF DWELLING UNITS

17. In their 18" Report, the Committee observed that in many cases in Arunachal
Pradesh, Bihar, Himachal Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka, Puducherry, Uttar Pradesh,
Kerala, Nagaland, Haryana, Chhattisgarh, West Bengal and Tamil Nadu, there was
no proper identification of beneficiaries of housing projects leading to the risks of
ineligible beneficiaries getting the benefits of JNNURM. To illustrate, in the IHSDP
Project in Ramnagara, Karnataka, there were 444 beneficiaries in the DPR but the
project proposal was for construction of 1800 houses. Under BSUP/IHSDP projects
in Lucknow and Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh, 295 houses constructed under the
scheme were allotted to the beneficiaries other than those mentioned in the DPR. In
respect of BSUP, Kochi Phase-ll-Individual houses,. Kerala, the beneficiaries of
three colonies (Panayapally, Pattathiparampu and Chilavannur) were corporation
employees with regular source of income who were not eligible for assistance under:
the scheme. .The Committee believed that the importance of identifying the correct
beneficiariés was absolutely critical for attaining the objectives of the scheme. [n
order to prevent the risk of ineligible beneficiaries deriving benefits of this scheme
intended for the urban poor, the Committee recommended the Ministry to make
concerted efforts to encourage the use of bio-metric identification procedure by the
States as well as to give wide publicity to schemes and their beneficiaries through
local newspapers and social media and introduce community audits to ensure that
only the eligible beneficiaries are provided housing under JNNURM, The


12

Committee further recommended that the Ministry review the status of all housing
projects, step up the efforts to make allotment to eligible beneficiaries and consider
giving incentives to the successful States. The Committee also desired to be
apprised whether the houses given to the ineligible beneficiaries identified by the
C&AG could be transferred to the eligible beneficiaries by the States concerned.
They also desired fo know whether allotment policy on the matter had been
formulated/ formalized in all the States including NCT of Delhi. ह

48. The Minisiry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation in their Action Taken

Note have stated as under:-

"The policy of allotment in Delhi is still not formulated. Learning
from the experience of implementation of earlier schemes which had
difficulty in identification of beneficiaries, the Ministry in its new mission
‘Housing for All’ (Urban) launched on 25th June, 2015, has provided for
a prior beneficiary identification through demand assessment linked to
Aadhar, PM Jan Dhan Yojana etc. :

As regarding the issue of transfer of houses given to the ineligible
beneficiaries identified by the C&AG to eligible beneficiaries, Ministry
has sought a status report from the concerned 12 State/UT
Governments. State Government of Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur and
UT of Puducherry have furnished their responses. Arunachal Pradesh
Government has informed that the BSUP project "Karsingsa Housing
Project (752)" is under completion and DUs so constructed shall be
allotted to eligible beneficiaries only as per biometric survey conducted.
UT of Puducherry has clarified that so far only 72 DUs have been
completed under their IHSDP project “Construction of 432 DUs at
Karaikovilpathu, Karaikal", out of whic only 9 DUs have been allotted to
the beneficiaries as per the criteria specified under JnNURM scheme.
State Govt. of Manipur has submitted that BSUP project of imphal city


13

is a beneficiary led construction and that 1250 beneficiaries under the
project were identified by the Imphal Municipal Council and the
parameters for selection of beneficiaries were fixed by the State based
on established criteria in line with JNNURM guidelines/objectives.
State Govt. of Manipur had constituted a "Committee of Officers” to
verify the list ‘of beneficiaries prepared by Imphal Municipal Council for
the BSUP Project for Smphal city.

The 1250 beneficiaries of BSUP project was approved by the -
State Govt. on the recommendation of the Committee.

Ministry is in the process of collating the requisite information
from the Himachal Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh, Kerala,
Nagaland, Haryana, Chhattisgarh and Tamil Nadu. ,

49. In their updated Action taken note the Ministry further stated as under:-

“On follow-up with States/UTs, only the States of Karnataka &
Gujarat have furnished the requisite status report in respect of their
projects. State Govt. of Karnataka has reported that in its project at
Ramnagar Town under JNNURM-IHSDP scheme, all the 1800
beneficiaries identified by conducting socio economic survey. 1560
DUs out of total 1800 DUs, constructed in 16 slums of Ramanagar city
have been allotted to 1560 eligible beneficiaries (in-situ slum dwellers)
who were already staying in the transit sheds and having documents
such as BPL card, voter ID etc. The remaining 240 DUs have been
constructed in relocated area of Doddamannugudde at Ramanagar city.
These houses and infrastructure works are in nearing completion.
These houses allotted to the eligible beneficiaries as per the list

approved by Karnataka Slum Development Board.


14

Govt. of Gujarat has submitted that under their IHSDP project at
Jamnagar, Jamnagar Municpal Corporation (JMC) had planned to
make 864 DUs and prepared a DPR to relocate 2 slum pockets - (1)
Summair Club Zupadpatti and (2) Jalaram Zupadpatti and the same
was sanctioned by Govt. of India. In the 1st Stage out of 864 DUs, 420
DUs have been allotted to the 101 beneficiaries of Summair Club
Zupadpatti, 230 beneficiaries of Dalitnagar, Nr. Sonal Nagar &
Temaining 89 units allotted to beneficiaries who were affected by T.P. &
_D.P. Road implementation in various slum parts of the city. In the 2nd
Stage, 444 DUs will be allotted to the 237 beneficiaries of Jalaram
Zupadpatti as per resolution approved by General Board Nominated
Avas Allotment Committed and remaining 207 DUs will be allotted to
the beneficiaries of 55 slum pockets of the Jamnagar city. Jamnagar
Municipal Corporation has allotted first of all fo the beneficiaries of 2
slum pockets which have been finalized in DPR and remaining all DUs
have been allotted to other slum identified beneficiaries. In light of
these facts, the State Govt. of Gujarat has reported that no ineligible *
beneficiaries are allotted houses under their said project. Ministry will

update as soon as information is received from other States.

There was no incentive designed in the JINURM scheme to be
given to States which implemented scheme successfully. Ministry,
however, had given awards to States and Cities for their efforts to
implement BSUP and IHSDP and pro-poor reforms. 13 such awards
were given in 2014, 12 awards in 2011, 12 awards in 2010, and 8
awards in 2009.

In the case of NCT Delhi, Delhi Government has reported that
due to various factors it has noi been able to decide the cutoff date for


15

selection of beneficiaries. Ministry has taken up with Delhi Government

on this issue many times.”

20. The Committee are pleased to note that States of Karnataka and Gujarat
have furnished the requisite status .in respect of their projects and
identification of beneficiaries. The Ministry are however, in the process of
collecting requisite information regarding identification of beneficiaries of
housing projects in respect of other States viz Himachal! Pradesh, Uttar
Pradesh, Kerala, Nagaland, Haryana, Chhattisgarh and Tami! Nadu. The
Committee impress upon the Ministry to vigorously pursue the matter of
identification of beneficiaries with the concerned States and expeditiously
prepare a final beneficiary list to facilitate 100% occupancy by the time
financial support to the projects sanctioned under JNNURM ends, 1.8 March
2017. The Committee also desire to be apprised of the reasons behind non-
formulation of policy for allotment of Dwelling Units (DUs} in NCT of Dethi.
While appreciating that the new mission ‘Housing For All’ provide for prior
_beneficiary identification through demand assessment linked to Aadhar, PM
Jan Dhan Yojana etc., the Committee impress upon the Ministry to periodically
assess the progress of the Scheme-so as to ensure timely completion of the

Scheme and 100% occupancy ०1 expiry of the term of the Scheme.

(Recommendation Para No.18)

PRIORITIZATION OF PROJECTS

21. In their 18" Report, the Committee noted that a new mission called Rajiv
Awas Yojana was being implemented for the period. 2013-2022 by the MoHUPA as
replacement of JNNURM with an aim to control the mushrooming of slums in
various towns, The Scheme was based on an appropriate, corrective and promising
approach to cure and prevent the ills of uncontrolled slum growth in towns especially
after the JNNURM debacle with an aim to construct 1 million houses with a unit cost



16

limit of upto Rs.4 lakh. The Committee, however, doubted the efficacy of the
scheme given the fact that almost all the towns were not yet equipped with matching
manpower and resources to realize the objectives of such a scheme. The
Committee desired that the Ministry. concerned take enough precaution, learn
suitable lessons from their experience of implementing JNNURM and also take into
account the Observations and Recommendation.of the Committee on the subject
and carry out all necessary ground work and put suitable mechanisms in place well
in advance and ensure a seamless monitoring and implementation of Rajiv Awas
Yojana. The Committee desired to be apprised of the budget’and targets set under
the Scheme.

22. The Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation in their Action Taken

Note have stated as under’

“The Ministry has launched a new mission 'Housing for All (HFA}
on 25th June, 2015 to provide Housing for all urban poor, in place of
RAY scheme. The new mission has four pillars namely, Slum
Redevelopment, Affordable Housing through Credit Linked Subsidy,
Affordable Housing in Partnership and Subsidy for beneficiary-led
individual house construction/enhancement. The budgetary allocation
for HFA Mission for the year 2015-16 isB.4150 Crs. During FY 2015-16,
100 cities will be selected and expect to complete preparation of
Housing for All Plan of Action (HFAPoA) in 50 cities. Construction of
houses under the new Mission is expected to commence from 2016-17
onwards. Construction of 1.5 lakh houses under ongoing schemes are
expected to be completed during this year also.

The liabilities arising out of 183 RAY projects which have started

on the ground, have been subsumed in the new mission.”


V7

23. In their updated Action taken note the Ministry further stated as under:-

“Slum’ and ‘Colonization’ are State subjects and it is the
responsibility of the State Government to prevent mushrooming of
slums. Ministry of HUPA through its Schemes has provided financial
assistance of States/ UTs in creation of affordable housing stock as a
preventive strategy/ measure to check creation of future slums. In the
newly launched HFA mission, three Verticals of PMAY-HFA (Urban)
Mission Viz. Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme (CLSS), Affordable
Housing in Partnership (AHP) & Beneficiary led Construction would
contribute to the creation of Affordable housing stock. In order to
facilitate creation of Affordable Housing mandatory conditions like
earmarking land for Affordable Housing and removal of condition of NA
permission in Master Plan area have been introduced under PMAY.
Also, Ministry is pursuing for inclusion of ‘Affordable Housing” in
harmonized list of Infrastructure sub-sectors to give boost to Affordable
Housing Projects.”

24. The Committee note that in place of INNURM, Rajiv Awas Yojana (RAY)
was initiated to be implemented for the period 2013-2022 by the Ministry of
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation with the intention to control the
mushrooming of slums in various towns. The Ministry launched another
mission Housing For All (HFA) in June, 2015 in place of RAY and the liabilities
arising out of RAY were subsumed in the new mission. However, the Ministry
have absolved themselves from the responsibility of preventing the
mushrooming of slums and stated that ‘Slum’ and ‘colonization’ are State
subjects and it is the responsibility of the State to prevent mushrooming of
-slums. The Committee, however, are of the view that the Ministry need to
assume a proactive approach and commit themselves towards mitigating
uncontrolled growth of slums. The Committee desire that the Ministry closely


18

monitor the assessment and identification of beneficiaries under the new HFA
Scheme. The Committee are perturbed to find that in the new Mission, the
Ministry have not addressed the basicforiginal purpose of RAY which was to
control mushrooming-of slums in various towns. The Committee desire that
availability and functionality of basic facilities tike clean running water,
electricity, toilets, sewerage and waste management system etc. in slum areas
be taken into account and areas with the least basic amenities be given

primary preference while prioritizing projects under the new Mission.
(Recommendation Para No. 25)

OVERALL RESPONSIBILITY OF THE MISSION

25. The Committee noticed that the Audit had found 7 cases in 7 States/UTs
where the JNNURM funds to the tune of Rs.9.86 crore meant for housing projects
were diverted for inadmissible purposes even for non-JNNURM purposes. In
another case, JNNURM funds worth Rs.1.22 crore were distributed amongst 407
unverified beneficiaries under the IHSDP project, Parole (Kathua}, Jammu and
- Kashmir. Further, JNNURM funds to the tune of Rs.114.68 crore meant for urban
infrastructure projects had been diverted for non admissible purposes in 8 cases in 6
States and the Ministry failed to obtain reasons therefor from the defaulting States.
Considering such cases a grave violation of financial procedures and guidelines, the
Committee recommended that all these cases of illegal diversion of JNNURM funds
should be probed and appropriate action taken against the erring officials and the
State Governments concerned. The Committee also desired to be apprised of the
progress on the matter and recoveries made so far. Further, the Committee
recommended that the monitoring of the execution of projects should be
strengthened so that there is no fund diversion to in-eligible beneficiaries/schemes.


19

26. The Ministry of Urban Development in their Action Taken Note have stated as
under:-

“The JnNURM ‘is ACA to the State Plan. The projects are
implemented by the States in accordance with their financial rules and
procedures. The Govt. of India has been requesting the State
Governments/UTs to adhere to all financial principles while
implementing the projects. GOI has also asked the States to ensure
fiscal discipline, including non-diversion of funds.

‘Haryana, Chhattisgarh and Jharkhand have been asked to
submit the reply.

Himachal Pradesh

As per the directions of the Hon’ble High Court of HP in CWP No.
56/2009, the change of land use was obtained from GO! under FCA,
4980. On the request of Forest Department, the funds amounting to
Rs.1.91 crores were deposited on account of compensatory
afforestation, NPV and cost of trees. Accordingly state funds. were
sanctioned by the Govt, of HP for the above said purpose. As such no
JnNURM/Gentral Funds were diverted for this purpose.

Andhra Pradesh

SLNA, A.P. has informed that an amount of Rs. 78.38 crores has
been recouped by making payment of JnNURM bill from the funds
available under Godavari Drinking Water Supply Schemie Phase -|
(Maulana Abul Kalam Hyderabad Sujala Sravanthi Scheme).

The Government of Assam has clarified that the land acquisition
cost of the South Guwahati West Water Supply Project was not
included in the approved DPR hence the amount was provided by the


20

State Government through separate administrative approval on
41.10.2010. Hence acquisition of private lands was made without

involving the project fund.

No diversion has taken place at the Government of India level.
Further, it is the submission of the Ministry that such paras are required
to be settled by the States with their respective A.Gs."

27. The Ministry have further stated that, corrective measures are being taken in
the cases of illegal diversion of JNNURM funds. |

28. The Committee find that the Ministry have not furnished satisfactory
explanation/ details on diversion of JNNURM fund. The Committee note that
the Ministry have requested State Governments/UTs to adhere to all financial
principles while implementing projects and ensure fiscal discipline, including
non-diversion of funds. The Ministry have also stated that funds are released
to ULBs through State Governments and as such States have to ensure that
funds are not diverted by the implementing agencies. While the Committee
understand that the State Government, through the Urban Local Bodies
({ULBs) are the implementing agency, the Committee question the logic behind
the Ministry absolving itself of all responsibility on the matter. The Committee
are of the view that merely requesting the States to adhere to the financial
principles will not be effective without a system of fixing responsibility and
imposing penalties for non compliance. The Committee feel that the Mission,
being a centrally approved and sponsored initiative, with the Ministry as the
nodal agency, the Ministry should have overall control and regulatory
authority over financial matters. The Committee advise the Ministry to learn
from the shortfalls of the old Schemes and avoid financial mismanagement in
future Schemes. The Committee, therefore, desire that a Review Committee be
constituted for overall review and audit of successor Schemes, and stipulate


2i

that a factual report by such a review committee a requirement for further
release of funds.

{Recommendation Para No. 26)

BETTER COORDINATION BETWEEN CENTRE AND STATE

29. In their 18 Report the Committee noted the failure of the Ministry to enforce
fiscal discipline on the States/ ULBs as evident from the number of cases of
mismanagement of JNNURM funds. The Revolving Fund meant to be created from
10 per cent of the funds released by SLA, for leveraging market funds to finance
further investment in infrastructural projects in the case of UIG/UIDSSMT and to be
utilized for meeting Operations and Maintenance expenses of assets created in the
case of BSUP and IHSDP, had not been created by the SLNAs in 25 States/UTs.
Though it was created in very few States, it was not utilized for its original purpose
but for meeting expenses for preparation of DPRs/Project Management consultancy
charges, etc. Audit had also found that in 9 cases in 9 States/Uts, JNNURM funds
to the tune of Rs.637.23 crore were parked by SLNAs or ULBs instead of releasing
those to the implementing agencies. Audit pointed out that the States had earned
interest of Rs.226.58 crore upto 31st December, 2011. Both the Ministries of Uroan
Development and Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation were unable to intimate the
details of -utilization/adjustment of the amount and the {otal interest earned on
JNNURM funds deposited in the banks. The Committee observed that the JNNURM
guidelines were not accompanied by appropriate advisory to the States regarding
parking of funds and the utilization of interest earned thereof. The Committee also
found that an amount of Rs.44.78 crore released as ACA for projects which were
later abandoned was not refunded to the Government of India and in respect of the
withdrawn projects, the quantum of such amount was Rs.309.29 crore. Later, the
Ministry claimed that a major part of this amount had been recovered/ adjusted. The
MoHUPA also failed to verify adherence to the conditions/guidelines for release of
ACA prior to the release of the first instalment in any of the test checked 29 projects.


22

Further, the flow of funds showed that there was a rush of expenditure ranging from
19,2 per cent to 100 percent in the last quarter and particularly in the month of
March at Central level during the years 2005-06 to 2012-13, much against the
General Financial Rule 5603). As funds were being released by the Ministry of
Finance/Ministry of Home Affairs at the fag end of the year, the Statef/UT
Governments were in turn releasing the same to the implementing agencies very
late leading to delays and problems in the implementation of the projects.
‘Furthermore, Utilisation Certificates amounting to Rs.10,032.13 crore were pending
with the MoUD and the MoHUPA. An analysis of the causes of these financial
irregularities indicated lack of concerted efforts from both the Ministries While these
facts established, beyond doubt, that the fin ancial management under JNNURM had
comprehensively failed and required innovative remedial measutes and
restructuring, in almost all these cases, the Ministries had merely issued advisories
for rectifying the lapses, deficiencies and shortcomings, that too only at the instance
of Audit, ॥ also showed that the Ministries’ internal mechanism was unable to detect
the financial mismanagement of the Mission funds, despite being well-aware of the
very limited capabilities of the States to handle the scheme. Since observing fiscal
discipline was paramount for success of any scheme, the Committee desired that
bath the Ministries should introduce a zero tolerance policy at all levels in respect of
fiscal indiscipline, monitor the fund flow arrangement in real time from the Centre to
the implementing agencies via the SLNAs/States/UTs as per ground level progress
of projects, to ensure minimum unspeni/excess amount outside Government
accounts. Further, the Committee desired the Ministries to reiterate the provisions of
fimely submission of the Utilisation Certificates and advise the States/Uts to strictly
comply with them ‘and liked to be apprised of the fotal amount released and
unutilized/unrefunded amount of ACA, if any, left at the end of the extended period
of JNNURM in March, 2014.


23

30. The Ministry of Urban Development in their Action Taken Note have stated as

under:-

“It ig reiterated that as per INNURM guidelines, the State is to
add its matching share to the release made by Central Govt. and
release it to the Implementing Agency. The same has been committed
vide the tripartite agreement signed between Centre, State and City. An
advisory dated 29th May, 2012 in this regard has also been issued to all

the States.

Progress under Urban Infrastructure and Governance (UIG). under Urban Infrastructure and Governance UIG):

Phase Total no. Total no. Total no.

Sanctioned Project} Completed - on-going
Projects projects

Data as on 31/03/2014

Mission(2005- | 534 (Excluding) 227 307

12) withdrawn
Projects)

. 7 .
Transition 61 0 61

Data as on 34/05/2015

Mission 534 (Excluding) 250; 284
(2005-12) withdrawn
| Projects)
Transition | 61 प्र er

Progress under. Urban infrastructure Development ocnertic | under, Urban infrastructure Development Scheme for
Small & Medium Towns (UIDSSMT) & Medium Towns (UIDSSMT

Phase Total 10. - of| Total no. Total no.
Sanctioned Completed . on-going
Projects . | Projects projects



Data as on 31/03/2014
Mission 8.9. (Excluding| 452 1349
(2005-12) withdrawn

Projects)
Transition 235 eo 235
Data as on 31/05/2014
Mission 801 (Excluding ro 7335
(2005-12) withdrawn

Projects)
Transition) 235 eC 235

31, In their updated Action taken note the Ministry further stated as under:-

“JNNURM ended on 31.03.2014. The utilization certificates for
funds released under JNNURM are being monitored.”

32. - The Committee note that in accordance with the instructions of the
Ministry of Finance, the Ministry adjusted the un-utilised Additional Central
Assistance (ACA) against fresh! ongoing projects in that particular State. The
Committee also note that the Ministry are unable to intimate the exact details
of utilized and adjusted funds in cases of withdrawn projects. The Committee
are of the opinion that lack of coordination and communication between the
Ministry and the States and lack of proper planning and supervision are the
reasons behind the ambiguity on the details of utilized and adjusted fund,
delay in the release of State share fund, indeterminate parking of fund, ete.
The Committee, therefore, desire that a real time system of sharing
information on an IT platform between the Ministry, States and the
implementing agencies needs to be devised urgently to facilitate transparency
in the implementation of ongoing projects as well as projects of the successor
Schemes. The Committee are of the view that such a system would not only


25

prevent loss of interest on ACA due to indeterminate parking of funds but also
enable the Ministry to keep track of the progress of the projects and manage
the flow of funds accordingly. Noting the huge number of ongoing projects of
JNNURM, the Committee recommend the Ministry to closely monitor the
progress of these projects and ensure completion within the prescribed time.
The Committee also desire that in all future Schemes, responsibility may be
fixed and stringent punishment may be imposed for financial mismanagement

and indiscriminate delays in the implementation of projects.
(Recommendation Para No.30)

STRONG MONITORING SYSTEM SYSTEM

33, In their 18" Report the Committee noted that the condition of development of
a municipal life, the type of municipalities and management needed in the North
Eastern and the Himalayan States were very much different from those in the plains
and the economically advanced States. The MoUD had aiso admitted that most of
the municipalities in the North Eastern or the Himalayan States had been formed
very recently and were still learning and comparatively more depended on the State
Governments. In comparison, the municipalities in more developed States like
Gujarat, Maharashtra and Andhra Pradesh were formed long back and had evolved
over time and gained competence in managing municipal affairs on their own.
Accordingly, JNNURM had considered bracketing the Norih Eastern and the
Himalayan States under Special Category and relaxed some norms for achieving
reforms. For example, cities in these States had to recover only 50 percent of
Operation and Maintenance charges as compared with 100 percent cost recovery
mandated for the rest.of Mission Cities. Further, as per the Governinent decision of
31° May 2012, achievement of réforms was delinked for ongoing UIDSSMT projects
in North Eastern States and Jammu and Kashmir, While welcoming such initiatives,
the Committee desired the Ministries concerned to have a different system for North


26

Eastern and Himalayan States in implementing a scheme like JNNURM so as to

provide a level playing field for these backward States.

34, The Ministry of Urban Development in their Action Taken Note have stated as

under:-

"JNNURM -has ended on 31.03.2014. The MoUD has now
launched the new Scheme “AMRUT". JNNURM has been subsumed in |
the said Scheme. It has now been decided to extend support to projects
sanctioned before 31.03.2012 subject to 50% physical and financial
progress and also the transition phase projects till 31 03.2017. Detailed
instructions regarding coverage of incomplete projects of INNURM, to
be covered under AMRUT, will be issued separately by MoUD.”

35. In their updated Action taken note the Ministry further stated as under:

“The funding pattern under AMRUT has been approved by the
Cabinet which is applicable fo all States / UTs." है

36. The Committee note that the Ministry have launched a new Scheme
‘AMIRUT’ and that JNNURM, which was extended till March, 2014, has been
subsumed into the new Scheme. The Committee urge the Ministry to pursue
the States to make all efforts to ensure completion of all pending JNNURM
‘projects within the extended period. The Committee also view that the

geographical bottlenecks and the harsh terrain of these States and the inferior ,
or limited connectivity need to be taken into account while formulating the
developmental guidelines and reforms for the North Eastern and Himalayan
States. [0 view of these shortfalts, certain concessions/ relaxations need to be
made in respect of these States. The Committee, therefore, desire that the
Ministries concerned formulate a different framework/ system for North
Eastern and Himalayan States in implementing the new Scheme not only to

provide a level playing field but also ensure completion-of projects within the


27

prescribed period. The Committee desire that the Ministry take necessary

action to this effect and apprise the Committee of the same.

NEW DELHI; PROF, K.V. THOMAS,
16 November, 2016 Chairperson,

25 Kartika, 1938(Saka) Public Accounts Committee.


(APPENDIX - Il)

(Vide para 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR EIGHTEENTH REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK
SABHA)

(i)

tii)

(iii)

(iv)

(५)

Total No of Observations/Recommendations

Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
which have been accepted by the Government:

Para Nos, 1-5, 7-17, 19-24, 27- 31
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee

do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received
from the Government:

-Nil-
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:
Para Nos. 6, 18, 25 and 26

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies:

=Nil-

24

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS

31

Total: 27
Percentage -87.10%

Total; Nil
Percentage - 0%

Total: 04

Percentage— 12.90%

Total; Nil
Percentage - 0%