86

PERFORMANCE AUDIT OF DUAL FREIGHT POLICY
FOR TRANSPORTATION OF IRON ORE TRAFFIC
IN INDIAN RAILWAYS

[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their Sixtieth Report (16th Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(Railway Board)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2017-18) |

EIGHTY-SIXTH REPORT

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI



EIGHTY SIXTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2017-18)

(SIXTEENTH LOK. SABHA)

PERFORMANCE AUDIT OF DUAL FREIGHT POLICY
FOR TRANSPORTATION OF IRON ORE TRAFFIC
IN INDIAN RAILWAYS

{Action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their Sixtieth Report (16th Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(Ratiway Board)

par जघूहै

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

December, 2017/ Agrahayana, 1939 (Saka)



CONTENTS:

“COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2017-18)

INTRODUCTION

CHAPTER |

CHAPTER II*

CHAPTER Ili*

CHAPTER ४४

" CHAPTER V*

ele | er

Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ............ .. .-.. ० -*----

Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of. the
replies received from the Government ..

Observations/Recommendations in: respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Comrnittes and which require
reiteration... cece cee eee ee eens eeeseeeeereeneseases

Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which the Government have furnished interim
Teplies

APPENDICES*

Minutes of the 11" Sitting of Public Accounts
Committee (2018-17) held on 23" August, 2016.

Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government.on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained. in their Fifteenth
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

* Not appended to the cyctostyled copy of the Report -

PAGE
(iii)

0)



16.

17.

18.

19.
20,
21.
22.

और

* COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE |

(2017-18}

Shri Mallikarjun Kharge . Chairperson

MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
Shri Nishikant Dubey

Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Smt. Riti Pathak

Shri Neiphiu Rio

Shri Abhishek Singh

Prof. Ram Shanker

Dr. Kirit Somaiya

Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
Shri Shivkumar C, Udasi
_Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABRA

Shri Naresh Agrawa!

Shri Satyavrat Chaturved?

Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Vacant *

Vacant ** -

Shri Ajay Sancheti

Shri Bhupender Yadav

SECRETARIAT

Shri A.K. Singh - Additional Secretary
Shri TJayakumar = + Director

Shri A.K. Yadav - Deputy Secretary

Shri Shantarant Naik Ceased to be a Member of Committee conscquent upon his retirement
from Rajya Sabha on 28 July, 2017.

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy Ceased to be 9 Member of Comiiitee consequent upon his
retirement from Rajya Sabha on 18 August, 2017

cnt)



'” INTRODUCTION

i, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2017-18) having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Eighty-Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
on action taken by the Government on the Obseryations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Sixtieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Performarice
Audit of Dual Freight Policy for Transportation of fron Ore Traffic in Indian
Railways’.

2. The Sixtieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on. 14
December, 2016. Replies of the Government to the Observations/ Recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 16 October, 2017. The Public Accounts
Committee considered and adopted the Eighty-Sixth Report at their sitting held on 27
October, 2017. Minutes of the sittings are given at Appendix-t.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the C&AG of India,

5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/

Recommendations contained in the Sixtieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given at
Appendix-tt.

NEW DELHI; - MALLIKARJUN KHARGE

04 December,.2017 . Chairperson
43 Agraahayana, 1939 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

(५)



cere - ४ FREBORT जन" ee -
CHAPTER - 1

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their Sixtieth Report (16 Lok Sabha) on ‘Performance Audit Of Dual Freight Policy for
Transportation of Iron Ore Traffic in indian Railways' based on C&AG Report No.
14 of 2015 (Performance Audit), Union Government (Railways) relating fo the Minisiry of
Railways {Railway Beard).

2. The Sixtieth Report (16 Lok Sabha), which was presented to Lok Sabha/aid in’
_Rajya Sabha on 14" December, 2016, contained 07 Observations and-
Recommendations. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations and
Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board)

are broadly categorized ag under : _

(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:

Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, and 7
“Fotal: 06
Chapter - IT

(i) | Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in
view of the replies received from the Government

Para Nos.
Total: 04°
Chapter ~IlE- .

(ii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government have
not been accepted by the Commitiee and which require reiteration:

Para Nos. Nit
: Total: Nil
Chapter - IV

{iv} Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished
interim replies.
: Para Nos,_ Nil * ह
. - Total: Nil;

Chapter-V. - -


3 The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed
deficiencies in internal control mechanism of the Railways which failed to ensure
veracity, legality and enforceability of the documents submitted to claim concessional
tariff rates. It was further observed that there was lack of enforcement of the institutional
framework of the Dual Freight Policy, its monitoring and implementation and laxity of the
“then Raiiway administration have eventually led to freight evasion, non-levy of penalties
for willful non-compliance and undercharge of freight. There were also instances of
manuat intervention in allotment of rakes through Rake Allotment System although the
system was computerized.

4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Railways in respect of all the
Observations/Recommendations of the Commitee have been reproduced in the
relevant chapters of this Report. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by
the Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations made in their Sixtieth’
Report, which need Teiteration or merit comments.

FIRST DETECTION OF CASES OF FRAUD
(Recommendation No.4)

5. The Committee were perturbed to note that while the representatives of the
Railways have claimed that Vigilance of South Eastern Railway had first detected the
case of mis-declaration by a customer who transported the iron ore. at domestic rate
after submitting ail the relevant documents but jater exported the iron ore instead of
consuming in their domestic manufacturing units and then handed those cases over to
CBI. Whereas the representatives of CBI had claimed that they had registered cases, in
total 17, on the basis of their own sourced information and no complaint had been filed
by the Railways in this regard. The divergent views expressed by the Railways and the
CBi points towards some cases of fraud yet to be exposed. Moreover, since the fraud
took place in the domain of the Railways, it was prima facie responsibility of the ;
Railways to have detected the fraud following its faiture to prevent the same. Thus, the
Committee had desired that the Railways may justify their statement with documentary
proofs of the matter being referred to the CB!.uponri its detection in a timely manner and े



- may also apprise the: Committee ofthe exact course-of action as-it happened and the

stage at which the CBI was involved and the extent to which they were cooperated with.

The Committee were surprised that even though there were large scale irregularities the

CBI investigated very few cases involving only Rs. 305.60 crore whereas the 1085

suffered by exchequer was Rs. 29,236.76 crore as Audit scrutiny revealed. The

Committee therefore, had desired the CB! to go deeper into the matter and enquire into

other similar cases.

6.

The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:-

“Following the detection of large scale freight evasion: in iron ore transported by a
Kolkata based company in 2011, demand cum show-cause notice were served
by South Eastern Railway (SER). The first ever demand cum show-cause notice
was served against the said company for alleged freight evasion on 16.08.2011.
The said company moved to Hon'ble Calcutta High Court challenging not only
the claim made by SER but also the basic policy of iron ore transportation itself.
The detection so made by Vigilance Department of SER was then sent to Central
Vigilance Commission (CVC) through Railway Board as per extant procedure.
The case was then entrusted to Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) by CVC for
examining criminal aspect of the case, possibility of-large scale conspiracy and
involvement of other government. department etc.

Pursuant to the Railway Vigilance Department report sent to CVC and
consequent to the directions of CVC, CBI registered their first case on
30.12.2011 against M/s Rashmi Cement Ltd vide RC.No.-0102011A0035. In the
meantime, Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG) had been conducting
their independent audit an the phenomenon of freight evasion and filed their
intermittent report to Railways on freight evasion on iron ore transportation. They
first filed their report to East Coast Railway (ECoR) on 15" May 2012. A table
giving the time lines for events is given below:

Detection of freight evasion in transportation of iron ;
ore by Railway Vigilance Department. Submission _

of report to Railway Board
Order of CVC to CBI for detail investigation Sep-2011

Filing of first FIR by CBI against M/s Rashmi
| Metaliks Ltd
C&AG fited their last report on freight evasion in .
transportation of iron ore in all affected Railway 8 May 2015

Zones for the period 2008 to 2013

४७-2011

Jan-2012



4

Thus it can be seen from the above that although the first case of freight evasion
of iron ore transportation was detected by Railway Vigilance Department
themselves, the CBI on direction of CVC and CAG had been investigating and
taking action under their statutory authority independently thereafter. However,
the Railway Administration have been extending all possible assistance and
cooperation as and when sought for by CBi to taciftate their investigation.”

7. The Committee are shocked to observe that the Ministry of Railways were
unable to prevent large scale irregularities and rampant corruption under the Duat
‘Freight Policy (067) during the period 2007-08 to 2041-12. The irregutarities in ©
implementation of DFP for iron ore traffic was first highlighted in Audit Para No. -
” 2.5 of G&AG’s Audit Report No. 32 of 2011-12 (Railways). The report brought out
irregularities in booking ‘of iron ore traffic at domestic rate without ensuring
receipts of stipulated documents from the consignors at three loading points of
Waltalr Division of East Coast Railways (ECoR) for the period from 22 May 2008 to
34 March 2011. Auditggain examined Implementation of DFP at 26 loading points
and 10 unloading points over three Zonal Railways for the period from 22 May
2008 to March 2012 and. highlighted Irregularities in submission of required
documents for availing benefits of domestic freight rate beside availing of
domestic rates by some manufacturing units while exporting/selling of iron ore.
The manufacturing units availed’ domestic rates in respect of iron ore already
utilised for other than domestic purposes like sale/export. In the Action Taken
Notes submitted in-October 2012 and October 2044, the Ministry of Railways
stated that onus of conforming to the affirmed end use was on the
consignor/consignee and admitted that they do not /did not had any inbuilt
mechanism for ascertaining the end use. Now the Ministry In its Action Taken
Notes against the Sixtieth Report (2016) of PAC stated that the Vigilance Wing of
South Eastern Railway had first detected the case of mis-declaration by a
customer who transported iron ore at domestic rate after submitting all the
relevant documents but later exported the iron ore instead of consuming in their

domestic. manufacturing units and the cvc handed over the case to CBI.



The Action Taken: Nofes of the Railways submitted in-October, 2042 and
October 2014 and the present one ‘submitted in July 2047 are mutually |
inconsistent. In their ATN in October 2012 and October 2014 they had stated that
the onus of conforming to the affirmed end use was on the consignor/consignee.
Now in the present ATN of 2017 they stated that it Is the Railways which had first
detect the fraud. The Committee are unable to understand the differant stands of
the Ministry of Railways where at one stage they absolve their responsibility for
the irregularity and at the other stage they take. the credit of finding out the
irregularity for the first time.

* The Committee note that even though the financial loss of expected Goods
earnings is to the tune of Rs. 28,236.78 crore the CBI is investigating very few
cases Involving only Rs. 305.06 crore. It reflects that large number of cases
invoiving almost Rs. 29,000 crore is yet to be investigated and culprits at large
are yet fo be brought to book. The Committee, therefore, desire the 081 to
investigate all the remaining cases of irregularities/corruption in implementation
of. DFP and alsof ts formulation and ensure that guilty officials are brought to
book at the earliest. \

AMBIGUITIES IN RAILWAY GUIDELINES
(Recommendation No.5} है

8. As per clause 8 of Rate Circular No.36 of 2009, the manufacturing units were
है allowed fo remove left over/residual iron ore fines for export out of the.iron ore carried at’ |
domestic rate in the Plant premises. However, it was required to be done only atter
verification of the crushing arrangements and process inside the Plant premises of the
consignees and there was a limit of 25 per cent of aggregated quantity as iv provisions
already in place prior to the introduction of dual freight policy of iraf ore w.e.f.
01.06.2009. However, it was admitted by the Raiiways that this provision was not brought
into play.and utilized for the purposes of additional Milocation of rakes in actual practice.
Rather, they had prescribed a norm of 10% asthe guiding principle for conducting checks
against diversion of iron ore away from the stated"énd-use for domestic manufacturing of
iron and stee! based on inputs of undertakings like MEKON and SAIL who were



considered: by the Railways as domain experts and circulated: the instruction vice letter
for guidance to the ED/RM office for allotment of rakes rather than incorporating the same
in RC 36/2009 which primarily dealt with charging and booking procedure. Irrespective of
the limit of 10% or 25% for removal of leftover/residual iron ore fines for export out of the
iron ore carried at domestic rate in the Plant: premises, the actual removal by 23
consignees of Iron:ore transported by rail at domestic rate from their Piant premises for
sale or export was in excess of 25 per cent with aggregated quantity of 8.79 lakh MT and
it went up to 100 per cent in certain cases. Railway Board had argued that as mixed
takes consisting of both iron ore lump and fines could be loaded from the mines and
there was no difference in rates for lumps and fines, it was not possible to strictly monitor
loading of lure and fines. The Committee had observed that removal of Iron Ore from
manufacturing unit beyond permissible limit was prima facie irregular and it would have
been appropriate for Railways to impose penalty for irregular removal of.‘ron Ore’. The
Committee had expressed their displeasure over the ambiguity regarding percentage of
removal of leftover/residual iron ore fines which was created by the Railways whereby
there were no clear instructions as to the limit of 25% or 10% even though instructions
regarding both were in place. The Committee felt that the Railways should have clearly
specified the limit in RC 36/2009 which primarily deait with charging and booking
procedure. Further, the Committee were informed that the Railways did not have any in-
built mechanism for ascertaining the end-use to which the iron ore was ultimately put
atter its delivery had been taken by the consignee at the designated destination station.
The Committee had, therefore, recommended that the Railways should have developed
some mechanism which could have helped igentify manufacturers by giving unique
identification code to all consignees who are not in a position to use iron ore fines due to
absence of Pelletisation Plant /Sinter Plant but were indenting rakes for carrying iron ore
fines, as 8 step towards verification of end use of iron ore transported at domestic rate.
and avoid misuse of provision for illegally exporting iron ore booked at domestic
consumption freight rates. The Committee had further desired that while laying down
Rate circulars, Railway Board should frame detailed guidelines for Zonal Railways laying
down clearly the procedure to be followed “fo ensure complete check of essential
documentation establishing the nature of use of iron ore transported by Rail. In this


---regard, the Committee had also desired that instructions for companies between iron ore ----——
transported and monthly/yearly consumption for domestic use with the aid of Excise

Returns should also be issued and insisted upon, This, the Committee, felt would create
essential checks on the possible misuse of the extant provisions of rules of procedure.

9. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:-

“The issue of ambiguity that has been raised is with regard to distinctly different
policies that are being talked about here. One is the RC36/2009 covering the
procedure for booking of iron ore, and -the other is policy with regard to allocation
of rakes which was based on certain entitlement norms. Talking more specifically
on the latter issue pertaining to generation of-residual fines, in course of crushing
of lump ore-for creating calibrated size ore for feeding furnaces, many industries
had represented in the past that due to lack of sintering/pellet plant facility, they
were unable to put into use such residual fines for steel making at their end.
These customers were seeking additional compensatory rake allocation to meet -
the basic requirement for manufacturing steel up to the desired levels or rated
capacity of the units. It was. keeping in view this requirement, that a norm of 25%
additional allocation was formulated by the office of Director, Rail Movement,
Kolkata which was of course subject to verification of the crushing arrangement
and processes inside the plant premises of the consignees. As has been
correcily pointed out this was never implemented. As regards the norm of 10%,
this was a guideline for the use in the office of DirfRM Kolkata for the purpose of
arriving at permissible extent to which fines could get generated out of handling
of iron ore lumps. It is* pertinent to mention that manufacturing units do not
necessarily receive entire quantity of iron ore by tail and also there are situation
of different grade of iron ore being sourced by customers from lifferent mines. A
conversion factor of 1.7 times as given by the JPC, under the "लीक of Steel, is
utilized for arriving at the consumption of iron ore or end use based on production
figures reflected in excise returns. Actual consumption is also reflected in excise
returns and at times removal of iron ore from the premises are also indicated in
excise returns. It is only in these cases, it becomes imperative for the. Dir./RM's
office to ascertain that under no circumstances any unusually large quantity of
iron ore is removed from the premises which could otherwise lead to doubts that
such iron.ore being removed is being diverted for exporis. A‘basic arithmetical
calculation of production of steel {as reflected in excise return) multiplied by
conversion factor of 4.7 is carried out and tallied with the “consumption (as
reflected in excise return), If the conversion ratio happens to be higher than 1.7,
and there-fe indicajians in the excise return regarding removal of iron ore then,
"this calculation becomes pertinent after faking into account receipts by Rail. Only
in the cases of large scale removal, where it is apparent that this quantum is
disproportionately*high even after taking. into account possible road receipts out
of the total receipts and where the residual fines generation is beyond the
permissible norms of 10% and also where the conversion ratio is higher than the
prescribed norms of 4.7 would there be any arising of possible doubts about



diversion for export-and freight evasion. Dir/R.M in all-such cases-of noticeable
discrepancies has withheld allocation of rakes. While the guidelines have been
utilized as a assisting tool for checks against possible diversion, the fact that
units source iron ore also by road and conversion ratio could be higher if Fe
content is lower in the iron ore are reasons that such assessment can never be
absolutely perfect. To deem that all cases of removal of surplus fines should
have been subjected to levy of penal charges for not being booked at export tariff
rates in the first place, is something which makes it an impractical and difficult
proposition to enforce in all cases for the reasons elaborated above.

By and large the Railways have information regarding the processing technology
at different manufacturing units whether they use only lump ore, only fines or both.
॥र already has unique identity of customers which can be mapped with use of iron
ore type to eliminate exceptional cases of wrong use as suggested by the
committee.”

10. The Committee note that the Dual Freight Policy.for transportation of iron
ore has since been withdrawn and the differential between export and domestic
iron ore freight rates has been removed. The Committee recommends the Ministry
of Railways to exercise extra vigitance, ensure thorough scrutiny of. documents
and conduct surprise Inspections on consignees’ premises whenever such dual
freight policies are implemented. ‘Even though the objective of the Railways in
formutating such policies are to achieve revenue growth, the Committee feel that
the Railways have to take. pre-emptive actions by anticipating ‘the possibility of
freight evasions hy the consignees to obtain maximum profit. The Committee note
that various guidelines were issued by the Railways to prevent manipulative
actions of consignees. However, in view of various deficiencies in implementation

-of such guidelines being pointed out by the audit, the Rallways need to
review/evaluate its general freight poticy and prevent foopholes and facunae |
therein and rectify the same In a time bound manner.

FAULTY.RAKE ALLOTMENT SYSTEM
(Recommendation No.6}

“44. The Committee found that allotment of rakes for Iron ore transportation is
governed by an allotment policy, assigning .priotity/preferences laid down by Railway
Board and hag a bearing on the implementation of the DFP. The policy was designed to
give priotity 10119 domestic manufacturers of iron ang’ steel in allotment of rakes for


“transporting iron ore:to plants. However, it was observed that the ailotment of rakes was
considerable in size to last priority customer, 18, Priority 0, in respect of whom there was
no check of use of ‘Iron ore’ by the consignees for the production of Iron and Steel at their
manufacturing units before allocations/allotments of rakes. Although Priority © customers
got assured allocation of rakes, consignees showed an increasing. preference to be
categorized under Priority D rather than under Priority ९, The Committee were surprised
to note that in SER, ten consignees even got themselves delisted from Priority C and
joined Priority D customers during March 2013 to March 2014, The Committee
understood that consignees did this because for a customer it was easy to get adequate |
rakes under Priority D without proving the use of ‘Iron ore’ at manufacturing units.
This shows that the whole system of rake allotment was pliable to the diversion of iron
ore for export purposes after availing benefit of lower freight charged for domestic
consumption purposes. Moreover, there were instances of manual intervention in
allotment through Rake Allotment System although’ the .allotment was computerized;
* imrespective of the category without complying with the parameters in the system. The
Committee had also observed that the Railways had prescribed easy booking conditions
under category D which made securing rakes under such category easier than that of
other categories. Therefore, the Committee were of the opinion that the Railways should
have devised the conditions for allotment of rakes under category D in such a way that it
would have discouraged the consignees from booking rakes under Category D in
preference over other categories thereby hidirig*their end usage of iron ore booked under
Railways for transport. The Committee were of the firm view that the system of rake
allotment in Railways is not transparent and prone to corrupt practices. The Committee
had, therefore, desired the Railways to review the system of rake allotment and come out
- with a new policy with a mechanism to. develop transparent system within a period of
three months to prevent recurrence of such eventualities in future. They had also desired
the Railway 8०400 to conduct an enquiry to ascertain-whgther any nexus existed between
the Railway officials and the consignees arf fix responsibility, if any, on the officials ,
found to be guilty, Action taken in this regard were to be informed to this Committee.



12,

10

The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Notes have stated:as under:-

“The materialization of allotment under 'D’ priority is lower as compared fo the
higher ‘C’ priority indents under the transparent rake allotment system (RAS)
which has got a very sound algorithm for computerized allotment generation.
Excise returns which are insisted on as mandatory documents at the time of
placing: indents at stations are proof of the fact that iron ore is received and put
into end use at these units. It is pertinent also to mention that each demand is
accompanied by form 'L’ and form 1 issued by the Department of Mines of the
State Government wherein the end use is certified. Also before accepting indents
for iron ore for domestic use, a number of other documents like consent to
operate, IEM (Industrial entrepreneurial memorandum) etc. were collected from

e party as mandated in RC-36 of 2009, These documents were collected and
Verified to ascertain that iron ore was meant for domestic use.

Categorization of demand under priorily 'C’ and (0! is necessitated out of the
following situation:- .

{i) Allocation are normally made to priority ‘C' customers based on peak
production in the previous quarter .excluding the immediate preceding
month. It may so happen that due to fluctuation in the production as
against capacity due to various reasons like maintenance, shut downs,
dislocation, units like to source additional quantum under priority 0! .

(i) | There are issues with regard to poor Fe content in some cases where

customers are’ required to source more iron ore of higher grade under

’ priority ‘D’ to compensate short fall in production. However, in these

cases, checks are undertaken by the office of Dir/R.M to ensure
adherence to conversion norm of 1.7.

(ii) | Standalone pellet plants are entitled to source iron ore only under priority

‘D'. There are some’ steel manufacturing units which have their own pellet
plants in side where they convert iron ore fines {brought in under priority
‘C’) for conversion into pellets for self-consumption for making steel.
Excess quantity of pellets as per capacity if required for sale purposes, is
required to be brought in under priority ‘D’ at par with standalone pellet
manufacturers. — हि :

With a dip in demand for export of iron ore, iron ore export loading during the FY
2013-14, 2014-15 and 2015-16 ‘came down significantly. Therefore getting
delisted from the list of priority ‘C’ customers to priority ‘D' for the purpose of
export does not seem Ukely. Loading of rakes under priority 'C’ over the years
when DFP was in force does not exhibit any pattern to substantiate the argument
that there was large scale migration from-priority ‘C’ to priority ‘D’. है

About manual allotment of rakes, it may be informed that there are very rare
instances .of the same in case of other than CBT indents and in each case, if



1i

found necessary due fo extenuating circumstances, is done withthe consent of
the competent authority. In case of the CBT customers manual allotment is done
only to ensure maximization of loading opportunity, particularly to prevent idling
of special type rolling stock dedicated for large integrated steel plants, and final
loading is always within the limit of the program quantity of the CBT customers.

The completely computerized Rake Allotment System (RAS) is. not only
transparent but also very 10008 Its coverage fs close to 90% of all iron ore loading
locations on IR and 100% proliferation will.be possible with integration issues with
respective mines department software modules of certain State Governments. Up
gradation of RAS is a constantly evolving process and its. coverage will be
expanded in the future. A new iron ore policy for the purpose of programming and .

- allocation is under evolution and can be turnéd out within the time frame of 3
months as stipulated by the Hon'ble committee."

13. “The Committee note that the Railways in their repty have stated that the
materialization of allotment under priority ‘D’ is lower as compared to the priority
‘C’ indents under the transparent Rake Allotment System (RAS). The audit in their
report have specifically highlighted cases to the contrary especially at two major ,
loading points i.e. Chakradharpur (CKP} Division of SER (from January 2011) and
Khurda Road (KUR) Division of ECoR {from May 2011) where the percentage of
rakes allotted to the priority ‘D’ customers was 24 per cent to 33 per cent in case of
CKP and 63 per cent to 83 per cent in case of KUR of total number of rakes allotied.
The Committee observe that the Audit study pertains to the period from 2274 May
2008 to 30" September 2013 and cases relating to Rake allotment were covered up
to 19" May 2014. Thus the fact that the Railways have quoted FY 2013-14, 2014-15
and 2016-16 for refuting the claim of defistings from priority ‘C’ customers to
Priority ‘D’ proves their explanation untenable. It is a matter of serious concern that
manual entries being made by the Terminal Management Systern (TMS) users
regarding timings of registration of indents for rake allotment which is to be
automatically captured by the RAS fem TMS of Freight Operation Information
System (5013), Such manual entries give enough scope for manipulations on.
allocation of rakes under the concept of Oldest Day of Regulation (ODR), which is
applied to Priority ‘D’ customers, under which allotment is done on the basis of
seniority of the indent. The Committee seek the reason as to why fen consignees in
SER got themselves delisted from Priority ‘C’ and joined Priority ‘D’ customers



12

during March 2043 to March 2014. The Committee feel that transparency of RAS
could be claimed by the Ministry only if it is operated in a transparent bonafide
manner, In view of audit findings of cases of circumventions of RAS through
manual interventions in the timings of registration of rake indents in RAS, the
Committee have serious apprehensions about the ability of the Railways to operate
RAS in a transparent, effective and tamperproof manner. The Committee, therefore,
urge the Railways to strengthen and streamline the Rake Allotment System (RAS)
and apprise them about the same, The Committee desire the Indian Railways to
establish a full fledged computerised Rake Allotment System with complete
coverage of all iron oke loading locations integrate with software modules of Mines
Departments of concerned State Governments within 3 months. The Committee
reiterate that the Ministry of Railways take alt required measures to frame and
implement a new iron ore policy with in a period of three months.

NEW DELHI; MALLIKARJUN KHARGE
04 Decermber,2047 - Chairperson
13 Agraahayana, 1939 (Saka} f Public Accounts Committee