1 
 
      103  
 
ASSESSMENT OF ENTITIES ENGAGED IN HEALTH AND ALLIED 
SECTOR  
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE) 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
               
                      
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  


2 
 
PAC NO.  2137 
 
 
O N E  H U N D R E D  A N D  T H I R D  R E P O R T  
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(2018 -19)  
 
 
(SIXT EENT H LOK SABHA)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE  
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)  
 
 
                                         
                                                                              
Presented to Lok Sabha on:  19.07.2018 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   19.07.2018 
 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
 
July, 2018 /Ashadha, 1940 (Saka)  
  
ASSESSMENT OF ENTITIES ENGAGED IN HEALTH AND ALLIED 
SECTOR 
 
 

3 
 
CONTENTS 
  
 
PAGE NO. 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2018-19)  
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2017-18)  
COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE III OF PAC (2017-18)  
INTRODUCTION  
  
PART -I 
 
I Introductory 1 
II Mechanism available with ITD for widening of tax base 7 
III Non-filers Monitoring System (NMS) and action taken on 
NMS data 
8 
IV Allocation of specific jurisdiction for assessment and codes 
to assessees related to healthcare sector 
13 
V Selection criteria for scrutiny 15 
VI Tax incentives available for private healthcare facilities 
under Income Tax Act 
17 
VII Systemic Issues 19 
VIII Exemption allowed to trust hospitals engaged in non -
charitable activities 
22 
IX Overlapping nature section 10(23C) and section 11 of Income 
Tax Act 
23 
X Maintenance of databases of charitable trusts/ institutions 25 
XI Donations not being watched properly 26 
XII Lacuna in section 35AD of Income Tax Act 27 
XIII Incorrect allowance of exemption for trading/commercial 
activities 
28 
XIV Other irregularities in allowance of exemption to hospital 
trusts 
28 
XV Irregular allowance of  depreciation/ expenses resulting in 
double deduction 
29 
XVI Irregular allowance of accelerated depreciation on life saving 
medical equipment 
29 
XVII Irregular allowance of deduction under section 35AD 30 
XVIII Irregular allowance of deduction under section 80IB 30 
XIX Irregular allowance of unlawful expenditure 31 
 PART -II  
 Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee 34 
 APPENDICES  
 MINUTES OF THE SITTINGS*  
   
   
   
 
*To be appended at the time of printing. 

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2018-19) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge   - Chairperson 
 
   MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria  
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra 
5. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar   
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
7. Smt. Riti Pathak 
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank” 
9. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
10. Shri Abhishek Singh 
11. Shri Gopal Shetty 
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya  
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
15. Dr. Ponnusamy  Venugopal 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda 
17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
18. Shri Shwait Malik 
19. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
21. Vacant 
 
22. Vacant 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh               -              Additional Secretary 
2. Shri T. JayaKumar           -              Director 
3. Smt. Bharti S.Tuteja - Deputy Secretary 

5 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2017-18) 
 
  
                                                             
1 Shri Neiphiu Rioh Ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon acceptance of his r esignation from Lok Sabha 
w.e.f. 22 February, 2018.  
2 Shri Naresh Agrawal ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 2 April, 
2018 
3 Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 2 
April, 2018 
4 Elected w.e.f. 29 December, 2017 in lieu of vacancy caused due to retirement of Shri Shantaram Naik.  
5 ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 18 August, 2017 and re -
elected w.e.f. 29 December, 2017. 
6 Shri Ajay Sancheti ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 2 April, 
2018 
7 Shri Bhupender Yadav ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 3 April, 
2018 
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge   - Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra 
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey 
6. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar   
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
8. Smt. Riti Pathak 
9. Vacant1 
10. Shri Abhishek Singh 
11. Prof. Ram Shanker 
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi 
15. Dr. P. Venugopal 
 RAJYA SABHA 
16. Vacant2 
17. Vacant3 
18. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
19. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan4 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy5 
21. Vacant6 
22. Vacant7 

6 
 
 
Sub-Committee – III (Direct and Indirect Taxes) of the PAC (2017-18) 
 
 
Convenor                  
: 
1. Shri Nishikant Dubey                     
Alternate 
Convenor   : 
2. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
Members                   
: 
3. Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi 
 4. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
 5. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
 6. Shri Ajay Sancheti 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

7 
 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, having been authorised by the Committee, 
do present this  One Hundred and Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on "Assessment of 
Entities Engaged in Health and Allied Sector " based on C&AG Report No. 27 of 2017 Union 
Government - relating to the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue). 
2. The Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended March 2017, 
was laid on the Table of the House on 28th July, 2017. 
3. The Public Accounts Committee (2017-18) selected the subject and allocated the same 
to Sub -Committee-III (Direct and Indirect Taxes) for detailed examination and report thereon.  
The Sub -Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Revenue)  on the subject at their sitting held on 16 November, 2017 and 13 
March, 2018.  The Sub -Committee of PAC (2017-18) considered and adopted this Report at 
their sitting held on 2 April, 2018.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Public 
Accounts Committee (2017-18) during their sitting held on 10 April, 2018. The Report was again 
considered and adopted by the Public Accounts Committee (2018 -19) during their sitting held 
on 10 April, 2018. The Minutes of the Sittings form Appendices to the Report.   
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and  Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part- II of the Report.   
5. The Committee thank their predecessor Committee (2017 -18) and the Sub -Committee-
III (Direct and Indirect Taxes)  for taking oral evidence of the Ministry and ob taining information 
on the subject. 
6. The Committee would also like to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) for tendering evidence before the Sub -Committee 
and furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in connection with the examination of 
the subject.    
7. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to them in 
the matter by the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                           MALLIKARJUN KHARGE 
18 July, 2018                                                                                             Chairperson, 
27Ashadha, 1940 (Saka)                                                  Public Accounts Committee.   
      
  

8 
 
REPORT 
PART I 
I. INTRODUCTORY 
 Indian healthcare sector is one of the fastest growing service areas and has 
witnessed significant growth in terms of revenue and employment generation in recent 
years. With liberalization of the economy, the per capita income had increased 
manifolds, whic h in turn increased the demand for high value quality health services. 
The public infrastructure for providing health related services is not sufficient to cater to 
the increasing demands of quality health services in the country. The healthcare sector 
in India comprises both private and public sectors. The private sector provides nearly 80 
per cent of outpatient care and about 60 per cent of inpatient care. The private health 
care sector comprises organizations that operate both on profit and not -for-profit basis. 
The “not -for-profit” organizations include healthcare service providers such as Non -
Government Organizations (NGO’s), charitable institutions, trusts, etc. The private 
sector in India has a dominant presence in medical education and training, hosp ital 
infrastructure and ancillary service areas such as medical technology and diagnostics. 
As per sector-wise data of the Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion , the share 
of foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows in “hospitals and diagnostic cen tres” has been 
increasing at an accelerating rate. This sector attracted FDI of ` 23,169.91 crore 
between April 2000 and September 2016 . The Private Health Expenditure as a 
percentage of GDP has shown an increasing trend during FY 2011 -12 to 2013 -14, 
growing respectively at the rates of 3.21 per cent, 3.24 per cent and 3.28 per cent 
respectively during these three years. GDP at factor cost at current prices in the  year 
2013-14 was estimated at ` 104.73 lakh crore, growing itself at the rate of 11.5 per cent 
over the first revised estimates of GDP of ` 93.89 lakh crore for 2012 -13, which in turn 
grew at 11.9 per cent over the second revised estimates of GDP for 2011 - 12 of  `  
83.91 lakh crore. This translates into an expansion of the private healthcare expenditure 
by more than ` 35,000 crore and ` 39,000 crore during the two years 2012 -13 and 
2013-14 respectively. However, despite this remarkable expansion, the number of 
corporate assessees in the categories viz. Medical Professionals, Nursing Homes, 
Speciality Hospitals had actually declined in FY 2012 -13 and then increased marginally 

9 
 
in FY 2013 -14. The assessees engaged in the business of Private Hospitals, Nursing 
Homes/Medical clinics, Medical C olleges/Research Institutes, Diagnostic Centres, 
Pathological labs, Medical supplies agencies/stores etc. are governed by all the 
provisions of the Income Tax Act that are generally applicable to the different class of 
assessees viz. Companies, Firms, Trus ts, Charity firms, Association of Persons, Hindu 
Undivided families, Individuals etc. Further, the Income Tax Act provides specific tax 
incentives to hospitals. It provides a five  year tax holiday in respect of profits derived 
from the business of operatin g and maintaining hospitals located anywhere in India 
other than the excluded areas subject to certain conditions, besides deduction of capital 
expenditure incurred in connection with setting up of new hospitals, also subject to 
certain conditions. Further, it allows higher rate of depreciation on medical equipment to 
incentivize the hospitals to upgrade their healthcare infrastructure and to provide access 
to patients to the latest technology. 
2. The healthcare infrastructure is divided into the following segments: 
 Hospitals, which include government hospitals and private hospitals. The 
 government hospitals include primary healthcare centres, district hospitals 
 and general hospitals. The private hospitals include nursing  homes/medical 
clinics, mid-tier and top-tier private hospitals. It also  includes hospitals run by trusts, 
charitable institutions and NGOs;  
 Medical Colleges/Research Institutes; 
 Clinical Establishment which include small clinics providing healthcare 
 services without nursing aids and poly-clinic services;  
 Diagnostics Centres/Pathological Labs which comprise businesses and 
 laboratories that offer analytic or diagnostic and pathological laboratory 
 services; and 
 Medical Equipment and Supplies which in clude establishments primarily 
 engaged in medical equipment management and supplies such as  surgical, 
dental, orthopaedic, ophthalmologic, laboratory, consumables  etc.  

10 
 
 Among the professionals engaged in delivery of healthcare services, there are all 
types of surgeons, doctors (all disciplines), nurses and allied health professionals 
(AHPs) viz. technologists, radiologists etc. 
3. The distinguishing characteristics of the sector are 
  i.    The health sector has witnessed a robust annual growth of 15 per cent 
 ii.   The sector is projected to grow from `  684,000 crore in 2015 to ` 823,700 
crore in 2018 with a Compounded Annual Growth Rate of 12.1 per cent 
 iii .   The fees charged by health professionals, private hospitals, nursing homes, 
medical clinics, medical colleges, diagnostic centres, pathological labs, medical supply 
stores etc. for their services are mostly received in cash, which is a high -risk area with 
potential for evasion of tax. 
 iv.   As this sector is expanding very fast, the sources of investment for 
acquisition of assets require proper verification to plug the loopholes on any possible 
transfer of money from untaxed sources or unaccounted funds for such investments.  
4. The C&AG Report No. 27 of 2017 contains significant results of the performance 
audit of assessment of Private Hospitals, Nursing Homes/Medical Clinics, Medical 
Colleges/Research Institutes, Diagnostic Centres, Pathological labs and  other Medical 
supplies agencies/stores etc. of the Department of Revenue – Direct Taxes of the Union 
Government in 2012 -13 to 2015-16. The instances mentioned in this Report are those, 
which came to notice in the course of test audit for the period 2012 -13 to 2015 -16 
conducted during the period July 2016 to November 2016. 
5. The objective of the audit was to:  
  ascertain whether the objectives of introduction of tax incentives specific to 
private hospitals, nursing homes/medical clinics, medical colleges/r esearch 
institutes, diagnostic centres, pathological labs, medical supplies agencies/stores 
etc. have been achieved optimally and whether adequate monitoring mechanism 
is in place;  

11 
 
 derive an assurance that the existing systems and controls are adequate to  
promote compliance of provisions specific to the healthcare institutions and 
medical professionals under the Act as well as compliance to general provisions 
of the Income Tax Act;  
 examine whether all the private hospitals, nursing homes/medical clinics, medical 
colleges/research institutes, diagnostic centres, pathological labs, medical 
supplies agencies/stores etc. were covered in the tax net of the Income Tax 
Department (ITD) and to ascertain whether the efforts made by ITD to strengthen 
the tax base were adequate. 
6. The audit covered:   
i)  The examination of data held by Income Tax Department and detailed 
examination of assessment cases of the assessees engaged in the business of Private 
Hospitals, Nursing Homes/Medical Clinics, Medical Colleges/ Research Institutes, 
Diagnostic Centres, Patho logical Labs, Medical Supplies Agencies/Stores etc., for 
ascertaining compliance to the provisions of the Income Tax Act, 1961. 
 ii)  Collection of data and information from other sources viz. registering bodies, 
Directorates of Investigation, Intelligenc e & Criminal Investigation etc. . The data so 
obtained from these sources were issued to the Commissioners of Income Tax to 
ascertain whether the entities were subject to tax assessment.  
iii)   Survey through issue of questionnaire  to: a) the Controlling Of ficers of 
CGHS/DGHS/PSUs that empanel Private Hospitals, Nursing Homes/Medical Clinics, 
Medical Colleges/Research Institutes, Diagnostic Centres, Pathological labs, Medical 
supplies agencies/stores and Authorised Medical Attendants (AMAs) to ascertain 
whether such empanelled healthcare facilities/professionals were within the income tax 
net; and b) other registering authorities and healthcare institutions to ascertain whether 
the conditions for registration as a healthcare facility/professional included rep orting on 
the income tax registration status. 
7. The audit scrutiny revealed that  

12 
 
a. Despite the availability of systems viz. Income Tax Payer Data Management System 
(ITDMS), Non-filers Monitoring System (NMS), Project Insight and other versatile tools 
for analyzing data collected from external sources for widening of tax base, audit 
noticed that these have not been effectively utilized/ implemented for strengthening the 
tax base in private healthcare sector and for identifying the stop -filers and non -filers. 
The existing tools could not be used to cross -verify whether medical professionals and 
medical companies/healthcare facilities registered with other registering agencies were 
effectively covered in the income tax net. Absence of any system of such cros s-
verification points to the possibility of potential assessees remaining outside the tax net.  
b. Businesses under healthcare sector like medical clinics, diagnostic centres, 
pathological labs and other medical supplies agencies/stores under the existing 
allocation of codes based on the nature of business with respect to healthcare 
assessees were not codified. This negatively impacts monitoring and vigilance of the 
healthcare sector as well as collection and sharing of relevant information on sector -
specific issues.  
c. There was no mechanism in existence for the identification of non -filers through NMS 
in Delhi, Kerala, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu states. The  NMS module also did not have any 
provision for generating reports based on the nature of business.   
d. Surveys, though an effective tool for strengthening tax base as well as deterrence 
against evasion, were not utilised at all in some states during FYs 2012-13 to 2015-16 
by ITD.  
e. ITD has not undertaken any impact analysis to assess the outcome of relief provided 
to assessees engaged in the private healthcare sector.  
f.  The Income Tax Act does not prescribe any measurable parameters to assess the 
extent of charitable activities  being undertaken by any hospital trust availing the benefit 
of exemptions under the Act. This gives rise to a possibility of assessees availing 
exemption without actually performing any charitable function. Audit noticed that 
hospitals in Maharashtra have availed unjustified exemptions amounting ` 249.66 crore 
involving revenue impact of ` 77.14 crore. 

13 
 
 g. In Maharashtra, out of eighty seven cases falling under stand -alone hospital 
category, the section 80G certificates were available only in 10 per cent of cases. In the 
absence of section 80G certificates, it was not clear as to how the Assessing Officers 
cross-verified the donation receipts vis-à-vis the claims. There is no provision in the ITD 
module to enable validation of section 80G certificates by A ssessing Officers as in done 
in the case of TDS certificates under TRACES. 
h. The provision under section 35AD of the Act does not specify the allowability of 
deduction on capital investments in cases where the value of land and building were not 
separable, resulting in allowance of excess deduction and loss of revenue.  
 i. Exemptions were allowed to ineligible assessees engaged in trading/commercial 
activities, as well as instances of incorrect allowance of accelerated depreciation on 
items not classified  under life -saving medical equipment, incorrect allowance of 
deduction under section 80IB of the IT Act on incomes from non -hospital activities and 
irregular allowance of deduction on provisioning rather than on actual capitalization 
under section 35AD of the Act. 
j. The provisions relating to depreciation on machinery and plants as well as 
depreciation on other assets and amortisation of preliminary expenses were allowed 
erroneously. Provisions relating to allowances of business expenditure, tax deducted a t 
source (TDS), minimum alternate tax (MAT) and set off of carry forward losses were not 
followed correctly by the ITD during assessment.  
k. The Assessing officers omitted to obtain details of cases where cash receipt and 
payments were made in contravention to sec 269SS and 269T and also failed to initiate 
penalty proceedings. The computation and allowance of capital gains/losses were not 
carried out according to the provisions of the Act. In some cases, incomes of the 
assessees were not considered in accordance with the laid down provisions of the Act.  
l.  The “referral fees” paid to the doctors by the private hospitals, nursing homes, 
diagnostic centres etc. for referring patients and payments made on account of 
“advertisement expenses” by the medical pr actitioners were allowed, although such 
expenditure has been held as disallowable and “unethical” as per CBDT’s directives and 
laws of regulatory bodies. 

14 
 
8. In the process of examination of the subject, the Sub -Committee-III of PAC on 
Direct and Indirect T axes , which was allocated the subject for indepth examination , 
obtained Background Notes and detailed written replies from the Income Tax 
Department, Central Board of Direct Taxes, Department of Revenue. They also took 
oral evidence of the representative s of Department. Based on written and oral 
depositions by the Department, the Committee examined the subject in detail and 
reached certain conclusions as enumerated in the succeeding paragraphs.  
II. Mechanism available with ITD for widening of tax base  
 As per Action Plan for the year 2016 -17 of CBDT, the strategy for widening tax 
base inter -alia includes devising and pursuing region -specific strategies, efficient 
handling of information without valid Permanent Account Number (PAN) and ensuring 
compliance from identified non -filers. ITD uses various tools of assessment and 
information-based investigations for detecting tax evasion. The Non -filers Monitoring 
System was introduced by ITD to identify the nonfilers/stop -filers from the PAN holders 
who have not filed/stopped filing their returns. ITD also undertakes survey operations to 
collect evidence of tax evasion. The Department receives data relating to cash 
transactions in bank accounts, registered immovable property below the circle rate and 
capital mark et transactions in the form of Annual Information Return (AIR), which is 
analysed to identify cases of tax evasion. To enhance the performance of the ITD, as 
well as to increase the revenue of the government, ITD envisaged an integrated data 
mining tool th at would allow them to search for tax information across different internal 
and external sources. The Income Tax Payer Data Management System (ITDMS) 
assists in generating a 360 -degree profile of an entity by compiling information from all 
data sources such as AIR, TDS and the Central Information Branch (CIB) that helps the 
government to track tax payments of individuals. ITDMS is used for analysing data 
gathered from AIRs, PAN database, ITD applications etc. to unearth illegal transactions. 
ITDMS is a data mining tool used by ITD for detection of potential cases of tax evasion. 
This tool has been implemented in all the offices of DGIT (Investigation) in ITD. ITD has 
also initiated Project Insight for data mining, collection, collation and processing of 
information on high value transactions for effective risk management with a view to 
widening and deepening the tax base. Despite the availability of the above systems and 

15 
 
versatile tools for analyzing data collected from external sources for widening of tax 
base, audit noticed that these have not been effectively utilized/implemented for 
strengthening the tax base in private healthcare sector 
III. Non-filers Monitoring System (NMS) and action taken on NMS data 
 The Non -filers Monitoring System (NMS) was impleme nted by ITD to prioritize 
action on non -filers with potential tax liabilities. This project was initiated in February 
2013 to identify PAN holders who have not filed their returns based on specific 
information available in its databases viz. the Annual Inf ormation Return (AIR), Central 
Information Branch (CIB) or TDS/TCS returns. In healthcare sector, the income 
(payment) is received largely in form of cash and without any deduction of TDS. Such 
cash receipts or payments are not being capt ured by any third party in AIR. Thus NMS 
is not able to identify/ track the high value cash transactions occurring in the private 
healthcare sector. CBDT has notified  standard operating procedure for processing and 
monitoring cases of ‘Non -filers of IT Returns’ identified b y the Directorate of Systems 
under the NMS cycles after which notices under section 142(1)/148 of the Income Tax 
Act were to be issued in appropriate cases. In order to ascertain compliance to 
instructions issued by CBDT, details of the action taken in the  Commissionerates were 
examined by Audit in respect of non -filers identified by the ITD itself. The detailed lists 
of non -filers along with action taken thereof could be furnished in respect of West 
Bengal, Assam and Gujarat only, where out of 18,333 cases , ITD had closed 3,627 
cases and the remaining 14,706 cases  were “under verification/action pending” or were 
yet to be closed. Audit found that no such process of identification of on non -filers 
through NMS existed in Delhi, Kerala, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu s tates. In West Bengal, 
out of 808 cases, in case of 668 non -filers, the AOs were yet to initiate proceedings 
under section 142(1) read with section 148 in Assessment Information System (AST) of 
ITD. For such cases, verification or any further action was pe nding even after the expiry 
of periods ranging from one year to two years from the identification of the assesse es. 
In the remaining 140 cases , it could not be ascertained whether the assessees were 
engaged in business/profession of private healthcare sect or. It was seen that by Audit 
that the NMS module also did not have any provision for generating reports based on 

16 
 
the nature of business (Code -wise). The codewise information in respect of healthcare 
sector hence could not be furnished by ITD. 
11. When asked about the efforts made to widen the tax net, the ITD replied that 
 ”The Department has devised multipronged strategy to bring potential assessees 
within the tax net. Widening the tax base is one of the major focus areas for ITD. The 
ITD has already implemented Non-filers Monitoring System (NMS) to prioritize action on 
non-filers with potential tax liability. This project was initiated in February 2013 to 
identify PAN holders who have not filed their returns based on specific information 
available in its databases viz. the Specified Financial Transactions (SFT), Central 
Information Branch (CIB) or TDS/TCS returns. Till date 6 NMS cycles have been 
implemented identifying 2.16 crores non -filers having potential tax liability. CBDT has 
recently assigned target for new return filers for A.Y.2017-18 at 1.25 crores." 
"The NMS identifies non-filers who are likely to have potential tax liability. Once returns 
are filed by such non-filers, returns pertaining to health sector can be segregated on the 
basis of 4 business codes assigned to this sector.  However, on the suggestion of the 
Hon’ble PAC, a letter has been written to Ministry of Health to make it mandatory for the 
registering entities to quote their PAN in the registration form itself so that this data can 
be used/matched with the data of return filers, thereby immediately flagg ing non-filers 
from the health sector. This will improve monitoring of this sector." 
12. During audit, efforts were made to assess the efficacy of the existing systems 
and mechanisms available and operating within the Income Tax Department (ITD) for 
bringing Private Hospitals, Nursing Homes, Medical Professionals, Diagnostic Centres, 
Pathological labs and other Medical supplies agencies/stores in the medical service 
sector in the income tax net. Audit collected information through survey questionnaire 
on likely assessees in respect of 26 states from different third party sources viz. various 
registering bodies, government agenc ies, besides official websites  etc. Data were 
collected through survey questionnaires from the respective Controlling Officers of the  
above agencies to ascertain whether the healthcare facilities/ professionals empanelled 
with them were covered by the income tax net. The data of probable assessees  
(approximately 3,20,733 records with respect to 26 states) so obtained from the sources 
were segregated according to jurisdictions and issued to the respective Pr.CsIT/CsIT of 

17 
 
ITD23 (May 2016 to December 2016) for verifying the income tax registration status of 
such assessees and to identify the nonfilers/stop -filers among them, if any. Howeve r, 
any attempt to identify such status through cross verification of such data with the 
income tax assessee database records proved by and large unsuccessful  
13. On being asked about the inadequacy of  the existing mechanisms in ITD for 
strengthening and widening of tax base for identification of probable assessees 
engaged in business/profession in the private healthcare sector, the ITD submitted that 
 "The current system in the Department did not allow name -based search without 
PAN and expressed difficult y to manually search and identify assessees under 
respective jurisdictions. " 
"In the present Finance Bill we have introduced a new clause that if any non -
individual entity is having any interaction,  any transaction of more than ` 2.5 lakh, they 
will have to obtain PAN compulsorily meaning thereby that every trust or every firm or 
small entities also will have to have PAN, if their transactions are mor e than  ` 2.5 lakh 
including the beneficiaries and the settler of the trust. That is a very big clause which we 
have brought in this Finance Bill. With this, at least the health sector and other entities 
will also come under the tax net as far as this issue is concerned." 
 "Population of PAN by name matching is a very challenging and time -consuming 
activity as address mentioned during registration may be different than the address 
available in the PAN database. Furt her, the registration of the medical clinics, 
pathological labs, medical supplies stores may be taken in the name of proprietary 
concern whereas the PAN may be in the name of individual. 
Under Project Insight an advanced analytical solution is being rolled out wherein it will 
be possible to select matching PAN by applying various PAN imputation rules. A letter 
has been written to Ministry of Health to  make it mandatory to registering entities to 
quote their PAN in the registration form itself so that external data can be used/matched 
with the Income-tax data. 
The final implementation of the Project Insight will be duly informed." 
14. When asked about the efforts being made to make the quoting of PAN 
mandatory, the ITD replied that 

18 
 
 "Letter was sent to the Secretary, Health Ministry. It was informed by Health 
Ministry that only CGHS is under their control for which necessary directions have been 
issued to all offices. Subsequently, letters under the signature of the Secretary 
(Finance) were also sent to the Chief Secretaries of 29 States and 7 Union Territories. 
Responses from 4 States and 1 UT have been received." 
15. The Chairman, CBDT during the course of  evidence submitted that 
 
 "Sir, we have got a full system called Non -Filers Management System. We do not have 
a system that we go after a hospital or a provision shop. We have got our parameters and we 
get the data from different specified authorities who are sending us the data. There are many 
entities like banks, mutual funds etc. Now, a new section has been introduced that if an ybody 
is investing more than ` 2  lakh, we get that information also. Then, we match it and then we 
find out as to who are the non -tax payers. We issue them notices saying that according to our 
data, you should have filed the return, but you have not filed the return. In six cycles, we have 
got something around two crore assesses. We have issued two crore new notice s to them as 
we found new assesses. You will find a very systematic increase in the number of returns. I 
think, three years before, we had only 3.7 crore assesses and by this March end, we are going 
to have 6 crore assesses. So it is the whole system. It i s not that one particular trade we are 
going to catch. We are moving ahead from 3.7 crore assesses to 6 crore assesses by the end 
of this month. Already more than 5 crore returns have been received So, there are systems 
existing. We should not see very min utely that hospital has not been covered or a particular 
trade has not been covered. This is the whole system. If a person is a doctor or a compounder, 
if he has purchased a property worth more than ` 30 lakh, we will get a report from the system, 
we will find out whether he has filed the return or not. If he has not filed the return, we will issue 
the notice. We are doing surveys also and we are doing searches also. It is not that we are 
leaving the doctors. Recently, in Uttar Pradesh we have done search o n a d octor’s house 
where we found ` 4  crore in cash. In another case, in Mumbai, a pharmaceutical company 
paid freebies to the doctors and we covered doctors. So, we have a system of finding out such 
cases. We cannot enter into everybody’s house." 
 

19 
 
IV. Allocation of specific jurisdiction for as sessment and codes to 
 assessees related to healthcare sector  
 Allocation of specific jurisdiction and proper codification of different businesses in 
the healthcare sector are essential for proper monitoring, collection and sharing of 
relevant information as also for the expert handling of sector -specific issues in the 
course of assessment. Specified jurisdiction/codification based on the nature of 
business/income for a growing sector like health is also essent ial for the Department to 
carry out quality assessment, better monitoring and improved vigilance. the Departme nt 
has codified  the healthcare sector assessees under three categories, viz. (a) ‘604’ 
covering ‘Medical Professionals’, (b) ‘605’ covering ‘Nursi ng Homes’ and (c) ‘606’ 
covering ‘Specialty Hospitals’. Thus, businesses under health sector like Medical 
Clinics, Diagnostic Centres, Pathological labs and other Medical supplies 
agencies/stores are not codified. Further, the jurisdictional CIT (COs) in s tates could not 
even furnish the data pertaining to these three existing codes, stating that their offices 
had no facility to generate the requested report. Audit noticed that the corporate and 
non-corporate assessees engaged in business/ profession of Pri vate Hospitals, Nursing 
Homes etc. were distributed geographically/alphabetically, independent of the nature of 
business, for assessment purpose amongst the Assessing Officers in Gujarat, 
Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal states. Only the assessments of 
(i)‘noncorporate assessees’ engaged in the Medical Profession/stores in Pune, Mumbai 
(Maharashtra), Kolkata (West Bengal) and Delhi and (ii) ‘corporate assessees’ engaged 
in healthcare business in Bengaluru, were being done in specified jurisdictions. 
17. When asked about the absence of sector specific information in respect of non/ 
stop filers, the ITD replied that 
 "Non-filer monitoring system (NMS) of ITD identifies the non -filers based on 
significant financial transactions reported to the  ITD by the reporting entities. The NMS 
cycle is run on the data submitted to the Department by various information submitting 
entities like SFT, CIB, TDS/TCS return. It is not possible to generate sector wise details 
of non -filers. However, such details c an be generated for stop filers on the basis of 
business codes quoted by the tax payers while filing their income tax returns. The ITD 
has specific codes for following sectors relating to health care business: 

20 
 
(i)        Drugs and Pharmaceuticals- 0105  
(ii)        Medical Professionals – 0604 
(iii)       Nursing Homes – 0605 
(iv) Speciality Hospitals - 0606 
 During the course of Oral Evidence, the Chairman, CBDT has assured the 
Hon’ble PAC that business code will be assigned to standalone Medical Clinics, 
Diagnostics Centres, and Pathological Labs from the next financial year. 
 The new codes for Medical Clinics, Diagnostic Centres, Pathological labs and 
Medical Supplier Agencies/Stores will be operational from the next financial year. For 
these, suitable changes in the I ncome Tax return form will also be made.With the 
implementation of new four codes, the health sector will be allocated 8 codes (including 
4 existing codes). This will ensure that maximum number of persons associated with 
health sectors are covered within o ne of these 8 codes. As regards NMS, it will be able 
to capture ‘’stop filers’’ from this sector on the basis of ‘’codes’’ mentioned in the last 
return filed 
 The formal mechanism of sharing information between ITD and State 
Registration Authorities can only be made possible through legislation. However, 
information can always be shared by such authorities with the ITD. The Department 
also, as and when required, seeks information from such authorities by invoking 
relevant provisions in the Act." 
 
18. Audit noticed that there was a mismatch in the number of corporate taxpayers 
registered with the ITD as compared to the number of active companies registered with 
the ROC, even though all of them were required to file tax returns mandatorily, pointing 
to the p ossibility of existence of non -filers, who could otherwise have been detected in 
case ITD had a system of checking the PAN status with the external databases of other 
Government agencies. Thus the ITD could not effectively utilize the existing tools for 
identifying potential tax payers or non -filers/ stop -filers from the databases of other 
registering bodies. Audit, attempted to asc ertain through a questionnaire  based survey 
whether the private healthcare facilities and AMAs empanelled with PSUs were within  
the income tax net. ITD could not furnish any information on the existence of these units 

21 
 
in their tax net in the absence of PAN details. Here also, the existing tools could not be 
utilized effectively to widen the tax base as per the existing strategy of the ITD. 
19. On the issue of mismatch in the number of corporate taxpayers registered with 
the ITD as compared to the number of active companies registered with the ROC 
 "ITD database capture the information on the basis of high value transactions 
which is a source, based o n the information sent by the  external reporting agencies viz. 
Banks, Registrars of immovable properties, credit card companies etc. These 
information are utilised  by the Department and are cross verified with the data of the 
existing tax payers and also for identifying potential tax payers." 
V. Selection criteria for scrutiny  
 The Intelligence and Criminal Investigation (I&CI) wing/Investigation wing  of the 
Department collects, collates and disseminates information under section 285BA40 of 
the Income Tax Act, 1961 (Annual Information Return -AIR) as well as other information 
under the Compulsory Central Information Branch(CIB) codes. Audit sought information 
to ascertain the efforts made by them for strengthening the tax base in healthcare 
sector. ITD informed that no information was collected in respect of private hospitals, 
nursing homes etc. during FY 2012-13 to 2015-16, in any of the states except in Punjab 
where only 5 cases  of assessees engaged in healthcare sector were noticed and 
brought into the tax net by the Investigation wing.  ITD uses Computer Aided Scrutiny 
Selection (CASS) for selection of cases for scrutiny in a centralized manner, based  on 
the risk analysis and 360 -degree data profiling of tax payers. Prior to the introduction of 
CASS in November 2004 and even till the AY 2012 -13, trust hospitals having annual 
receipts of more than ` 5 crore were required to be compulsorily selected for scrutiny 
assessments. After the introduction of online filing of ITR 7 (Returns for Trusts and 
Charitable Institutions) with effect from AY 2013 -14, selection of such cases is now 
being done through CAS S. However, the Assessing Officer can still exercise discretion 
for manual selection under specified circumstances. In CIT (Exemption), Pune case 
records, the selection criteria for CASS were indicated in general terms like “Large 
receipts reported by trus t for charitable purposes”, “Large amount spent on charity”, 
“Large cash deposits” etc. Audit noticed that some assessees having significant gross 

22 
 
receipts (e.g. Mahatma Gandhi Mission, Aurangabad, having a turnover of ` 1,635 crore 
(AY 2013 -14), Terna Pub lic Trust (Terna Medical College and Research Centre's 
Sahyadri Hospital) having gross receipts of ` 89 crore (FY 2013-14)), were not selected 
for scrutiny during AY 2012 -13. Neither did the Assessing Officer utilise his powers of 
manual selection despite the turnover of the assessees being high and far above the 
earlier prescribed threshold. In PCIT -Siliguri, West Bengal, in case of Dr. Chhang’s 
Super Specialty Hospital Private Limited, although the as sessee had earned high 
incomes during the FYs 2009 -10 to 2012-13, it was not selected for scrutiny during AY 
2010-11, though selected for the subsequent years (AYs 2011 -12, 2012-13 and 2013 -
14). Similarly, in PCIT -Exemption, Kolkata, in case of Kothari Welfare Institute, the 
assessee d espite having very high i ncome during FY 2010 -11, was not selected for 
scrutiny during the subsequent year AY 2011 -12, when the income had dropped 
significantly but still remained high. 
21. On the query regarding non selection of cases of very high income during 
scrutiny, the ITD submitted 
 "There are already several systems in the Department to monitor the progress in 
all the sectors filing ITR with the Income tax Department like review, inspection, 
watching financial result of the companies/print media. "  
  
 "Further, there is already a system through which the Banks report the high value 
cash transactions to the ITD through the Specified Financial Transactions (SFT). In 
addition to this the Banks also send information of high value cash/non -cash transaction 
through Suspicious Transaction Reports (STR) to the Financial Intelligence Units (FIU) 
under the Finance Ministry, which are passed on to the ITD. These informations are 
duly verified by the Income -tax Department and appropriate proceeding/action is 
initiated in cases of suspicious/unexplained cash transactions. In the high risk cases, on 
the basis of potential intelligence information Searches u/s 132 and Surveys u/s 133A 
are carried out. " 
 "The d epartment believes mainly in non -intrusive methods for tax co mpliance. 
Only in exceptional cases based on actionable intelligence & specific information, 

23 
 
surveys & searches are conducted. Whenever such information has been received in 
respect of health care sectors, searches/surveys have been carried out on them. " 
 
VI. Tax incentives available for private healthcare facilities under Income Tax 
Act 
  Tax incentives encourage the growth of private sector investment and serve as 
important policy tools for achieving economic and social objectives. The assessees 
engaged in the business of running hospitals, nursing homes, medical research 
institutes etc. can avail of reliefs and ince ntives under sections 10 (23C), 11, 35AD and 
80IB (11B/11C)  of the Income Tax Act. As per data furnished by the Department of 
Revenue, the amount of revenue foregone on  account of weighted deduction in case of 
hospitals under section 35AD and on building and operating private hospitals in rural 
areas under section 80IB(11B) amounted to ` 5,418.91 crore and ` 7.04 crore 
respectively The ITD has not undertaken sector -specific analysis of revenue foregone 
under section 35AD to assess the impact of the incentives provided to different sectors 
including healthcare. The revenue foregone under section 80IB (11B/11C) is not very 
significant indicating that the incentive has been availed by very few assessees thereby 
defeating the purpose of introduction of this legislation. Audit sought the details of the 
number of assessees availing deductions under sections 35AD and 80IB (11B/11C), but 
the same could n ot be furnished by the Department. Audit noticed that despite the 
considerable volumes of revenue foregone, no proper monitoring mechanism was in 
place. There were also discrepancies in the application of the provisions of income tax 
related to profit-linked/ investment-linked tax incentives specific to the healthcare sector. 
The specific tax incentives provided by Government have a definite revenue impact and 
can be viewed as an indirect subsidy to tax payers, also referred to as ‘tax 
expenditures’. The revenue impact of tax incentives was assess ed by way of ‘Revenue 
Foregone’, now termed as ‘Revenue Impact of Tax Incentive s under the Central Tax 
System’. The quantum of revenue foregone is the chief parameter to assess the impact 
of tax deduction which is t reated as a measure of tax expenditure incurred for the 
promotion of organised activity (viz. creation of infrastructural facilities, accelerated 
depreciation as an incentive for capital investment) in the targeted sector. 

24 
 
23. On being asked about the impact analysis, the CBDT stated that  
 "Direct tax concessions were provided by the Government as part of overall fiscal 
incentives to realise the macroeconomic objectives and to achieve policy goals of 
development and growth in various sectors of economy . No such quantitative exercise 
had been undertaken by the Department to assess the outcome of reliefs provided to 
private hospitals, medical colleges/research institutes, diagnostic centres etc. Further, 
CBDT had not undertaken any evaluation study/ speci fic analysis or research to assess 
the impact of tax incentives. However, feedback on the implementation and 
effectiveness of the existing provisions of the Income Tax Act were received from field 
authorities, tax payers and various stakeholders from time to time. It further informed 
that the feedback formed the basis for any intervention if required from the CBDT by 
way of legislative amendments or through notifications and circulars. " 
 
24. The ITD further replied that 
  "It is further stated that administrative ministries were requested to provide an 
impact assessment study in respect of tax concessions provided for the sectors under 
their jurisdiction and provide a detailed cost -benefit analysis on, inter alia, the following 
aspects: 
I. additional in vestment made and resultant increase in manufacturing/economic 
activity in case of both greenfield and brownfield projects; 
II. additional employment generated; 
III. additional exports made; 
IV. improved affordability and resultant increase in demand of the concerned p roducts 
made in the country.  
 
 In this connection, it may be mentioned here that the Ministry of Shipping has 
intimated that the presumptive taxation scheme called “Tonnage Tax” for calculating 
shipping related profits has led to increase in the fleet of ships by 100% and a growth 
of 60% in the gross tonnage between 2004 and 2016. Moreover, there have been 
several indirect benefits to the economy through generation of additional employment 
and increase in foreign direct investment." 
 

25 
 
 
VII. Systemic Issues  
 The private healthcare sector comprises organizations working both on 
commercial basis for profit and on not -for-profit basis. The ‘not -for-profit’ healthcare 
sector includes Non -Government Organisations (NGOs), charitable trusts etc. A large 
number of hospitals and medical institutions enjoy the benefit of exemption either under 
section 11 or under section 10(23C). However many institutions which are not running 
for charitable purpose escape taxation by virtue of the fact that they are registered as 
Trusts and claim exemption under Income Tax Act. Income of a charitable trust is 
exempt according to the provisions of sections 11, 12 and 13. The trust should be one 
established in accordance with law and its  objects should fall within the definition of the 
term “Charitable purpose”. Section 2(15) of the Income Tax Act defines charitable trust 
as to include relief of the poor, education, medical relief, preservation of environment 
and preservation of monuments  or places or objects of artistic or historic interest and 
the advancement of any other object of general public utility. It was seen that the 
appellate Income Tax authorities had allowed exemptions to trusts as there was no 
performance-specific bar in the  Income Tax Act to deny such exemption. In 
Maharashtra, charitable trusts are governed by the Bombay Public Trust Act, 1950 (BPT 
Act) and while granting the registration under section 12AA of the Income Tax Act, the 
ITD requires the trusts to produce proof of registration under the BPT Act. Under section 
41AA of the BPT Act, the Bombay High Court in 2004 introduced a scheme of 
measurable charity under which all charitable trust hospitals registered under the BPT 
Act, 1950, and having annual expenditure of m ore than `  5 lakh were required to fulfil 
following conditions: a) Reserve 10 per cent of the total number of operational beds for 
indigent patients and provide medical treatment to these indigent patients free of cost. 
b) Reserve 10 per cent of the beds for the weaker section patients for treatment at 
concessional rate. c) Earmark 2 per cent of total patient billing as Indigent Patient Fund 
(IPF) to be utilised on the treatment of indigent patients. It was further required that the 
Trust shall not ask for  any deposit in case of admission of indigent patients. Audit 
analysed a sample of ten trust hospitals situated in Maharashtra on the basis of data 
supplied by the Charity Commissioner, Mumbai. The information was also obtained in 

26 
 
respect of nine oth er cases through other sources  and also through field a udits. Audit 
examination revealed that the conditions specified in the BPT Act were not fulfilled in 
some cases, though exemptions were allowed to such trusts.  
26. The Income Tax Act, however, does not iden tify non -compliance with the BPT 
Act as a ground to deny exemption and the Income Tax Act does not have its own 
criteria to identify and classify charitable institutions on the basis of measurable and 
quantifiable parameters, like those described under the  BPT Act. Under such 
circumstances, trusts that are not fulfilling the criteria for charity prescribed under 
governing Acts of the State were able to claim exemptions under the Income Tax Act. 
Further in cases where registration status of the trust assesse es changes under state 
laws, it could not be ascertained whether ITD had any mechanism to deal with the 
exemptions already allowed in such cases.  
27. The C & AG of India in its report number 4 of the year 2016 for the Government 
of Maharashtra placed befo re Maharashtra State Assembly pointed out several 
irregularities in respect of the charitable activities carried out by these hospitals in 
Maharashtra vide chapter number III. It was stated in the report that hospitals avail 
Government benefits without performing activities as specified under the Bombay Public 
Trust Act, 1950. These hospitals have availed non -justified exemption amounting ` 
249.66 crore involving revenue impact of `  77.14 crore. 
28. On being asked about absence of measurable parameters the ITD replied  
 "The ITD grants exemptions after thoroughly verifying the aims &objectives of 
any charitable trust. Section 2(15) of the Act defines “charitable purpose”. The 
exemptions are allowed to the entities once they fulfil the conditions laid down under the 
Act. As such, there is no procedure in place to consult the State Registration Authority. 
However, if the State Govt. finds that a certain Charitable Institution is not fulfilling the 
criteria for charity, it can cancel their registration and inform the ITD for further 
necessary action. In this regard please refer to answer to question no. 26 above. 
Breach of BPT Act 1950, cannot be a ground for not allowing exemption to the claiming 
entities once they have been found to have fulfilled all the necessary conditions laid 
down under the Act." 

27 
 
 29. The ITD further stated that 
  "Prescribing a certain percentage of their services to be dedicated to the poor will 
not serve any purpose since we have to depend upon self-certification and there cannot 
be any mechanism to verify the same.   
 Similarly, regular inspections will lead to ‘Inspector Raj’ and open up 
opportunities for rent seeking behavior.  Further, there are sufficient in -built checks and 
balances to ensure that the income is applied for the objects of the trusts under the 
Income-tax Act, 1961.  In view of the above, the suggestions are not acceptable." 
30. However, the Secretary, DoR in his submission during evidence stated that  
 “Unless the country is going to restrict the definition of ‘charitable activity’ by 
putting strict conditionality or we say, at least, that if 50 per cent of the patients being 
served by charitable institutions have to be below the poverty line. Are we going to pu t 
such a conditionality in the definition, then, yes, we will be greatly benefited. All this 
misuse will go away..” 
 
VIII. Exemption allowed to trust hospitals engaged in non-charitable activities  
 A charitable institution can also be engaged in non-charitable activities. As per 
Section 11(4A), deductions under section 11 shall not be admissible in relation to any 
income, being profits and gains of business, unless the business is incidental to the 
attainment of the objectives of the trust or the institution and separate books of accounts 
are maintained by such trust or institution in respect of such business. Section 
10(23C)(via) of the Act provides that exemption to the trust is available if it exists 
“solely” for philanthropic purpose and not fo r purposes of profit. Further, s ection 13 
specifies situations in which the exemptions can be denied to trusts. Audit noticed two 
cases in West Bengal and Maharashtra states where the Department allowed 
exemptions to trust hospitals where the activities in dicated the fact of their being run for 
profit/ non charitable purposes. 
32. When asked about the grant of exemptions to the trusts being run on profitable/ 
charitable purposes, the ITD replied 

28 
 
 "The charitable nature of trust is verified by concerned CIT( Exemptions) before 
grant of registration u/s 12AA. The CIT(Exemptions) satisfies himself about object of the 
trust or institution and the genuineness of its activities by making necessary 
enquiry/verification as required u/s 12AA(b) before grant of registration." 
 
IX. Overlapping nature of section 10(23C) and section 11 of Income Tax Act  
 As per section 10(23C), the income of certain funds, Universities, educational 
institutions, hospitals, etc., that deal with philanthropy works are not to be included in 
the total income. Section 11 of the Act governs the grant of exemption to income of a 
charitable trust or institution. Thus Section 10(23C) and section 11 of the Income Tax 
Act, 1961 are overlapping in nature. Though, the contours of both the sections are more 
or less the same, absence of clear definitions and boundaries, besides existence of 
overlapping provisions covering the same purposes (philanthropy or charity) in both 
sections leave scope for confusion and varying interpretations, allowing the assesses to 
take unfair advantage of excluding the income or claiming exemption utilising on e of 
these two provisions that suits them. The statute renders itself amenable to misuse by 
permitting an assessee to claim similar benefits under both the sections. Audit noticed 
instances, as illustrated below, where Assessing Officers allowed exemption under one 
section while disallowing exemption on the grounds of existence of profit motive under 
another. In CIT (Exemption) Mumbai, scrutiny -assessments of Breach Candy Hospital 
Trust for the AY 2012 -13 and National Health and Education Society for AY 201 3- 14 
were completed in March 2015 and March 2016 respectively. In the case of Breach 
Candy Hospital, it was observed that the assessee had claimed and was allowed 
exemption under both the sectio ns i.e. section 11 and 10(23C) . In the case of National 
Health and Education Society, the A ssessing officer did not allow  exemption under 
section 10(23C) stating the reason that the hospital trust did not exist “solely” for 
philanthropic purposes and was engaged in business for making profit, but was 
alternatively a llowed exemption under section 11 as per the claim made by the 
assessee.  

29 
 
34. When asked about the overlapping nature of  two sections, the ITD submitted 
that 
 "The Department makes necessary enquiry/verification before grant of exemption 
under relevant sections i.e. Section 11, 10(23C) etc., as per the conditions prescribed in 
the Income Tax Act. Though the provisions of the two sections are overlapping so far as 
purposes (philanthropy or charity) are concerned, conditions prescribed in the Act are to 
be fulfilled for these two sections separately which are to be examined by the Assessing 
officer/CIT at the time of grant of exemption/approval. Hence, there is no possibility of 
misuse by permitting an assessee to claim similar benefits under both the sections." 
 "Further, the Board has already issued a circular no. 14 of 2015 dated 
17.08.2015, which explains that Section 10(23C)(vi) does not prescribe any stipulation 
which makes registration u/s 12AA a mandatory pre or post condition. In fact, provisions 
of section 11 and 10(23C) are two parallel regimes and operate independently in their 
respective realms although some of the compliance criteria may be common to both. 
Hence obtaining prior registration before granting approval u/s 10(23C) cannot be 
insisted upon. However, in case of a trust or an institution having obtained registration 
u/s 12AA as well as approval u/s 10(23C)(vi), if registration is withdrawn at some point 
of time due to certain adverse findings, the withdrawal of approval u/s 10(23C)(vi) sh all 
not be automatic but will depend upon whether these adverse findings also impact the 
conditions necessary to keep approval u/s 10(23C)(vi) alive." 
 "Another issue was raised regarding 1023C and Section 11. This was also 
debated during this year’s budget meetings. But as we have already set up a task force 
for rewriting the Act, this is under active consideration of that particular Committee, and 
we have referred the matter to that Committee ." 
 
35. The ITD further stated that 
 "The powers in respect of approval under section 10 (23C) and registration under 
section 12A of the Income Tax Act were earlier vested with different authorities. 
However, with effect from FY 2014 -15, these powers have been combined and vested 

30 
 
with a single authority, viz. CIT (Exemption) who would be deciding the eligibility for 
exemption under both the sections to reduce the scope of any assessee availing 
exemptions under the alternate section if denied exemption under one section." 
X. Maintenance of databases of charitable trusts/ institutions 
  The ITD maintains a database on exempt entities on its officia l website  
containing details of entities viz. name, address, state, city, jurisdiction, section under 
which registered, date of order etc. Structuring of  the database of tax exempt entities 
maintained by the ITD in more detailed manner and establishing their linkage with the 
ITRs of the trusts would facilitate streamlining of assessment and detection of tax 
evasion. ITD may consider adopting the global bes t practices in respect of maintaining 
databases on exempt entities. 
 
37. On the issue of database relating to health sector, the ITD stated that 
 "The ITD does not select specific sector based information. The tools available 
with the Department cover various SFT/CIB codes through which information related to 
all sectors is collectively captured. " 
 "Further, the ITD stated that it has not made any estimation of the probable 
number of medical clinics in the county. " 
 
 "As regards revenue foregone by way of deductions u/s 35AD/80IB(11B), this 
exercise is undertaken every year by the Department." 
 "As per the figures available on website Indiabudget.gov.in, revenue impact for 
deduction u/s 35AD has increased to ` 1,890.84 cr. during FY 2015 -16 as compared to 
` 1,790.57 cr. in FY 2014 -15. These figures are incorporated in the budget after the 
feedback given by the Income Tax Department." 
 
XI. Donations not being watched properly 

31 
 
  Deduction under section 80G of the Income Tax Act is a taxation tool to help 
donee trusts to receive funds to further their charitable objectives. It also helps donors 
to claim the amounts of donation as deductions, resulting in lowering of their tax liab ility. 
One of the conditions for registration for availing tax benefits under section 80G 
stipulated that receipts issued to the donor should bear the ‘Reference Number’ and 
‘Date of the order’. Audit noticed  that out of eighty seven cases falling under st and-
alone hospital category, the section 80G certificates were available in 10 per cent of 
cases. In the remaining cases, only a list of donations received was available. In cases 
having representative receipts, audit noticed instances, where nature of don ation or 
mode of receipts was not on record. In the absence of section 80G certificates, it was 
not clear as to how the Assessing Officers cross -verified the donation receipts vis -à-vis 
the claims. The 80G donation aspect needs more attention from the Depa rtment as it 
entails revenue foregone on account of exemption to recipients and also deduction to 
donors. In the absence of mechanism for cross verification of claims made by donors 
and donees, the chances of ineligible assessees getting deduction cannot r uled out. 
There is no provision in the ITD module to enable validation of section 80G certificates 
by Assessing Officers on similar lines as in done i n the case of TDS certificates  under 
TRACES. 
39. On being asked about the feasibility of issuing certificates under Section 80G, the 
ITD replied that 
 "It may further be mentioned here that the automated generation of 80G 
certificates on similar lines as under TRACES would not be feasible to implement and 
would be extremely complicated for small donors and sma ll exempt organizations who 
would have to submit a statement to the Department and then obtain a certificate to be 
given to the donor. However, there is provision in the Income tax return for providing 
PAN/TAN of the donee so as to enable to check the corr ectness of the claim while 
processing the case by the Department. The limit of cash donation has been reduced 
from ` 10,000/- to  ` 2,000/- w.e.f. 01.04.2018, thereby minimizing scope for claim of 
bogus donations." 
 

32 
 
XII. Lacuna in section 35AD of Income Tax Act  
 As per section 35AD of the Income Tax Act, expenditure incurred on the 
acquisition of any land or goodwill or financial instrument is not eligible for any 
deduction under section 35AD. Audit noticed that due to am biguity in the Act, the AO s 
had allowed deduction under section 35AD on the value of land in cases where it is 
included in the total cost of the building as where the two values are not separable has 
not been clarified. 
41. The ITD, in response to the query relating to lacuna in Sec 35AD, replied 
 "The Department has taken a considered view that the cost of land cannot be 
reduced from the cost of building (which includes cost of land as well) while making a 
claim u/s 35AD. However, the department is considering to issue  clarification in cases 
where the construction has been done only on a very small portion of the land indicating 
thereby the intention of the taxpayer to take undue advantage of the said section." 
XIII. Incorrect allowance of exemption for trading/commercial activities 
  In Maharashtra, audit noticed instances where trust hospitals were operating 
pharmacy stores in the hospital premises and were generating huge amounts of surplus 
on the sale of medicines. The margins of profits earned on  the sale of medicines 
constituted major portion of their total surplus generated during a year. The Department, 
in the case of Jaslok Hospital and Hinduja Hospital (AY 2013 -14) had taxed pharmacy 
income as business income. However, in seven such cases (li sted in Appendix -1), the 
Department had not taxed the huge surplus generated from pharmacy business, despite 
the issues being identical in nature. This resulted in underassessment of income of ` 
72.65 crore involving tax effect of ` 21.86 crore. 
XIV Other irregularities in allowance of exemption to hospital trusts  
 Sections 11, 12 and 13 of the Income Tax Act contain provisions governing the 
grant or withdrawal of registration, conditions for allowability of exemption to trusts or 
institutions in res pect of income derived from property held under trust and voluntary 
contributions. Disposal of trust properties by trustees through unethical means is one of 
the concerns for the legislation governing the trusts. Income Tax Act also addresses 

33 
 
such concerns  under section 13(2)(c). As per the provisions, if any part of income or 
property held under the trust is applied directly or indirectly for the benefit of any perso n 
referred to in sub-section 3 thereof, then the exemption benefit would not be available to 
the trust. Audit noticed instances of incorrect allowance of exemption on income of trust 
in contravention of conditions stipulated in the Act. In Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Uttar 
Pradesh states, audit noticed 17 cases involving tax effect of ` 32.87 crore ,where the 
AOs had irregularly allowed exemption under section 11 of the Act. 
XV. Irregular allowance of depreciation/expenses resulting in double deduction 
  As per the judgement of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in the case of 
Escorts Ltd. vs Unio n of India  where a full deduction has been allowed in relation to a 
capital asset (under section 11 of the Act), no depreciation is to be allowed under 
section 32 on the same asset. It was further held that in the absence of clear statutory 
indication to t he contrary, the statute should not be read so as to permit the assessee 
two simultaneous deductions . The Kerala High Court (2012)  also supported the above 
view. However, it was additionally held that if the assessee had claimed depreciation in 
such cases,  then in order to reflect the true income available for application for 
charitable purposes, it should write back the depreciation amount in the account to form 
part of its income. Otherwise such notional claim becomes unaccounted cash surplus 
for the assessee outside its books of a ccounts . In Maharashtra, audit noticed six cases 
where the Department had allowed depreciation along with capital expenditure on 
assets as application of income resulting in double deduction of ` 44.67 crore involving 
potential tax effect of ` 22.19 crore. In one case, the Department had disallowed 
depreciation of ` 27.97 crore in the assessment order but did not add back the same to 
taxable income while completing the assessment. 
XVI Irregular all owance of accelerated depreciation on life saving medical 
equipment  
 As per section 32 of the Income Tax Act, in respect of depreciation on ‘machinery 
and plant’ (life-saving medical equipment), the deductions shall be allowed at the rate of 
40 per cent o f the written down value of the relevant assets. Audit noticed 33 cases 

34 
 
involving tax effect of ` 3.91 crore in 15 states where the AO had allowed irregular 
depreciation in contravention of the laid down provisions. 
 
  
XVII Irregular allowance of deduction under section 35AD  
 As per Section 35AD (1)(a) & (b), an assessee shall be allowed deduction at the 
specified rate, in respect of any expenditure of capital nature incurred for the purposes 
of any specified business during the previous year in which he c ommences operations 
of his specified business, if (a) expenditure is incurred prior to the commencement of its 
operations; and (b) amount is capitalized in the books of account of the assessee on the 
date of commencement of its operations. However, as per section 35AD(5)(ab) of the IT 
Act, deduction is allowable only if the assessee commences operation on or after 01 
April 2010. Also sub section (2) of Section 35AD inter-alia lays down different conditions 
when deduction is not allowable viz. (i) if the bus iness is set up by splitting up or the 
reconstruction of a business already in existence; (ii) if it is set up by transfer to the 
specified business of machinery or plant previously used for any purpose etc. Audit 
noticed five cases involving tax effect of  ` 4.60 crore in six states  where the AO had 
allowed irregular deduction under section 35AD in contravention of such provisions. 
XVIII Irregular allowance of deduction under section 80IB 
  As per the Section 80IB(11C) of the IT Act, profits from the business of operating 
and maintaining a hospital shall be allowed deduction of hundred per cent of profits and 
gains for a period of five consecutive assessment years, beginning with the initial  
assessment year, if (i) a hospital was constructed and started functioning at any time 
during the period beginning on 01 April 2008 and ending on 31 March 2013; (ii) the 
hospital has at least one hundred beds for patients; (iii) construction of the hospit al was 
in accordance with the regulations of the local authority; and (iv) assessee furnishes, 
along with the return of income, a report of audit in such form as may be prescribed. 
Audit noticed seven cases involving tax effect of ` 5.30 crore in four stat es where the 

35 
 
AOs had allowed irregular deductions in contravention of the provisions under section 
80IB. 
 On being asked about the grant of irregular exemptions, the ITD stated that 
 "Exemption/deduction is allowed to the claiming entities only when they fulfil all 
the conditions laid out under the Act. The trust/institution is registered under the Act only 
when the Commissioner of Income Tax satisfies himself about the objects of the 
trust/institution and the genuineness of its activities. The assessing o fficers are 
expected to apply the law correctly. However, they being quasi -judicial authorities 
sometimes they interpret the law as per their understanding inspite of the best efforts by 
the Department to impart them with adequate training programs / instr uctions/ circulars / 
latest relevant case laws on the issue. It may, however, be mentioned here that after 
creation of the charge of CCIT (Exemption), chances of such mistakes on account of 
incorrect application of law are likely to be minimal. "       
 
XIX Irregular allowance of unlawful expenditure 
 As per CBD T directive dated August 2012 , claim for any expense i ncurred in 
providing freebies to medical practitioners in violation of the provisions of Indian Medical 
Council (Professional Conduct, Etiquette and Ethics) Regulations, 2002 shall be 
inadmissible under section 37(1) of the Income Tax Act, being an expense prohibited by 
the law. It has been j udicially held  that any commission paid to private doctors for 
referring patients was prohibited by law and hence not to be allowed as business 
expenditure. Audit notice d in 19 cases in eight states  in which AO had allowed such 
expenditure in contravention to such provisions involving tax effect of ` 5.56 crore. 
Further, in nine cases in Maharashtra, audit noticed that advertisement and business 
promotion expenses of ` 52.21 crore were allowed by the Department although 
advertising has been deemed as “unethical” practice as per Para 6139 of the Indian 
Medical Council (Professional Conduct, Etiquette and Ethics) Regulation, 2002 and 
Para 6(1) 140 of Homoeopathic Practitioners - (Professional Conduct, Etiquette & Code 
of Ethics) Regulations. This resulted in undercharge of tax of ` 16.93 crore in such 
cases. 

36 
 
49. The ITD on the issue of freebies submitted that  
 "The assessing officers have been advised not to allow such unlawful 
expenditure in future. Circular no. 5/2012 has already been issued by the CBDT in this 
regard." 
  The Chairman, CBDT, during evid ence stated that the provision in the law is 
such that if the expenditure is not wholly and exclusively for the purpose of business, if 
there is any other purpose, then Section 37 comes in. 
50. The Chairman, CBDT in his submission before the Committee stated that  
"Recently, we conducted a search in Mumbai. I can narrate that. I will not mention the 
name. We found that something like this was being paid to the doctors. We also 
simultaneously searched doctors that they were not showing that particular benefits in 
their return of income tax. These benefits were going to them through CSR. Ultimately, 
the doctors also surrendered that income. But the Income Tax Department cannot go 
through all four lakh doctors in this country." 
51. On the issue of the overlapping sections and misuse of exemptions, the 
Secretary DoR  stated that  
 "My personal view is that exemptions always lead to distortions in the system.  
They lead a greater incentive for doing certain things irregularly by people.  So, ideally, 
we should have a simpler income tax law in which there is just a simple tax rate and the 
compliance is very simple. But when the tax laws  are m et with so many other social 
objectives of the G overnment, then it does become  very complicated Act not only for 
the purpose of compliance management but also for the purpose of ensuring that in th e 
implementation there are no gaps and ensuring that nobody cheats the Government.  It 
becomes a very challenging thing for the administration to do that. That is why, we have 
got so many cases of some kind of problems in the compliance management when we 
try to look at all these cases.  We are trying to use more of technology to ensure that the 
loopholes are all plugged by technology. But still beyond a point it is not possible to 
simply go by technology.  We are also split between the objective of not hav ing 
interventionist kind of manual audit and inspection vis -à-vis a need for keeping a 

37 
 
complete check.  That also is an objective where we are split. As of now, we are 
restricting our audits to only one per cent of the total number of cases in Income Tax 
and we have to ensure that all cases of irregularities are covered in this one per cent 
itself.  It is not possible and it is not desirable also to have a larger set of audit being 
done because that will create its own problems in the field. So, this is a nother challenge 
that we have. " 
52. The Chairman, CBDT stated that 
 "We have already set up a committee to re -write the law. the Committee is 
supposed to submit its report by May The Committee is examining the Direct Tax Code, 
the earlier Code and the new suggestions." 
********* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART II 

38 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
1. Indian healthcare sector,  one of the fastest growing service areas has 
witnessed significant growth in terms of revenue and employment generation in 
recent years.  The health sector  has witnessed a robu st annual growth of 15 per 
cent and is projected to grow from ` 684,000 crore in 2015 to ` 823,700 crore in 
2018 with  a Compounded Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) of 12.1 per cent . The 
healthcare sector in India comprises both private and public sectors. The private 
sector in India has a dominant presence in medical education and training, 
hospital infrastructure and ancillary service areas such as medical technology 
and diagnostics and provides nearly 80 per cent of outpatient care and abo ut 60 
per cent of inpatient care. The private health care sector comprises organizations 
that operate both on profit and not -for-profit basis. The “not -for-profit” 
organizations include healthcare service providers such as Non -Government 
Organizations (NG O’s), charitable institutions, T rusts, etc. The assessees 
engaged in the business of Private Hospitals, Nursing Homes/Medical clinics, 
Medical Colleges/Research Institutes, Diagnostic Centres, Pathological labs, 
Medical supplies agencies/stores etc. are gov erned by all the provisions of the 
Income Tax Act that are generally applicable to the different class of assessees 
viz. Companies, Firms, Trusts, Charity firms, Association of Persons, Hindu 
Undivided families, Individuals etc. Further, the Income Tax Act  provides specific 
tax incentives to hospitals  viz five year tax holiday in respect of profits derived 
from the business of operating and maintaining hospitals located anywhere in 
India other than the excluded areas , besides deduction of capital expenditur e 
incurred in connection with setting up of new hospitals, subject to certain 
conditions. It also allows higher rate of depreciation on medical equipment to 
incentivize the hospitals to upgrade their healthcare infrastructure and to provide 
access to patients to the latest technology. The Committee note that though there 
was expansion of the private healthcare expenditure by more than `35,000 crore 
and `39,000 crore during the two years 20 12-13 and 2013 -14 respectively, the 
number of corporate assessees in the categories viz. Medical Professionals, 
Nursing Homes, Speciality Hospitals had actually declined in FY 2012-13 and then 
increased marginally in FY 2013 -14. The audit covered assessment cases relating 

39 
 
to Private Hospitals, Nursing Homes/Medical Clinics,  Medical Colleges/Research 
Institutes, Dia gnostic Centre s, Pathological Labs, Medical Supplies 
Agencies/Stores etc., including those running on ‘not -for-profit basis’, and 
healthcare delivery professionals and the cases of scrutiny assessments, appeal 
and rectification cases completed during the period 2012 -13 to 2015 -16. The 
Committee’s examination of the subject and their observations/recommendations 
on the issues raised relating to the Income Tax Department (ITD), CBDT, 
Department of Revenue  brought out  in the Audit Report  are detailed in the 
succeeding paragraphs. 
2. The Committee note that Income Tax Payer Data Management System 
(ITDMS), Non -filers Monitoring System (NMS), Project Insight have not been 
effectively utilized/ implemented for identifying the stop-filers and non-filers  and 
to cross-verify whether medical professionals and medical companies/healthcare 
facilities registered with other registering agencies were effectively covered in the 
income tax net. The Committee further note that the a bsence of system of cross -
verification points to the possibility of potential assessees remaining outside the 
tax net.  The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that the Income Tax 
Department has implemented Non -Filers Monitoring System (NMS)  whic h 
identifies non-filers based on significant financial transactions reported to the ITD 
by Central Information Branch (CIB), Specified Financial Transactions (SFT) and 
TDS/ TCS returns etc. The Ministry has further submitted that it is not possible to 
generate sector wise details of non -filers, however, sector wise stop filers can be 
identified on the basis of codes quoted by the tax payers while filing their income 
tax returns. The Committee are of the view that since most of the  Bank accounts 
have been se eded with Aadhar, the ITD may  also make use of the Aadhar 
numbers to identif y non -filers. Further, ITD may seek information from the 
registering agencies on periodical basis to ensure that the new entrants are not 
evading taxes. The Committee while noting that the ITD has written to all the State 
Governments for making quoting of PAN mandatory at the time of registration 
opine that furnishing registration numbers of the asseessees be made mandatory 
while filing of Income Tax Returns to enable cross -verification. The Committee 
while noting that  Project Insight, an advanced analytical solution is being rolled 

40 
 
out wherein it will be possible to select matching PAN by applying various PAN 
imputation rules desire that the same may be implemented at the earliest a nd the 
Committee be apprised thereof.  
3. The Committee observe that with the rise in popularity of systems of 
alternative medicines, the practice in these fields are flourishing. The Committee 
are of the view that the data available with agencies like Cen tral Council of Indian 
Medicine and other registering agencies for medical professionals engaged in the 
practice of alternate medicines be also analysed to identify the non -filers. 
However, the Committee while noting that demand for alternative medicines h as 
increased opine that tax incentives be given to only those manufacturers who 
comply with  quality control standards. 
4. The Committee observe that the fees charged by health professionals, 
private hospitals, nursing homes, medical clinics, medical colleges, diagnostic 
centres, pathological labs, medical supply stores etc. for their services are mostly 
received in cash, whic h has a potential for evasion of tax. The Committee are of 
the view that an estimation of the probable number of medical professionals, 
private hospitals, diagnostic labs, medical supply stores etc. in the country would 
be useful to gauge the efficacy of t he measures taken by the Department to 
broaden the tax base in the health sector and, therefore, desire that the ITD may 
in coordination with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation and State Governmen ts collect 
authentic and accurate data and apprise the Committee thereof. 
5. The Committee note that ITD has specific codes for four  sectors relating to 
health care business i.e. Drugs and Pharmaceuticals, Medical Professionals, 
Nursing Homes, and, Specia lty Hospitals. The Committee further note from the 
reply of the Ministry that the new codes, as pointed out by the Audit, for, Medical 
Clinics, Diagnostic Centres, Pathological labs and Medical Supplier 
Agencies/Stores will be operational from the next fin ancial year. The Committee 
expect that this addition will ensure that maximum number of person s associated 
with health sector  are covered within one of these 8 codes and will enable 
monitoring and vigilance of the healthcare sector as well as collection an d 

41 
 
sharing of relevant information on sector -specific issues.  The Committee are of 
the view that it may also be ensured that the entities engaged in medical 
education, medical research and those practicing alternative medicine are 
covered under the coding s ystem to ensure comprehensive monitoring of the 
sector. The Committee also desire that the entities seeking exemption under the 
health sector may be given a sub code  to analyse the revenue impact of the tax 
incentives.  
6. The Committee note that t he Income Tax Act,1961 does not prescribe any 
measurable parameters to assess the extent of charitable activities b eing 
undertaken by any hospital/Trust availing the benefit of exemptions under the Act 
which gives rise to a possibility of assessees availin g exemption without actually 
performing any charitable function. The Committee observe that under section 
41AA of the Bombay Public Trust Act, 1950 ( BPT Act), the Bombay High Court in 
2004 introduced a scheme of measurable char ity under which all charitabl e Trust 
hospitals registered under the BPT Act, 1950, and having annual expenditure of 
more than ` 5 lakh were required to  a) Reserve 10 per cent of the total number of 
operational beds for indigent patients and provide medical treatment to these 
indigent patients free of cost. b) Reserve 10 per cent of the beds for the weaker 
section patients for treatment at concessional rate. c) Earmark 2 per cent of total 
patient billing as Indigent Patient Fund (IPF) to be utilised on the treatment of 
indigent patient s. It was further required  that the Trust shall not ask for any 
deposit in case of admission of indigent patients. The Committee further note that 
the conditions specified in the judgement were not fulfilled in some cases, 
however, exemptions were allowed to such trusts as the Income Tax Act does not 
identify non -compliance with the BPT Ac t as a ground to deny exemption.  The 
Committee observe from the reply of the ITD that prescribing a certain percentage 
of their services to be dedicated to the poor wil l not serve any purpose since ITD 
has to depend upon self -certification and there cannot be any mechanism to 
verify the same.  The Committee are dismayed to note that the T rusts that are not 
fulfilling the criteria for charity prescribed under governing Acts of the State are 
able to claim exemptions under the Income Tax Act . The Committee are of the 
considered view that tax exemptions are the contribution of the Government 

42 
 
towards the charitable cause and therefore, the charitable activities being 
undertaken by those seeking exemption need to be measured to justify the same. 
The Committee, therefore, desire that the exemption to the Trusts be only allowed 
on production of a certificate from a competent authority, as prescribed under the 
governing Act, as to the  fulfilling of the requirements by that Trust. The 
Committee while opining that self certification is a facilitation step and cannot be 
an excuse for not implementing a new measure exhort the ITD to  fix measurable 
parameters, on the lines of BPT Act, for charitable activities to  justify the 
exemptions given to the Trusts/ Hospitals and install a robust mechanism for 
verifying the charitable activities carried out by any Trust/ Hospital. 
7. The Committee note that as per section 10(23C), the income of cert ain 
funds, Universities, educational institutions, hospitals, etc., that deal with 
philanthropy works are not to be included in the tot al income and Section 11 of 
the Act governs the grant of exemption to income of a charitable trust or 
institution. The Committee further note that  Section 10(23C) and section 11 of the 
Income Tax Act, 1961 are overlapping in nature  and cover  the same purposes 
(philanthropy or charity) leaving scope for confusi on and varying interpretations 
that allows  the assesses to take u nfair advantage of excluding the income or 
claiming exemption utilising one of these  two provisions that suits them. The 
Committee observe that absence of cl ear definitions renders the provisions 
amenable to misuse.  The Committee note from the reply of the ITD that t hough 
the provisions of the two sections are overlapping so far as purposes 
(philanthropy or charity) are concerned, conditions prescribed in the Act are to be 
fulfilled for these two sections separately which are to be examined by the 
Assessing officer/CIT at the time of grant of exemption/approval.  The Committee 
are of the view that the Assessing officers should ensure that two sections are 
not misused by those  trusts/ hospitals  who have not applied thei r income  for 
charitable purposes since it defeats the object of the law. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that to eliminate possibility of misuse by permitting an assessee 
to claim similar benefits under both the sections , specific instructions may be 
issued/ reiterated.  

43 
 
8. The Committee further note that Section 11(c) of Income Tax Act, 1961 
provides that the income derived from property held under trust/hospital created 
for a charitable purpose which tends to promote international welfare in which 
India is interested to the extent such income is applied for such purposes outside 
India shall not be included in the total income. The Committee are of the view that 
a charitable purpose which tends to promote international welfare in which India 
is interested is a subjective phrase, open to different interpretations, which needs 
to be aptly verified. The Committee are, therefore, of the view that the Trust may 
obtain a certificate from the Ministry of External Affairs stating that the income 
has actually been a pplied for such a purpose that promotes international welfare 
in which India is interested for claiming such exemption. The Committee desire 
that the details of all beneficiaries who have been sponsored by the  hospitals/ 
trusts for availing benefits outsid e India during last five years may be furnished 
to the Committee within three months of the presentation of the Report to the 
House. 
9. The Committee observe that t he specific tax incentives provided by 
Government have a definite revenue impact and can be viewed as an indirect 
subsidy to tax payers, also referred to as ‘tax expenditures’. The revenue impact 
of tax incentives was assess ed by way of ‘Revenue Foregone ’, now termed as 
‘Revenue Impact of Tax Incentive s under the Central Tax System ’. The quantum 
of revenue foregone is the chief parameter to assess the impact of tax deduction 
which is treated as a measure of tax expenditure incurred for the promotion of 
organised activity (viz. creation of infrastructural facilities, accelerated 
depreciation as an incentive for capital investment) in the targeted sector. The 
Committee note that the ITD has not undertaken any impact analysis to assess 
the outcome of relief provided to assessees engaged in the private healthcare 
sector.  The Committee n ote from the reply of ITD that direct tax concessions 
were provided by the Government as part of overall fiscal incentives to realise the 
macroeconomic objectives and to achieve policy goals of development and 
growth in various sectors of economy and no su ch quantitative exercise had 
been undertaken by the Department to assess the outcome of reliefs provided to 
private hospitals, medical colleges/research institutes, diagnostic centres etc . 

44 
 
The Committee are of the considered view that sector specific infor mation will 
enable the ITD to analyse the sector specific issues and efficacy/ misuse of the 
sector specific provisions . The Committee are of the view that with 
computerization, the analysis of the information collected from various sources 
has become easi er and therefore, desire that necessary modifications/ additions 
may be made in the forms to be filled by the assessees to enable sector specific 
analysis. 
10. Further, the Committee observe that the ITD has requested  administrative 
ministries to provide a n impact assessment study in respect of tax concessions 
provided for the sectors under  their jurisdiction and provide a det ailed cost -
benefit analysis on additional investment made and resultant increase in 
manufacturing/economic activity in case of both g reenfield and brownfield 
projects; additional employment generated;  additional exports made;  improved 
affordability and resultant increase in demand of the concerned products made in 
the country. The Committee expect that the ITD will follow -up on this request with 
the Ministries concerned and provide a comprehensive analysis to the Committee 
in six months from the presentation of this Report to the House. 
11. The Committee note that  donation u/s 80G entails revenue foregone on 
account of exemption to recipients and also deduction to donors.  As per Audit 
out of eighty seven cases falling under stand -alone hospital category, the section 
80G certificates were available only in 10 per ce nt of cases. The Committee 
further note that in absence of section 80G certificates, it was not clear as to how 
the Assessing Officers cross -verified the donation receipts vis -à-vis the claims. 
Further, there is no provision in the ITD module to enable val idation of section 
80G certificates by Assessing Officers on similar lines as in done in the case of 
TDS certificates under TRACES.  The Committee note from the reply of the ITD 
that the automated generation of 80G certificates on similar lines as under 
TRACES would not be feasible to implement and would be extremely complicated 
for small donors and small exempt organizations who would have to submit a 
statement to the Department and then obtain a certificate to be given to the 
donor. However, there is a provision in the Income tax return for providing 

45 
 
PAN/TAN of the donee so as to enable checking of the correctness of the claim 
while processing the case by the Department. The Committee are of the view that 
the ITD may issue specific instructions to be follow ed while giving and receiving 
donations. The list of the donors should invariably have either PAN/ Aadhar 
number quoted against each of them and the ITD before allowing deduction/ 
exemption make a test check of a prescribed percentage of donors on random 
basis and the donees to ensure correctness of the claims.  
12. The Committee note that t he referral fees paid to the doctors by private 
hospitals, nursing homes, diagnostics centres etc. for referring patients and 
payments made on account of advertisement e xpenses by the medical 
practitioners were allowed, although such expenditure has been held as 
disallowable and “unethical” as per CBDT’s directives and Indian Medical Council 
(Professional Conduct, Etiquette and Ethics) Regulations, 2002 read with 
Homoeopathic Practitioners - (Professional Conduct, Etiquette & Code of Ethics) 
Regulations respectively . The Committee , ho wever, observe that despite the  
directives in this regard, such benefits are still being distributed, though in other 
forms. The Committee are of the view that in order to ensure transparency in the 
business activities, such expenses, being related to promotion of business, be 
allowed to be incurred from the pro fits after tax of the hospitals/pharmaceutical 
and allied industries and similarly, these may be made taxable in the hands of the 
beneficiaries.  
13. The Committee note that the  provision under section 35AD of the Act does 
not specify the allowability  of deduction on capital investments in cases where 
the value of land and building are not separable, resulting in allowance of excess 
deduction and loss of revenue. The Committee note from the reply of the ITD that 
that the cost of land cannot be reduced from the cost of building (which includes 
cost of land as well) while making a claim u/s 35AD. The Committee while noting 
that the department is considering to issue  clarification in cases where the 
construction has been done only on a very small portion o f the land indicating 
thereby the intention of the taxpayer to take undue advantage of the said section  
are of the view that such clarification will again lead to different interpretations as 

46 
 
to the area covered for excluding the value of land by the Asses sing Officers. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that DG (Exemptions) may be given the 
responsibility for making assessment of cases where construction has been done 
only on a very small portion of the land. 
14. The Committee also note the cases  where exemp tions were allowed to 
ineligible assessees engaged i n trading/commercial activities;  incorrect 
allowance of accelerated depreciation on items not classified unde r life -saving 
medical equipment; incorrect allowance of deduction under section 80IB of the IT 
Act on incomes from non -hospital activities; irregular allowance of deduction on 
provisioning rather than on actual capitalization under section 35AD of the Act . 
The Committee are of the view that the provisions specifically related to the 
allowance of exe mptions  are being interpreted differently by the Assessing 
Officers. The Committee desire that besides strengthening internal audit to 
ensure consistency in interpretation, regular brain storming sessions for 
assessing officers be conducted to enable  intensive group discussion on issues 
that arise while implementing the laws. The Committee further  desire that 
detailed and specific instructions may be issued to the assessing officers on the 
issue of allowing exemptions, and be directed to exercise caution in such cases. 
Further, the Committee note from the reply of the ITD that assessing officers  
being quasi -judicial authorities sometimes interpret the law as per their 
understanding inspite of the best efforts by the Department to impart them with 
adequate training programs / instructions/ circulars / latest relevant case laws on 
the issue.  The Committee are of the view, that , strict action against those 
responsible for violation of laid down procedures and laws acts as a deterrent 
and, therefore, desire th at exemplary punitive action may be taken against such 
officials. The Committee , therefore,  exhort the ITD to make a thorough review of 
the cases pointed out by Audit and take stringent action against the officials 
found responsible for allowing exemption s incorrectly.   The Committee also 
desire that a consolidated statement of the specific cases pointed out by the 
Audit, the final action taken by the ITD in each of such cases be furnished to the 
Committee within one month of the presentation of this Report to the House. 

47 
 
15. The Committee note the instances where trusts having significant amount 
of gross receipts had not been selected for scrutiny.  The Committee observe that 
many trusts are only being formed for claiming exemptions and charitable 
objectives are only a  pretext to cover up transaction s or intention s of those 
involved. The Committee are therefore, of the view that since  assessment of 
charitable trusts is a high risk area , larger number of cases be selected for 
scrutiny to ensure that exemption s are not misused. The Committee, further, 
desire that in order to minimize such misuse, penalties may be imposed on trusts 
failing to fulfill their objectives, repeatedly.   
16. The Committee during their deliberations on the subject found that 
exemptions allowed by the Government were being misused by a fairly large 
number of assessees. Further, overlapping provisions and absence of clear 
definitions have led to different interpretations by the Assessing Officers. The 
Secretary in his submission stated th at exemptions always lead to distortions in 
the system and , therefore, there should be a simple Income Tax Law with simple 
tax rate for greater compliance.  The Committee also note that  a new committee 
has been constituted to re -write the law by May, 2018.  The Committee are of the 
view that the Direct Tax Code, 2010 and the Report of the Standing Committee on 
Finance thereon should be examined in right perspective and  expect that the 
new committee will give its report  after giving due consideration to the 
recommendations of Standing Committee of Finance. The Committee desire to be 
apprised of its suggestions made by the new committee.  
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                           MALLIKARJUN KHARGE 
18 July, 2018                                                                                             Chairperson, 
27Ashadha, 1940 (Saka)                                                  Public Accounts Committee.   
      
 