55

CIVIL ENGINEERING WORKSHOPS IN INDIAN
RAILWAYS, DELAY IN BUILDING THE NEW RAIL-
BRIDGE OVER RIVER SONE AND SIGNAL AND
TELECOMMUNICATIONS

[Action taken by the Government on the Observations
Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their Fifth Report (16th Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(Railway Board)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

FIFTY FIFTH REPORT

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


FIFTY-FIFTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) -

CIVIL ENGINEERING WORKSHOPS IN INDIAN
RAILWAYS, DELAY IN BUILDING THE NEW RAIL
BRIDGE OVER RIVER SONE AND SIGNAL AND
TELECOMMUNICATIONS

TAction taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their Fifth Report (16th Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(Railway Board)

Presented to Lok Sabha on: ००१०००००४० ०
ei
Laid in Rajya Sabha,on: ae

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

November, 2016/ Kartika. 1938 (Saka)


CONTENTS

PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (iii)
COMMITTEE (2016-17)
INTRODUCTION ........................ ७७७०-००. ७,७७७... {iv}
CHAPTER | 1

CHAPTER II* Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government .......................... :

CHAPTER III"  Observations/Recommendations = which __ the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
repties received from the Government ................

CHAPTER IV¥* — Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration

CHAPTER V* Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which the Government have furnished interim
POPES ......... ....-" ०० नल जन जलन ल जज तब पे

APPENDICES*

| Minutes of the 12" Sitting of Public Accounts
Committee (2016-17) held on 8" September, 2016.

Ul Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Commitiee contained in their Fifth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

“Not appended to the oyelostyled copy of the Report

qin


डे 99% >१फ 9 # ७ ७

41.
12,
13,
14.
15.

16.
17.
18.
19,
20.
21.
22,

fons

* Elected w.e.f, 09.08.2016 vice Shri Vijay Goel, MP appointed as Minister of State wef.

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2016-17)
Prof. K.V. Thomas - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
Shri Nishikant Dubey

Prof. Richard Hay

Shri Gajanan Kirtikar

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Smt. Riti Pathak

Shri Neiphiu Rio

Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
Shri Abhishek Singh

Dr. Kirit Somaiya

Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
Shri Shivkumar Udasi

Dr. 7. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Naresh Agrawal

Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Shri Shantaram Naik

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
Shri Ajay Sancheti

Shri Bhupender Yadav*

SECRETARIAT
Shri A.K. Singh - Additional Secretary
Shri S.C. Chaudhary - Joint Secretary
Shri Tirthankar Das - Additional Director
Shri A.K, Yadav - Deputy Secretary

05.07.2016.

civ)


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chaitperson, Public Accounts Committee (2016-17) having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Fifty-Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
on action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Civil Engineerin
Workshops in Indian Railways, Delay tn buitding the new Rail Bridge over River
Sone and Signal and Communications' based on the C&AG Report No. 32 of 2011-
12, Union Government - Railways related to the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board).

2. The Fifth Report was presented 10 Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 25
November, 2014. Replies of the Government to the Observations/ Recornmendations
contained in the Report were received.on 10 June, 2016. The Public Accounts
Committee considered and adopted the Fifty-Fifth Report at their sitting held on 08
September, 2016. Minutes of the sittings are given at Appendix-/

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the C&AG of India.

5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is
given at Appendix-i.

NEW DELHI; PROF. K.V, THOMAS
/é November,2016 Chairperson,
25 Kartika, 1938 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

w


REPORT
CHAPTER -।

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Cornmittee contained in
their Fifth Report (16" Lok Sabha) on 'Givil Engineering Workshops in Indian Railways';
‘Delay in Building the New Rai? Bridge over River Sone’, and ‘Signal and
Telecommunication' “based on C&AG Report No. 32 of 2011-12 Union Government—
Railways relating to the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board).

2. The Fifth Report (16 Lok Sabha), which was presented. to Lok Sabha/laid in

Rajya Sabha on 25 November, 2014, contained 11 Observations/Recammendations
Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations have been
received from the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) are broadly categorized as

under :

(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been-accepted by the Government:

- Para Nos. 1,2,3,6,7,8 and 10 7.
हे Total: 07
Chapter - Il

(i) | Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue tn
view of the replies received from the Government

Para Nos. 9 पर

Total: 01

- Chapter - II]

ता) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government have
not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:

Para Nos. 4and 5 है -
Total: 02
Chapter - IV

(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished
interim replies
Para Nos. 11
Total: 1
Chapter - ४



ir nnn amma लनत+++++० नल ननननानन een ALBA RAMEN EL EERE ५ “०००५०

3. The Committee desire that the Government should furnish at the earliest

final’conclusive Action Taken Note on the Observation/Recommendation No. 11

, in respect of which the Ministry have furnished interim replies.

4. The detailed examination of the subject had revealed that the Civil Engineering
Worksheps (CEWs) which were set up more than five decades ago were functioning
with quite old machines and required technology upgradation with the average age
profile of machines in CEWs ranged from 22 to 47 years against the expected average
life of 15 years. Further, no plan for modernization of the CEWs was found to be
prepared by the Railways. Assessment of existing capacity revealed that data regarding
installed capacity was not available in five CEWs and in the remaining five CEWs, it had
nat been reassessed at regular intervals Citing one example, the installed capacity of
Arakkonam workshop had been declining injudiciously owing to fall in the staff strength
of technicians every year and the vacancies due on fetirement not being filled for the

last many years.

5. Another issue of Sone Nagar (SEB)—Mughalsarai (MGS) section (124 km)
which is a vital corridor for movement of coal, other minerals and goods from Bengal-
Bihar-Jharkhand fields to North India and is a part of the Grand Chord (Mughalsarai
Asansol) on the Delhi-Howrah route was also examined. To cater to the increasing
traffic load, it was planned to lay an: additional line between SEB—MGS which
necessitated a three-line bridge over river Sone. However, the work of construction of
the third line between Dehri-on-Sone (DoS) and MGS (excluding the bridge work) was
sanctioned in 4990-91 and the work was-progressively completed and opened for- traffic
between 1997-2002 at a cost of Rs. 262.24 crose. But the Bridge work was neither,
sanctioned nor progressed simultaneously. The administrative sanction for the bridge
work was accorded only in 1997-98 with escalation in the estimated cost fram 7125.63
crore in 1991-92 to ₹ 248.64 crore in December, 1999.

6 Further, issue of Anti-Callision Device (ACD) was also examined which is a train
collision prevention equipment based on a microprocessor. In case two trains approach

each other on the same track, ACDs apply the brakes on both trains to stop them. The


Committee. had noted that first Site Acceptance Test (SAT-l}) of ACOs on Katihar-
Jatpaiguri-’ Samukatala of NFR done during July ‘to August 2005 indicated spurious
detection of abnormal situations causing unwarranted applications of train brakes,
mismatch of information amongst different ACDs installed on the loco, guard van, at
stations and level crossings and the work was stopped on the direction of Ministry of -
Railways in May, 2006 pending evaluation of performance parameters by a Multi
Disciplinary Team (MOT-constituted by Railway Board in-November, 2006}, transfer of
design documents to.RDSO as well as verification of selection of technology partner by
KRCL. During SAT-I], about 23.84 per cent ACOs were either found defective or
decommissioned. Further, the TPWS (Train Protection Warning System) wark in North
Central Railway had not been completed despite incurring an expenditure of हैं 41.54

crore,

7. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Railways in respect of all the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have been reproduced in the
relevant chapters of this Report. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by
the Gavernment on some of their Observations/Recommendations made in their Fifth

Report, which need reiteration or merit comments.

INSUFFICIENT FUND ALLOCATION
(Recommendation No. 2)

8. The Committee in their original Report had observed that funds allocated to the

CEWs were less than the demand projected. They were also unhappy to find that it took
about two to three years fo procure/commission machines for the CEWs due to
procedural sigmaroles. While viewing with serious concern the constraints being faced
by the CEWs,. the Committee impressed upon the Ministry fo urgently assess the
requirement of funds by the Workshops and accordingly take appropriate measures 50
that fund constraints do not impede the modernization plan of the CEWs. The
Committee had also desired that the Ministry should streamline the process and.
procedures by incorporating e-tendering for procurement and commissioning of modern

machines so as to ensure their installation in a time bound manner and consequential

increased productivity.



9. The Ministry of Railways in their Action’Taken Note have furnished as under:-

“The e-tendering for procurement and commissioning of machines: has already
been implemented on Indian Railways. There has been a wide gap between the
overall requirement and fund allotment for the modernization/expansion
maintenance of railway workshops including engineering workshops. Hence
funds are allocated, duly prioritising them as per operation and safety
requirements and as per overall availability of funds based on overall priority of
various items as indicated by Zonal Railways. However, as soon as the situation
improves and the gap is tess, it will be ensured © that
adequate funds are allotted to the warkshops works.”
10, Audit while vetting: the reply of Ministry of Raikways. commented on the lack of
information with respect to details of comprehensive mechanisation and upgradation
“plan indicating time lines and fund requirement in their reply. The Ministry, in response
to the comments, further stated that the broad recommendations of the Holistic Review
Committee on comprehensive modernization and: technological upgradation of the
workshops including fund requirement have already been furnished in the Action

Taken. The committee's report is under consideration by the Government.

41. The Committee note that although the shortage of fund for
modernization/expansion/maintenance of railway workshops ‘including
engineering workshops has been acknowledged by the Ministry, yet no concrete
steps have been taken by them in this regard. it was even more interesting for
the Cémmittee to note that they are prioritizing such works as per operation and
safety requirements which do not correspond to a serious modernization plan
and its implementation. The Committee further note that the Holistic Review
Committee, constituted by the Railways, for comprehensive modernization and
technological upgradation of the workshops has given its’ recommendations
which are under consideration by the -Railways. However, no precise fund -
requirement or definite time line has been indicated by the Ministry by which the
said recommendations shall be implemented, The Committee, therefore, desire
the Ministry to apprise the Committee about the salient features of the
recommendations of the Holistic Review Committee along with total funds
required to modernize all Civil Engineering Workshop with a definite timeline

indicating the schedule of implementation. The Committee would also like to be



informed of the reasons for fund crunch being faced by the Ministry for effective
modernization of CEWs and also the steps taken by them in consonance with its
commitment to the modernization plan of the CEWs to overcome the shortage of

funds to meet the requisite modernization plan.

AMBIGUITY IN STUDY TO ASSESS THE CAPACITY UTILIZATION OF THE
WORKSHOPS . :

-. (Recommendation No..3) .

12. The Committee had observed that the Research Design and Standard
Organisation (२०50) were advised by the Railway Board to review the Consortium of
Bridge Workshops and organize regular meetings as a result of which RDSO has
discussed several issues pertaining to. the modernizatianf mechanization and

improvements of workshops, repairs to workshop infrastructure’ and machinery,

_ procurement of steel, inspection schedule of girders etc. The conclusions/suggestions of

RDSO were reportedly under the consideration of the Railway Board. in view of the
scarce private participation’ in the manufacture/supply of girders etc. and the excellent
job rendered by the Workshops in meeting the immediate and unforeseen requirements,
as candidly admitted by the Chairman, Railway Board, the Committee had urged the
Ministry to take time bound action on the suggestions of RDSO to explore the possibility
of increased private participation so that the 0४४5 meet the growing requirements more

effectively, The Cammittee had also desired that a comprehensive study be carried out

- to assess the capacity utilization of the Workshops vis-a-vis the installed capacity so as

to ensure effective utilization of both manpower and machinery.

13. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:-

“Presently, depending upon the capacity of the Engineering workshops,
jabrication and related activities are being done departmentally. Additional
workload beyond capacity is already being offloaded to private agencies. In order
to ensure maximum utilisation of workshops, each workshop has been
associated with different zonal railways. To meet the growing requirernent of
production in workshop, certain activities such as metalizing of finished girders,
transportation of materials, stud welding for composite girders etc. have also
been identified for outsourcing. Further, the Committee set up for Holistic
Review of the Workshops in its report has examined the issue of capacity
assessment. Based on the existing infrastructure, machineries & plants, the


Committee has suggested a formula for arriving at the capacity of the workshop.
The report of the Committee is under consideration.

14. As the-reply of the Ministry of Railways !acked details of suggestions made by
RDSO and action taken on them and capacity utilization of workshops the Audit asked
for details in this regard. है

15... The Ministry in response to the comments of the audit have further stated as
under:

"On the recommendations of Consortium of Bridge Workshops, RDSO has
mainly recommended to enhance financial powers of workshop officer in
charge/workshop stores officers fot procurement of stock/non stock items and
repair/maintenance of M&P items, to go for trade for fabrication of bridge girders
only with prior cansent of concerned Chief Bridge Engineer (CBE), replacement
of old M&P items, girder fabrication as core activity of workshop.

In this regard, the issue of increasing the financial powers of workshop officers is

under consideration in Board's office. Board has also issued orders as per which

thrust is to be given on production of bridge girders and railway to explore the

girder fabrication through existing bridge workshops first before going to trade

- with prior consent of concerned CBE only. For assessing the capacity of the

workshop,: the committee has suggested formula of 0.6 EqT/man/month to
applicable uniformly to all the workshops. The report is under consideration."

16. The Committee had desired that a comprehensive study be carried out to

assess the capacity utilization of the Workshops vis-a-vis the installed capacity

so as to ensure effective utilization of both manpower and machinery. From the

submission made by the Railways, the Committee note that although the Holistic

Review Committee has examined the issue of capacity assessment based on the

existing infrastructure, machineries & plarits, and suggested a formula in

October, 2012, for arriving at the capacity of the workshop, the report of the

Committee is still under consideration by the Railways even after a passage of 04

years. They have neither indicated a definitive timeline for its implementation nor

have chalked out any road-map for implementation. The Committee, therefore,

desire the Railways to expedite their efforts in the matter of modernization plans

of CEWs and take urgent steps to move past the stage of. consideration of the

report of Holistic Review Committee and apprise the Committee of the concrete

steps taken in line with recommendations of the holistic review committee.



seers

SUBSTANTIAL BACKLOG OF VACANCIES IN CEWS
(Recommendation No. 4) है
t?. The Committee in their earlier Report had expressed its disappointment to find

that there were 1406 vacancies in various cadres in the ten CEWs as against the

. combined sanctioned strength of 6546 personnel. Worse, no target date had been fixed

for filling up the vacancies on the plea that creation and filling up of vacancies is a
continuous process and manpower availability and requirement will be assessed by the
Committee set up to undertake a holistic review of the Workshops. The Committee were
not satisfied with the reasoning of the Ministry for nat prescribing a target date for filling
up the vacancies. They had emphasized that, till such time the manpower requirement
8 pending consideration by the Carmmittee constituted for the purpose, the Ministry
should take urgent requisite measures to fill up the vacancies so as to obviate any
adverse effect on the productivity and output of the Workshops. The Committee further
desired that a study on the rationalization of the CEWs be undertaken so as to ensure
that there is optimum utilization, of human" resources with no idle manpower in the
Workshop. The Committee had also desired that the Raihway Board should meticulously
follow the instructions issued by the DoPT in drafting a annual Recruitment Plan. ;

18, ». The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:-

“The creation of vacancies and filling up of vacancies is a continuous process

dué to continuous retirement, periodic review of cadre position etc. However, the

action for filling up the vacancies through Railway Recruitment Board, Railway
- Recruitment cell & Departmental promotions etc. is being continuously taken as
» required. है

19, Audit in their comments on the reply of the Ministry observed that action taken to
fill up the vacancies in a time bound manner has not been indicated. The results of
study conducted and the rationalization of CEWs to ensure optimum utilization of
human resources have not been spelt out. The Ministry in their reply to the comments
of the audit have further stated as under:

“The generation of vacancies due to retirement ete. and filling up of vacancies in
the Bridge Workshops is a continuous process. Vacancies are filled up through
direct recruitmentidepartmental promotions etc. Direct recruitment is done
- through Railway Recruitment Board/Railway Recruifment Cell. The railways have
already placed indents ‘on the respective Railway Recruitment Board/Railway



Recruitment Cell for filling up vacancies required to be filled up through direct
Tecruitment which is at various stages by RRB/RRCs.

The committee in its report has deliberated an. Manpower and Human Resources
aspects. The committee has given thrust on reduction of indirect manpower,
training and skill upgradation .of staff, to include bridge workshop staff in safety
category. The report is under consideration
20. The Committee note that the Ministry have not taken any concrete action in
pursuance of their recommendation with respect to filling up of the vacant posts
in various cadres in the ten CEWs in order to avoid any adverse effect on the
productivity and output of the Workshops. The Committee are further dismayed to
note that action taken replies submitted by the Ministry are even cénspicuously
silent about the recommendation of the Committee to initiate a study on the
rationalization of the CEW to ensure optimum utilization of human resources with
no idle manpower in the Workshop. Although, the Ministry have stated that the
report of a Committee set up to undertake holistic review of the Workshops is: .
under consideration, the reply does not state the time by which the said ‘report
shall be adopted and major reforms proposed in the report will be implemented.
Moreover, the Ministry have ‘informed the fact that the railways have placed
indents. on the respective Railway Recruitment Board/Railway Recruitment Cell
for filling up vacancies required to be filled up through direct recruitment which is
at various stages by RRB/RRCs. This reply does not indicate any definite timeline
by which the requisite vacancies will be filled-in nor does it reflect any proactive
role on the part of the Railways to rise to the occasion in tackling the problem of
shortage of manpower. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry
should take an objective stand in the matter and pursue the matter of filling up
vacancies in a time bound ,manner by ensuring accountability from respective
Railway Recruitment Board/Railway Recruitment Cell rather'than absolving itself
of the requisite action by passing on the matter to Recruitment Board. The
Committee may be informed of the action taken by the Ministry in this regard.
They would also like to be apprised of the entire gamut of activities undertaken

towards achieving rationalization of manpower in CEWs.



RAILWAY ENGINEERING COLLEGES/RA|LWAY UNIVERSITY.

(Recommendation No. 5)

21 In view of the fact that there are no exclusive Railway Engineering Colleges in
the country, the ‘Committee in their original Report had recommended that the Ministry,
in consultation with the appropriate authorities, explore the feasibility of establishing
such exclusive university and colleges $0 that skilled specialized professionals are
available to effectively cafer to the various technical activities undertaken by the

Railways at different points of time.

22. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:-

“Hon'ble Minister for Railways while introducing the Railway Budget had
announced that the-Government is contemplating to set up Railway University for ~
both technical and non-technical subjects. The courses in the Railway
University will provide skills in Railway related technology and management.
deste The National Academy of Indian Railways at Vadodara is being upgraded
to be set up as the first Railway University, in association with other centralised
Training Institutes and Zonal Training Centres.”

23. With respect to setting up of a Railway University, the Committee note that
after their report was presented to the House in November, 2014, the Railway
Minister, while presenting the Railway Budget, had stated that the Government is
contemplating 10 set up such an university which will provide skills in Railway
related Technology and management. Moreover, the Committee have been
informed that the national Academy of Indian Railways at Vadodara is being
upgraded to be set up as the first Railway University, in association with other
centralized Training Institutes and Zonal Training Centre. The Committee desire
the Ministry/Railway Board to take adequate steps to transform the aspirations of
the Government into tangible accomplishments. Action taken in this regard and
the consequent development with respect to setting up of the University be

intimated to this Committee.



APPENDIX-II
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction}

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
CONTAINED IN THEIR FIFTH REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

{i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations - 11

(i) | Observations/Recommendations of the Committee - Total : 07
. which have been accepted by the Government: Percentage: 63.63%

Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 6, 7,8 & 10

(iii) | Observations/Recommendations which the न Total : 01
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of Percentage: 9.09%
the reply of the Government:

Para No. 9

{iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of ~~ Total : 02
which replies of the Government have not been Percentage:18.18%
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

Para Nos. 4 & 5

(v)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of - Total : 01

which the Government have furnished interim replies: Percentage: 9.09%

Para No. 11