 1 
127 
 
 
SUPPLY AND INFRASTRUCTURE 
DEVELOPMENT FOR NATURAL GAS 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
              
  
                      
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 

 2 
PAC NO. 2166 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY SEVENTH 
REPORT 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(201 8-19) 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH  LOK SABHA)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
 
 
 
 
 
                         Presented to Lok Sabha on:  19.12.2018 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on:      19.12.2018 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
N E W  D E L H I  
 
December, 2018/Agrahayana 1940 (Saka)  
 
SUPPLY AND INFRASTRUCTURE 
DEVELOPMENT FOR NATURAL GAS 
 

 3 
CONTENTS 
 
PAGES 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2018-2019)……..    (iv)   
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………….….    (v) 
 
PART- I 
 
I INTRODUCTORY  1-2 
II INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT 
A. PIPELINE INFRASTRUCTURE 
B. R-LNG TERMINALS 
3-10 
3-8 
8-10 
III IMPACT OF NON-AVAILABILITY OF NG/R-LNG ON FERTILIZER 
SECTOR  
10-13 
IV IMPACT OF NON -AVAILABILITY OF NG/R -LNG ON POWER 
SECTOR  
13-16 
V SUPPLY OF NATURAL GAS 16-24 
  
PART – II 
 
 Observations/Recommendations 
 
25-28 
          
 APPENDICES 
 
*I. Minutes of the 2nd sitting of Sub-Committee V of Public Accounts Committee 
(2015-16)  held on 02.12.2015. 
II. Minutes of the 6th sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2018-19) held on 
22.06.2018. 
III. Minutes of the 21st sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2018-19) held on 
14.12.2018. 
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE V OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
        (2014-2015)……..         (iii)   

 4 
COMPOSITION OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria  
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra 
5.    Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar   
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
7. Smt. Riti Pathak 
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank” 
9. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
10. Shri Abhishek Singh 
11. Shri Gopal Shetty 
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya  
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
15. Dr. Ponnusamy  Venugopal 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda 
17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
18. Shri Shwait Malik 
19. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
21. Vacant 
 
22. Vacant 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Paolienlal Haokip  - Additional Director 
3. Shri Shankarnath Sharma - Executive Assistant 

 5 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee  (2018-19) having been authorised 
by the Committee, do present this  One Hundred and Twenty Seventh Repo rt (Sixteenth 
Lok Sabha) on “Supply and Infrastructure Development of Natural Gas”  based on 
C&AG Report No. 6 of 2015 (Union Government) related to the Ministry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas.  
 
2. The above-mentioned Report of the Comptroller and Auditor Ge neral of India was 
laid on the Table of the House on 5th May, 2015. 
 
3. The Public Accounts Committee  (2018-19) took up the subject for detailed 
examination and report.  The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Na tural Gas on the subject at their sitting held on 22 nd June, 
2018.  The Sub Committee V of PAC (2015-16) also took evidence of the representatives 
of the Ministry Petroleum and Natural Gas on 2 nd December, 2015.  As the examination 
of the subject could not  be completed due to paucity of time, the Public Accounts 
Committee (2018 -19) retained the subject to continue the examination and hereby, 
present a Report based on the earlier evidences taken by their predecessor Committee.  
Accordingly, a Draft Report wa s prepared and placed before the Committee for their 
consideration.  The Committee considered and adopted this Draft Report at their sitting 
held on 14th December, 2018.  The Minutes of the Sittings are appended to the Report.   
 
4. For facility of referen ce and convenience, the Observations and  
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type and form Part- II of 
the Report.   
 
5. The Committee thank their predecessor Committee for taking oral evidence and 
obtaining information on the subject.   
 
6. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministries of Petroleum and Natural Gas for tendering evidence before them and 
furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in connection with the examination  
of the subject.    
 
7. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to 
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                           MALLIKARJUN KHARGE 
    December, 2018                                                                               Chairperson, 
   Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)                                       Public Accounts Committee 
 

 6 
 
R E P O R T 
 
PART- I 
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on “Supply and 
Infrastructure Development for Natural Gas” {Report No.-6 of 2015 -Union Government 
(Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas)} was laid on the table of the Parliament on 5th 
May 2015. The report havi ng automatically been referred to Public Accounts Committee 
under Rule 308 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct  of Business in Lok Sabha, was 
taken up for examination by the PAC 2016-2017, 2017-2018 and 2018-19. This Report of 
the Committee contains the C ommittee’s findings based on their further examination of 
the above report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India, involving oral 
evidences of the representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas. 
 
2. Natural Gas (NG), one of the clean est and most useful of fossil fuels is being 
increasingly used in various sectors like fertilizer, power, city gas, steel and other heavy 
industries. Primary consumers of NG in the country are in the power and fertilizer sectors 
(62 per cent) which are cri tical to economic development of the country. The Working 
group on Petroleum and Natural Gas for the XI and XII Plan anticipated increase in 
requirement of NG in the fertilizer sector to meet expected increase on account of 
conversion of liquid fuel based plants to NG/re -gasified LNG (R -LNG) based plants, 
expansion of plants, revival of closed units, setting up of new plants etc. Similarly, 
increase in requirement of NG was expected to meet the projected power generation. 
Demand for NG in the country was fa r in excess of its supply from domestic as well as 
imported sources taken together and gap between demand and supply was 77 Million 
Metric Standard Cubic Meter per day (mmscmd) in 2009-10. Consequent upon reduction 
in production from domestic fields from 2 011-12, this gap between demand and supply 
widened further to 250 mmscmd in 2013 -14. As domestic demand was far in excess of 
indigenous production and there were very few new domestic sources available to cater 
to additional demand, options available to me et the demand were import of NG through 
transnational pipelines and import of Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG). Government of India 
(GoI) initiated steps for import of gas through Trans -National pipelines (1989) and for 
import of LNG (1995) anticipating shortfa ll in domestic production. With a view to having 
a long term policy on Hydrocarbons, a Group of Ministers (GoM) was set up in 1999 for 

 7 
working out a specific framework for developing “India Hydrocarbon Vision - 2025”. The 
report submitted by GoM (2000), int er alia, set objectives for NG sector which included 
steps to ensure adequate availability of a mix of domestic gas, gas imported through 
pipelines and Re-gasified Liquefied Natural Gas (R-LNG). It suggested various initiatives 
for import of gas from neigh bouring and other countries expedite setting up of a 
regulatory framework and encourage domestic companies to participate in LNG chain. 
Further, to provide adequate infrastructure for supply of NG, GoI conceptualized (2000) a 
National Gas Grid to facilitat e supply of NG to remote areas of the country. 
Subsequently, considering the need to provide a policy framework for the future growth 
of pipeline infrastructure to facilitate evolvement of a nationwide gas grid, GoI notified a 
Pipeline Policy in 2006. In o rder to provide regulatory and legal framework for 
downstream activities, GoI enacted (March 2006) the Petroleum and Natural Gas 
Regulatory Board (PNGRB) Act and established PNGRB (October, 2007). Coming to the 
sale of products that use NG, the selling pri ce of Urea is controlled by GoI which bears 
subsidy on the difference between the sale price and the cost of production. Similarly, 
the price of power is regulated by Electricity Regulatory Commissions.  
 
3. The Performance Audit report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India titled 
“Supply and Infrastructure Development of Natural Gas” was with the objective to 
assess:  
(i) Whether Government of India has played its wider role in providing adequate pipeline 
and R-LNG Infrastructure to cope with emerging demand in the country?  
(ii) Impact of non -availably of Natural Gas/RLNG on Fertilizer/Power Sector and pipeline 
infrastructure providers,  
(iii) Whether the policies of the Government on allocation and utilization of Natural Gas 
(NG) were effective to meet the requirement of NG across the country?  
 
4. For the above purpose, CAG has conducted scrutiny of records of MoP&NG relating to 
assessment of demand, allocation of NG, pipeline authorizations, steps taken to create 
import and re -gasification infrastructure for LNG and details of plant utilization. In 
addition, CAG also conducted scrutiny of records of (i) Ministry of Power (MoP) relating 
to demand projections and utilization of available NG, (ii) Dept. of Fertilizer (DoF) relating 
to projections a nd utilization of available NG and payment of subsidy on domestic 
production/import of urea and (iii) GAIL (India) Ltd (GAIL) in respect of execution of major 

 8 
pipeline projects, utilization of pipeline capacity, supply of APM gas and procurement of 
R-LNG etc.  
 
5. CAG, in the above said report, has certain observations. The observations fall under 
the following head. 
1. Infrastructure Development 
2. Impact of Non-availability of NG/R-LNG on Fertilizer sector 
3. Impact of Non-availability of NG/R-LNG on Power sector 
4. Supply of Natural Gas 
 
I. Infrastructure Development:  
6. A. Pipeline infrastructure:  
 
(i) GoI set up PNGRB in October 2007 as a regulator but notified Section 16 of PNGRB 
Act (the Act), empowering PNGRB to issue authorizations for new pipelin es, only in July 
2010. This delay of 33 months acted as a hindrance in development of cross -country 
pipelines and associated infrastructure, as in the intervening period neither GoI nor 
PNGRB was able to authorize any project despite demand. This is eviden t from the fact 
that even as GSPL/GAIL expressed interest between November 2008 and September 
2009 for laying four pipelines, PNGRB was not in a position to issue authorization on 
account of non -notification of Section 16 of the Act till July 2010. These p rojects were 
subsequently authorized by PNGRB between July 2011 and April 2012, after notification 
of Section 16 of the Act.  
(ii) Till the time PNGRB became fully operational with adequate legal mandate, GoI 
issued authorizations in 2007 for nine pipeline  projects. In respect of five out of these 
nine pipeline projects, respective entities did not commence execution even after lapse 
of more than six years since authorization. Audit analysis revealed that authorizations 
were given without setting a definite  start and target date for completion. There was 
considerable delay in taking administrative decisions (five projects by GAIL) to go ahead 
with the project as there was delay in determining availability of gas source. In respect of 
remaining four projects,  Reliance Gas Transmission Infrastructure Limited (RGTIL) did 
not speed up execution of project, citing non development of City Gas Distribution 
projects and non -availability of NG. Thus pipeline infrastructure which is a prerequisite 
for development of gas market was not taken up for development.  

 9 
(iii) Out of total 23 corridors identified (2000 -2011 under National Gas Grid) for 
completion till 2013 -14, seven pipelines were completed, six were at different stages of 
construction and 10 pipelines were yet to be taken up (October 2014).  
 
7. In response to these observations by Audit, the Ministry furnished the following 
comments: 
“(i) Prior to PNGRB, the Central Government ( MoP&NG) was granting 
authorization for laying the natural gas pipelines. In mid -2007, MoP&NG had 
granted authorization for construction of nine cross country natural gas pipelines 
as a part of developing national gas grid in the wake of expected major KG -D6 
domestic gas discovery and upcoming proposed RLNG terminals in the country.  
On 1st  October, 2007, PNGRB was established and all the provisions (except 
Section 16) of the PNGRB Act, 2006 came into force. Initially, MoP&NG had 
apprehension that the provision of deemed authorization in Section 16 could be 
misused; hence, Section 16 was not  notified initially. Further, MoP&NG sought 
advice of Ministry of Law and Solicitor General on the issue. The Ministry of Law 
and Justice, based on the opinion of Learned Solicitor General, conveyed that 
notification under Section 16 may be carried out and  the appointed date for 
commencement of effectiveness of Section 16 could be future date as specified 
by the Central Govt. Accordingly, Section 16 was notified and made effective from 
15.7.2010. PNGRB evolved their process of authorization by the year of 2 008 
through notified Regulations under the Act. In 2008 -09, PNGRB identified various 
Natural Gas Pipelines Infrastructure including City or local gas distribution 
networks (CGD networks) and started bidding process for selection of successful 
entities to g rant authorization to lay, build, operate or expand the identified 
projects as per its notified regulatory framework. Further, in mid of 2009, PNGRB 
granted the authorization to lay, build, operate or expand the CGD networks in 6 
Geographical Areas (GAs) under its 1st round of CGD bidding.  
In a Writ Petition No. 9022/2009 (IGL vs. PNGRB), Hon’ble Delhi High Court had 
clarified in its order dated 8.2.2010 that till Section 16 is notified, the Central 
Government would be authorized to make arrangement for la ying, building, 
operating or expanding a CGD network. In view of this order, MoP&NG also 
granted permission to the selected entities for laying CGD networks in 6 GAs 
under PNGRB ’s 1st round of CGD bidding on June, 2010. Thus, till Section 16 

 10 
was notified, there was no vacuum in development of pipeline infrastructure as the 
Central Government ( MoP&NG) was granting permissions for developing the 
requisite new gas pipeline infrastructure from time to time.  
As per the terms of authorization for the pipelines authorized by the Ministry, the 
entities had to complete the projects within 36 months of the publication of 
notification under Section 3 (1) of the P&MP Act. However, the projects have been 
delayed due to decline in production of KG -D6 gas, absence of anch or load 
customers, resistance from farmers/land owners in laying pipelines/Court cases 
and apprehension of entities regarding under utilization of pipeline projects 
thereby resulting in adverse financial implications.  
(ii) PNGRB has already carried out 8 rounds of CGD bidding to grant authorization 
for the development of CGD networks/PNG networks in different parts of the 
country. At present, 94 Geographical Areas (GAs) have been 
authorized/operationalised for development of CGD Network in the country. Now , 
PNGRB has invited bids under “9th CGD Bidding Round” covering 174 districts 
(156 complete and 18 parts) grouped in 86 GAs. Last date of bid submission is 
10.07.2018. These are spread over 22 states and UTs and cover 24% of India’s 
area and 29% population . Selected bidders for the GAs would create 
infrastructure and supply Natural Gas to domestic Customers, vehicles, industries 
and commercial customers in GAs awarded to them.” 
 
8. When it was pointed that there was delay setting up PNGRB, the regulating bo dy and 
further delay for five years (from PNGRB formation in 2007) in taking executive decision 
(2012) for fixing eligibility conditions of entities to apply for registration to establish LNG 
terminals, the Ministry representative during evidence deposed as follows. 
“One issue raised was about the PNGRB’s functioning could not start even after 
the PNGRB Act was enacted.  As pointed out in the Report and we have given our 
replies also, initially, there were some problems between the PNGRB and the 
Ministry bu t those issues have been sorted out now.  The PNGRB is fully 
functional. The Chairman, PNGRB has come here also …….Sir, one issue was 
about pipeline infrastructure development and the role of PNG RB and the 
Ministry. As you know, PNGRB was set up in 2007. Prior to that, the authorisation 
for laying of natural gas pipelines were given by the Ministry of Petroleum and the 
Ministry had granted a number of authorisations. To be specific, authorisations for 
nine cross -country natural pipeline s were granted. In 200 7 the PNG RB was 
established. Whenever any new organisation or regulatory agency is established, 
initially there may be some teething troubles in its functioning. They took some 
time in overcoming those issues and ultimately, the PNGRB has started 
functioning. They have framed their regulations and are going ahead with the 

 11 
authorisation of new pipelines, depending upon the requirement of the country. 
They have, in fact, assessed the infrastructure requirement also and have their 
plans. They are inviting bids  for pipelines, for CGD entities and others, the details 
of which we have given.” 
 
9. On the issue of the 9 Pipelines granted authorization by the Ministry in 2007, the 
Ministry in their ATN have submitted as follow. 
“With regard to 9 pipelines authorised by MoP&NG in 2007 (5 to GAIL and 4 to 
RGTIL/Relog) before the establishment of PNGRB, there was a definite target 
date for completion of the project which was linked to first date of notification of 
RoU for the said pipeline i.e. the target date of the date of completion of the said 
pipeline from the first notification.” 
 
10. Replying to queries related to delay in Gas pipeline project, representative of GAIL 
during evidence had submitted as follow. 
 
“Sir, the only point I want to share is that five pipelin es were authorised to GAIL in 
2008. We have already completed three pipelines in 2013 -14. The fourth pipeline 
is stuck up because of right of way problem in Tamil Nadu and Kerala for the last 
two years. The fifth one is dependent upon the anchor -load customers, that is, the 
fertilizer plants. The observation given by C&AG as far as the company is 
concerned, we have our reservation to say that we were not able to take a 
decision in time. In fact, all these projects were approved by the Board way back 
in 2009. But there was a condition that these projects should be synchronised with 
the development in downstream. So, some of the projects which could start were 
linked with the downstream investments in fertilizer and power sectors. They 
came; I am giving you th e example of a pipeline of Rs. 14,000 Crore from Dahej 
all the way to Punjab, Bhatinda. It was anchoring these three fertilizer plants in 
Punjab and Haryana, and the 1400 MW power plant in Delhi to meet the 
Commonwealth requirement. GAIL was well in time. There was a delay on the 
downstream investment in these plants and the conversion by them. So, in our 
view, it is not fair to say that GAIL delayed this investment. Jagdishpur -Haldia 
pipeline was approved by the Board way back in 2009. We started the work,  but 
we stopped in between because the fertilizer plants were not moving. So, as a 
company, GAIL has been rather ahead of it. Today, the infrastructure of GAIL is 
running at such a low capacity, some of the pipelines are running even at 10 per 
cent capacity. These are the issues which, as a company, we are struggling.” 
 
11. The committee took strong exception to the inordinate delay in construction of 
pipelines for which the Ministry had authorized Reliance Gas Transmission Infrastructure 
Limited (RGTIL) in  2007, where even after a lapse of 36 months, construction was not 
commenced. The Ministry had no response to Audit ’s observation that the Ministry failed 
to forfeit Bank Guarantee of Rs. 80 Crore which expired in 2010.  

 12 
 
12. Replying to queries on the geo graphical spread of gas pipeline in the country, the 
representative of the Ministry during evidence stated as under. 
“Sir, as regards Eastern and North Eastern part of the country, the Government 
has given viability gap funding to GAIL of about Rs. 5000 Crore. That pipeline – 
which is called Pradhan Mantri Urja Ganga – from Jagdishpur up to Haldia and 
Dhamra in Odisha, has now been extended up to Guwahati from Barauni. This 
pipeline is being constructed.  In fact, it is ahead of schedule. We are hopeful that  
by the end of 2021 the pipeline will be completed. Then , for the North Eastern 
Region, from Guwahati to all the North Eastern State capitals also, our five public 
sector undertakings have joined hands. PNGRB has also agreed to give 
authorisation. So, thos e pipelines also will come up.  These are already on the 
card. Concrete arrangements have been made. So, regarding the pipeline 
coverage in Eastern and Northern Eastern Region, we are very hopeful that within 
next few years, this will be completed.” 
 
13. Replying to queries about the east and west coast connectivity of pipelines and the 
host of connected issues like distribution network of gas in the country, the 
representative of GAIL stated as below during evidence. 
 
“Sir, I would like to address the issue  on behalf of industry. Though I am from 
GAIL but my colleague Director (Commercial), PLL is there.  PLL was initially 
mandated to set up terminals as you mentioned at these four places on the West 
Coast. Depending upon the demand in the market, these term inals were taken up. 
The first was at Dahej, which was initially planned for five million tonnes, then 
expanded to 10 million tonnes, and today it is further expanded for 15 million 
tonnes. That is the source where the main market developed and the pipelin e 
network developed. That is why the expansion happened at Dahej. The next you 
mentioned are at Mangaluru and Kochi. In fact Kochi and Kayamkulam is only one 
place, it is Kochi. Mangaluru market was to be served from Kochi only. So, as 
against 2.5 million tonnes at Kochi we have set up five million tonnes at Kochi, 
which will be the able to cater the need of both Kayamkulam plus Mangaluru 
market. So, at one place a bigger terminal has already been set up. The only 
problem this terminal is facing is the pipe line problem. As I mentioned, in Kerala 
and Tamil Nadu from the last three years we are not able to get right of way and 
pipeline is stuck up. Otherwise, the terminal is commissioned at Kochi. So, to that 
extent the terminals on the west coast are pretty w ell in time. The other terminals 
on the west coast are already there at Hazira by Shell and the other terminal is at 
Dabhol which was by Enron but now revived by GAIL and NTPC.  So, Dabhol is 
also operating. So, you have Dahej at 15 million tonnes, Hazira a t five million 
tonnes, Dabhol at five million tonnes, and Kochi  at five million tonnes. So, 25 
million tonnes as against the initial mandate, which you were mentioning, of 10 
million tonnes has already been set up. The problem in these terminals as our 
Secretary mentioned is the demand for imported gas because these terminals are 
based on imported LNG. Then it is to be gasified and then it is called Regasified 
LNG (RLNG). Because gas is very price sensitive, when the prices of crude were 
100 plus dollars, the price of gas was as high as 14 to 15 dollars, and so demand 
was not coming. Today the prices have come down to eight to nine dollars and 

 13 
there is demand which is picking up especially in the retail sector. But still we have 
enough capacity on the west c oast to bring the LNG.  As regards the pipeline, you 
mentioned about those 23 corridors. When it was planned the expectations were 
90 million  cubic of gas coming from KGD6 gas block in the Andhra Pra desh. In 
fact it went up to 60 million also. Then these pi pelines were to be synchronised. 
But in 2011 -12 onwards decline started and today you know the gas is almost 
eight to nine million. So, that is the problem.  The domestic gas production is not 
commensurate which is able to feed these pipelines.  As I menti oned, most of 
these pipelines which we built in last five years, are running at 10 per cent 
capacity.  So, that is why that the whole ecosystem including fertilizer, power, 
pipelines, domestic gas production, and import of LNG together has to been seen 
in one basket.  Otherwise, there will be an issue where we have constructed some 
places which are not being used and we have not constructed other places.   The 
priority given by the Government was to connect all the fertilizer plants which we 
have done barring three plants in southern India, out of which one is in Mangalore 
and one is in Chennai.  The Chennai is on the east coast.  So, there is no LNG 
facility and now it is being built by IOC.  There is a terminal coming up at Ennore.  
After that, the Chennai  fertilizer plant will get the gas.  Once the pipeline from 
Kochi to Mangalore happens, the Mangalore fertilize r plant will also get the gas. 
So, this is how the gas connectivity to fertilizer plants is concerned.  Barring these 
two plants, all the plants have been converted.  They are running on gas today.  
Now with the new policy of the Government of India, the pool prices have been 
given to all the fertilizer plants and they are running at full capacity.  About 40 per 
cent gas is imported and the rest is all domestic gas.    
 
B. R-LNG Terminals  
14. GoI created (1997) Petronet LNG Limited, a public limited company, with a mandate 
to set up LNG terminals for import and re -gasification of LNG. Twelve other entities also 
obtained clearance (1997 -2000) from F oreign Investment Promotion Board (FIPB) for 
setting up LNG terminals across the country. A regulatory framework as envisaged in the 
"India Hydrocarbon Vision 2025" was lacking to authorize entities to set up facilities. 
Though PNGRB was set up in 2007, GoI took more than five years in taking an executive 
decision (October 2012) for fixing eligibility conditions of entities to apply for registration 
to establish and operate LNG terminals. In the absence of regulatory framework and a 
mechanism to review the progress of LNG projects, progress in this regard was very 
slow and MoP&NG was not able to monitor the LNG projects, for which clearance was 
given.  
 
15. To these observations, the Ministry furnished the following comments. 
“LNG terminal involves the twin risk of very high investment and difficulty in 
projecting demand of imported LNG. LNG is procured at the prevailing 
international market prices by different entities and the same is costlier than the 
domestic gas. LNG is to be supplied to various gas custo mers as per their 

 14 
affordability at reasonable price by the LNG importing entities. At present, due to 
high price differential between LNG and domestic gas, very few customers are 
willing to purchase imported RLNG. Most of the demand is for domestic gas and  
not for RLNG. Therefore, establishment of LNG terminal purely depends on 
techno-commercial feasibility of the project by the interested entities.  
As per PNGRB Act, 2006, PNGRB has to register the entities desirous of 
establishing LNG terminals and fulfil ling the eligibility criteria notified by the 
Central Government. Consequent upon notification of eligibility criteria by the 
Central Government, PNGRB has developed draft Regulations for registration of 
entities establishing LNG terminals, In this regard,  vide public notice dated 
28.03.2018, PNGRB has re -web hosted  the draft regulations for seeking public 
comments and comments from stake holders have been received. Open house 
discussion with stake holder is being scheduled shortly.  
LNG is imported under O pen General License. Further, 100% foreign investment 
is allowed for development of LNG terminals by private/public sector based on the 
demand of LNG and commercial viability. The notification of eligibility criteria by 
the Central Government and issuance of Regulations for registration thereupon by 
PNGRB has no connection with the pace of development of LNG terminals.  
Petronet LNG, which commenced operations in 2004 with nameplate capacity of 5 
MMTPA at Dahej, has expanded terminal to 15 MMTPA and further  expansion to 
17.5 MMTPA is underway. This 2.5 MMTPA expanded capacity is likely to be 
available from June 2019 onwards. Further, Petronet LNG had also commissioned 
Kochi LNG terminal, Puthuvype Island in the State of Kerala of 5.0 MMTPA 
capacity in September 2013. The Kochi terminal was expected to be connected to 
demand centre within Kerala including Kayamkulam, certain districts of Tamil 
Nadu, Bangalore and Mangalore through pipelines network viz. network of Kochi 
area, Kochi- Bangalore and Kochi – Mangalore. Out of these, only around 45 km 
of pipeline around Kochi has been completed so far. Pipeline laying work by GAIL 
in Kochi - Mangalore section is in progress. Petronet is in the process of exploring 
the possibility of setting up terminal on East Coast of India.” 
 
16. On concerns raised about the delays in Re -gasified LNG projects and audit’s 
contention about restriction of entities allowed to develop R -LNG terminals , the 
representative of the Ministry during evidence submitted as follows. 
 

 15 
“As regards RLNG terminals, at present, any entity can set up RLNG terminals. 
There is no restriction. In fact, a number of RLNG terminals have already been set 
up and some of them are in the process of being set up. We can give the details 
separately, if required. I would like to say that the basic issue in RLNG terminals is 
that even the existing capacity of RLNG terminals is not being fully used at this 
moment. The main issue in regard to gas is the price sensitivity of the Indian 
market. For that matter, in any mar ket, price sensitivity will always be there for 
such an item of mass consumption and Indian market is no exception. The end -
users, what we call off -takers in the industry language, have to commit. Until and 
unless they commit the gas to be taken by them, t he importing agencies cannot 
import that because if there is no taker after the import, where will the gas go? In 
the renewed international market scenario, the spot gas prices have come down 
quite a bit and there is an increase in demand for imported LNG.  This is also 
because of certain policy changes which the Government has brought out 
recently. I would like to mention two of them. One is pooling of gas for stranded 
gas-based power plants. It has resulted in increase in the use of RLNG for power 
plants a nd revival of a number of gas -based power plants. Second one is 
increased use of gas in fertiliser sector. The gas is now being pooled for urea -
based fertiliser plants. After pooling, consumption of gas has increased and the 
production of fertiliser has al so increased since this policy has been implemented 
from June this year. With these steps, we have been able to increase the 
consumption, but at the same time, so far as urea is concerned, it is a subsidy 
driven product in the sense that it is a subsidised  product, the price of which is 
controlled by the Government. So, subsidy burden is also linked with that and it 
depends on that. The Department of Fertilisers has a policy for urea -based 
fertiliser plants. But we are able to supply gas for Urea -based fertilizer plants. So, 
there is no problem at this moment.” 
 
II. Impact of Non-availability of NG/R-LNG on fertilizer sector  
17. Some of the observations of Audit the Committee further examined are: 
(i) Sale price of Urea products is controlled by GoI which b ears subsidy. NG is 
considered the most suitable feedstock for producing urea. Urea production in the 
country remained by and large stagnant during XI Plan. To enhance domestic production 
capacity, GoI formulated various schemes envisaging new plants, expa nsion of existing 
units and revival of closed units through which production capacity of urea was to be 
enhanced by approximately 122 Lakh Metric Tonne Per Annum (LMTPA) in different 
stages from 2010-11 to 2012-13 through NG based urea plants.  
 
(ii) Non a vailability of NG, however, remained one of the main constraints in increasing 
indigenous production capacity of urea. Out of envisaged enhancement of production 
capacity of 122.25 LMTPA of urea during XI Plan, achievement was negligible, at only 
3.30 LMTP A. Though it was evident that subsidy on import of urea was higher than 
subsidy on domestic production, action taken by GoI to facilitate import NG/LNG and 
produce urea through NG was not adequate. This was mainly due to shortfall in 

 16 
materialization of pla ns for LNG terminals, regasification facilities, construction of 
pipelines and facilitating long term agreements to make available NG/RLNG. Such a 
situation led to non -enhancement of urea production capacity and consequently led to 
import of urea to meet t he gap between demand and availability. Thus, the objective of 
enhancement of production capacity of urea production through use of NG as feedstock 
could not be achieved. During the period 2011 -12 and 2012 -13, the actual domestic 
production was only 445.58 LMT against the requirement of 604.36 LMT. The shortfall of 
158.78 LMT was imported. Accordingly, due to non -expansion of urea production 
capacity as envisaged, GoI lost an opportunity of saving subsidy by Rs 4202.12 Crore for 
the same period even after t aking into account Capital Related Charge taken on basis of 
estimated investment in expansion, revamp and revival projects.  
 (iii) GoI in its policy for stage III of new pricing scheme for urea manufacturing units 
(2007) targeted conversion of all existin g (nine units) naphtha and FO/LSHS based units 
to NG/RLNG based within a period of three years (by 2009 -10) with a view to reducing 
the cost of production and subsidy burden. Uninterrupted supply of NG at affordable 
price to the plant is a prerequisite for  such conversion. Owing to absence of adequate 
pipeline connectivity and non-availability of gas, there was delay in conversion of all units 
planned. Out of the nine units planned for conversion, five units converted to gas during 
2012-13 and one unit was converted in 2013 -14. Resultantly, urea units continued 
production by using costlier feedstock. This resulted in loss of opportunity to reduce 
subsidy burden by Rs. 7673.82 Crore on the exchequer during 2010 -11 to 2012 -13, by 
the units which were not conve rted, even after taking into account Capital Related 
Charge taken on the basis of estimated investment required for planned conversions.  
 
18. In response to the above observations of Audit, the Ministry in their submissions 
before the Committee took the following position. 
 
“As per the present gas utilization policy of the Government, gas based urea 
plants get priority after CGD ( PNG, Domestic and CNG,  Transport). With the 
increasing trend in demand of gas and declining availability of domestic natural 
gas, it is necessary to optimize supplies of domestic and imported gas. LNG is 
imported by different entities under Open General License and is easily available. 
MoP&NG has no role in allocation and pricing of imported gas. The pipelines are 
laid by different entities based on the authorizations granted by the Govt./PNGRB. 
However, since laying of pipelines involve substantial risk of investment, the 

 17 
infrastructure is laid down by entities who have been authorized by the 
Govt./PNGRB to lay the pipelines by tak ing into consideration availability of 
anchor load customers on the route of the pipeline. While revival of closed 
fertilizer unit requires a time period of 42 -48 months, the pipeline can be executed 
within a span of about 40 months. It is submitted that a vailability of gas and 
pipeline connectivity is not an issue; the main concern is affordability of price as 
demand is highly price sensitive. Government has approved the revival of fertilizer 
plants at Gorakhpur (U.P.), Barauni (Bihar) and Sindri (Jharkhan d). Department of 
Fertiliser ( DoF) is the implementing agency for revival of these plants. These 
plants are going to be the anchor gas consumers for the under constr uction 
Jagdishpur-Haldia-Bokaro-Dhamra Gas Pipeline (JHBDPL) popularly known as 
Pradhan Man tri Urja Ganga of Eastern India. GAIL has started the work on 
execution of JHBDPL which is likely to be commissioned by December 2020.  
Further, The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) in its meeting held 
on 31.3.2015 has approved the proposal of pooling of gas in Fertilizer (Urea) 
sector. This will ensure supply of gas (Domestic + RLNG) at uniform delivered 
price to meet the individual gas requirement of the Urea producing plants which 
are connected with natural gas pipeline grid. This scheme has encouraged the 
existing fertilizer (urea) plants to produce Urea beyond the reassessed capacity 
and will increase the domestic Urea production.  
 
19. Replying to queries regarding the revival of fertilizer plants which were to be supplied 
with Gas from the  /NGR-LNG pipelines and the status of pipeline supply to these plants, 
representative of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers  deposed before the 
Committee as follows. 
“Sir, you made a specific reference desiring to know the status of the revival 
projects.  Following the restructuring of FCIL in 2013 and HFCL in 2016 a decision 
was taken by the Government to revive five fertilizer projects namely, Gorakhpur, 
Sindri, Barauni, Ramagundam and Talcher.  To tell you very briefly the status of 
Gorakhpur, Sindri and Barauni which is being executed through a joint venture of 
NTPC, IOCL and Coal India is that the LSTK contracts have been awarded and 
the project work has commenced. 
  
Regarding Ramagundam, which is being executed through a joint venture of EIL 
and NFL, Telangana Government has an 11 per cent share and Haldor Topsoe 
also is likely to come in as a shareholder.  FCIL has 11 per cent hare because 
they have given the land.  Here the status of the project is that it is at an advanced 
stage and likely to be  commissioned in the financial year 1918 -19. Regarding the 
Talcher Fertilizer Plant, this is a coal gasification plant and the pre -project 

 18 
activities are underway.  All these plants will be coming up.  No decision has been 
taken as yet for Haldia, Durgapur and Korba plants.  That is yet to be taken. 
 
Regarding the pipeline, we are eagerly awaiting.  CMD GAIL has just informed 
that gas should be reaching the Mangalore Fertilizer Plant by February 2019.  We 
are happy about that but there are two other plants also where we need the 
pipelines as quickly as possible; one is the Madras Fertilizer Plant which is 
currently using a very expensive feedstock Naphtha which it buys from CPCL. 
SPIC Tuticorin also requires the pipeline to switch to natural gas.  Regarding your 
concern about Urea production not being very satisfactory and our dependency on 
imports being very high, under a policy which was initiated about three years ago, 
above RAC production that is anything which is above the re-assessed capacity of 
30 Urea plants has been incentivized.  If companies find that domestic production 
is less than the IPP, they are incentivized to produce above RAC because they 
are compensated at IPP rates and they are also given about 10 to 12 dollars as 
handling charges. Our maj or concern with respect to the Urea plants is that 
against a demand of roughly about 41 MMSCMD, it was committed that we would 
get about 31 MMSCMD of domestic gas because the higher the ratio of domestic 
gas in our total gas requirement the lower is the su bsidy outgo.  But unfortunately 
for the last few months the domestic gas proportion in the total gas consumed by 
the Urea sector has been falling and is roughly ranging between 17 -18 MMSCMD 
to about 21 MMSCMD.  I understand from the Presentation that the d omestic gas 
production itself has been on the decline.” 
 
20. On the issue of the failure to supply Natural Gas to Fertilizer plants not being able to 
produce at full capacity and having to use costlier energy supplies, the representative of 
the Ministry submitted before the committee as follows. 
 
“Sir, it is the problem of pipeline because of which three fertilizer plants have not 
been connected with gas. As she has mentioned the case of Tamil Nadu, I would 
like to inform the hon. Committee that ROU has bee n an issue. In fact, the whole 
matter has gone up to Supreme Court. The Supreme Court upheld that wherever 
the ROU has been given, the work should start. But again at the local level there 
were problems. We coordinated with the State Governments but the co nstruction 
could not take place. But, at present, the construction work has started gradually. 
Tamil Nadu has been a special case where instead of availability of land, the 
pipeline could not be constructed.” 
 
III. Impact of non-availability of NG/R-LNG on Power Sector  
21. The Committee also sought further response of the Ministry on the following issues 
highlighted by Audit. 

 19 
(i) As per National Electricity Policy, use of NG as fuel for power generation depends on 
its availability at reasonable price. It w as envisaged that new power generation capacity 
based on indigenous NG at reasonable price could emerge. The existing power plants 
using liquid fuel were to shift to use of NG or R -LNG at the earliest to reduce cost of 
generation. During XI Plan, the actua l capacity addition of gas based plants was 5936 
MW including projects carried over from X Plan. Against the total requirement of 90.70 
mmscmd NG for operating these plants at 90 per cent PLF, actual availability was 40 
mmscmd only. Steps taken to meet sho rtage of NG viz. import of NG/R -LNG at 
affordable rate were inadequate and led to a situation where gas based power plants 
suffered generation loss of 66,129 Million Units during 2008 -09 to 2012 -13. Financial 
impact on account of above loss of generation c ould not be worked out by Audit as cost 
of production as well as supply price of electricity varies from state to state.  
 
(ii) Where there is provision for use of alternate fuel in gas based plants, generation loss 
on account of non -availability of NG was  compensated by using Naphtha and HSD. As 
cost of these liquid fuels is comparatively higher, cost of power is proportionately 
increased. During 2008-09 to 2012-13, gas based plants had used 31.35 Lakh Kilo Litres 
Naphtha and 5.01 Lakh Kilo Litres of HSD t o make up non -availability of NG/R -LNG. 
Based on the computation of cost of power by “Expert Committee on Fuels for Power 
Generation‟, increase in cost of power due to using Naphtha instead of R -LNG at long 
term contract rate would work out to an estimated Rs. 2375.33 Crore during 2010-11 to 
2012-13 which was ultimately passed on to consumers.  
 
22. Commenting on these observations by Audit, the Ministry submitted the following 
before the Committee. 
 
“Due to limited availability of domestic natural gas, it is imperative to optimize the 
supplies of domestic and imported gas. LNG is imported under Open General 
License and the price of LNG  is decided mutually between the buyer and seller. 
Due to high price of LNG, few customers are only willing to purchase RLNG. Most 
of the demand of natural gas is for domestic gas and not for RLNG. The entire 
demand-supply of natural gas cannot be met by d omestic gas, as demand is 
highly price sensitive. It may be noted that MoP&NG on 01.01.2013 has issued 
Guidelines on Clubbing/Diversion of gas between power plants of same owner 

 20 
with the intent to serve larger public interest so that the available gas by 
clubbing/diversion can be used more efficiently in order to improve the PLF with 
corresponding increase in generation of electricity production vis-à-vis pre 
clubbing/diversion period with certain terms and conditions prescribed in the 
guidelines. In order to utilize the stranded gas based power generation capacity, 
the CCEA, in its meeting held on 25.03.2015, has approved the policy to revive 
and improve utilization of the stranded gas based power generation capacity 
connected with pipeline grid in the coun try for the year 2015 -16 & 2016 -17. The 
scheme envisages supply of imported spot R -LNG “e-bid RLNG” to the Stranded 
gas based plants as well as the plants receiving domestic gas, up to the target 
PLF selected through a reverse e -bidding process. The scheme  also envisages 
sacrifices to be made collectively by all stake holders and support from Power 
System Development Fund (PSDF) to make R -LNG based power generation 
commercially viable. This scheme was discontinued on 31.03.2017 by Ministry of 
Power and the same was communicated to PMO by them.  
 
23. Explaining the reasons for the slow progress on production of power based on NG 
and R-LNG, which have to be imported due to short domestic production and therefore 
are price sensitive, the representative of the Ministry during evidence stated as follows. 
 
“As regards power plants, the power companies have to sell power produced by 
them through power purchase agreements to the State Governments or the 
DISCOMs. Unless and until DISCOMs and State Governments agree to  buy 
power, the power plants cannot start production.” 
 
24. Explaining the reasons for the discontinuation of the e -bid R-LNG scheme and the 
diversion of APM Gas, the representative of the Ministry of power stated as follows. 
“Sir, there were two issues ra ised in the audit report.  One was the question as to 
why ERLNG Scheme was withdrawn after two years.  The ERLNG Scheme was 
withdrawn because there was no shortage of power.  Our energy deficit had come 
down from 8.7 per cent in 2012-13 to 0.7 per cent in the first four months this year.   
Secondly, all the discoms are with the States who are very reluctant to buy 
expensive power which the imported gas entails.  The States have also withdrawn 
some of the concessions.  VAT concession has been withdrawn.  CST  has been 
imposed.  So, this Scheme was not viable.  From the States’ perspective, there is 
a whole basket of different sources of power which are far cheaper.  I can give 
you the rates of power.  On an average, per unit coal is Rs.3.35; solar is Rs.3; 

 21 
wind is Rs.3.50 whereas domestic gas is Rs.3.50 and imported gas is about Rs.  
6.50 to Rs.7 per unit.  That is the reason why ERLNG Scheme was withdrawn.  
 
25. Further supplementing his reply on the issue, the representative also stated as 
follows. 
 
“There was a question. Why was e-bid closed?  As I submitted earlier, our 
electricity distribution is done by the States and it is in the concurrent list. The cost 
of power to the consumer really depends on the cost of the power at which they 
buy.  The cost of the imported gas is 6.50 to 7.00 rupees per kilowatt per unit.  
The States are, therefore, very reluctant to buy especially in the scenario where 
the shortage is very minimal and when the alternative sources of power are 
available at cheaper cost.  Since they are the purchasers and they are reluctant to 
buy, we cannot force the scheme down the course.  Andhra Pradesh, Telangana 
are not ready to enter into PPAs. Maharashtra and Gujarat have withdrawn their 
VAT exemption. So, the scheme is really unworkable because of the cost that 
imposes on the consumer at the end.” 
 
IV. Supply of Natural Gas  
 
A. Absence of mechanism for monitoring end use of NG  
26. Power and Fertilizer sectors receive about 69 per cent of domestic gas at 
Administered Price Mechanism (APM) price through allocation.  
(i) MoP&NG directed (June 2006) that as far as power sector consumers were 
concerned, APM price would be applicable only for those quantities of gas which were 
used for generation of electricity for supply to the grid for distributio n to consumers 
through public utilities/licensed distribution companies and market rate was to be 
charged for NG used for other than above purpose.  
(ii) MoP&NG directed (July 2006) that products other than fertilizers were not covered 
under supply of APM and the quantity of APM gas utilized for manufacturing products 
other than fertilizers should be charged at market price. However, there was no 
mechanism available to ensure compliance to above instructions either with 
MoP&NG/DoF or GAIL, as a result of wh ich there was under recovery in gas pool 
account to the extent of 630.60 Crore in the cases of mis -utilization of NG revealed in 
limited test check by Audit.  
(iii) Cases of underutilization of available NG were noticed during test check in Audit 
which not only resulted in loss of production but also led to import of more urea. This led 
to payment of extra subsidy (Rs. 637.07 Crore) as the subsidy paid on imported urea 
was more than the subsidy paid on indigenously produced urea.  
 

 22 
27. Commenting on the above issues raised by audit, the Ministry furnished the following 
replies to the Committee. 
 
“In the pricing order of MoP&NG dated 20.6.2005, it was clarified that all available 
APM gas would be supplied to only power and fertilizer sector consumers against 
their existing allocations along with  specific end users committed under Court 
order/small scale consumers having allocation up to 0.05 mmscmd at the revised 
price. All other customers who are getting existing gas supplies through GAIL 
network were require d to pay at market related price, subject to a ceiling of ex -
Dahej RLNG price of US $ 3.86. With regard to Power consumers, it was further 
clarified vide letter dated 27.6.2006 that APM gas price would be applicable for 
only those quantities of gas which a re used for generating electricity and is 
supplied to the grid for distribution to the consumers through public 
utilities/licensed distribution companies. As regards end use of domestic Gas 
supplied at the Power Sector Customers, Ministry of Power informed  that it is 
difficult to ensure that the Gas is utilized for the purpose of which it was allocated 
to Power plants. Ministry of Power has suggested the followings:  
(i) Gas based power plants may be directed to furnish a certificate to GAIL stating 
that gas has been utilized for specified purpose and  
(ii) Those consumers which do not furnish utilization certificate may be penalized 
by GAIL.  
 
Regarding the Fertilizer sector, in order to ensure that gas is utilized for the 
purpose for which it was allocated  to various fertilizer units, the matter has time 
and again been taken up with Department of Fertilizers/FICC to furnish end 
Utilization Certificate. Besides, the EGoM in its meeting held on 24.2.2012 had 
inter-alia directed that “the proposal to suspend t he supply of KG -D6 (NELP) gas 
to P&K plants (Deepak, GSFC and RCF) including the proposal to restrict future 
supply only to Urea fertilizer plants be kept in abeyance till 24.5.2012 during which 
time, the Department of Fertilizers will finalize the guideli nes to mop -up the 
additional profit of P&K plants having NELP gas allocation and thereafter the 
matter be placed before the EGoM”. Though the Department of Fertilizers has, so 
far, not finalized the guidelines, supplies to P&K plants have been continuing 
based on recommendation of Department of Fertilizers. MoP&NG issued 
directions in July 2014 empowering GAIL to impose penalty on those consumers 

 23 
who do not furnish utilization certificate stating that APM gas is utilized for the 
purpose for which it was all ocated. Further, GAIL was directed to charge highest 
rate of R -LNG used for production of urea during the concerned period, for the 
quantity of APM gas used for other than specified purpose. FICC has forwarded 
certificates for the 13 fertilizer units for t he period FY 2006-07 to 2014-15. For the 
FY 2014-15 certificates were received in June 2016. GAIL issued claim letter for 
the differential price for the quantity of APM gas misused on concerned units for 
the period till 2013 -14. Further, GAIL has informed that GAIL has raised 
provisional claims to the tune of Rs. 2992.17 Cores on defaulting fertilizer 
customers for the period from FY 2006 -07 to FY 2016 -2017 on the basis of 
available FICC certificates/information (Including information relating to the 
domestic gas usage for urea production provided by FICC for fertilizer pooling 
scheme since June 2015 onwards). Out of which Rs.8.43 Cores have been 
recovered as on date. GAIL is pursuing with FICC for the certificates/information 
pertaining to the customers for  whom information is still pending. As per the 
notification of a uniform price of domestic gas in accordance with the New 
Domestic Natural Gas Pricing Guidelines, 2014, MoP&NG has issued order dated 
16/12/2015 to charge highest rate of RLNG used for production of Urea with effect 
from 1.11.2014 for the quantity of domestic gas used for non -urea purpose. For 
the period beyond 1.11.2014, the claims for Non -Urea production are to be raised 
based on market price instead of higher rate of RLNG used for productio n of urea 
during the concerned period. Department of Fertilizer is in the process of a Draft 
Cabinet Note on the said matter.” 
 
28. On the issue of diversion of APM gas for purposes other than they were supplied at 
subsidized cost, the representative of Mi nistry of power during evidence stated as 
follows. 
“As far as verification of misuse of gas is concerned, we have given the reply.  
Actually the audit Para says that the response had not been received from Moping 
which they have informed you.  So, the UCs are not being given to GAIL by the 
gas generating units.” 
 
29. Replying to queries on the rising prices of Natural gas in the country and the 
alternatives available, the representative of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
stated as follows. 
 

 24 
“There was a specific question asked as to why when NG prices are going up.  It 
is because of the increase in dependency on imports.  We are not using 
alternatives like naptha and HST.  Sir, naptha and HST are actually more costly 
and it would increase the subsi dy outgo and they are more inefficient.  Natural 
Gas is actually the globally accepted best feedstock for fertilizer production. 
However, our country is rich in coal and coal resources.  China has set the 
example.  It has more than 200 coal gasification pl ants. So, in order to exploit our 
potential, we are, for the first time, setting up coal fertilizer plant for scale 
1.31million ton plant in Talcher and this will be based on the coal gasification 
route.  It is a new technology.  So, there is a certain ris k involved and also, it 
involves certain additional costs but this is a conscious decision of the 
Government.  We have the full backing of the NITI Aayog in trying out this coal 
gasification route.  Should it succeed it would set a benchmark which can be 
replicated in the rest of the country.  Typically, a plant takes about 36 to 38 
months from the date of award.   So, we are expecting three plants in Gorakhpur, 
Barauni and Sindri to be commissioned by 2021.  The Talcher plant was following 
the coal gasification route.  So, it should take about 40 to 44 months and it should 
be ready by 2022-2023.” 
 
30. Addressing queries related to supply network of gas in cities and the progress and 
plans thereof, the representative of the PNGRB stated as follows. 
 
“Sir, so  far as city gas distribution is concerned, PNGRB has very recently 
launched a very ambitious scheme whereby it would be implemented in 174 
districts across 22 States and Union Territories. Out of these, 156 districts will be 
covered completely and 18 will  be in part. All these districts have been divided in 
86 geographical areas. About 29 per cent of India’s population reside in these 
areas. They cover about 24 per cent of the geographical area of India. Let me tell 
you as to how ambitious this scheme is. Until now, in the previous eight rounds, 
only about 19 per cent of the population of India has been covered. But after the 
scheme is launched, in one single round, we would be covering about 29 per cent 
of the population. With this about half the populatio n of India would be covered 
under city gas distribution. Bids are already on. We expect the bidding to close on 
10th July. Awarding of bids would be done by end of October and after that the 
work would start. We have been going from city to city in India a nd we also went 
in Dubai through road shows. We have covered about 15 cities and two cities are 
yet to be covered. The response which we have got from the public sector as well 
as private sector companies is really great. We feel that we would be able to 
award bids in almost all geographical areas by October 2018. Other than this, we 
are also trying to establish trading exchanges for natural gas. We are also trying 
to make the public access to the pipelines in a more transparent way. So, we are 

 25 
working on all these projects. These projects would also be finishing by the end of 
2018.”  
 
 
B. Marketing Margin on supply of NG  
31. Marketing Margin on supply of domestic NG for GAIL was approved by GoI in Rupee 
terms, whereas the Contractor for KG D6 block was cha rging marketing margin in US 
dollar terms. DoF was not reimbursing marketing margin as demanded by the Contractor 
to the fertilizer units and subsidy claims on account of marketing margin on KGD6 gas 
were pending since 2009 -10. If DoF decides to reimburse marketing margin as 
demanded by the Contractor and requested by fertilizer units, additional subsidy burden 
would be Rs. 201.40 Crore from May 2009 to March 2014, being the difference between 
marketing margin demanded by the Contractor and marketing margin allowed to GAIL.  
 
32. In response to the above observations by Audit in their report, the Ministry submitted 
the following comments to the Committee. 
 
“The matter regarding marketing margin chargeable on sale of domestic gas to 
end consumers had been exa mined and it was decided that there is a case for 
Government to fix marketing margin for supply of domestic gas to Urea and LPG 
producers. In all other cases marketing margin should be determined by the buyer 
and the seller and complaints about exercise of  monopoly power should be 
addressed by PNGRB and/or the Competition Commission. With the approval of 
CCEA, MoP&NG had notified on 24/11/2015 that the Marketing Margin of up to a 
maximum of Rs.200 per 1000 SCM (@ NCV of 10000 kCal/SCM) to be levied on 
any d omestic gas being produced within the country and supplied to Fertilizer 
(Urea) and LPG producers in the country.  
 
33. In view of the above observations/comments of MoP&NG and those received from 
Department of Fertilizers and Ministry of Power, CAG has ma de the following 
recommendations-  
(i) MoP&NG should develop a mechanism, with clearly defined responsibility 
centers, in coordination with implementing agencies and authorities, to ensure and 
assess timely completion of NG pipeline and R -LNG projects acro ss the country 
and cut down delays so that the desired growth in the NG sector is achieved.  

 26 
(ii) MoP&NG in coordination with DoF and MoP may consider setting up of Inter -
Ministerial Committee (IMC) that could suggest:  
(a) A time bound action plan for syn chronizing implementation of NG pipeline 
projects and revival of fertilizer units so that benefit of NG as feedstock may be 
derived optimally besides reducing import of urea.  
(b) Measures to create required infrastructure to provide NG/R -LNG to Power 
Sector at affordable price so that capacity created in the sector is adequately 
utilized.  
(iii) MoP&NG may work out modalities by involving all the implementing agencies 
for implementing a control system/mechanism to detect and prevent 
diversion/mis-utilization of NG supplied at regulated price. The modalities so 
worked out may also include decision on rate at which recovery would be made 
for utilization of such NG for other than specified purposes as there would be no 
difference between APM and non-APM price with effect from November 2014.  
(iv) GAIL may critically review NG supply contract management system and put in 
place specific measures, such as incorporation of a clause in Gas Sales and 
Transmission Agreement enabling GAIL to verify end use of NG and re viewing 
Article 17 that permits buyer to use the NG for purposes other than those 
contemplated with mutual agreement between buyer and seller etc., that would 
empower it adequately to track ultimate utilization of NG supplies at regulated 
price and prevent its diversion towards unauthorized purposes.  
(v) MoP&NG should ensure that same methodology, i.e. charging marketing 
margin in Indian Rupee, is adopted for supply of NG from domestic source for use 
in sectors where GoI bears subsidy burden.  
 
34. The Ministry submitted before the Committee, the following comments, on the above 
recommendation of CAG:  
I. Infrastructure Development: Pipeline and R-LNG Terminals.  
(i) Subsequent to establishment of the Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory 
Board (PNGRB) under  PNGRB Act, 2006 in year 2007, PNGRB is the statutory 
authority to grant authorization and monitor the development of common carrier or 
contract carrier natural gas pipelines in the country in accordance with the 
provisions of the said Act and the PNGRB (A uthorizing Entities to lay, build, 
operate or expand natural gas pipelines) Regulations, 2008. Under these 
regulations, the authorized entities are submitting the quarterly progress report of 

 27 
their authorized pipeline projects to PNGRB. PNGRB takes the req uisite actions 
against the non-performing entities to ensure and assess timely completion of NG 
pipeline. In addition, MoP&NG is also taking periodic reviews with entities in order 
to expedite completion of the National Gas Grid across the country in a tim e-
bound manner.  
(ii) LNG Terminal involves the twin risk of high investment and difficulty in 
projecting demand of imported LNG. LNG is procured at the prevailing 
international market prices by different entities and the same is costlier than the 
domestic gas. LNG is to be supplied to various gas customers as per their 
affordability at reasonable price by the LNG importing entities. GoI ’s existing 
policy provides for 100% Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in LNG terminals 
through the FIPB route. Further, imp ort of LNG is under Open General Licensing 
(OGL). Therefore, the above referred policy framework provides an investment 
friendly environment to LNG investors for establishing LNG terminals based on 
their own techno-commercial feasibility.  
(iii) Regarding a system to monitor the progress of R -LNG projects, GOI reviews 
the steps taken / being taken by PSUs in R -LNG projects to expedite the 
development of R-LNG projects. With regard to gas pipeline projects, the following 
monitoring steps are taken / being taken:  
a) The projects are closely monitored by MoP&NG for expeditious completion 
through regular review meetings and fortnightly Project Progress reports are being 
submitted to MoP&NG.  
b) Progress of the Projects valued more than Rs 150 Crore and the proj ects 
included in the MoU are being submitted to Ministry Monitoring Cell (MMC). 
Further, the progress is also being entered in OCMS website of Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation (MOSPI).  
c) Status of the on-going projects is being reviewed by Secretary, MoP&NG.  
d) Progress of the Projects is being monitored by PMO, through Pragati meetings 
wherein impetus is given for early resolution of the issues impeding the progress 
of the projects. State level issues of the projects are being updated  in the e -
Samiksha portal of Cabinet Secretariat.  
e) Project review Dashboard for PSU Capex Monitoring has been developed by 
Quality Council of India (QCI) for MOPNG, which is being updated on monthly 
basis.  

 28 
II. Coordination with DoF and MoP: availability of gas for Fertilizer and 
Power Sector in synchronization with implementation of NG pipeline 
projects:  
(i) Government has approved the revival of fertilizer plants at Gorakhpur (U.P.), 
Barauni (Bihar) and Sindri (Jharkhand). Department of Fertiliser ( DoF) is the 
implementing agency for revival of these plants. These plants are going to be the 
anchor gas consumers for the under constructed Jagdishpur-Haldia-Bokaro-
Dhamra Gas Pipeline (JHBDPL) popularly known as Pradhan Mantri Urja Ganga 
of Eastern India. GAIL has started the work on execution of JHBDPL which is 
likely to be commissioned by December 2020. It is submitted that the Government 
has approved a capital grant of Rs 5176 Cr i.e. 40% of Rs 12940 Cr to GAIL for 
timely completion of Jagdishpur -Haldia-Bokaro-Dhamra Pipeline in order to 
ensure the economic viability of the pipeline project as well as ensuring the gas 
supplies en route fertilizer (urea) units by 2020.  
The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) in its meeting held on 
31.3.2015 has approved the proposal of pooling of gas in Fertilizer (Urea) sector. 
This will ensure supply of gas (Domestic + RLNG) at uniform delivered price to 
meet the individual gas requirement of the Urea producing plants which are 
connected with natural gas pipelin e grid. This scheme has encouraged the 
existing fertilizer (urea) plants to produce Urea beyond the reassessed capacity 
and will increase the domestic Urea production.  
(ii) In order to utilize the stranded gas based power generation capacity, the 
CCEA, in its meeting held on 25.03.2015, has approved the policy to revive and 
improve utilization of the stranded gas based power generation capacity 
connected with pipeline grid in the country for the year 2015 -16 & 2016 -17. The 
scheme envisages supply of import ed spot R -LNG “e-bid RLNG” to the Stranded 
gas based plants as well as the plants receiving domestic gas, up to the target 
PLF selected through a reverse e -bidding process. The scheme also envisages 
sacrifices to be made collectively by all stake holders a nd support from Power 
System Development Fund (PSDF) to make R -LNG based power generation 
commercially viable. This scheme was discontinued on 31.03.2017 by Ministry of 
Power and the same was communicated to PMO by them.  
III. Modalities by involving all t he implementing agencies for implementing a 
control system/mechanism to detect and prevent diversion/mis -utilization of 
NG supplied at regulated price  

 29 
MoP&NG issued directions in July 2014 empowering GAIL to impose penalty on 
those consumers who do not fu rnish utilization certificate stating that APM gas is 
utilized for the purpose for which it was allocated. Further, GAIL was directed to 
charge highest rate of R -LNG used for production of urea during the concerned 
period, for the quantity of APM gas used for other than specified purpose. FICC 
has forwarded certificates for the 13 fertilizer units for the period FY 2006 -07 to 
2014-15. For the FY 2014 -15 certificates were received in June 2016. GAIL 
issued claim letter for the differential price for the quan tity of APM gas misused on 
concerned units for the period till 2013 -14. Further, GAIL has informed that GAIL 
has raised provisional claims to the tune of Rs. 2992.17 Cores on defaulting 
fertilizer customers for the period from FY 2006 -07 to FY 2016 -2017 on the basis 
of available FICC certificates/information (Including information relating to the 
domestic gas usage for urea production provided by FICC for fertilizer pooling 
scheme since June 2015 onwards). Out of which Rs.8.43 Cores have been 
recovered as o n date. GAIL is pursuing with FICC for the certificates/information 
pertaining to the customers for whom information is still pending.  
For the period beyond 1.11.2014, the claims for Non -Urea production are to be 
raised based on market price instead of hi gher rate of RLNG used for production 
of urea during the concerned period. Department of Fertilizer is in the process of a 
Draft Cabinet Note on the said matter.  
IV. Review of Natural Gas supply contract management system by GAIL 
(India) Ltd:  
GAIL has in formed that they have no authority/means of ascertaining the end 
usage of gas by customers and necessary conditions regarding usage of gas are 
incorporated in the term sheets executed with the customers. However, as 
suggested by CAG, GAIL has incorporated of a suitable clause in GSA enabling 
GAIL to h ave unrestricted right to stop/ restrict gas supply if the buyer is found 
using gas for any purpose/application other than those contemplated in 
GLC/MoP&NG allocation.  
V. Methodology for charging Marketing marg in (in Rupees) for supply of NG 
from domestic source for use in sectors where GoI bears subsidy burden:  
With the approval of CCEA, MoP&NG had notified  on 24/11/2015 that the 
Marketing Margin of up to a maximum of Rs.200 per 1000 SCM (@ NCV of 10000 
kCal/SCM)to be levied on any domestic gas be ing produced within the country 
and supplied to Fertilizer (Urea) and LPG producers in the country.  

 30 
PART II 
Observations and Recommendations 
 
The Public Accounts Committee, noting the importance of enhancing the 
percentage of the clean and efficient energy source, i.e Natural Gas, in the 
countrys energy basket, feel the need to further examine the Performance 
Appraisal Report given by Audit on the availability, supply, allocation, adequacy of 
transmission infrastructur e of Natural Gas, development of Regassified LNG 
terminals and its impact on power and fertilizer sectors, etc. Even though the 
paragraphs have been settled with the C&AG by the Ministry, the Committee feel 
that certain issues merit further deliberation an d action. Hence, having taken 
evidence of the representatives of the Ministries concerned as well as other public 
sector bodies, the Committee have arrived at the following observations and 
recommendations. 
 
1. The Committee are aware that there had been p roblems of delay in decision 
making with regard to authorizing the Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory 
Board (PNGRB) to grant authorizations to entities to lay, build, operate or expand 
the identified projects as per its notified regulatory function. The Committee takes 
strong exception to the Ministry’s vague explanation of the delay by simply 
attributing it to ‘some problems between the Ministry and PNGRB’. Further, rather 
than admitting the responsibility for the delay in timely empowerment of the 
PNGRB, the Ministry sought to underplay the same by claiming that the Ministry 
had been issuing authorizations prior to and in the interim period between the 
setting up of PNGRB in 2007 and notification of Section 16 of the PNGRB Act in 
2010 which empowers the PNGRB to issue such authorizations. The Committee 
cannot fathom the rationale behind the Ministry’s “apprehension” about the 
misuse of Section 16 and the reference being made to Ministry of Law and 
Solicitor General on the issue. The Committee feel the so -called apprehension and 
advices sought merely manifest the Ministry’s reluctance to delegate the power of 
authorizations to the PNGRB even after the Regulatory body was already in place. 
They also feel that subsequent developments and achievements are no 
justification for the delay in enabling the PNGRB to exercise its powers and 
functions in time, and that much more could have been achieved without the delay 
in notifying Section 16 of the PNGRB Act. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
the Ministry to re -examine the reasons for delay in notifying Section 16 of the 

 31 
PNGRB Act and furnish the full details to the Committee, along with action taken 
against officials responsible for the delay. They also desire that action should be 
taken against officials responsi ble for failure to forfeit the Bank Guarantee of Rs. 
80 Crore against RGTIL for defaulting on timely commissioning of the pipeline 
project before its expiry in 2010. 
 
2. The Committee note with dismay the Ministry’s assertion that delay in 
notification of eligibility criteria by the Central Government and issuance of 
Regulations for registration thereupon by PNGRB has no connection with the pace 
of development of LNG terminals by interested entities. They fail to comprehend 
how any entity interested in deve lopment of LNG terminals could begin to operate 
in the absence of any clarity on eligibility criteria and regulations for registration 
as an entity while it is clearly provided under the PNGRB Act, 2006, that PNGRB 
has to register the entities desirous of establishing LNG terminals and fulfilling the 
eligibility criteria notified by the Central Government. While appreciating the price 
sensitivity related pressures on the sectoral players as well as the downstream 
market linkages to investments in LNG termin al projects, the committee feel the 
delay on the part of the Ministry in notification of eligibility criteria and issuance of 
regulations for registration is irrefutable. They, therefore, recommend that 
responsiblities must be fixed for such a huge delay, and the ongoing exercise to 
put the regulations in place must be expedited and completed within a fixed 
timeframe not longer than six months from the date this report is laid in 
Parliament. 
 
3. The Committee note that efforts are afoot to connect the eastern coast to the 
western coast LNG terminals. They also note that pipeline projects to connect the 
eastern and northeastern regions with the rest of the country are also under 
execution. While appreciating the plans and projects to connect the entire countr y 
with a network of gas pipelines to form a national gas grid, they recommend that 
every effort should be made to avoid further delays by regular monitoring and 
constant review of progress achieved at appropriate levels. 
 
4. The Committee are distraught to  note the Ministry’s nonchalant attitude 
towards the failures observed by Audit. Indecision and delays in taking timely 
action by the Ministry clearly has been at the root of the non -availability of piped 

 32 
R-LNG and LNG to several fertilizer plants identified for revival by the Government. 
The objective of enhancement of production capacity of urea production through 
use of NG as feedstock could not be achieved as also the targeted conversion of 
all existing (nine units) naphtha and FO/LSHS based units to NG/RLNG based units 
within a period of three years (by 2009 -10), due to timely commissioning of 
pipelines. The goals of reducing the cost of production and subsidy burden remain 
unachieved, and huge saving on subsidy to the tune of  Rs 4202.12 crore was 
forfeited due to non -expansion of capacity of Urea production units, and Rs. 
7673.82 crore due to failure to convert 4 of the proposed nine Urea productions 
units to NG based plants. The Committee find the Ministry’s responses to be in the 
nature of indifferent jugglery of facts and figures sans any sense of responsibility 
for the lapses and delays caused by their sloth and inaction. They feel that if laying 
pipelines involves risk of investment and requires anchor gas consumers, the 
concerns of interested enti ties could well have been addressed by a coordinated 
plan between the Ministry of P&NG and Department of Fertilizer to synchronize 
authorization of pipeline projects with revival of fertilizers units which would serve 
as anchor consumers to reassure the in vesting entities involved in the pipeline 
projects. The inter -ministerial coordination was visibly absent, leading to such 
delays, and huge losses to the exchequer on subsidies which could have been 
saved. The Committee desire that efforts should be made t o fix responsibility for 
the failure to orchestrate inter -ministerial coordination, if only for establishing the 
failures to serve as lessons for the future. They further recommend that the 
ongoing projects be closely monitored by an inter -ministerial team apart from the 
monitoring at the PMO level. 
 
5. The Committee appreciate the fact that the initial policy objectives of 
enhancing power supply by increased infusion of gas based power generation in 
to the energy mix of the country’s power basket could not  be fully met due to the 
less cost effectiveness of NG based power. They also understand that schemes 
related to gas based generation of power were discontinued as the country gets 
adequate power from other cheaper sources. However, keeping in mind the 
environmental concerns related to coal based thermal power generation, the 
committee recommend that the government must continue to consider gas based 
power generation as one of the options and continue the efforts to get imported 
piped gas through internatio nal agreements at long -term and economical prices. 

 33 
Reiterating that the national policy on natural gas supply and infrastructure 
development is with a thrust on clean energy, the committee desire that the 
government should continue to strive for adequate energy as well as clean energy. 
 
6. The committee note with appreciation that the Ministry has acted on many of 
the corrective actions recommended by Audit on the issues of supply and pricing, 
as well as inter -agency coordination on matters relating to chec king diversion of 
Gas supplied at regulated price as well as implementation of NG pipeline. The 
committee note that there are certain pending cases of claims to be raised and 
realized from entities who have diverted gas supplied at regulated (APM) price fo r 
purposes other than for which it was allocated. They recommend that all such 
pending claims must be realized at the earliest and the claims once raised must be 
made interest bearing till they are paid. 