MAINTENANCE OF BRIDGES IN INDIAN
RAILWAYS ,

‘MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(Railway Board)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2017-18)

EIGHTY-SEVENTH REPORT

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

87


PAG NO.2121
EIGHTY SEVENTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS Fa BEIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2017-18)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

MAINTENANCE OF BRIDGES IN INDIAN ©
RAILWAYS

MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(Railway Board)

Presented to Lok Sabha on: 7१2७
Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 24 \=2) 20 B

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

February, 2018/ Magha, 1939 (Saka)


CONTENTS

Page
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (iii)
COMMITTEE (2017-18)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS न
COMMITTEE (2016:17) (iv)
INTRODUCTION (५)
REPORT
Part-I
Introductory 1

Sanction of Bridge Rehabilitation/Strengthening/Rebuilding
work

. Physical Progress of Bridge Rehabilitation/ Strengthening/

Rebuilding work

(a) Budget Allocation and Expenditure for Bridge

Rehabilitation works

(b) Time required for execution of Bridge
Rehabilitation/Strengthiening/Rebuilding work

(c) Rehabilitation/Rebuilding of bridges within their codal life

(०) Replacement of Early steel Girders/Cast iron screw pile bridge

. (७) Bridge Girder Fabrication by Civil Engineering Workshops

Use of Non Destructive testing equipments and modern
techniques

Adherence to schedule for inspection of bridges
Bridge Management System (BMS)

Inadequacy of manpower for inspection and maintenance of
bridges

PART II

Observations and Recommendations
APPENDICES*

Minutes of the Twenty-seventh sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2016-17) held on 17.02.2017

Minutes of the Twentieth sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
(2017-18) held on 30.01.2018 :

* Not appended to the cyclosiyed copy ofthe Ropar’ "--+-+- Not appended to the Gyclostyled copy of the Report


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2017-18)
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge - Chairperson
MEMBERS.
LOK SABHA

2 Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay

3 Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey

6 Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
7 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab |

8. Smt. Riti Pathak

9. Shri Neiphiu Rioh

10... Shri Abhishek Singh

11. Prof. Ram Shanker

12, Dr, Kirit Somaiya

13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur

14. — Shri Shivkumar 0. Udasi

15. Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Naresh Agrawal

17. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
18. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
19. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan”

20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Royt
21. Shri Ajay Sancheti

22, Shri Bhupender Yadav

SECRETARIAT
1. ShriAK. Singh + Additional Secretary
2. Shri T Jayakumar - Director
3. ShriA.K. Yadav '  - Deputy Secretary

" Blected wef, 29 December, 2017 in lieu of vacancy caused due to retirement of Shri Shantaram Naik

ceased to be a Member of Committee cansequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 18 August, 2017 and
re-elected w.e.f. 29 December, 2017.



COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS GOMMITTEE

(2016-17)
Prof. K.V. Thomas - Chairperson
‘MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

2 Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
3 Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
4. Shri Nishikant Dubey

6. Prof. Richard Hay

6 Shri Gajanan Kirtikar

7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

8. Smt. Riti Pathak

9. Shri Neiphiu Rio

10. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
11. Shri Abhishek Singh

12. | Dr. Kirit Somaiya

13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
14. Shri Shivkumar Udasi

15. Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Naresh Agrawal

17. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi

18. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita

49. Shri Shantaram Naik

20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy -
21. Shri Ajay Sancheti

22. — Shri Bhupender Yadav*

* Elected w.e.f. 09.08.2016 vice Shri Vijay Goel, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e,f.
05.07.2016.


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2017-18) having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Eighty-seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha) on ‘Maintenance of Bridges in tndian Railway' based on Chapter-! of C&AG
Report No. 24 of 2015 (५०.॥), Union Government (Railways) related to the Ministry of
Railways.

2. The above-mentioned Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
was laid on the Table of the House on 8 December, 2015. पु

3. The Public Accounts Committee (2016-17) took up ihe subject for detailed
examination and report, The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) at their sitting held on 17" February, 2017. As the
6xamination of the subject could not be completed due to paucity of time, the Public
Accounts Committee (2017-18) re-selected the subject to continue the examination and
accordingly a Draft Report was Prepared and placed before the Committee for their
consideration. The Committee considered and adopted this Draft Report at their sitting
held on 30" January, 2018. The Minutes of the Sittings are appended to the Report,

4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type and form Part- 1 of
the Report. :

5. The Committee thank their predecessor Committees for taking oral evidence and
obtaining information on the subject,

6. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) for tendering evidence before them and furnishing
the requisite information to the Committee in connection with the examination of the
subject,

7. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to

them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India and the
PAC Secretariat in preparation of the Report.

NEW DELHI; MALLIKARJUN KHARGE

04 February,2018 Chairperson,

12 Magha, 1939 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


REPORT
Part -1
| Introductory
1. This Report is based on the subject "Maintenance of Bridges in Indian Railways"

contained in Chapter | of C&AG Report No. 24 of 2015 (Volume {l), Across Indian
Railways, there were over 1.36 ijakh railway bridges, which constitute an essential part
of the Railway network. The existence of a large number of very old bridges identified
as due for rehabilitation/ reconstruction is a concern for safe train operations.

2. The Corporate Safety Plan (CSP) of IR (2003- 2013) envisaged progressive
tehabilitation/ rebuilding of bridges over IR on condition basis by providing funds
through normat plan outlay. The CSP also focussed on the need for modernizing bridge
management system — modernization of inspection, and maintenance of bridges. The
review was conducted to see whether the mechanism for identification and planning for
rehabilitation’ reconstruction of railway bridges was effective and efficient; and
rehabilitation of bridges was carried out as envisaged in the Corporate Safety Pian. It
was also seen whether inspections for maintenance of bridges were adequate and
efficient.

3. Out of 1.36 lakh bridges across Indian Railways (IR), 741 were classified as
important, 10,944 as major and 1,25,035 as minor bridges. As per Indian Railway
Bridge Sub-structure and Foundation Code, important bridges are those which have a
linear waterway of 300 meters (m) or a total waterway of 1000 sqm. Major bridges have
a total waterway of more than 18 m. or which have a clear opening of more than 12 m
or more in any span. The rest are minor bridges. Out of 1,36,728 bridges over IR
network, 36,470 (26.67 per cent) were over 100 years old of which 6,680 bridges
located in eight zones were over 140 years, 14,324 bridges were 81 to 100 years old,
while 15,637 bridges were 61 to 80 years old. The balance 70,297 bridges were less
than 60 years old. |


4. The CSP of IR (2003-2013), inter-alia, envisaged plarined rehabilitation of
bridges duly providing funds through normal outlay. The GSP also focussed on the
need for creating a bridge management system, modernization of inspection and
maintenance of bridges etc. A High Level Safety Review Committee headed by Shri Anil
Kakodkar recommended (February 2012) instrumentation of all bridges and use of
advanced scientific measurements and inspection for condition assessment. In this
backdrop, a review was conducted by the Audit on maintenance of bridges in IR.

5. The Public Accounts Committee {PAC) took up the subject for detailed
examination and report. The representative of the Ministries of Railway appeared before
the Committee for tendering evidence on 17th February, 2017. Subsequently, the post-
evidence replies were also received from the Ministries/Departments. Based on all
these written and oral deposition by the aforesaid Ministries/Depariments, the
committee examined the subject in detail and identified certain critical issues which are
discussed at length in succeeding paragraphs.

A. Sanction of Bridge Rehabilitation/Strengthening/Rebuilding work

6. Audit observed that Railway Board (RB) pruned down proposals of bridgeworks
submitted by Zonal Railways keeping in view the monetary resources available for a
particular year for bridgeworks over IR. Audit reviewed the records pertaining to
proposals submitted by Zonal Railways and sanction of bridgeworks by RB and found
that, during the period from 2010-11 to 2013-14, the Z2Rs shortlisted recommendations
received from field offices and forwarded proposal for 2694 works at an estimated cost
of Rs.3559.10 crore to RB for approval. As against this, RB approved 1953 bridgewarks
(72.49 per cent) estimated to cost Rs.2195.85 crore (61.70 per cent).

7. Audit had further observed that-

« The system of identification of bridges for rehabilitation provides that bridges are
identified for rehabilitation based on condition assessed during inspection at field
level (SSE/ ADEN) and further confirmation by next higher level officials (OEN/
Sr. DEN). Despite this, restricting the proposals (at CBE i.e. zonal level and RB
level) on monetary considerations defeats the very purpose of the system of
identification. This Jed to compromising the safety of train services on the


8.

bridges, identified for rehabilitation due to sanction not being accorded or
delayed sanction.

A sample check by Audit on 102 bridgeworks pertaining to 150 bridges revealed
that, in case of 31 bridgeworks (which included category-] and category-t
bridges also), on an average, RB took 43 months to sanction the bridgeworks
after identification by the Zonal Railways.

The average time taken for sanction of a bridgework was as high as 131 months
in NCR followed by CR (57 months), ECoR (55 months), SER (54 months) and
average delay of 30 months each in SR and WCR.

Delay in completion of bridgeworks also caused continuation of speed
Testrictions on the bridges that led to extra operational cost as discussed in Para
1.6.2.5).

On being asked about the reasons for delay in sanctioning the bridgeworks even

after identification, Ministry in their written submission furnished as under:

9.

"in this regard, it is stated that the works proposed for sanction at Railway Board
level (more than Rs 1 crore each) are examined based on the information
furnished by respective Zonal Railways such as justification of the work, cost of
work, existing throw forward, likely budget allotment, available time allowance
etc. All the works proposed by Zonal Railways do not involve safety aspects."

Apprising the Committee about the present position with regard to continuation of

speed restrictions on the bridges which had led to extra operational costs, besides

being a safety hazard on account of running of services on technically obsolete bridges,

the Ministry of Railways In the written note submitted as under:-

10.

“Depending upon the availability of funds and resources, the works required from
safety considerations are given topmost priority. The bridges are maintained to
ensure safe running of trains ail the time at permitted speed and if the corrective /
remedial measures are expected to take a long duration due to the complexity of

' the site situation, etc., suitable safety measures like imposing speed restrictions

and keeping such bridge under close watch are taken till the bridge Is repaired /
strengthened / rehabilitated / rebuilt. The safety of train operations is never
compromised,”

The reply is not acceptable as Zonal Railways themselves prioritize bridgeworks

at CBE/PCE level based on safety considerations identified during the inspection and

proposals are submitted to RB accordingly. Further, the work pertaining to the bridges

categorized as distressed category-| & ॥ (ORN rating 1 and 2 respectively) took


substantial time for sanction resulting. in delayed execution. Imposition of speed
restriction has been termed as a remedial measure to ensure safety. But it invelves
huge additional expenditure on account of extra operational cost as noticed during a
study conducted in SCR. As such, delay in sanctioning of bridgeworks and limiting the
proposals of bridgeworks based on financial constraints not only compromise the safe
train operations but also result in extra financial burden.

B. Physical Progress of Bridge Rehabilitation/Strengthening/Rebuilding work

41. An analysis of the overall position of achievement of targets for rehabilitation/
reconstruction of bridges over IR, the overall status of execution of rehabilitation’
reconstruction of bridges carried out during the years 2010-11 to 2013-14 indicated that ~

« Against the overall target of rehabilitation works of 3433 bridges in 16 Zones over
IR, 3292 bridges were rehabilitated leaving shortfall of 141 bridges. While in nine
zones, shortfall in achievement of target (245 bridges) was noticed, in the remaining
seven Zones, no shortfall was noticed. In five Zones ((CR, ECoR, ER, NFR and
NWR), bridges were rehabilitated in excess of the target set for these Zones.

» The shortfall in achievement of target was highest in NER (52.63 per cent) followed
by NR (42.78 per cent), WR (23.17 percent), ECR (22.88 per cent), SR (21.51 per
cent).

* The reasons attributed by Zonal Railway Administrations for the shortfall in
achievement of targets were, paucity of funds, non-availability of line block,
encroachment eviction problems etc.

12, Audit further noticed that across IR, three distressed category-t bridges were
identified (one in 2002 and other two in July 2009) and all the three bridges were pending
to be rehabilitated/reconstructed as on 31 March 2014 though as per IRBM provision the
works should have been completed within a year of sanction. in regard to distressed
category-ll bridges, out of 45 bridges identified, four bridges (one each in ER, ECoR, ECR
and SECR) remained to be rehabilitated (March 2014) beyond the period of four years after
sanction (between 1999 and 2005). In other than distressed category | & ॥ (ORN rating 1
and 2 respectively), there were 4529 bridges over IR. Qut of these 4529 bridges, in
respect of 3931 bridges, sanction for rehabilitation was accorded by RB. Out of these 3931
rehabilitation works on 703 bridges were not completed even after four years of sanction.


13. On being asked about aforesaid issue, the Ministry in their written reply furnished as
under:

“During last five years, 3675 bridges have been strengthened/rehabilitated/rebuilt on
IR. Audit in its report has mentioned that during the review period (2010-11 to 2013-
14), against the overall target of 3433 bridges, 3292 bridges were rehabilitated -
leaving shortfall of 141 bridges. In this regard, it is stated that there has not been
any shortfall in achieving the targets of bridge rehabilitation works. The actual
position from 2010-11 to 2013-14 is as under:

RLY "No. of f
2010-14 2019-12 2012-13 2013-14
Target | Achieve | Target | Achiev | Target | Achiev | Target | Achieve
ment ement ement ment

CR aT aq 15 23) 30 37 26 26
R छत Ti ee Co 87 87 61 64
ECR 62). 54 77 56 43 43 38 29°
EGoR ST 45 36 391. 28 40; 26740
NR TIT TS 50 | | | =| 74 | ma i
NCR 59 | 8 50 43 28 32 27 af
[NER 5 3 6 | 3 3 | 7] 0174 4
NFR rz डक 7A 30 उठ हे 28
NWR | के। FO 66 | % | | ७9% | | | 33/37
se a eB छा ऊझा ae aat 8 &
SCR 70; ot, 86 85 | 5 | 8 छाए FF
[कि | 7561 116 60 a7 58 | %। | के 406
SECR 56 क्र 558 69 48 46 33 33
[ser | | ४8 | | ®| 79 72 40 50 26 23
WR 105 | | g3 ("ae 32 32; बहता कक
wer 80 90 65 67 56 हा 43,50
Total oso] 1187) Se? | 324 | 702; 806/591) 739



it may 08 seen from above table that the period from 2010-11 to 2013-14, against
overall target of 3310 bridges, 3666 bridges have been rehabilitated i.e, 356 bridges
(10.75%) more than the target. Presently, 3017 bridges at a throw forward cost of
Rs.3386 crores have been sanctioned for rehabilitation/rebuilding which are planned
for completion within next three to four years in phased manner.”
14. However, in the reply given in the table, it was shown as progressed against the
stated target. As such it is not clear whether all the bridgeworks progressed, as shown in
the table, were completed or not. Moreover, the figure calculated by Audit regarding
shortfall: in achievement of target was based on the data furnished by the Zona! Railway

Administrations during audit.

(a). Budget Allocation and Expenditure for Bridge Rehabilitation works

15. Audit assessed allotment and utilization of fund by IR and observed that as against
2432 works proposed by all zonal Railways at a cost of Rs. 3453.52 crore during the
review period, RB sanctioned 1691 works for a value of Rs. 2090.27 crore. During the
review period, the average Budget Grant (BG) provided per year was short of average BG
demanded per year, to an extent of Rs. 213.69 crore (38.65 per cent) in IR. Provision of
less Budget Grant than that was demanded ranged from 0.73 crore (in respect of WCR) to
Rs. 53.41 crore (in respect of ECR). The magnitude of short provision of BG has the effect
of slowing down the momentum of progress of bridge works.

16. While BG provided was short of demand, on the other hand, the total average BG
surrendered per year through the process of demand for less Final Grant (FG) across
zones was Rs. 58.60 crore (17.28 per cent). The average surrender per year through less
demand for FG was highest at Rs.10.47 crore in SER followed by ER at Rs.7.29 crore, WR
at Rs.7.19 crore, SCR at Rs.6.36 crore and so on. This apart, average under-utisation of
funds per year by way of less actual expenditure was Rs. 2.35 crore ranging from Rs.0.08
crore by NFR to Rs. 4.95 crore by ECR.

47. Itis evident from the above that, on one hand paucity of funds was quoted as one of
the main reasons for slow progress of bridgeworks and shortfall in achievement of target
for rehabilitation’ reconstruction of bridges, on the other hand, BG provided was not utilised
10 the tune of Rs. 60.95 crore per annum.


48... Explaining about the reasons for huge gap between demand and allocation of funds,

Railway Board furnished in its written submission as under:

“In this regard it is submitted that it is true that the budget allocation has been fess than
the demand but funds have been allotted in bridge works based on overail availability
of funds only. However, it is not true that there has been surrender in the funds

allocated, to the extent indicated in Audit's contention, as can be seen from the table
below:
Year | Funds (crores of rupees)
BE PRE FG Expenditure
2010-11 | 408.00 329.5 353.93 353.69
2011-12 330.00 336.45 340.26 315.09
2012-13 484.00 339.67 328.72 322.19
2013-14 513.00; 382.69 381.34 380.19
Total 4715.00 1388.31 1402.85 1985.16

It may be seen that the funds were reduced at RE stage as compared to BE on the
basis of availability of funds and the same were almost completely utilised. The
funds utilisation is monitored vigorously through various means to ensure that funds

are not surrendered.”

{b). Time required for execution of Bridge Rehabilitation/Strengthening/Rebuilding work

18. Audit noted inordinate delay in the execution of works relating to distressed
Category-I Bridges ranging from 2 to 10 years. The delay in execution of works at various
stages were as under:

* there was delay of five months due to delay in the finalisation of tender and award of

contract;

change of scope of work after award of contract caused a delay of six months;

delay in handing over of site free from encumbrances accounted for 22 months time

over-run;

e termination and re-award of contracts took 24 months;
* and for various other reasons, there was time loss of 46 months.

20. Audit had further highlighted that the execution of works relating to distressed
Category-ll and “other than distressed category-I & II" bridges was also delayed. RB stated


(June 2008) in its Action Taken Note on Audit Para of Report No. 9 of 2003 on
‘Rehabilitation! rebuilding/ strengthening of Railway Bridges in Indian Railways’ that the

rehabilitation’ reconstruction of these category of bridges would be completed within a

period of four years after sanctioning of. works. Execution of 82 bridgeworks pertaining to

rehabilitation/ reconstruction of eight distressed category-ll bridges and 141 bridges of

“other than distressed category-I & II category were reviewed by Audit in detail. Audit

commented that-

21.

The average time taken per work in the commencement of work was assessed by
Audit as 33 months. Average time taken per work for commencement was highest in
ECR (82 months) followed by SR (55 months), NCR (51 months), CR (41 months),
WR (37 months), SER (36 months), ER (30 months), WCR (15 months), NR (11
months) and so on.

Average time taken per work for finalization! approval of plans and drawings was
seven months per work (NWR, ECoR, WCR, NR and NCR).

Average time per work taken in the finalization of tenders and award of contract was
12 months in CR, NWR, NCR, SWR, ECoR, NR, ER and WCR.

Average time lost per work was assessed by Audit as three months due to award of
contract without properly assessing the capability of contractor (GR and SER).
Termination and re-award of contract led to average loss of five months per work in
ECR, NR, ER, SR and WCR.

Change in the scope of work after award of contract resulted in an average time loss
of 9 months per work in NCR and NR and two months per work in NFR.

Failure to hand over site free from encumbrances to contractor caused average
delay of one month per work in NR.

Paucity of funds led to average delay of two months per work in NWR, ECoR and
WER.

During evident the representative of the Railway Board further informed as under:

“For reconstruction and rehabilitation, there are a large number of issues. All the
works are being managed through contracts. Sometimes in case of contract fails,
then we are supposed io terminate the contract and we give to the new agency for
rebuilding. We also need traffic biocks for replacernent of bed blocks, bearing and
super structure. For rebuilding, we also need imposition of speed restriction for
carrying out the rehabilitation works.”


22.

23.

In this regard, Ministry of Railways in their reply furnished as under:

“After sanction. of bridge work, several activities are involved in bridge rehabilitation
work such as preparation and finalization of General Arrangement Drawing (GAD),
preparation and sanction of detailed estimate, Jand acquisition in some cases,
obtaining CRS sanction, finalization of tenders, execution of work etc. Generally, the
time required for completion of bridge rehabilitation/rebuilding work, after its sanction
in budget, is about three to four years. However for important bridges, time required
may be more due to various complexities involved in the work. Presently, 3017
bridges are sanctioned for rehabilitation/rebuiiding and it is planned to
rebuild/rehabilitate them within next three to four years in phased manner.”

(०) Rehabilitation/Rebuilding of bridges within their codal life

During the inspection by Zonal Railways during 2010-11 to 2013-14, 42 bridges

were found to have become due for rehabilitation within their codal life, Out of these 42
bridges, 37 were located in SWR alone and in other five zones (NR, ECoR, SER, SR and
WR) there was one bridge in each zone. This indicates to premature rehabilitation

necessitated due to poor maintenance of bridges.

24.

reason for high number of instances of maintenance, have stated as under:

The Ministry in their reply regarding codal tife of bridges, their maintenance and

“As per Indian Railway Finance Code, for the purpose of the Annual Sinking Fund
payment, the normal life (Codal life) of the various classes of Railway assets
pertaining to Bridges should be taken as in the table below;

Class of Asset न
Bridge Work - Steel Work — 60 years. ———
Bridge Work - Masonry {od years SS
“REE BidgeWork “>> 7 60 years —
Prestressed Concrete Bridge Work 40 years ~—

These guidelines are for making financial provisions te enable accumulation of
sufficient funds for future renewals. The age of the bridge however, does not have
direct relevance on the physical condition of the bridge and the repair/strengthening


10

/ rehabilitation / rebuilding is undertaken whenever so warranted by its physical
condition and not on the basis of age.

As compared to the total na of bridges on Indian Railways (1, 40,919) and number
of bridges sanctioned for rehabilitation (2827), there are very few cases of bridges
being rehabilitated / rebuilt before expiry of codal life (42 Nos. as mentioned by
. Audit), These cases are not due to poor maintenance but for other reasons such as
increased loading standards necessitating strengthening/rehabilitation of existing
bridges, inadequate water way due to change of pattern of flow in the catchment
area, excessive corrosive conditions due to proximity to see/station yards etc.
During annual meetings held with zonal railways and at several other forums,
emphasis is given on proper maintenance of bridges to enhance the life of bridges,
It may be appreciated that most of bridges are being rehabilitated much after expiry
of the codal life because of systematic inspection, maintenance and monitoring of
the bridges.
In order to enhance the life of bridge girders and to increase the life of paints at
reduced life cycle cost, the long life painting system having life of 15 years or more
is being developed. Trials of three type of long life painting system are in progress.
Expression of interest (EO!) is being invited for more type of painting system for
exploring more options."

25. The reply is contradictory in itself as on one hand it was stated that premature
rehabilitation was not due to poor maintenance, on other hand one of the reasons stated
was excessive corrosion. Continuous excessive corrosion needs to be tackled by effective
measures of maintenance. Audit pointed out that out of 42 bridges found to have become
due for rehabilitation within their codal life, 37 were located In South Western Region alone.
This is a-serious matter to be enquired into and action taken against the delinquent
officials.

(d) Replacement of Early steel Girders/Cast iron screw pile bridges:

26, According to Corporate Safety Plan (CSF) 2003-13, all early steel girders/screw pile
bridges were planned to be replaced by 2013 however still 96 such bridges temained to be
fehabilitated as of March 2014.

27. 118 Ministry in their written submission stated as under:-

“In regard to eliminating these types of bridges, it is stated that the work of phasing
out of early steel girders / cast iron pile bridges has largely been completed. The


1.

work of these bridges has been executed keeping in view the availability of funds,
the condition of the bridge, etc. Priority being accorded on the condition basis. As
far as 69 bridges in NFR is concerned, the early stee! girders were situated on meter
gauge route and they have been replaced in gauge conversion work of Lumding -
Badarpur line in 2015. Presently, only 18 early steel bridges are existing on BG on
Indian railways which are planned for elimination during 2017-18 except one bridge
on ER for which rebuilding is sanctioned. The work of rebuilding of remaining screw
pile bridges (4 on WR & one on WGR) is in progress, out of which two are planned
for completion during 2017-18 and remaining are planned to be completed by 2018-
19.”

(e) Bridge Girder Fabrication by Civil Engineering Workshops

28. Audit had noticed that during review period, as against the indent placed by Civil
Engineering department for fabrication of 45847 MT of steel girders, the Workshops
turned out 12360 MT of steel girders. i.e, a shortfall of 68.09 per cent. In SWR, out of
37 technically absolete bridges taken up for rehabilitation, the rehabilitation of 12
bridges got delayed due to delay in supply of bridge girders by the CWE at
Arakkonam/Sr. Progress of work in these cases ranged from 0 to 14 percent as on
March 2015, |

29. In this regard, Ministry in reply to the query of the Committee fumished as under:

"{t may be appreciated that the work orders / indents placed on the workshops are

always in excess of the production capacity of the workshops. It is desirable that
the workshops are having work orders of about three times the production
capacity of the workshop as Jot of time is required for procurement of raw
material such as steel etc. after work order is placed on the workshop. Moreover,
during the review period, the total production of bridge girders across all the
workshop was 45217 MT. The breakup is as under:

Rly” [Workshop | 2010-11 | 2041-12 [~~ 2012-13 2043-14
GR | Manmad 3205 “3134 “4085 A387
ECR | Mughaisarai 2505 2508 | 1715 4673
‘NR | Lko/JOC 2296 1690 1676 2429
NER | Gorakhpur 783 166 302 [0 540



12

NFR] Bongaigaon "95 310 325 313
sR Arakkonam “~e73 |. 981 157 30
SCR |Lallaguda 223 256 6 0
SER | Sini a7 116 ES) “207
wR | Sabarmati e125 1875 | 2108 2093
Total — 12143 | 11003 10456 T1646

In order to increase the output of the workshops, it has been decided to augment

and modemise the workshops with modern machines/technologies in a time

bound manner. A work of modernisation of Bridge Workshop, Lucknow costing
approx Rs. 40 crores has been sanctioned in Works Programme 2016-17 and
the work is in progress.”
30. it is a fact that delays in supply of girders by the Bridge Workshops affect timely
execution of the relevant bridgeworks. As such, Railways need to enhance the capacity
of the workshops to ensure adequate supply as absence of it ultimately impacts the
safety aspects on account of delay in execution of bridgeworks identified for
tehabititation.

९, Use of Non Destructive testing equipments and modern techniques

31, Audit noticed that 290 equipment of five types (on an average) have been
procured in different Zones over IR... Utilization of these equipments during inspection
of bridges was only 7.07 per cent. Some of the equipments were not used even once
as ascertained from the log book maintained by the Zonal Railways.

32. In this regard, Ministry in their written submission has stated as under:

“Non-Destructive Testing (NDT) of railway bridges for assessment of condition’
quality of the material is carried out wherever considered necessary with the help
of non-destructive testing equipments. The procurement of non-destructive
testing equipments and training of railway staff for using these equipments is a
continuous process on Indian Railways. These equipments are procured by
zonal railways and Research. Design and Standards Organization (RDSO)
regularly on need basis. Audit has pointed out that NDT equipments procured by
Zonal railways are grossly underutilized. In this regard, it is stated that the NDT


13

equipments available in zonal railways are being used regularly to assess various
parameters related to condition of bridge. These equipments are being used as
per requirement.”

33. | The reply of Railway Board is incorrect as based on the data collected by Audit
from the log books relating to use of NDT equipments, the overall average utilization of
the same stood at 7.07 per cent only. The NDT equipments procured at an approximate
cost of Rs.12.99 crore over IR remained grossly underutilized, defeating the very purpose
of strengthening of inspection techniques.

D. Adherence to schedule for inspection of bridges

34. The objective of conducting bridge inspection is to assess the condition of bridges

_and to take corrective remedial measures needed if any. There was shortfall in
adherence to scheduled inspection of bridges by various levels of inspection authority.
The Committee observe that Bridge inspections to be carried out by SSE/SE-Works
were not carried out in many zones, citing non-availability of staff and infrastructure 88
reasons. Shortfall in conduct of inspection at the fevel of SSE/Works (35.42 per cent)
and SSE/ Permanent Way (28.96 per cent) that may result in shortfall in the timely
identification of defects in bridges and this may lead to serious consequences The
shortfall may result in a serious bridge condition going unnoticed. Against 156 bridges
due for Under Water Inspection during the review period, Under Water Inspection was
carried out on 112 bridges leaving a shortfall of UWI on 44 bridges. Lack of trained
manpower was cited among reasons for large scale shortfall in conduct of inspection of
bridges.

35. However, Railway Board stated (April 2015) that by and large, the inspection
schedules are being adhered to by the designated officials and remedial actions are
being taken and instructions have been reiterated by the Zona! Railways to the field
Officials for adhering to the inspection schedule, making good the shortfall if any, and
also recording the observations/ furnishing certificates.

36. The complete adherence to inspection schedule at each level was not ensured
by Zonal Administrations. However, Railway Board stated that they have instructed


4

(July 2007) Zonal Railways to implement Centralized Bridge Organization at the zonal
level under the Chief Bridges Engineer (CBE).

37. During evidence a representative of the Railway Board deposed in this regard as
under:

"We have a very well laid out system of keeping the record of bridge inspections.
It starts even from the year when the bridge is constructed and every year
whatever inspection notes are there, they are recorded in the register. That
tegister also contains all drawings and important photographs.
Subsequently, the track management system was adopted in the Indian Railways
in which one of the modules was bridge management system. In it all important
parameters of the bridge are uploaded. In 2016-17, we have also sanctioned a
new work for bridge management system at the cost of Rs.7.4 crore. We are
developing this system.”

38. The Creation of separate Bridge Cell was intended to provide specialized
attention on inspection and maintenance of bridges and also in the effective monitoring
of bridgeworks. The policy guidelines for implementation of centralized bridge
organization at zonal level were prepared in April 2008. However, out of 16 zones, only
in ten zones 20 separate bridge cell has been formed. Audit found that where Bridge
Cells were established, details of inspection and identified bridges due for rehabilitation
were recorded in the Bridge Cell for better monitoring of bridgework.

E, Bridge Management System (BMS)

39. The BMS, which was mentioned in CSP as one of the thrust areas in technology
improvement in regard to bridge inspection and maintenance, targetted to be completed
by 2006-07, was still in nascent stage. Out of the 20 modules proposed, only one
module relating to creation of central structured Bridge Data Base was finalized and in
that too, feeding of data relating to bridges was completed to an extent of 61.38 per cent
only across 14 zones. |

40... ॥ reply to the query of the Committee in this regard, the Ministry of Railways
submitted as under:

“Initially, it was envisaged to develop Bridge Management system ( BMS) as a
separate module of Track Management System (TMS). However, due to capacity


15

constraint of the software, it was decided to develop a separate Bridge
Management System and accordingly the work was sanctioned at a cost of Rs
10.14 crores in Budget 2016-17. The work is being executed by CRIS. The work
of master feeding of bridge data in Bridge management sysiem has been
completed. Further, the bridge inspection proforma of bridge management
system is under development and gradually it is planned to do away with the
bridge registers physically. In the BMS, there will be a facility for uploading
GAD of the bridge, photographs, videos etc.”

41. On being asked about the bridge rehabilitation management the Ministry in its
written submission stated that-
“As far as management of bridge rehabilitation is concerned, there is a separate
application IRPSM on which the progress of each sanctioned work is updated and
monitored every month. This is web based application.”

42. The fact remains that in its recommendations, CSP envisaged that the BMS had to
be fully functional by 2006-07. But even after expiry of ten years, the same is yet to be
made fully functional/operational.

F. inadequacy of manpower for inspection and maintenance of bridges of bridges

43. . There was an acute shortage of staff in skilled category Group '0' (40.48 percent)
and unskilled category Group "D' (28.91 per cent) required for inspections: and
maintenance of bridges. It is seen that out of 444 posts of Senior Section Engineers
(8528) and Junior Engineers (JEs), as many as 109 posts were vacant, as of March
2014. Similarly, Out of the sanctioned strength of 2,681 skilled staff, as many as 4,095
posts were vacant, as of March 2014, In the case of unskilled staff, 1,086 posts out of
3,756 were vacant. The shortage of staff in northern railway, north frontier railway and
north Central railway is more pronounced. This clearly indicates that sufficient and
suitable manpower required to carry out the important safety functions viz., inspection
and maintenance of bridges was not available in most of the Zonal Railways.

44, The Railway Board accepted the audit comments and stated that the bridge staff
works in safety related circumstances and efforts are being made to put bridge staff in
safety category and the vacancies are being filled through departmental! promotions,
direct recruitments etc.


PARTI
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

4. C&AG in its earlier Report No. 9 of 2003 had highlighted substantial delays
in rehabilitation of identified bridges. Shortfall in scheduled inspections was also
' pointed out in the audit, Railway Board (RB) in their Action Taken Note (June
2008) stated that rehabilitation of distressed bridges other than category 1 would
normally requiré 3 to 4 years for completion after sanctioning bridge works. The
Raitway Board had assured that all bridgeworks of over 4 years affer sanction are
specially monitored upto highest level. However, the latest audit (2015) of C&AG
reveals the inordinate delays in sanctioning/executing and monitoring of
bridgeworks. This resulted in unpardonable delays in achieving target date for
completion of bridges. Thus the non serious approach of the Railways leads to
the possibility of compromising passenger safety during operation of train
service on those indentified bridges.

2 Delay_in sanctioning the bridgeworks even_after identification for identification for
rehabilitation by Railway Board and speed restrictions

The Committee note that out of 102 bridge works pertaining to 150 bridges,

in the case of 31 bridge works whieh included Category (I) and Category {ll}
bridges also, on an average, Railway Board took 43 months to sanction the
. bridge works after identification by the Zonal Railways. It is also brought out that
the average time taken for sanction of a bridge work was to the extent of 1314
months in North Central Railway (NCR), followed by Central Railway (CR}(57
months), East Cost Railway (ECoR) (55 months), South Eastern Railway (SER)(54
months) and an average delay of 30 months in Southern Railway (SR) and West
Central Railway(WCR). The audit, brought to light that during the period from
2040-11 to 2013-14, the Zonal Railways shortlisted the recommendations received
from the field officers and forwarded proposals for 2,694 works. Against this, the
Railway Board approved 1,953 bridge works, i.e. 72.49%. The Committee note
that delay in completion of bridgeworks resulted in continuation of speed
restrictions on the bridges which ultimately led to additional operational costs,


7

besides being a safety hazard on account of running trains on technically
obsolete bridges. The extra expenditure incurred due to continued operation of
speed restrictions on 87 bridges in 13 Zonal Railways, of which 31 located in
important routes worked out to be Rs.103.40 crores during the period from 2010-
11 to 2043-14. However, the Railway Board stated that depending upon the
availability of funds and resources, the works required from safety
considerations are given top most priority, which implies monetary
considerations was given precedence over safety requirement. In response to
speed restrictions, the Railway Board stated that speed restrictions on bridges
are imposed within available time allowance and that extra expenditure, alleged
by audit was only “notional”. The Committee are distressed to note that even in
this era of fast paced developments, Railway Board takes a substantial period of
time to sanction the bridgeworks. The Committee are of the view that speed
restrictions and delaying crucial bridge work at zonal levels and RB level simply
on. monetary considerations defeats the very purpose of the system of
identification for rehabilitation, besides compromising the safety of passengers
as well as train services on the bridges. The Committee desire that a strategic
‘management system be developed for fast tracking sanction of
rehabilitation/reconstruction of bridges within a time frame based on priority for
safety. ,

3. Underutilization of Funds

The Committee observe that even though paucity of funds was cited as a
reason for shortfall in achievement of targets for bridgeworks, substantial
surrender of funds was noticed in various Zonal Railways. The Budget Grant
provided to individual Zonal Railways per year was short of average Budget Grant
demanded per year to the extent of Rs. 213.69 crofes (38.65 %) in Indian railways.
Provision of less Budget Grant than the demand ranged from Rs.0.72 crores in
respect of WCR to Rs. 53.41 crores in respect of ECR. The magnitude of short
provision of Budget Grant has the effect of slowing down the momentum of the


18

progress of bridge works. The Committee further note that on the one hand, the
Budget Grant provided was short of demand, whereas, on the other hand, the
total average Budget Grant surrender per year through the process of demand for
less final grant across the Zones was Rs, 58.60 crores, i.e. 17.28 per cent. Thus,
on the one hand, paucity of funds was quoted as the main reason for slow
progress of bridge works and short fall in achievement of target for rehabilitation/
reconstruction of bridges, whereas, on the other hand, the Budget Grant provided
was not utilized to the tune of Rs, 60.95. crores. per annum. However, the Railway
Board has claimed that the funds have been allotted based on overall availability.
The RB have claimed: that the funds were actually utilized and that there was no
under utilization. Nevertheless, the contention of the Railway Board is not
acceptable because the audit fiad collected the figures from certified
appropriation accounts of various Zonal Railways. The Committee feel that there
are some serious flaws in budget planning and it exposes the lack of seriousness
on the part of railways which needs: to be. rectified. The Committee, therefore,
desire that proper planning, execution and effective mechanism of monitoring
should be set up at both Zonal and RB levels to ensure optimum utilization of
funds,

4, Underutilization of modern equipments for bridge inspection inspection

The Committee note that even though for conducting objective inspection
of bridges 290 equipments of five types have been procured at different Zones
over IR on the recommendations of the High Level Safety Review Committee
headed by Shri Anil Kakodkar, it has been found that the utilization was woefully
only 7.07%. The Committee further observe that these equipments procured at an
exorbitant approximate cost of Rs.12.99 crore, While Zonal Railway
administrations replied that the reasons for non/underutilization of these
equipments for inspections was due to absence of trained staff, vacancy in Group
D category staff, lack of skills and logistics etc. The Railway Board stated (April
2045) that the equipments available in Zonal Railways are being used regularly to


19

assess various. parameters related to. condition of bridges. The log book entries,
however, showed that the utilization of various equipments were insignificant
since their procurement, The Committee are of the view that underutilization of
equipments procured after spending crores of rupees is defeating the very
purpose of timely strengthening of bridges. The Committee, are surprised to
observe the unjustified decisions of the officers of Indian Railways in procuring
costly equipments without any proper planning, cost analysis, assessing the
actual need and its effective utilisation. The Committee, therefore, desire that
accountability should be fixed at of Zonal as well as RB levels against the officers

who have procured equipments at exorbitant, rates which are lying underutilized.

5. Inordinate delay in execution of sanctioned bridgeworks

The Committee are shocked to note that out of 3979 bridgeworks,
sanctioned by the Railway Board, works of 710 bridges remain to be completed
as on March 2014 even after expiry of prescribed period of one/four years. The
Committee further observe that the audit in its test checked cases of 102
bridgeworks pertaining to 150 bridges, pointed out average delay of 41 months,
ranging between 8 months (SECR) and 105 months (ECR). The Railway Board
contended that the rehabilitation/rebuilding may take several years and also it
can't be generalized. Some isolated cases may take more than four years also
because of reasons beyond the control of Railway administration. The
Committee, however, are of the view that poor planning and improper contract
management on the part of Zonal Railway administration caused inordinate delay
in execution of bridge reconstruction projects. The Committee, therefore, desire
the Railways to set timelines for the execution and completion of bridgeworks
with effective planning and proper monitoring so as to ensure that safety of
human tives is not compromised and railway assets protected.


20

6. Need for rehabilitation/reconstruction of bridges within their codal |"e bridges. within their codal life

The Committee note that during inspection by Zonal Railways during 2010-
11 to 2013-14, 42 bridges were found to have become due for rehabilitation within
their codal life. Out of these 42 bridges, 37 were located in SWR alone and in
other five zones (NR, ECoR, SER, SR and WR) there was one bridge in each zone.
These-are ample evidences highlighting the fact that poor maintenance of railway
bridges lead to the need for its rehabilitation/reconstruction within their codal life.
Railway Board stated that these cases of rehabilitation within the codal life are
not due to poor maintenance but other reasons such as increased loading
standards, inadequate water way due to change of pattern of flow in the
catchment area, excessive corrosive conditions etc. The reply of the RB is
contradictory in itself as on one hand it was stated that premature rehabilitation
was not due to poor maintenance, on other hand one of the reasons stated was
excessive corrosion. The Committee are of the view that continuous excessive
corrosion needs to be tackled by effective measures such as timely maintenance, °
monitoring and ensuring good quality materials used in the construction work
etc, The Committee are shocked to note.that out of 42 bridges found to have
become due for rehabilitation/reconstruction within their codal life (normal life),
37 of them were located in South Western Region alone, The Committee are,
therefore, of the view that the matter may be enquired into, action taken against
the officers responsible for the lapse and report the same to the Committee within

six months of presentation of this report.in Parliament.

7. Need for creation of Bridge Cells in remaining Railway Zone Railway Zone

The Senior Sections Engineers (SSEVSE-Works is expected to inspect
superstructure and steel works and bearings of all girders less than 2.2 m clear
span once in 5 years, In addition, foundation, sub-structure and bed block of all
bridges should be inspected once in a year prior to monsoon. The objective of
conducting bridge inspection is to assess the condition of bridges and to take.
corrective remedial measures needed, if any. The Committee observe that Bridge


2i

inspections scheduled to be undertaken by SSE/SE - Works were not: carried out
in many Zones, citing non-availability of staff and infrastructure as reasons.
Shortfall in conduct of inspection at the level of SSE/SE- Works (35.42 per cent)
and SSE/ Permanent Way (28.96 per cent), as pointed out in C&AG report, may
result in shortfall in timely identification of defects in bridges and this may lead to
serious consequences. The, Railway Board stated (April 2015} that by and large,
the inspection schedules are being adhered to by the designated officials and
remedial actions are being taken, Railway Board’s instructions have ‘been
reiterated by the Zonal Railways to the field officials for adhering to the
inspection schedule, making good the shortfall, if any, and also recording the
observations/ furnishing certificates. The Committee are of the view that
complete adherence to inspection schedules at each level should be ensured by
Zonal Administrations. In this regard Railway Board instructed (July 2007) Zonal
Railways to implement Centralized Bridge Organization at the Zonal level under
the Chief Bridges Engineer (CBE). Greation of separate Bridge Gell was intended
to provide specialized attention on inspection and maintenance of bridges and
also in the effective monitoring of bridgeworks. The policy guidelines for
implementation of centralized bridge organization at zonal level were prepared in
April 2009. However, out of 16 zones, only in ten zones 20 separate bridge cells
have been created. Audit found that where Bridge Cells were established, details
of inspection and identified bridges due for rehabilitation were recorded in the
Bridge Cell for better monitoring of bridgework. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that Bridge Cells be created in the remaining six Railway Zones for
better monitoring of inspections and execution of bridgeworks over IR and action
taken in this regard intimated to the Committee within three months of the
presentation of this Report to Parliament. :

8. Jnadequacy of manpower for inspection and maintenance of bridges

The Committee observe that there is an acute shortage of staff in Group 'C’

and Group 'D' cadres telling upon the quality of inspections and maintenance of


22

bridges. It is seen that out of 444 posts of Senior Section Engineer(SSE) and
Junior Engineer (JE), as many as 109 posts were vacant, as of March 2014,
Similarly, Out of 2,681 skilled staff sanctioned, as many as 1,095 posts were
vacant, as of March 2014. In the case of unskilled staff, 1,086 posts out of 3,756
were vacant. The shortage of staff in Northern Railways, North Frontier Railways
and North Central Railways is more pronounced, This clearly indicates that
sufficient and suitable manpower required to carry out the important safety
functions. viz., inspection and maintenance of bridges was not available in most
of the Zonal Railways. Railway Board accepted the audit cormments and stated
_ that the vacancies are being filled through departmental promotions, direct
recruitment etc. The Committee are of the view that such large scale vacancies
exposes the lack of seriousness on the part of railways to carry out the much
needed inspection of railway Bridges. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
urgent steps be taken to fill up vacant posts, expedite holding of DPCs and

conduct of recruitment of requisite manpower.

9. Implementation of Bridge Management System (BMS)

The Committee note that the BMS, which was mentioned in Corporate
Safety Plan (CSP) as one of the thrust areas in technology improvement in regard
to bridge inspection and maintenance, scheduled to be completed by 2006-07, is
still in nascent stage. Out of the 20 modules proposed, only one module relating
to creation of central structured Bridge Data Base was finalized and in that too,
feeding of data relating to bridges was completed to an extent of 61.38 per cent
only across 14 Zones. However, Railway Board stated that the feeding of master
data for bridges is in advance stage-and is planned to be completed during 2018-
46. They further stated that bridge inspection proforma is under development गा
will be available to railways by May 2015. The fact remains that in its
recommendations, CSP envisaged that the BMS had to be fully functional by
2006-07. But even after expiry of seven years, the same is yet to be implemented

‘completely. The Committee desire that Railway Board give updated information


23

on the funetioning of the BMS. As BMS will help Ministry of Railways in keeping
track of all kinds of maintenance and inspection issues related to Railway
Bridges, the Committee emphasize the imperative need for making the BMS
system fully operational within six months of the presentation of this Report.

10. Replacement of early steel/cast iron/screw pile bridges bridges

The Committee note that Bridges made of Early Steel/ Crew Pile/ Cast Iron
were considered to be prone to brittleness and hence had to be phased out by
end of 2043.as per Corporate Safety Plan (CSP) projections. The audit report
however, revealed that as on March 2014, out of 147 bridges due to be phased
out, 96 bridges of these types still existed over five Zonal Railways. Railway
Board stated that the work of technically obsolete bridges has been executed
keeping in view the availability of funds, the condition of the bridge etc. They
further stated that the obsolete bridges, falling on Broad Gauge route in five zonal
Railways (NR, WR, ER, NFR and WCR) would be replaced by March 2017 and
other bridges, falling in Meter Gauge route of NFR would be replaced in gauge
conversion work. They audit contended that target fixed by Railway Board for
replacement of technically obsolete bridges, failing on Broad Gauge route as
March 2017 was not as per the recommendations of CSP, wherein it was
envisaged that these bridges would be phased out by 2013. The Committee
further note that Railway Board have not fixed any target for replacement of 69
such bridges on Meter Gauge route in NFR. Moreover, it is pertinent to mention
here that at the time of inspection, these bridges were declared technically
obsolete ones as it, contain higher proportion of Sulphur, making bridges prone
to brittleness. The Committee, therefore, desire that keeping in view the safety of
passengers, technically obsolete bridges need to be replaced in a time bound
manner at the earliest, The Committee may be apprised in this regard within a

period of three months of presentation of this report in Parliament.


24

11. Nexus between Railways and Contractors

The Committee note that while certain railway bridges constructed during
British rule are in good condition, railway bridges constructed/reconstructed after
independence are of inferior quality and need frequent repair. Nexus between
railway officials and few contractors severely affect the quality and life of its
construction. Delays in construction leads to cost overrun, speed restrictions on
trains, heavy loss to the exchequer and ultimately safety of passengersi/trains are
put to risk/danger. The Committee are of the view that tender for

' construction/rehabilitation of bridges be done through ¢-tendering so as to make
the system transparent and to attract large number of reputed and competent
construction companies in the tendering process. | The Committee also desire
that construction companies/contractors who fail to ensure quality and long fife
of bridges be debarred from participating in future tenders and penalized/earnest
money forfeited. The Committee further desire that the officials found lacking in
their duties to ensure good quality work or colluded with contract be punished in

an exemplary manner.

12. Stow progress_of the fabrication of girders for bridgeworks_ by Civil
Engineering Workshops;

The Committee note that delay in timely supply of steel girders by the Civil
Engineering Workshops (CEWs) resulted in delay of rehabilitation of railway
bridges. There was a shortfall to the extent of 66.09 per cent in the supply of
steet girders by Civil Engineering Workshops (CEWs) in CR, ECR, NR, SCR and
SR during 2011-12 to 2013-14. In SWR, out of 37 technically obsolete bridges
taken up for rehabilitation, the rehabilitation work of 12 bridges got delayed due
to delay in supply of bridge girders by the CWE at Arakkonam/SR. Progress of
work in these cases ranged from 0 to 14 per cent as on March 2015. The Railway
Board, however, stated that the work orders/indents placed on the workshops are
always in excess of the production capacity of the workshops and a [ot of time is
required for procurement of raw material such as steel etc. after work order

placed on the workshop. The Committee observe that delays in supply of girders


. 25

by the Civil Engineering Workshops affect execution of the relevant bridgeworks,
The Committee, therefore, desire that Railways need to modernize! enhance the
number and capacity of the workshops and augment advance procurement of raw
materials to avoid the delay in supply of steel girders as it ultimately impacts the
safety of passengers on account of non-completion of bridgeworks identified for

rehabilitation.

NEW DELHI; MALLIKARJUN KHARGE
01 February,2018 Chairperson,

12 Magha, 1939 (Saka) © Public Accounts Commitiee