70

COMMERCIAL PUBLICITY IN INDIAN RAILWAYS

MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD).

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17) 5

SEVENTIETH REPORT

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT |
NEW DELHI .


PAC NO, 2103

“SEVENTIETH REPORT

(2016-17)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

| comarca, COMMERCIAL an IN
INDIAN RAILWAYS

MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD)

t :
5

Presented fo Lok Sabha on: [pe Pot wt Pol?
Laid in Rajya Sabha on: {U4 Bot: { ree Pol}

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

April 2017 / Chaitra 1939 (Saka}


CONTENTS

हे Pages
= COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE {2016-17} _ . (0)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2018-15) . 1]
- COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE -॥ (RAILWAYS} OF P_A:C. (2016-17) (४)
- "COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE -Il (RAILWAYS) OF P.A.C. (2015-16) (vi)
INFORUDCTION . . (vii)
एज REPORT ote
coe ae aE PARTE L हि
या I Introductory = TT , ~ 7 |
॥ Assessment of revenue Pp and budgetary estimate —_ 2
‘iit -| Underachievement of targets हु है | 37
“WW _| Exploitation of variaus, media for Commercial Publicity —_ 7
@ ‘Master Pian. ह ~ 7
() Publicity at Stations “TE 810 -
(fi) Publicity through Trains a 10-11 |
1] Publicity through stationery items _ 44-12
V__| Deficiencies in contract management : ) 12-14
जा | Internal Control Mechanism ~ 7 4316
जा. Non-inclusion of clause of Service Tax “16-17
PART -li ;
“Observations/Recommendations है 7 18-24 है

APPENDICES के

Accounts Committee (2015-16) held on 15 October, 20145
= —_| Minutes of the First sitting of the Sub-Commiltiae-i(Railways) of Public —
Accounts Committee (2016-17) held on 03 August, 2016

pn Minutes of the Third sitting of the Sub-Commitfee-Ii(Raliways) of Public
Accounts Gornmittes (2016-17) held on 30 August, 2016

Vv “Minutes of the Fourth sitfing of the Sub-Committee4l{Railways) of Public
Accounts Committee (2016-17) held’on 26 October, 2016

Vv. Minutes of the Fifth sitting of the Sub-Committee-li(Railways) of Public
Accounts Committee (2016-17) held on 08 December, 2016

जा Minutes of the Sixth sitfing of the Sub-CommiliceII(Railways) of Public |
Accounts Committee (2016-17) held on 29 March, 2017

Vil__ | Mintites of the Twenty-ninth Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
(2016-17) held on 06 April, 2017

Neb हु 7 आग


Canam agnr

46.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

AWN >

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

Prof. K.V. Thomas - Chairperson

MEMBERS ...

- LOK SABHA

Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay --- . ——-
Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra — ना

- Shri Nishikant Dubey

Prof, Richard Hay

Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Smt. Riti Pathak |

Shri Neiphit Rio. -

Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal .
Shri Abhishek Singh

Dr. Kirit Somaiya .

Shri Anurag Singh Thakur

Shri Shivkumar GC. Udasi

Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Naresh Agrawal

Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
" Shri Bhupender Yadav
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Stiri Shantaram Naik

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
Shri Ajay Sancheit ~

SECRETARIAT

Shri A.K. Singh Additional Secretary
Shri S.C. Chaudhary - Joint Secretary

Shri T.Jayakumar - Director
Shri AK. Yadav Deputy Secretary

4

* Bleeted w.c. 09.08.2016 vice Stvi Vijay Gacl, MP appointed as Minister af State w.e.f. 05.07.2018,

(0)


eh et
re

ed
थी की Ps

16.

18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

pe naw FY PS

COMPOSTTION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE -

(2015-16)
Prof. K.V. Thomas -. Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
Shri 8.9. Ahluwalia
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay .
Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura
Shri Nishikant Dubey
Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
Shri Bhartruhari Muhtab
Shri Ramesh Pokbriyal "Nishank"
Shri Neiphiu Rio
Sbri Dushyant Singh.
Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
Dr. Kicit Somaiya
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
Shri Shivkumar Udasi
Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA
Shti Naresh Agrawal

- Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi

Shri Anil Madhav Dave
Shei Vijay Goel

‘Shri Bhubaneswar KaGta

Shri Shantaram Naik ©
Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy

( ‘}


COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE - II (RAILWAYS) OF
THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2016-77)
Convenor : ‘Br. Kirit Somaiya
Alternate Convenor : Shri Naresh Agrawat
: Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita

Members
हु Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
Shri Bhupender Yadav

PUN

‘ Appointed w.e.£ 08.07.20 16 vice Shri Vijay Goel, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f 05.07.2016,

(wv


COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE - ॥ (RAILWAYS) OF
7 - ‘THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
Shri Naresh Agrawal

(2015-16)
Convenor : 4. Shri Vijay Goet
Alternate Convenor :; 2. Sti Sudip Bandopadhyay
Members > 3. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
4.
5.


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee, faving been authorised by the
Commitics, do present this Seventieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha} on "Commercial
Publicity in Indian Railways" based on Chapter { of C&AG Report No. 11 of 2043
Union Government - Railways relating fo the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board). हैं

2. The Report of Compirolier and Auditor General of India for the year ended March
201, was laid on the Table of the House on 13 August, 2013.

3. | The Public Accounts Committee (201 5-16) took up the subject for detailed
examination and report. A Sub-Committee was constituted for the purpose. The Sub-
Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway
Board) on the subject at their sitting held on 15th October, 2015. As the examination of
the subject remained inconclusive, the subject was again selected by PAC (2016-17)
which took further oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Railways
(Railway Board) on the subject at their sittings held an 03 August, 30 August, 26
October & 08 December; 2016. The Sub-Committee of PAC (2016-17) considered and
adopted the Report at their sitting held on 29 March, 2017. The Report was considered
by the Public Accounts Committee (2016-17) during their sitting held on 06 April, 2017.
The Minutes of the Sittings form Appendices to the Report. . हु

4.. For facility of reference and convenience, ithe . Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed-in thick type and form Part- I of,
the Report.

5. The Committee thank the Sub-Committees of Public Accounts Committee,
(2015-16) & (2016-17) for taking oral evidence of thé Ministry and obtaining information
on the subject.

6. The Committee wauld also like to express their thanks to the representatives of
the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) for tendering evidence before the Sub-
Committee and furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in commection with
the examination of the subject. हु

7. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the office of the Gamptraller and Auditor Generat of India.

NEW DEI-HI; पु PROF. K.V. THOMAS

06 Aprit, 2017 ह Chairperson,
46 Chaitra, 1939 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

vit)


REPORT
PART I
4. Introductory *

Indian Railways with its vast tracts of land, abundant resources of buildings, stations,
bridges, trains, platforms, railway crossings, entrance/exit gates throughout the country -
have tremendous scope and huge potential to generate revenue through commercial
publicity/advertisements. Scientific planning and management, proper and. effective
utilization of its vast potential for commercial publicity can earn enough revenue without any
expenditure by the Railways. There is no doubt that the revenue generated through 7
commercial publicity would be of great help to the cash-strapped Indian - Railways.
However, it is found that the Ministry of Railways failed miserably to have a scientific
planning and prudent Management of its huge patential of resources for its effective
utilization in commercial publicity to’ generate rich source of revenue. The Ministry of
Railways set up a Task Force (1999) te submit recommendations on generation of
Tesources from non-traditional sources which inter affa, included earnings from commercial
publicity. On the basis of recommendations of the Task Force (April 2000}, the Railway
Board identified varicus media/ assets like stations, irains, level crossing gates etc. for
Commercial Publicity and issued broad guidelines to Zonal Railways for framing action
plan. Subsequently, Railway Board issued a series of detaifed instructions from May 2006
to January 2012 for exploitation of identified railway assets/ media for commerciat publicity/
advertising identifying various media vehicles which included guidelines for selection of
advertising sites. During 2007-08 to 2011-12, the revenue mobilization through cammercial
publicity had crossed Rs.100 crore but failed to” sustain a clear momenium and hovered
within the overall range of Rs. 150 crore fo Rs. 200 crore. Revenue earnings remained
substantially belaw the targets set. The PAC selected this subject for detailed examination,
The Chairperson, PAC appointed a Sub-Committee under the convenorship of Shri Vijay
Goel, MP (2014-15): and (2015-16) and Dr. Kirit Somaiya, MP (2016-17) to examine the
issue and submit report to the Main Committee

2. This report is based on Chapter 1 of C8&AG's Teport No. 11 of 2013 for the year
ended March 2012. The Audit review covers issues related to commercial publicity in Indian
Railways. Based on audit findings on 'Commerciat Publicity in Indian Railways’, across

“Zonal Railways, the report focuses on performance of the Zonal Railways in exploiting the -


2

potential of advertising media on stations, trains and level crossings to enhance ifs revenue

earnings.

3. The audit scrutiny revealed that the Ministry failed.to ensure a proper assessment of
the demand potential. The-targets framed were driven by the Ministry. The’ lack of
knowledge of market potential resulted in iow response to advertising fenders floated by the

- Zonal Railways. Uneven earings across various asset classes were also observed
Stations/ trains wéré more actively used for_commercial publicity in comparison to assets

like’ Railway tickets, reservation forms/charts etc. Weak contract management led to
unauthorized displays beyand expiry of the contract period with high risk of recoverability of
outstanding license fee.

4. In the process of examination of the subject, the Sup - Commitiee cbtained

हि background note and detailed written replies from the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board).

They also took oral evidence ‘of the representatives of the Ministry and obtained post.
evidence replies. The PAC also discussed the subject during its on-the-spot study visit to
Mumbai with Central and Western Railways. Based on written and oral depasitions by the
Ministry, the Committee examined the subject in detail and reached certain conclusions as

enumerated in the succeeding paragraphs.

Ik. Assessment of revenue potential and budgetary estimate ~

5. Audit scrutiny revealed that the revenue projections set by the Railway Board on
account of commercial publicity were not backed by assessment of market potential and
earnings targets were set without associating the Zonal Raifways. Déspite’a‘ decision in
General Managers' Conference in December 2007 that deliberated the recommendations _
of the Task Force (2000), no external agency/ consultants were hired to assess the
fevenue potential through advertising/publicity tnedia. The fenders floated by Zona!
Railways for advertising rights for divisions/stations/ trains efc. witnessed limiied response. ‘

6. The Committee desired io know as to why the revenue projections and the targets
set for Zonal Railways were not based on any assessmenit/studies of the market potential.
The Ministry in their reply stated as under:

“Indian Railways have not been using any outside agency for assessment of market

pofential and targets are set based on the optimistic assumptions and the prevailing
regulatory mechanism imposed by the State Governments and quantum of


3

expenditure made by various companies on advertisement which are not under the
control of Railways.

The contracts for selling/leasing out media spaces of commercial publicity on Indian
Railways are given through tender basis at assessed rate of license fee decided on
the basis of the market conditions.

In order to enhance the actual performance and to. avoid {ack of commitment and
under perfarmance on the part of the Zonal Railways, stiff targets were being set for
the Zonal Railways to stretch their efforis in maximizing revenues.”
7. The Committee ‘further eriquired from the Railways about the reasons for
non-appointment of an external agency/ consultant for conducting assessment of the
market potential of commercial publicity through railway assets. The Ministry in their written
submissions stated as under:
“The Railway has been utilizing the knowledge and expertise developed over the

years by the staff and officers of the commercial department to assess the potential -
revenue that could be generated through commercial publicity. 7

A task force has been constituted by the Ministry for assessing the revenue potential
from commerciat publicity based.an the report of RITES to suggest measures for
realizing the potential. The committee would be submitting its report by end of April
2045." | ; .

8. . Audit pointed out that lack of specific budgefary head for commercial publicity
earnings resulted in diluted accountability. Earnings from commercial! publicity were found
to be clubbed under ‘Sundry eamings’ which subsume various receipts from miscellaneous
‘sources. The Zonal Railways, thus, did noi provide for expected earnings in the ‘budget
estimates submitted fo the Railway Board for the review period. है

9... 18 Committee then enquired the reasons for absence of a specific budgetary head
for the eamings under commercial publicity. The Ministry in their reply stated as under. -

“A separate budgetary head at “Detaited Head” fevel in the classification of Accounts
already exist for accounting/booking revenues received from Commercial Publicity,
namely, 7-610-Advertisement Fees.” है

HL Underachievement of targefs
10. Audit observed that the Zone-wise targets of eamings fixed by the Railway Board
vis-A-vis actual earnings for the period 2009-10 fo 2011-12 reflected sharp under

achievement by a wid margin. Overall shortfall against targets for Indian Railways during

2009-10 to 2011-12 remained more than 51 per cent. Further the targets showed a huge



4

year on yeer variation and reflected an ad-hoc approach. Audii also pointed out that targets

were set by the Railway Board without Zonal involvement, leading to weak monitoring and

ineffective compliance on the part of Zonal Railways.

- 11.

The Commitiee desired to know the reasons behind shorifall against targets during

2009-10 to 2011-12, ta which the Ministry submitted as under :--

12.

“Earnings from Commercial Publicity depends on various factors like expenditure by
-various companies (producers) on adverfisements, growth in the economy in
general, growth in other sectors of advertising viz TV, print, outdoor hoardings, web
media etc. In order fo enhance the revenue.from non-conventional sources, an
increased target of Rs.1000 crores was annaunced in the Budget of 2010-11 by the

then Hon'ble Minister of Railways. However, owing to the slump in the market, this.
target could not be realized."

Asked ta state the details of the mechanism of periodic review and the remedial :

measures undertaken to overcome the revenue shortfall, the Ministry submitted the -

faltowing reply :—

“Railway Board conducts review of the performance of Commercial Department with
Chief Commercial Managers/ Senior Divisional Commercial Managers about various
subjects including performance of Railways pertaining to Commercial Publicity.
Based on the feedback received from Zonal Railways, the following policy measures
have been intraduced:-

-Divisions are empowered to approve contracts on ‘first come first served’ basis on

‘new and innovative idea’ at stations, on trains. and in railway premises for value up
to rupees one crore per item for a period of one year.

In order to facilitate participation of Government Departments/ Public Sector
Undertakings (PSUs). separate guidelines have been issued affering media spaces

’ for advertisement to Ministries/Departments, PSUs of Central/State Government

offered media space on a special footing without participating in the tender process.
To address the issue of market unpredictability and consequent foss of opportunity
due to failure of tenders the concept of ‘estimated value' of contract has been
introduced which allows the tender committee io assess the reasonability of rates in
a rational manner. हु

The uniform escalation of ficense fee @ 10% which was confdbuting to failure of
fenders has been withdrawn for the contracts with a period upto 3 years.

To attract advertisers for development of newer sites involving considerable capital
investment like video wall, electronic bill boards, sculptures etc., Zonal Railways
have been authorized to stipulate the period of such contracts upto 10 years with
escatation of 10% from 4th year onwards.“


13.

5

With fegard to the audit observations that targets were not fixed in consultation with

Zones, the Ministry in their reply submitfed as under:

14.

“While Zonal Railways are consulted during fixation of targets for earnings from
different sectars of Indian Railways like freight earnings, passenger earings, sundry
eamings efc, the Ministry of Railways finally fixes the targets as per the overall
economic scenario. The inputs received from Railways are taken into account for the
final targets, which are fixed in an aspirational manner in order to motivate the Zonal
Railways to exceed their past performance.” a

When the Committee asked the details about the First-Come-First Serve (FCFS)

basis for the allotment of contracts, the Ministry furnished the following reply:

“Under the FCFS policy, proposals are received on an open ‘entry basis for

commercial publicity at schedule/tariff rates already vetted by Finance. Relevant extracts
of Board’: Policy circulars in this regard are:

Commercial Circular No.24 of 2000, clause_5.10 states, “In order to develop this
area, it is necessaiy to encourage new ideas for commercial publicity: The new
idea/concepis proposed by prospective advertisers/parties should be examined and
if found feasible technically and aesthetically they may be offered to the concemed
party for @ period of one year for an amount which is not lawer than the scheduled
rate." : -

“Commerciat Circular No.34 of 2004, amended clause 5.10 states, “In order to
. develop this area, it is necessary to encourage new ideas for Commercial Pubticity.

The new ideas/concepts proposed by prospective advertisers/parties should be
examined and if found feasible technically and aesthetically they may be offered to
the concemted party for a period of one year or for a reasonable period keeping in
view the financial implications of the implementations of the new idea and the
investment put in by the party for an amount which is not lower than the scheduled
rate. Concurrence of FA&CAO and approval of GM may be taken for such publicity
work to be awarded on first-come-first-serve basis, withaut ars open tender."

Commercial Circtilar No.46 of 2013 "THe allotment of contract on First-Come-First-

-Serve basis on new and innovative ideas of commercial publicity at stations, on

tcains and im railway premises upto rupees one crore per site and the period of
coniract shaft nat exceed one year ‘and the powers to be delegated to Divisional
Railway Manager (power to be exercised by him personally and not to be delegated
further) with the concurrence of Associate Finance for accepting the allotment of .
contract

Central Railway - No station on Central Railway has been given on FCFS basis. Out
of total 831 identified locations of hoardings at various stations and other locations,
619 hoardings have been allotted by open tenders, 52 identified locations are vacant
and 160 hoardings were previously allotted on scheduled tariff rates with escalation
clauses (FCFS). However, notices for termination have been issued to make sites
available fa NER directorate so as to create attractive package size for tender by
them shortly. .



6
Western Railway - 118 sites were allotted on Western Railway, Mumbai Division on
_ the basis of FCFS.

Certain locations were granted FCFS rights which extended beyond the period of
one year. However, it is not possible to estimate the revenue losses, as these
locations were granted at rates vetted by Finance which were based on prevalent
matket conditions. The contracts on FCFS were awarded with the objective of
- minimizing losses of Indian Railways by avoiding any vacant spaces which were not
considered very lucrative by the market.”

15. The representative of the Ministry of the Railways during evidence informed that

FCFS practice was prevalent in the Mumbai Division for the last 25 - 30 years in case of
‘contract for advertisement at ROBs, in order to develop new areas of advertising and
increase the revenue of the Railways. further informed that after the formation of the
directorate it has been clarified to alf the Zones that FCFS policy will not be continued.
Both CR & WR have stapped this policy now. Everything will be done by transparent
auction through online method.

16. in view of discretionary nature of policy of First-Come-First Serve (FCFS), the
Committee enquired from the Railways whether vigilance has examined the policy of FCFS
based on new and innovative ideas from the point of view of scope for exploitation of
vulnerability of policy to discretionary interpretation of officials. The Ministry in their reply
stated as under: हि

“Framing of policy is done hy the concerned executive department. However, if any
complaint is received regarding non following of the executive instructions, fhe same
is duly investigated by Vigilance and appropriate action is recommended against the
officials found responsible. Vigilance has also recommended a system-improvement
to the concerned executive Directorate on 19.12.16. if in the course of investigation,
it is found that there is some deficiency/lacuna which can lead to misuse, system
improvement is also recommended to the executive department. Vigilance
department of Central Raifway has also’ forwarded a system improvement
recommendation to Commercial Depit/Central Railway on 30.6.15 proposing that
allotment of Commercial publicity sites be done through open tenders in more
transparent manner. Ratlway Board Vigilance has also recommended a system
improvement to the concemed executive Directorate on 19.12.2016." : .

17. 85 for the targets for the year 2016-17, during the meeting of the Cammittee on
30.08.2016, Member (Traffic) submitted that Railways have set a target revenue of
Rs.1700 crores from Commerciat Publicity during -the year 2016-17. When Commitiee
enquired about the rationale behind ihe said target revenue fixed by the Railways, the

Ministry in their reply submitted as under:


“Minister of Railways in the Rail Budget Speech 2016-17 mentioned that:

"Although we enjoy the highest captive in a railway system internationally, we eam
less than 5% of our revenuos through non-tariff sources. Many of the warld railway
systems generate 10% to 20% of their revenues from non-taniff sources. Over a
period of fe next five years, we will strive to reach this workd average by monetizing ~
assets and undertaking other revenue yielding activities. We have already begun
this exercise with fervor.”

Accordingly, a separate multi-disciptinary directorate- the Non Fare Revenue
Directorate- has been created in the Ministry of Railways, fo coordinate the exercise
of raising nan-fare revenue

In view of the current frend and earnings from Fare bax-freight and fare, it is
imperative that Indian Railways focus on saising the non fare revenue. A growth of
65% has been targeted in respect of ‘sundry earnings this financial year. An
ambitious farget of Rs..1700 crore from advertising revenues has been set. In order
to realise the full potential of advertising revenues, a new approach is under
consideration. The creation of an attractive package size for tenders, cutfing across
Zonal Railways and proper marketing at the appropriate forums are considered as
important to raise the advertising revenue. An effective strategy for optimal utilization
of commercial publicity potential is under. preparation with the assistance of RITES
and Ernst & Young as Professional Market Media Evaluation Agency. {t is expected
that the new strategy will create a framework to help fo achieve the potential
revenue. :

A new non fare revenue policy is presently being framed and will be issued shortly
for improving non fare revenue. It is expected that the new policy will enable the
zonal railways to have adequate flexibility in encouraging innovative and unsolicited
ideas, while maintaining transparency.”

\V, Exploitation: of various media for Commercial Publicity

18. Audit scrutiny revealed uneven earnings across various ‘asset classes. Assets like
stations/ trains were more used in comparison fo Railway tickets, reservation forms/ charts
etc. It was observed that much potential remains unexploited in terms ofa more even
distribution of eamings share. The audit study brought to light the lapses in utilizing ihe
various media avaifable for commercial publicity. The Railway Board had Issued guidelines
in 2000 fo prepare Master Plans for stations to depict potential sites available for
commercial publicity. Hoardings, Plasma TVILCD, CCTV, Fare repeaters, Public address

systeras were identified for publicity at stations.

{i} Master Plans ;
19.. Railway Board directed the Zonal Railways (May 2000) to develop a Master Plan for

. all stations fo facilifate award of bulk contracts! sole advertisement rights at agreed

locations. This master plan would depict the potential sites for exploitation of various assets


g

for commercial publicity. Subsequently, Ralhvay Board had advised (May 2006) Zonal

- Railways to give bulk advertisement iights on pilot basis to one division of each Railway

and appraise the results for extending the same to other divisions. These directions, inter

” alfa, provided broad guidance on award of bulk publicity contracts pertaining to the entire

division. Audit scrutiny reveated that in seven Railways; the master plan was available in

~ 833 stations whereas in ten Railways including Metro Railway Kolkata no master plans

were developed for stations in any of the selected divisions including the pilot divisions.

--="Further scrutiny Té¥edled that none of thése plans were-complete as per directives of the

Board as these plans faited to depict in full sites available for Hoarding, Video Walls,
Electronic Displays, Fare Repeaters, Plasma 195, PA Systems, Wall Paintings, Track
Divider etc. : है

20.

The Committee desired to know that in the absence of Master Plans of the siations,

as to how the Railways assess the total area available for publicity while fioating tenders for

bulk publicity rights of the whole Division. The Ministry in their reply stated as under:

21.

“Palicy provides for developing master plan for stations offered under ‘Bulk Right’
contracts either as whole station or cluster of stations or the entire Division. in
contracts other than bulk rights, the Senior Divisional Commercial Manager and
Senior Divisional Engineer of the Division are required fo identify the location,
existing as well as new, for floating fenders.”

On being asked to explain as to why such crucial job has been assigned to the in

house staff rather than engaging domain experts to maximize the possibility of revenue

generation, the Railways in their reply dated 20.01:2016 stated as under:

(ii)
22.

“Indian Railways have not been using any outside agency for assessment of market
potential. However, in view of 18 récommendations made by the Task Force
constituted for this purpose, RITES has already been directed to facilitate’ the
Selection of a Professional Media Market Evaluation Agency (PMMEA) which would
assess fhe eaming potential/value of select media assets of Indian Railways.

The Professional Media Market Evaluation Agency(PMMEA}, Ernst & Young, is in
the last stage of submitting its assessment of commercial publicity revenue potential
of Indian Raitways and suggesting methods in which this potential can be realised”.

Publicity at Stations
The broad guidelines issued by Railway Board (May 2000) identified specific areas

for underiaking commercial publicity, namely, advertisements at stations, trains, level

crossings, freight wagons, etc. and laid down ifistructions for framing of proposals for


9
display of advertisements/ signages etc. Audit review revealed that sources viz., hoarding,
Plasma TV/LCD/CCTY, Public- Address system were not properly utilized for commerciat

advertisement.

23. “The Committee enquired from the -Raiiways Whether they have assessed the
-reasons for ihe inadequate response to offers for letting out sites for cammercial publicity
“and sought measures which were undertaken to maximize revenue through media sources.
The Ministry in their reply stated as under: ---. -- _
; "Zonal Railways were not able to finalize a large number of tenders on account of no
response, poor response, low rates quoted as against the reserve price, restrictions

imposed by local authorities etc. Several policy measures have been taken by the
Railway Board as well as Zonal Railways viz:

© Modifications in the policies to provide greater flexibility ta Zonal Railways in
fixing the reserve price, relaxing the annual escalation clause for license fee,
permitting longer period of contract for capital intensive media assets,
delegation of financial powers, delegation of powers to the Divisions and Zonal
Railways to revise the reserved price after the failure of tenders. हु

¢ Zonal Railways/Divisions have been authorized to regroup stations into smaller
clusters or divide the Stations into several Zones for the purpose of bull right
contract.

° Replaced the concept of reserve price by concept of estimated value/assessed
earning potential of the locations.”

24. The Raiiways further submitted in their written teplies that the-praspeci af enhancing
Commercial Publicity Earnings has to be seen from the potential advertiser's point of view
and the market available to us. [t is common knowledge that outdoor advertisement has
lost its sheen as compared with other forms of media like electronic media which are
taking centre stage. Preference of clients for electronic media especially Televisions and
online platforms have contribuied to decline in demand for conventional hoardings, the
raainstay of adveriising business over the years. In Some cases, directions of various
Courts have also jed to non-utilization af vital sites thereby losing the revenue.

25. The Commiifee enquired from the Ministry, if the preference of clients is more for
electronic media for advertising then given the reasons for non-uiilization of advertising
through, CCTVs/LCDTVs/Piasma TVs at sfations. The Ministry in their reply stated as

under:


ta

“Policy provides for installation of LCDs, Elecironic Bill boards, Digital Video
Wails ete by the Agencies at identified sites in the Railway premise. To promoie
“installation of such capital intensive niedia assets by agencies palicy also
provides for langer period of coritract. However, as far as advertisement through
electronic media like Television (news channelentertainment channels) is
concerned, Indian Railways do not own any Television Channel at present.”

26. The Committee were further informed that work is underway on the installation of
a hightech centralized retwark of 200,000 screens across 2000 stations as Railway
- _ Display Network during the 10.years period.after-approval of RDN policy in March 2017.

27... The Committee further enquired from the Railways whether they conducted
surprise checks at Railway Stations to identify the unauthorized hoarding displayed at
Railway Propertiesfland. The Ministry in their reply stated as under:

“Surprise inspections are conducted by Officers and Inspectors of various
departments of Railways in addition ta the periodic and scheduled inspections at
the stations to ensure identification of any unauthorized hoardings displayed at
railway properties/land and take necessary action whenever such hoardings are
found. Station Masters maintain registers indicating the number, location and date
of commencement and expiry of all contracted sites at the station.”

(iii) Publicity through trains

28. Railway Board vide its guidelines (May 2006 and March 2007) advised Zonal
Railways to use the technique of wrapping the entire coach using viny! stickers vis-a-vis
display of advertisement boards inside the coaches on a pilot basis on selected trains like
Rajdhani, Shatabdt & Suburban Trains and some passenger trains. However, Audit scrutiny
tevealed that the compliance of above directives for implementation of this pifot project was

not Satisfactory over Zonal Railways.

29. The Comrnittee desired fo know about the efforts being made by the Raihways to
maximize utilization of the exterior of trains for viny! wrapping/stickers to enhance revenue,
The reply stated by the Ministry is as under:

“Large numbers of trains over the Zonal Railways were identified and open

tenders called 10 sell spaces on exterior of passenger trains for the. purpose of
displaying advertisement through vinyl wrapping.

Modifications were made to the policy based on feedback received from ihe
Zonal Railways including delegation of powers to DRMs for fixing of reserve
price.”


a1

30. Being further probed on whether the vinyl wrapping -had proved to be a costly
proposition, the Ministry replied as under:— ~

= “Problems cited by Zonal Railways and the advertising agencies regarding the vinyl

5-7 ‘wrapping include change in the composition of the rakes because of operationat

~ reasons leading to discontinuity and loss of visibility of the displayed advertisement,

1. -- considerable time taken for pasting and removal of vinyl wrappings on the trains,
“high cost of material and the pracess of pasting and removal of vinyl wrappings.

it has not been a costly proposition far the IR as the cost of material and the cost of
pasting ‘removal is bome by the agency. However, the contract agencies have cited
high cost of material, précess involved in vinyl) wrapping, lack of option to use
altemative maierial as some of the reasons for poor response to tenders. for
wrapping on the exterior of the trains.” .

31. The Committee were informed that the Minister of Railways had released the new
Train Branding Policy on 10.01.2017 and Railways expect to earn Rs. 1500 crores during
the 10 years péried of implementation of this policy. Bid process managers of RITES have
sent the Tender Documents and estimated earnings to Zonal Railways in January 2017.
Tenders are likely to be finalized by 30.04.2017.

{iv} Publicity through stationery ifams
32. For exploitation of PRS/UTS tickets, reservations charfs/ forms for -cornmercial
publicity, Railway Board issued a series of guidelines from November 2006 to November
2007. Check of records revealed that about 85 per cent of total revenues eared from
advertising through stationery items (Rs.12.11 crore) during fhe three year period was
accounted for by PRS tickets only, The Committee enquired about the reasons for poor
exploitation of UTS tickets/ reservation charts for generating revenue through
advertisements despite huge potential as seen in case of PRS fickets. The Ministry in their
reply stated as under: a है
“Railway Board’s policy Circular No.22 of 2009 permits advertisement on PRS/UTS
fickets, Reservation Charts and Reservation Forms through a composite tender of
procurement of biank stationery and advertisement on the stationery so procured for
fickeis or charts etc. While there has been a good response from the advertisers for
buying the space on PRS ficket the response has been poor for advertisement on
charts and UTS tickets. As leamt from Zonal Railways, the reason for poor response
fo the tender is that the advertisers do not find ‘advertisement on tickets and

_ reservation charts as commercially viable option on account of poor returns on
investment.” * .


12

33. The Railway Ministry also proposed io increase the size of tickeis so thai more

-space is available for advertisements and submitted 10108 Commities as under.

“~~~ “Railway Board has decidéd to increase the sizé of the UTS tickets on a pilot
-.-- basis to facilitate thermal printing of tickets. However, the increased size would
': Offer additional space on tickets for disptay of railway information for passengers

‘+ -- -and advertisement.” पु :

34. The Committee were informed that Minister of Railways had released the new
~ ‘Out of Home Advertisement Policy’ on 10.01.2047 with objective to allow moneiization

of Railway assets by means of advertising and expect to ear Rs. 6000 crores in ten
years tenure.

35. The Committee were informed that the Minister of Railways have also released
on 10.04.2017 the new () ‘Content on Demand and Rail Radio Policy’ allowing
~ monetization of entertainment based services on trains and stations and expected to
earn Rs. 6000 crores in ten years; (ii) ATM policy with a view to earn Rs. 2500 crores in
ten years; (पल) Integrated Mobite Application is also likely ta be launched in July 2017;
and (iv) Policy for App based Cab Services which also has a very good eaming

potential.

Vv. Deficiencies in contract management

36. Audit scrutiny revealed that in 13 Divisions of nine Railways, not a single cluster of
sfafions/ station was identified for the advertisement rights. In. Mumbai Centrat and
Ahmadabad Division of Western. Railways out of-44-number-of cluster. of stations/ stations _
identified only at 15 number of cluster of stations/ stations fenders were finalized. Tenders
were invited in June 2007 only for suburban Section (Churchgate. fo Dahanu Road) instead
of entire BCT ‘Division. The single offer received far Rs. 55.54 crore could not materialize
due to dispute an making available vacant sites to the advertiser, Moreover, despite the
approval of floating of tenders for cluster of stations of BCT Division, delay in approvat of -
cluster of stations (26 monihs) and subsequent delay in awarding the contract (24 months)

fed to 1058 of revenue.

37. The Committee enquired from the Railways the reasons fer regular non-identification
of stations/cluster of stations for advertising rights. The Ministry in their reply stated as

under.


13

“Identification of stations/ctuster of stations for advertising rights is one of the
multiple strategies adopted by Ministry of Railways to maximize the earnings from
commercial publicity. However, it Is a time consuming process and adequate
precautions have to be taken for proper assessment of the potential of each asset,
stations and cluster of stations. Even after identification of cluster of stations, the
market forces undergo major variations due to economic conditions and thus selling
of larger cluster despite major efforts ‘spent in identifying the assets, does not lead to
desirable results, Indian Railways have been constantly monitoring their strategies to
increase the earnings from commercial publicity as it is a dynamic market where
: indian Railways compete against equally lucrative opportunities offered from non
—- _~ railway sites like metro rail, airports,-municipal corporations etc., also -offer good
oppariunities to advertising agencies.” :
38. The Committee further desired to know the measures taken to ensure speedier
finalization of confracts and elimination of procedural delays. The Ministry in their reply
stated as under:

- “Indian Railways have a ‘well established mechanism for the compleiion of tender
process are unless there are special reasons, tenders are usually finalized within
the given time frame, especially those which are revenue generating. Time taken to
finalize tender is monitored at various administrative levels at Divisions and. Zonal
Railways.” ~ हु

39. While the Zonal Railways were advised (May 2006) to cali open tenders for
awarding bulk rights of publicity for an entire Division, the audit study revealed that in 15
Divisions of 12 Railways, no efforts were made to call tender and in other 16 Divisions of 12
Railways, contracts were not finalized due to no/poor response, high reserve price, non-
fulfillment of eligibility criteria ete. Further orders (October 2006 and June 2007) clarified
that in case of no response to sole advertisement. rights for the entire Division, a cluster of
stations, may be selected for award of sole adveriisement rights or stafion as a whole may -
be given for sole advertisement rights. With a sample of 32 Divisions, the audit noticed that
in 13 Divisions of nine Railways, not a single cluster of stations/station was identified for the

advertisement rights.

40. The Commities when enquired about ihe existence of a system in place at Railway
Board to moniter implementation of the guidelines issued in respect of execution of .
contracts, the Ministry replied that the Railway Board has a system of Tele-conference for .
conducting review of the performance of Commercial Department with Chief Commercial
Managers/Senior Division Commercial Managers about. various subjects _incfuding ,

performance of Ralways pertaining to Commercial Publicity.


14

44 The Committee specifically soughi io know the basis for setiing the Reserve price for

fenders for Bulk Rights of commercial publicity on entire division/cluster of stations and

whether market inputs were assessed or.considered while ‘fixing the reserve price. The

Ministry deposed as under:—

"The- reserve price for tenders for bulk rights was determined on the basis of
consolidated earnings of ali the stations included in a bulk rights contract during the -
previous years: Initially, for the first year of the contract, the reserve price was
_Stipulated as three times of actual publicity earning of the Division or the cluster of
stations during the previous year with’an escalation at a rate of 10%, 15%, 20% and.
25% tespectively for the second, third, fourth and fifth years. This was revised
through subsequent policy circular in June 2013 and the criteria for reserve price for
the first year was stipulated as 1.5 times of the highest annual earnings of entire
Division/cluster of stations/station/Zones of a Station during any of the three
preceding financial years. The escalation in the license feé for second, third, fourth
and fifth year was kept at uniform rate of 10% over the first year. Presently the
concept of reserve price has bsen replaced by the concept of estimated value/
assessed eaming potential of the locations."

42. On being asked about the séasons for non-recovery/ short recovery of license fee/
penalty on delayed payment on various advertisement contracis and the measures
undertaken to ensure timely recovery, the Ministry informed that that Zonal Railways have
not reported any laxity in ensuring timely execution of agreements and .non-recovery of
license fee. The Ministry had also instructed the Zonal Raitways to fake necessary action in

this regard.

43, The Committee, when enquired whether new tules are being framed for the
: exploitation of Railway assets fo generate additional revenue through Commercial Publicity,
; the Ministry replied that a separate multi-disciplinary directorate - the Non Fare Directorate

- has been created in the Ministry to coordinate the exercise of raising non-fare revenue. A

new non fare revenue policy is also being framed which is expected to enable the Zonal

Railways to have adequate flexibility in encouraging innovative ideas while maintaining

transparency.

Vi. -Internal Gentrof Mechanism _

44, Internal controls help to ensure compliance of. operations .with applicable
procedures, norms and regulations for economical, efficient and effective realization of
conimon goals and objectives. As per Operating Manual, ihe Station Master is required to
maintain a register showing full particulars of each advertisement exhibited at the station in


15

~ the prescribed form incorporating details of payments, date of expiry/removal and checked

regularly at station level.

"45.

~VAudit “Scrutiny revealed that _ advertisement registers had not been _

maintained/updated by selected’stations, hoardings/boards were displayed even after the

- _expiry -of.. the currency of contract, excess display of advertisement, material,

ilegal/unauthorized advertisements displayed at some stations. The deficiency in record

4lanagement_and_lack of vigilance creates a-risk of possible collusion between Railway दि

authorities -and: the illegal users/ trespassers resulting in unauthorized display : of

advertisements and leakage of revenue.

46.

When enquired about the lapses in record management and action taken in this

regard, the Ministry stated as under:.

47,

“Regular and surprise checks are being conducted to prevent unauthorized and
itegal display of advertisement at stations and.in trains. Responsibilities are fixed
and action initiated in cases for non compliance of the guidelines/instructions. For
instance during ihe year 2014-15, cases were registered and action initiated against
defaulting officers and staff (including in one case handing _ over of ihe case to

- CB): 2 cases in Southern Railway, 8 cases in Central Railway and 3 cases in

Northern Raifway. Recently, RPF has identified two cases in Mumbai and an amount
of Rs.1,61,500 has been recovered towards penalty/fine as per the direction of
Hon'ble court in order to curtail incidences of advertisements continuing to get
displayed beyond their contractual validity at stations/trains, endorsement of the

-authority lefter number and the contract period cn the advertisement is being

insisted upon. .

Zonal Railways have formed core teams, inclusive. of RPF ‘personnel, and special

. drives are being conducied against unauthorized advertisements.”

The Committee were informed that while that there is an established system of

record management which has worked well concemed employees were suitably taken up

where the record keeping was not up to date. The Ministry also stated that it will formulate
policies in line with the recommendations of the report prepared by PMMEA, Ernst &

Young.

48.

The Committee desired tobe apprised of the entity responsible for clearing the trains

and stations of unauthorized and illegal display of advertisements and also the frequency of
such illegal display clearing drives. It was further enquired whether the records for such

drives/checks are maintained by the authorifies and sought details of the specific

instructions in this regard. To this, the Ministry in their submission stated:—


16

“The Station Manager of the concerned station is the nodal authority to remove ail
unauthorized and illega! advertising which are not as per approved pfan along with
the concemed Commercia{ staff. In a large number of cases, action has been taken .
by ‘the Station Manager to ensure compliance fo advertising plans so that
advertisements are displayed on the stations as per the sanctioned plan. However,

_as Station Manager is in-charge of the entire train operations and cammercial
activities, the display of advertisements does not get a high priority. However, Zonal
Railways have been advised fo ensure that no advertisement is displayed beyond
the sanctioned plan

49. The.Commitiee were informed about the iregularities in allotment af advertising |
sites and involvement of railway. officials In the alleged irregularities. When Commitiee
enquired from the Railways about the statis of investigation and whether any disciplinary
action has been initiated against the erring officers, the Ministry in their répty stated as
under:
“A complaint from Dr. Kirit Sormaiya, Hon’ble MP, was received from CVC vide their ©
Jetter No. 141/RLY/009/255362 dated 31.07.14. The. same was investigated by
Central Raifway Vigilance. The matter was consulted with CVC which advised major
penally action against 7 officials, cut-in-pension against 2 officials and administrative
action against one official. As regards the proposed disciplinary action, cut-in-
pension proceedings upon two charged officials (now retired) have commenced.
Major penalty proceedings have. been initiated upon another three charged officials
. and adminisirative action against one fs under process in Central Railway: (i.¢

action has already been initiated on 6 out of 10 charged officials}. Cases of 4 officers
- are under consideration of the disciplinary authority.

As regards the role of other officials, a report has been receivedfrom Central
* Railway and the same is under consideration of the competent authority. The matter
will be consulted with the CVC and aciion wil be initiated on their advice.”

Vil. Non- inclusion of clause of Service Tax

50... # SWR, Raitway Administration failed to incorparate a suitable clause regarding the
payment of applicable service tax in the advertisement contracts in terms of Finance Act
1994. As a resulf, Railway Administration had been served with a demand notice for
Rs.1.76 crore towards service tax and penalty of equal ammount not recovered from the
contractor for the period from May 2008 to June 2009. The demand notice was yet to be
setiled with the Ceniral Excise Authorities.

- §1. The Committee enquired about the status of recovery of demand notice of service
iax amounting to Rs. 1.76 crores served on Railways for failure to- incorporate a suitable
clause regarding the payment of applicable service tax in the advertisement contracts. The

Ministry in their reply stated as under:


~ fs 52...

a7

“The payment of Rs. 1.76 crares to Central Excise, Customs & Service Tax
authorities is exempted by Customs, Excise & Service Tax Appellate Tribunat

__ South Zonal Bench, Bangalore. However, with reference to MISC ORDER

passed by CESTAT Appellate Tribunal, South, Zonal Bench, Bangalore, panelled
Tax Consultant Shri Tulgjappa Kalburgi, Hubli was requested vide letter no.

"7 -¢ 249/CP/PCNol.W0g/Part -1, dt.16.12.2014 (copy enclosed) fo pursue the _

case (॥ the case is finalized.”

. On being asked about the number of contracts suffering from deficiency of service

-tax clause and whether the. Railways have issued any instructions/guidelines in this regard,

the Ministry in their reply stated as.under:

53.

“No contracts suffer from deficiency of service tax clause. Railway Board, has
advised to ensure the levy of service tax on the basis of the notifications/ instructions
issued by Ministry of Finance in consultation with their associate finance and local
service tax authorities.” :

As regard the clarification, whether contracts have been suitably amended to

incorporate the clause of service tax, the Ministry in their reply stated as under:

“The Concemed department, along with finance and legal wings is responsible for

formulation and execution of contracts in Railways. Domain experts are used from

time to time to ensure compatibility with existing rules and regulations.

{nstructionsiclarifications were issued fo Zonal Railways in consultation with

Accounts and Finance Directorate of Railway Board for levy, collection and

remittance of service tax on commercial publicity and other auxiliary services

rendered by Indian Railways which are not included in the negative list and mega -
exemption list. Zonal Railways have largely ensured compliance and ho major

deviations have been reported.”


18

[PARTAE- >

“= OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS

"The Committee observes that with a view ‘to supplement the financial
constraints faced by the Indian Railways Hon'ble. Minister of Raihways.had set up
~ Task Force in 2000 which, infer alia, considered, various resources under

‘Commercial Publicity’ and identified freight wagons, Raiiway Stations, passenger
trains, raliway crossings, sites along railway track etc as poteniial targets. Realising |
the static growth of revenues under Commercial Publicity, way back in May 2005, thie
Standing Committee on Railways in its 10” Report, presented to 14" Lok 89819, had
urged the Raiiway Board to frame a comprehensive policy on marketing strategies
for exploiting commercial pofentiat by affording incentives to prospective
advertisers. While identifying various media vehicles a series of guidelines for
selection of . advertising sites were issued by the Railway Reard.
The revenue mobilization through Commercial Publicity during 2007-08 to 2011-12
remained between Rs. 150 crores to Rs. 200 crores. Gemmercial Directorate of
Ratlway Board is responsible for policy directions related to Commercial Publisity.
Para 6.4.14 of C&AG Report No. CA 49 of 2008-09 had highlighted deficient
implementation of Railway Board's guidelines on Commercial Pubticity. In their
Action Taken Nofe, the Ministry had admitted to failure of certain initiatives owing to
poor market response with reference fo [evel crossing gates, freight wagons etc. In
December, 2009 the then Minister of Railways tabled in Parliament a 'White Paper’ on
Indian Railways where concern was expressed on the slow growth in oarnings from
commercial publicity due to poor success of new initiatives, namely, bulk right
contract etc. lé ts really shocking fo note that in spite of the 10" Report of Standing
Committee on Railways (May, 2005) during 147 ॥ 01 Sabha, C2AG's Report No. GA 19
of 2008-09 and white paper on Indian Railways tabled in Parliament in December,
2009 by the then Railway Minister and the C&AG Report No. 11 of 2013 highlighting
- the slow growth in earnings from Commercial Publicity, the Ministry of Railways
could not learn any lesson to improve its working. The Ministry of Railways failed to
ensure that a proper assessment of the demand potential was conducied by the

Zonal Railways involving external agencies and market experts. Moreover,


‘19

exceedingly high targets were fixed by the Ministry of Railways without consulting
the Zonal Railways with the objective to put pressure on them in making more efforts _
to improve their performances rather than focusing on realistic and achievable
targets . As a result there was no ‘incentive or compulsion on Zonal Railways to
_ formulate an action plan to achieve the prescribed targets for exploitation of
Due to lack of focus of Zonal-

identified assetsfmedia for. commercial publicit

Railways, the fenders floated for advertising contracts did not elicit adequate

sponse from the targeted parties. The presence of unauthorized
advertisements/hoardings in and around Railway platforms which points towards
connivance of the officiais of Raitways with advertisers also shows lack of adequate
monitoring and vigilance by the Railway authorities. Moreover, contract management
by the Railways suffered froin various deficiencies such as poor record management
leading to missing of escalation clauses from contracts of 32 divisions of 16 Zonal
Railways, and in respect of 47 contract cases’ involving seven Zonal Railways. The

_license feelpenaity on delayed payment fo the tune of Rs. 7.75 crore were either not,
recovered or short recovered. The deficiencies in contracts were also highlighted by
the fact that due fo non incfusion of service tax clause, Railway Administration was
served with a demand notice for Rs. 1.76 crore for non recovery of service fax from
contractors for the period from May 2006 to June 2009. The Ministry of Railways
have failed miserably to” exploit the potential of Gommercial Publicity in: Indian
Railways despite wide reach of network of the Railways across length and breadth of -
the country. The Committee examined various aspects of the issue and their findings

are given in succeeding paragraphs.

Targets Based On Asse Assessment (21 Revenue Potential

2. The targets for Gommorcial Publicity have so far not been based. on
assessment of revenue potential which has resulted in setting of exaggerated
targets which were not given due importance by the Zonal Railways as the Railways
themselves have admitted that targets were set in an aspirational manner to motivate
the Zonal Railways to achieve higher commercial publicity earnings than the
previous years. This also shows that neither the Railways nor the concerned Zones
were accorded importance for the exploitation of Commercial Publicity aspect of the

Railways. This shows that ihe Ministry failed to ensure that a proper assessment of


20

the demand potential was conducted by the Zonal Railway involving external
agencies. CR and WR under Mumbai Region were carning almost 40% of the total
revenue through Commercial Pubficity out of the total earning of the Railways under
this head. Mumbai region also noticed shortfall in revenue during the period under
assessment. However, the Railways have submitted that in response to ‘the
recominendation made by the Task Force, RITES has been directed to facilitate the
selection of a Professional Media Market Evaluation Agency {PMMEA) and they have |
selected Mis Erist & Young, Mis Ernst &Young is in the last stage of submitting its
assessment of commercial publicity revenue potential of Indian’ Railways’ and
suggesting methods in which this potential can be realized. The Committee also note
that in January, 2017, the Railway Ministey bas announced new policy for
monetization of Railway assets. The Committee, however, desire that the Raitways
formutais fhe target for next year based on the study.conducted by Mis Ernst &
- Young and submit the details of their recommendations and action taken thereon by
the Railways and -lafest status thercof to the Committee within a perind of six

months.

3. The एकाआग्रा6889 understood that one site वी. Mumbai has earnings of
Rs. 17 crores through contract for the Railways on account of advertisement through
hoardings. The Committee are perturbed fo note that the Railway official were unable
to correctly ‘assess the capacity of Railway in earning through auction of
advertisement sites in the past as it can now he easily assessed that if one side can
give Rs.17 crores then on all Indian basis how much revenue the Railways has to-
forego in the absence of 2 professional approach by Railways officials. The
Committee, however, are happy that now Railway has hired a professional agency
(E&Y} which has suggested/advised Railways in the direction ता various measures to
increase the non-tariff rovenue of the Railways from present 3% to 5% of total
revenue in the next five years. The Committee desire fo be informed of latest stafus

of the various measures taken by the Indian Railways in this regard.

Hoardings/Plasma TV/LCD, CCTV |

4. Audit observed that the’ total revenue collection (Rs. 25.62 crore) from
hoardings during 2009-10 fo 2011-12 were contributed by nine Zonal Railways
(ECoR, NR, NCR, NER, SR, SER, SWR, SECR and. Mefro} from main display in and


2a

around! Goods sheds/parcel offices, circulating areas of stations, railway tracks etc.
They have pointed out that each of these Zones had awarded contracts in tespect of ह
only’ गाल the-above identified Sites, while Metro Railway, Kolkata oxploited 23
ied area of 96,912 sq. fi.
_Similarly, out of 2500 reservation/booking offices on 24 selected Divisions, plasma
TV had been provided only in 19 booking offices of five Zonal Railways (CR, NR,
NWR, SR and WR) which earned Rs. 4.57 crore through advertisemenis. , Modes like’

- CCTV earned revenue of Rs. 9.06 crore through advertisements on 11 Zonal

siation premises and utilized 36,805 sq. fi. out of total iden

Railways while these remained unutitized in six Zonal Railways (NCR, NR, NWR,
NFR, WR and WCR). Similarly, Fare Repeaters remained unutilized on 12 Zonal
Railways. However, four Zonal Railways (SR, SER, SCR and SWR) were able to”

generate revenue of Rs. 0.33 crore by utiliziny this media.

‘The above cases highlight the lackadaisicat attiude of the Railways in utilizing.
its vast resources for generating the much heeded revenue. There seems to be lack
of coordination in motivating the Zonal Railways to follow the best examples set by
other zones. The Gommitiee also note that the Minister of Railway has announced
some poticy measures taken to professionally handie the Issue to increase the
non - tat iff earnings of the Railways throug Rail Display Network which is likely to
be taken up in March 2017. The Commiitee, therefore, exhort that the Ministry of
Railways also encourage the Zones which garn ‘maximum rovenué through
commercial publicity by giving them incentives/awards of excotlence in the field
which will, in turn motivate the other Zones to generate more revenue through

commercial publicity.

Improvement in Contract Management

5.- The process of tender finalization for advertisements at cluster of stations by
the Railways 001 8 longer time tian the stipulated period of 45 to $0 days with
delays running up to 24 months at BCT Division which led to foss of revenue due to
delays in awarding of the contracts. Moreover, there have been instances of nor
execution of agreement in 44 contract cases on three Zonal Railways which made
the recovery of license fee very difficult in absence of agreement backing fhe same.
‘The Railways have cited that the process of tender finalization is a time consuming

process and adeqiiate precautions are taken for proper assessment of potential of


22

each asset, siziions and cluster of stations. However, the Committee feel that the
stipulated time period for finatization of: contracts must have encapsulated the

adequate time period required for assessment and finalization of contracts and

_delays. beyond stipulated period cannot be justified on the plea of taking a
~ “precautionary approach which is actually resulting in losses to the Railways. The

Committee, therefore, rocommend. that the Railways should review its process of
contract formulation and executian and shed the non-chalant approach of
condoning delays iit finalization of contracts owing to precautionary approach.

6. The Gommittee were also informed about the cases of contracts in South
Western Railways (SWR) suffering from non-inclusion of clause of Service Tax which
led to demand notice of Rs. 1.76 crores being served to the Railways. Although ihe
Tribunal has exempted the Railways from the payment, the Committee feel tat
nor-inclusion of service fax clause in agreements is a serious lapse which should
have been avoided by the Railways. The Committee desire to be apprised of the final

status of the cases within six months.

Unauthorized displays displays

7. The menace .of unauthorized displays at the sfations. has been a constant

source, of leakage of revenues of fhe Railways and if has been found that the
problem is particularly severe in case of FMUs/ passenger frains where contracts
had to be foreclosed due to lack of space on account of unauthorized and illegal
display of ativerisements on the trains. The main reason which has been found
during the examination by the Committee is poor record management regarding the
details of advertisements displayed at the EMUs/trains/stations. The. Cammittee were
informed that Station Master maintains registers regarding the number, location and
date of commencement and expiry of all contracted sites of .a commerciat ©
publicity/advertisements at the EMUsftrains/stations and is responsible for removal
of unauthorized advertisements, However, the practice of non-maintaining of
regisfers at the stations has been found rampant at many stations of seven Zonal
‘Railways (GR, ER, NFR, SCR, SWit, WCR and WR) and some Stafion Managers werd
not even aware of requirement of maintaining such registers. Thus, the possibility of

- collusion between Railway authorities and illegal advertisers cannot be ruled ouf.

The Committee feels that the Railways have been Jax in carrying out adequate ttmely


23

inspections of stafions and trains for checking and removing unauthorized
advertisements as the Committees were informed that there are no prescribed
schedule or guidelines for inspections to be carried out at the tations and trains by
officers, of Railway Board. Alihough it has_been informed that Zona! raifways have
formed core teams, inclusive _of RPi!-personnet and special drives are being
conducted but the Conmiitee feel that in absence of any ready mechanism for
identifying unauthorized displays such drives may not yield desired results. The’ .
Commitie, therefore, recommend that the Railways should explore the feasibility of
hailmarking or branding with authorized symbols on all the contracted
advertisements as one of the conditons for their display at the stations with |
provision of security deposit being maintained with the Railways by the advertisers
for recovering of the loss of revenue in cause of advertisement being displayed

beyond expiry date.

8. ‘The Committee further recommend that the Railways prescribe a full fledged
schedule of regular inspection of trains and stations by the officers of the Railway
Board with the time interval between such inspections determining the duration for
which security deposits have fo be secured from the advertisers. The Committee *
may be apprised of the assessment made and action taken in this regard within a

period of six months of presentation of this report.

9, ‘The Committee note that there were irregularities in award of contract of
adveriisemenis on First cum First Serve basis which was prevailing in the Mumbai है
divisions of GR and WR for the last 28 - 30 years. There was no clarity on

identification of contracted site, about innovative ideas for selection of new sites and

displays of advertisement. The Committee note that thero was no transparency in
award of contracts in GR & WR. The Committee note that cases of irecgufarities in
allotment of advertisements sites and involvement of Railway officials ‘were enquired
by the Centra! Railway vigilance. Afier the matter was consulted by CVG action
against 06 officials were initiated and cases of 04 officers were under consideration
of disciplinary authority. Further, in case of role of other officials, a.report has been
received by the Railway Board and is under their consideration. In view of the CVC

enquiry it is established that the fraud in award of contract in adveriisements has


24

been detected by the CVC and action against the officials of the Railway are being .
है taken. The Commitice, therefore, desire that:

“{i) ~~ AIF contract which were allotted on the basis of KCVS should be
terminated with immediate effect -

(ii)  CBl-enquiry should te ordered to conduct inquiry in the Whole
- gamut of FCFS policy, in Mumbai Mivision of Centraf Railway and Western
Railway.

10.. The- Committee also, desire that strict action be taken against the erring
contractors and officials: anc informed of the action faken fo complete the
disciplinary proceedings. The Committee may ४४४० be apprised of fhe latest status of
‘all the cases within three ‘months from the date of presentation of this report fo the
Parliament. The Committee ave of the view that uifess and until exemplary
punishments are awarded to the corrupt officials from top fo bottom, irregularities in
commercial publicity in Indian Railways cannot be rooted out. The Committee exhort
the indiart Railways to introduce awards of excellence to the best performing Zones

50 as fo encourage them and set example for the non-performing Zones to follow

suit.
NEW DELHI; . पु PROF. K.V. THOMAS
06 April, 2017 ~ Chairperson,

16 Chaitra, 1939 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.