93

MANAGEMENT OF VACANT LAND
IN INDIAN RAILWAYS

MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(Railway Board)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2017-18)

NINETY-THIRD REPORT
eS

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO.2127

NINETY THIRD REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2017-18)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

MANAGEMENT OF VACANT LAND
IN INDIAN RAILWAYS

MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(Railway Board)

'सत्यमेद wat
Presented to Lok Sabha on: 2 23) 20)
Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 295.) हि 6.

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

March, 2018/ Chaitra, 1940(Saka)


CONTENTS

Page
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (iii)
COMMITTEE (2017-18)
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE Il OF PAC (2017-18) (iv)
iv
INTRODUCTION (v)
REPORT
Part-I
|! Introductory 1

Land Management Cell

Maintainance of Land Records

Measures to prevent Railway Land from encroachment

Management of existing encroachment

PARTI

Observations and Recommendations

APPENDICES*

Minutes of the Second sitting of the Sub-Committee II of the
Public Accounts Committee (2017-18) held on 28.06.2017

Minutes of the Sixth sitting of the Sub-Committee II of the Public
Accounts Committee (2017-18) held on 11.01.2018

Minutes of the Seventh sitting of the Sub-Committee II of the
Public Accounts Committee (2017-18) held on 20.03.2018

Minutes of the Twenty-second sitting of the of the Public
Accounts Committee (2017-18) held on 23.03.2018

* Not appended to the cyclostyled copy of the Report



COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2017-18)
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
(2. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
4, Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
[5.
[6. |
(7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
[8 |[ Smt. Riti Pathak
[9.][_ Shri Neiphiu Rioh’
10. | ShriAbhishek Singh id Abhishek Singh
11. || Prof Ram Shanker
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
14. Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi
15. Dr. P. Venugopal
RAJYA SABHA
16. [ Shri Naresh Agrawal
17. || Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
18. || Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
19, ॥ Shri Mohd. Ali Khan’
20. |{ Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy’
21. | Shri Ajay Sancheti
22. || Shri Bhupender Yadav
SECRETARIAT
[1. ][ Shri AK. Singh - Additional Secretary
2. Shri T. JayaKumar - Director
3. [Shri AK. Yadav - Deputy Secretary

* Ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon acceptance of his resignation from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 22
February, 2018.

1 Elected w.e.f. 29 December, 2017 in lieu of vacancy caused due to retirement of Shri Shantaram Naik.

4 ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 18 August, 2017 and
re-elected w.e.f. 29 December, 2017.


COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE — II (Railways) OF THE PUBLIC
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2017-18)

Convenor : | 1. | Dr. Kirit Somaiya
Alternate Convenor : | 2. | Shri Naresh Agrawal
Members : | 3. | Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita

4. | Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

5. | Shri Anurag Singh Thakur

| 6. | Prof. Ram Shanker



INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2017-18) having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Ninety-Third Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha) on ‘Management of Vacant Land in Indian Railway’ based on Chapter-4 of
C8&AG Report No. 24 of 2015 (५०.॥), Union Government (Railways) related to the
Ministry of Railways.

2. The above-mentioned Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
was laid on the Table of the House on 8 December, 2015.

3. The Public Accounts Committee- (2017-18) took up the subject for detailed
examination and report. A Sub-Committee was constituted for the purpose. The Sub-
Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway
Board) on the subject at their sitting held on 28 June, 2017 and 11 January, 2018. The
Sub-Committee of PAC (2017-18) considered and adopted this Report at their sitting
held on 20 March, 2017. The Report was considered and adopted by the Public
Accounts Committee (2016-17) during their sitting held on 23 March, 2018. The Minutes
of the Sittings form Appendices to the Report.

4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type and form Part- II of
the Report.

5. The Committee thank their Sub-Committee for taking oral evidence of the
Ministry and obtaining information on the subject.

6. The Committee would also like to express their thanks to the representatives of
the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) for tendering evidence before the Sub-
Committee and furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in connection with
the examination of the subject.

7. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

NEW DELHI; MALLIKARJUN KHARGE
27 March, 2018 Chairperson,

06 Chaitra, 1940 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


REPORT

INTRODUCTORY

As per records maintained by the Land & Amenities Directorate of the Railway Board,

Indian Railways owned 458588.16 hectares of land as on 31 March 2014. Out of this a
significant quantum of Railway land, i.e. 47339.5 hectare (10.33 per cent) has not been put to
any use (46408.75 hectare land is vacant i.e.10.12 per cent and 930.75 hectare i.e.0.21 per
cent under encroachmen ). It is, therefore, imperative that Indian Railway (IR) manages both
the custody of land and its utilization to its best advantage by formulating a proper system to
watch safe custody of its existing land by ensuring clear title, taking -action to prevent

encroachment and if encroached, taking suitable action to remove the encroachment. For

management of IR land, there are provisions in Indian Railway Works Manual for maintaining

various land records, Providing boundaries and periodical verification thereof, maintaining

land plans and removal of encroachments etc.

2.

The Public Accounts Committee (PAC) in its Sixteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)

which was based on C&AG Report No.PA 8 of 2008 (Chapter 2), recommended the following
to strengthen the land management in Indian Railways:

To set up separate land Management cell to deal effectively with land related
matters and to make necessary arrangements to staff the cell with those who
possess adequate knowledge and skills;

To correct the inaccuracies in the existing land records; and °

To formulate a comprehensive action plan for removal and prevention of
encroachments.

Accordingly, the Ministry of Railways (MOR) issued detailed comprehensive
instructions in April 2010 to ensure the following:

Creation of land management cells in Zonal headquarters and Divisions;

Regular monthly meetings of SAG level officers with appropriate revenue
authorities in the State Governments;

Maintenance and updation of registers connected with land management,
provisions of which have been made in IRWM; .

Formulation of action plan for prevention of encroachments; and
Computerization of land plans.


4. Audit examined (2014) the issue of prevention and removal of encroachments on
railway land with a view to assess whether the existing provisions of Indian Railway Work
Manual (IRWM), PAC's recommendations and Railway Board's instructions of April 2010
were followed in ensuring that:
> The Land Management Celis were set up at Zonal and Divisional levels and
functioning effectively;
> Land Records have been properly maintained; and

> Whether a comprehensive action plan for prevention and early removal of
encroachments was formulated and followed.

5. - This Report is based on Chapter 4 of C2AG Report No.24 of 2015 on the subject
"Management of vacant land in Indian Railways" wherein Audit had observed that IR is
lacking in proper management of land and its utilisation. The PAC (2016-17 and 2017-18)
selected the subject and allotted the same to Sub-Committee-Il (Railways) for detailed
examination and report. In the Process of examination of the subject, the Sub-Committee
obtained background note from the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board). They also took oral
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry and obtained post evidence replies. Based on
the written and oral depositions by the Ministry, the Sub-Committee examined the subject in
detail and discussed some important issues as enumerated in the succeeding paragraphs.

i. LAND MANAGEMENT CELL (LMC) MANAGEMENT CELL (LMC:

6. Audit review of the working of Land Management Cells (LMC) at Zonal headquarters

and Railways’ Divisions in compliance with the recommendations of the PAC and instructions

of the Railway Board (April 2010) ibid revealed the following:

e Out of 16 Zonal Railways no separate LMC existed (March 2014) at Zonal headquarter
of three Zones.

. As of the end of March 2014, none of the 18 Divisions in four Zones had a LMC. Only
three Zonal Railways had a separate LMC in each of their Divisions (total 13 -
Divisions). LMC were, however, not created in 19 out of 36 Divisions of remaining 9

Zones.

° Even in 12 Zones where LMC existed in 32 Divisions out of 50 Divisions, the
Officials posted there were not deployed..exclusively for land matters, except three
Zones.

० As on 31 March 2014, no staff (89 nos.) posted in LMC of 15 selected Divisions in 9
Zones and Metro Railway, Kolkata was imparted training in land matters. This
indicates that due importance was not given to land matters as untrained staff was
deputed for this work. पु

2


. The maintenance of important basic land data (viz. land holdings, vacant land,
encroachments etc) in the LMC of Zonal headquarters and their Divisions was
deficient. There were inconsistencies in facts and figures in basic data pertaining to
land holdings (in all Zones except ECoR, NER, NWR, SECR and WCR), vacant land
(in all Zones except ECoR, NWR, SECR and WCR) and encroachments (in all
Zones except ECoR, NCR, NWR, SECR and WCR) at various levels. There were
also differences in figures relating to land plans at various levels in all Zones except
ECR and NWR.

e As against the codal provisions, LMC were not Properly monitoring the position of
vacant land and its area. The area of vacant land with each ADEN was not
maintained in these cells. Position of vacant land was maintained in LMCs only in
two Zones (NFR and WCR). :

7. Despite PAC’s recommendations for creation of LMCs in all Zones and their Divisions,
separate LMC had not been established in all Zonal headquarters and Railway Divisions.
Detection of discrepancies in the maintenance of data‘in LMCs showed that even where
LMCs had been created, they were not functioning properly. The weaknesses in the working
of LMCs resulted in several deficiencies in the management of land.

8. The Ministry of Railways (MOR) have stated in their background note the following
contradictory statements to Audit findings:

“Almost all the Railways have already taken action for forming separate Land
Management Cell. However, on few zones/ divisions, there is need to strengthen the
LMC. Instructions have already been issued: to Zonal Railways to review the
status of LMC in Headquarters/Divisions and furnish a time bound programme for
strengthening the LMC.

In order to ensure efficient functioning of these Cells, Official and staff of LMC are
imparted training in Railways Training: Institute which is a continuous process.
Indian Railways centralize training institute ie. Indian Railway Institute of Civil
Engineering (IRICEN), Pune, conduct regular one week course for the officers of the
Indian Railways for imparting training in the subject related to land
management.”

9. The Committee desired to know the reasons for non-creation of LMCs at three Zonal
Headquarters and all the Divisions of. all the Zones although these were required to be
created as per PACs directives and Railway Board orders (2010) and also non-assignment of
jobs to staff exclusively related to LMCs. The Ministry in their reply furnished as under:

“The work of land management is looked after by one of the HoDs generally called

Chief Engineer (General) in all the zonal railways. Chief Engineer (General) is

assisted by Deputy Chief Engineer/Land or XEN/Land. These officers are assisted

by the supervisors and the ministerial staff. This is the general set up of Land

Management Cell in Headquarter in all the zonal railways. In Divisions, the work of
है 3


land management is looked after by the Divisional Engineer/Land. Sometimes on
some of the divisions, Divisional Engineer/Land is designated as Divisional
Engineer/Headquarter who besides looking after the work of land management Cell
also look after other assigned duties. These officers are further assisted by the, junior
officers, supervisors and ministerial Staff. This is the general set up of Land
Management Cell of almost all the divisions of Indian Railways. The information
regarding LMC has been collected from almost all the Zonal Railways; all of them
have continued existence of LMC at Head Quarter and division as per their need."

10. In reply to the query of the Committee regarding training of staff on land management,
it was stated that

“Official and staff of LMC are imparted training in Railways Training Institute which
is a continuous process. Indian Railways centralized training institute i.e. Indian
Railway Institute of Civil Engineering (IRICEN), Pune also conducts regular one week
Course for the officers of the Indian Railways for imparting training in the
subjectrelated to land management. However, all the zonal Railways have been
advised to ensure training of all the officials and staff posted in LMC by conducting
special course at Zonal Training School. The information regarding LMC has been
collected from almost all the Zonal Railways, all of them have confirmed existence of
LMC at HQ and Divisions as per their need. "

HL MAINTENANCE OF LAND MAINTENANCE OF LAND RECORDS

11. The PAC had observed that the failure of Railways to maintain the requisite land
records registers snowballed into a big problem not only for the Railways but also for other
stakeholders for the simple reason that many of the disputes and the court cases stemmed
from.this lapse. The Railway Board in its instructions of April 2010 directed that all land record
registers should be maintained and up-dated by the Zonal Railways and Railway Divisions as
per codal provisions. Land Plans, Land Record Register (LRR), Land Boundary. Verification
Register (LBVR) and Encroachment Inspection Register (EIR) are the basic land records.
These are necessary records as Railway land has been a soft target for encroachers for
residential, commercial or religious purposes. There are provisions in the Railway
Codes/Manuals to keep a constant watch on encroached lands and also on the attempts
being made for removal of encroachments.

(a) Land Plan .
12. The Committee note that Land Plan is a document in which details of a piece of land
such as total area, particulars of locality, dimension of land, particulars of adjoining land, title
of such land etc. are given. Assistant Divisional Engineer (ADEN)/Senior Section Engineer
(SSE) - Works/Permanent Way of field units should keep with them the copies of certified
4


land plans pertaining to their jurisdictions showing complete dimensions. Railways should get
ail land plans authenticated with State Revenue authorities to avoid any discrepancy of title. A
review in audit, however, revealed the following:

13.

Out of the required 56255 land Plans, 53898 land plans (96 per cent) were
available with the Railways. The remaining 2357 iand plans (4 per cent) were
missing in 14 Zones.

Area was not indicated in land plans of twelve Zones.

Out of 53898 land plans available with Railways, 8554 land plans (16 per cent) had
not been got authenticated from State Revenue Authority which could cast a doubt
on title of railway land to that extent, Authentication of State Revenue Authority had
been obtained for all the land plans in three Zones only.

Records connected with mutation were not made available for review by WR, WCR
& NCR. Out of the remaining 13 Zones, no mutation of land had been done in ER,
ECoR, SER, SECR and SWR and Metro Railway, Kolkata. In eight Zones where land
mutation records were available, out of total available 31567 land plans, only
15325 land plans (48 per cent) had been mutated with the State Revenue Authorities.
Under the circumstances, Audit could not ascertain whether mutation had not been
done at all or the data was not available with the Railway Administration.

Thus, in the absence of total land plans and status of mutations, the IR was not ina

position to ascertain the quantum of land in their actual possession without which proper

management of land was in doubt. Railway Board accepted (April 2015) the deficiencies in

maintenance of Land Plans.

14.

On being asked about non-indication of area in land plan the Ministry in their reply

stated as under:

“An online application called Land Management Module has been provided in Track
Management System (TMS). This module provides Centralised database for land
records of Railway, 1.8. Land Acquisition details, Area Details, Usage Details along
with authenticated land plans. Zonal Railways have been instructed that all
ownership related information should be digitalized and kept in Centralised form. In
land plan generally width of land from central line of track is shown, however, some
Zonal Railways also indicate area.

Earlier, land plans on website were uploaded in parts which resulted in more no. of
land plans shown in website. However, as per latest information available on
website, out of 42182 land plans, 41467 land plans have been uploaded. Out of -
these, 37720 land plans are authenticated. During 2016-17 & upto May 2017, 187
land plans were got authenticated by various Railways. Certain land parcels, being
very old, do not have the land plans readily available. Efforts are on to recreate them.
Instructions have already been issued to all the Zonal Railways to get the missing and
plans constructed /authenticated by deploying the outside agency, if same is not
5


Possible to get the work done in-house. Railways are making all efforts to take care
of the land record. It may be pointed out that reconstruction /authentication of land
Plans which are very old is a tedious task.”

(b) Digitization of land plans

15. Audit review revealed that the Railways have undertaken the digitization of land plans.
Rules provide that certified land plans should be transferred on microfilms, requisite sets of
which can be kept in safe custody in the Headquarters’ office and also in the Divisional
Offices. Railway Board in Aptil 2010 also instructed that scanning and microfilming of land
plans should be completed by December 2010. It was, however, observed that as on 31
March 2014, there was 100 per cent digitization of land plans in five Zones (NCR, NFR, SER,
SWR and WCR). Out of total 53898 land plans available with IR, 43342 land plans (80.41 per
cent) had been digitized. No land plan was digitized in Metro Railway, Kolkata. Shortfall in
digitizing the land plans to the extent of 19.59 per cent indicates that the Railway
Administration did not Prioritize the issue even after clear deadline given by the Railway
Board. Further, the incomplete digitisation of land plans could also not ensure an effective
and robust management information system for land management.

16. — Railways in their background note stated that for further improvement in keeping land ह
records, an online application called Land Management Module has been provided in Track
Management System (TMS). This module provides Centralized Database for land records of
Railway, ie. Land acquisition details, area details, usage details along with authenticated land
plans. Zonal Railways have been instructed that all ownership related information should be
digitalized and kept in centralised form. In most of the railways digitization of land plans is in
advance state.

17. As a result of sustained effort, out of total land plans 42682 (as on 31.3.201 5), the data
of 42582 plans have been uploaded in the land module along with uploading of 40220 land
plans out of which, 36310 plans are authenticated. As on 31.3.2015, about 6374 land plans
were missing/ not authenticated. A drive has been launched to reconstruct/ authenticate the
plan. During the year up to 31.12.2015, 1401 plans have been reconstructed/ authenticated,
The efforts are made to complete this work as early as possible with the assistance of
revenue department and if required outsourcing the activities, Soon all records will be
digitized and will be available on website. In addition the détails of all the vacant plots of more

6


than one acre along with plan have also been uploaded on Land Management data base.
This heips to chalk out the details for commercial utilization.

18. The Committee enquired about the reasons for non-completion of digitization of land
records within the fixed dead line and efforts made for digitization of remaining land records
(20 percent on Zones and all in Metro Railway, Kolkata). The Committee were informed that
out of 42182 land plans, 41467 land plans have been uploaded. Out of these, 37720 land
plans are authenticated.

19. On being asked about reasons for difference in figure that audit has noted 53898 as
total land plans whereas the Railways have stated in their background notes a figure of 42682
as total land plans, the Ministry in their note stated that land plans have been uploaded on
land module of TMS. Earlier, land plans on website were uploaded in parts and there was
duplication of land data also. Because of that number of land plans were more. However, as
per latest information available on website total land plans are 42182.

20. In regard to query of the Committee regarding uploading of both authenticated and
unauthenticated records the Ministry informed that Railways are uploading both
unauthenticated and authenticated land plans. Authentication.is being got done from State
Governments. About 4462 land plans are required to be authenticated for which Railways are
making efforts:

21. During evidence, the representative of the Railway Board stated that all land records
are being updated and being authenticated. Some 10 percent of plans are still to be
authenticated i.e. around 4450 which they hope to do in the near future.

22. In reply to another query of the Committee regarding fixing of all land records
numbering 53898 as counted by the Audit, the Ministry stated that most of the available tand
plans have been digitized in Indian Railways. However, this is a continuous process as
Railway acquires and relinquishes the land every year. Efforts are on to get this finalised and
completed at the earliest,

(c) Land Record Register (LRR) हे हे
23. IRWM_ provides for the maintenance of LRR in the office of Chief Engineer and
Divisional Engineer showing details of Railway land such as land plans, kilometerage,

7


description of land, area, cost and date of transfer of land. Railway Board instructed all Zonal
Railways that a register of total railway land is also to be maintained at field level by SSE
(Works). A review in Audit, however, revealed that:

० LRR was not being maintained in 37 out of 68 Railway Divisions of all Zones except
NER, NFR and WR. The register was also not being maintained in Metro Railway,
Kolkata. :

° The register of total railway land was also not being maintained in 40 out of 68

Railway Divisions in all Zones except NER, NFR and WR. The register,was also not
being maintained in Metro Railway, Kolkata.

_ (d) Land Boundary Verification Register (LBVR)

24. Railways are required to maintain separate printed LBVR .in the prescribed format for
each section showing "Details of Encroachments" and "Details of the Missing Boundary
Stones" and action taken thereon. The entries in the register should be certified by the SE
(Works/P. Way) of the respective sections in field and verified/inspected by the ADEN / DEN
/Sr. 0 EN or other higher officers (Dy. CE/CE at Zonal headquarter) from time to time. A
review in Audit revealed that:

(i) Out of 223 SSEs test-checked, LBVR was being maintained by only 126 SSEs (56

per cent), The register was being maintained by all SSEs test - checked in three
zones only.

(ii) Selected SSEs of ER and SR did not verify the entries in register even once during
the review period (2011-14). SSEs who maintained the registers verified the
boundaries in their respective sections regularly only in CR, NCR and NWR. Due
verification of boundaries by the ADENs and submission of these registers to Zonal
headquarter for verification was noticed only in CR.

iil) In the remaining 11 zones, the tegisters were neither being maintained by any 5555
nor the content in the registers verified regularly by the SSEs/ADENs.

(e) Encroachment Inspection Register (EIR)

25. — Encroachment Inspection Register (EIR) showing the encroachments on Railway land
noticed during inspections by various officials is required to be maintained by each SSE duly
furnishing the location, name of the encroacher, area encroached, type of encroachment
(commercial/ residential/ cultivation), date of commencement of unauthorized occupation,
date on which the encroachment came to notice for the first time, action taken and date of
removal of encroachment. The encroachment plan prepared to scale is also required to be


Pasted on the right side of the register. The EIR should also be verified by the SSEs quarterly.
However,

. None of the SSE verified the encroachments entered in EIR in any of the selected
Railway Divisions regularly as.prescribed

. No selected SSEs in SR and Metro Railway, Kolkata verified the register even once
during the review period.

e Verification of the registers by the ADENs was also not regular.

° Verification of these registers by Dy. CE./ CE at Zonal headquarters was also not
regular

26. - The Committee desired to know the reasons for non-maintenance and non verification
of various registers (LRR, LBVR, EIR) and efforts made to ensure compliance of records
maintenance. The Ministry in their reply stated as under:

“Railway maintains land records which includes land plans, land boundary verification
registers, details of encroachment, missing boundary stones, etc.

For further improvement in keeping land records, a web based application called Land
Management Module integrated with Track Management System (TMS) of
Indian Railways has been developed for maintaining data ie. details of
acquisition/area/usages and land plans of Land Bank of Indian Railways, now most
of the data has been uploaded. However, it.is a ‘continuous process as Railway
acquires and relinquishes the land on regular basis.

A work costing Rs.36.24 crore has been sanctioned for mapping of all fixed Railway
assets on Geographical Information System (GIS) of Bhuvan Satellite Imagery of
Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) integrated with Track Management
System (TMS) of Indian Railways. This system is designed to provide the status of
Railway land whether encroached or ‘not and thus would be helpful in tackling the
menace of encroachment.

However, all Zonal Railways have been advised to ensure proper maintenance of
the Land Record Register, Land Boundary Verification Register and Encroachment
Inspection Register by the SSEs and verification of the same by the higher officers
as per the provision given in Indian Railway Works Manual.”

IV. MEASURES TO PREVENT RAILWAY LAND FROM ENCROACHMENT

(a) Boundary Wall

27. Proper maintenance of land boundary is the first and effective step towards prevention
of encroachment. Guidelines for demarcation of land boundaries, laying of boundary stones,
boundary walls, fencing etc. have been explicitly enumerated. All land permanently occupied
for the purposes of Railway, should have its boundaries demarcated in such a manner that

boundaries to be readily ascertained and identified. The PAC had observed that the main
9


cause for increase in cases of encroachment was non-errection of boundary walls around the
vacant Railway land. The Railway Board directed (April 2010) that the Zonal Railways should
identify vulnerable locations Prone to encroachments and to construct boundary walls at such
locations on a programmed basis. The PAC had also desired that inaction or negligence in
preventing or removing the encroachment of Railway land should be viewed adversely and
stringent action taken against the officials concerned for collusion or dereliction of duty. They
also advised MoR to formulate a comprehensive action plan both for early removal of all the
encroachments and prevention of fresh encroachments on Railway land especially those
Railway land adjacent to Railway tracks, encroachment on which may impact adversely. on
safe operation of trains. पु

. In NER, a major portion (4973.79 HA- 86 per cent) of total vacant land (5775.65 HA)
land was not protected. However, in the remaining 14 Zones and Metro Railway,
Kolkata, Railway Administration did Not inform the position in regard to protection of _
vacant land. पु

० Out of the seven Zones (CR, ER, NR, NCR, NWR, SER and WCR) that assessed
the requirement for construction. of boundary walls, targets were not fixed by the
Railway Board indicating that due seriousness was not accorded to this issue at the
initial stage itself.

° In seven Zones (SCR (19%), NFR (20%), SECR (40%), ECR (61%), CR (70%), WR
(95%) and NER (96%)) where construction of boundary wall was assessed as__ well
as targeted, the shortfall in achievement of target ranged from 19 per cent to 96
per cent indicating that due priority was not accorded to this.

28. Toa query of the Committee that despite observation of PAC for provision of boundary
walls along vacant land and MOR’s assurance for suitable compliance, why the Zonal
Railways were not accorded due importance to this important issue directly linked to
encroachments of Railway land and whether the monitoring on it from MoR was done, the
Ministry replied as under:
“Railway ‘boundary has been Properly demarcated by erecting post/fencing.
Where ever necessary, boundary wall is also constructed to prevent railway land from

encroachers. For protecting Railway land from encroachments, Zonal Railways
have been instructed to take necessary action as under:

(a) RCC Boundary walls in Metro/major cities where land value is high.
(b) Fencing (steel/barbed wire) or masonry walls in vulnerable urban areas and

(c) Multiple rows of plantation on remaining land boundary.

To prevent encroachment, Railway have constructed boundary wall of 102 km
during 2014-15, 193 km during 2015-16 and 129 Km during 2016-17. Railways were
also asked to examine the option of private investment in lieu. of advertisement on

10


the Boundary walls. But due to very low potential of the work, it was not found
workable.

It may not be possible to protect all the railway land by constructing boundary wall
due to economic reason as such, now, requirement of boundary wall and fund for
_ the same is collected from all the Zones. As per the details collected from Railways
there is requirement of about 3455 Km boundary wall costing about Rs. 2796
crores to protect railway land at vulnerable locations from encroachment...
However, to increase the speed on existing routes of Delhi-Howrah and Delhi-
Mumbai, two works have been sanctioned. In these works, provision for boundary
wall all along the track at the end of railway land has been made to prevent
derailments on account of cattle run over. This will also help to prevent railway land
from encroachment. In future, more such works will be sanctioned on other routes.”

(b) Grow More Food Scheme

29. The Indian Railways introduced “Grow More Food Scheme” in July 2010, to license
vacant Railway land .to its employees for cultivation to protect valuable land from
encroachment. It realizes license fee for the same. While the main purpose of licensing
vacant Railway land to its employees was to protect Railway land from encroachment, a
reasonable quantum of return by way of license fee was also to be ensured. हु

30. Audit, however, noticed that during the period covered under review, the Scheme was
not implemented in 11 Zones (ER, ECR, ECoR, NCR, NER, NWR, SCR, SER, SECR, SWR
and WCR) as no vacant Railway land was allotted for the same. During 2011-12, only two.
Zones (CR and SR) implemented the Scheme by allotting vacant land to the extent of 293.33
HA and 55.13 HA respectively. During the period 2012-14, three more Zones (NR, NFR and
WR) implemented the Scheme and allotted 289.88 HA, 14.74 HA, 43.89 HA land
respectively. As on 31 March 2014, total vacant land allotted to Railway employees under the
Scheme was 1356.36 HA (3 per cent approx.).

31. In regard to slow pace of implementation of this scheme Ministry stated that as per
land data furnished by Zonal Railways as on 31.03.2017, GMF Scheme is already undertaken
in 3348 Hectares of Railway land. Except three zones NWR, SWR and SER; on all other
Zonal Railways, for this Scheme land has been licensed. NWR, SWR and SER have been
asked to implement the Grow More Food scheme at the earliest.

(c) Plantation
32. Plantation in vacant railway land is a measure to check encroachment of vacant

railway land and also to reduce air pollution. Zonal Railway Administration has been

11


authorized to decide the railway land for plantation. For this, targets are fixed. Audit observed
that during the years 2011-12 to 2013-14 fixation of targets for plantation vis-a-vis actual
plantation were as under:

° Targets for plantation were not fixed by two Zones (NER and SWR).
० Plantation was as per target in NCR and SECR only.

° Target fixed for plantation by Zones were not achieved in 12 Zones. The actual
plantation against the targets fixed ranged between 0 per cent and 91 per cent
during 2011-14. The actual plantation was nil in CR and less than 50 per cent in
seven Zones.

33. In this regard, Ministry in their reply stated that during 2016-17, Railway did mass
plantation of 1.25 crores Saplings. Now, Railway have finalized a model agreement with
MOEF to be entered by Zonal Railways with State Forest Department, to protect Railway land
being declared as protected forest by Forest Department. Plantation will further improve in
coming years. Moreover, now instructions have been issued to all Zonal Railways to make
Provision of 1% in all estimates to environment related matter. This will help in meeting the
cost of plantation, as such, Railway is making all efforts to plant more and more saplings.

Vv. MANAGEMENT OF EXISTING MANAGEMENT OF EXISTING ENCROACHMENT

(a) Details of Encroachments है
34. For Railway land that has been encroached it is essential that the existing
encroachments are not only watched but efforts are made for their earliest removal. This may
be possible if the details of encroachments are available with Railway Administration and they
watch the developments through adequate monitoring and monthly joint inspections with
State Revenue Authorities. During the audit review it was found that:

. Area under 8775 encroachments was not available with the selected SSEs in CR.

° Zonal Railways’ vacant land had been encroached during the period between 1950
and 2013. Existence of encroachments for such long periods indicates insufficient
action taken by the Railways for removal thereof. Non-availability of area under
encroachments raises the concern that Railway Administration does not possess the
required data to defend its claim before the adjudicating Authorities/Courts.

35. The Ministry informed that Central Railway. has been advised to ensure that besides
number of encroachments, details of area of encroachment must also be maintained by all
the SSEs.

12


36. Since the encroachments belong to the period from 1950 and 2013, the Committee
enquired about insufficient action on the part of Railway Administration for their removal. The
Committee were informed as under:

“Some of the problems which are faced in removal of encroachment are as under:

> For removal of hard encroachment, action under PPE Act is regularly taken.
However, the final ‘removal of the encroachers from the railway land generally could
not take place as most of the encroachers approach the Court.

> Regular encroachments removal drives are launched, for these drives, most of the
times, police force are not made available by State Government to protect the
railway employee and maintain law and order problem.

> Normally there is reluctance on the part of State Governments for. rendering
assistance in removing the encroachments unless the land to be evicted is
immediately required by railway for construction for some works. Some district
authorities are asking for a comprehensive rehabilitation plan/package for: the »
encroachers. :

> ॥ is seen that the local authorities are providing water supply and electricity
connection to these encroachers which encourages consolidation “of the
encroachments.

> Due to interference of local leaders encroachments removal drives are generally not
successful.

> Occupants particularly children and women come in the front of demolition squad
and throw stones/ pebbles, etc on demolition squad as well as women pore
kerosene oil and threaten to burn themselves.” .

37. The Committee desired to know whether Railways have any plan to hire or engage a
private/PSU consultancy firm which can undertake a scientific study on different types of land
available with Railways and submit proposal of use of vacant land removal of encroachment
and maintenance of various records of such land. Such agency can also suggest
valuation of land as per their present status. The representative of the Railway Board during
evidence informed that 10 5५०) strategy has been made but there is need to frame strategy

for valuation of land and investment on that based on its valuation.

38. The Committee also desired to know whether Railways have any proposal to PPP or
joint venture scheme for maintaining of land record. The representative during evidence
stated as under:

“We are trying for PPP. Around 60 multifunctional complexes are being run where
Railway or private parties developed the complex and running it which is given

13


earnings to Railways. It is at a lower level. Some of our big projects failed but we
are again actively progressing on this front Railways have its own company Rail Land
Development Authority (RLDA). It has mandate for PPP”.

39. The Committee desired to know at present in what Projects RLDA is involved in and
how it is performing. The representative of the Railway Board stated as under: :
“RLDA has around 80 sites at its jurisdiction. They first scout sites as per its
potential then GM of concerned Railway is asked to indicate whether land is
required by them. Out of 80 sties entrusted to them some are very successful. They
have scouted some sites in big cities. Their idea is that RLDA will identify sites worth
Rupees one lakh crore by the end of 2017.” :
40. The Railways had constituted ‘Rail Land Development Authority (RLDA) in 2005.
About the role RLDA has been assigned in management of Railway Land, the Ministry of
Railway stated that vacant land which is not required by Railways for its immediate
Operational needs, is utilized for commercial development, wherever feasible, in order to
mobilize additional financial resources through Rail Land Development Authority (RLDA),
including redevelopment of Railway Stations.

(b) Removal of Encroachments
41. The PAC had recommended that the Railway Board should take up the matter with
various State Governments with a view to ascertain the causes of their reported reluctance in
providing necessary assistance for removal of encroachments so that an amicable solution is
arrived at for speedy reclamation of Railway land. The PAC had urged the Ministry of
Railways to formulate a comprehensive action plan both for early removal of all the
encroachments and prevention of fresh encroachments on Railway land especially those in
the Safety Zones (Railway land adjacent to Railway tracks, encroachment on which may
impact adversely on safe operation of trains). However, The encroachments on Railway land
were being removed at a negligible rate of around two percent in three years which was
sufficiently neutralized by fresh encroachments. In such a bad scenario, the Committee
desired to know the concrete Steps taken/planned by MoR for removing existing
encroachments and avoiding fresh encroachments and about the plan formulated by the
Railways in line with recommendations of PAC. The Ministry in their reply furnished as under:

“MOR at the level of zonal railways/production units are trying their best to vacate
encroached land. Due to sustained efforts there is reduction in encroached area.
Railway have retrieved 81,74 hectares of land during last three years. There is
continuous decrease in total area of encroachment which is evident from the
following figure:-

14


42.
various categories such as land
dwellers, etc. They asked for de’
in their reply furnished as under:

43.

Year As on

31.03.2015 | As on 31.03.2016 | As on 31.03.2017

Area under

(in ha)

encroachment 914.80 879.51 861.70

%age of total

land 0.20

0.19 0.18

Removal of encroachment
and Police. However, some

dwellers/encroachers which is a subject matter of State Governments.”

is carried out with the assistance of State Government
State Governments are insisting on rehabilitation of slum

The Committee desired to know whether Railways has bifurcated encroachments into

grabbing, acquired by armed forces, occupies by slum

‘ailed data of encroached land in six major cities. The MOR

City No. of Area (Approx) (in No. of Court
encroachments 11९6. cases*

[Delhi SSS~™Y 48924 [60S 2

Hyderabad + 1100 4,25 38

Secunderabad Twin Cit

[Chennai | [2775 /_.__7/ 40.18 12

Bangalore [558 /_._ /[ (1.85... 5 |! 5

(भिपाएआं_._._._... | 21761 (4120... [255

॥ S~*d ([6526__| (49656... | 39

[Total शिश है 81414 [152__.. | 369

* One court case may have many encroachments

It may not be possible’ to

encroachment.”

(०) Removal of encroachm

bifurcate encroachment into various categories like land
grabbing etc. In Railways, all such unauthorised occupation comes under

ent through PPE Act, 1971

For old encroachments, where Party is not amenable to persuasion for removal of such

encroachments, action should be taken under the provisions of Public Premises (Eviction of

Unauthorized Occupants) Act 1971. Rules also provide that whenever encroachments are
taken up under the PPE Act, the concerned officials from the Engineering branch would act

15



as the presenting officer, and proactively help expeditious finalization of the proceedings. A
review in Audit, however, revealed that:

44,

Though there were 113920 cases of encroachments in selected SSEs in all 16
Zones, their pursuance under PPE Act was insufficient as may be observed from the
fact that only 9135 cases were outstanding with Estate Officers -in selected
Divisions. The remaining. 104785 cases remained outside the proceedings under PPE
Act. ह हे

Of these 9135 cases, 3081 cases were pending with Estate Officers for more than
ten years. Out of these, 1185 cases were pending for more than 20 years. Cases
pending for more than ten years were mainly noticed in CR (1483) and NER (1212),
indicating ineffective pursuance of cases filed with Estate Officers. हि

In all Zones except SWR, though the Estate Officers finalized 11519 cases during
2011-14, Railway Administration could not implement the orders of Estate Officers
in 11169 (97 per cent) cases resulting in non-removal of encroachments.

The Committee asked the Ministry about insignificant pursuance of encroachments
cases under PPE Act and efforts made by.MoR to accelerate the pursuance. The
Ministry of Railway in their submission furnished as under:

“Some of the problems which are faced in removal of encroachment under PPE Act
are as under:

For removal of land encroachment, action under PPE Act is regularly taken.
However, the final removal of the encroachers from the railway land generally could
not take place as most of the encroachers approach to the Court.

Normally’ there is reluctance on the part of State Government for rendering
assistance in removing the encroachments unless’ the land to be evicted is
immediately required by railway for construction for some works, Even some district
authorities are asking for a comprehensive rehabilitation plan/package for the
encroachers. Most of the times, police force are not made available by State
Government to protect the railway employee and maintain law and order problem.

For more effective dealing the encroachments on Government land, Ministry of
Railway réquested Ministry of Urban Development to amend the Public Premises
(Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 by insertion of Section 10-A in
Section-11 of the act as under:-

“Section 10-A, The State Government authorities shall be responsible for eviction of
the unauthorized occupants, destruction and removal of all the unauthorized
constructions and unauthorized additions/alterations thereto, and/ or for providing
adequate assistance by way of Police and Magistrates to the concerned Central
Government authorities for eviction of the unauthorized occupants, destruction and
removal of all the unauthorized constructions and unauthorized additions/ alterations
thereto within certain time limits to be prescribed by the Estate Officer.”

The matter is being perused with Ministry of Urban Development.”

16


45. The Committee desired to know the reasons for Non-initiation of proceedings in
104785 cases under PPE ACT as pointed out by the Audit for pendency of cases with Estate
Officers. The Ministry of Railway informed the Committee that Estate Officers deal with the
encroachment cases in addition to the other work assigned to them. Estate Officers have to
take action as per procedure laid down under PPE Act, 1971. At present, about 37235
numbers of eviction orders passed by Estate Officers are pending for execution.

46.. The steps to be taken up for monitoring encroachments were found to be insufficient.
The Committee were informed that to strengthen the monitoring the Railway officials have
been instructed to remain more vigilant about the encroachment during routine inspection of
track/bridge/colony to’ avoid fresh encroachment on Railway land. Due to sustained efforts
Railway has retrieved 81.74 Hectares of land during last three years.

17


PART-II
OBSERVATIONS AND OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

1. The Committee note that Indian Railways owned 458588.16 hectares of land. Out
of it a significant Railway land i.e. 47339.5 hectare (10.33 per cent) has not been put to
any use i.e. 46408.75 hectare land is vacant (10.12 per cent) and 930.75 hectare (0.21

Per cent) is under encroachment. Indian Railway (IR) need to manage their land and
its utilization to best advantage by preventing encroachments and if encroached.

taking suitable action to remove the same. For management of IR land records, there
are provisions in Indian Railway Works Manual providing boundaries and periodical
verification thereof, maintaining land plans and removal of encroachments etc. The
Public Accounts Committee (PAC) in its Sixteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) had
recommended for strengthening the land management in Indian Railways and desired
IR to set up separate Land Management Cells to deal effectively with land related
matters and to.make necessary arrangements to staff the cells with those who possess
adequate knowledge and skills; to correct the inaccuracies in the existing land
records; and to formulate a comprehensive action plan for removal and prevention of
encroachments. Accordingly, the Ministry of Railways (MoR) issued detailed
comprehensive instructions in April 2010 to ensure compliance of PAC's
recommendations during Fifteenth Lok Sabha. This Report is based on Chapter 4 of
C&AG Report No.24 of 2015 on the subject "Management of vacant land in Indian
Railways" wherein Audit had observed that IR is lacking in proper management of land
and its utilisation. The PAC (2016-17 and 2017-18) selected the subject and allotted
the subject to Sub-Committee-Il (Railways) for detailed examination and report. The
findings of the Committee are enumerated in the succeeding paragraphs.

2. Setting up of Land Management Cell (LMC) up of Land Management Cell (LMC

The Committee note that as per Audit Report No.24 of 2015, as of March 2014,
out of 16 Zonal Railways no separate LMCs existed at three Zonal headquarters and
LMC were not set up in 19 out of 36 Divisions of 9 Zones. The officials posted there
were not deployed exclusively for land except in three zones; the staff (89 nos.) posted
in LMCs were not imparted training in land matters. The Committee further note that
officials were untrained and had no knowledge of maintenance of basic land data in

18


the LMC of Zonal headquarters and their Divisions. There were inconsistencies in
facts and figures in basic data pertaining to land holdings in most of the Zones. The
Committee observe that despite PAC’s earlier recommendations for creation of LMCs
in all Zones and their Divisions, separate LMC had not been established in all Zonal
headquarters and Railway Divisions. The anomalies pointed out by Audi in the
maintenance of data in LMCs showed that even where LMCs had been created, they
were not functioning properly. MoR in their reply stated that almost all the Zonal
Railways have already taken action for forming separate Land Management Cell but
accepted that in few Zones/ Divisions, there is need to strengthen the LMCs and
instructions have already been issued to review the status and strengthen LMCs in
Headquarters/Divisions level in a time bound manner. Ministry also stated that staff
are given proper training at Railways Institutes on land matters. However, the MoR
accepted that on some of the Divisions/ Divisional Engineer(Land) is designated as
Divisional Engineer (Headquarter) who besides looking after the work of land
management Cell also look after other assigned duties. These officers are further:
assisted by the junior officers, supervisors and ministerial staff. The Committee are
shocked to note that in Spite of their recommendations contained in Sixteenth Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) the IR could not set up LMCs in all Zones and resultant failure to
protect their own precious land from encroachments/illegal occupations. It is
surprising to observe that the IR do not have proper basic data of exact facts and
figures pertaining to land holdings till date as their own records are mismatching. The
Committee, therefore, desire MoR to ensure setting up of LMCs on priority basis and
in a time bound manner in the remaining Zonal Headquarters and Divisions. They
exhort that MoR to take adequate and sincere measures to strengthen its. land
management system by deputing qualified and well trained staff in these cells.

3. Maintenance of land Maintenance of land records
Maintenance of land records

The Committee note that the PAC in their Sixteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)
had observed that the failure of Railways to maintain the requisite land record
snowballed into a big problem not only for the Railways but also for other stakeholders .
for the simple reason that many of the disputes and the court cases stemmed from this
lapse. The Committee note that despite the Railway Board had issued instructions in

19


April 2010 that all land record registers should be maintained and up-dated by the
Zonal Railways and Railway Divisions as per codal provisions. Land Plans, Land
Record Register (LRR), Land Boundary Verification Register (LBVR) and
Encroachment Inspection Register (EIR) are the basic land records. However, audit
review found that 4 Per cent land plans were missing in 14 Zones, area was not
indicated in land plans of 12 Zones, some land plans had not been got authenticated
from State revenue authorities, records of mutation were not made available for review
by WR, WCR & NCR and in six Zones no mutation of land had been done. IR have
since introduced an online application called Land Management Module under the
Track Management System which provides Centralised database for land records of
Railway, i.e. land acquisition, area, usage along with authenticated land plans. As per
information available on website, out of 42182 land plans, 41467 land plans have been
uploaded. Out of these, 37720 land plans are authenticated. In view of above the
Committee desire the Indian Railways:

i. To ensure maintenance of all essential land records at all Zonal Railways
and Railway Divisions on priority basis and in a time bound manner.

ii. To ensure the safe custody of Railway land and prevention of the
encroachments, MoR should evolve a strategy that such land records are
regularly updated and verified as prescribed in the Manual.

iii. To ensure that the remaining land plans are uploaded on website, the
outstanding land plans to be got authenticated in a timeline and court
cases are vigorously pursued for its early verdicts.

4, Authentication and Ditigization of land records and Ditigization of land records

The Committee note that certain land parcels, being very old, do not have the
land plans readily available. Out of total 53898 land plans available with IR, 43342 land
plans (80.41 per cent) had been digitized. No land plan was digitized in Metro Railway,
Kolkata. Shortfall in digitizing the land plans to the extent of 19.59 per cent indicates
that the Railway Administration did not Prioritize the issue even after clear deadline
given by the Railway Board. Further, incomplete digitisation of land plans could also
not ensure an effective and robust management information system for land
management. The Committee further note that out of 42182 land plans, 41467 land

20


plans have been uploaded. Out of these, 37720 land plans are authenticated. About
4462 land plans are required to be authenticated for which Railways are making efforts.
Land Record Register was not being maintained in 37 out of 68 Railway Divisions of all
Zones except NER, NFR, WR and Metro Railway, Kolkata. The register of total Railway
land was also not being maintained in 40 out of 68 Railway Divisions in all Zones
except NER, NFR and WR and Metro Railway, Kolkata. Further, Railways are required
to maintain separate printed Land Boundary Verification Register (LBVR) in the
prescribed format for each section showing "Details of Encroachments" and "Details
of the Missing Boundary Stones" and action taken thereon which should be certified
by the SE (Works/P. Way) of the respective sections in field and verified/inspected by
the ADEN / DEN /Sr. DEN or other higher officers (Dy. CE/CE at Zonal headquarter)
from time to time. This practice has not been followed in most of the Zones reviewed
by audit. Encroachment Inspection Register (EIR) showing the encroachments on
Railway land noticed during inspections by various officials is required to be
maintained by each SSE duly furnishing the location, name of the encroacher, area
encroached, type of encroachment (commercial/ residential/ cultivation), date of
commencement of unauthorized occupation, date on which the encroachment came to
notice for the first time, action taken and date of removal of encroachment. Despite the
instructions issued by Indian Railway, Divisional! Zonal Railways failed to ensure
Proper maintenance of the Land Record Register, Land Boundary Verification Register
and Encroachment Inspection Register by the SSEs and verification of the same by the
higher officers as per the provision given in Indian Railway Works Manual. The
Committee express their dissatisfaction over the state of affairs at various levels on
maintenance of land records. The Committee desire the Indian Railways to take

immediate steps to:

i. streamline the system of authentication and mutation of land plan by regular
follow up with the concerned State Government authorities;

ii. Computerize/digitize land records on priority basis and in a time bound manner
so as to ensure a robust and effective land management information system.

5. Prevention of encroachment
The Committee note that despite observations of PAC in their Sixteenth Report

(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) for provision of boundary walls along vacant land and MoR’s
- 21


assurance for suitable compliance, the Zonal Railways did not accord due
consideration to this important issue directly linked to encroachments of railway land,
The MOR, however, contended that to prevent encroachment, IR have constructed
boundary wall of 102 km during 2014-15, 193 km during 2015-16 and 129 km during
2016-17. Railways were also asked to examine the option of private investment in lieu
of advertisement on the boundary walls. But due to very low potential of the work, it
was not found workable. On the other hand Railway stated that it may not be possible
to protect all the Railway land by constructing boundary wall due to economic reasons.
As per the details collected from Railways there is requirement of about 3455 km
boundary wall costing about Rs. 2796 crores to protect railway land at vulnerable
locations from encroachments. The Committee are of the considered view that in
order to prevent encroachments of the remaining vacant land there should be some
kind of marking around the land. Therefore, the Committee desire the MoR to ensure
demarcation of such land with adequate marking on all such vacant land on Priority
basis and in a time bound manner. The Committee also desire that Railway should

- seek the assistance of Department of Space for satellite mapping and monitoring of its
vacant land.

6. Independent agency on maintainance of railway land agency on maintainance of railway land

The Committee note that for Railway land which has been under encroachment,
it is essential that the existing encroachments are not only kept under constant
observation but continuous efforts are made for their earliest removal. This may be
possible if the details of encroachments are available with Railway Administration and
they watch the developments through adequate monitoring and monthly joint
inspections with State Revenue Authorities. During the audit review it was found that
area under 8775 encroachments was not available with the selected SSEs in CR. Zonal
Railways’ vacant land had been encroached during the period between 1950 and 2013.
Existence of encroachments for such long periods indicates that the Railway officials
remained as mute spectators and did not take appropriate action at the right time for
removal thereof. Non-availability of area under encroachments raises the concern that
Railway Administration does not possess the required data/valuable evidence to
defend its claim before the adjudicating Authorities/Courts. However, MoR stated that
for removal of hard encroachments, action under PPE Act is regularly taken. However,

22


the final removal of the encroachers from the Railway land generally could not take
Place as most of the encroachers approach to the Courts. In addition the issue of
reluctance on the part of State Governments for rendering assistance in removing the
encroachments and interference of local leaders can be solved only with the help of
State. The Committee, therefore, exhort the MOR to get the Public Premises (Eviction
of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1974 suitably amended by the Ministry of Urban
Development at the earliest. Since insertion of section 10A in the Act will make the
State Governments responsible for eviction of unauthorised occupants, destruction
and removal of unauthorised construction and Providing adequate security and
assistance by way of Police and Magistrates to the MoR within certain time limits it will
be immensely help to remove encroachments. . The Committee are of the opinion that
MOR should hirelengage a PSU/private consultancy firm which can undertake a
scientific study on different types of land available with Railways and submit proposal
of use of vacant land, removal.of encroachments and maintenance of various records
of such land in a scientific manner as also its valuation and commercial exploitation.

7. Categorisation of encroached Railway land of encroached Railway land

The Committee note that as on 31.03.2017 the area of Railway under
encroachment was 861.70 ha (0.18 per cent of total land). Out of this, 152.4 ha. land is
under encroachment in six big cities (Delhi, Hyderabad & Secunderabad, Chennai,
Bangalore, Mumbai and Kolkata) consisting of 81414 No. of encroachments where 363
court cases are undergoing for settlement. The IR has not bifurcated this encroached
land into various categories such as land grabbing, land under court cases, land under
unauthorised occupation of slums dwellers, land taken over by armed forces for their
use, etc. The Committee are of the view that if encroached land of the IR is categorised
under various groups/headings it would be helpful in removal of encroachment ina
better way. The Committee therefore, desire IR to take up the issue of categorising
encroached Railway land under various sub-categories and deal with each category of
encroachment separately for its removal by making specific plan for. such
encroachment.

23


8. Removal of encroachment through PPE Act, 1971 of encroachment through PPE Act, 1971

The Committee note that whenever removal of encroachments are taken up
under the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants) Act 1971, the
concerned officials from the engineering branch would act as the presenting officer,
and proactively help expeditious finalization of the proceedings. However, review by
Audit, revealed non serious pursuance of encroachments cases under PPE Act. For
more effective dealing with the encroachments on Government land, Ministry of
Railway have requested Ministry of Urban Development to amend the Public Premises
(Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1974 by insertion of Section 10-A in Section-
11 of the act which will put responsibility of State Government Authorities’ for eviction
of the unauthorised occupants, destruction and removal of unauthorised construction
or providing assistance to Central Government authorities. The Committee desire MoR
to vigorously pursue the matter regarding removal of existing old/ fresh
encroachments through strict compliance to the provisions of PPE Act/Railways Act
and ensure the reclamation of encroached Railway land. The Committee
also desire MoR to pursue with the Ministry of Urban Development for amendment in
the PPE Act, 1971 at the earliest. At present, about 37235 numbers of eviction orders
passed by Estate Officers are pending for execution. The Committee express their
displeasure over the pendency of eviction orders in large number.

NEW DELHI; MALLIKARJUN KHARGE
27 March, 2018 Chairperson,

06 Chaitra, 1940 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

24