112

“INCORRECT ADOPTION OF EXCHANGE RATE
AND UNDUE BENEFIT TO THE’ SERVICE
PROVIDER"

MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2018-19)

ONE HUNDRED AND TWELFTH REPORT

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2150

ONE HUNDERED AND
TWELFTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2018-19)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

“INCORRECT ADOPTION OF EXCHANGE
RATE AND UNDUE BENEFIT TO THE

SERVICE PROVIDER"

MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS

Presented to Lok Sabha on: 10:08: 2.018
Laid in Rajya Sabha on: J0:.08: 2018

August, 2018 /Shravana, 1940 (Saka)


CONTENTS

PAGE
NO.

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2018-19)

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2017-18)

INTRODUCTION

PART -।

Introduction

a Less collection of revenue due to incorrect adoption of exchange
rate on fees/penalties charged towards renunciation of citizenship

and misuse of passports

| 1. | Undue benefit to the Service Provider

PART - Il

Observations/recommendations of the Committee

11

Appendices *

ma Minutes of the Sixteenth sitting of PAC (2017-18) held on 24.11.2017

pW Minutes of the Twelfth sitting of PAC (20-19) held on 9.8.2018

* Tou be appended at He tune 4 p tiring,



COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2018-19) OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2018-19

Shri Mallikarjun Kharge - Chairperson

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay

Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Smt. Riti Pathak

Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank”
Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal

Shri Abhishek Singh

Shri Gopal Shetty

12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya

13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur

14. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi

४०9 PANAMA LYN

Ss

15. Dr. Ponnusamy Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA
16. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda
17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
18. Shri Shwait Malik
19. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
21. Shri C.M.Ramesh*
22. Shri Bhupender Yadav*

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh - Additional. Secretary
2. Shri T. Jayakumar - Director
3. Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Additional Director
4, Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary
5. Smt. Malvika Mehta - Committee Officer

*Elected w.e.f 6" August, 2018


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2017-18) OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2017-18

Shri Mallikarjun Kharge - Chairperson

MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2 Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey
6 Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
7 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Smt. Riti Pathak

9. Shri Neiphiu Rioh’
10. Shri Abhishek Singh
11. Prof. Ram Shanker
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
14. Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi
15. Dr. P. Venugopal
RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Naresh Agrawal

17. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
418. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
19... Shri Mohd. Ali Khant

20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy*
21... Shri Ajay Sancheti

22. Shri Bhupender Yadav

* Ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon acceptance of his resignation from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 22
February, 2018.

1 Elected w.e.f. 29 December, 2017 in lieu of vacancy caused due to retirement of Shri Shantaram Naik.

+ ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 18 August, 2017 and
re-elected w.e.f. 29 December, 2017.


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2018-19), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this One-Hundred and Twelfth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on "Incorrect Adoption of Exchange Rate and Undue
Benefit to the Service Provider" based on Para Nos. 7.1 and 7.2 respectively of the
C&AG's Report No. 11 of 2016 relating to the Ministry of External Affairs.

2. The Report No. 11 of 2016 of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India was
laid on the Table of the House on 2 August, 2016.

3. The Public Accounts Committee (2017-18) selected the subject for detailed
examination and report. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of External Affairs on the subject at their sitting held on 24.11.2017. The Public
Accounts Committee (2018-19) considered and adopted this report at their sitting held
on 9.8.2018. Minutes of the Sittings form appendices of the Report.

4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part II of the
Report.

6. The Committee thank the predecessor Committee for taking oral evidence and
obtaining information on the subject.

7. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of External Affairs for tendering evidence before them and furnishing the
requisite information to the Committee in connection with the examination of the
subject.

8. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance
rendered to them in the matter by the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of
India.

NEW DELHI; MALLIKARJUN KHARGE
9 August, 2018 Chairperson,

18 Shravana, 1940 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.


Part-A
Report
Introduction

1. The Public Accounts Committee decided to take up for detailed examination and
report, Paras 7.1 and 7.2 of Audit Report no. 11 of 2016 (Union Civil Compliance) on
‘Less collection of revenue due to incorrect adoption of exchange rate on fees/penalties
charged towards renunciation of citizenship and misuse of passports’ and ‘Undue
benefit to the Service Provider’ respectively.

1 Less collection of revenue due to incorrect adoption of exchange rate on
fees/penalties charged towards renunciation of citizenship and misuse of
passports

2. In Para 7.1, Audit contended that incorrect adoption of prevailing official
exchange rate by High Commission India (HC!) Ottawa and its Consulates in Toronto
and Vancouver in June 2010, instead of the exchange rate for visa fees as required
under the Manual and unwarranted downward revision of service fees for renunciation
of Indian citizenship and penalty on misuse of passports later in March 2013, resulted in
less collection of revenue of % 27.01 crore.

3. According to Audit, as per Schedule IV of the Citizenship Rules 2009 which came
into force from 25 February 2009, and Passport Manual 2010 (Chapter 29 para 5 (ii)), a
service fees of 7,000 was to be charged for renunciation of citizenship abroad.
Further, the Passport Manual 2010 (Chapter 29 para 5 (iv a and Q)) prescribed a
penalty of हैं 10,000 for passport not surrendered upto three years, but used once for
travel after obtaining foreign passport or when the passport is retained over three years.
The manual further provided that the rate of exchange for collection of penalty in
applicable local currency was the same exchange rate as being used for
calculation/conversion of visa/other consular services. Further, as per practice, the
exchange rate adopted for renunciation fees by the Missions was the same as used for
penalty for misuse of passports.

4. Audit noticed in September 2014 that the rate of exchange used by the HCI,
Ottawa and two Consulates under its jurisdiction, at Toronto and Vancouver for visa
services was @ 1 Canadian Dollar (C$)=% 29.231'. However, instead of adopting the
above exchange rate being used for visa services as prescribed under the Passport
Manual, these Missions/Posts had applied the official exchange rate prevailing in June

116$5' 29.23 with effect from 1 March 2002 to 30 September 2012 used for visa services.


2

2010 @1C$=% 41.662? for local currency both for penalty and renunciation fees.
Accordingly, HCI, Ottawa fixed (June 2010) the renunciation fees at C$168 (= 7000
41.66) and penalty to be charged at C$240 (₹ 10,000/% 41.66) instead of C$ 240 ((₹
7000 29.23) for renunciation fees and C$343 ((% 10,000 29.23) for penalty as per the
rate of exchange being used for visa services. The incorrect fees was applied to 17,664
renunciation cases and 797° misuse of passport cases during the period from June
2010 to February 2013. This according to Audit resulted in revenue loss of C$
13,53,899 (₹ 6.05 crore’ ).

5. According to Audit, the Ministry had revised Passport fees and Passport related
services through Ministry's Gazette Notification in October 2012. The Ministry, while
referring to revised passport fees and related fees, issued further clarifications in
October 2012 and December 2012 stating that the above Gazette Notification only
covered passport fee and passport related services as enumerated therein and hence
structure of consular fees would remain unchanged. The Ministry also advised the
Missions in October 2012 that the fee in terms of local currency may be revised if the
local currency depreciated against US dollar by 10 per cent or more. However, the fees
may not be revised in the case of appreciation of local currency against US dollar.

6. Audit, however, observed in September 2014 that 101, Ottawa and its
Consulates in Vancouver and Toronto, despite the above clarification issued by the
Ministry, had again made downward revision of service fees for renunciation from
C$168 to C$126 and penalty on misuse of passports from C$240 to C$180 in March
2013 by applying the official exchange rate of October 2012° (1C$=%55.55). The
downward revision of service fees was applied to 27,057 renunciation cases and 5,125 :
misuse of passport cases during the period from 1 March 2013 to 22 January 2015.
Thus, as per Audit, due to such incorrect downward revision on renunciation fees and
penalty based on the prevailing official exchange rate, the Mission suffered a revenue
loss of C$ 39,19,873 (% 20.96 crore® ).

7. In reply, the Ottawa Mission in January 2015 stated that error in re-fixation of
passport surrender fees and associated penalty was neither intentional nor an

> 4C$=" 41.66 - the prevailing exchange rate as in June 2010

3 Consulate General of India, Vancouver did not provide data on misuse of passports for the period from
June 2010 to December 2010.

“Least exchange rate for the month of May 2011 1C$=" 44.69 during the period June 2010 to February
2013 has been considered for calculating loss of revenue in terms of rupee.

°% 1 = C$ .018 prevailing exchange rate as in October 2012.

® Least exchange rate for the month of April 2013 1C$=% 53.47 during the period March 2013 to January

2015 has been considered for calculating loss of revenue in terms of rupee.


3

inadvertent lapse on Mission's part but on account of ambiguity in the instructions
issued by the Ministry and delay by the Ministry in responding to Mission's request in
October 2014 for clarification on this issue. The Mission further stated that in September
2015 fees had been revised after receipt of clarification from Ministry on 22 January
2015.

8. Audit did not accept the reply of the Mission as according to them there was no
necessity for the Mission to obtain clarification from the Ministry since the Passport
Manual provisions were clear on the rate of exchange to be adopted. Further, the fact
that other Missions test checked in Audit correctly followed the Passport Manual
provisions in applying the exchange rate for renunciation fees and penalty for misuse of
passports also indicates that there was no ambiguity in the Manual provision warranting
any clarification.

9. The Mission correctly revised the renunciation fees and penalty for misuse of

passports with effect from 23 January 2015 following clarification from the Ministry at

the instance of Audit. Thus, according to Audit, the total revenue loss amounted to (% 6. ©
05 crore + हैं 20.96 crore) हैं 27.01 crore.

10. In this regard, the Ministry in their final action taken notes have submitted the
following:-

“It was clarified in Ministry's Message No. V.1/401/1/2011 dated 5th October,
2012 that for revision of Passport and related fees, the current official
exchange rate conveyed by FE Section of the Ministry was applicable
and not that of 2002 when the Passport fee were revised last. It was also
clarified vide Ministry's communications dated 6.12.2012 and reiterated on
01.01.2013 that the above mentioned criteria could be followed for the fixation
of penalty also. The Mission/Posts in Canada abided by the instructions
of the Ministry and fixed the fees accordingly.

11... The Ministry have further submitted that:-

“Ministry does not completely agree with the Audit conclusion. We
do agree with thecontention of Audit that the adoption of
prevailing official exchange rate by the Mission was incorrect. However,
the Mission/Posts in Canada also abided by the Ministry's
instructions dated 06.12.2012 and 01.01.2013 in fixing the fees and were
correct to that extent. The revision of the fees of passport related
services is also applicable in the cases of renunciation of Passport
and for penalty fixed for non-surrendering of passport.”


142. In response to the above, Audit contended the following :-

“There was no necessity for the Mission to obtain clarification from the
Ministry since the provisions of Passport Manual were clear on the rate of
exchange to be adopted and there was no ambiguity in the Manual
Warranting any clarification.”

13. The Ministry were asked if there was any internal audit system in place in
Missions, and that since Audit is only a test check, whether the Ministry has reviewed
services being provided vis a vis charges being levied by service providers for other

missions. In response, the Ministry stated the following:-

“Indian Missions and Posts abroad undergo both internal and external (i.e.
statutory) audit. Internal Audit is conducted by the Internal Audit wing of the
Office of the Principal Chief Controller of Accounts of the Ministry of External
Affairs as per the approved Internal Audit Plan for a given year. The external or
statutory audit of Indian Missions and Posts abroad is conducted by the C&AG,
including through the Offices of the Principal Director of Audit with resident
offices in Embassy of India in Washington, High Commission of India in Kuala
Lumpur and High Commission of India in London.

The Ministry monitors implementation by Indian Missions and Posts abroad of
contracts awarded for outsourcing of consular and visa support services. After a
comprehensive review, the outsourcing model is currently being reviewed for
further revision.”

ll Undue benefit to the Service Provider

14. In Para 7.2, according to Audit, High Commission of India, London (Mission)
entered into an agreement with VF Services (UK) Ltd, the Service Provider (SP) for
various visa support services on 24 January 2008 for a period of five years. The
agreement became operational on 29 May 2008.

15. As per the agreement, the SP was, amongst others, responsible for accepting
visas application forms, accepting visa fees and paying the fee due to the Mission in
Mission’s bank account, scrutinizing the visa applications to ensure completeness,
forwarding the complete applications along with passports to the Mission twice each
day, collect processed applications from Mission twice each day, return passports to
applicants, maintaining proper records, accounts, quality control system, security,
telephonic enquiry system, progress tracking system and contingency plan. As per the
agreement, the charges to clients were not to exceed the cost of the appropriate
prescribed visa fee plus SP’s Service Charge for each passport not exceeding GBP


5

6.90 per visa application. The amount of the SP’s Service Charge was to remain fixed
for the entire duration of the Agreement and was to be changed only if there was a
change in the rate of local taxes or VAT. Accordingly, the SP’s Service Charge was
increased to GBP 7.70 in September 2011.

16. | The Mission introduced the service of Fast Track Business Visa (FTBV) in March
2010 whereby business visa would be issued on same day on payment of additional
visa fee and Service Charges. The Service Charges were to be collected and retained
by the SP. The Mission fixed a Service Charge of GBP 25 for each such visa.

17. According to Audit, the award of above additional work to the SP resulted in
undue benefit to the SP for the following reasons:

+ additional work was given to the existing SP (contractor) without competition,
transparency and price discovery which was mandated by General Financial
Rules and CVC guidelines;

+ additional work of FTBV initially awarded without competition and price
discovery was not reviewed for a long period of 5 years; The Mission continued
outsourcing of this work at current rate (GBP 25 per application) despite the
Ministry expressing its reservations in June 2013’, August 2013° and May 2014° .
The Ministry essentially disfavored outsourcing of FTBV and wanted the Mission
to process such visas;

+ Mission did not undertake due diligence in estimating the Service Charges.
Initially, it proposed (August 2008) a Service Charge of GBP 50 which was later
on reduced (October 2009) to GBP 25 without detailed estimation of cost, market
survey and study; and negotiations with the vendor. The fact that the new SP had
agreed to render the same service at normal Service Charges (GBP 7.44) with
effect from March 2015 (new agreement) against the enhanced Service Charge
of GBP 25 during 15 March 2010 to February 2015 points also Mission had
arbitrarily fixed a Service Charge of GBP 25 in March 2010.

+ the entrustment of additional work of FTBV did not entail any additional
process/activity by the SP. The FTBV processing required collection of
applications upto 1130 hours on each day, delivery of these applications to the
Mission and collection of issued visas on the same day at 1600 hours. This
schedule did not require extra investment as the SP was already responsible for
delivery of applications and collection of passports twice each working day

7 Ministry's Egram No. 104 dated 28 June 2013
3 Ministry's Egram No. 132 dated 13 August 2013
° Ministry's Email No. 2154/JS(CPV)/2014 dated 8 May 2014


18.

6

(timings to be determined by the Mission). The additional burden in issuing same
day visa, if any, was on the Mission as they had to process all such cases on day
to day basis.

+ while going for a fresh tender for visa work in July 2013, the Mission omitted to
include this item of work. This hampered price discovery and created uncertainty
about continuity of services;

When the above facts were pointed out by Audit in August 2015, the Mission

justified the levy of Service Charge by stating that the Service Charge of GBP 25 was
approved by the Ministry. The Mission’s contention is not acceptable due to the
following reasons:

19.

+ The decision to award additional work was not in conformity with General
Financial Rules and CVC guidelines.

+ Ministry also did not agree to the Mission’s proposal in July 2013 to consider
continuation of present arrangement for handling FTBV through the SP with
Service Charge remaining at the same level (GBP 25).

Thus, the Mission’s decision to award processing of FTBV cases at enhanced

Service Charge of GBP 25 per case in place of normal Service Charge of GBP 7.70
resulted in undue benefit of हैं 10.727 crore to the SP from March 2010 to February

2015.
20.

The Ministry in their final action note to Audit, submitted the following:-

“Ministry does not agree with the views of the Audit that Mission had contradicted
the specified basic guidelines (rules-178 outsourcing of services) and CVC
guidelines regarding transparency in works/purchase/consultancy contracts for
signing of agreement contract with VF services (UK) Itd. the services provider
(SP) for outsourcing of various visa support services.

Mission vide letter no. Lon/visa/551/02/2008 dated 20 October 2009 had moved
a proposal! to the Ministry, para 5 of which specifically proposes the Ministry may
consider GBP 100 (GBP 75 for the mission and GBP 25 for the SP) as
emergency visa fee in addition to the normal visa fee for business category. The
letter was followed up with the reminder on 5 November 2009. Ministry vide JS
(CPV)'s letter No. VII/407/12/2007 dated 27 January 2010 had approved the
proposal of the Mission to introduce emergency processing fee for the issuance
of business visa on the same day. Para 3 of Ministry's letter states that ‘as
proposed’, the Mission may change GBP 100 as emergency processing fee for
processing of business visa on the day of application. Thus, the approval for

30 72006 Applications multiplied by GBP 17.3 (25 minus 7.70) as Service Charge per application is equal to GBP
1245703.80 or INR 107155440.87 (calculated @ GBP 1 = 86.02 being the Average Official rate of exchange for the
period 2010-11 to 2014-15).


7

charging of GBP 25 as processing fee by VFS on emergency business visas was
by the Ministry, as proposed by the Mission.

Mission has been receiving a large number of request for the urgent visa from
the business travellers. In the absence of a separate mechanism for the receipt
and processing of the urgent business visa applications, it is practically very
difficult for the mission to handle such urgent visa requests. It is also not feasible
fadvisable for the Mission to completely disregard as it could generate
complaints.

Proposal of the Mission to introduce FTBV with an additional fee of GBP
100(GBP 75 for government and GBP 25 For services provider) was examined
by the Ministry keeping the above facts in view and to help those business
travellers who require to travel to India on urgent basis. This had resulted in
substantial facilitation of business travellers to India and reflects efficient service
rendered by the Mission to the business communities and PlOs.who need fast
services and are willing to pay for it. It is worth mentioning here that introduction
to FTBV does not force applicants to compulsorily apply for it and pay additional
fees Ministry has also not received any complaints so far from urgent visa
seekers regarding payment of additional fee to get FTBV on the same day. The
main objective of the introduction to FTBV was not to benefit the service provider
but to facilitate short notice business travellers to India as well as increase the
ability of our visa issuance system to cater to urgent needs thus promoting our
overall trade and economic interest. Ministry vide JS (CPV)'s letter No.
VII/407/12/2007 dated 27 January 2010 had approved the introduction of FTBV
Mission had been authorized to charge GBP 100 as emergency processing fee
for processing of business visa on the day of application in accordance with the
Mission’s proposal. Thus, charging of GBP as processing fee by VFS on
emergency business visas was only done with approval of the Ministry and
therefore, no undue benefit had been provided as observed by the Audit.
Ministry appreciates the views of the Audit that as per agreement with the SP,
there is a provision for the delivery of the applications and the collection of the
passport twice each working day, but it is not possible for the mission to
segregate emergency visa applications out of hundreds odd applications
received by the Mission without a separate mechanism for it. Ministry is of the
view that the Service Provider is required to deploy additional efforts and
resources to segregate and process FTBV cases on the urgent basis as much as
higher level of the service is assured. Therefore, logic and reason demand that
the Service Provider should be incentivised and paid extra for processing FTBV
separately. It is also earned additional revenue @GBP 75 each for FTBV cases.
Therefore, no financial loss has resulted to the Government as result of
introducing this scheme.

Audit may appreciate that the matter has been reviewed by the Ministry and in
the new agreement effective from the March,2015, the SP has agreed to provide
the services at the same rate of GBP 7.44 only.

With introduction of e-TV facility, which also allow routine business meetings, the
demand for FTBV had come down. FTBV has since been dispensed with.”



21.

8

Secretary, MEA in his oral submission to the Committee in the sitting on

24.11.2017 stated the following:-

22.

23.

"the Ministry is looking at that Ministry does not want to disturb the existing
arrangement. So, there is a noting which says that the current arrangement can
continue till the expiry of the existing contract. This is one possibility which they
had in mind. Then they also say, the new contract must have such a provision.
Do not separate from the contract. Alternatively, Mission can handle the fast
track passports directly. This is the thinking in the notes which audit, the CAG is
aware of. So, you can see that they are looked at possibilities. How is this
reflected in the correspondence between the Ministry and the Mission? In June
the Ministry has told the Mission, Mission may consider handling the fast track
business visa directly without involving the service provider..”

The Secretary, MEA also stated that :-

“With the introduction of the e-visa, demand for this Fast Track Service has
come down in the new contract effective from March, 2015 and the service
provider is not charging any additional service fee for emergency business
visas.”

In this regard when asked what is the mechanism of issuing e-visas and whether

the fees for issuing business visas now been reduced, the Ministry replied as under:-

24.

“It is submitted that the issuance of e-Visas is handled by Ministry of Home
Affairs.”

When asked why was the additional work of Fast Track Business Visa given to

the existing contractor without any tendering, due diligence or price discovery , what

was the prevalent rate when the contract was awarded and why was the rate of 25 GBP

for the service not revised for five years, the Ministry submitted the following response:-

he fast-track business visa was an optional service available to visa applicants.
Therefore, it would have been operationally impractical, and would have
inconvenienced applicants, to provide this optional service from.a location other
than from the application centre being operated by the existing service provider
after separately tendering for a service provider for this particular optional service
alone. Therefore, it is submitted for the Hon'ble Committee’s consideration that it
was functionally optimal to provide this service as a new item in the scope of
work of the existing service provider. However, the Mission should have signed
an Addendum to the existing contract with the service provider outlining the
terms and conditions of this new item in the scope of work for which a higher



9

service fee (from the tendered bid) was to be charged; this procedural lapse is
regretted. The rate of GBP 25 was revised after five years, as this item was
covered under the scope of work at the time of re-tendering.”

25. The Ministry was asked to give details of the system that has been devised in
order to avoid under-bidding and subsequent overcharging by service providers and the
penalties being imposed for non-adherence to the contract. The Ministry submitted then

following:-

“In December 2015, after comprehensive internal consultations, the Ministry revised
the standard tender document issued by Indian Missions and Posts abroad for
outsourcing of visa, passport and consular support services, based on which
contracts in eight countries covering 17 Missions and Posts have been awarded
since January 2016.Some features of this revised ‘Request for Proposal’ (RFP),
are:

a. The eligibility criteria have been broadened to facilitate wider participation
and competition among bidders.

b. More emphasis has been laid on technical soundness of the bidders, with
numerical evaluation of the technical criteria ensuring greater transparency
and objectivity in the process.

c. Steps have been taken to prevent dishonest underbidding. Bidders have to
provide a Cost Sheet with the Financial Bid; criteria by which a bid would be
deemed financially unviable has been defined; and it has been notified that
such bids would be considered unresponsive and would be rejected.

d. A Service Level Agreement has been introduced to help Missions and Posts
to penalise the Service Provider in case of violation of the service standards
defined in the Agreement.

e. The Performance Security has been broken into four smaller parts (10%,
20%, 20% and 50%) so that service deficiencies can be penalized in a
proportionate manner, as per the severity of the Agreement's violation.

f. Provision has been kept for steeper penalties in cases of a serious violation
of the contractual provisions.

g. Bidders have to quote their rates for ‘Value Added Services’ (such as
intermet or photocopying) in their Financial Bid, which are given due
weightage in the financial evaluation.

h. The working hours of the application centres to be operated by the Service
Provider have been increased to extend the availability of the services.

i. Sub-contracting the work by the Service Provider to a local partner has been
prohibited, to ensure accountability.

j. In large and sensitive areas, the contract is awarded to more than one
company for better competitive rate and service.”



10
Part-B

Recommendations/Observations of the Committee

4. The C&AG of India in their Report no. 11 of 2016 (Union Civil Compliance)
have brought out two paras viz. 7.1 and 7.2 pertaining to the Ministry of
External Affairs on ‘Less collection of revenue due to incorrect adoption of
exchange rate on fees/penalties charged towards renunciation of citizenship
and misuse of passports’ and ‘Undue benefit to the Service Provider’,
respectively. In Para 7.1, Audit found that incorrect adoption of prevailing
official exchange rate by the Mission and Posts in Canada in June 2010 and
further unwarranted downward revision of service fees for renunciation of
Indian citizenship, and penalties on misuse of passports in March 2013
resulted in revenue loss of (% 6. 05 crore + % 20.96 crore) हैं 27.01 crore. In Para
7.2, Audit found that the decision of High Commission of India in London to
award processing of Fast Track Business Visas cases at enhanced Service
Charge of Great Britain Pound (GBP) 25 per case in place of normal Service
Charge of GBP 7.70 resulted in undue benefit of ¥ 10.72 crore to the Service
Provider from March 2010 to February 2015. The Committee have observed
certain shortcomings in the functioning of the Ministry with regard to these
audit paras and have accordingly made their observations/recommendations

on important issues in the succeeding paragraphs.

Recommendation no. 1- Laxity in following laid down procedures/ rules in following laid down procedures/ rules

2. The Committee note that the High Commission of India, Ottawa and two
Consulates under its jurisdiction, at Toronto and Vancouver applied the
official exchange rate prevailing in June 2010 i.e.@ 1 Canadian Dollar (C$)=%
41.662 for local currency both for penalty of misuse of passports and
renunciation of citizenship fees as against the rate of exchange for visa
services i.e. 1 (C$)=% 29.231 which was the rate required to be used according
to the Citizenship Rules 2009 and Passport Manual 2010, resulting in a loss of
%6.05 crore. The Committee further note that the High Commission in Ottawa

and the two Consulates made downward revision of service fees for


11

renunciation and penalty and misuse of passports despite the Ministry’s clear
instructions that the fee in terms of local currency may be revised if the local
currency depreciated against US dollar by 10 per cent or more and which
depreciation had not happened at that point. The Committee are dismayed to
note that the Mission in Ottawa could be so callous in their reply by stating
that the error was on account of ambiguity in the instructions issued by the
Ministry and delay by the Ministry in responding. The fact that all the other
missions applied the correct rate of exchange points to error of judgment on
the part of the concerned officials in the Mission and laxity in following duly
laid down procedures/rules. The Committee further observe that, the fees was
revised after receipt of clarification from the. Ministry in January 2015 and that
too at the instance of Audit. The Committee deprecate the lackadaisical
attitude of the Ministry and the Mission in this regard. While, the amount so
lost cannot be recovered, the Committee recommend the Ministry to fix
accountability for non-adherence of stipulated rules and guidelines and
further; to conduct a review of all the missions to check that such errors are
not repeated and also to issue necessary instructions that strict action would

be taken if such instances were to arise again.

Recommendation no. 2- Internal Audit

3. The Committee are disappointed to note that the internal audit of the Mission
in Ottawa and the two Consulates at Toronto and Vancouver failed to point out
the deviation in application of exchange rates which ultimately led to
pecuniary loss. In this regard, in their 30 report on ‘Global Estate
Management’ and 61% report on ‘Action taken on recommendations/
Observations of the Committee contained in their 30" Report on ‘Global Estate
Management’, the Committee, while observing that the internal audit system of
the Ministry was not functioning properly, felt that there was a need for
strengthening internal audit as a preventive and remedial mechanism and had
strongly recommended that an effective internal e-audit system may be
developed in the Ministry. The instant case of incorrect adoption of exchange

rate on fees/penalties charged towards renunciation of citizenship and misuse


12

of passports points to the same issue of lack of internal audit. The Committee
has been categorically pointing out in their earlier reports the need for
strengthening internal audit mechanism of the Ministry as strong internal
controls followed by regular internal audit are a hall mark of good governance
and the need of the hour for the Missions. The Committee, accordingly,
recommend that an effective mechanism for internal audit for early detection
and rectification of irregularities/errors may be developed under intimation to

the Committee.

Recommendation no. 3- Visas on Urgent Basis/Short Notice

4. The Committee note that the High Commission of India, London introduced
the service of Fast Track Business Visa (FTBV) whereby business visa would
be issued on same day on payment of additional visa fee and Service Charges.
Audit contended that the Mission’s decision to award processing of FTBV
cases at enhanced Service Charge of GBP 25 per case in place of normal
Service Charge of GBP 7.70 resulted in undue benefit of हैं 10.72 crore to the
Service Provider i.e. VF Services (UK) Ltd. The Committee observe from the
reply of the Ministry that the High Commission of India, London had been
receiving a large number of requests for urgent visas from business travellers
and in the absence of a separate mechanism for receipt and processing of
urgent business visa applications, it was very difficult for the Mission to
handle such urgent visa requests. In this regard, Secretary MEA in his
submission stated that with the introduction of e-visa, demand for the FTBV
came down. The Committee further observe that e-visa is being handled by
Ministry of Home Affairs. The Committee are apprehensive of coordination and
jurisdictional issues in handling of e-visa which is being handled by Ministry
of Home Affairs as the Missions come under Ministry of External Affairs, and
hope that steps will be taken to streamline the whole process of issue of e-
visa. It has further been stated in the final action taken note of the Ministry that
FTBV has been dispensed with. In this context, the Committee are of the view
that efficient delivery of Visa services across all Missions is essential not only

to promote trade and economic interests but also to allow seamless, smooth


13

and hassle free movement of people from overseas to India and vice versa.
While taking care of security concerns is important on one hand, the focus
should be on facilitation rather than hindrance. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that all Missions should provide, through their visa issuance
services, visas on short notice for immediate travel on medical reasons, death
of family/relative, or any other ground which can be justified by the traveller as

urgent apart from business purposes.

Recommendation no. 4- Administrative control over Missions

5. The Committee note that the work of Fast Track Business Visas was not
reviewed for a period of 5 years. The Mission continued outsourcing of this
work at the prevalent rate of GBP 25 per application despite the Ministry
expressing its reservations in June 2014, August, 2013 and May, 2014. In the
context of above and in case of the contract related to issuance of fast track
visas, Secretary, MEA in his oral submission to the Committee stated that the
Ministry did not want to disturb the existing arrangement and had
communicated to the Mission that the prevalent arrangement could continue
till the expiry of the existing contract and that alternate possibilities could be
explored thereafter. The apparent hesitation of the Ministry in giving clear
directions to the Mission points towards incongruity in the administrative
relationship of the Mission and the Ministry. The Committee recommend that
steps be taken to ensure that administrative instructions of the Ministry are
followed consistently by the Missions and that there should not be any scope

for discretion in the same.

Recommendation no. 5- Due Diligence/Detailed study before finalising Contracts

6. The Committee are constrained to note that the Mission did not undertake due
diligence in estimating the Service Charges for Fast Track Business Visa. In
August, 2008 it proposed a Service Charge of GBP 50 which was reduced in
October, 2009 to GBP 25 without detailed estimation of cost, market survey

and study and negotiations with the vendor. The Committee note that the new


14

Service Provider agreed to render the same service at normal Service Charges
of GBP 7.44 w.e.f. March 2015 in a new agreement against the enhanced
service charge of GBP 25 during 15 March 2010 to February 2015. The
Committee find that while going for a fresh tender for visa work in July 2013,
the Mission omitted to include this item of work. The Committee note that the
contention of the Ministry that the Service Charge for Fast Track Business
Visa in 2009 was based on prevailing market rates and negotiations, were not
supported with any documentary evidence on record. This clearly indicates
that the decision of fixing the Service Charges for FTBV was arbitrary. The
Committee, therefore, enjoin upon the Ministry to fix the responsibility on the
concerned officers for this aberration and unfair trade practice and to refer the
matter to the CVO of the Ministry for enquiry. It is needless to state here that
the Committee be apprised of the trajectory in this regard. While noting that
the Ministry has revised the standard. tender document issued by Indian
Missions and Posts abroad for outsourcing of visa, passport and consular
support services, the Committee hope that the provisions so incorporated

shall be followed in letter and spirit.

Recommendation no. 6- Computerisation

7. The Committee note that incorrect fees was applied to 17,664 renunciation
cases and 797 misuse of passport cases from June 2010 to February 2013, i.e.
for almost 3 years, and incorrect downward revision on renunciation fees and
penalty was applied to 27,057 renunciation cases and 5,125 misuse of
passport cases from 1 March 2013 to 22 January 2015, i.e. for almost 2 years.
The Committee infer that the Mission correctly revised the renunciation fees
and penalty for misuse of passports with effect from 23 January 2015 only
after being pointed out by Audit. The Committee are of the firm opinion that
the delay in identification and rectification of the incorrect rate of exchange
points towards a gap in communication between the Ministry and Missions.
Accordingly, in the present scenario, in the opinion of the Committee, full

computerization of all processes and systems is essential for effective


15

communication and efficient service delivery. Accordingly, the Committee in
unequivocal terms recommend that :-

i. All the Missions be fully computerized and connected with the
central portal of the Ministry of External Affairs for real time
interface between the Missions and the Ministry;

ii. Information on various visa services provided, average
number of days taken for the same and charges thereof may
be made available online to ensure transparency. Further, a
response time for clarification of queries regarding visa
services be prescribed by the Ministry; and

iii. Mechanism to ensure timely reporting and accountability may

be created.
NEW DELHI; MALLIKARJUN KHARGE
9 August, 2018 Chairperson,

48 Shravana, 1940 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.