           
 121 
 
WORKING OF CENTRAL BOAR D OF FILM 
CERTIFICATION (CBFC) AND ACADEMIC ACTIVITIES 
OF SATYAJIT RAY FILM & TELEVISION INSTITUTE 
(SRFTI), KOLKATA FOR THE  PERIOD FROM 2010 -11 
TO 2014-15 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Ninety-fourth Report (16th Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION & BROADCASTING 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
               
                      
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 


 
 
                         PAC NO. 2160  
 
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY FIRST            
REPORT 
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(201 8-19) 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Ninety-fourth Report (16th Lok Sabha)] 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION & BROADCASTING  
 
 
                                         
                                                                             
Presented to Lok Sabha on:  18.12.2018 
 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   18.12.2018 
 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
December, 2018 /Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka) 
 
 
 
WORKING OF CENTRAL BOAR D OF FILM 
CERTIFICATION (CBFC) AND ACADEMIC 
ACTIVITIES OF SATYAJIT RAY FILM & TELEVISION 
INSTITUTE (SRFTI), KOLKATA FOR THE  PERIOD 
FROM 2010-11 TO 2014-15 
 
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2018-19)   
    
(iii) 
INTRODUCTION  
   
(iv) 
CHAPTER I Report  
 
1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received 
from the Government 
 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been acce pted by 
the Committee and which require reiteration 
 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
the Government have furnished interim replies  
 
 
APPENDICES/ANNEXURES 
 
I* 
 
Minutes of the Twentieth Sitting of the Public Accounts 
Committee (2018-19) held on 5th December, 2018 
 
 
II Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public 
Accounts Committee contained in their Eighty-ninth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
III Annexures 
 
 
                   
 ____________________________ 
 *Not appended to the cyclostyled copy of the Report 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
 (2018-19) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge   - Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria  
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra 
5.    Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar   
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
7. Smt. Riti Pathak 
8. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank” 
9. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
10. Shri Abhishek Singh 
11. Shri Gopal Shetty 
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya  
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
15. Dr. Ponnusamy Venugopal 
 RAJYA SABHA 
16. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda 
17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
18. Shri Shwait Malik 
19. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
21. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
22. Shri C.M. Ramesh 
 SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A.K. Singh - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Director 
3. 
4. 
Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja 
Shri Deepankar Kamble 
- 
- 
Deputy Secretary 
Committee Officer 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2018-19), having been authorised by 
the Committee, do present this  One Hundred and Twenty First Report (Sixteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Ninety -fourth Report (S ixteenth Lok Sabha) on " Working of 
Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC) and Academic Activities of Satyajit Ray 
Film & Television Institute (SRFTI), Kolkata for the period from 2010 -11 to 2014 -15" 
relating to Ministry of Information & Broadcasting.  
 
2. The Ninety-fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 28 th 
March, 2018. Replies of the Government to the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Report were received on 9 th November, 2018.  The Public Accounts Committee 
considered and adopted the One Hundred and Twenty First Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) at 
their Sitting held on 5th December, 2018.  Minutes of the sitting are given at Appendix-I. 
 
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to  them 
in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/  
Recommendations contained in the Ninety-fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)  is given at 
Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                MALLIKARJUN KHARGE, 
13th  December, 2018                                                                         Chairperson, 
22 Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)                                              Public Accounts Committee 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER - I 
R E P O R T 
 
 This Report of the  Public Accounts  Committee deals with Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the C ommittee contained in their 
Ninety-fourth Report ( Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on  "Working of Central Board of Film 
Certification (CBFC) " and "Academic Activities of Satyajit Ray Film & Television 
Institute (SRFTI), Kolkata for the period from 2010 -11 to 2014 -15" based on Para Nos. 
11.1 and 11.2 respectively of Chapter 11 of the C&AG's Report No.  11 of 2016 relating to 
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting (MoI&B).  
 
2. The Ninety-fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) , which was presented to Lok 
Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha  on 28th March, 201 8, contained a total of 1 4 
Observations/Recommendations. Observations/Recommendations Nos. 1 to 7 pertained to 
Para No . 11.1  on " Working of Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC)" and 
Observations/Recommendations Nos. 8 to 1 4 pertained to Para No . 11. 2 on  "Academic 
Activities of Satyajit Ray Film & Television Institute  (SRFTI), Kolkata for the per iod from 
2010-11 to 2014 -15". Action Taken Notes in respect of all the 
Observations/Recommendations have been received from the MoI&B and these have been 
categorized as under: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government: 
 
Paragraph Nos. 1, 7, 8, 9,10 and 14 
 
Total: 06 
Chapter- II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the replies received from the Government: 
 
-NIL- 
                                                                                                                                       
          Total: 00 
Chapter- III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
 
 Paragraph Nos. 2, 3, 5, 6 and 13 
Total: 05  
Chapter- IV 

 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government have 
furnished interim replies: 
 
 Paragraph Nos. 4, 11 and 12 
 
Total: 03 
Chapter- V 
 
3. The detailed examination of the two subjects by the Committee  had revealed certain 
shortcomings/deficiencies and the Committee had accordingly given 
Observations/Recommendations in their Ninety -fourth Report. The Committee had 
recommended on various issues such certification of films  on first come first serve basis , 
explicit provision for re-certification of a fi lms, creation of a database to mitigate the risk of 
issuance of duplicate certificates, regular updating of syllabus by SRFTI, grant of recognition 
by UGC, administrative support for timely completion of courses , setting up of a research 
department and increasing posts to conduct regular short term courses. 
 
4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the MoI&B on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee  contained in their Ninety-fourth Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. In the 
succeeding paragraphs, t he Committee have dealt with the Action Taken by the 
Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations which either need reiteration 
or merit comments.  
 
5. The Committee desire that the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting to 
furnish Action Taken Notes in respect of Observations/Recommendations contained 
in Chapter -I and final/conclusive Action Taken Replies in respect of the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -V for which interim reply has 
been given by the Government w ithin six months of the presentation of the Report to 
the House. 
 
I. Recommendation Para No. 2 
  
6.  The Committee note d that the Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983 prescribe 
different time limits for various stages of certification process, totaling t o 68 days and all the 
films are required to be certified on “first come first served” basis. The Regional Officers 
(ROs) have been given the discretionary powers to alter the order of examination of films, if 

 
 
a written request from the applicant is receive d and the RO concerned feels that there are 
grounds for an early examination, which are to be recorded in file. However, inspection of 
175 records by the audit from 1 st April, 2013 revealed that in 57 films (32.57 per cent) which 
had jumped the queue, lett ers from the applicant requesting for special consideration/ROs 
justification accepting the request were not found on records and further note that a clear 
‘U/UA’ or clear ‘A’ certification was done for 135 films. Further, in 49 films (36 per cent) 
despite completion of certification process, time taken for issue of certificates ranged 
between 3 to 491 days after recommendation for grant of certificate by Examining 
Committee (EC). The Committee could not find any tenable reason for not issuing the 
certificate for months together even after clearance by the EC and desire d that in light of a 
case study by Audit relating to fabrication of documents and favoritism by Secretary to 
Chairperson, detailed inquiry into the cases of inordinate delay may be conducted a nd the 
Committee may be apprised of the f indings thereof. The Committee we re further concerned 
to note that while this discrepancy could not be detected by the system it came to light when 
a complaint was received by the Central Vigilance Commission and, thereof, desired that the 
Ministry may look into the matter and streamline the system by establishing a control 
mechanism under which the decision involvin g relaxations made by Committee/ RO we re 
subjected to review by the Board to ensure transparency in the working of CBFC. The 
Committee further desire d to be apprised of the cases pointed out by the Vigilance wing in 
the Ministry/CBFC during the last 10 years and punitive action taken against those found 
guilty. 
 
7. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under: 
"The online certification system provides a list of all the applications for certification 
chronologically, with respect to the date of application and to the date of application 
approval by the scrutiny officer. By and large, all the films are examined 
chronologically. However, in certain cases when there is an urgency expressed by 
the filmmaker, CBFC takes a written request from the filmmaker and places it on 
record along with some proof that such an urgency is necessary. Only after t hat, the 
respective regional officer in accordance with the proviso to Rule 41(3) of the 
Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983 allots an early screening to the films. A 
register is also being maintained separately for that purpose. Even in special case s of 
early certification, CBFC endeavors for a minimum time period of about two weeks so 
as to avoid any potential misuse of this facility.  
 As regards delay in issue of certificates, it is submitted that all the pending 
cases have been disposed of. In th e online certification system, the status of each 
application is visible online in the dashboard of the producer/concerned CBFC official 
and thus there is effective monitoring & real time progress tracking for both CBFC 

 
 
Officials and the applicants. The system has inbuilt alerts depending on the pendency 
of the application, to ensure that time limits prescribed by the Rules are not violated. 
A completely online system ensures transparency and efficiency at all levels. 
 However, it is submitted that in accor dance with the prescribed process, the 
Examining Committee after viewing a film recommends certification of a film for public 
exhibition under any of the prescribed categories with or without 
excisions/modifications. The recommendation of every member of t he Examining 
Committee is recorded in unambiguous terms and a category (U/UA/A) is arrived at 
either unanimously or by majority. The recommendation of the Examining Committee 
is conveyed to the producer/applicant. The producer/applicant is required to conv ey 
the acceptance of the Examining Committee’s decision and submit final version of the 
film. The delay on part of producer/applicant to submit the final version of the film also 
increases the total time taken to issue certificate and is therefore not attr ibutable to 
CBFC.  
  In the case of fabrication of documents and favoritism by Secretary to 
 Chairperson, it is informed that after a detailed enquiry, major penalty of removal 
 from service was awarded. In the same case, major penalty proceedings have 
 been initiated against another officer. Prompt action is taken on every 
 complaint/vigilance cases."  
 
8. The Committee had noted that the Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983 
prescribe different time limits for various stages of certification process, totaling to 
68 days and all the films are required to be certified on “first come first served” basis.  
The Committee could not find any tenable reason for not issuing the certificate for 
months together even after clearance by the EC and desired that in li ght of a case 
study by Audit relating to fabrication of documents and favoritism by Secretary to 
Chairperson, detailed inquiry into the cases of inordinate delay may be conducted 
and the Committee may be apprised of the findings thereof. The Committee were  
further concerned to note that while this discrepancy could not be detected by the 
system and came to light when a complaint was received by the Central Vigilance 
Commission. The Committee had, therefore, desired that the Ministry may look into 
the matter  and streamline the system by establishing a control mechanism under 
which the decision involving  relaxations made by Committee/ RO were subjected to 
review by the Board to ensure trans parency in the working of CBFC. The Committee 
note from the reply of the  Ministry that in cases when there is an urgency expressed 
by the filmmaker, CBFC takes a written request from the filmmaker and places it on 
record along with some proof that such an urgency is necessary  before allotting an 
early screening to the film . Though the Ministry has outlined the procedure for 
allotting an early screening , it has not made any effort to establish a control 
mechanism under which relaxations are subjected to the review of Board. The 

 
 
Committee are of the considered opinion that a revi ew by a higher authority will act a 
deterrent and would definitely reduce the cases of delays/ favouritism. Further, the 
Committee observe that all pending cases have been disposed of, however, the 
Ministry has not undertaken any inquiry into the cases of i nordinate delays. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate that detailed inquiry into the cases of inordinate delay 
may be conducted  urgently and a control mechanism whereby all relaxations are 
subjected to the review of a higher authority may be established by the Ministry and 
the Committee be apprised thereof.  
 
II. Recommendation Para No. 3 
9. The Committee were dismayed to note that CBFC, in order to help big film makers 
who had applied for certification very close to release date, granted certificates to their films 
ahead of other applicants even when there was no such urgency expressed. The Committee 
exhorted the Ministry/CBFC to ensure a transparent and disciplined regime by certifying 
films on first come first serve basis with no favoritism and by encou raging big and small 
banners alike to apply well before the release date. With regard to out -of-turn preference for 
the certification of certain films, it was necessary that there should be some sound reasons 
to justify the exercise of discretionary powers  by the RO and which should be recorded in 
the file. The Ministry/CBFC may prescribe the guidelines under which order of certification 
may be altered. The power of Regional Officer (RO) to alter the order of examination of the 
film be exercised only in tho se cases covered under the guidelines and the reasons may 
invariably be recorded in each case of deviation. Further, the Committee observed that 
CBFC had submitted a proposal for enhancement of certification fee for introduction of 
'Tatkal charges'. The Co mmittee desired the priority to applicants paying Tatkal charges be 
given while ensuring that other applicants got certificates within the stipulated period. 
 (i) The Committee further note d that CBFC had issued certificates to films without 
verifying the film that was certified earlier by them or any other Regional Office and hence 
probability of two or more certificates being issued for the same films existed. The 
Committee understood from the reply of the Ministry/ CBFC that ever increasing workload, 
manpower constraints and when the cuts submitted were contested etc. led to delays in film  
certification and further dates were given depending on the availability of the Examining 
Officer and one member who had originally watched the film. The Committee felt that 
maintenance of systematic records, absence of manpower planning, non adherence to 

 
 
prescribed timelines, non-existence of intern al control framework and lackadaisical attitude 
led to issue of multiple certificates to the films, delays etc.. The Minist ry/CBFC cannot take 
umbrage of shortage of manpower for the mistakes of issuing certificate twice  to the same 
films by CBFC. They should have increased manpower as p er requirement from time to 
time. The Committee, therefore, desire d the Ministry/CBFC to au gment its manpower 
urgently in line with the increasing workload and submit a proposal for recruiting personnel 
after taking into account the present and future manpower requirements under intimation to 
the Committee. The Committee were of the view that al l existing records be digitized 
centrally within a pre scribed timeframe to avoid any f urther instances of issuance of  
duplicate certificate and efforts made to identify films where duplicate certificates were 
issued and appropriate action taken to rectify the mistake in each such case. 
 (ii) The Committee noted that the computerization project envisages automation of 
the entire process of certification including filing of online application, secured online fee 
payment, integration of relevant data, scheduli ng of examination, intimation thereof to all 
concerned, formation of Examination committees, reporting, intimation for cuts, intimations 
for certificate and identification of any duplicity at the application stage itself. They, therefore, 
were of the view that timeframes be revised/shortened for every stage taking into account 
computerization of whole process be scrupulously followed and delays duly accounted for. 
Further, all producers, copy right holders or those applying for certification of imported fil ms 
and titles be mandatorily registered and all details regarding applications received, cleared, 
pending etc be made available online so as to ensure transparency and efficiency in the 
system. 
 (iii) The CBFC should develop a robust internal control mecha nism followed by 
regular internal audit of the system to ensure that the same is working properly and 
effectively. 
 
10. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under: 
 
 "It is humbly submitted that CBFC has strived to help all filmmakers without making 
any discrimination between a big or a small filmmaker. The urgency for out of tu rn 
examination is seen on a case to case basis only and CBFC, in order to facilitate 
such films and help the filmmakers avoid non -release as per the schedule, en abled 
certification ahead of  other applicants where there was no issue of  urgency. The 
online certification system provides a list of all the applications for certification 
chronologically, with respect to the date of application and to the date of applica tion 
approval by the scrutiny officer. By and large, all the films are examined 
chronologically. However, in certain cases when there is an urgency expressed by 

 
 
the filmmaker, CBFC takes a written request from the filmmaker and places it on 
record along wi th some proof that such an urgency is necessary. only after that, the 
respective regional officer in accord ance with the proviso to Rule 4/ (3) of the 
cinematograph (certification) Rules, 1983 allo ts an early screening to the fil ms. A 
register is also being maintained separately for that purpose. Even in special cases of 
early certification, CBFC endeavors for a minimum time period of about two weeks so 
as to avoid any potential misuse of this facility.  The proposal for enhancement of 
certification fee for i ntroduction of "Tatkal charges" has not been considered as it is 
felt that introduction of Tatkal charges may further delay the certification for the film 
makers who do not pay enhanced fee. 
            (i) Now after the implementation of online certificat ion system, the problem of 
issuing duplicate certificates has been resolved. New system does not allow duplicate 
applications. A film which has been certified earlier cannot be reapplied in this new 
online certification system. The records have been digiti zed and after the launch of 
online system, the issue of duplicate certificates have been resolved. Earlier, it was 
not possible for CBFC to identify films where duplicate certificates were issued, but in 
the new system, this has been taken care of. CBFC was requested to work out the 
optimum strength of advisory panel members in respec t of each Regional Office of 
CBFC. CBFC has indicated the desired strength of advisory panel members after 
carrying out a detailed analysis of work load in each of the regional  offices based on 
the number of feature films, video films and short films certified. Ministry has already 
initiated the action to appoint the requisite number of advisory panel members at 
each regional office of CBFC in accordance with Section 5(1) of the  cinematograph 
Act, 1952 read with Rules 7 and 8 of the cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983'. 
            (ii) The time limit in relation to certification of films is prescribed under Rule 41 
the Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983 which have been framed in exercise of 
the powers conferred by Section 8 of the Cinematograph Act, 1952. The online 
certification system has inbuilt alerts depending on the pendency of the application to 
ensure that time limits prescribed by the Rules are not violated . After the launch of 
Online Certification System, the entire film certification process is being done online, 
viz. from application to printing of certification. Any applicant (producer/authorized 
representative) applyi ng for certification of a film/video /song/advertisement/trailer/ 
promo (including all producers, copyright holders or those applying for certification of 
imported films and titles) from CBFC is duly registered under the online certification 
system. All steps are being recorded under the new system. The details of 
applications received, cleared, pending, etc. are available to the senior officers of  
CBFC and an alert is sent to the next higher authority, if there is any delay at any 
level.  
  (iii) There is a robust MIS (Management Information System) in the online 
certification system to track and monitor the performance of CBFC and its regional 
offices. A daily MIS report is generated which gives the region -wise pendency of the 
applications at each level of the certification process." 
 
11. The Committee had exhorted the Ministry/CBFC to ensure a transparent and 
disciplined regime by certifying films on first come first serve basis with no favoritism 
and by encouraging big and small banners alike to app ly well before the release date 
and desired that the Ministry/CBFC may prescribe the guidelines under which order 

 
 
of certification may be altered.  The Committee had also opined that timeframes be 
revised/shortened for every stage taking into account computerization of whole 
process to be scrupulous ly followed and delays be accounted for . It was further 
desired that t he CBFC should develop a robust internal control mechanism followed 
by regular internal audit of the system to ensure that the same is working properly 
and effectively.  The Ministry have apprised the Committee regarding steps/measures 
taken by them to correct the certification process, however, no guidelines have been 
issued for alteration of the order of certification, as desired by them. The Committee 
are of the view that clear instruc tions for alteration of the order of certification is 
imperative to rule out any favoritism towards big banners. Further, repeated requests 
for early screening of the film from the same filmmaker should not be entertained as it 
undermines the relevance of a regulatory organiz ation. The Committee also find that 
though the Ministry has stated that robust MIS (Management Information System) in 
the online certification system track s and monitors the performance of CBFC and its 
regional offices, it has not responded to the recommendation regarding the need for 
an internal audit to ensure that systems are working efficiently. The Committee , at 
this stage has no other option but to reiterate earlier recommendation that the 
Ministry/CBFC may issue guidelines regarding alteration in the order of certification, 
carry out yearly internal audit of the system and consider shortening the time limit for 
film certification process so that films being submitted for certificates are cleared in a 
defined and prescribed timeline in wake of the computerization of the whole process. 
 
III. Recommendation Para No. 5  
 
12. The Committee noted that as per notification issued by MoI&B  in September 1984, 
the validity of certificates was perpetual instead of 10 years as earlier provisions. However, 
the CBFC continued to accept films for revalidation of certificates which points to the clear 
failure of the Ministry in enforcing its own orders. 
 Further, as per Sub -rule 6 of Rule 21 of the Cinematograph Rules, 1983, the 
applicant has to furnish the original or a certified copy of the import license together with 
custom clearance permit for public exhibition of video films imported in India but in many 
cases as pointed as out by the Audit, CBFC did not obtain the sam e. The Ministry submitted 
that since the Department of Commerce vide public notice dated 29 th January 2002 had 
allowed import of cinematograph feature films and other films (inclu ding films on video tape, 

 
 
compact video disc, laser video disc or digital video disc) without a license, the condition 
could not be complied with. 
 In view of the above discrepancies, the Committee adjure d the Ministry/ CBFC to 
bring out a manual of rules/g uidelines incorporating all the relevant notifications and latest 
instructions issued in connection with certification of films at one place to avoid recurrence of 
such instances. 
13.  The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under: 
"The revalidation of certification was done by the CBFC as per provisions of Rule 29 
of the Cinematograph Act. However, as per notification issued by Ministry of I&B, 
(September 1984) the Central Government had exempted all films in respect of 
which certification have been or may be granted by the Board, from the validity of 10 
years and the validity of such certificates were therefore perpetual. The process of 
revalidation of certificates has been dispensed with and any such applicant is 
informed accordingly. 
 Regarding import license, it is submitted that Ministry of Commerce and 
Industry, Department of Commerce vide its Public Notice No. 64/1997 -2002 dated 
29th January, 2002 has exempted from import license the import of cinematograph 
feature films and other f ilms (including film on video tape, compact video disc, laser 
video disc or digital video disc). To be in conformity with the said Public Notice, Sub -
rule 6 of Rule 21 of the Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983 relating to 
application procedure in th e case of imported films has been deleted vide this 
Ministry’s Notification G.S.R. 357(E) dated 11th April, 2017 published in the 
Extraordinary Gazette of India. Accordingly, CBFC is not required to ask for import 
license for a film. However, CBFC at the t ime of accepting applications for 
certification of such films, does ask for copies of agreement between the copyright 
holder/ producer of the film and the person who imports the film and seeks 
certification, copy of shipping/airway bill or copy of digital download document. 
 It is submitted that the website of CBFC contains all the rules /guidelines and it 
is regularly updated with relevant notifications and latest 
instructions/communications issued in connection with certification of films. 
 Notification No . G.S.R. 357(E) dated 13th April, 2017 published in the 
Extraordinary Gazette of India, Part II, Section 3, Sub -section(i) deleting sub-rule (6) 
of Rule 21 of the Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983, relating to application 
procedure in the case of imported films, was laid in Lok Sabha on 28.12.2017 and in 
Rajya Sabha on 02.01.2018." 
 
14. The Committee had noted that due to lack of awareness about amendments to 
the Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983  etc., the CBFC continued with the earlier 
provisions and therefore, had recommended that the Ministry/CBFC may bring out a 
manual of rules/ guidelines incorporating all the relevant notifications and latest 
instructions issued in connection with certificat ion of films at once place. The 
Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that the website of t he CBFC contains 
all the rules/guidelines which is regularly updated. The Committee are  of the view that 

 
 
a compendium/ ready reckoner of all the rules and reg ulations, the amendments 
thereon, related judgments etc. for internal use by the staff, will go a long way in 
applying the correct provi sions in various situations and , therefore, reiterate that a 
manual may be brought out for use by the staff for better a dministration of the 
Cinematograph Act by the CBFC. 
IV. Recommendation Para No. 6  
 
15. The Committee noted that the Cinematograph Act prescribed constitution of a Board 
to be called the Board of Film Certification consisting of a Chairman and not less than twelve 
and not more than twenty -five other members to be appointed by the Central Gove rnment. 
As per reply of the Ministry, each state should be represented by at least one or two Board 
Members as there are different dialects around the country. The Committee hoped that the 
Government while constituting the CBFC ensured that one or two repr esentatives from each 
state is/are appointed there. The Committee were unhappy that proper records about 
agenda of the Board meetings had not been kept and that in 2014 -2015 and 2015-2016, the 
Board met only once a year. The Committee were unable to comprehend the need for a high 
profile Board when they are not even inclined to meet frequently and discuss the film 
certification process and its impact on the public at large. The Committee exhorted that the 
Board be more proactive and a guiding spirit in the healthy working of the institution. The 
Committee were of the view that number of members of the CBFC be fixed so that each 
State/region gets a representation in the Board and one/two Board Member/s be attached to 
every Regional Office to ensure its transp arency. The Committee further enjoined that 
tenure of the members of the Board and the Advisory Panels should only be renewed/ 
extended after analyzing their contribution in the film certification process. The Committee , 
while noting from the reply of the Ministry that desired strength of the advisory panel 
members in respect of each Regional Office of CBFC was worked out after carrying out a 
detailed analysis of work load in each of the Regional Offices based on the number of 
feature films, video films and  short films to be certified desires that an analysis of the 
involvement/performance of the panel members may be made at the end of tenure to ensure 
that such numbers as appointed were actually required. The Committee while noting that 
only three workshops  for Advisory Panel Members were conducted during the last five 
years, were of the considered opinion that such workshops should be a regular feature to 
enlighten and update the Panel Members about the latest issues involved .  Further, the 

 
 
Committee were surprised to note that not even a single case has been detected and 
reported for violation of category classification or for not screening certification before the 
film is actually screened or for not carrying out the cuts as prescribed by the CBFC. The 
Committee while noting from the reply of the Ministry that since Cinema is a State subject 
(as Entry 33 of the List-II, subject to the provisions of Entry 60 of List -I), the responsibility for 
enforcement of category classification on the ground lies primaril y with the State 
Government desired that requisite information be collected from the States and furnished to 
the Committee.   
 (ii) The Committee observed that since 1952 when the Cinematograph Act was 
enacted, there had been many changes/developments in t he field of cinema with the 
proliferation of TV channels, cable network, YouTube and advent of new digital technology 
making various kinds of contents accessible to all. Further, the CBFC established under the 
provisions of the Act has been steadily losing  its credibility/significance and non -
controversial character. The Committee noted that the CBFC had been taking discretionary 
decisions in absence of any specific rules/provisions. With the advent of new technology in 
the cinema field and emergence of med ia as a powerful medium to discuss and form 
opinions, CBFC needs to keep abreast of latest developments in the field and control its 
Regional Offices in an effective manner so as to ensure complete transparency in the 
working of the CBFC. The Committee wer e also concerned to note lack of control of CBFC 
over contents available on internet. The Committee, therefore, desired that the Act may be 
reviewed and amended suitably keeping in view the changing dynamics of film industry and 
the change in society values. 
 (iii) The Committee also desired that the film makers be enabled to certify their 
films themselves and for being eligible for self certification under specific categories, the 
CBFC may prescribe detailed parameters keeping in view the ethos and traditi ons of the 
country to guide the film producers to align with the requirements for certification under that 
category. In case the CBFC/Examining Committee does not agree with the category under 
which certification has been applied for, the film may be refer red to ‘Film Certification Jury’ 
comprising of retired Judges, eminent lawyers, film makers, eminent actors, writers and 
acclaimed artists for a matured view. 
 
16. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under: 
 "Meetings of the Board are b eing held regularly and proper records of all Board 
Meetings are being kept in the CBFC office. Last year, three Board Meetings were 

 
 
held. All Board Members are contributing towards the healthy working of CBFC. 
CBFC periodically conducts workshops for Advi sory Panel Members at various 
regional centers for the benefit of the members of the Advisory Panels and Examining 
Officers in certification of films. Various issues involved in the examination of the films 
are discussed at the workshops. The need for obse rving a code of conduct and 
discipline is also emphasized. The members of the Board and Advisory Panels have 
been requested to implement the guidelines strictly. Specific clarifications have been 
issued about interpretations of some of the guidelines. CBFC  shall strive to engage 
more proactively with workshops and Board meetings. 
  The screening of visual contents without certification by CBFC is in violation of 
Section 7 of the Cinematograph Act, 1952.In the recent past it has come to the notice 
of the Min istry that in some areas of each of the eight North Eastern States, 
uncertified films/ videos/ advertisements/trailers/ promos/songs and other visual 
presentation through video projectors both fixed and mobile are being exhibited. 
Ministry has written to t he Chief Secretaries of the North Eastern States to issue 
necessary instructions/guidelines to the District Magistrates to take cognizance of any 
violation of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 and the Cinematograph (Certification) 
Rules, 1983 and to take appropr iate action as deterrence to such violation by any 
individual/group/institution. Copies of D.O. letters dated 28th May, 2018 addressed to 
the Chief Secretaries of the North Eastern States are at Annexure B. 
 (ii) CBFC primarily certifies films for theatric al release and TV & satellite in video 
format in accordance with the Cinematograph Act, 1952, the Cinematograph 
(Certification) Rules, 1983 and the guidelines issued thereunder. These guidelines 
are to be observed by CBFC for certification of films for pub lic exhibition and attempt 
to objectively define the prerogatives of the Board’s certification process. The 
members of the Board and Advisory Panels have been requested to implement the 
guidelines strictly. Specific clarifications have been issued about in terpretations of 
some of the guidelines.  
  CBFC has no control over the content available on the internet. India being a 
diverse heterogeneous country, having numerous different ethos and traditions, it is 
important to maintain a certain level of propriet y with respect to language and visuals 
which are deemed to be acceptable to the wider audience. The content available over 
the internet is regulated under the Information Technology Act, 2000 and the Rules 
framed thereunder. Under Section 79(3)(2) of the r ules framed under the IT Act, 
2000, intermediaries must observe due diligence as prescribed under Rule 3 in the 
Information Technology (Intermediaries guidelines) Rules, 2011. Section 79(3) of the 
Information Technology Act, 2000 provides for removing or d isabling access to the 
material which is being used to commit unlawful acts.  
  It is relevant to mention that M/o I&B has taken cognizance of pirated film 
content available on the internet and has requested the Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology to get the issue examined to curb piracy of films or any other 
copyright violation through pirate websites. MEITY has also been requested to set up 
a legally mandated mechanism under the provisions of the IT Act 2000. 
 (iii) Film motivates thoughts and actions and assures a high degree of attention 
and retention, perhaps compared to the printed word.  The combination of act and 
speech, sight and sound has a strong impact on the minds of the viewers and may 
affect emotions. The Hon’ble Supreme Court i n K.A. Abbas vs Union of India upheld 
the constitutionality of certifying films within the Ambit of Article 19(2) of the 
Constitution and added that films have to be treated separately from other forms of 

 
 
art and expression because a motion picture has the ability of stirring up the emotions 
more deeply than any other product of art. Considering this kind of sensitivities, self -
certification of films has not been considered so far. 
  Article 19(1)(a) and 19(2) of the Constitution of India lays down that whi le all 
citizens shall have the right to freedom of speech and expression, the State can 
operate any existing law, or make any law, in so far as such law imposes reasonable 
restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the 19(1)(a), in the interest s of 
the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with 
foreign States, public order, decency or morality or in relation to contempt of court, 
defamation or incitement to an offence. 
  “Sanctioning of Cinematograph f ilms for exhibition” is included in Entry 60 of 
the Union List (List I).The Union Government has been entrusted with matters 
pertaining to sanctioning or certification of films for exhibition in India and accordingly 
the CBFC certifies films for public exh ibition under the provisions of Cinematograph 
Act. 
  Appointment of Chairperson and Members of the CBFC is in accordance with 
Section 3(1) of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 read with rule 3 of the Cinematograph 
(Certification) Rules, 1983. The Board consists of a Chairman and not less than 12 
and not more than 25 other members. The present Board consists of 12 Members to 
represent each region.  
  Workshops are held for Advisory Panel Members at various regional centers 
such as Mumbai, Kolkata, Hyderabad, Delhi  and Chennai for the benefit of the 
members of the Advisory Panels and Examining Officers in certification of films. The 
workshop module for newly inducted Advisory Panel members sensitizes them to the 
guiding principles for certification of films. Various   issues  involved  in  the  
examination  of  the  films  are  discussed  at  the workshops. The need for observing 
a code of conduct and discipline is also emphasized. Details of Meetings/Workshops 
held during the last year are given below: 
 i)  The 142nd  Board Meeting -cum-workshop was held at Thiruvananthapuram on 
28th July, 2017. 
 ii) The 143rd Board Meeting -cum-workshop was held at Mumbai on 11th September, 
2017. The Board meeting was presided over by newly appointed Chairman, Shri 
Prasoon Joshi. 
 iii) A Regional Officers’ Meeting was held on 24th October, 2017 at Films Division 
Complex, Mumbai.   
 iv) A workshop for advisory panel members and an interaction with representatives of 
film industry was held at Mumbai on 20th September, 2018.  
 v) The 1 44th Board meeting held on 21st September, 2018. A meeting of Board 
Members and Regional Officers was also conducted. 
  Regulation of exhibition by means of cinematograph is under Part III of the 
Cinematograph Act, 1952 and the power of Central Government extends to Union 
Territories only. No information regarding enforcement of category classification 
collected from State Governments. 
  Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP) under Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry, which oversees implementati on of the National IPR Policy, 
allotted the following Action Point to the M/o I&B - “3.7 – Indian Cinematograph Act, 
1952 may be suitably amended to provide for penal provisions for illegal duplication 
of films”.  

 
 
  A joint meeting of officials of MIB, MEI TY and DIPP was held under the 
chairmanship of Joint Secretary (Films) on 01.10.2018 to discuss the issue of piracy. 
The need for inclusion of penal provisions in the Cinematograph Act was discussed in 
detail to tackle the menace of film piracy effectively . It was observed that the onus of 
ensuring these provisions should lie with the State Governments and District 
machinery. Accordingly, it has been decided to amend the Cinematograph Act, 1952 
to include penal provisions for unauthorized duplication of a f ilm (anti -camcording 
provisions)." 
 
17.   The Committee had exhorted the CBFC Board to be proactive and a guiding spirit 
in the healthy working of CBFC as an  institution. The Committ ee had desired that 
each state/region may be re presented in the Board and one/two Board members may 
be attached to every regio nal office to ensure transparency  and accountability and 
that the tenure of the members of the Board and the Advisory Panel be renewed only 
after analyzing their contribution in certifying films.  Further, the Committee had 
desired that film makers be allowed to certify their films themselves for which 
detailed parameters may be prescribed by the CBFC. The Committee find that the 
Ministry instead of replying specifically on the issues raised by them has giv en a 
general and vague submission. The Committee find that the Ministry has not 
responded to the Committee's recommendation regarding steps taken for attachment 
of one/ two members from the Board to the Regional office, analyzing the contribution 
of the Bo ard members and organizing regular workshops for Advisory panel 
members, analysis of work load of each regional office and collection of information 
regarding enforcement of category classification by the State Governments. The 
Committee are aghast to note  the callous approach of the Ministry while replying to 
their recommendation and desire that information  covering all the points may be 
furnished to the m within one month of the presentation of this Report to the House. 
The Committee further note that thou gh Ministry has been deliberating upon the 
amendments needed in the Cinematograph Act for a long time, nothing concrete has 
emerged so far and, therefore, desire that long pending amendment to the Act in line 
with the changing dynamics of the film industry  and the change in societal values 
may be brought to finality at the earliest. While amending the Act, the 
recommendation of the Committee enabling self certification of the films may also be 
considered. 
 
 

 
 
V. Recommendation Para No. 13 
 
18. Audit had pointed out that most of the Assistant Professors and Associate Professors 
did not achieve the core load per week as stipulated in the Bye -laws as the teachers of 
SRFTI were engaged in additional activities like conducting festivals, holding additional 
charge of Dean & Director, attending meetings, holding enquiries etc apart from their regular 
teaching job. The Committee noted that since SRFTI is an internationally renowned institute, 
many miscellaneous activities took place on campus as part of the learn ing process. 
However, the calculation of teaching hours based on the duration of academic programmes 
of faculties including both theory and practical sessions presented a very different picture. 
The Committee, therefore, desire d that planned teaching hours  may depict hours to be 
devoted to formal teaching and mentoring separately so as to ensure that the faculty 
members devote minimum time to each area.  
(i) Audit scrutiny highlighted various irregularities in the evaluation process and promotion of 
students in contravention of Bye -laws of the Institute. The Committee while opining that 
uniform and strict parameters ensure competitiveness and sense of discipline amongst 
students expect a premier Institute like SRFTI to invariably adhere to the norms to assur e 
students of transparent evaluation process. The Committee desire d that variations may only 
be made in exceptional circumstances which should be duly recorded and approved by the 
competent authority.  
(ii) The Committee while opining that the teaching and  evaluation process may have serious 
implications regarding the quality of education being imparted and that of the students 
passing out of the Institute , exhorted the Ministry to constitute a sub -committee to review 
whole gamut of issues plaguing the Inst itute and give suggestions for improving the quality 
of teaching and techniques adopted. 
 
19. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under: 
 " The faculty of SRFTI is not only involved in taking theory classes (in the classrooms) 
 but also teaching students outside classrooms. Most of the student activities in the 
 campus happen in the studio floors and campus premises (practical exercises like 
 actuality, camera practice, sound recording etc.) and the faculties are constantly 
 engaged in guiding and mentoring students and giving their practical lessons of film 
 making. Added to this there are workshops by industry experts that keep on 
 happening round the year in all the departments. Faculties are rigorously involved in 
 arranging these workshops and co -ordinating them by communicating with the guest 
 faculty, arranging their travel, stay, food and facilitating the students with all the 
 requisite resources to make sure to create a conducive environment for the student -

 
 
 expert intera ction and solid practical learning. These activities from the side of the 
 faculty also are a part of nurturing a student and giving them much required hands -on 
 inputs and prepare them for the cut -throat film making world. Also, the curriculum of 
 SRFTI is project based and since their second semester, they start making their films 
 which require continuous inputs and interaction with the faculty members in the 
 process of writing, visualising, conceptualizing, story -boarding and pre -planning their 
 ideas and shoots for which the faculty members give a lot of time from their schedule 
 in interacting with students on one -to-one basis and mentor them and mould them 
 based on their individual personalities. This is a rigorous activity that keeps the faculty 
 members busy throughout their day in the campus. As the number of students are 
 increasing due to the newly started short term courses and TV wing, mentoring 
 activity is and going to take a large space from a faculty’s academic hours. 
  In order to track d own the faculty academic activities the institute has 
 developed a  centralized computer based digital Academic Management System 
 (AMS) which  keeps track of the scheduling of the classes, practical, administrative 
 work, workshop co -ordination, student m entoring, students’ attendance publication 
 of results. 
  AMS also tracks down the student attendance. This allows the faculty 
 members and the students to keep a regular check on their attendance, scheduled 
 classes, practical and workshops. Modifications  are under process to digitally upload 
 the results and marks-sheets of the students on the AMS. 
  SRFTI has developed a very systematic evaluation process from the first 
 semester itself. Evaluation happens through various methods, viz., (a) written 
 examinations, (b) Cumulative evaluation based on students’ involvement in various 
 exercises, practicals and demonstration workshops,  (c) Assessment of different 
 projects is done by various departments both by faculty members and external 
 experts based on c ontent, narrative flow, script, cinematography, editing and sound 
 and production docket and the final result is obtained as a weighted mean with one 
 external expert for each department deliberating and assessing based on the different 
 criteria for different departments, (d) In the workshops taken by guest faculties, 
 students are assessed individually, based on their involvement, response and 
 interaction, (e) The evaluation for the final Dissertation film is done wholly by external 
 experts after deliberation and discussion with the faculty members. 
  It may be mentioned here that Academic Council(AC), constituted by GC, 
 consists of six domain specialists in addition to Dean and six HODs of the Institute 
 and representatives of student s and alumni. AC is mandated to oversee all the 
 academic and pedagogy -related issues. Academic Council has representations from 
 many institutes/organizations viz. FTII, Doordarshan, WWI etc. Further, AC as per 
 Academic Bye laws of SRFTI undertake period ic review of —academic programmes 
 including training schedules, methods & procedures of examination, exchange 
 programme. In line with the recommendations of AC, steps taken by SRFTI for 
 improving the quality of education in the Institute may be seen at Annexure-A." 
 
20. The Committee had desired the faculty members  of SRFTI to devote minimum 
prescribed time to each area and plan ned teaching hours may depict hours to be 
devoted to formal teaching and mentoring separately as most of the Assistant 
Professors and Associate Professors could not achieve the core load per week.  The 

 
 
Ministry has in its rep ly only outlined the need for fiel d/practical/mentoring exercise. 
The Committee had appreciated the need for the mentoring part while making their 
original recommendation and had therefore recommended that the planned teaching 
hours may depict minimum hours to be devoted to both theory and  practical as the 
relevance of theory part is well established. Further, the Committee had desired that 
norms for evaluation and promotion of students may be invariably followed to assure 
a transparent evaluation process. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry 
that a very detailed systematic evaluation process has been provided for and are 
shocked at the irregularities noticed by the Audit, despite, the same. The Committee 
desire that inquiry be conducted into the irregularities in the evaluation  process 
noticed by the Audit for fixing the responsibility and urgent action taken against 
those found responsible. The Committee , therefore,  reiterate their earlier 
recommendation that a sub-committee may be constituted to look into such issues 
urgently under intimation to the Committee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER - II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1. The Committee while scrutinizing the Audit Report on the working of Central Board of 
Film Certification noted many systematic deficiencies such as unjustifiable delays beyond 
prescribed period in certification process; altering of order of films for examination; 
conversion of certified films from ’A’ to ‘UA/A’ category, etc. Also,  they noticed lack of 
internal controls within the CBFC for tracking the records of film certification which carried a 
risk of issue of duplicate certificates for the same film to different individuals not holding 
copyrights. The scrutiny of the subject by  the PAC (2016 -17) and PAC (2017 -18) further 
revealed various other shortcomings. The observations/ recommendations of the Committee 
have been detailed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
(Para 1 of the Ninety-fourth) 
 Report of the Public Accounts Committee 
(16th Lok Sabha) 
 
Action Taken 
These deficiencies have been adequately covered through the new online certification 
system. Now there are no unjustifiable delays beyond prescribed period in certification 
process; the order of films is changed only in rare cases and conversion of certifi ed films 
from ‘A’ to ‘UA/A’ category has been upheld by the Hon’ble High Court of Delhi. Issue 
regarding duplicate certificates for the same film by different individuals has also been 
covered in the new online certification system. 
 
Audit Comments 
 
Introductory. 
 
Ministry's Comments 
 
No comments. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
2. The Committee note that Indian film industry is the largest in the world with nearly 
one thousand feature films and fifteen hundred short films being made every year. The 
Committee observe that films are one of the most appreciated art forms where the view ers 
receive knowledge, understanding of the lives and traditions of the people and these films 
influence their own ideas consciously or sub consciously, their way of life and their 
relationships. The Committee further observe that the film makers put their  own insights into 
their films to find the most effective form to engage the viewers. The Committee note the 
judgment given by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in 1989 in which it had observed that “…the 
movie has unique capacity to disturb and arouse feelings. It has as much potential for evil as 
it has for good. It has an equal potential to instill or cultivate violent or good behavior. With 

 
 
these qualities and since it caters for mass audience who are generally not selective about 
what they watch, the movie can not be equated with other modes of communication.”. Since 
India is a diverse and heterogeneous country, the Committee are of the opinion that 
filmmakers should maintain a certain level of propriety with respect to contents of their films. 
The Committee fin d that recent controversies have given rise to numerous debates on 
extent of freedom of expression vis -à-vis censorship and public feelings. The Committee 
opine that wide reach and deep impact of films make intervention by the Government 
desirable as the p ublic opinion tends to be divided between those arguing for freedom of 
expression, those for restrictions and others who argue for balanced approach. The 
Committee are of the considered view that though control by Government is needed to 
check divisive inf luences, in order not to offend ant particular group, the events must be 
depicted in a manner that no one suffers at the expense of others. The Committee expect 
the film makers to exercise self restraint with respect to religion, historical facts, culture,  
ethos, tradition and profession so that people do not get exposed to damaging content and 
their moral and culture heritage is effectively safeguarded. The Committee also desire that 
the cinema should be the guiding, binding and enlightening medium. 
 
(Para 7 of the Ninety-fourth) 
 Report of the Public Accounts Committee 
(16th Lok Sabha) 
 
Action Taken 
 
A large part of the film industry in India is under the private sector and the Government does 
not interfere so far as film production is concerned. However, “Sanctioning of 
Cinematograph films for exhibition ” is included in Entry 60 of the Union List (List I) of the 
Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India. The CBFC setup under the Cinematograph 
Act, 1952 performs the statutory function of certifying film s for public exhibition. All films, 
music videos and documentaries, irrespective of their length and media type (Celluloid, 
video, CD or DVD) require mandatory certification from the CBFC for public exhibition in 
India. CBFC certifies films for public exhi bition in accordance with the Cinematograph Act, 
1952 read along with the Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983 and the Central 
Government guidelines of 1991. CBFC has a well -defined process for examining every film 
as per the guidelines framed under the Cinematograph Act, 1952. 
 
Audit Comments 
 
Action taken by the Ministry to ensure that “the Cinema should be the guiding, binding and 
enlightening medium as well as no one suffers at the expense of other” may be stated to 
PAC. 
 
Ministry’s Comments 
 
The guidelines for certification of films stipulate that the objectives of film certification will be, 
inter-alia, to ensure that the medium of film remains responsible and sensitive to the values 
and standards of society. Also, it is to be ensured that artisti c expression and creative 
freedom are not unduly curbed. CBFC strives to adhere to the guidelines of certification and 
periodically conducts workshops for Advisory Panel Members at various regional centers for 
the benefit of the members of the Advisory Pan els and Examining Officers in certification of 

 
 
films. Various issues involved in the examination of the films are discussed at the 
workshops. The need for observing a code of conduct and discipline is also emphasized. 
The members of the Board and Advisory Panels have been requested to implement the 
guidelines strictly. Specific clarifications have been issued about interpretations of some of 
the guidelines.  
 
(Ashokkumar R Parmar) 
Joint Secretary to the Government of India 
 
(Ministry of Information and Broa dcasting O.M. No. M -11013/1/2018DO(FC) dated    
.11.2018) 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
3. The C&AG carried out an audit of the academic activities of Satyajit  Ray Film and 
Television Institute, Kolkata (SRFTI) for the period from 2010 -11 to 2014-15 and highlighted 
that SRFTI had failed to achieve their stated objectives as it could not introduce various 
courses, viz., undergraduate course for film and television, post graduate diploma courses in 
television and regular short term courses in films even after 20 years of its establishment. 
Further, students were not enrolled for two years and a number of seats remained vacant/ 
unutilized due to improper planning. A lso, the Institute did not execute academic activities 
properly as none of the batches were completed in prescribed time, lesser teaching hours by 
faculty and instances of gap in evaluation of performance of students were noticed in audit. 
The examination of the subject by the PAC (2016 -17) and (2017 -18) further highlighted 
various other short comings. The observations recommendations of the Committee have 
been detailed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
(Para 8 of the Ninety-fourth) 
 Report of the Public Accounts Committee 
(16th Lok Sabha) 
 
 
Action Taken 
None. 
 
Audit Comments 
 
Introductory. 
 
Ministry's Comments 
 
No comments. 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
4. The Committee noted that SRFTI instead of continuing with the old syllabi did not 
enroll students for two batches i.e, 2010 -13 and 2014 -17 pending revision of curricular 
design and syllabi. The Committee while observing the reply of the SRFTI that with the  fast 
changing technology of film making, it would not have been prudent to continue with old 

 
 
syllabus & impart education on out -dated skills are unhappy that a premier institute like 
SRFTI failed to revise syllabi in time. The Committee feel that any Inst itute that imparts 
education in any field has to face such challenges/updation i.e. new inventions, rapidly 
evolving technology, changing values etc. and incorporating these changes into the syllabus 
should be a continuous and simultaneous exercise. The Co mmittee is of the view that 
instead of dispensing with admissions, SRFTI should develop a mechanism whereby 
syllabus may be revised periodically and the updation exercise should start immediately 
after implementation of a revised curriculum to ensure that neither revenue is lost by the 
Institute nor any opportunity for learning the art is denied to the prospective students. 
 
(Para 9 of the Ninety-Fourth 
Report of the Public Accounts Committee) 
Sixteenth Lok Sabha 
 
Action Taken 
 
Modification of the course structure and changes in syllabi:  With the rapidly 
changing cinema technology and a speedy transition of the commercial industry from 
Celluloid to digital format, the syllabus structure needed drastic modifications.      
 From the 12th Batch onwards, the learning format for the students was changed to 
digital which called for inclusion of inputs on digital format and exclusion of the obsolete 
celluloid format. With faster outputs on digital media, there were no more delays in the 
projects due to dependency on the outside laboratories.   
Also, it was found that Short film project in the 2nd year specialization was a studio project 
which required building a set for each of the student project in one studio space. This 
required building-dismantling-rebuilding of the set for each project. This process consumed 
more time which caused delay in starting the 3rd year before finishing the Short film project 
of the last students’ team. 
 All these anomalies were rectified by a rigorous meeting amongst the Director, Dea n 
and all the faculty members and it was decided that every academic semester would consist 
of symmetrically 20 weeks instead of 26 weeks through the modular system and the 
syllabus was re-modified again and there were changes made in the projects, especia lly the 
short film project which is now a studio cum outdoor project to save time spent in set 
dismantling and construction.  
 An academic calendar was designed for 20 weeks for each semester and the classes 
and practicals in every department were made in tune with each other for a better 
collaboration amongst the students. For rationalization of the syllabus, Playback project has 
been dropped from the syllabus. However inputs are given to the students by the in -house 
faculty that gets terminated with a wor kshop conducted by an external expert from the 
industry. For completion of courses within the scheduled calendar and to put less pressure 
on infrastructure, the Diploma film project, newly coined as Dissertation films are 
commissioned outside so that all the projects of the batch can start simultaneously. 
 The revised and modified course structure was approved in the 5th AC meeting held 
in April 2017. 
 
Audit Comments 
 
Though the Ministry has cited changes made by SRFTI, Kolkata in syllabus and academic 
calendar, the reply of the Ministry is silent on development of mechanism to revise the 

 
 
syllabus periodically without skipping enrolment of students. Hence, reply of the Ministry is 
not in line with the recommendation of PAC. 
 
Ministry's Comment  
 
The observations of the Audit have been noted for compliance. Instructions being issued to 
all departments for regularly updating the syllabus in keeping with the changes and ensure 
that there is no loss of revenue due to the inability of the institute to enrol st udents pending 
revision of syllabus. 
 
(Ashokkumar R. Parmar) 
Joint Secretary (Films) 
 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. M -11013/1/2018DO(FC) dated    
.11.2018) 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
 
5. The Committee note from the reply of SRFTI that lack of adequate infrastructure and 
manpower has been responsible for most of the shortcomings pointed out by the C&AG 
such as non -enrolment of Indian students against forei gn students' quota, non -introduction 
of under-graduate courses, delays in cour se completion, not undertaking research activities 
and not conducting short term/refreshers/in services training courses. The Committee is 
dismayed to note that SRFTI which was established in 1995 is complaining of inadequate 
infrastructure for providing facilities enshrined in its objectives even after more than 22 years 
of its establishment. The Committee while noting that Government has provided Rs. 55 
crores during the current plan period for infrastructure development in SRFTI are of the view 
that the Institution should now work urgently towards creating the required infrastructure and 
fix timelines which must be strictly adhered to. The Committee also desire that the Ministry 
may look into the issue of providing adequate manpower to the Institute so th at it can do 
justice to the objectives for which it has been established. 
 
(Para 10 of the Ninety-Fourth 
Report of the Public Accounts Committee) 
Sixteenth Lok Sabha 
Action Taken 
 
Infrastructure for providing facilities:  Six new departments in Electronic & Digital Media 
(TV) have been started in 2017. SRFTI has hired the faculty members and support staff 
(total 21) for smooth running of Television/EDM Wing. Further, SRFTI had already initiated 
the process of procurement of advance equipment and other acces sories necessary to 
provide optimum facilities to students of TV Wing. 
 Utilization of funds sanctioned, under Infrastructure Development in SRFTI, for the 
year 2017-18 has been fully achieved for up gradation of infrastructure in the film wing and 
for acquisition of equipment (phase I) for EDM (TV) wing.  
 The same is to be continued in the year 2018 -19 under the same head out of the 
sanctioned BE of Rs. 14 Crore (including North-East Component), 

 
 
Further, the lease agreement and other formalities for runni ng a temporary campus of 
proposed Film & Television Institute at Itanagar has been completed for a period of three 
years. SRFTI has already conducted 2 short term courses in temporary campus at Itanagar 
titled "Short Trip to Cinema" with an intake in 24 st udents in the first batch followed by 14 
students in the second batch for the people of North -East. The third batch with an intake of 
13 students has already commenced in April 2018. 
 
Audit Comments 
No Comments 
 
Ministry's comments 
No Comments 
(Ashokkumar R. Parmar) 
Joint Secretary (Films) 
 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. M -11013/1/2018DO(FC) dated    
.11.2018) 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
6. The Committee noted that activities of the Institute were marred with delay in 
completion of courses, vacant seats, lesser teaching hours and gap in evaluation of 
performance of students. The Committee are of the view that lack of monitoring by the 
Ministry led to violation of the procedures. The Committee, therefore, desires that a 
mechanism of i nspection of the Institute by the Administrative of the Ministry/CVO or by 
internal audit team may be developed urgently to ensure accountability and transparency in 
the working of SRFTI. 
 
(Para 14 of the Ninety-Fourth 
Report of the Public Accounts Committee) 
Sixteenth Lok Sabha 
 
Action Taken 
 
Ministry vide letter dated 07.03.2018 (Annexure-B) had requested O/o Comptroller & Auditor 
General Of India to carry out special performance and financial audit of SRFTI, Kolkata. O/o 
CAG was also requested to verify whether SRFTI has taken adequate measures to address 
the issues highlighted by CAG in its audit report of C&AG for the year ended March 2015 
(Report No.11 of 2016, Academic Activities of SRFTI, Kolkata) during regular audit of 
SRFTI. Further, O/o CAG was r equested to look into the following issues also during their 
next regular audit of SRFTI: 
 
i. The Institute is utilizing the fund only for the purpose for which it is sanctioned. 
ii. Institute is following all General Financial Rules with regard to financial matt ers, 
salary and allowances to its staff, all advances to its staff, deputation and foreign 
services, procurement of stores, tendering/ contracts etc.  

 
 
iii. Review the performance of Institute as per the mandate under their Memoranda of 
Association. 
iv. Whether obje ctives for which institute have been set up are being achieved; any 
shortcomings and reasons thereof. 
The Audit vide letter dated 20.03.2018 (Annexure -C) had apprised the Ministry that O/o 
DGACE, Kolkata has been communicated to look into the working of SRFTI, Kolkata and the 
issues raised by the Ministry during their regular audit of the Institute.  
 
 It is relevant to highlight here that internal audit is already in place and it is being conducted 
annually by Internal Audit Wing Departmental Accounting Or ganisation of Ministry of I&B. A 
copy of Audit report may be seen at Annexure -D. Ministry also continuously monitors the 
performance of SRFTI by seeking various reports viz. a list of permanent and semi -
permanent assets acquired during the year, annual performance cum achievement report for 
the activities done, Annual and Audit Report of the Institute etc. Further, an expert 
committee (Annexure -E) has been constituted by Ministry to review the functioning of 
SRFTI.   
 
Audit Comments                              
No comments 
 
Ministry comments 
No comments 
 
(Ashokkumar R. Parmar) 
Joint Secretary (Films) 
 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. M -11013/1/2018DO(FC) dated    
.11.2018) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER - III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1. The Committee note that the Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983 prescribe 
different time limits for various stages of certification process, totaling to 68 days and all the 
films are required to be certified on “first come first served” basis. The Regional Officers 
(ROs) have been given the discretionary powers to alter the order of examination of films, if 
a written request from the a pplicant is received and the RO concerned feels that there are 
grounds for an early examination, which are to be recorded in file. However, inspection of 
175 records by the audit from 1 st April, 2013 revealed that in 57 films (32.57 per cent) which 
had jumped the queue, letters from the applicant requesting for special consideration/ROs 
justification accepting the request were not found on records and further note that a clear 
‘U/UA’ or clear ‘A’ certification was done for 135 films. Further, in 49 films (3 6 per cent) 
despite completion of certification process, time taken for issue of certificates ranged 
between 3 to 491 days after recommendation for grant of certificate by Examining 
Committee (EC). The Committee could not find any tenable reason for not is suing the 
certificate for months together even after clearance by the EC and desire that in light of a 
case study by Audit relating to fabrication of documents and favoritism by Secretary to 
Chairperson, detailed inquiry into the cases of inordinate delay may be conducted and the 
Committee may be apprised of the findings thereof. The Committee are further concerned 
that while this discrepancy could not be detected by the system it came to light when a 
complaint was received by the Central Vigilance Commissi on and, thereof, desire that the 
Ministry may look into the matter and streamline the system by establishing a control 
mechanism under which the decision involving relaxations made by Committee / RO are 
subjected to review by the Board to ensure transparen cy in the working of CBFC. The 
Committee further desire to be apprised of the cases pointed out by the Vigilance wing in the 
Ministry/CBFC during the last 10 years and punitive action taken against those found guilty. 
 
(Para 2 of the Ninety-fourth) 
 Report of the Public Accounts Committee 
(16th Lok Sabha) 
 
Action Taken 
The online certification system provides a list of all the applications for certification 
chronologically, with respect to the date of application and to the date of application approval 
by the scrutiny officer. By and large, all the films are examined chr onologically. However, in 
certain cases when there is an urgency expressed by the filmmaker, CBFC takes a written 
request from the filmmaker and places it on record along with some proof that such an 
urgency is necessary. Only after that, the respective re gional officer in accordance with the 
proviso to Rule 41(3) of the Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983 allots an early 
screening to the films. A register is also being maintained separately for that purpose. Even 

 
 
in special cases of early certificati on, CBFC endeavors for a minimum time period of about 
two weeks so as to avoid any potential misuse of this facility.  
 
As regards delay in issue of certificates, it is submitted that all the pending cases have been 
disposed of. In the online certification  system, the status of each application is visible online 
in the dashboard of the producer/concerned CBFC official and thus there is effective 
monitoring & real time progress tracking for both CBFC Officials and the applicants. The 
system has inbuilt alert s depending on the pendency of the application, to ensure that time 
limits prescribed by the Rules are not violated. A completely online system ensures 
transparency and efficiency at all levels. 
 
However, it is submitted that in accordance with the prescri bed process, the Examining 
Committee after viewing a film recommends certification of a film for public exhibition under 
any of the prescribed categories with or without excisions/modifications. The 
recommendation of every member of the Examining Committee  is recorded in unambiguous 
terms and a category (U/UA/A) is arrived at either unanimously or by majority. The 
recommendation of the Examining Committee is conveyed to the producer/applicant. The 
producer/applicant is required to convey the acceptance of t he Examining Committee’s 
decision and submit final version of the film. The delay on part of producer/applicant to 
submit the final version of the film also increases the total time taken to issue certificate and 
is therefore not attributable to CBFC. An a nalysis of the cases referred to by the Audit is 
placed at Annexure A. 
 
In the case of fabrication of documents and favoritism by Secretary to Chairperson, it is 
informed that after a detailed enquiry, major penalty of removal from service was awarded. 
In the same case, major penalty proceedings have been initiated against another officer. 
Prompt action is taken on every complaint/vigilance cases. 
 
Audit Comments 
 
As per Audit, 31 films were found for which delay was noticed. However, the list attached by 
the Ministry includes 30 films. Same may be verified. 
 
The matter may be taken up with the PAC. 
 
Final outcome in the fabrication / disciplinary case may be intimated to PAC. Steps taken by 
the Ministry to establish a control mechanism to streamline the sys tem & ensure 
transparency as desired by PAC may be intimated to the PAC. Also, PAC may be apprised 
of the punitive action taken against those found guilty in respect of the cases pointed out by 
the Vigilance Wing during last 10 years. 
  
Ministry's Comments 
 
The Indian Audit &  Accounts Department forwarded a draft of Long Paragraph on “Working 
of Central Board of Film Certification”, proposed for inclusion in the Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year 2015 -16 (Civil), to this Ministry vide 
their Dem i Official Letter No. PDA(C)/MUM/C&AB/DP No.957/2015 -16 dated 30 th 
November, 2015. ‘ Annexure C – List of films delayed for more than 100 days ’ contained in 
the Long Paragraph of Audit lists only 30 films. A copy of the same is placed at Annexure C 

 
 
for refe rence. Accordingly, an analysis of the 30 cases referred to by the Audit has been 
provided at Annexure A. However, in the Report No. 11 of 2016 of C&AG - ‘Para 11.1 
Working of CBFC’, it is mentioned that in “ 31 cases during the period 2013 -14 and 2014-15, 
reasons for delay were not seen recorded on file”.  
 
In the case of fabrication of documents and favoritism by Secretary to Chairperson, it is 
informed that after a detailed enquiry, major penalty of removal from service was awarded. 
In the same case, majo r penalty proceedings have been initiated against an Additional 
Regional Officer of CBFC, Mumbai.  
 
There is a robust MIS (Management Information System) in the online certification system to 
track and monitor the performance of CBFC and its regional offic es. A daily MIS report is 
generated which gives the region -wise pendency of the applications at each level of the 
certification process. A completely online system ensures transparency and efficiency at all 
levels. 
 
During July, 2015, Regional Officer, CBF C, Hyderabad who was on deputation was placed 
under suspension and repatriated to his parent cadre based on the report of his arrest by 
CBI in June, 2015. In August, 2014, the then CEO, CBFC was arrested by CBI and was 
immediately suspended and repatriated to his parent cadre.  
 
(Ashokkumar R Parmar) 
Joint Secretary to the Government of India 
 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. M -11013/1/2018-DO(FC) dated     
.11.2018) 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
2. The Committee are dismayed to note that CBFC, in order to help big film makers who 
had applied for certification very close to release date, granted certificates to their films 
ahead of other applicants even when there was no such urgency expressed. The Committee 
exhort the Ministry/CBFC to ensu re a transparent and disciplined regime by certifying films 
on first come first serve basis with no favoritism and by encouraging big and small banners 
alike to apply well before the release date. With regard to out -of-turn preference for the 
certification of certain films, it is necessary that there should be some sound reasons to 
justify the exercise of discretionary powers by the RO and which should be recorded in the 
file. The Ministry / CBFC may prescribe the guidelines under which order of certificati on may 
be altered. The power of Regional Officer (RO) to alter the order of examination of the film 
be exercised only in those cases covered under the guidelines and the reasons may 
invariably be recorded in each case of deviation. Further, the Committee o bserve that CBFC 
has submitted a proposal for enhancement of certification fee for introduction of ‘Tatkal 
Charges’. The Committee desire the priority to applicants paying Tatkal charges be given 
while ensuring that other applicants get certificates within the stipulated period. 
 
(i) The Committee further note that CBFC had issued certificates to films without 
verifying the film was certified earlier by them or any other Regional Office and hence 
probability of two or more certificates being issued for the same  films existed. The 
Committee understand from the reply of the Ministry / CBFC that ever increasing 

 
 
workload, manpower constraints and when the cuts submitted were contested etc. led 
to delays in film certification and further dates were given depending on  the 
availability of the Examining Officer and one member who had originally watched the 
film. The Committee feel that maintenance of systematic records, absence of 
manpower planning, non adherence to prescribed timelines, non -existence of internal 
control framework and lackadaisical attitude led to issue of multiple certificates to the 
films, delays etc.. The Ministry/CBFC cannot take umbrage of shortage of manpower 
for the mistakes of issuing certificate twiceto the same films by CBFC. They should 
have in creased manpower as per requirement from time to time. The Committee, 
therefore, desire the Ministry/CBFC to augment its manpower urgently in line with the 
increasing workload and submit a proposal for recruiting personnel after taking into 
account the pre sent and future manpower requirements under intimation to the 
Committee. The Committee are of the view that all existing records be digitized 
centrally within a prescribed timeframe to avoid any further instances of issuance of 
duplicate certificate and ef forts made to identify films where duplicate certificates 
were issued and appropriate action taken to rectify the mistake in each such case.  
 
(ii) The Committee note that the computerization project envisages automation of 
the entire process of certification including filing of online application, secured online 
fee payment, integration of relevant data, scheduling of examination, intimation 
thereof to all concerned, formation of  Examination Committees, reporting, intimation 
for cuts, intimations for certific ate and identification of any duplicity at the application 
stage itself. They, therefore, are of the view that timeframes be revised / shortened 
for every stage taking into account computerization of whole process be scrupulously  
followed and delays duly accounted for. Further, all producers, copy right holders or 
those applying for certification of imported films and titles be mandatorily registered 
and all details regarding applications received, cleared, pending etc be made 
available online so as to ensure transparency and efficiency in the system 
 
(iii) The CBFC should develop a robust internal control mechanism followed by 
regular internal audit of the system to ensure that the same is working properly and 
effectively. 
(Para 3 of the Ninety-fourth) 
 Report of the Public Accounts Committee 
(16th Lok Sabha) 
 
Action Taken 
3. It is humbly submitted that CBFC has strived to help all filmmakers without making 
any discrimination between a big or a small filmmaker. The urgency for out of turn 
examination is seen on a  case to case basis only and CBFC, in order to facilitate such films 
and help the filmmakers avoid non -release as per the schedule, enabled certification ahead 
of other applicants where there was no issue of urgency. 

 
 
The online certification system provide s a list of all the applications for certification 
chronologically, with respect to the date of application and to the date of application approval 
by the scrutiny officer. By and large, all the films are examined chronologically. However, in 
certain cases when there is an urgency expressed by the filmmaker, CBFC takes a written 
request from the filmmaker and places it on record along with some proof that such an 
urgency is necessary. Only after that, the respective regional officer in accordance with the 
proviso to Rule 41(3) of the Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983 allots an early 
screening to the films. A register is also being maintained separately for that purpose. Even 
in special cases of early certification, CBFC endeavors for a minimum time p eriod of about 
two weeks so as to avoid any potential misuse of this facility.  
 
The proposal for enhancement of certification fee for introduction of “Tatkal charges” has not 
been considered as it is felt that introduction of Tatkal charges may further de lay the 
certification for the film makers who do not pay enhanced fee. 
 
3 (i) Now after the implementation of online certification system, the problem of issuing 
duplicate certificates has been resolved. New system does not allow duplicate applications. 
A film which has been certified earlier cannot be reapplied in this new online certification 
system. The records have been digitized and after the launch of online system, the issue of 
duplicate certificates have been resolved. Earlier, it was not possible f or CBFC to identify 
films where duplicate certificates were issued, but in the new system, this has been taken 
care of. 
 CBFC was requested to work out the optimum strength of advisory panel members in 
respect of each Regional Office of CBFC.CBFC has indic ated the desired strength of 
advisory panel members after carrying out a detailed analysis of work load in each of the 
regional offices based on the number of feature films, video films and short films certified. 
Ministry has already initiated the action t o appoint the requisite number of advisory panel 
members at each regional office of CBFC in accordance with Section 5(1) of the 
Cinematograph Act, 1952 read with Rules 7 and 8 of the Cinematograph (Certification) 
Rules, 1983. 
 
3 (ii) The time limit in relation to certification of films is prescribed under Rule 41 the 
Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983 which have been framed in exercise of the 
powers conferred by Section 8 of the Cinematograph Act, 1952. The online certification 
system has inbuilt  alerts depending on the pendency of the application to ensure that time 
limits prescribed by the Rules are not violated. 
 After the launch of Online Certification System, the entire film certification process is 
being done online, viz. from application to  printing of certification. Any applicant 
(producer/authorized representative) applying for certification of a film/ video/ song/ 
advertisement/ trailer/ promo (including all producers, copyright holders or those applying for 
certification of imported film s and titles) from CBFC is duly registered under the online 
certification system. All steps are being recorded under the new system. The details of 
applications received, cleared, pending, etc. are available to the senior officers of CBFC and 
an alert is sent to the next higher authority, if there is any delay at any level. 
 
3 (iii) There is a robust MIS (Management Information System) in the online certification 
system to track and monitor the performance of CBFC and its regional offices. A daily MIS 
report is generated which gives the region-wise pendency of the applications at each level of 
the certification process. 

 
 
Audit Comments 
 
The matter may be taken up with the PAC. 
 
Whether Ministry has prescribed any guidelines under which order of certification may be 
altered? If so, same may be intimated to PAC. 
 
Further progress in the matter of recruitment of advisory panel members and its effect on 
time frame fixed, if any, on expedite disposal of cases may be intimated to PAC. The extent 
of digitization of record may also be stated to PAC. 
 
Ministry may state whether any proposal for shortening of time frame (as envisaged in Rule 
41 of Cinematograph (Certification) Rule 1983) has been explored in view of 
Computerization/automation in CBFC. 
 
Will be verified by Audit during next local Audit. 
 
Ministry’s Comments 
 
Rule 41(3) of the Cinematographic (Certification) Rules, 1983 provides for the first cum first 
serve basis to be followed for film certification with exceptions being allowed on the basis of 
recorded reasons. Ministry of Information and Broadcasting has not prescribed any further 
guidelines under which order of certification may be altered. 
 
Advisory Panel members have been appointed in all nine regional offices of CBFC vide 
Ministry’s notification date d 5 th October, 2018. Copy of the notifications is at Annexure D. 
Requisite number of advisory panel members enable timely processing of applications for 
certification.  
 
At present, no proposal for shortening the time limits for certification has been expl ored in 
view of Computerization/automation in CBFC till now. The online system has inbuilt alerts 
depending on the pendency of the application to ensure that time limits prescribed by the 
Rules are not violated. Therefore, an online certification system en sures accountability at all 
levels. However, actual time taken for examination of any application will still depend on the 
time required for carrying out each process of certification, viz. scrutiny of application, 
formation of examination committee (EC), forwarding EC report to Chairperson, 
communication of the order to applicant, surrender of cuts by applicant, examination of cuts, 
issue of certificate, etc. Further, the work load at each regional center of CBFC has 
increased substantially over the years. 
 
 
 
(Ashokkumar R Parmar) 
Joint Secretary to the Government of India 
 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. M -11013/1/2018-DO(FC) dated   
.11.2018) 
 
 

 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
3. The Committee note that as per notification issued by MoI&B  in September 1984, the 
validity of certificates was perpetual instead of 10 years as earlier provisions. However, the 
CBFC continued to accept films for revalidation of certificates which points to the clear 
failure of the Ministry in enforcing its own orders. 
 
Further, as per Sub -rule 6 of Rule 21 of the Cinematograph Rules, 1983, the applicant has 
to furnish the original or a certified copy of the import license together with custom clearance 
permit for public exhibition of video films imported in India but in many cases as pointed as 
out by the Audit, CBFC did not obtain the same. The Ministry submitted that  since the 
Department of Commerce vide public notice dated 29 th January 2002 had allowed import of 
cinematograph feature films and other films (incl uding films on video tape, compact video 
disc, laser video disc or digital video disc) without a license, the condition could not be 
complied with. 
 
In view of the above discrepancies, the Committee adjure the Ministry / CBFC to bring out a 
manual of rules /guidelines incorporating all the relevant notifications and latest instructions 
issued in connection with certification of films at one place to avoid recurrence of such 
instances. 
(Para 5 of the Ninety-fourth) 
 Report of the Public Accounts Committee 
(16th Lok Sabha) 
Action Taken 
The revalidation of certification was done by the CBFC as per provisions of Rule 29 of the 
Cinematograph Act. However, as per notification issued by Ministry of I&B, (September 
1984) the Central Government had exempted all films in respect of which certification have 
been or may be granted by the Board, from the validity of 10 years and the validity of such 
certificates were therefore perpetual. The process of revalidation of certificates has been 
dispensed with and any such applicant is informed accordingly. 
 
Regarding import license, it is submitted that Ministry of Commerce and Industry, 
Department of Commerce vide its Public Notice No. 64/1997-2002 dated 29th January, 2002 
has exempted from import license the import of cinemato graph feature films and other films 
(including film on video tape, compact video disc, laser video disc or digital video disc). To 
be in conformity with the said Public Notice, Sub -rule 6 of Rule 21 of the Cinematograph 
(Certification) Rules, 1983 relating to application procedure in the case of imported films has 
been deleted vide this Ministry’s Notification G.S.R. 357(E) dated 11th April, 2017 published 
in the Extraordinary Gazette of India. Accordingly, CBFC is not required to ask for import 
license for  a film. However, CBFC at the time of accepting applications for certification of 
such films, does ask for copies of agreement between the copyright holder/ producer of the 
film and the person who imports the film and seeks certification, copy of shipping/ airway bill 
or copy of digital download document. 
 
It is submitted that the website of CBFC contains all the rules/guidelines and it is regularly 
updated with relevant notifications and latest instructions/communications issued in 
connection with certification of films. 
 

 
 
Audit Comments 
 
The Ministry has not agreed to bring out a manual of rules/guidelines stating that it is 
available in the website. However, any action taken by the Ministry to link the latest and 
relevant notifications regarding import and certification of films by way of workshops etc., if 
any, may be stated to PAC. 
 
Ministry’s Comments 
 
Notification No. G.S.R. 357(E) dated 13 th April, 2017 published in the Extraordinary Gazette 
of India, Part II, Section 3, Sub -section(i) deleting sub -rule (6) of Rule 21 of the 
Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983, relating to application procedure in the case of 
imported films, was laid in Lok Sabha on 28.12.2017 and in Rajya Sabha on 02.01.2018. 
 
(Ashokkumar R Parmar) 
Joint Secretary to the Government of India 
 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. M -11013/1/2018DO(FC) dated   
.11.2018) 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
4(i). The Committee note that the Cinematograph Act prescribes constitution of a Board to 
be called the Board of Film Certific ation consisting of a Chairman and not less than twelve 
and not more than twenty -five other members to be appointed by the Central Government. 
As per reply of the Ministry, each state should be represented by at least one or two Board 
Members as there are different dialects around the country. The Committee hope that the 
Government while constituting the CBFC ensure that one or two representatives from each 
state is/are appointed there. The Committee are unhappy that proper records about agenda 
of the Board meetings have not been kept and that in 2014 -2015 and 2015-2016, the Board 
met only once a year. The Committee are unable to comprehend the need for a high profile 
Board when they are not even inclined to meet frequently and discuss the film certification  
process and its impact on the public at large. The Committee exhort that the Board be more 
proactive and a guiding spirit in the healthy working of the institution. The Committee are of 
the view that number of members of the CBFC be fixed so that each Sta te / region gets 
represented in the Board and one/two Board Member/s be attached to every Regional Office 
to ensure its transparency. The Committee further enjoin that tenure of the members of the 
Board and the Advisory Panels should only be renewed / exte nded after analyzing their 
contribution in the film certification process. The Committee while noting from the reply of 
the Ministry that desired strength of the advisory panel members in respect of each Regional 
Office of CBFC is worked out after carrying  out a detailed analysis of work load in each of 
the Regional Offices based on the number of feature films, video films and short films to be 
certified desires that an analysis of the involvement/performance of the panel members may 
be made at the end of t enure to ensure that such numbers as appointed were actually 
required. The Committee while noting that only three workshops for Advisory Panel 
Members were conducted during last five years are of the considered opinion that the 
workshops should be a regula r feature to enlighten and update the Panel Members about 
the latest issues involved in the from time to time. Further, the Committee are amazed to 
note that not even a single case has been detected and reported for violation of category 
classification or for not screening certification before the film is actually screened or for not 

 
 
carrying out the cuts as prescribed by the CBFC. The Committee while noting from the reply 
of the Ministry that since Cinemas is a State subject (as Entry 33 of the List -II, subject to the 
provisions of Entry 60 of List -I), the responsibility for enforcement of category classification 
on the ground lies primarily with the State Government desires that requisite information be 
collected from the States and furnished to the Committee.   
 
(ii). The Committee observe that since 1952 when the Cinematograph Act was enacted, 
there have been many changes / developments in the field of cinema with the proliferation of 
TV channels, cable network, youtube and advent of new digital technolog y making various 
kinds of contents accessible to all. Further, the CBFC established under the provisions of 
the Act has been steadily losing its credibility / significance and non -controversial character. 
The Committee note that the CBFC has been taking di scretionary decisions in absence of 
any specific rules / provisions. With the advent of new technology in the cinema field and 
emergence of media as a powerful medium to discuss and form opinions, CBFC needs to 
keep abreast of latest developments in the fi eld and control its Regional Offices in an 
effective manner so as to ensure complete transparency in the working of the CBFC. The 
Committee are also concerned to note lack of control of CBFC over contents available on 
internet. The Committee, therefore, de sire that the Act may be reviewed and amended 
suitably keeping in view the changing dynamics of film industry and the change in society 
values. 
 
(iii). The Committee also desire that the film makers be enabled to certify their films 
themselves and for bein g eligible for self certification under specific categories, the CBFC 
may prescribe detailed parameters keeping in view the ethos and traditions of the country to 
guide the film producers to align with the requirements for certification under that category . 
In case the CBFC/Examining Committee does not agree with the category under which 
certification has been applied for, the film may be referred to ‘Film Certification Jury’ 
comprising of retired Judges, eminent lawyers, film makers, eminent actors, writer s and 
acclaimed artists for a matured view. 
 
(Para 6 of the Ninety-fourth) 
 Report of the Public Accounts Committee 
(16th Lok Sabha) 
 
Action Taken 
Meetings of the Board are being held regularly and proper records of all Board Meetings are 
being kept in the  CBFC office. Last year, three Board Meetings were held. All Board 
Members are contributing towards the healthy working of CBFC. CBFC periodically 
conducts workshops for Advisory Panel Members at various regional centers for the benefit 
of the members of t he Advisory Panels and Examining Officers in certification of films. 
Various issues involved in the examination of the films are discussed at the workshops. The 
need for observing a code of conduct and discipline is also emphasized. The members of 
the Boar d and Advisory Panels have been requested to implement the guidelines strictly. 
Specific clarifications have been issued about interpretations of some of the guidelines. 
CBFC shall strive to engage more proactively with workshops and Board meetings. 
 
The screening of visual contents without certification by CBFC is in violation of Section 7 of 
the Cinematograph Act, 1952.In the recent past it has come to the notice of the Ministry that 

 
 
in some areas of each of the eight North Eastern States, uncertified fil ms/ videos/ 
advertisements/trailers/ promos/songs and other visual presentation through video 
projectors both fixed and mobile are being exhibited. Ministry has written to the Chief 
Secretaries of the North Eastern States to issue necessary instructions/gu idelines to the 
District Magistrates to take cognizance of any violation of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 and 
the Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983 and to take appropriate action as deterrence 
to such violation by any individual/group/institution. Co pies of D.O. letters dated 28 th May, 
2018 addressed to the Chief Secretaries of the North Eastern States are at Annexure B. 
 
(ii) CBFC primarily certifies films for theatrical release and TV & satellite in video format 
in accordance with the Cinematograph Act, 1952, the Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 
1983 and the guidelines issued thereunder. These guidelines are to be observed by CBFC 
for certification of films for public exhibition and attempt to objectively define the prerogatives 
of the Board’s ce rtification process. The members of the Board and Advisory Panels have 
been requested to implement the guidelines strictly. Specific clarifications have been issued 
about interpretations of some of the guidelines.  
 
CBFC has no control over the content ava ilable on the internet. India being a diverse 
heterogeneous country, having numerous different ethos and traditions, it is important to 
maintain a certain level of propriety with respect to language and visuals which are deemed 
to be acceptable to the wide r audience. The content available over the internet is regulated 
under the Information Technology Act, 2000 and the Rules framed thereunder.  Under 
Section 79(3)(2) of the rules framed under the IT Act, 2000, intermediaries must observe 
due diligence as pre scribed under Rule 3 in the Information Technology (Intermediaries 
guidelines) Rules, 2011. Section 79(3) of the Information Technology Act, 2000 provides for 
removing or disabling access to the material which is being used to commit unlawful acts.  
 
It is relevant to mention that M/o I&B has taken cognizance of pirated film content available 
on the internet and has requested the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology to 
get the issue examined to curb piracy of films or any other copyright viola tion through pirate 
websites. MEITY has also been requested to set up a legally mandated mechanism under 
the provisions of the IT Act 2000. 
 
(iii) Film motivates thoughts and actions and assures a high degree of attention and 
retention, perhaps compared to the printed word.  The combination of act and speech, sight 
and sound has a strong impact on the minds of the viewers and may affect emotions. The 
Hon’ble Supreme Court in K.A. Abbas vs Union of India upheld the constitutionality of 
certifying films within the Ambit of Article 19(2) of the Constitution and added that films have 
to be treated separately from other forms of art and expression because a motion picture 
has the ability of stirring up the emotions more deeply than any other product of art. 
Considering this kind of sensitivities, self -certification of films has not been considered so 
far. 
 
Article 19(1)(a) and 19(2) of the Constitution of India lays down that while all citizens shall 
have the right to freedom of speech and expression, the State ca n operate any existing law, 
or make any law, in so far as such law imposes reasonable restrictions on the exercise of 
the right conferred by the 19(1)(a), in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India, 
the security of the State, friendly relat ions with foreign States, public order, decency or 
morality or in relation to contempt of court, defamation or incitement to an offence. 

 
 
“Sanctioning of Cinematograph films for exhibition ” is included in Entry 60 of the Union List 
(List I).The Union Govern ment has been entrusted with matters pertaining to sanctioning or 
certification of films for exhibition in India and accordingly the CBFC certifies films for public 
exhibition under the provisions of Cinematograph Act. 
 
Audit Comments 
Ministry has not replied about the Constitution of the Board and its members from each state 
and renewal/appointments to be made after analyzing the contribution of members.  
 
Whether Ministry has taken any steps to include members of CBFC who represent 
state/region?  
 
What steps are taken to attach Board members to regional office may be stated to PAC. 
 
Any workshop conducted for Advisory Panel Members during 2017 -18 and onwards may be 
stated to PAC. 
 
Information regarding enforcement of category classification, if any, collected from State 
Government(s) may be furnished to PAC. 
 
Ministry may explore the possibility for amendment of Act incorporating changing dynamics 
of film industry and change in societal values, keeping in view the relevant sections of IT 
Act, 2000. 
 
Further progress in the matter may be intimated to PAC. 
 
Ministry’s Comments 
Appointment of Chairperson and Members of the CBFC is in accordance with Section 3(1) 
of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 read with rule 3 of the Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 
1983. The Board consists of a Chairman and not less than 12 and not more than 25 other 
members. The present Board consists of 12 Members to represent each region.  
 
Workshops are held for Advisory Panel Members at various regional centers such as 
Mumbai, Kol kata, Hyderabad, Delhi and Chennai for the benefit of the members of the 
Advisory Panels and Examining Officers in certification of films. The workshop module for 
newly inducted Advisory Panel members sensitizes them to the guiding principles for 
certification of films. Various  issues  involved  in  the  examination  of  the  films  are  
discussed  at  the workshops. The need for observing a code of conduct and discipline is 
also emphasized. Details of Meetings/Workshops held during the last year are given below: 
 
i)  The 142nd Board Meeting -cum-workshop was held at Thiruvananthapuram on 28 th 
July, 2017. 
 
ii) The 143rd Board Meeting -cum-workshop was held at Mumbai on 11 th September, 
2017. The Board meeting was presided over by newly appointed Chairman, Shri  
Prasoon Joshi. 

 
 
iii) A Regional Officers’ Meeting was held on 24th October, 2017 at Films Division 
Complex, Mumbai.   
 
iv) A workshop for advisory panel members and an interaction with representatives of 
film industry was held at Mumbai on 20th September, 2018.  
 
v) The 144th Board meeting held on 21 st September, 2018. A meeting of Board Members 
and Regional Officers was also conducted. 
 
Regulation of exhibition by means of cinematograph is under Part III of the Cinematograph 
Act, 1952 and the power of Cent ral Government extends to Union Territories only. No 
information regarding enforcement of category classification collected from State 
Governments. 
 
Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP) under Ministry of Commerce and 
Industry, which oversee s implementation of the National IPR Policy, allotted the following 
Action Point to the M/o I&B - “3.7 – Indian Cinematograph Act, 1952 may be suitably 
amended to provide for penal provisions for illegal duplication of films”.  
 
A joint meeting of official s of MIB, MEITY and DIPP was held under the chairmanship of 
Joint Secretary (Films) on 01.10.2018 to discuss the issue of piracy. The need for inclusion 
of penal provisions in the Cinematograph Act was discussed in detail to tackle the menace 
of film pirac y effectively. It was observed that the onus of ensuring these provisions should 
lie with the State Governments and District machinery. Accordingly, it has been decided to 
amend the Cinematograph Act, 1952 to include penal provisions for unauthorized 
duplication of a film (anti-camcording provisions).  
 
(Ashokkumar R Parmar) 
Joint Secretary to the Government of India 
 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. M -11013/1/2018DO(FC) dated    
.11.2018) 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
5.  Audit has pointed out that most of the Assistant Professors and Associate Professors 
did not achieve the core load per week as stipulated in the Bye -laws as the teachers of 
SRFTI were engaged in additional activities like conducting festivals, holding add itional 
charge of Dean & Director, attending meetings, holding enquiries etc apart from their regular 
teaching job. The Committee noted that since SRFTI is an internationally renowned institute, 
many miscellaneous activities took place on campus as part of  the learning process. 
However, the calculation of teaching hours based on the duration of academic programmes 
of faculties including both theory and practical sessions presented a very different picture. 
The Committee, therefore, desire that planned teach ing hours may depict hours to be 
devoted to formal teaching and mentoring separately so as to ensure that the faculty 
members devote minimum time to each area.  
 

 
 
(i) Audit scrutiny highlighted various irregularities in the evaluation process and promotion of 
students in contravention of Bye -laws of the Institute. The Committee while opining that 
uniform and strict parameters ensure competitiveness and sense of discip line amongst 
students expect a premier Institute like SRFTI to invariably adhere to the norms to assure 
students of transparent evaluation process. The Committee desire that variations may only 
be made in exceptional circumstances which should be duly reco rded and approved by the 
competent authority.  
 
(ii) The Committee while opining that the teaching and evaluation process may have serious 
implications regarding the quality of education being imparted and that of the students 
passing out of the Institute exhort the Ministry to constitute a sub -committee to review whole 
gamut of issues plaguing the Institute and give suggestions for improving the quality of 
teaching and techniques adopted. 
 
(Para 13 of the Ninety-Fourth 
Report of the Public Accounts Committee) 
Sixteenth Lok Sabha 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
The faculty of SRFTI is not only involved in taking theory classes (in the classrooms) but 
also teaching students outside classrooms. Most of the student activities in the campus 
happen in the studio floors and campus premises (practical exercises like actuality, camera 
practice, sound recording etc.) and the faculties are constantly engaged in guiding and 
mentoring students and giving their practical lessons of film making. Added to this there are 
workshops by i ndustry experts that keep on happening round the year in all the 
departments. Faculties are rigorously involved in arranging these workshops and co -
ordinating them by communicating with the guest faculty, arranging their travel, stay, food 
and facilitating  the students with all the requisite resources to make sure to create a 
conducive environment for the student -expert interaction and solid practical learning. These 
activities from the side of the faculty also are a part of nurturing a student and giving t hem 
much required hands-on inputs and prepare them for the cut -throat film making world. Also, 
the curriculum of SRFTI is project based and since their second semester, they start making 
their films which require continuous inputs and interaction with the faculty members in the 
process of writing, visualising, conceptualizing, story -boarding and pre -planning their ideas 
and shoots for which the faculty members give a lot of time from their schedule in interacting 
with students on one -to-one basis and mentor  them and mould them based on their 
individual personalities. This is a rigorous activity that keeps the faculty members busy 
throughout their day in the campus. As the number of students are increasing due to the 
newly started short term courses and TV wing, mentoring activity is and going to take a large 
space from a faculty’s academic hours. 
 
In order to track down the faculty academic activities the institute has developed a 
centralized computer based digital Academic Management System (AMS) which keeps track 
of the scheduling of the classes, practical, administrative work, workshop co -ordination, 
student mentoring, students’ attendance publication of results. 
 

 
 
AMS also tracks down the student attendance. This allows the faculty members and the 
students to keep a regular check on their attendance, scheduled classes, practical and 
workshops. Modifications are under process to digitally upload the results and marks -sheets 
of the students on the AMS. 
 
SRFTI has developed a very systematic evaluation process from the first semester itself. 
Evaluation happens through various methods, viz., (a) written examinations, (b) Cumulative 
evaluation based on students’ involvement in various exercises, practicals and 
demonstration workshops,  (c) Assessment of different projects is done by various 
departments both by faculty members and external experts based on content, narrative flow, 
script, cinematography, editing and sound and production docket and the final result is 
obtained as a weighted mean with one external exp ert for each department deliberating and 
assessing based on the different criteria for different departments, (d) In the workshops 
taken by guest faculties, students are assessed individually, based on their involvement, 
response and interaction, (e) The e valuation for the final Dissertation film is done wholly by 
external experts after deliberation and discussion with the faculty members. 
 
It may be mentioned here that Academic Council(AC), constituted by GC, consists of six 
domain specialists in addition to Dean and six HODs of the Institute and representatives of 
students and alumni. AC is mandated to oversee all the academic and pedagogy -related 
issues. Academic Council has representations from many institutes/organizations viz. FTII, 
Doordarshan, WWI etc. Further, AC as per Academic Bye laws of SRFTI undertake periodic 
review of —academic programmes including training schedules, methods & procedures of 
examination, exchange programme. In line with the recommendations of AC, steps taken by 
SRFTI for improving the quality of education in the Institute may be seen at Annexure-A. 
                                                           
Audit Comments     
                          
No comments 
 
Ministry comments 
 
No comments 
(Ashokkumar R Parmar) 
Joint Secretary to the Government of India 
 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. M -11013/1/2018DO(FC) dated    
.11.2018) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
CHAPTER - V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES 
  
Observation/Recommendation 
 
1. The Committee find that there is no provision in Cinematograph Act 1952 to convert 
films from ‘A’ to ‘UA’ /’U’ category, however, CBFC had converted 172 ‘A’ category certified 
films into ‘UA’ category films and 166 of ‘UA’ to  ‘U’ category during the period 2012 -2015. 
The Committee observe from the reply of the Ministry that there is no specific provision 
which prohibits recertification of films already certified and the practice being followed by 
CBFC as the competent certifyi ng authority appears to be in accordance with Rule 21, 33 
and 35 made under the Cinematograph Act. The Committee find that the Rules 21, 33 and 
35 made as quoted by Ministry do not empower CBFC to re -certify the films. The Committee 
from the reply of the Ministry that in order to get a U, UA certificate required to telecast films 
on Cable TV, the filmmakers edit content of the film themselves and apply for recertification. 
The Committee desire that Cinematograph Act be suitable amended to make provisions fo r 
recertification of film to telecast on television and a formal procedure be framed to enable 
conversion of films a transparent exercise and more specific categorization of films into 
‘UA12+’ and ‘UA15+’ etc. The Committee exhort that such conversion be r eflected on the 
website of CBFC/Ministry. 
(Para 4 of the Ninety-fourth) 
 Report of the Public Accounts Committee 
(16th Lok Sabha) 
Action Taken 
The Government is in the process of amending the existing Cinematograph Act, 1952. The 
Committee of Experts, headed by Justice (Retd.) Mukul Mudgal, constituted to examine 
issues of certification under the Cinematograph Act, 1952 and the Expert Committee, 
headed by Shri Shyam Benegal, constituted to recommend guidelines/procedure for 
certification of films by the  Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC) have both 
recommended that there shall be a provision to apply for change in category of certificate of 
a film. The recommendation of the Committees to insert a specific provision for change in 
category of certificate of a film is under consideration in the Ministry. 
 
However, it is relevant to mention that the Hon’ble High Court of Delhi, vide Order dated 
24.01.2018, in W.P. (C) No. 5203 of 2013 of Edara Gopi Chand v/s UOI & Others has 
upheld the conversion of films from A to UA/U categories. 
 
Audit Comments 
 
Further progress in the amendment of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 incorporating 
recommendation of the expert committee may be stated to PAC. Whether any action has 
been initiated to reflect the changes/conversion of films in official website of CBFC/Ministry? 
  
 
 

 
 
Ministry’s Comments 
 
The recommendations submitted by both the Committees were examined in the Ministry. 
Majority of the recommendations require amendment in the Cinematograph Act and Rules. It 
was decided to seek wider consultation in the matter before accepting the 
recommendations.  
 
A Consultation meeting between the then Hon’ble Minister of Information and Broadcasting, 
Minister of Law and Justice, Minister of Finance and Minister of Human Resources 
Development held on 16 th March, 2017 to deliberate on the issue of repeal/amendment of 
the Cinematograph Act.  Another round of consultation in this regard by Hon’ble Minister 
with Hon’ble Chief Minister of Maharashtra and the representativ es of Film Industries was 
held on 6th June, 2017 at Mumbai. 
 
Based on the deliberations, Ministry is in the process of amending the Cinematograph Act 
and Rules and formulation of guidelines. 
 
The explanation under Rule 21 of the Cinematograph (Certificatio n) Rules, 1983 which 
concerns with the submission of application for examination of films clearly states that for 
the purpose of certification for public exhibition, every revised version or shorter version of a 
film shall be deemed to be a fresh film. Complete details of all films/promos/trailers/teasers 
certified by CBFC, including the category of certificate granted, certificate number, certificate 
date, name of Producer, name of Applicant, etc., are duly provided on the official website of 
CBFC.  
 
(Ashokkumar R Parmar) 
Joint Secretary to the Government of India 
 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. M -11013/1/2018DO(FC) dated    
.11.2018) 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
2. The Committee note from the reply of SRFTI that appointment of permanent  skilled 
manpower for project works could not be justified due to lesser workload associated with the 
job and SRFTI is facing difficulty in hiring on need basis as the available trained manpower 
prefers their primary professional assignments first and simi larly, procurement of additional 
equipment is risky due to factors like high costs, obsolesce, expenditure on maintenance, 
etc. and therefore, taking such equipment on hire on need basis is more feasible proposition 
given the cost versus the workload but, this approach sometimes leads to non -availability of 
equipment on time. The Committee is of the view that SRFTI should give extra emphasis on 
completing the courses in time as non -completion of courses timely may hamper career of 
students. The Committee de sire that few agencies providing these equipment and trained 
manpower may be empanelled for the purpose so that they are available and called for as 
and when needed. 
 
(Para 11 of the Ninety-Fourth 
Report of the Public Accounts Committee) 
Sixteenth Lok Sabha 

 
 
Action Taken  
 
The final year dissertation films are being outsourced as per the project guidelines so that 
the projects of the batch can start simultaneously in order to avoid delays. The students 
(Producing for Film & Television department) acting as executive producers hire the entire 
infrastructure and manpower from outside agencies/local Cine -workers’ Guild at per 
approved rate within the allocated budget.   
 
So far four dissertation films of the 12th batch are being executed on commissioned basis. 
For other student exercises/short films light and grip items with attendants are being hired 
from empanelled agency.   
Audit Comments 
No Comments except that SRFTI, Kolkata instead of created a panel of few agencies, 
executed a rate contract with one agency to hire light, grip and accessories for period of one 
year. 
Ministry comments  
 
The maximum hiring of equipment takes place for the final year dissertation films in SRFTI. 
After the Academic Council asked to implement the commissioning of the dissertation films 
the students are by default allowed to shoot anywhere in the country. The first few 
commissioned films were shot in the deep interiors of Manipur, one in the villages of 
Tamilnadu, another 50 kms fro m Tundla in Uttar Pradesh. Naturally, it is not feasible or 
affordable to carry all the equipment (camera with lenses, lights in number of around 25 -30 
kilos, grips) from Kolkata to these far off places. Instead, we hire the same equipment from 
the nearest town where all these are available to save cost as well as unnecessary labour 
and trouble. Hence, to create a panel of these agencies we need to travel all around the 
country and take quotations from these agencies and empanel the agencies in due course, 
the process of which will take time as we have limited strength in the department of 
production. However, the process has already been started. For regular campus exercises, 
a rate contract was done with an agency for regular hiring. It has been ascertaine d through 
informal market survey that the rates being charged by the existing agency are reasonable. 
 
 
(Ashokkumar R Parmar) 
Joint Secretary to the Government of India 
 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. M -11013/1/2018DO(FC) dated    
.11.2018) 
 
Observation/Recommendation 
 
3. The Committee note with Concern that SRFTI had not offered any regular short term 
Courses citing insufficient manpower and infrastructure and express their displeasure over 
the fact that SRFTI did not take up the matter with the Ministry for addressing the  issues till 
January 2016. The Committee also does not agree with the contention of the SRFTI that the 
Ministry is apprised of the matter as the officials of the Ministry are part of the Governing 
Council. The Committee is shocked to note that even though officials of the Ministry are 

 
 
represented in Governing Council, the SRFTI could not impress upon the Ministry that the 
Institute could not offer short term courses due to insufficient manpower and lack of 
infrastructure. The Committee, therefore, desires t hat SRFTI should take up the matter 
earnestly with the Ministry and apprise the Committee of response of the Ministry thereon.  
The Committee notes that undergraduate Courses and research department can only be 
started in the SRFTI once the issue related t o awarding of diploma/degree is resolved. The 
Committee desire that the Ministry may take up this matter with UGC on urgent basis and 
apprise the Committee of the decision of the UGC. 
(Para 12 of the Ninety-Fourth 
Report of the Public Accounts Committee) 
Sixteenth Lok Sabha 
 
Action taken: 
 
SRFTI within its available infrastructure has conducted the following short term courses in 
the financial year 2017-18: 
 
i. 20 week long Certificate Program on ‘Screen Acting’ for Graduates.  
ii. 3 week long Certificate Program on ‘Film Appreciation’ for Graduates. 
iii. 12 week long Certificate Program on ‘The Practice of Editing’ for Graduates. 
iv. 1 week long ‘International Workshop cum Training Programme on Library 
Automation (IWTPLA) : Emphasizing on digital and audio -visual media’ fo r 
Graduates/Working professionals. 
v. Two 10 week long certificate courses ‘A short trip to Cinema’ for the 
undergraduate students were held at the temporary campus of FTI at Itanagar, 
Arunachal Pradesh. 
vi. 1 week long short Film -making Workshop at Itanagar unde r the auspices of 
Directorate of Information & Public Relations, Government of Arunachal Pradesh.  
vii. 8 week long Film Appreciation course for Bharatendu Natya Academy. 
In respect of proposal for additional manpower & infrastructure Action taken note against 
para 10 may please be referred.  
  
Research activities, undergraduate course 
 
SRFTI has started a research wing and is inviting applications for research projects in the 
field of cinema. Also, SRFTI is coming up with an annual peer -reviewed national journa l 
titled ‘Take One’ which invites articles from experts in the fields of cinema, film making, film 
criticism and cinema technology and electronic and digital media. The first issue is already in 
press awaiting the RNI registration for ISSN no.  
 
SRFTI has conducted one -day national conference in November 2017 on ‘Cinema in the 
Age of New Media’ in association with another academic organization named as ‘Parbo 
Kagaj’. The conference was broken up in three sessions titled: ‘Challenges for Today’s 
Television’, ‘New Horizon in the Post Modern Scenario of Film Making’ and ‘Creativity and 
New Media’. Compilation of all the research based papers presented at the seminar are 

 
 
coming out as a Proceeding Volume (proof read stage) with the key note address delivered 
by the famous film critic Shri Dhritiman Chatterjee. 
 
Besides these, a three days workshop was conducted for the faculty of SRFTI on Research 
Methodology and the Use of the software SPSS from 14 May to 16 May 2018. 
 
SRFTI every year provides three research fellowships in various fields of cinema and film 
making under the umbrella of ‘Indian Cinema’. The period of the fellowship is six months at 
the successful completion of which every fellow receives a sum of Rs.1,00,000. 
 
However, regarding the issue of rec ognition of courses of SRFTI by UGC, it is relevant to 
highlight here that a meeting with Chairman, UGC under the chairmanship of Secretary 
(I&B) was convened on 11th December,2017 to discuss the modalities pertaining to grant of 
“Deemed University” status  to IIMC. This proposed University would also include Film and 
Television Institute of India (FTII) Pune, Satyajit Ray Film and Television Institute (SRFTI) 
Kolkata and the National Centre of Excellence for Animation, Visual Effects, Gaming and 
Comics (Nco E-AVGC) proposed to be established in Mumbai. However, in the meeting, 
IIMC was advised by UGC to apply for “Deemed university Status” under De -Novo category 
on stand -alone basis i.e. without bringing FTII, Pune and SRFTI, Kolkata under the 
administrative control of the proposed Deemed University. It has been opined by Chairman, 
UGC that the decision i.r.o FTII, Pune and SRFTI, Kolkata may be taken at later stage once 
IIMC has stabilized over a period of two to three years after getting the Deemed Universit y 
status.  
 
Audit Comments 
 
The reply of the Ministry on the issue of recognition of courses of SRFTI by UGC could not 
be verified as SRFTI, Kolkata could not furnish any documents regarding meeting with 
Chairman, UGC convened under the chairmanship of Sec retary, I&B for recognition of 
courses of SRFTI. 
 
Ministry comments  
 
The minutes of meeting of Secretary (I&B) with Chairman (UGC) for recognition of courses 
of SRFTI may be seen at Annexure-F. 
 
(Ashokkumar R Parmar) 
Joint Secretary to the Government of India 
 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. M -11013/1/2018DO(FC) dated    
.11.2018) 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                MALLIKARJUN KHARGE, 
13th  December, 2018                                                                         Chairperson, 
22 Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)                                              Public Accounts Committee 
 

 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
CONTAINED IN THEIR NINETY-FOURTH REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations  14 
 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee           Total : 06  
which have been accepted by the Government:            Percentage: 42.85% 
 Para Nos. 1, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 14          
 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the             Total : 00  
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of              Percentage: 00% 
 the reply of the Government: 
            Para Nos. Nil 
 
 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of              Total : 05 
which replies of the Government have not been                      Percentage: 35.71% 
  accepted by the Committee and which require  
 reiteration: 
Para Nos. 2, 3, 5, 6 and 13 
 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of               Total : 03 
which the Government have furnished interim replies:               Percentage: 21.42% 
 Para Nos. 4, 11 and 12 
 
 
************** 
 