35

INTEGRATED CHILD DEVELOPMENT SERVICES
SCHEME

{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Fourteenth Report (16 Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2015-16)

THIRTY FIFTH REPORT

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO.2067

THIRTY FIFTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2015-16)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

INTEGRATED CHILD DEVELOPMENT SERVICES
SCHEME

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Fourteenth Report (16 Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT

Presented to Lok Sabha on: 22.12.2015

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 23.12.2015

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

December, 2015 /Pausa, 1937 (Saka}


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2015-16)

INTRODUCTION

CHAPTER!

CHAPTER I”

CHAPTER III*

CHAPTER IV*

CHAPTER V*

Observations/Recommendations which have
been accepted by the Government
Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the replies received from the Government
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration

Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which the Government have furnished interim
replies

APPENDICES

Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2015-16) held on
21 December, 2015

Analysis of the Action Taken by the
Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public

Accounts Committee contained in their

Fourteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) .....

* Not appended to this cyclostyled copy of the Report.

PAGE
(iii)

(iv)
1-18

19


ea ST ET ARES LS च २३०८५ TR EL Cae AM EE ET

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2015-16)
Prof. K.V. Thomas - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

2. Shri 5.5. Ahluwalia

3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
4. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey

6 Shri Gajanan Kirtikar

7 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" . पु
9. Shri Neiphiu Rio

10. Shri Dushyant Singh

11. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
42. — Dr. Kirit Somaiya

13... Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
14. — Shri Shivkumar Udasi

15. छा. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Naresh Agrawal -

17. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
18. Shri Anil Madhav Dave

19. Shri Vijay Goel

20. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
21... Shri Shantaram Naik

22. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri 8.1९. Singh - Additional Secretary
2. Shri TJayakumar — - ' Director

3. Smt. Bharti‘Tuteja - Deputy Secretary


INTRODUCTION

1, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2015-16), having been
| by the Committee, do present this Thirty Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Fourteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) Scheme" relating to Ministry of
Women and Child Development.

2. The Fourteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 27" April, 2015 and laid
in Rajya Sabha on 28" April, 2015. Replies of the Government to all the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received. The Public
Accounts Committee considered and adopted ‘the Twenty Sixth Report at their sitting,
held on 21" December, 2015. Minutes of the sitting are given at Appendix |.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the

Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to

them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Fourteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given

at Appendix-il.
NEW DELHI; PROF, K.V. THOMAS,
4{ December, 2015 Chairperson,

30 Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.


1
REPORT
PART -।
INTRODUCTORY

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken

by the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Fourteenth Report (167 Lok Sabha) on "Integrated
Child Development Services (ICDS) Scheme" based on C&AG Report No. 22
of 2012-13, Union Government (Civil), relating to Ministry of Women and Child
Development.
2. The Fourteenth Report (16" Lok Sabha), which was presented to Lok
Sabha on 27" April, 2015 and laid in Rajya Sabha on 28" April, 2015, contained
17 Observations and Recommendations. Action Taken Notes in respect of all
the Observations and Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of
Women and Child Development and are broadly categorized as under:

(i) | Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:

Para Nos. 1-4,6-8,10,12-14,16 and 17
Total: 13
Chapter - Il
(ii) | Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:

Para Nos. Nil
Total: Nil
Chapter - Ill
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:

Para Nos. Nil
Total: Nil
Chapter - 1४
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:

Para Nos. 5,9,11 and 15
Total: 4
Chapter - V


3. In their Fourteenth Report, the Committee examined the Integrated Child
Development Services (ICDS) Scheme of the Ministry of Women and Child
Development and found the following shortcomings:

i) Delay in operationalization of 10 out of 7076 sanctioned projects and
33000 out of 13.75 lakh sanctioned AWCs/Mini-AWCs as on
8.10.2014 and the target to operationalize 13,000 more AWCs by
31.3.2015. ,

ii) Non-Coverage of all areas inhabited by SC/ST/OBCs and minority
communities under the ICDS Scheme.

iii) | Co-ordination gap between the 5-tier (Central, State, District, Block
and Village) monitoring and review mechanism of ICDS Scheme

iv) Non-availability of basic infrastructure, utensils and medical kits/
equipments for Anganwadi Centres

v) Non-filling up of 1,14,368 vacant posts for AWWs, 3209 for CDPOs
and 19831 for Supervisors

vi) No uniformity on the implementation of the revised financial norms
on supplementary nutrition leading the shortfall in expenditure

vii) Shortfall of 40 to 100% on the expenditure against the funds
released for Information, Education and Communication (IEC) in a
number of test checked States, suggesting passive attitude towards
the importance of dissemination of information and educating the
beneficiaries about the Scheme.

4, The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Women and Child
Development in respect of all Observations and Recommendations of the
Committee have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. The
Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations and Recommendations made in the Original Report which either

need reiteration or merit comments.


OPERATIONALIZATION OF AWCs/ Mini AWCs
(Recommendation Para No.1)

5. In their Fourteenth Report, the Committee noted that the Integrated Child
Development Services Scheme (ICDS) was launched by the Government of
India in the year 1975 with objectives of holistic development of children (0-6
years) and pregnant and lactating mothers through a package of 6 services and
Ministry of Woman and Child Development decided in 1995 to universalize the
Scheme by covering all the 5239 Community Development blocks and 684
identified major urban slums in the country by the end of the Eighth Plan (1992-
97). A writ petition was filed in the Supreme Court on which the Court vide their
interim orders dated 28 November 2001, 29 April 2004, 07 October 2004 and 13
December 2006, had also directed the Government of India to universalize the
coverage of ICDS Scheme. Further, the Supreme Court directed the Government
of India in December 2006 to sanction and operationalize a minimum of 14 lakh
Anganwadi Centres (AWCs) by December 2008 in a phased and even manner.
The Committee, however, found that operationalization of 10 out of 7076
sanctioned projects and 33000 out of 13.75 lakh sanctioned AWCs/Mini-AWCs
were pending as on 8.10.2014 and the Ministry were targeting to operationalize
13,000 more AWCs by 31.3.2015.

1(a). The Committee were disappointed to find that even after launching a
Restructured and Strengthened ICDS in 2012 with an allocation of
Rs.1,23,580 crore, the Ministry were not likely to achieve the target
of covering 14 lakh habitations by AWCs in foreseeable future
though the deadline set by the Supreme Court was December,
2008. The Committee were of the view that the Ministry should take
urgent steps to operationalize all the pending sanctioned AWCs/Mini
AWCs and endeavor to reach the target of covering 14 lakh
habitations at the earliest and recommended that the Ministry need

to prescribe and strictly adhere to the timelines for setting up these


4

Anganwadis and desired to be apprised of the targets achieved at
the action taken stage. The Committee aiso desired that the Ministry
may furnish the report on Concurrent Independent Evaluation of
ICDS in 100 Blocks of High burden districts during 2013-14,
conducted by the Central Monitoring Unit (CMU).

1(b). Finding that the main reasons for non-operationalization of AWCs
reportedly were court cases, financial processes involved and delay
in recruitment of Anganwadi Workers (AWWs)/Anganwadi Helpers
(AWHs), the Committee recommended that to ensure
operationalisation of Anganwadis at the earlieast, the Ministry should
take up the issue of expediting the financial processes with the
respective State Mission Steering Groups and issue instructions to
the State Governments to take urgent steps to fill up the vacancies
on priority basis and apprise the Committee of the progress made in

this regard.

1(c). The Committee were disappointed to note that the Ministry had no
information on the coverage of habitations under ICDS as the State
Governments were responsible for confirming whether all the
habitations had been covered under the ICDS. The Committee
hoped now that National Informatics Centre has been assigned the
task of developing a web-based Management Information System, a
robust MIS would be developed within a reasonable timeframe so
that both the Ministry and the State Governments are able to timely
upload/ update all data relating to the coverage, sanction and
operationalization of the AWCs online. The Committee desired to be
apprised of the timeframe fixed for the database created under
ICDS.

6. The Ministry of Women and Child Development in their Action Taken Note
have stated as under:-


1(b).

5

"On reconciliation of number of sanctioned projects with States/UTs.,
there are 7075 sanctioned projects of which 7072 Projects become
operational as on 31.3.2015 leaving 3 pending projects [one each in
Manipur, Nagaland and Punjab]. As regards AWCs, all the 14 lakh
approved AWCs have been sanctioned to the States/UTs. Out of this,
13.46 AWCs have become operational as on 31.3.2015.

State Governments have been requested from time to time and
recently by the Secretary (MWCD) on 25.8.2015 in this regard."

. "In order to cover all the habitations in the country, States/ UTs were

requested to undertake ground level survey for opening additional
AWCs/mini-AWCs/ Anganwadi on Demand (AoD) and furnish their
demand. Based on the requirement received from States/UTs and the
availability of total AWCs with the Ministry, all the 14 lakh AWCs/mini-
AWCs/ Anganwadi on Demand (AoD) have been sanctioned to the
States/UTs. Out of 14 lakh AWCs sanctioned, as on 31.3.2015, 13.46
lakhs AWCs became operational. MWCD is continuously taking up the
matter with the States/UTs requesting them to operationalize the remaining
about 54000 AWCs. In this regard, recently Secretary (MWCD) sent a
letter dated 25.8.2015 to the States/UTs.

A copy of the report on Concurrent Independent Evaluation of ICDS in 100
Blocks of High burden districts during 2013-14 conducted by Central
Monitoring Unit (CMU) is available at link of NIPCCD namely:
http:/Awww.nipecd.nic.in/emu/r32. pdf."

"Under the restructured ICDS scheme, States/UTs are required to submit
their Annual Programme Implementation Plans duly approved by the State
Mission Steering Group which is considered and approved by the
Empowered Programme Committee (EPC) headed by Secretary, MWCD.
Therefore, there is active involvement of State Mission Steering Group in
the financial process. Funds are released on the basis of approvals given


by the EPC.

State/UTs have been requested from time to time and recently by
‘Secretary, MWCD vide his D.O. letter No.11013/2/2015-ME dated
25.8.2015 10 operationalise all the pending AWCs/minitAWCs/AoDs
including filling up of vacant posts of Child Development Project Officers
(CDPOs), Supervisors, Anganwadi workers (AWWs) and Helpers. As on
31.3.2015, there are 5495 in position CDPOs /ACDPOs out of 9047
sanctioned, 35735 in position Supervisors out of 55187 sanctioned, 12.87
lakh in position AWWs out of 14 lakh sanctioned and 11.64 in position
Helpers out of 12.83 lakh sanctioned."

1(c). "Under the web-based Management Information System (MIS) on ICDS,
8.1 lakhs AWCs/mini-AWCs/ 800 have been assigned 11 digit unique
code and process of assigning unique code for the remaining AWCs is
under way."

7. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that as on
31.3.2015, 7072 out of 7075 sanctioned projects have been operationalised
leaving 3 pending projects in Manipur, Nagaland & Punjab respectively. As
regards AWCs, 13.46 lakh out of 14 lakh sanctioned AWCs have been
operationalized as on 31.3.2015. The Committee while appreciating the
efforts desire the Ministry to persuade State Governments to make the
remaining 54,000 AWCs and 3 sanctioned projects operational at the
earliest. The Committee further note that 3552 posts of CDPOs, 19452 posts
of Supervisors, 1.13 lakh posts of AWWs and 1.19 lakh posts of Helpers are

still vacant. The Committee exhort the Ministry to take urgent steps to fill
up the vacancies at the earliest and reiterate their earlier recommendation
that a cadre for ICDS may be created to meet the personnel requirements

under the Scheme. The Committee while, noting the reply of the Ministry
that the process of assigning 11 digit unique code to all AWCs under the
web-based Management Information System (MIS) on ICDS, is under way,

desire that the web-based MIS should include the fields as spelt by the


7

Committee in their earlier recommendation viz data relating to coverage,
sanction and _operationalization etc. The Committee further hope that the
process of assigning the codes would be completed at the earliest,

COVERAGE OF 61 SC/ST/OBC AND MINORITY __ COMMUNITY
HABITATIONS UNDER ICDS SCHEME

(Recommendation Para No.2)

8. In their Fourteenth Report, the Committee noted that consequent to the
Supreme Court's order dated 13 December 2006 stipulating, inter alia,
identification of SC and ST hamlets/ habitations for opening of new Anganwadi
Centres (AWCs) on a priority basis, the Ministry, issued sanctions for opening of
additional AWCs to States/UTs with the conditions that villages predominantly
inhabited by population belonging to SC/ST and minority community should be
given priority and an AWC in a village, as far as feasible, should be located in the
areas inhabited by population from SC/ST and minority community but the State
Governments were to certify that all SC, ST, OBC and minority community
habitations had been saturated. Audit had recommended that the Ministry should
conduct a survey to have an assurance that all habitations, especially those
inhabited by SC/ST/OBC and Minority community population are covered under
the Scheme. The Committee had observed that the Ministry kept waiting for the
response of the States and 19 States had reported compliance after 8 years of
the Supreme Court order. The Committee felt that the Ministry should have been
pro-active in its approach, identified the areas inhabited by SC/ST/OBC and
minority community as per Census 2001/2011 and sought information from the
State Governments about coverage of the identified habitations under the
Scheme. The Committee desired that the Ministry identify such habitations in rest
of the States and the respective State Governments may be asked to formulate
and send proposals for setting up of Anganwadi on Demand (AODs) in
habitations not yet covered under the Scheme.


8

9. The Ministry of Women and Child Development in their Action Taken Note
have stated as under:-

“Under universalization of ICDS scheme, 14 lakh AWCs were
sanctioned. All these AWCs have been sanctioned. As per the
instructions issued by MWCD, the AWCs are to be located in an area
inhabited by SC/ST/OBC population.

The States have also been authorized to relocate an AWC if there is
any uncovered area subject to certain conditions. A letter No.1-19/2013-
CD-I dated 1.12.2014 in this regard has been issued to all the States/UTs.”

10. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that under
universalization of ICDS scheme, 14 lakh Anganwadi Centres (AWCs) have
been sanctioned and the Ministry had instructed the States/ UTs that the
AWCs were to be located in an area inhabited by SC/ST/OBC population.
The States were also authorized to relocate an AWC if there were any
uncovered area subject to certain conditions. The Committee find that
apart from issuing a letter in this regard, the Ministry have not taken any
concrete steps to cover the area inhabited by the SC/ST/OBC communities.
The Committee deplore the non-committal attitude of the Ministry toward
coverage of the areas inhabited by SC/ST/OBC population under the ICDS
Scheme. The Committee are surprised to note that after issuing a letter to
the States/UTs way back on 1.12.2014 the Ministry is still groping in the
dark about the setting up of AWCs as well as its relocation in uncovered
areas inhabited with SC/ST/OBC population. The Ministry should have
vigorously pursued the matter with the States/UTs authorities to
accomplish the target. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that instead_of
merely instructing the States/ UTs that too after being pointed out by the
Audit, the Ministry should have suo moto identified such areas in the

country and instructed the States/UTs for setting up AWCs there. The
Committee desire to be apprised_of the latest number of AWCs located/



9

relocated_in_ the areas inhabited by SC/ST/OBC and other minority

communities.
(Recommendation Para No.3)

11. In their Fourteenth Report, the Committee noted that the Supreme Court
stipulated that rural communities should be entitled to an Anganwadi on Demand
(AOD), not later than three months from the date of demand in cases where a
settlement has at least 40 children under six but no Anganwadi. The Ministry
had, during third phase of expansion of ICDS Scheme (October 2008), approved
20,000 additional AODs. The Committee were disappointed to note that only
2030 AODs were sanctioned for six States by the Ministry in 2011-2012 and the
delay in sanction of AODs was due to the failure of State Governments to send
their proposals in the prescribed format as they mixed the proposals for AODs
with the proposals for setting up new AWCs under third phase of expansion. The
Committee viewed that delay in setting up of AODs defeats the very purpose of
the concept. The Committee further viewed the suggestion of the Supreme Court
that the concept of setting up of AODs only to compensate the procedural delays
but neither the Ministry nor the State Governments could take timely action. The
Committee felt that, instead of entrusting the responsibility of sending the AOD
proposals entirely with the State Government, the Ministry could have involved
the NGOs and SHGs active in the rural areas for identifying and sending
requests directly to the Ministry for setting up AODs in consultation with the State
Governments. In addition to setting up the AWCs in urban slum dwellings, the
Committee viewed that the reach of AWCs need to be extended to cover areas in
the vicinity of large factories and industrial areas where substantial number of
women workers are employed and the timings of these AWCs may be made co-
terminus with the timings of the factories/ industries in that area for the benefit of

children of such workers and P&LMs among those as well.

12. 116 Ministry of Women and Child Development in their Action Taken Note

have stated as under:-


10

“During ICDS universalization, 14 lakh AWCs (including 20,000
Anganwadi-on-demand) were sanctioned. All these 14 lakh AWCs have
been sanctioned and as on 31.3.2015, 13.46 lakh have become

operational.

The States/UTs have been authorized to reallocate any nearby AWC
for any uncovered population in urban, rural and tribal areas vide MWCD
letter No.1-19/2013-CD-I dated 01.12.2014. A letter No.4-2/2015-CD-I
dated 24.9.2015 has also been sent to the States/UTs for such survey and
seeking the possibilities of involvement of SHGs/ NGOs regarding
coverage of habitations inhabited by SC/ST/OBC.”

13. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that 14 lakh AWCs
(including 20,000 AoD) have been sanctioned and in pursuance to
Committee’s recommendation a letter has been issued to the States/UTs
for survey regarding reallocation of any nearby AWC for any uncovered
population in urban, rural and tribal areas and for seeking the possibilities
of involvement of SHGs/ NGOs regarding coverage of habitations inhabited
by SC/ST/OBC. The Committee, however, find that the Ministry has
conveniently ignored the recommendation of the Committee regarding
setting up of the AWCs in the urban slum dwellings and the need to extend
the reach of AWCs to cover areas in the vicinity of large factories and
industrial areas where substantial number of women workers are
employed. The Committee reiterate their recommendation that the Ministry
while sanctioning future AWCs give adequate attention to the areas where
a large number of women workers work and the timings of such AWCs may

also be adjusted according to the needs of these women.



14

BASIC INFRASTRUCTURAL FACILTIES AND EQUIPMENTS FOR AWCS
(Recommendation Para No. 6)

14. In their Fourteenth Report, the Committee noted that Anganwadi Centre
(AWC), being the focal point for delivery of ICDS services accommodating upto
40 children during day-time, require basic infrastructure for which the States/UTs
were to arrange for AWC buildings, either through community support or by hiring
suitable buildings on rent or by tapping funds from other schemes, for
construction of buildings. In 2011, the Ministry had issued guidelines for
construction of AWCs which state that an AWC must have a separate sitting
room for children/women, separate kitchen, store for storing food items, child
friendly toilets, separate space for children to play (indoor and outdoor activities)
and safe drinking water facilities. The Committee were dismayed to note that 866
out of 2701 test-checked AWCs were at sites other than their own buildings or
rented premises such as primary schools functioning in school verandahs, under
trees, open places and in dilapidated/ incomplete buildings or kachcha
structures. Further, separate space for cooking, storing food items and indoor
and outdoor activities for children was not available in 40% to 65% of the test
checked AWCs in different States. The Committee felt that non-availability of
quality infrastructure affected the motivation on part of the parents to send their
wards to the AWCs and also exposed these children to the vagaries of the
weather. The Committee, therefore, were of the strong view that the Ministry
closely monitor the construction of AWC buildings taken up by the State
Governments so as to ensure availability of good quality buildings for the AWCs
fulfilling the prescribed standards and shift the AWCs functioning under the trees,
in open places, dilapidated buildings and kachcha structures to pucca structures,
which can either be rented premises or make shift arrangements in the
Government owned buildings in the vicinity. The Committee also noted that
States have reportedly been given approval for 44709 new AWC buildings and
upgradation of 42642 AWCs during 2013-14 and desired to be apprised of the
achievement made. The Committee further desired that timelines be fixed for


12

construction of owned buildings for all AWCs and strictly followed up. Further the
Committee were of the view that all AWC buildings should have a display board
providing information on the number of beneficiaries, services being provided,
medicines available etc. in local language for better outreach.

15. The Ministry of Women and Child Development in their Action Taken Note
have stated as under:-

“A letter No.4-2/2015-CD-I dated 24.9.2015 regarding the
construction of buildings for all AWCs has been sent to States/UTs
prescribing a timeline of four months.”

16. The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry have prescribed a
timeline of four months to the States/UTs for completion of construction of
owned buildings for all AWCs. The Committee desire that the Ministry
monitor the progress of construction and obtain a monthly progress report
from_the States/UTs 10 ensure construction of the AWCs as per the
stipulated guidelines for construction of AWCs in 2011 and completion of
the buildings within the prescribed timeline. The Committee desire to be
apprised of the details on the efforts made by the Ministry to accommodate
the AWCs functioning under trees, in open places, dilapidated and kaccha
structures and that whether the Ministry, pursuant to the recommendation
of the Committee, have taken urgent action towards shifting these AWCs to
rented premises or in make shift arrangements in Government buildings as
a_temporary measure until the completion of the construction of owned
buildings for the AWCs.



13

NUTRITIONAL NEEDS OF THE CHILD AND MOTHER

17.

(Recommendation Para No.12)

In their Fourteenth Report the Committee noted that the latest financial

norms for providing Supplementary Nutrition (SN) are Rs.6 per day for children

aged 6-72 months, Rs. 9 per day for severely malnourished children and Rs. 7

per day for pregnant women and lactating mothers. The Committee appreciated

that the said norms have since been revised and observed that

18.

(i) Since nutritional requirements of a 6 month old child differ from a 6
year old child, prescribing the same amount for the whole age group might
not be helpful in catering to the nutritional requirements of two different age
groups, the Ministry need to take up the issue with the child health experts
and apprise the Committee of their opinion.

(ii) In case of malnourished children, the ICDS functionaries must be
appropriately trained to analyse the reasons for their matnourishment and
counsel the parents on the need for nutritious diet for overall growth of
children, Where poverty is the major reason for malnourished children,
steps may be taken to simultaneously cover the parents under other

welfare schemes of the Government of India.

(iii) | The financial norms for providing SN be linked to the Cost Inflation
Index and revised twice a year.

The Ministry of Women and Child Development in their Action Taken Note

have stated as under:-

‘i) The financial norms for supplementary nutrition for various ICDS
beneficiaries were revised in the year 2012. Although the financial norms
for supplementary nutrition for 6 months-3 years and 3-6 years normal
children are same but their nutritional requirements are different. The
nutritional requirements for different groups of ICDS beneficiaries have
been listed in the nutrition guidelines issued by the Ministry on 24.2.2009.


14

il) For malnourished children, under the restructured ICDS, apart from
providing higher financial norms and additional nutrition, there is a
provision for holding Sneha Shivirs at the AWC level which is based on
positive deviance approach. In these Shivirs, not only the severely
malnourished children are attended, their parents are also counselled on
various approaches to manage the malnourished children.

iii) | The proposal to link the financial norms for SN with the Cost Inflation
Index was not agreed to.”

19. The Committee find from the reply of the Ministry that although the
financial norms for supplementary nutrition for 6 months to 3 years and 3-6
years normal children are same but their nutritional requirements are
different which have been listed in nutritional guidelines dated 24.2.2009.
The Committee are of the view that besides age, height and weight of the
children are vital parameters in ascertaining their nutritional needs. The
Committee therefore reiterate their recommendation that_child health
experts may be engaged to evolve a comprehensive criteria for determining
the nutritional requirements of children, link the financial norms for SN with
the Cost Inflation Index and the Committee be apprised of their opinion.

IMPLEMENTATION OF THE REVISED FINANCIAL NORMS
(Recommendation Para No. 13)

20. In their Fourteenth Report, the Committee noted a shortfall of 15% to 36%
in the expenditure on Supplementary Nutrition (SN) during the period 2006-11.
The average daily expenditure per beneficiary on SN as per the audit was
Rs.1.52 to Rs.2.01 against the norm of Rs.2.06 during 2006-09 and Rs.3.08 to
Rs.3.64 against the norm of Rs.4.21 during 2009-11. The Committee further
noted that there was a gap of 33% to 45% between the number of eligible
beneficiaries identified and those receiving SN during 2006-07 t0 2010-11. The


15

Ministry reasoned that the shortfall in expenditure on SN by States was due to
longer time taken by some of the States to implement the revised financial norms
for SN and also delay in supply of SN at the AWC due to various unavoidable
reasons at the field level etc. The Committee were not able to comprehend as to
how the Ministry kept on releasing SN funds at new rates, despite not getting
confirmation from the States that the new rates have actually been implemented,
The Committee recommended that the Ministry take urgent steps to ensure
implementation of the revised financial norms by all the States at the earliest and
apprise the Committee of the action taken in this regard.

21... The Ministry of Women and Child Development in their Action Taken Note
stated as under:-

“As per the Statements of Expenditure (SoEs) received from
States/UTs, there are only 5 states which are providing the supplementary
nutrition to the beneficiaries at the old cost norms. Instructions have been
issued to these states to follow the new cost norms / revised financial
norms for providing SN to the beneficiaries immediately.”

22. The Committee are dismayed to note that even after the lapse of more
than two years since the revision of financial norms for supplementary
nutrition in 2012, still there are 5 States which are providing supplementary
nutrition to the beneficiaries at the old cost norms. Noting that the Ministry
have issued instructions to these States to follow the new cost
horms/revised financial norms for providing supplementary nutrition, the
Committee observe that merely instructing and entrusting the entire
responsibility of implementation of the norms on these States would not

yield desired results. The Committee desire that the Ministry look into the
matter_and_identify the reasons as to why these States have not been
foHowing the revised norms, and persuade 11858 States in
rectifying/resolving the shortfalls urgently, and accordingly instruct these
States to implement the revised financial norms.


16

EDUCATION AND DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION ON ICDS SCHEME

(Recommendation Para No.16)
23, In their Fourteenth Report, the Committee noted that Information,
Education and Communication (IEC) and the Nutrition and Health Education
(NHED) were two components of ICDS aimed at sustained behavior and
attitudinal change of society for holistic development of children. The main
objective of IEC is to create awareness and build up image of ICDS, stimulate
demand for its services, affect and sustain behavioral and attitudinal changes in
child caring, nutrition and health care practices and elicit sustained community
participation. Audit found a shortfall of 40 to 100% on the expenditure against the
funds released for IEC in a number of test checked States. The Committee
agreed with the recommendation of the Audit that IEC activities should be
planned in advance in accordance with the financial norms and the expenditure
be monitored by the Ministry to examine the reasons for shortfall. The Committee
were of the view that seminars/ workshops, monthly meets, home visits,
screening of films/ slideshows, campaigns to community on Infant & Young Child
Feeding (IYCF) and SN and other components of the IEC & NHED aim to
effectively deliver the benefits of the Scheme to the maximum eligible population
and therefore should be undertaken earnestly by the Ministry and the State
Governments. The Committee further viewed that a digital handheld device may
also be provided to the AWWs under the IEC equipment to help them in getting
and disseminating information, in augmenting the education levels of both
functionaries and the beneficiaries and effective communication. The Committee
were of the view that every AWC should have Display Board to indicate the
details of functionaries upto the level of CDPO, the details of the beneficiaries,
the services supposed to be given at an AWC and the services being provided,
list of equipment available at the AWC, events proposed during the month and
important dates for immunization, monthly check-ups, visits of other functionaries
and various IEC activities. All the displayed information must be verified and
initialed with date by the Supervisor during their routine visits to the AWC. The


17

Committee would aiso like to be apprised of further progress in the nationwide
‘Campaign against malnutrition’ launched in November, 2012 as on date.

24. The Ministry of Women and Child Development in their Action Taken Note
stated as under:-

“The Food and Nutrition Board of the Ministry, through its 43 regional
field units, is engaged in conducting training programmes in nutrition, in
addition to advocacy towards generating awareness through nutrition
education programmes on importance of healthy balanced diets
throughout the lifecycle through the use of locally available foods, mass
awareness campaigns, use of electronic and print media and celebration of
National events like World Breastfeeding Week, etc., especially
emphasizing the importance of good infant and young child feeding
practices.

The Nationwide Information, Education and Communication (IEC)
campaign against malnutrition which comprised of four stages namely (1)
Create Awareness, (2) Clarion Call, (3) Action Points, and (4) Community
using Tools/Services was launched by the Hon'ble President of India in
2012. The first cycle of the campaign was undertaken during the year
2013-14 and the second cycle during 2014-15.”

25. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that the Food and
Nutrition Board of the Ministry, through its 43 regional field units, is
engaged in conducting training programmes in nutrition, in addition to
advocacy towards generating awareness through nutrition education
programmes on importance of healthy balanced diets throughout the
lifecycle through the use of locally available foods, mass awareness
campaigns, use of electronic and print media and celebration of National
events like World Breastfeeding Week, etc., especially emphasizing the
importance of good infant and young child feeding practices. The
Committee, however find that the Ministry has not submitted its reply on
the recommendation of the Committee that a digital handheld device may


18

also be provided to the AWWs. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their

recommendation that to improve the implementation of various measures
taken by the Ministry and for effective monitoring, a digital handheld device
may be provided to the AWWs.

NEW DELHI; PROF. K.V. THOMAS,
21 December, 2015 Chairperson,

30 Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


(APPENDIX ~ Il)

(Vide para 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE

OBSERVATIONS/

RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS

COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR FOURTEENTH REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK
SABHA)

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

tiv)

(v)

Total No of Observations/Recommendations

Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
which have been accepted by the Government:

Para Nos. 1-4,6-8,10,12-14,16 and 17
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received
from the Government:

-Nil-
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which

replies of Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:

-Nil-

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies:

Para Nos.5,9,11 and 15

17

Total: 13
Percentage -76.47%

Total:
Percentage - 0%

Total:

Percentage - 0%

Total: 4
Percentage - 23.53%