79

ADARSH CO-OPERATIVE HOUSING SOCIETY,
MUMBAI

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recominendations of
the Committee contained in their 91° Report (15 Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF DEFENCE

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2017-18)

SEVENTY-NINTH REPORT

SIXTEETNH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2712

SEVENTY-NINETH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2017-18)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

ADARSH CO-OPERATIVE HOUSING SOCIETY,
MUMBAI

{Action Taken by the Gavernment on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Ninety-First Report (15 Lok Sabha)t

MINISTRY OF DEFENCE

Presented to Lok Sabha on:

Laid in Rajya Sabha on:

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

July, 2017 /Ashadha, 1939 (Saka}


CONTENTS

PAGE.
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (iti)
COMMITTEE (2017-18)
INTRODUCTION {iv)
CHAPTER | ROpOtt .............................. ०" >> तल ले ने 1

CHAPTER lt" Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ........... eer न

CHAPTER Ill? Observations/Recommendations — which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
replies received from the Government :

CHAPTER IV? | Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration a

CHAPTER V* Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which the Government have furnished interim

ioc) 9) | (23: OES
APPENDICES”
¥* I Minutes of the 6" sitting of the Public Accounts
Coramittee (2047-18) held on
14” July, 2017
il Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on

the Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their Ninety-first
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha}

Not appended fo fhe cyclostyied copy of the Report ~

७1)


OPN OARYN

14.
12.
43.
14.
15.

16.
47.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

Pens

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2017-18)

Shri Mallikarjun Kharge - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
Shri Nishikant Dubey

Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Smit. Riti Pathak

Shyi Neiphiu Rio

Shri Abhishek Singh

Prof. Ram Shanker

Dr. Kirit Somaiya

Shri Anurag Singh Thakur

Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi

Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Naresh Agrawal

Shri Satyaveat Chaturvedi
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Shri Shantaram Naik

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
Shri Ajay Sanchett

Shri Bhupender Singh Yadav

SECRETARIAT

Shri AK. Singh - Additional Secretary
Shri T.Jayakumar - Director

Srat. Anju Kukreja - Under Secretary

Shri Shankamath Sharma - Committee Assistant

uid


INTRODUCTION

1, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2017-18), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Seventy-ninth Report (Sicenth Lok
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Ninety-first Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on “Adarsh
Co-Operative Housing Society, Mumbai” relating to Ministry of Defence.

2. The Nincty-first Report was presented to Lok Sabhailaid in Rajya Sabha on
9" December, 2013. Replies of the Government to ali the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the’ Report were received. The Public
Accounts Committee considered and adopted the Seventy-ninth Report at their sitting

held on 14" July, 2017. Minutes of the sitting are given at Appendix 1.

3. For facilily of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the

Report.

A. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to

them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations!
Recommendations contained in the Seventy-Ninth Report (16" Lok Sabha) is given at
Appendix-i.

NEW DELHI; SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE
47 July, 2017 Chairperson,
26 Ashadha, 1939 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

(४४)


REPORT

PART-1

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the

Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in

their Ninety-First Report (15" Lok Sabha) on “Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society,

Mumbai",

2.

The Ninely-First Report which was presented to Lok Sabha on 09" December,

2013 contained 17 Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken Noles on aif the

Observations/Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Défence and

are categorized as under:

®

{ii)

(iit)

Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the

Government:
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 13, 15, 15 & 17

Total; 42
Chapter - It
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to

pursue in view of the repiles received from the Government:

Para Nos, NIL

Total: NIL
: Chapter - Il
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replics of the

Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require

reiteration:

Para Nos. 12 & 14

Total; 2
Chapter - IV


(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have

furnished interim replies/rio replies: -

Para No. 9,10 & 11

Total: 3
Chapter -V

3. The Committee desire that the Ministry of Defence furnish finalfconclusive
Action Taken Note on the ObservationfRecommendation Nos. 9, 10 & 11 of their
91* Report (15 Lok Sabha} in respect of which the Ministry have furnished

‘interim replies wifhin one month of the presentation of this Report to Parliament.

4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Defence on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in the Ninety-First Report
(ism Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of the Report. In the
succeeding paragraphs, the Committee have dealt wilh the Action Taken by the
Goverment on their Obscrvations/Recommendations made in the Original Report -

which either need comment ar reiteration.
1. Strengthening the Management(Ownership of Defence Lands

5. The Committee in their Original Report (91 Report) had observed that audit
scrutiny revealed how a group of select officials holding key post subverted rules and
regulations, suppressed facts and took the ruse of welfare of servicemen and war
-widews and children. The Committee’s ‘scrutiny corroborated the irregularities in the
entire process right from allocation of fand to the Society, obtaining ‘No Objection’ from
the Army, extension of various concessions by Government of Maharashtra, getting ‘No
Objection Certificate(NOC}' वीणा BEST for transfer of developmental rights of the
adjotning fand, obtaining clearance for residential development in Coastal Regulation
Zone by cortain officials who abused their official position for personal gain. Asked how

the NOC was given to the Society, the Minisiry of Defence stated that the NOC was “~

issued by the local Defence authorities because of mismanagement of Defence land,
poor record keeping and lack of, mutation of land already in possession of the Armed
Forces, Further, the mulliplicity of agencies managing Defence fand had contributed
to the matacministralion with no centralized information being available on Jand
holdings. With the lines of responsibility and consequently of accountability being


blued, no agency had accepied responsibility on many aspects of land management,
The Committee considered this a monumental failure at all levels of governance.
Apparently, the Public Servants entrusted with 18 rosponsibilities of safeguarding the
Public trust brazenly betrayed the fiduciary {rust by acting against afl norms of Public
interest and probity. . :

@.

fil).

(1)

(2)

पु [Para-2 Nincty-First
Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15" Lok Sabha)]

‘The Ministry of Defence in their Action Taken Note submitted as under:

"The iregularities pertain to the process fromm allocation of land to the Society,
obtaining ‘NOC’ from the Army, extension of various concessions by the Govt. of
Maharashtra, NOC given by the BEST for transfer of developmental tights of the
adjoining land, obtaining clearance for residential development in Coastal
Regulation Zone by certain officials, However, it is atso correct that the land in
Block - Vi had not been formally transforred to the Ministry of Defence/ Army by
the Government of Maharashtra nor mutated in Revenue Records, It was duc to
this reason that there was no entry in the Military Lands Register (MLR)
maintained by Defence Estate Offico(DEO) Mumbai in this regard.

Defence Fstaies Department of Ministry of Defence maintains two types of
important lands registers. One register is for lands within Cantonments and the
other register is for lands outside Cantonments, Tho former register is calfed
General Lands Register (GLR) and the latter register is called Military Lands
Register (MLR}. Both the registers record survey number-wise the ownership of
land, iis area, persons in occupation, any fransfer/sale transaction and other
summary details. Both the registers aro maintained in every(Defence Estates
Office (DEO) Circle. GLR is maintained in every Cantonment Board Office for
land placed under the management of Cantonment Boards, [Each office
maintains multiple volumes of both these registers. There are 62 Cantonment
Board Offices and 37 DEO Circles.

It is alse correct fo slate that no centratized information was available. However,
pursuant to the Adarsh Housing Scheme incident, the following initiatives have
been taken by Ministry of Defencel DGDE to improve land records management,
strengthen contro! and custody of defence land and to prevent any arbitrary issue
of ‘NOC’ for allotment/ usc of defence land:-

Computerisation of Defence land invelving data जाए, its verffication,
authentication of land records in Raksha Bhoomi Software in respect of all
Cantonment Boards and Defence Estates Offices has been undertaken, है

Digitization, Indexing, Microfilming, Protection and Preservation of Land Records
has also been underlaken. ‘This wilt help create a durable electronic database for


(3)

(4)

(५)

{v).

better management of documents thereby protecting. vital govt. interest in its
estates, simultaneously, establishing Archival Unit and Resource
Centre(AU&RC) as central repository of old records for easy retrieval of land
records. है

Survey, Demarcation and Verification of all Defence Lands{outside as well as
inside Cantonments and Boards) is going on . पु .

Land Audit has been carried out in almost all the 37 DEO Circics. This will be a
continuing process to ensure compliance with fald down instructions on
management and optimum utilization of land.

A policy on issue of NOC in respect of land adjacent to defence land has already
been issued by MOD vide fetier No.11026/2/201 1/D(Lands) dated 18.05.2011;
this was issued specifically inter alia with reference to the affairs of the Adarsh
Co-operative Housing Society.

Multiplicity of Agencies: Defence land is located across the country and is under
active use of thé three Services, other Defence Departments/ Organizations and
persons. Thus, management of land becomes a complex matter involving large
number of stakeholders and various tenures of holdings which are governed
under different statutes and policy instructions. Ministry, while replying fo one 0
the recommendations made by C & AG in its 357 Report, has made the following
submnission- है है

रत Keeping in view, the nature of accupation of land by the Services, an
omnibus authority will not serve the purpose. LMA/DEOs do not have any
powers 10 dispose fand. instructions regarding issue of NOCs and ceding ०
Defence lands have already been issucd. The land audit will strengthen the land
management system further. Defence Estates have been managing land
keeping in viow all the rules/regulations issued by Ministry of Defence. Creation
of an authority as suggested may not serve the required purpose, rather may add
increased financial burden. Instead; Defence Estates organization can be
strengthened by way of having more and more officers nominated from the sctect
list of the Civil Services exams and rationalization of rules, instructions and

delegation of powers..........".

Yhe Ministry is committed to improving the procedures and processes of land
management, including strengthening of the Defence Estates Department, fo
ensure efficient and optimal utilization of available land and (0 prevent alienation
of land in an arbitrary or collusive manner, Now computerization of Defence Land
is under way post provisioning of space in the Cloud Server and necessary
hardware and software by the NIC. The indexing, scanning and digitization of
files identified in the project has been completed in respect of all DEO Circles
and 62 Cantt. Boards, "98% of physical ‘survey has been completed by Cantt. *
Boards while 97.55% of defence tand outside Cantonments has also been
surveyed. है


w

PAC/Audit will be kepi apprised of further developments made towards
completion of computerization of Defence Land stated to be under way as well as
towards completion of the remaining physical survey of defence tan fill finality.” ”

7. The Committee note the initiatives taken by the Ministry of Defence in the
aftermath of the irregularities in the process of allocation of land to the Adarsh
Housing Society, regarding NOC from the Army, extension of various
concessions by the Government of Maharashtra, NOC given by fhe BEST for
transfer of devclopmental rights of adjoining land, obtaining clearance for
residential development in Coastal Regulation Zone by certain officials. The
Committee are shocked to note that the Action Taken Note of the Ministry is silent
about the action initiated against a group of officials holding key posts in the
Ministry who violated rules and regulations and committed wunpardonable
irregularities under the ruse of welfare of servicemen, war widows and-children.
The Committee desire that the Ministry must fix responsibility of the erring
officials, award exemplary punishmont to them and apprise the Committee
accordingly within four months of presentation of this report. The Committee are
dismayed to note that the Ministry failed. miserably to accomplish even the
physica! survey, clear demarcation and proper verification of its entire land
leaving enough scope for irregularities and alienation of its land in an arbitrary
and collusive manner. The Committee also deprecafe the lackadaisical attitude of
the Ministry as the updation of defence land records in Raksha Bhoomi Software
has not been completec even after a lapse of more fhan two and half years of the
presentation of 917 Report of PAC (450 Lok Sabha}, The Committee, therefore,
desire that updation of Raksha Bhoomi software be done on 8 priority basis and
regularly update the same. so

“ah Acquiring Land in licu of the Defence Land already transferred

8. The Commitiee in their original Report had noted that according to the
Agreement in 1958, between Ministry of Defonce and the then Government of Bombay,
41 acres and 8 guntas of Defence land from Santacruz Rifle Range was transferred to
the Government of Bombay for construction of Western Express Highway on the
condition, that the State Government in lieu shall give land, in Block VI, Colaba, Bombay
failing which the State Government was to pay the market value of the land. Out of this,
a piece of fand measuring 3854 square meters in Block VI, Colaba was under
consideration for exchange with State Government in 180 of the aforesaid Santacruz
land. Though this land had been under the occupation of the Army, its ownership was
not transferred in favour of Ministry of Defense:
Defence land already transferred to ‘State Government was also not finalized. This
clearly indicated that the Ministry of Defence did not have a Proper mechanism to
Secure ownership of its properties. Obviously, the Ministry of Defence failed fo get the

her, the claim for payment in ticu of ..


land transferred from the State Government when it had surrendered its land for the
construction of Western Express Highway. It was also not clear as to why the Ministry
did not seek the market value of the land which it had surrendered. The Committee
sought reasons from the MoD for the same within 3 months of the presontation of the
Report.

[Para-4 Nincty-First
Report of the Public Accounts Commiitee
(157 Lok Sabha}}

9. The Ministry of Defence in their Action Taken Note submitted as under:

"It is seen from the records of DEO, Mumbai that the matler regarding transfer of
the State Govt. land to Ministry of Defence in exchange of defence land already
transferred had been taken up with the Govt, of Maharashtra since 1963 on a
regular basis. It is further seen from the report of DEO, Mumbai that the Collector
Mumbai in 1964 had informed that the land from Bloek Vi Back Bay reclamation
cannot be transfered to the Defence Department. There are serics of
correspondence thereafter with the office of DEO, Mumbai on this matter. The
950, Mumbai in 1995 also had- taken up the matter with the Govt. of
Maharashtra for payment of the full market value for the land already transferred
to the State Govt. The DEO had also taken up the matter with the PWD in 1995
for fulfilling the condition of the transfer. The matter was also raised in various
Civil Mititary Liaison Conference (CMLC) meetings held in 1997, 2002 and 2013.
The State Govt. has been maintaining that the land in Block VI is not available
and provision of land at Thane and Panvel could be considered in lieu of [and
already transferred to the State Govi. The matter regarding seeking the market
value of the land already surrendered was not pursued since discussions with the
State Govt. and LIMA were on for provision of land in lieu of defence land already
transferred.

During the course of vetting of the abovesaid Action Taken Note, the Audit made
the following observations:

"Though the minutes of the CMLCs of 2002 and 2013 have been altached with
the revised Action Taken Note(the CMLC of 1997 is, however, still nat furnished),
{he reply however, still does not corroborate the statement about the matter
being pursued wilh the Maharashtra Government on regular -busis since 1963, as
copics of the periodic correspondence made in this regard has not been
furnished. The Action Taken note is therefore, fortnally vetted subject to the
condition that the Audit comment may be reproduced in a separate sheet, reply
provided thereagainst and the same attached wilh the same as part thereof."

The reply of the Ministry on the aforesaid Audit observation is given as under


Despite best cffotts CMLC minutes of 1997 could not be obtained, Delails of the
correspondence made with the concerned authorities have alteady been
inclucted in the main reply(Appendix ||॥ & HID. Since the matter became sub-
judice no further correspondence have been made with the authorities."

10. The Committce are extremely unhappy to tote from the reply of the
Ministry that cven after a lapse of nearly 45 years the Ministry of Defence has
failed to get-the land of the State Government of Maharashtra transferred in lieu
of tho 41 acres and 8 guntas tand of Ministry of Défence from Santa Cruz Rifle
-Range previously handed over to the Government of Bombay for construction of
Western Express Highway. The agreement entered into in 1958 between the
Ministry of Defonce and the then Government of Bombay clearly stipulates that
the State Government shall give land, in Block VI, Colaba Bombay (now Mumbai)
failing which the State Government was to pay the market value of land. The
Ministry could neither obtain the land in Block VI, Colaba or anywhere else nor
receive the market value of the land on the ploa that discussions with the State
Government are on for provision of land, The Committee tako serious note that
after 2002 the Civil Military Liaison Conference (CMLC) which is convened to
settle land issues etc. met only in 20143 and feel that had CMLC conducted
meetings regularly the Issue could have been settled much earlier. The
Committee, further desire that the Ministry to make carnest efforts either to get
the compensation aS per agreement or get an alternative fand from the

Government of Maharashtra in a time bound manner.

i, Conduction of Regular CMLC Meeting for perusal with the concerned State
Government for 100 percent Defence Land Mutation

11... ‘The Committee in their Original Report had observed thaf the said particular
piece of land was not recorded in Military Land Register, Asked to explain the reason for
the land not being mutated in the name of ‘MoD, it was submitted that the Collector,
Mumbai had intimated ‘in 1964 that land from Block VI could not be transferred.
Admitting before the Committee, the Secrelary stated ‘poor record keeping and tack of
mutation of thie land aiready in possession of the Armed Forces’ wero’ among the major
reasons that contributed .to. mismanagement of Defence Land. He added thal an
impetus had been given to the computerization of Defence Land records. It was also
added that subsequent to the alleged scam of Adarsh Housing Society a number of
remedial steps have been taken by the Ministry. These included computerization of alt


Defence Land records and a project of survey and demarcation of Defence Land. The
Committee were also informed that computerization was being done for the whole
country and as on date two registers namely Military Land Register and General Land
Register were being computerized. In addition, two more projects had been initiated for
physical verification and demarcation of Defence Land on ground and digitalization and
also microfilming of all land records for their preservation. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the outcome of such initiatives within three months of the presentation of
this report.

[Para-7 Ninety-First
Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(18" Lok Sabha)]

42. The Ministry of Defence in their Action Taken Note submitted as under:

"As per the information made available by DGDE, though the Govt. of India had
accorded sanction for transfer of defence land at Santacruz Rifle Range for
construction of Western Express Highway in exchange of State Govt. land in
Colaba aller working out tentative scheme for the reclamation of Block VI, the
same could not materialize as tho State Govt. did not agree to hand over the land
in Block Vi at Colaba, It was not possible for the DEO Bombay to entor the land
in the MLR as Defence Land as the land had not been transforred by the Stale
Government to the Ministry of Defence. There was, therefore, no possibility of
taking up the case with the State Government for mutating the land in favor of
Government of India in the State Revenue Records. Out of total defence land
sproad across the country, about 80% land have already been mutated in the
revenue records of the State Governments concerned. To expedite the proccss,
consistent efforts have been made by the Defence Estates Department from time
to- time with the State Governments concerned. Principal Directors, Defence
Estates and Defence Eslates Officers have bcen taking up the matter of mutation,
of Defence land in the State Revenue Records with the Chief Secretarics and
Revenue Departments of the concemed States. Same of the recent
correspondences made by the Defence Estate Department in this respect are
enclosed for ready reference: -

, :
i} Minutes of Civil Military Liaison Conference held at HQ South Western
Command, Jaipur on 29.09.2011 wherein at point No,39 the State Govt of
Rajasthan agreed to mutate defence lands at the earliest.

ii) Principal Director, DE, “Northern Cornmand, Jammu _ letter dated
19.07.2012 to the Revenue Secretary, Govt. of J&K. :

“ii) DO letters dated 04.09.2013 ‘from Director, DE, Central Command,
Lucknow 10 the Revenue Secretary, Govt. of Madhya Pradesh, Cornmissioncr
cum Secretary (Revenue & Disaster Management), Govt. of Orissa, Principat


g

Secretary, Dept of Revenuc, Govt. of Bihar, Principal Secretary, Dept of
Revenue, Govt. of Jharkhand, Commissioner Land Records, govt. of Chattisgarh.

iv) Director, DF, DO letters dated 27.10.2011 & 28.10.2011 to the Chief
Secretaties, Governments of Sikkim, Manipur, Assam, Meghalaya, Nagaland and
West Bengal. हु

Further, the matier of mutation of defence larid has consistently been taken up by
them with the State Revenue authorities, The issue of mutation of Defence land
in the State Revenue Records has becn taken up by DGDE with State Revenue
Department from time to time. Now computerization of Defence Land is under
way after provisioning of space in the Cloud Server and necessary hardware and
software by the NIC . The,indexing, scanning and digitization of files identified in
the project has been completed in rospect of all DEO Circles and 62 Canit.
Boards. 98% of physical survey has been completed by Cantt. Boards while
' 97.55% of defence land outside Cantonments has also been surveyed,

During the course of vetting of the abovesaid Action Taken Note, the Audit made
the following observations: हे

"PAC/Audit will be kept apprised of further developments made towards mutation
of the remaining Defence land till the entire Defence land is mutated in the name
of the Ministry of Defence across the country.”

The reply of the Ministry on the aforesaid Audit observation is given as under :

"DGDE has been asked to get the remaining Defence land mutated and also
update the land mutation record. PAC/Audit will be kept apprised of further
progress in this regard."

13. The Committee note the fact that out of the defence land spread across the
country, about 80 percent land has already been mutated in the revenue records
of the State Governments concerned and consistent efforts are being made by
fhe Defence Estates Department in mutating remaining 20 percent of defence land
in the State Revenue Records across the country through CMLCs and regular
pursual with the State Governments concerned. The Committee, therefore, urge
the Ministry to set up a monitoring cell so as to fast track the pending cases of
mutation of defence fand, complete the process in a time bound manner and
apprise the Committee accordingly.

1४... Fixing Responsibility on Public Sorvants

14, The Conimitiee in their Originat Report had observed that the Society was
allowed to circumvent both the Development Control Rules (DCR) 1967 and the PCR
1991. -In accordance with DCR 1967, no building could be errected or raised to a height
greater than one and a half times the sum of the width of the streets on which it abuls
and the width of the open space between the street and the building as measured from


to

the Jevel of the centre of the street in front. Thus, the maximum height of the Society
building permissible as per DCR 1967 was'45.6 metres. The DCR 1991 had no height
testriction but brought down the Floor Space Index (FSI) for Back Bay Reclamation
Scheme (BBR) Block VI to 1.33 from 3.5 as per the DCR 1967. The plot in question was
categorized as Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ) ॥ and for the buildings permitted in that
Area, DCR 1967 were applicable. Though DCR 1967 were to be adhered to for building
construction activities praposed in CRZ ॥ areas of Mumbai, the Society was allowed to
apply DCR 1991 in this aspect as height restriction was not stipulated by DCR 1991.
Further, loss of FSI was offset by transferring the developmental rights of the BEST plot
and relaxation of 15 per cent on account of RG as and when required. Further, against
the approval for 27 floors, the Socioty constructed 26 floors which raised the height to
100.70 metres. The Municipal Commissioner accepting (21 October 2009) the
contention of the Society that there was no necd te obtain fresh NOC from High Rise
Commitiec stated that Mumbai Metropolitan Region Development Authority's (MMRDA}
approval may be obtained. The NOC for 28" Floor was issued on 4" August 2010
when the son of the Municipal Commissioner became a member of the Society. Also,
many relaxations werc made in grant of membership and environmental clearances for
ineligible persons, obviously under a certain quid-pro-quo. The Committee did not wish
to make any comment at that stage as the Government of Maharashtra had set up an
- Enquiry Commission, to enquire inte all specified, connected and individual issucs, fix
responsibility on public servants for the lapses on the basis of enquiry conducted and
make recommendation for transparency in government in land allotment and to
eliminate unwarranted discretion, The Committee desired the Ministry of Defence to
apprise the Committee about the final outcome of the Enquiry Report in duc course.

[Para-12 Ninety-First
Report of the Public Accounts Commitiec
: (15" Lok Sabha)]

45. The Ministry of Defence in their Action Taken Note replied as under:

"The Govi. of Maharashtra has informed that as per the Enquiry Report, the
appropriate DCR which ought to have been applied by the MMRDA to the Adarsh
plot was the DCR1967 and not the draft DCR1989 or DCR 1991 in view of the
CRZ notification dated 19.02.1991 and appropriate action under the relevant
provisions of MRTP Act, 1966 and DCR 1967 will be taken against those
responsible for not following the faid down preccdure. The PAC/Audit will be
apprised of the action taken against those responsible for not following the laid
down procedure, in duc course."

16. The Action Taken Note furnished by the Ministry of Defence is silent on the
steps initiated to establish transparency in allotment of Government land,


UW

elimination of unwarranted discretion as per DCR 1967 and the disciplinary actiow
taken against the erring officials on the basis of the outcome of the Report of the
Enquiry Commission set up by {he Government of Maharashtra. The Committcs,
therefore, reiterate its earlior recommendation to fix responsibility on erring
public servants on the basis of the Enquiry Commission's findings and exhort to
implement transparency in allotment of government [and and climinat

unwarranted discretion, ;

Vv. Failure to Defect the Violation of DCR 1967

17. The Committee in their in their Original had noted that the OCR 1967 and 1991
were applied sclectively and tho Socicty allowed to’ construct the building beyond the
permissible height. The maximum height of the society building permissible as per DCR
1967 was 45.6 meters‘and DCR 1991 had no height restriction for buildings in CRZ-IL.
The Committee found that the MoEF had failed fo prevent construction of a building of
such a height coming up in thaf aroa. When the Ministry was asked to explain their
failure,. their reply was that no proposal was: received from Urban Development
Department, Government of Maharashtra secking CRZ clearance for the construction of
building of M/s Adarsh Cooperative Housing Society(ACHS). This was far from
convincing and not acceptable to the Committee. The Committee wished to be apprised
about the action taken by the MoEF against those officials in Maharashtra Coastal Zone
Management Authority (MCZMA) who failod to dotect grave environmental violations in
their jurisdiction. The Committee also desired to be apprised about how the MoEF
envisaged fo cnsure that the delegated authorities carried out. their duties
conscientiously, without any fear or favour.

[Para-13 Ninety-First
. Report of the Public Accounts Committee
; (157 Lok Sabha]

18. The Ministry of Defence in their Action Yakon Note submitted as under:

"As per the information made available by MoEF, it is submitted {hat as soon as
fhe matler was brought to the notice of the MoEF through media in October,
2010, Ministry directed the MCZMA / State Authorities to submit a report /
’ documents on the matter. It was also examined by the NCZMA wherein the
Principat Secretary, UDD, Chairperson, MCZMA were invited. Based on the
recommendation of NCZMA, appropriate action in term of Show Cause Notice
(SCN) was immediately issued followed by necessary and final order directing
the State “Goverment that Why the unauthorized structure should not be
removed due fo violation of CRZ Notification, 1991, To minimize the violation of
CRZ Notification, 1991 various directions have bean issued from time to time as
to the State Government and a direction has also been issued under Section 5 to


42

all coastal States in February, 2011. Keeping in view the violations and the non-
effectiveness of the Coastal Zone Management Authorities, the Ministry had
issued an Office Memorandum on 7 November, 2008. Further, in accordance
with the Coastal Regulation Zone Notification of हा January, 2011, a direction
under Section 5 has been Issued lo all coastal States and Union territories to:

a} Identify the violations of the Coastal Regulation Zone Notification, 4991
and the approved Coastal Zone Management Plan there under within their
respective jurisdiction in a period of four months from the receipt of this”
directions;

9) Initiate action under the Environment (Protection): Act, 1986 upon the
identified violations within four months thereafter;

9) Upload the relevant details of the identified violations, including the action
taken on the violations, as per para (a) and (0) above on their respective website,
every fortnight.

The National Coastal Zone Management Authority periodically monitors the
implementation of the directions. All coastal Zone Management Authorities have
developed their website and are monitoring the violations on the website
including the status. However, the action taken by the MoEF against those
officials in MCZMA who failed to detect grave environmental violation in their
jurisdiction would be apprised to the PAC/Audit in duo course."

19. The Committee note that the Ministry of Environment and Forests have
taken steps and issued directions fo the Coastal Zone Management Authority
(CZMA) to ensure that the concerned authorities discharge their duties efficiently.
However, the replies furnished by the Ministry is devoid of the action taken
against the delinquent officials of Maharashtra Coastal Zone Management
Authority (MCZMA) for dereliction of duty in not detecting serious environmental
violation by the Adarsh Cooperative Housing Society(ACHS), The Committee
therefore, desire that the Ministry of Environment and Forest take action against
officials of MCZMA who have failed to detect the violation of DCR 1967 allowing
- gonstruction of the building in ACHS beyend permissible height.

VIL Plugging Loopholes in the Environmental Acts/Rujes/Natification

20. The Committee in their Original Report had noted that as per the Ministry of
Environment & Forests, the detection of violation of the provisions of the CRZ
Nolification 1991, was the first duty'of the ‘BMC and the other local authorities’,
Notably, in the event of local authorities conniving with vested interests, as happened in
the instant case, the MoEF had no other means of detecting the violations and taking
action against the law violators. The MoEF also stated that the Regional office of MoEF
‘at Bhopal monitors projects in Maharashtra region which had heen accorded
environmental and CRZ clearance by the Ministry or by the State Level Environment


eget

13

Impact Assessment Authorities. Obviously, in cases of projects underleken without
environmental clearance, the regional office at Bhopal had no mechanism to know of
such projects much less of taking action against such projects. The Committee were
perturbed fo nofe that the Regionat-otfices so created across the Country had no
proaclive role to play and that they act only after the focal authorities detect violation or
in cases where. project proposals are submitted to them for necessary environmentat
clearances. The Cornmitlee therefore recommended that the MoEF plug foopholes in
the Acts/Rules/Natification for cnsuring proper forest conservation and environmentat
protection, The Committee wished to be apprised of the measures contemplated by the
Ministry in this behalf,

[Para-14 Ninety-First
Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(450 Lok Sabha)]

21 The Ministry of Defence in their Action Taken Nota submitted as under:

"As per the taformation made available by MoEF, it is submitted that Ministry of
Environment and Forests had issued the Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ)
Notification in 1991 under the Environment Protection Act, 1986 far protection
and conservation of the coastal environment. A Committee under the
chairmanship of Prof. M.S. Swaminathan was constituled 10 review the CRZ
Nofification, 1994. The Commiltee submitted its report with various
recommendations for strengihening the CRZ Notification, which interalia
included protection and conservation of the coastat ecosystem, livelihood
security of local cornmunities, introduction of regulation to manage the
profiferation of parts along the coasis, introduction of tighter standards for
disposal of effluent into coastal waters, etc. On the basis of the recommendations
of the above Committee and extensive consultations with various stakeholders
Ministry ‘notified thé CRZ Notification, 2011 for the main land and Island
Protection Zone (72) Notification, 2011 for Lakshadweep as well as Andaman &
Nicobar [stands fn supersession of the CRZ Notification, 1991. The CRZ
Notification, 2011 covers 500 meters from the high tide fino on the landward side, *
including the intertidal area on the. seafront, and upto 12 nautical miles on the
seaward side. It also covers 100 meters ar width of the creek, whichever is less,
from the high fide fine on the landward side along the tidal influenced wator
bodies. The Coastal Regulation Zone Notification, 2011 prohibits setting up of
new Industries and expansion of existing industries units in CRZ areas. Only
activities which require foreshore facilities viz Ports, fishing harbor and pipeline
for sea water intake / outfall, transmission lines ele. are permissible within CRZ.

v-+ -During the course of vetting of the abovesaid Action Taken Note, the Audit made
the following observations:


14

"The Ministry has quoted the CRZ Notification of 2011, whereas the PAC had
made their recommendation through their 915 Report of 2013-14(19# Lok
Sabha) (abled in the Parliament on 9-12-2013}. Further, no measures
taken/proposed to be taken by the MoEF 10 plug the loopholes in the
Acls/Rules/Notification for ensuring proper forest conservation and environmental.
protection have been mentioned in the Action Taken nate. The Action Taken note
is vetted subject to doing the needful.”

The reply of the Ministry on the aforesaid Audit observation is given as under :;
"As informed by MoEF CRZ, 2011 also provides for

(a) “The State Government of the Union Territory CZMAs shall primarily be
responsible for enforcing and monitoring of this notification and to assist in this
task, the Stafe Government and the Union Territory shall constitute district level
committees under the Chairmanship of the District Magistrate concerned
containing atleast three representatives af local traditional coastal communities
including from fisherfolk"; arid पु

{o} "To maintain transparency in the warking of the CZMAs it shall be the
responsibility of the CZMA to create a dedicated website and post the agenda,
“minutes, decisions taken, clearance letters, violations, action taken on the
violations and court matters including the Orders of the Hon'ble Court as also the
approved CZMPs of the respective State Government or Union ferntory”.

lfowever, the concer of Audit has been intimated to MoEF for their
consideration and necessary action.”

22, The Committee are constrained to note that the Action Taken reply
furnished by the MoEF through Ministry of Defence is silent on the meastires
taken to plug the loopholes in the Acts/Rules/Notification for efficient forest
conservation and environmental safeguard by the Regional offices of MoEF
across the cauntry and to have a miore proactive role in giving timely
environmental clearance for projects. The Committce are dismayed to find the
laggardly approach of the Ministry in furnishing details of the initiatives
undertaken by the MoEF pursuant to the recommendations of the Prof, M.S.
Swaminathan Committee for reviewing the CRZ Notification, 1991. The
Cammittee, therefore, reiterate that the MoEF may appoint a study group to
review and give suggestions for necessary amendments in tho Environmental
Acts/RulesiNotifications so as to ensure proper forest conservation. and
envirormental protection. है

SHR} MALLIKARJUN KHARGE
Chairperson,
Public Accounts Cormmifiee

NEW DELHI;
47 July, 2017 .
26 Ashactha, 1939 (Saka)

ae


OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMEND

0

ए)

(iii).

(iv)

v)

APPENDIX
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE

ATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

CONTAINED IN THEIR NINETY-FRIST REPORT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA}

Total number of Observations/Recommendations

Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
which have been accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 1-8, 15-16 and 17

Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire fo pursue in view of
the reply of the Government:

Para Nos. -Nil
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been

accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

Para Nos, 12 and 14

_ Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which fhe Government have furnished interim replies:

Para Nos. 9-10 and 11

“47

Total: 12
Percentage: 70.59%

Total: 0

Percentage: 0

Total : 2
Percentage: 14.76%

Total +3
Percentage: 17.65%


आदर्श कोऑपरेटिव हाउसिंग सोसाइटी, मुंबई

समिति के 91वें प्रतिवेदन (15वीं लोक सभा) में अंतर्विष्ट
टिप्पणियों/सिफारिशों पर सरकार द्वारा की गयी कार्रवाई

रक्षा मंत्रालय

लोक लेखा समिति
(2017-18)

उनासीवां प्रतिवेदन

लोक सभा सचिवालय
नई दिल्‍ली


hopin 2 ced ,
लत Ow ५2०५० 0003. १४ Ordre fon Roespr
४] LK & Wem

d ?

PRGEFORMA
No.C-13019/8/2010-D(Vig.)

Ministry of Defence

Observation/Recommendation

1. INTRODUCTORY:

The Comptroller & Auditor General(C&AG) Report No.11 of 2011-12 on
‘Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society(ACHS), Mumbai’ presented to Parliament on
9" August, 2011 was selected for in-depth examination by the Committee at their
sitting held on 23 August 2011. The Ministry of Defence (MoD) handed over the
case to the Central Bureau of Investigation(CBI) on 09.11.2010 to get the matter
thoroughly investigated and fix responsibility. The Ministry of Environment and
Forests(MoEF) on 117 January, 2011, after following due procedure, issued a final
order directing the ACHS to remove the unauthorized construction in its entirety and
restore the area to its original condition. This order of MoEF on being challenged by
ACHS in the High Court of Bombay rendered the matter Sub-judice. The other
levelopments in the case were that Bombay Electricity Supply and Transport
Undertaking i.e. BEST disconnected the electricity of the ACHS on 2.10.2011 and
the Mumbai Municipal Corporation discontinued the water supply on 3.10.2011.
When the names of owners of the flats of ACHS, along with the relevant details were
sought by the Committee, the Ministry of Defence stated that a site visit of the
premises of ACHS, was conducted on 20.1.2012 by officers from Mumbai
Metropolitan Region Development Authority. Statedly, the Secretary of ACHS and
the Manager of the Society were present who handed over a list of Members
mentioning the status of the possession given to the individual flat owners. A
Commission of Enquiry was also constituted by the Maharashtra Government under
the Commission of Enquiry Act, 1952 vide the Notification dated 08.01.2011 under
the Chairmanship of Hon’ble Justice Shri J.A- Patil, Retired High Court Judge and
Shri P. Subrahmanyam, Retired Chief Secretary, Government of Maharashtra. The
Commission of Enquiry commenced its proceedings from April 2011. When the
Committee started their examination and called for information relating to Adarsh
Co-operative Housing Society through the Ministry of Defence, Government of India,
the Government of Maharashtra submitted that all the concerned departments of the
State Government were directed to submit the original files/papers relating to ACHS
before the Commission of Enquiry. The Government of Maharashtra also submitted
that the Ministry of Defence was represented before the said Commission through
their advocate and therefore, Ministry of Defence could obtain the papers filed by
various departments of Government of Maharashtra from the Commission through
their advocate. Further, the Committee in December 2011, had asked the MoD to
obtain photocopies of all the relevant documents from the State Government of
Maharashtra. However, the MoD could not furnish the said documents to the
Committee.

(SI. No.-1; Para-1 of the Ninety-First
Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15"" Lok Sabha)

Yo


Proposed reply of MOD

The Ministry of Defence provided requisite available documents to CBI & the
Commission of Enquiry set up by the State Government of Maharashtra from time to
time and as and when required.

The Commission of Enquiry set up by the Govt. of Maharashtra submitted its
first and final report on Reference Points No. 1 & 2 on 13.4.2012, recording its
finding to the effect that the land in question belonged to the Government of
Maharashtra and not to the Ministry of Defence. This is contrary to the stand taken
by the Ministry of Defence. A Title Suit No. 2591 of 2012 has already been filed by
Local Military Authority(LMA) which is pending in Hon'ble High Court, Bombay.
Further, the Commission of Inquiry has submitted its Second and Final Report on
Reference Point Nos. 3 to 13 wherein it has reiterated its earlier finding that the land
belongs to the Government of Maharashtra. Copies of these reports are enclosed
for perusal of the PAC.

PAC/Audit will be kept apprised of further developments made towards
remedial/corrective action taken by the Government of Maharashtra on the
findings of the Commission of Enquiry, till finality.

2F

(Suresh Kumar)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India

Ministry of Defence O.M. No. C-13019/8/2010-D(Vig.)

—th -

-2-


PROFORMA

Ministry of Defence
Observation/Recommendation

2. VARIOUS IRREGULARITIES COMMITTED:

Audit scrutiny revéaled how a group of select officials holding key post
subverted rules and regulations, suppressed facts and took the ruse of welfare of
servicemen and war widows and children. The Committee’s scrutiny corroborated
the irregularities in the entire process right from allocation of land to the Society,
obtaining ‘No Objection’ from the Army, extension of various concessions by
Government of Maharashtra, getting ‘No Objection Certificate(NOC)’ from BEST for
transfer of developmental rights of the adjoining land, obtaining clearance for
residential development in Coastal Regulation Zone by certain officials who abused
their official position for personal gain. Asked how the NOC was given to the
Society, the MoD stated that the NOC was issued by the local Defence authorities
because of mismanagement of Defence land, poor record keeping and lack of
mutation of land already in possession of the Armed Forces. Further, the multiplicity
of agencies managing Defence land had contributed to the maladministration with
no centralized information being available on land holdings. With the lines of
responsibility and consequently of accountability being blurred, no agency has
accepted responsibility on many aspects of land management. The Committee
consider this a monumental failure at all levels of governance. Apparently, the
Public Servants entrusted with the responsibilities of safeguarding the Public trust
brazenly betrayed the fiduciary trust by acting against all norms of Public interest
and probity.

(SI. No.-1; Para-2 of the Ninety-First
Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(157 Lok Sabha)

Proposed Reply of MoD:

The irregularities pertain to the process from allocation of land to the Society,
obtaining ‘NOC’ from the Army, extension of various concessions by the Govt. of
Maharashtra, NOC given by the BEST for transfer of developmental rights of the
adjoining land, obtaining clearance for residential development in Coastal Regulation
Zone by certain officials. However, it is also correct that the land in Block — VI had
not been formally transferred to the Ministry of Defence/ Army by the Government of
Maharashtra nor mutated in Revenue Records. It was due to this reason that there
was no entry in the Military Lands Register (MLR) maintained by Defence Estate
Office(DEO) Mumbai in this regard.

2. Defence Estates Department of Ministry of Defence maintains two types of
important lands registers. One register is for lands within Cantonments and the
other register is for lands outside Cantonments. The former register is called
General Lands Register (GLR) and the latter register is called Military Lands

नया


Register (MLR). Both the registers record survey number-wise the ownership of
land, its area, persons in occupation, any transfer/sale transaction and other
summary details. Both the registers are maintained in every(Defence Estates Office
(080) Circle. GLR is maintained in every Cantonment Board Office for land placed
under the management of Cantonment Boards. Each office maintains multiple
volumes of both these registers. There are 62 Cantonment Board Offices and 37
DEO Circles. .

३. It is also correct to state that no centralized information was available.
However, pursuant to the Adarsh Housing Scheme incident, the following initiatives
have been taken by Ministry of Defence/ DGDE to improve land records
management, strengthen control and custody of defence land and to prevent any
arbitrary issue of ‘NOC’ for allotment/ use of defence land:-

(1) Computerisation of Defence land involving data entry, its verification,
authentication of land records in Raksha Bhoomi Software in respect of all
cantonment Boards and Defence Estates Offices has been undertaken.

(2) Digitization, Indexing, Microfilming, Protection and Preservation of Land
Records has also been undertaken. This will help create a durable electronic
database for better management of documents thereby protecting vital govt. interest
in its estates, simultaneously, establishing Archival Unit and Resource
Centref(AU&RC) as central repository of old records for easy retrieval of land
records.
(3) Survey, Demarcation and Verification of all Defence Lands(outside as well as
inside Cantonments and Boards) is going on .
(4) Land Audit has been carried out in almost all the 37 DEO Circles. This will be
a continuing process to ensure compliance with laid down instructions on
management and optimum utilization of land.

4 A policy on issue of NOC in respect of land adjacent to defence land has
already been issued by MOD vide letter No.11026/2/2011/D(Lands) dated
18.05.2011; this was issued specifically inter alia with reference to the affairs of the
Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society.

5. Multiplicity of Agencies: Defence land is located across the country and is
under active use of the three Services, other Defence Departments/ Organizations
and persons. Thus, management of land becomes a complex matter involving large
number of stakeholders and various tenures of holdings which are governed under
different statutes and policy instructions. Ministry, while replying to one of the
recommendations made by C & AG in its 35" Report, has made the following
submission-

० Keeping in view, the nature of occupation of land by the Services, an
omnibus authority will not serve the purpose. LMA/DEOs do not have any powers to
dispose land. Instructions regarding issue of NOCs and ceding of Defence lands
have already been issued. The land audit will strengthen the land management
system further. Defence Estates have been managing land keeping in view all
the rules/regulations issued by Ministry of Defence. Creation of an authority as
suggested may not serve the required purpose, rather may add increased financial
burden. Instead, Defence Estates organization can be strengthened by way of

abe [R=


having more and more officers nominated from the select list of the Civil Services

exams and rationalization of rules, instructions and delegation of powers......... .

The Ministry is committed to improving the procedures and processes of land
management, including strengthening of the Defence Estates Department, to ensure
efficient and optimal utilization of available land and to prevent alienation of land in
an arbitrary or collusive manner. Now computerization of Defence Land is under
way post provisioning of space in the Cloud Server and necessary hardware and
software by the NIC . The indexing, scanning and digitization of files identified in the
project has been completed in respect of all DEO Circles and 62 Cantt. Boards.
98% of physical survey has been completed by Cantt. Boards while 97.55% of
defence land out side Cantonments has also been surveyed.

PAC/Audit will be kept apprised of further developments made towards
completion of computerization of Defence Land stated to be under way as well
as towards completion of the remaining physical survey of defence land till
finality.

a sh Kumar)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India

Ministry of Defence 0.0. No. C-13019/8/2010-D(Vig.) of Defence 0.0. No. C-13019/8/2010-D(Vig.

-S— 19


PROFORMA

Ministry of Defence
Observation/Recommendation |

3. NON-COOPERATION WITH AUDIT:

The Committee are deeply concerned to note the fact that the Audit officials
who sought records relating to the case of issue of ‘No Objection Certificate’ in
favour of Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society, were initially denied the same by
the Headquarters, Maharashtra, Gujarat and Goa Area (HQ MG&G) and
Headquarters Southern Command, Pune in April-May 2010 and subsequently given
access in September-October 2010. Asked to explain such an attitude of non-
cooperation with the Audit, the Ministry of Defence submitted that Army being a
hierarchical organization, the visits/inspection by outside Government agencies are
co-ordinated at. appropriate level. The Committee deplore the attitude of dilly-
dallying and non- co-operation with the Audit with a view to blocking Parliamentary
scrutiny. The Committee need to be explained such an attitude of non-cooperation
and the measures taken to prevent such recurrences.

(SI. No.-1; Para-3 of the Ninety-First
Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15" Lok Sabha)

Proposed Reply of MoD

It is reiterated that the Audit Officials were given due access to the sought
records. However, keeping in view the sensitive nature of the case and Army being
a hierarchical organization, due sanction and coordination at appropriate level was
deemed prudent. The AHQ has assured that audit authorities would be rendered all
necessary assistance in discharge of their constitutional duties and necessary
instructions to this effect have been passed to all concerned for strict compliance. A
copy of the letter issued in compliance thereof is enclosed(Annexure IA).

(Suresh Kumar)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India

Ministry of Defence O.M. No. C-13019/8/2010-D(Vig.)

>&+ QU7


PROFORMA

Ministry of Defence

Observation/Recommendation |

4. LACK OF PROPER MECHANISM TO SECURE OWNERSHIP 07
PROPERTIES:

According to the Agreement in 1958, between Ministry of Defence and the then
Government of Bombay, 41 acres and 8 guntas of Defence land from Santacruz
Rifle Range was transferred to the Government of Bombay for construction of
Western Express Highway on the condition that the State Government in lieu shall
give land, in Block VI, Colaba, Bombay failing which the State Government was to
pay the market value of the land. Out of this, a piece of land measuring 3854 square
meters in Block VI, Colaba was under consideration for exchange with State
Government in lieu of the aforesaid Santacruz land. Though this land had been
under the occupation of the Army, its ownership was not transferred in favour of
Ministry of Defence. Further, the claim for payment in lieu of Defence land already
transferred to State Government was also not finalized. This clearly indicated that
the Ministry of Defence did not have a proper mechanism to secure ownership of its
properties. Obviously, the Ministry of Defence failed to get the land transferred from
the State Government when it had surrendered its land for the construction of
Western Express Highway. It is also not clear as to why the Ministry did not seek
the market value of the land which it had surrendered. The Committee seek reasons
from the MoD for the same within 3 months of the presentation of this Report.

(SI. No.-1; Para-4 of the Ninety-First
Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(157 Lok Sabha)

Proposed Reply of MoD

it is seen from the records of DEO, Mumbai that the matter regarding transfer of
the State Govt. land to Ministry of Defence in exchange of defence land already
transferred had been taken up with the Govt. of Maharashtra since 1963 on a
regular basis. A copy of HQrs Maharashtra & Gujarat Area letter dated 21.06.1963 is
enclosed(Appendix 1). It is further seen from the report of DEO, Mumbai that the
Collector Mumbai in 1964 had informed that the land from Block VI Back Bay
reclamation cannot be transferred to the Defence Department. A copy of Collector
of Bombay letter dated 11.02.1964 is also enclosed(Appendix Il). There are series
of correspondence thereafter with the office of DEO, Mumbai on this matter. The
DEO, Mumbai in 1995 also had taken up the matter with the Govt. of Maharashtra
for payment of the full market value for the land already transferred to the State
Govt. The DEO had also taken up the matter with the PWD in 1995 for fulfilling the
condition of the transfer. A copy of DEO Bombay Circle letter dated 11.01.1995
addressed to the Secretary, Govt of Maharashtra (PWD) is enclosed(Appendix III).


The matter was also raised in various Civil Military Liaison Conference (CMLC)
meetings held in 1997, 2002 and 2013. The State Govt. has been maintaining that
the land in Block VI is not available and provision of land at Thane and Panvel could
be considered in lieu of land already transferred to the State Govt. The matter
regarding seeking the market value of the land already surrendered was not pursued
since discussions with the State Govt. and LMA were on for provision of land in lieu
of defence land already transferred. Copies of Minutes of CMLC meetings of
2002(Appendix Ill A) and 2013(Appendix fll 8) are enclosed.

Comments of Audit:

Though the minutes of the CMLCs of 2002 and 2013 have been attached with the
revised Action Taken note(the CMLC of 1997 is, however, still not furnished), the
reply however, still does not corroborate the statement about thematter being
pursued with the Maharashtra Government on regular basis since 1963, as copies of
the periodic correspondence made in this regard has, not been furnished. The
Action Taken note is therefore, formally vetted subject to the condition that
the Audit comment may be reproduced in a separate sheet, reply provided
thereagainst and the same attached with the same as part thereof.

Further Reply:

Despite best efforts CMLC minutes of 1997 could not be obtained. Details of the
correspondence made with the concerned authorities have already been included in
the main reply(Appendix ।॥॥ & fll). Since the matter became sub-judice no further
correspondence have been made with the authorities.

(Suresh Kumar)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India

Ministry of Defence O.M. No. C-13019/8/2010-D(Vig.)



PROFORMA

Ministry of Defence

Observation/Recommendation

5. INADEQUATE MANAGEMENT OF DEFENCE ESTATES:

The Committee are shocked to note the laggardly approach of the Ministry of
Defence (MoD) to manage its Estates. When asked if MoD had reached any
agreement with the State Government by way of Memorandum of Understanding for
transferring the land at Block VI, Colaba in their favour, the Ministry submitted that
Government of India, MoD letter dated 31.12.1958 had brought out the terms and
conditions for transfer of Defence land from the Santa Cruz Rifle Range to
Government of Bombay for construction of the Western Express Highway and for
Slum Clearance Scheme. According to the agreement, once the proposal for
exchange materialized, the Colaba land was to be valued and the difference
between the valuation of Santa Cruz land and Colaba land was to be paid by the
concerned Government. The Committee find that the MoD failed to pursue the
matter to its logical end once they had transferred the land for construction of the
Western Express Highway. Though the findings of the investigation by the CBI in
the matter are awaited, the Committee recommend that MoD initiate urgent
measures for efficient management of the Defence Lands and keep the Committee
apprised, as recommended by them in their report on management of Defence
Estates.

(SI. No.-1; Para-5 of the Ninety-First
Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15" Lok Sabha)

Proposed Reply of MoD

Efforts have been made by the Defence Estates Department by pursuing the matter
with the State Govt. for allotment of alternate land to the defence in lieu of the
defence land transferred at Santacruz Rifle Range. The matter has been raised with
the State Govt. since 1963 on a regular basis by them. It was informed by DEO
Bombay that no agreement on valuation of land could be worked out between the
State Government and the DEO due to wide difference on valuation made by both
sides. The issue has also been on the agenda of various CMLC meetings held in
1997, 2002 and as late as in March, 2013. The State Govt. has stated that though
the land is not available at Block VI Colaba, the Defence authorities could identify
land at Thane and Panvel which can be considered favourably. The LMA
accordingly will have to identify the appropriate land which is functionally suitable to
their needs.

-4-

He 3 -


The matter of exchange of land between the Central and the State Government
invariably takes long time due to involvement of various stake-holders. In the
present case, the issue could not be settled since the availability of land of
appropriate size and usé in the Mumbai Metropolitan region or surrounding areas
was difficult and there was disagreement on valuation of land. However, it is agreed
that the issue needs to be settled now on priority. Now the matter is sub-judice.

Regarding measures taken for management of Defence land it is submitted that as
of now computerization of Defence Land is under way post provisioning of space in
the Cloud Server and necessary hardware and software by the NIC . The indexing,
scanning and digitization of files identified in the project has been completed in
respect of all DEO Circles and 62 Cantt. Boards. 98% of physical survey has been
completed by Cantt. Boards while 97.55% of defence land out side Cantonments
has also been surveyed

Comments of Audit:
No further comments are offered in view of the matter being sub-judice.
However, it is suggested that latest efforts/correspondence made with the
State Government towards settlement of the case may be attached with the
Action Taken note.

Further Reply:

Since the matter became sub-judice no further Correspondence have been made
with the authorities

suresh Kumar)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India

Ministry of Defence 0.0. No. C-13019/8/2010-D(Vig.)

-jor

—2Y-


PROFORMA

Ministry of Defence

Observation/Recommendation

6. The Committee were apprised that the land in question which was under the
possession of the Army had a boundary wall constructed by the Military Engineering
Services(MES) though MES had no records available to show about the said
construction. The Collector, City of Bombay in his letter dated 11 December, 1989,
while addressing the issue of ‘Grant of Land measuring 1000.00 sq. meter between
Back Bay BEST Bus Depot and Prakash Pethe Marg at Cuffe Parade, Colaba’ for
he construction of Rest House for Ex-Servicemen had stated that ‘the land in
question falls in the Block VI, B.B.R. Estates’. The letter also stated that after the
issue was discussed in the meetings held by the Minister of State for General
Administration and Metropolitan Commissioner, Bombay Metropolitan Region
Development Authority(BMRDA) with the top officials, it was decided that the matter
be referred to the Revenue and Forests Department as the ‘land in question is in
ossession of the Military Department since 1940 and Military area/jurisdiction
begins from this demanded land’. The Ministry also submitted that the subject land
was inaugurated as ‘Eco Park’ by Major General B.A. Cariappa in 1996 and was
called as ‘Khukri Park’. It was also submitted that this Park was maintained by the
Garrison Battalions. The Committee are appalled to note that this very land in
Possession of the Military Authorities was handed over to the Society by issuing a
‘No Objection Certificate’ stating “the said land falls in Block No.VI of Colaba Division
(Backbay Reclamation Scheme-Vl) which falls outside the Defence Boundary.
Necessary action at your end may be taken as deemed fit for the welfare of service
personnel/Ex-servicemen/their widows’. Furthermore, the Committee found that the
ostensibly pious intention of the Society to look into the ‘Welfare of service
personnel/ex-servicemen/their widows’ was lost sight of, as seen from the
membership of the Society which kept expanding to accommodate senior Service
officers, senior civilian public servants and private individuals, most of whom were
relatives of politicians and public servants. The Committee would like the CBI to
expedite its investigation so that the law takes its course expeditiously and the guilty
are brought to justice.

(SI. No.-1; Para-6 of the Ninety-First
Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15™ Lok Sabha)

Proposed reply of MOD

The land in question was fenced in 1996 and was inaugurated by one Maj Gen
Cariappa as an Eco Park named ‘Khukri Park’. As per the information made
available by AHQs the said land has always been in possession of the Army, still
the officials with vested interests and malafide intentions provided NOC for
construction of the building on the defence land. Accordingly, the case was handed
over to CBI for investigations and fix the culpability. CBI thereafter filed the charge
sheet on 04 Jul 2012 against 13 persons involved in the fraud.

-|5

— WZ -


As per the information made available by DGDE, it is seen from the
record(Appendix |) that on a query from Maharashtra, Gujarat & Goa (MG&G) Area
regarding the status of the land, DEO Mumbai intimated the LMA that the land in
question was part of Block VI of Colaba Division which belongs to the Govt. of
Maharashtra and is outside the defence boundary. The fact that the land was under
occupation of LMA was within their knowledge. It is further submitted that the
ownership of land is under dispute and the LMA has filed a Title Suit No. 2591 of
2012 in the High Court of Bombay which is pending with following prayers:-.

(a) Declare that the Plaintiff (Union of India, Min of Def) is the sole and absolute
owner of the Suit Property bearing C.S. No 652, Block VI, Colaba Division, Captain
Prakash Pethe Marg, Colaba, Mumbai — 400 005; and that the Suit Property has
been fraudulently and illegally made over to the Defendant No. 1 (Govt of
Maharashtra) and Defendant No 2 (Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society Ltd.); and
that the Adarsh Building has been fraudulently and illegally constructed on the Suit
Property.

(b) Order and decree that the Defendants forthwith handover quite, vacant,
peaceful and unencumbered possession of the Suit Property to the Plaintiff: and if
they fail to deliver actual physical possession within the time stipulated by this
Hon'ble Court then the same be done through the agency of the Hon’ble Court.

(c) Order and decree that the Defendants (jointly and/ or several ly) do disclose the
actual profits made by the Defendants from use of the Suit Plot and that the same
ordered and decreed to be made over to the Plaintiff.

(d) Issue an appropriate order and decree for the Defendants (jointly & severally)
to pay mesne profits to the Plaintiff from the date of wrongful possession of the Suit
Property until vacant and peaceful possession of the Suit Property is handed over to
the Plaintiff. Direct the Defendant No 1 to consequently cause the name of the
Plaintiff to be entered in the Survey Register/ Revenue Records prepared under
Section 282 of the Maharashtra Land Revenue Act, 1966 and delete the name of the
Defendant Nos 1 and 2 from the said Survey Register.

(e) Issue a permanent order and injunction to restrain the Defendants, their
servants and/or agents and any other person acting for or on behalf of the
Defendants from:-

(i) Taking any steps from transferring and/or alienating and/or otherwise creating
third party rights and/or any encumbrances whatsoever in respect of the Suit
Property, or any part thereof, or the Adarsh Building or any part thereof, or any Flats
in the building standing on the Suit Property, or any part thereof.

(ii) Taking any steps of any nature whatsoever for carrying out any further
construction, completion or development of whatsoever nature and / or any

other act in respect of the Adarsh building standing on the Suit Property or any
part thereof.

(f) Pending the hearing and final disposal of the Suit, the Defendants, their
servants and/or employees and/ or agents and any other person acting for or on

—|a-

— dA -


behalf of the Defendants be restrained by a temporary order and injunction of this
Hon'ble Court from:-

(i) Taking any steps from transferring and/or alienating and/or otherwise creating
third party rights and/or any encumbrances whatsoever in respect of the Suit
Property, or any part thereof, or the Adarsh Building or any part thereof, or any Flats
in the building standing on the Suit Property, or any part thereof.

(ii), Taking any steps of any nature whatsoever for carrying out any further
construction, completion or development of whatsoever nature and/ or any other act
in respect of the building standing on the Suit Property or any part thereof.

(g) Pending the hearing and final disposal of the Suit, the Defendants, jointly or
severally be directed by a mandatory order to make payment, as mesne profits per
month of such sum as this Hon’ble Court deems fit for the period from the Date of
wrongful possession, that is, 27" October 2004 onwards until the vacant and
peaceful possession of the Suit Property is handed over to the Plaintiff or in the
alternative, deposit the same in this Hon’ble Court;

(h) Pending the hearing and final disposal of this Suit, appoint a Receiver of the
Suit Property and the Adarsh Building with all powers under Order XL, Rule 1 of
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and appoint the Plaintiff as the agent of the
receiver,

i) For costs of this Suit;

(j) For such further and other reliefs as this Hon'ble Court deems appropriate in
the nature and circumstances of the case.

As per the LMA, the land was within the possession of Army, on the contrary the
Commission of Enquiry constituted by the Government of Maharashtra in its first and
final report on Reference Points No. 1 & 2 on 13.4.2012, recorded its finding to the
effect that the land in question belonged to the Government of Maharashtra and not
to the Ministry of Defence. Regarding investigation, it is stated that the CBI has
completed investigation and filed charge-sheets against 13 accused in the Special
Court CBI Cases at Mumbai. The CBI also filed cases against 50 more accused
persons under Benami Transaction(Prohibition)Act 1988. The cases are pending
before the Court

(SureSh Kumar)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India

Ministry of Defence 0.00. No. C-13019/8/2010-D(Vig.) C-13019/8/2010-D(Vig.

“de
— 2h 4 —


PROFORMA

. Ministry of Defence
Observation/Recommendation

7. NON-MUTATION OF LAND:

The Committee find that the said particular piece of land was not recorded in
Military Land Register. Asked to explain the reason for the land not being mutated in
the name of MoD, it was submitted that the Collector, Mumbai had intimated in 1964
that land from Block VI could not be transferred. Admitting before the Committee,
the Secretary stated ‘poor record keeping and lack of mutation of the land a ready in
possession of the Armed Forces’ were among the major reasons that contributed to
mismanagement of Defence Land. He added that an impetus had been given to the
computerization of Defence Land records. It was also added that subsequent to the
event of Adarsh Housing Society a number of remedial steps have been taken by
the Ministry. These included computerization of all Defence Land records and a
project of survey and demarcation of Defence Land. The Committee were also
informed that computerization was being done for the whole country and as on date
two registers namely Military Land Register and General Land Register were being
computerized. In addition, two more projects had been initiated for physical
verification and demarcation of Defence Land on ground and digitalization and also
microfilming of all land records for their preservation. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the outcome of such initiatives within three months of the
presentation of this report.

(SI. No.-1; Para-7 of the Ninety-First
Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(157 Lok Sabha)

Proposed reply of MOD.

As per the information made available by DGDE, though the Govt. of India had
accorded sanction for transfer of defence land at Santacruz Rifle Range for
construction of Western Express Highway in exchange of State Govt. land in Colaba
after working out tentative scheme for the reclamation of Block VI, the same could
not materialize as the State Govt. did not agree to hand over the land in Block VI at
Colaba. It was not possible for the DEO Bombay to enter the land in the MLR as
Defence Land as the land had not been transferred by the State Government to the
Ministry of Defence. There was, therefore, no possibility of taking up the case with
the State Government for mutating the land in favor of Government of India in the
State Revenue Records.

Out of total defence land spread across the country, about 80% land has
already been mutated in the revenue records of the State Governments concerned.
To expedite the process, consistent efforts have been made by the Defence Estates
Department from time to time with the State Governments concerned. Principal
Directors, Defence Estates and Defence Estates Officers have been taking up the
matter of mutation of Defence land in the State Revenue Records with the Chief
Secretaries and Revenue Departments of the concerned States. Some of the recent

—lh-
— &-


correspondences made by the Defence Estate Department in this respect are
enclosed for ready reference: -

i) Minutes of Civil Military Liaison Conference held at HQ South Western
Command, Jaipur on 29.09.2011 wherein at point No.39 the State Govt of Rajasthan
agreed to mutate defence lands at the earliest(Appendix IV).

ii) Principal Director, DE, Northern Command, Jammu letter dated 19.07.2012 to
the Revenue Secretary, Govt. of J&K(Appendix V).

iii) DO letters dated 04.09.2013 from Director, DE, Central Command, Lucknow to
the Revenue Secretary, Govt. of Madhya Pradesh, Commissioner cum Secretary
(Revenue & Disaster Management), Govt. of Orissa, Principal Secretary, Dept of
Revenue, Govt. of Bihar, Principal Secretary, Dept of Revenue, Govt. of Jharkhand,
Commissioner Land Records, govt. of Chattisgarh(Appendix VI).

iv) Director, DE, DO letters dated 27.10.2011 & 28.10.2011 to the Chief
Secretaries, Governments of Sikkim, Manipur, Assam, Meghalaya, Nagaland and

West Bengal(Appendix Vil).

Further, the matter of mutation of defence land has consistently been taken up
by them with the State Revenue authorities. The issue of mutation of Defence land
in the State Revenue Records has been taken up by DGDE with State Revenue
Department from time to time.

Now computerization of Defence Land is under way after provisioning of space
in the Cloud Server and necessary hardware and software by the NIC . The
indexing, scanning and digitization of files identified in the project has been
completed in respect of all DEO Circles and 62 Cantt. Boards. 98% of physical
survey has been completed by Cantt. Boards while 97.55% of defence land out side
Cantonments has also been surveyed.

Comments of Audit:

PAC/Audit will be kept apprised of further developments made towards
mutation of the remaining Defence land till the entire Defence land is mutated
in the name of the Ministry of Defence across the country.

Further Reply:

DGDE has been asked to get the remaining Defence land mutated and also update

the land mutation record. PAC/Audit will be kept apprised of further progress in this
regard.

(Suresh Kumar)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India

Ministry of Defence O.M. No. C-13019/8/2040-D(Vig.) of Defence _O.M. No. C-13019/8/2010-D(Vig.



PROFORMA

Ministry of Defence
Observation/Recommendation

8. NOC ISSUED BY LMA:

It is intriguing as to how the MoD issued a ‘No Objection’ for construction of
residential building for the proposed private Society when the Army was in physical
possession of the land. On being enquired, the Committee were apprised that MoD
had not issued any NOC for construction of residential building by a private Society
but it was issued by Local Military Authority (LMA) and Defence Estates Officer
(DEO) as though these entities were outside the central command. On being
probed further, the Ministry submitted that the Officers involved at that time, Army as
well as civilian officers, more or less have retired. The Ministry however conceded
that prima facie it was a case involving criminality, and therefore the Government
had ordered CBI inquiry. The Committee therefore expect that the CBI would
complete their investigation at the earliest in order to ensure that officers responsible
for their questionable acts of omission and commission are brought to justice without
further delay.

(SI. No.-1; Para-8 of the Ninety-First
Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(157 Lok Sabha)

Proposed reply of MOD

The case has been handed over to CBI to fix the culpability and responsibility for
criminal breach of trust. The CBI has completed investigation and filed charge-
sheets against 13 accused including Government officials, in the Special Court CBI
Cases at Mumbai. The CBI has also filed cases against 50 more accused persons
under Benami Transaction(Prohibition)Act 1988. The cases are pending before the
Court.

(Suresh Kumar)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India

Ministry of Defence 0.0. No. C-13019/8/2010-D(Vig.)



PROFORMA

Ministry of Defence
Observation/Recommendation

13. VIOLATION OF HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS:

The Committee find that the DCR 1967 and 1991 were applied selectively and
the Society allowed to construct the building beyond the permissible height. The
maximum height of the society building permissible as per DCR 1967 was 45.6
meters and DCR 1991 had no height restriction for buildings in CRZ-Il. The
Committee find that the MoEF had failed to prevent construction of a building of such
a height coming up in that area. When the Ministry was asked to explain their
failure, their reply was that no proposal was received from UDD, Government of
Maharashtra seeking CRZ clearance for the construction of building of M/s ACHS.
This is far from convincing and not acceptable to the Committee. The Committee
would like to be apprised about the action taken by the MoEF against those officials
in MCZMA who failed to detect grave environmental violations in their jurisdiction.
The Committee would also like to be apprised about how the MoEF envisages to
ensure that the delegated authorities carried out their duties conscientiously, without
any fear or favour.

(SI. No.-1; Para-13 of the Ninety-First
Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(157 Lok Sabha)

Proposed reply of MOD

As per the information made available by MoEF, it is submitted that as soon as
the matter was brought to the notice of the MoEF through media in October, 2010,
Ministry directed the MCZMA / State Authorities to submit a report / documents on
the matter. It was also examined by the NCZMA wherein the Principal Secretary,
UDD, Chairperson, MCZMA were invited. Based on the recommendation of
NCZMA, appropriate action in term of Show Cause Notice (SCN) was immediately
issued followed by necessary and final order directing the State Government that
why the unauthorized structure should not be removed due to violation of CRZ
Notification, 1991. .

To minimize the violation of CRZ Notification, 1991 various directions have
been issued from time to time as to the State Government and a direction has also
been issued under Section 5 to all coastal States in February, 2011.

Keeping in view the violations and the non-effectiveness of the Coastal Zone
Management Authorities the Ministry had issued an Office Memorandum on 7
November, 2008. Further, in accordance with the Coastal Regulation Zone
Notification of 6 January, 2011, a direction under Section 5 has been issued
(Appendix XI) to all coastal States and Union territories to;


a) Identify the violations of the Coastal Regulation Zone Notification, 1991 and the
approved Coastal Zone Management Plan there under within their respective
jurisdiction in a period of four months from the receipt of this directions;

b) Initiate action under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 upon the identified
violations within four months thereafter;

c) Upload the relevant details of the identified violations, including the action taken
on the violations, as per para (a) and (b) above on their respective website, every
fortnight. :

The National Coastal zone Management Authority periodically monitors the
implementation of the directions. All coastal Zone Management Authorities have
developed their website and are hosting the violations on the website including the
status.(Copy of letter from MoEF dt.2.9.2015 enclosed as Appendix 201).

However, the action taken by the MoEF against those officials in MCZMA
who failed to detect grave environmental violation in their jurisdiction would
be apprised to the PAC/Audit in due course.

(Suresh Kumar)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India

Ministry of Defence 0.0. No. C-13019/8/2010-D(Vig.)



PROFORMA

Ministry of Defence
Observation/Recommendation

15. TARDY PACE OF CBIINVESTIGATION:

The Preliminary Enquiry conducted by CBI had detected prima facie serious
omissions and commissions on the part of Defence Officials/State Government
Officials and based on this a case was registered by CBI, ACB, Mumbai on
29.01.2011 against 13 persons including officers from Army, Navy, DGDE and
others. Further, on completion of investigation the CBI has filed a chargesheet
against the 13 persons on 04.07.2012. CBI has submitted that investigation with
respect to allegations of Benami Transaction/Benami holding of flats in the Adarsh
Society was in progress and on completion the Final Report under Section 173 Cr.
PC will be filed before the Competent Court. The Committee deplore the tardy pace
of investigation. Considering the fact that glaring irregularities were committed by
men in governance, the Committee exhort CBI to expedite its investigation. The
Committee are appalled to note that the Defence Minister while replying to a
Parliamentary question stated that ‘during investigation CBI found that the file of
MoEF relating to grant of clearance is reportedly not traceable’. It was also added
that CBI is also investigating the case of missing/stolen documents/files of the
Department of UDD of the Maharashtra Government related to ACHS. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the files/documents reported
missing/untraceable, the particulars of the Department(s) from where the documents
were required to be kept in safe custody and the efforts made to retrieve the missing
documents.

(SI. No.-1; Para-15 of the Ninety-First
Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(157 Lok Sabha)

Proposed reply of MOD

CBI vide their letter dt. 4.9.2015 has informed(Appendix XIII) that as a result of the
investigation, CBI has filed charge-sheets against 13 accused including
Government officials, in the Special Court CBI Cases at Mumbai. With regard to the
Benami Transaction noticed during investigation, CBI has filed two supplementary
Charge sheets against 50 more accused persons and the case is pending before the
Special Court, CBI Cases at Mumbai.

The MoEF(Appendix XII) has submitted that it has not granted any clearance
nor any NOC to ACHS. There was neither any proposal from ACHS, nor any
tecommendation of Maharashtra Coastal Zone Management Authority on the
proposal as mandatory to grant clearance. There was not even any communication
between MoEF and ACHS. The letter dated 11.3.2003 of the MoEF was clarification
addressed to the UDD, Govt. of Maharashtra. Though the file was not traceable but
when CBI inquired thé matter, the note file retrieved from Computer along with
hard disk and copy of communications between UDD and MoEF including letter


dated 11.03.2003 collected from a Writ Petition filed before Hon’ble High Court of
Bombay, were provided to CBI.

if
(Suresh Kumar)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India

Ministry of Defence O.M. No. C-13019/8/2010-D(Vig.)

a ay -


aed

ROFORMA

|

Ministry of Defence
Observation/Recommendation

16. SECURITY CONCERNS IGNORED:

In the course of examination, the MoD pleaded before the Committee that
though the land was not recorded in their name, it be allotted to the Services.
Justifying the plea, the Ministry stated that ‘there is a security imperative’. The
Ministry admitted that ‘Adarsh Building is the tallest building consisting of 31 floors
and facilitated observations of military vehicles and personnel moving into and out of
the Colaba Military Station. The building directly overlooked and was in the
immediate proximity of existing military establishment units’. The apprehension
expressed was that in times of enhanced tension and hostilities, it enabled the
residents to observe the number and type of specialized and general performance
vehicles, that are parked in Electronics and Mechanical Engineers (EME) workshop
rom which their availability and serviceability could be analysed. The security
concerns arose also because the potential residents of the Adarsh building could be
foreign nationals who would not be under the jurisdiction of the Indian Navy or Indian
Army authorities and thus not amenable to security checks. The representative of
the Ministry conceded before the Committee the security risk involved in view of the
location and the height of the Adarsh building. Surprisingly, the Ministry of
Defence/Military authorities chose to ignore these aspects when the building was
coming up. On being asked as to why the Ministry had not taken seriously the
security concerns arising out of the construction of building by ACHS, the Ministry of
Defence replied that consequent to terrorist attacks in Mumbai between 26 and 29
November, 2008, the security environment in Mumbai had irrevocably changed. In
he changed scenario, the Flag Officer Commanding-in-Chief, Western Naval
Command was vested with the responsibility of ensuring Coastal security on the
western Seaboard and was also designated Commander-in-Chief Coastal Defence.
On their part, the HQ WNC(Western Naval Command) had made several attempts
from 27 August 2009 to get the details of the members of the ‘ACHS Ltd’ which had
gone in vain and finally on 05.07.2010 the issue was forwarded to MoD (Army) for
further necessary action. The Committee deplore the cavaliar manner in which a
serious issue of security was overlooked to the detriment of security installation.

(SI. No.-1; Para-16 of the Ninety-First
Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15" Lok Sabha)

Proposed Reply of MOD

As per the information made available by AHQs the said land has always been in
possession of the Army, still the officials with vested interests and malafide
intentions provided NOC for construction of the building on the defence land.
Accordingly, the case was handed over to CBI for investigations and fixing the


culpability. CBI thereafter filed the charge sheet on 04 Jul 2012 against 13
persons involved in the fraud.
HQ MG & G Area has filed a Security Writ Petition on 10 Feb 2012, (WP 4652/2012)
with the following prayers:-
(a) That this Hon’ble Court may be pleased to issue a writ of mandamus or a writ
in the nature of mandamus or any other appropriate writ, order or direction.
(i) Restraining the State of Maharashtra, The Mumbai Municipal Corporation &
The Mumbai Metropolitan Regional Development Authority Respondent and their
servants, agents, Officers from granting any building/development permissions in
the vicinity of and/or within the Colaba Military Station without obtaining NOC from
the Army Authorities and from granting any development permissions, completion
certificate or occupation certificate to the Adarsh Co-operating Housing Society Ltd
respondent or in respect of the Adarsh Building or the land on which it stands.
(ii) Directing Respondents i.e. State of Maharashtra, The Mumbai Municipal
Corporation & the Mumbai Metropolitan Regional Development Authority and their
servants, agents and officers to forthwith demolish the building Adarsh CHS Ltd, and
pending demolition, not to permit any occupation thereof.
(b) That pending the hearing and final disposal of this Petition, this Hon’ble Court
may be pleased to direct the State of Maharashtra, The Mumbai Municipal
Corporation & The Mumbai Metropolitan Regional Development authority
Respondent (their servants, agents and Officers) to forthwith cease and desist from
granting to the Adarsh Co-operating Housing Society Ltd Respondent any
development permission or an Occupation or Completion Certificate in respect of the
said building Adarsh CHS Ltd, situated near Plot 87-C, now allotted.

(Su esh Kumar)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India

Ministry of Defence O.M. No. C-13019/8/2010-D(Vig.)



PROFORMA

Ministry of Defence
Observation/Recommendation

17. CONCLUSION:

Thus, in conclusion, the Committee find that a group of select officials
holding key posts had subverted rules and regulations, suppressed facts and took
the ruse of welfare of servicemen and war widows and children in cornering the
prime piece of public land in Mumbai. ‘Irregularities were committed in the entire
process right from allocation of land to the Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society,
obtaining ‘No Objection’ from the Army, extension of various concessions by
Government of Maharashtra, procuring ‘No Objection Certificate (NOC)’ from BEST
for transfer of developmental rights of the adjoining land and obtaining clearance for
residential development in Coastal Regulation Zone by certain officials who abused
their official position for personal gains. The Committee hope the Government
would take appropriate remedial action to ward off such incidents in the light of their
recommendation in the preceding paragraphs. The Committee refrain from making
further comments as the matter is still subjudice with respect to the title of the land
and other allied/connected issues.

(SI. No.-1; Para-17 of the Ninety-First
Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(150 Lok Sabha)

Proposed Reply of MOD

As detailed in paras 1-16 of the Report, steps have already been taken for (a)
computerization of defence land (b) digitization, indexing, micro filming, protection
and preservation of land records, (c) survey, demarcation and verification of defence
land and (d) land audit (e) issue of policy on issuance of ‘NoC’. Further, with a view
to get the matter investigated and fix responsibility, matter has been handed over to
CBI. Charge Sheet has been filed by CBI against 13 persons including Government
officials involved. The 081 has also filed cases against 50 more accused persons
under Benami Transaction(Prohibition)Act 1988. The cases are pending with
Special Court, CBI cases at Mumbai(Appendix XIll).

=>
Oy

न

(Suresh Kumar)

Joint Secretary to the Government of India

Ministry of Defence O.M. No. C-13019/8/2010-D(Vig.)



Chaplr ny
ObAwvekiom / Ko tommundorhi gun astieh Ae
Comuttu de wh duaive +o puree sm

Ui cf We map hive "७९७० व, arden Lo
Gvornment” ;

—Nil-

न 28-


Lop rr ५७ पक २.
u . pity rit pay

. San SP Kg '
Obs ohisen ९०४ gy, om oT iy bil

WL & Wr + . me a 1 Gir
SNS net ads mss ee ve Tus
PROFORMA

Ministry of Defence
Observation/Recommendation

12. RELAXATION W.R.T. DCR 1967 AND DCR 1991:

The Committee observe that the Society was allowed to circumvent both the
Development Control Rules (DCR) 1967 and the DCR 1991. In accordance with
DCR 1967, no building could be erected or raised to a height greater than one and a
half times the sum of the width of the streets on which it abuts and the width of the
Open space between the street and the building as measured from the level of the
centre of-the street in front. Thus, the maximum height of the Society building
permissible as per DCR 1967 was 45.6 metres. The DCR 1991 had no height
restriction but brought down the Floor Space Index (FSI) for Back Bay Reclamation
Scheme (BBR) Block VI to 1.33 from 3.5 as per the DCR 1967. The plot in question
was categorized as Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ) ॥ and for the buildings permitted
in that Area, DCR 1967 were applicable. Though DCR 1967 were to be adhered to
for building construction activities proposed in CRZ II areas of Mumbai, the Society
was allowed to apply DCR 1991 in this aspect as height restriction was not
stipulated by DCR 1991. Further, loss of FSI was offset by transferring the
developmental rights of the BEST plot and relaxation of 15 per cent on account of
RG as and when required. Further, against the approval for 27 floors, the Society
constructed 28 floors which raised the height to 100.70 metres. The Municipal
Commissioner accepting (21 October 2009) the contention of the Society that there
was no need to obtain fresh NOC from High Rise Committee stated that Mumbai
Metropolitan Region Development Authority's (MMRDA) approval may be obtained.
The NOC for 28" Floor was issued on 4!" August 2010 when the son of the
Municipal Commissioner became a member of the Society. Also, many relaxations
were made in grant of membership and environmental clearances for ineligible
persons, obviously under a certain quid-pro-quo. The Committee do not wish to
make any comment at this stage as the Government of Maharashtra have set up an
Enquiry Commission, to enquire into all specified, connected and individual issues,
fix responsibility on public servants for the lapses on the basis of enquiry conducted
and make recommendation for transparency in government in land allotment and to
eliminate unwarranted discretion. The Committee would like the Ministry of Defence
to apprise the Committee about the final outcome of the Enquiry Report in due
course.

(SI. No.-1; Para-12 of the Ninety-First
Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(157 Lok Sabha)

Proposed reply of MOD reph of MOD

The Govt. of Maharashtra has informed that as per the Enquiry Report, the
appropriate DCR which ought to have been applied by the MMRDA to the Adarsh

a -

- 34-


plot was the DCR1967 and not the draft DCR1989 or DCR 1991 in view of the CRZ
notification dated 19.02.1991 and appropriate action under the relevant provisions of
MRTP Act, 1966 and DCR 1967 will be taken against those responsible for not
following the laid down procedure.

The PAC/Audit will be apprised of the action taken against those responsible
for not following the laid down procedure, in due course.

(Sure: ia Kumar)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India

Ministry of Defence _O.M. No. C-13019/8/2010-D(Vig.)

~aT-

— o>


PROFORMA

Ministry of Defence
Observation/Recommendation

14. LACUNAE _IN_ACTS/RULES/NOTIFICATIONS , 707? ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION:

The Committee were apprised by the Ministry of Environment & Forests that
detection of violation of the provisions of the CRZ Notification 1991, is the first duty
of the ‘BMC and the other local authorities’. Notably, in the event of local authorities
conniving with vested interests, as happened in the instant case, the MoEF has no
other means of detecting the violations and taking action against the law violators.
The MoEF also stated that the Regional office of MoEF at Bhopal monitors projects
in Maharashtra region which have been accorded environmental and CRZ clearance
by the Ministry or by the State Level Environment Impact Assessment Authorities.
Obviously, in cases of projects undertaken without environmental clearance, the
regional office at Bhopal had no mechanism.to know of such projects much less of
taking action against such projects. The Committee are perturbed to note that the
Regional offices so created across the Country have no proactive role to play and
that they act only after the local authorities detect violation or in cases where project
proposals are submitted to them for necessary environmental clearances. The
Committee therefore recommend that the MoEF plug loopholes in the
Acts/Rules/Notification for ensuring proper forest conservation and environmental
protection. The Committee would like to be apprised of the measures contemplated
by the Ministry in this behalf.

(SI. No.-1; Para-14 of the Ninety-First
Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(157 Lok Sabha)

Proposed reply of MOD

As per the information made available by MoEF(Appendix XI), it is submitted that
Ministry of Environment and Forests had issued the Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ)
Notification in 1991 under the Environment Protection Act, 1986 for protection and
conservation of the coastal environment. A Committee under the chairmanship of
Prof. M.S. Swaminathan was constituted to review the CRZ Notification, 1991. The
Committee submitted its report with various recommendations for strengthening the
CRZ Notification, which inter-alia included protection and conservation of the coastal
ecosystem, livelihood security of local communities, introduction of regulation to
manage the proliferation of ports along the coasts, introduction of tighter standards
for disposal of effluent into coastal waters, etc.

a ae
4) -


On the basis of the recommendations of the above Committee and extensive
consultations with various stakeholders, Ministry notified the CRZ Notification, 2011
for the main land and Island Protection Zone (IPZ) Notification, 2011 for
Lakshadweep as well as Andaman & Nicobar Islands in supersession of the CRZ
Notification, 1991.

The CRZ Notification, 2011 covers 500 meters from’ the high tide line on the
landward side, including the inter-tidal area on the seafront, and upto 12 nautical
miles on the seaward side. It also covers 100 meters or width of the creek,
whichever is less, from the high tide line on the landward side along the tidal
influenced water bodies.

The Coastal Regulation Zone Notification, 2011 prohibits setting up of new
Industries and expansion of existing industries units in CRZ areas. Only activities
which require foreshore facilities viz Ports, fishing harbor and pipeline for sea water
intake / outfall, transmission lines etc. are permissible within CRZ.

Comments of Audit:

The Ministry has quoted the CRZ Notification of 2011, whereas the PAC had
made their recommendation through their 911 Report of 2013-14(15" Lok
Sabha) (tabled in the Parliament on 9-12-2013). Further, no measures
taken/proposed to be taken by the MoEF to plug the loopholes in the
Acts/Rules/Notification for ensuring proper forest conservation and
environmental protection have been mentioned in the Action Taken note. The
Action Taken note is vetted subject to doing the needful.

Further Reply:
As informed by MoEF CRZ, 2011 also provides for

(a) “The State Government or the Union territory CZMAs shall primarily be
responsiblefor enforcing and monitoring of this notification and to assist in this
task, the State Government and the Union territory shall constitute district
level Committees under the Chairmanship of the District Magistrate
concerned containing atleast three representatives of local traditional coastal
communities including from fisherfolk”, and

(b) “To maintain transparency in the working of the CZMAs it shall be the
responsibility of the CZMA to create a dedicated website and post the
agenda, minutes, decisions taken, clearance letters, violations, action taken
on the violations and court matters including the Orders of the Hon'ble Court
as also the approved CZMPs of the respective State Governement or Union
territory’.

However, the concern of Audit has been intimated to MoEF for their
consideration and necessary action.

~T
(Suresh Kumar)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India
Ministry of Defence 0.0. No. C-13019/8/2010-D(Vig.)

“34
Y2 =


t Chop Yo . 7
Ober U [० 0०० / Recommindab wna on NP ule ५ ne a
fy errtinent tens pment atrnol a dear wf D) a> }
Ay Ap hus हे
PROFORMA

Ministry of Defence
Observation/Recommendation

9. VIOLATION OF THE TERMS OF NOC:

The Committee note that the Army Authorities issued NOC to the Housing
Society for the ‘Welfare of servicemen, ex-servicemen and their widows’. The
Committee find that the membership of the Society continued to expand to
accommodate public servants, politicians and their relatives. Asked as to why NOC
was not rescinded once the change in membership of the Society was noticed by the
MOD, it was tacitly admitted that ‘probably because all the decision making
functionaries at Headquarters Maharashtra, Gujarat & Goa( MG&G ) Area, Defence
Estates Office (DEO) Mumbai and Officers of State Government were beneficiaries’.
It was further submitted that, DEO, Mumbai Circle vide letter dated 16.06.2003 had
requested the Collector, Mumbai not to allot the subject land to Adarsh Cooperative
Housing Society (ACHS) and DEO, Mumbai had written to HQ, MG&G Area vide
letter dated 14.07.2003 to withdraw the NOC issued by them to the State
Government. However, to the dismay of the Committee, no action was taken by the
concerned authorities. Furthermore, the Committee found that the Defence
authorities did not press their earlier demand of providing accommodation for the
Girls’ Hostel for wards of Army Officers posted in far flung areas, welfare of Kargil
war heroes, welfare of widows of servicemen for which the Chief Promoter had
initially approached the Chief Minister for allotment of land in question. The Ministry
submitted that ‘the Defence Authorities did not press their earlier demand because in
all probability the decision making authorities from inception till 2010 were interested
parties’. The Committee are appalled by the temerity with which the ruse of welfare
of servicemen and ex-servicemen was used by the select elite belonging to the
Service and civilian administration, politicians and well-heeled individuals connected
with them for private profit. Since the Government have ordered investigation in the
matter, the Committee hope the CBI would spill the beans and help fix individual
responsibility with respect to individual cases referred to in this Audit report who are
found to have prevaricated in the matter. The Committee should like to be apprised
of the action taken in the matter in due course.

(SI. No.-1; Para-9 of the Ninety-First
Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(157 Lok Sabha)

Proposed reply of MOD

As per the information made available by DGDE, DEO Mumbai had requested the
Collector vide letter No._BOM/ADM/CONF/251 dated 16.06.2003(Appendix VIIA) to
reconsider the issue of allotment of the land to the Society. DEO also requested HQ
M&G Area vide letter No.BOM/ADM/CONF/Kukri Park dated 14.07.2003(Appendix
VIIB) to review the LMA’s decision of grant of NOC and withdraw the same in Govt.
interest. DEO Mumbai has reported that there was no intimation regarding the
action taken by the Collector, Mumbai or the MG&G Area on his letter. However, to

= [he

- ३८


ensure that such incidence do not recur, detailed rules/guidelines for issue of ‘NOC’
have been issued vide Government of India, Ministry of Defence letter
No.11026/2/2011/D(Lands) dated 18.05.2011(Appendix VIII).

PAC/Audit will be apprised of the final action taken in the matter, in due
course”.

(Surdsh Kumar)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India

Ministry of Defence O.M. No. C-13019/8/2010-D(Vig.)

at Sos
— Y Vy न


PROFORMA

Ministry of Defence
Observation/Recommendation

10. EXPANSION IN MEMBERSHIP OF THE ADARSH SOCIETY:

The Committee are distressed to note that the much acclaimed pious avowal of
‘Welfare of service personnel, ex-servicemen and their widows’ was used as a
smoke screen to corner prime piece of land by Senior Service officers, Senior
Civilian public servants and private individuals, most of whom were relatives of
politicians and public servants. The Committee note that the initial list of 40
members of the Society submitted to the Collector, Mumbai City, largely comprised
of individuals belonging to Defence services and Civilian organizations related to
Defence. However, as the case moved in the corridors of the Mantralaya seeking
odd clearances and no objections from various authorities, the list of membership
swelled from time to time as more senior officers of Services, State Government and
private individuals were accommodated. The MoD however failed to furnish the
names of add on membership in chronological order and the dates on which
successive clearances and objection were taken. The Committee would like the list
of membership on the indicated lines to be prepared and furnished to the Committee
in due course.

(SI. No.-1; Para-10 of the Ninety-First
Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(157 Lok Sabha)

Proposed reply of MOD

The membership issue is between the Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society and the
State Government of Maharashtra. Military Authorities / Ministry of Defence have no
role in applications and grant of membership to the individual members. However, a
list of new Members who were accorded membership of the Society at the later date
alongwith date of approval given by the Collector, Mumbai has been received from
the Additional Chief Secretary, Revenue vide his 0.0. NO. LND 2512 /176/CR -85/J-
2 dated Nil is enclosed(Appendix IX).

PAC/Audit will be apprised of the information immediately on receipt from
Government of Maharashtra.

(Suresh Kumar)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India

Ministry of Defence O.M. No. C-13019/8/2010-D(Vig.)

oth

हा - ५६ -


PROFORMA

Ministry of Defence

Observation/Recommendation

11. MODIFICATION OF MMRDA DEVELOPMENT PLAN:

The Committee find that flouting of norms in the case was not restricted only to
wrongful appropriation of Government land to benefit some influential members of
the Armed Forces and Civilian officers, politicians and their relatives. When the
Committee sought information from the Government of Maharshtra, they submitted
that a Commission of Enquiry has been ordered by them to look into the matter
holistically including the title of the land allotted to Adarsh Cooperative Housing
Society (ACHS).. The Ministry of Defence while submitting the replies to the
Committee stated that the replies to questions concerning. Government of
Maharashtra are awaited as the State Government has said (i) the original
files/papers related to ACHS matter have been submitted to the Commission of
Enquiry, (ii) the terms of reference provided to the Commission cover almost all the
questions referred to them, and (iii) the Commission will be submitting its report to
the State Government after recording the evidence of all the concerned parties. It
also stated that it would not be possible to make any comments at this stage. A
perusal of records made available to the Committee reveals that amongst the
various concessions made by the Government of Maharashtra was the modification
of Mumbai Metropolitan region Development Authority's Development plan for the
Area to accommodate the Society. Since the land sought by the Society was
reserved for road widening as per Mumbai Metropolitan Region Development
Authority’s (MMRDA) development plan, the Collector, Mumbai City had reported to
Revenue and Forest Department, Government of Maharashtra that NOC from
Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai and approval of MMRDA were to be
taken. Further, the membership was to be approved by the Government. The
Committee find that the Society while consenting to accommodate 40 per cent
civilian members had given their willingness to leave an area of 10 to 15 feet for
further widening of the road. In this very letter, the Society had also requested the
Revenue Minister to allot land, which was in the physical custody of Military Authority
(MA) ‘to accommodate and reward the Heroes of Kargil operation who had bravely
fought at Kargil to protect our Motherland’. Notably, an earlier request of Bombay
City Sainik Welfare Office for allotment of land for construction of a rest house had
been refused in March 1986 and again in December 1989 on the ground that the
land was earmarked for widening of the road. Surprisingly, later, i.e. in April, 2002,
the Urban Development Department considering the Society’s request for allotment
of land, approved the modifications to the MMRDA Development Plan. The
modifications were deletion of 60.97 meters wide road leading to South Colaba
Harbour link and changing width of Captain Prakash Pethe Marg from 60.97 metres
to 18.40 metres and inclusion of the deleted area in Residential Zone, Parade
Ground, Helipad, Garden and BEST Depot. Thus the area reserved for roads were



converted into residential area paving the way for allotment of the land to the
Society. The Committee hope that appropriate action would be taken by the State
Government of Maharashtra on the report of the Enquiry instituted by them. The
Committee further recommend that Ministry of Defence may keep the Committee
apprised in the matter.

(SI. No.-1; Para-11 of the Ninety-First
Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(157 Lok Sabha)

Proposed reply of MOD

The Govt. of Maharashtra has informed that as per the Enquiry Report, the
appropriate DCR which ought to have been applied by the MMRDA to the Adarsh
plot was the DCR1967 and not the draft DCR1989 or DCR 1991 in view of the CRZ
notification dated 19.02.1991 and appropriate action under the relevant provisions of
MRTP Act, 1966 and DCR 1967 will be taken against those responsible for not
following the laid down procedure(Appendix X).

The details of action taken by Maharashtra Government against those
responsible for not following the procedure laid down under the relevant
provisions of MRTP Act, 1966 and DCR 1967 would be furnished to the
PAC/Audit in due course.

(Suresh Kumar)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India

Ministry of Defence O.M. No. C-13019/8/2010-D(Vig.) Defence 0.0. No. C-13019/8/2010-D(Vig.



(i)

(i)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

APPENDIX-I
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
CONTAINED IN THEIR NINETY-FRIST REPORT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)

Total number of Observations/Recommendations

Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
which have been accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 1-8, 15-16 and 17

Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the reply of the Government:

Para Nos. -Nil
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

ParaNos. 12 and 14

Observations/Recommendations in respect of

which the Government have furnished interim replies:

Para Nos. 9-10 and 11

~Ye-

17

Total : 12
Percentage: 70.59%

Total: 0

Percentage: 0

Total : 2
Percentage: 11.76%

Total : 3
Percentage: 17.65%