62

RATNA AND R-SERIES .
HYDROCARBON FIELDS

MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

SIXTY-SECOND REPORT
i कक नििक

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2095

SIXTY-SECOND REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

RATNA AND R-SERIES
HYDROCARBON FIELDS

MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS

Presented to Lok Sabha on: Jfa.22.:.2.06

Laid in Raiya Sabha on: ./4.:/2:.2.006.

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

Decemher, 2016/ Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka}


CONTENTS

| PAGE
{ || foo दिल 1४0
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2016-17) - (| | )
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2015-16) (५)
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB COMMITTEE-VIl OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS | i
COMMITTEE (2015-16) (vip
INTRODUCTION ~ ~
विधा लाए _
CHAPTER -।
. INTRODUCTION
1. | Introductory 7
“ut. [Award of contract for Ratna and-R-Series fields a 2
ll. | Failure of Negotiating Team of Secretaries (NTS) to कद
execute Production Sharing Contract {PSC} with
__ [respect to R&RS Fields |
lV. |Delay in decision making leading to reassessing -6
financial capability of bidders:
~V. | Deliberations on techno-legal issues and issue of 40
royalty and cess:
VI. | Reimbursement of past-cost and 1d non-maintenance of 18

idle facilities:

execution of mandate.

Sequence of events for last 25 years (since 1991)

जा. | Fixing of responsibility towards delay in non-|

PART -॥

Observations/recommendations of the Committee

है APPENDICES

|, | Minutes of the sitting of Sub-Committee VIll of PAC (2015-16)
held on 63.02.2016

I. | Minutes of the sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2016-17)
held on 12.07.2016

iit. | Minutes of the sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2016-17)
held on 15.42.2016



16.
17.

18.

20.
21.
22.

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUN िऑललननलर POSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS € OMMITTE

(2015-16)
Prof, K.V. Thomas - Chairperson
MEMBERS :
LOK SABIIA
Shri S.S. Abluwalia

Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura
Shri Nishikant Dubey
Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
Sbri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Shri Ramesh Pokhviyal “Nishank"
Shri Neiphiu Rio
Shri Dushyant Singh

_ Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
Dr. Kirit Somaiya
Shri Anurag Singh ‘Thakur
Shri Shivkumar Udasi
Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABBA

" Shri Naresh Agrawal

Shri Satyaveat Chaturvedi
Shri Anil Madhav Dave
Shri Vijay Goel

Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Shri Shantaram Naik

Shri Sukhende Sekhar Roy

(v)


- COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE-VII(HY DREN" —= OF SUB-COMMITTEE: Vill HYDROCARBON
PRODUCTION SHARING CONTRACTS) OF THE TLEL™ SHARING CONTRACTS) OF THE PUBLIC
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2015-10) COMMITTEE (2045-16)

- Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy ‘ ७ Convenor
Shri Shiv Kumar Udast 9"; - Alternate Convenor
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA —

3. Shri 5.5. Ahluwalia

4, Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

5. Or. P. Venugopal ;
RAJYA SABHA

6. Shri Naresh Agrawal

% Shri Vijay Goet

8. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita

. (५४०


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2016-17), having been authorised
by the Committee, do present this Sixty-Second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Rafna
and R-Series Hydrocarbon Fields' based’on C&AG Report No. 43 of 2015 {Compliance
~ Audit) Union Government relating to the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas.

2. The Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of india was laid on the Table of
the House on 18 December, 2015.

3. C&AG Repart No. 43 of 2015 (Compliance Audit) was selected by the Public
Accounts Committee for examination in 2015-16. Subsequently, this Report was allocated
to Sub-Committee Vill (Hydrocarbon Production Sharing Contract) of PAC (2015-16) for
an in-depth examination.

4. The Sub-Committee VItl of PAC (2015-16) had a briefing by Audit on C&AG Report
No. 43 of 2015 on 3 February, 2016 and procured advance information to the list of points
arised out of the important aspects of the C&AG Report and subsequent developments in
award of R&RS Hydrocarbon Fields.. However, due to paucity of time, the examination of
the said C&AG Report could not be-completed.

5. The subject was subsequently taken up by the successor Public Accounts
Committee (2016-17) for examination. The Committee took evidence of the
representatives of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas and 01 and Natural Gas
Corporation Limited (ONGC) on the subject at their sitting held on 12 July, 2016. The draft
Report which was placed before the Main Committee was considered and adopted at their
sitting held on 15 December, 2016. The minutes of the Sittings on the subject are
appended to the Report. पु

6. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in botd and form Part II of the Report.

7. The Committee thank the Predecessor Committee and Sub-Committee for taking
briefing and obtaining information on the subject. हु

8. The Committee would alse like to express their thanks-to the representatives of the
Ministry of Petroleum and Natura! Gas and ONGC for tendering evidence before them and
furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in connection with the examination of
the subject. है

9. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

NEW DELHI; PROF. K.V. THOMAS

15 December, 2016 Chairperson,

24 Agrahayana 1938 (Saka} Public Accounts Committee.



REPORT
PARTI

L Introductory

1... The Ratna and R Series (R&RS) medium sized hydrocarbon fields
are located in the Western Offshore area (at an average-water depth of 45
metres) 130 kilometres southwest of Mumbai city. These fields ‘were
discovered and partially developed by the Oil and Natural Gas Corporation
Limited (ONGC) in November 1979. The Government of India (Gol)
decided in 1991 for inviting private parties in upstream oil sector. In 1993,
Gol issued notice inviting offers for development of R&RS fields.

2. Following invitation of bids from private parties by Government of
India (50) in 1991, the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA)
approved (February 1996) award of contract in respect of R&RS fields to a
Consortium of Successful Bidders* (0058). Accordingly, the Ministry of
Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoPNG) issued (March 1996) a Letter of
award of R&RS fields to CoSB. Thereafter, CCEA approved (March 1999)
negotiation to be held by the Negotiating Team of Secretaries (NTS) for
finalising and concluding Production Sharing Contract (PSC) within six

months.

3. The process of reaching upto a decision to finalise the PSC was not
completed despite more than 16 years having passed (as of August 2015)
since the CCEA approval for entering into negotiations with ७०58,
Deliberations on some technical clauses were held till 2004 between
MoPNG and the Ministry of Law and Justice (MoL&J). Thereafter, issue of
royalty and cess had been raised by MoPNG and NTS which had been
frequently referred among various Ministries ‘and sent for opinion of MoL&J
and the Attorney General of India (AGI) multiple times. Simultaneously,

.these references fo various agencies and consequent delays had led to re-

assessments of financial capability of the bidders at various points of time.

* M/s. Essar Oil Limited (india) {EOL} (50% and Premier 91 Pacific (UK} {POL} [40%]. ONGC to hold 46 per
cent Participatory interest {Pt}. . .


2

As per Audit, no final decision on signing of PSC for R&RS fields was taken
(August 2015). .

4... Audit, while working out on financial implications by keeping
discovered R&RS hydrocarbon fields idle without assigning the preduction
rights to any party, had led to deferment of domestic production of Crude
Oil and Natural Gas from the fields from October 2005 to March 2015 to the
tune of USD 5245 million (equivalent हैं 26200 crore). Gol's take to the tune
of € 1405 crore on account of royalty and cess on Crude Oj] and royalty on
Natural Gas for the said period also remained deferred (August 2015). In
addition to the above, the detay had ied to idling and nen-maintenance of

xisting facilities at Ratna R-12 field since September 1994, which ‘would

“result in an avoidable financial burden of हैं 1086 crore on re-development

of the field

5. The Audit while. bringing out Report No. 43 of 2015 (Compliance
Audit) on “Ratna and R-Series Hydrocarbon Fields’ laid before the
Parliament on 18 December, 2015 examined records pertaining to R&RS
fields of MoPNG and ONGC.

6. However, subsequently on 10 March, 2016, CCEA approved the
cancellation of the award letter dated 12.3.1996 issued in favour of the
consortium of M/s. Essar Oil Limited and M/s. Premier Oil Pacific UK Ltd.
and revert the Ratna & R Series fields to ONGC, subject to payment of
cess and royalty at the current rates, as applicable under the nomination
regime.

li. Award of contract for Ratna and R-Series fields

“7. Gol invited (1993) bids” for development of discovered oil and gas

fields including R&RS fields. Bids in respect of R&RS fields were received
(31 March 1994) from two consartia of bidders, A joint team from the
Directorate General of Hydrocarbons (DGH) and ONGC evaluated the
technical contents of the bids, sought clarifications from the bidders, and

? ¢ medium (inclnding Ratna and R-Series fleld) and 33 small skeet fletds,


3

held direct negotiations with them. Thereafter, the bidders submitted final
bids on 08 February 1995. DGH and ONGC conducted a detailed techno-
economic analysis and arrived at the conclusion that R&RS fields be
- awarded to CoSB after resolving certain issues. An’ Empowered
Commitiee of Secretaries (ECS) at its meeting held on 26 December 1995
recommended the award of R&RS fields to CoSB subject to conditions.
CCEA approved (February 1995) the recommendations (26 December
4995) of ECS for award of contract in respect of R&RS fields to CoSB
subject to the above conditions alongwith the fime schedule that PSC
would be negotiated and finalised within six months of the receipt of CCEA
approval. Accordingly, MoPNG issued (12 March 1996) letter of award to
CoSB intimating the decision of Gol for award of contract for development
of R&RS fields. :

8. The contract negotiations with the successful bidders of small and
medium sized fields were not finalised from March 1996 to February 1999
due to various investigations relating to the award of contracts in the +"
round, public interest litigations before the Delhi High Court and the
Supreme Court and ONGC's request to compensate it for the past cost.

- 9... Thereafter, CCEA approved (March1999) negotiations to be held by a
Negotiating Team of Secretaries (18) for finalising and concluding
Production Sharing Contract (PSC) within six months.

lll. Failure of Negotiating Team of Secretaries (NTS) to execute
Production Sharing Contract (PSC) with respect to R&RS Fields:

40. CCEA approved (March 1999) a proposal of MoPNG for:

{a) concluding contracts in respect of the 12 discovered fields awarded
under the second round in 1996 after due negotiations were held with
ihe parties by the NTS, consisting of
* Secretary, MoPNG;

e Finance Secretary,

. Secretary Expenditure;

. Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs (DEA);
. Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs (DLA) and;


© The Chairman and Managing Director (CMD) of ONGC.

(b) to continue the policy of offering discovered fields for private
participation, as hitherto, but with bids being invited by National Oi
Companies (NOCs)

(c) MoPNG evolving modalities for past cost compensation separately
with the MoF and the Planning Commission, independent of the issue
under consideration herein; and

(d) Keeping the cess and royalty levies in respect of awarded discovered
fields at the tevels prevailing at the time of inviting bids with the
flexibility to provide for increased royalty, if required by State
Government, by adjustment from cess.

In its approval, CCEA also prescribed that PSC should be finalised
within six months of the approval.

11. ‘After CCEA’s dacision, PSC in respect of nine small sized fields were
signed in February 2001. For the remaining two small sized fields, PSC
were signed in February 2004.

12. The Committee took note of the fact that NTS kept setting targets for:
completion of negotiations and signing of PSC. In November 1999, the
NTS decided that the entire process of negotiations would be completed by
15 February 2000. In March 2000 meeting, NTS decided that negotiations
should be completed by 30 April 2000 and in 7 September 2000 meeting,
NTS decided to conclude the negotiation process by 18 September 2000.
However, NTS did not adhere to its own targets for completion of the
negotiations. NTS held 20 meetings between November 1999 and June
2043, During the period from May 2010 to July 2015, only two meetings of ~
NTS were held and on both occasions, it was decided to hold another
meeting to take a final decision in the matter *

13. The Ministry in its reply to the Audit (August 2015) stated that NTS
concluded the’ process of finalisation of PSC in respect of 11 small sized
fields and undertook series of meetings examining several complex.
commercial, technical, financial and legal issues related to the negotiations

“and bringing. convergence on these issues.


14. “When asked to the Ministry about what monitoring mechanism was
put in place to see the progress made by NTS with regard to finalization
and conclusion of PSC and further who should be held accountable for
non-signing of PSC, the Ministry submitted as under:-

“CCEA meeting was held on 97 March, 1999 and it was decided to
conclude the PSCs in respect of 11 small sized fields and one
medium sized field Le. Ratna and R-Series Fields. CCEA authorized
Negotiating Team of Secretaries (NTS) to conclude contracts after
due negotiations. NTS comprising Secretary (P & NG), Finance
Secretary and Law Secretary undertook negotiations with the
consortiums, based on a Model Production Sharing Contract (MPSC)
approved in November, 1999 as the basis for negotiation and
finalization of the PSC with the consortiums.

NTS undertook a series of meetings undertaking several complex
issues related to negotiations and bringing convergence on the
technical, commercial, legal and financial issues. Based on these
efforts, PSC for 11 small sized fields were signed (9 in February,

_ 2001 and 2 in February, 2004). Thus, NTS concluded the process of
finalization of PSC in respect of 11 small sized fields. NTS was
working under the mandate and directions of CCEA.

During the NTS meeting beld in March, 2000, it was decided to
assess thé updated financial status of the awardee companies in
respect of all the-12 fields, which were approved by CCEA in 1999.
While the financial capability of other awardee companies was
approved by NTS, certain actions on part of the consortium partners
including issues related to financial capability of EOL - POL, creation
of charge on the fields against refinery loans contrary to provisions of
the draft PSC and differences on other issues with ONGC held back
signing of the Ratna and R-Series fields. Although some of these
issues like financial capability were accepted by NTS after obtaining
opinion from ICICI, it was desired by NTS that EOL — POL may sort
out issues of inventory and COSA with ONGC. On the issue of EOL
creating charge on Ratna — R Series Fields against their refinery
loan, Ministry of Law on 28.02.2003 and 05.03.2003 opined that since
no agreement /- contract had been signed by EOL with the
Government in respect of the fields, therefore, EOL had not acquired


18.

G

any right in the Said field and PSC did not provide power to the
contractor to create charge on Pi for securing loan on any other
project.

As may be seen from these developments that PSC for other
discovered fields were signed. However, certain actions on part of the
consortium delayed signing of the PSC of the Ratna and R- Series
fields.”

Further, on being asked what factors contributed to the cancellation

of award to the consortium, the Ministry in their reply has submitted as
under:-

16.

“In pursuance of the CCEA decision dated 09.03.1999, the
negotiations were initiated by the Negotiating Team of Secretaries
(NTS} for concluding the contract. However, even after holding active _
negotiations, the terms and conditions to execute the formal PSC
between the Government of India and the joint venture of the
companies and ONGC, as required under Article 299 of the
Constitution of India and other statues, could not be concluded due to
disagreements between the consortium partners and Government of
India on multiple issues and certain irregularities on the part of the
consortium partner after the issuance of letter of award.

In view of the inordinate delay in concluding the contract resulting into
delay in the development of the fields, it was decided with the
approval of CCEA to cancel the contract.”

The Ministry, in their evidence before the Committee on 12 July, 2016

stated as under :-

17.

This is one unfortunate case, in which many issues came up, and
those could not be resolved and ultimately the contract could not be
signed. To say that NTS did not do any work, would not be
appropriate. Negotiation for this field could not be done, it is true.”

Delay in decision making leading to reassessing financial
capability of bidders:

Audit noticed that the Notice Inviting Offer (NIO) did not indicate any

criteria for evaluating financial capability. However, bids of both the bidders


7

were evaluated by DGH and ONGC and based on this valuation, award of
contract to GoSB was recommended (December 1995) by an Empowered
Committee -of Secretaries (ECS) for the approval of CCEA. CCEA
approved (February 1996) the recommendations and Letter of Award of
contract for R&RS fields was issued in favour of CoSB on 12 March 1995.

48. However, after assignment (March 1999} of work to NTS by CCEA for
finalisation of PSC, NTS decided (March 2000) to assess the updated
financial strength of the CoSB. Accordingly, DGH carried out (May 2000)
assessment of financial capability and informed (September 2000) NTS
that net worth of CoSB was positive and it had souhd financial health.
Accordingly, NTS decided (February 2001) to process the PSC. However,
final decision was not taken due to techno-legal issues.

19. Later, in August 2004, NTS again asked DGH to carry out
assessment of financial capability of CoSB. Based on the inputs provided
(October 2004) by DGH and MoF, NTS concluded that CoSB was
financially capable to meet its obligations as envisaged in PSC. However,
before processing of PSC for finalisation, NTS raised (April 2005) the issue
of applicability of rates for cess and royalty and final decision had not been
taken.

20. InNTS meeting {October 2014), the issue of negative net worth of the

successful bidder partner was again raised and it was decided to freshly
ascertain the present net worth of CoSB. The issue was further raised on
two occasions by one of the members of the NTS through letters to
MoPNG (November 2011 and February 2012). Meanwhile, in January
2012, the CoSB partners submitted the net worth certificates issued by
their statutory auditors, indicating a positive and higher net worth than that
ascertained in earlier assessments. ह

21. MoPNG is its reply (August 2015) to the Audit stated that NTS
decided (March 2000) to assess the updated financial status of all awardee
companies is respect of 12 fields and matter of financial capability was
accepted by NTS afier obtaining opinion from ICICI Limited. The issue of
re-assessing financial capability of CoSB came up again only during the


8
NTS meeting of October 2011. It further detailed the circumstances leading
to re-assessment of financial capability of CoSB.

22. As per Audit, MoPNG's contention of re-assessments of financial
capabilities may be viewed. in the light of the fact that this exercise was
conducted in the years 2000, 2004 and in 2011. Delays in taking final
decision on various matters and raising of already settled issues led to
repeated assessments of the financial capability of CoSB which contributed
to further avoidable delays.

23. On being asked (i) if this exercise could have been avoided had the
NTS adhered to its target of 6 months in assessing the financial capacity of
CoSB; and (ii) raising of already settled issues (techno-legal and rates of
royalty and cess) led to reassessing of financial capability time and again,
the Ministry has replied as under:-
“It was not that the financial capacity of CoSB was assessed in
respect of only Ratna & R Series Fields. This was done for bids in
respect of other fields as well. During the NTS meeting held on
02.03.2000, NTS decided that financial strength of all the awardee
companies should be evaluated based on the latest available
information. NTS authorized DGH to obtain necessary information
from the awardee companies and evaluate their financial strength
and submit the position. During the subsequent NTS meeting held on
18.07.2000, NTS noted that according to the assessment carried out
‘by DGH, all the awardee companies, except for Essar Oil, were
- financially capable. .

Certain actions on part of the consortium pariners held back signing
of the Ratna and R-Series fields. The. bidding of field is an important
‘economic decision and should be taken with due caution after
ascertaining all the related aspects.” है

24. Further on being posed with the question why did MoPNG repeatedly
carried out reassessment of financial capability of CoSB leading to delay in
final decision and raising of already settled issues , the Ministry replied as
under:~ .
* Ministry of Finance who is also a member of NTS observed that in
the light of the negative net-worth (as on 31.3.2011) of Essar Oil Ltd.,
as evaluated in NELP-IX; as well-as the fact that the parameters of


25,

9

the bid undertaken so many years earlier are dramatically different
today, and that the PSC has not been entered into for such a tong
period, it will be appropriate that a fresh opinion of the Attorney
General is obtained, on whether 501 is obliged to enter into a-~
Production Sharing Contract with Essar Oil Ltd (notwithstanding the
earlier fegal opinion that the “contract” with Essar Oil Ltd led
consortium for Pre-NELP R-Ratna Series is “concluded”). Thereafter,
Finance Ministry vide लाश dated 13.2.2012 reiterated “since the
NELP-iX Essar Oil Limited is being evaluated as having negative net- -
worth, in that case how can NTS agenda for considering award to
Essar Consortium in the Pre-NELP R-Ratna series be justified.

The reassessment of financial capability was necessitated fo adjudge
the updated financial position and strength of the CoSB to ensure that
they are financially capable to meet the obligations as envisaged in.
PSC in the current date. Evaluation of financial capability and net
worth of each of the constituent companies are examined to ensure
that each of them has a positive net worth.”

Further, on being asked to furnish a brief background note detailing

the chronological developments on the award of contract and subsequent
cancellation of the same to the consortium, the Ministry has tabulated the
three dated (19.04.2000, 02.05.2000 and 18.07.2000) sequence as tinder:-

“ (i) DG, DGH vide letter dated 19.4.2000 stated that EOL ‘s networth
arrived as on. 31.3,1999 was (-1170.93) crores affer adjusting the
unamortized portion of Miscellaneous Expenditure and Contingent
liabilities of ₹ 43.68 crores and %2730 crores respectively. DGH
suggested that before the PSC is signed with EOL for Ratna R-
Series, EOL may be requested to give a letter of comfort from its
bankers for commitment for its share of investment in the field, which
is expected to be around US$ 300 MM (equal to $4300 crores).

(ii), DGH vide letter dated 2.5.2000, based on the clarifications given
by EOL, stated that EOL is having sound financiat health, in order to

- take up the financing of Ratna R-Series award, which for its share of

PI shalt require around 650 crores (considering 50% share given in
the Bid). ;

(iii) NTS in its meeting dated 18.7.2000 decided that information from
EOL has to be obtained by DGH to assess their financial capability


10

and that EOL-POL fo be intimated of the sixty days time limit to
finalise the PSCs, failing which the negotiation process would stand
concluded.”

V. Deliberations on techno-tegaf issues and issue of royalty and
cess:

26. On techno-legal issues, the Audit observed that, during discussion in
its- meeting held on 20 February 2001, NTS gave go ahead to process the
PSC for R&RS fields for approval and signing, after financial capability of
the CoSB had been analysed and accordingly the draft PSC was initialied
by all the parties in April 2001. Review of MoPNG's files revealed that
while forwarding the draft PSC to MoL&J for vetting, MoPNG noted .as

- follows:

a) CCEA had approved finalisation of PSC after due negotiations by
‘NTS;

b)'NTS approved that the Model PSC would be the basis for negotiation
and finalisation of PSCs;

०) CoSB had 3150 confirmed acceptance of all issues raised by NTS;
d) NTS had also approved the consequential changes; and

e) CVC had given no objection if MoPNG desired to proceed further to
take a view on proposed signing of PSC of R&RS fields.

27. Audit observed that MoL8&J had informed: (29 January 2002) MaPNG

- that the draft PSC appeared to be formally in order from legal angle subject

to (i) MoPNG exercising powers under Petroleum and Natural Gas Rules
1959 (PNG Rules) for grant of petroleum Mining Lease (ML) for 25 years
instead of 20 years and grant of contract area in excess of 250 square
kilometres (sq. kms.); (ii) clarity to be brought out in PSC regarding the
party responsible for bearing ‘all costs and risks at the delivery point’ and
(iii) confirmation on certain other changes suggested by MoL&J. MoPNG,
after reviewing MoL&J's advice, forwarded (18 February 2002) the issue
again to MoL&J for consideration and advice on the issues relating to the
delivery point and ML. MoL&J responded (22 April 2002) that they had no
legal objection for grant of ML for a period of 25 years and reiterated its
stand that necessary amendment in PSC may be carried out specifying the


name of the party responsible for bearing the costs and risks relating fo
delivery point to avoid dispute in future.

28. Audit noticed that a series of discussions were held thereafter within
MoPNG, and also with MoL&J/MoF/CoSB (between May 2002 to
September 2004) for finalising of PSC wherein the issue relating to the loan
agreement signed by CoSB partner, financial capability of CoSB,
applicability of rate of cess and royally on Crude Oil and reimbursement of -
maintenance cost to ONGC were raised. The three ministries (MoPNG,
MoL&J and MoF) kept on deliberating these issues. It was in its meeting of
15 April 2005 that NTS authorised MoPNG to take necessary action on
these issues including asking confirmation from CoSB on applicability of
cess and royalty. है .

29. On the issue of ROYALTY AND CESS, Audit observed that CCEA
had approved (9 March 1999) freezing of the rates of levy of royalty and
cess prevailing at the time of bidding and not at the time of execution of
PSC. This had been applied in 11 other fields (excluding R&RS fields) in:
respect. of which Gol had decided in 1996 fo award contract for
development of fields. PSCs for these fields had been signed accordingly

between February 2001 and February 2004.

'30. During deliberations in April 2005, NTS observed that a long time had

elapsed and there had been significant change in the oil price market. NTS
advised that CoSB may be asked to confirm payments of statutory levies at
the current level rather than those prevailing in 1995. !t recommended that
the consequential changes to the PSC subsequent to the above may be
initiatled after vetting by MoL&J. है

31. However, 0058 did not agree to the change in the rates of royalty

and cess and stuck fo the old agreed rates. ONGC, on its part relating to 40

per cent PI initially did not agree {2 May 2005} to current rates but
subsequently agreed (4 May 2005) to pay royalty and cess at the current
rates. हु

32. Audit further observed that in June 2005, AGI opined, that
“Government cannot take a position contrary to what it did in regard fo tt


be tote. ts

otha मे लक की

2२५२००२००८-२७६०७०००-+००५७८०८५४०९८७०९०७१०:००६३/०३:३//८८८--०५०:०१

sates

Dies Anant EL PTO TL

42

other fields in the years 2001 and 2004. This stand would not be just, fair -
and reasonable. There is no basis for discriminating against one of the

twelve fields in fixation of royalty and cess different from the eleven others

where it agreed to lesser rate.” AGI further stated, “there wil, in any event

clearly be a case of discrimination and violation of Article 14 of the
Constitution. Further no good reason appears as to why ONGC supports

the increase in the royalty and cess when it would be one of the

beneficiaries of lower cess/royalty ......xxxx." Moreover, representative of

MoL&J stated (19 April 2006) that “the, NTS would be going beyond its

mandate in negotiating any material changes such as rates of cess and

royalty through the PSC.”

33. Thus, the Government was advised (June 2005) by AGI to proceed
with signing of PSC in relation to R&RS fields, with the successful bidder
on the basis of royalty and cess as fixed in the draft PSC. Representative
of MoF agreed ‘in principle, in the NTS meeting (19 April 2006), that cess
and royalty.on Crude Oil be maintained at the old rate. NTS decided (19
April 2006) that based on the tegal opinion by AGI and MoL&dJ, the contract
would stand concluded with the issue of award letter in March 1996 and
statutory levies should be maintained at the old level ONGC be given 45
days to initial the changes to the draft PSC and finalise other subsidiary
agreements/contracts with CoSB partners. However MoPNG decidect (24
August 2006) that clear concurrence of Finance Minister be obtained

34. MoF informed (08 August 2007) that MoPNG may consider issue of
necessary notification, in consultation with MoL&J, prescribing the
applicable rate of cess and royally, in accordance with the terms of
concluded contract, on Crude Oif produced in R&RS fields awarded under
PSC to CoSB. .

35. NTS (20 March 2008), which also had as its member the Secretary
(Law), reiterated its earlier stand of maintaining old rate of cess and royalty
with ald cost recovery fimit (CRL).

36. MoPNG re-examined the maiter and decided (21 July 2009) that
matter may be considered by NTS once again to analyse ali altematives
available. MoPNG observed that NTS had not analysed in detail the


13

alternatives available and had only reiterated its earlier recommendation.

This observation of MoPNG may be seen in the fight of the fact that NTS
was chaired by its own Secretary (MoPNG) and was having representation
of other Secretary level officers of Gol.

37. Meanwhile, in response to advice sought by MoPNG, MoL&J stated
(17 December 2009) that the award of contract for the development of
R&R& fields on 12 March 1996 had been duly concluded and had acquired
finality. It was also emphasised that the only option available to Gol for.
consideration was the option, which specifies levying old rates of cess and
royalty and old CRL. :

38. NTS asked (7 April 2010) DGH to prepare a comparative and
consolidated statement regarding revenues, which would accrue to Gol
applying old rates of cess and royalty and current rates of cess and royalty
with production profile of the discovered field, so as to know the exact stake
of Gol. DGH submitted (December 2010) analysis of Gol's take under
various scenarios in its report. However, DGH in its report stated that Gal's
share of profit could not be reliably estimated as it depended on multiple
dynamic variables and any estimates would be indicative only.

39. in November 2011, it was advised by the Finance Secretary, who
was also one of the members of the NTS, that the parameters of the bid
undertaken so many years earlier are dramatically different today and the
PSC had not been entered into for such a long period, and it would be
appropriate that fresh opinion of the Attorney General be obtained, on
whether Gol was obliged to enter into a Production Sharing Contract with
0058. In response, MoPNG referred to MoL&J’s opinion dated 30.12.2009
that “we may reiterate our earlier stand confirming the opinion of the earier
Attomey General. There is no need fo refer it fo present AG again” and
requested NTS to decide upon the course of action in the matter.

40. In February 2012, the Finance Secretary reiterated his earlier queries
and suggested that MoPNG should have a fresh look into the matter and
sought fresh opinion from the AGI through MoL&dJ. MoPNG referred the
matter again to MoL&J for opinion of the AGI. The AGI, in his opinion in
October 2012, stated that the matter had been pending for a very long time


14

and it was advisable that it should be concluded on a fair and reasonable
basis as suggested.

41. Finally, CoSB agreed (August 2012) to accept the payment of cess
and royalty at current rates with updated cost recovery limits (CRL) based
on current costs to expedite the formal execution of the PSC. CoSB,
however, clarified that the rates would remain fixed during currency of the
PSC.

_ 42. MoPNG, while agreeing to the facts of the case, in reply, admitted

(August 2015) that the issue of royalty and cess definitely delayed
finalisation of PSC for R&RS fields and the issue has been a major factor
which could not be resolved to satisfaction of all the stakeholders.

43. On being asked, what lead to change in ONGC decision supporting
the increase in the Royalty and cess when it would be one of the
beneficiaries of lower Royalty and cess (as pointed out by AG!}, ONGC
made following submission:-

“Initially ONGC agreed for the cess and royally rates for Rs 900 per
MT and Rs 528 per MT respectively as per the provisions of draft
PSC of Ratna R-Series Field. Since ONGC intended to get back the
field, it was a strategic decision by ONGC to agree for the then
current rates of cess and royalty as ONGC would have to pay the
statutory levies at the prevailingrates ( as applicable under the
Nomination regime) in case the field was reverted back to
ONGC.Further, ONGC obtained the opinion of Solicitor General (59)
dated 20.05.2005 which advised that applying earlier rates of cess
and royalty would cause huge public loss.” हि

44, Further, the Ministry on being asked that {i) despite initial negation to

‘the NTS advise (Apri! 2005) by CoSB on the matter of change of rates of

Royalty and cess, what factors eventually contributed to their acceptance
(August 2012) for payment of Royaliy and cess at current rates with
updated cost recovery limits {CRL) based on current costs; and (ii) despite
clear opinion on the issue-of Royalty and cess by the AGI and MoL&J, why


15

the issue was repeatedly raised and referred among various ministries, the
reply of the Ministry is as under :-

“During the meeting of NTS held on, 15.04.2008, it was observed that
since the contract was still under finalization, in view of very high
ruling prices of crude oi @ 58 dollars per barrel as compared to
when the field.was awarded (@ US $ 16 per barrel) as also when it
was again considered by CCEA in 1999, there would be significant
financial implications for the Government. Consequently, NTS felt that
the statutory levies should be fixed at current tevel rather than those.
in 1995. NTS decided that the consortium of Premier Oil, Essar Oi!
and ONGC should be asked to confirm -acceptance of royally on
crude oil @ 10 % of well-head value and cess on crude oil @ = 1800
per metric tonne. This rate should be frozen for entire period of the
PSC. The consortium should be asked to confirm its agreement on
this issue as well as reimbursement of maintenance cost to ONGC as
non-recoverable contract cost. ,

EOL - POL responded that cess and royalty should be retained at
earlier level prevailing at time of bid finalization / award of field.
ONGC, which initially declined to agree to curtent rates,
subsequently, agreed to pay royalty and cess af current rates. ONGC
obtained Solicitor General (SG) opinion. SGI opinion dated
20.05.2005 that applying earlier rates would cause huge public loss.
However, EOL’ and POL did not agree 10 pay royalty and cess at
current rates. As decided by NTS and to consider SGI opinion
forwarded by ONGC on applicability of current rates for statutory
levies, opinion of MOLJ was sought. MOLJ forwarded legal opinion
from Attorney General (AG) that the rates for royalty and cess as
mentioned in “finalized draft PSC” (i.e. at. old rates) should be
maintained. He further added that the Government was advised to

_ proceed with the signing of contract with the consortium on the basis

of rates of royalty and cess as fixed in the draft PSC.

In view of this legal advice and considering huge firiancial implication
for the Central Government, MOPNG sought views of the Department
of. Revenue, MOF under Rule 4(2) of Government of India,
Transaction of Business Rules on keeping royalty and cess rates at


16

the old tevel, as advised by AG. File was received back on
30.08.2005 with following minutes of Finance Minister:
“A bid is an offer. Has the Government accepted the Bid,
feading to a concluded contract? If MOP&NG is of the view that
there is a concluded contract, then the AG’s opinion appears
normal and the rates of royalty / cess must be the original
rates.”

NTS in the meeting held on. 19.04.2006 decided that based on the
legal opinion by AG and MOLJ, the contract stands concluded with
the issue of award letter in March, 1996 and statutory levies should
be maintained at the old level. ONGC should be given 45 days to
initial changes to the draft PSC and finalize other subsidiary
agreements / contracts with the consortium partners involving ONGC.
In case the issues are not resolved and ONGC does not come
forward to initial all the agreements / contracts involving it, the matter
would be taken to the Cabinet under the terms of the offer to find an
alternative partner for 40 % stake of ONGC. NTS recommendations
were submitted for approval of Minister (P & NG) who desired that
clear concurrence of FM should be obtained. Finance Ministry, in
August, 2007 opined that MOP&NG may consider issue of necessary
notification, in consultation with Ministry of Law, prescribing the
applicable rates of cess and royalty, in accordance with the terms of
the concluded contract on crude oil produced in Ratna & R-series
fields awarded under PSC to consortium. Minister (P & NG) observed
on filé in October, 2007 that, “as lot of time has elapsed since the fast
direction / approval of the CCEA as well as the announcement of the
Discovered Field Policy, we may submit the case to CCEA for an
appropriate decision on merits.”. A CCEA Note dated 1* February,
2008 on “Finalization of the Production Sharing Contract for
Discovered Field Awarded by CCEA for Ratna & R-Seires Fields”
was forwarded which was returned by Cabinet Secretariat point out
deficiencies in the CCEA Note. Another meeting of NTS was held on
20" March, 2008 whereby NTS decided to recommend old rates of
cess and royalty with old CRL bid by the contractor without any
provision for the upward revision on account of higher prices.


Vv

However, in order to: fully comply with the directions of Cabinet
Secretariat, it was felt that NTS should consider the matter with a
view to analyzing in detail the various alternatives available along
with the financial_implications, The following alternatives were -
considered for examination by NTS in the meeting held on 21% July,
2009 — .

(i) Old rates of Cess and Royaity with old CRL

(ii) Current rates of Cess and Royalty with old CRL

(iii) Current rates of Cess and Royaity with updated CRL

(iv) Re-inviting Bids

(v) Reverting the field io ONGC

(vi) Secession of negotiation on ground of non-finalization of contract

for last 18 years:

NTS desired to seek comments of AG and MOLJ on each of
the options to work out legal liability of the Government in each of the
options and suggest best option available to the Government.

MOLJ vide opinion dated 16.12.2009 stated that the only option
available to the Government for consideration is the one specifying
levying old rates of cess and royalty and other options may not be
open to the Government to resile from the concluded contract nor fo
unilaterally vary any of the terms of such concluded contract. It was .
further stated that there may be no need to bother AG in the matter

again.

NTS meeting held on 7.4.2010 and it was decided that DGH will”
prepare a comparative and consolidated statement regarding
revenue to accrue to GOI applying old rates of cess and royalty and
current rates of cess and royalty with production profile of the
discovered field. It was also decided that DGH will work out possible
hike: in Cost Recovery Limit {CRL) if current rates are made
applicable. Based on NTS decision, DGH suggested that study may
be Undertaken on estimation of CRL which may involve
comprehensive estimation of cost estimates of the Development Pian
activities. DGH presented a report based on different scenarios that
permitting a higher cost recovery would reduce the total government
take. Next NTS meeting was held on 17.10.2011 whereby the issue


18

of net worth of EOL during award of NELP-IX blocks was raised
again. NTS agreed to ascertain the present net worth of EOL and its
consortium partners.

Finally, EOL agreed only in August 2012 to accept new
amendments to finalize PSC, incorporating cess and royalty at
current rates with updated cost recovery limit based on current costs.

From the above Sequence of Events (SOE), it may be seen
that number of factors triggered by high ruling prices of crude oil @58
dollars per barrel in 2005, as compared to when the field was
awarded (@ US $ 16 per barrel) and its significant impact on the
Government revenues in the form of statutory levies eventually
contributed to acceptance by the CoSB for payment of royalty and

- cass at the current rates with updated Cost Recovery Limits (CRL).”

VI. Reimbursement of past-cost and non-maintenance of idle
हैं facilities:

45. ONGC had drilled 35 exploratory wells and 9 development wells and
had installed one well cum production platform in one of the fields viz. R-
42. Commercial production of Crude Oil and Natural Gas was started by
ONGC from R-12 field in February 1983. The Government of India (501)
decided in 1991 for inviting private parties in upstream oil sector. ‘In 1993,
Gol issued notice inviting offers for development of R&RS fields. ONGC
stopped production of Petroleum from these fields from September 1994.

46. ONGC had created facilities in Ratna R-12 field at a cost of € 472.55
crore. These facilities were used by the Company for production since
February 1983. Following stoppage of production from the field (September
1994), ONGC did not maintain the facilities though specific directions were

. issued by MoPNG/NTS with an acceptance to reimburse the cost by the
Consortium Partners. ONGC’s own inspections reported the facts of
serious deterioration in the condition of the facilities and ‘Plundering and
looting’ of platform utilities and equipment. The estimated repair cost for the
existing facilities at current exchange rates (September 2015) would he
%1085.70 crore. ;


19

47... After adjusting the tax benefits and revenue enjoyed by ONGC from
the field, the net past cost that remained to be compensated to ONGC, was
% 270.46 crore. Need for settiement of this compensation amount has been
highlighted in the earlier audit reports”. Though CCEA had directed {March
1999) MoPNG to evolve modalities for past cost compensation in
consultation with MoF and the Planning Commission, the same was yet ta
be finalised (March 2015). Following stoppage of production from the. field
(September 1994), ONGC did not maintain the facilities.

48, Audit further noted that one of the main reasons for not undertaking
repair and maintenance activities by ONGC was the issue of non-resolution
of compensation for such activities. In this connection, Audit further
observed that NTS had decided (October 2004) that ONGC would be
reimbursed the maintenance cost incurred between the date of award and
effective dates of PSCs. CoSB also agreed to reimburse the cost of
maintenance of the facilities (January 2006). Besides, even in the event of
actual award, ONGG would continue to hold 40 per cent share in the field
and proper maintenance of the asset was in its own interest. Thus, while
PSC remained fo be finalised, the existing idle facilities deteriorated with
passage of time. Non-maintenance of facilities would place an additional
financial burden on development of the field, which could have been
avoided

49. Further Audit scrutiny of the records revealed that although the
facilities were no longer its asset, in the annual accounts, ONGC showed
that it was the owner of this field and provided abandonment liability in the
accounts. Thus, according to the Audit the reply was contradictory to
financial statement of ONGC. Further, MoPNG instructed (August 2002

भाव October 2004) ONGC to maintain the facilities and NTS also decided

(October 2004) that ONGC would be reimbursed the maintenance cost
incurred between the date of award and effective date of PSC. Even after

- these instructions/ decisions, ONGC failed to maintain the facilities that led

to deterioration. CoSB also agreed (January 2006) fo reimburse the cost of
maintenance of facilities. Even after such acceptance, ONGC did not

3 Andit Report no. of 1996 of Uuion Government-Conmnercial (Paragraphs 2,15 to 2.20) and the fallow up
Report no.6 of 2005 of Union Gavernment Connuercial (Paragraph 3.3.4 {i 1))


20

maintain these facilities. Further, as ONGC would continue to hold 40 per
cent share in the field, as a prudent measure, it should have maintained
these assets, which would have reduced the burden of repair cost. Also,
linking the maintenance of the facilities with the non-reimbursement of past
cost was not justified since the modalities for reimbursement of past cost
were to be decided by MoPNG in consultation with MoF and’ Planning
Commission.

50. Thus, according to Audit, non-maintenance of facilities by ONGC at
R&RS fields, even after specific directions from MoPNG/NTS was not
justified and it led to deterioration of the assets with an avoidable repair

cost.

51. MoPNG in its reply (August-2015) to the Audit stated that the issue of
reimbursement of past cost to ONGC is another significant issue in making
the field operational and monetizing the field reserves. The issue’ of
reimbursement of past cost fo ONGC, including the cost incurred by ONGC
on maintenance & security of these fields over last 21 years subsequent to
publishing the NIO would require consideration based on number of

possible alternatives. It further stated that a salient issue has been pointed -

out by Audit regarding non-maintenance of the idle facilities in the field.

52. On being asked why ONGC did not maintain and kept the facilities
created at R&RS fields safe, when NTS (October 2004) had specifically

decided to reimburse the maintenance cost incurred between the date of.

award and effective dates of PSCs, ONGC in its written submission has
stated as under:-

० ONGC had been highlighting the issue of repair/maintenance of the
facilities through its various communications and during the meeting

of Negotiating team of Secretaries (NTS) and requested for-

confirmation regarding decision on re-imbursement of such cost.
Though NTS has deliberated on the need to facility maintenance, but
cost re-imbursement issue has always been kept pending and stated
that cost re-imbursement shall be discussed separately.

In-spite of the fact that no confirmation regarding re-imbursement of
maintenance cost was conveyed to ONGC, an expenditure of


ececacpassenst २५७ ९-४५ wit cavities ५

i
a

21

%6.92Crores plus USD 335,840 was incurred and conveyed to
MoP&NG vide letter dated 9" December, 2004 . The note of such
expenditure was made by NTS in its meeting dated 157" April 2005.

it may please be appreciated that since, the facilities were not
operated by ONGC subsequent to award to JV in 1996, ONGC was
not in a position to incur any expenditure without a decision on
confirmation of its reimbursement. Though the issue of maintenance
cost reimbursement had been discussed in NTS forum, no firm
decision in this regard has ever been conveyed to ONGC.

Since there has been neither any decision on past cost
reimbursement nor Ratna contract was being concluded and in light
of non-reimbursement of already incurred expenditure, it was not
prudent for ONGC to incur any further expenditure on Ratna R-

series.

Now, since the Government has communicated the decision to revert
the field back to ONGC, ONGC would undertake all
repairfrefurbishment and bring back the field to production. Further,
ONGC would undertake exercise to prepare detailed estimates for
actual expenditure involved.”

Vil. Fixing of responsibility towards delay in non-execution of
mandate: .

53. While approving the proposal in March 1999, CCEA approved
conclusion of contract keeping the cess and royalty at the levels prevailing
at the time of inviting bids. Déspite the above decision of CCEA and the
fact that PSCs for rest of 11 fields from the bundle of 12 fields offered
simultaneously under similar terms and conditions had been finalised and
signed till the end of 2004, opinion of AGI to go for finalisation of PSC and
recommendation of NTS (April 2008) for conclusion of PSC, the case was
sent (January 2008) to. CCEA for an appropriate decision. CCEA Note was
returned by the Cabinet Secretariat to .obtain. unambiguous
recommendations of NTS. NTS forwarded its unambiguous,
recommendations in March 2008. MoPNG submitted (June 2008) the Note
to CCEA, agreeing with NTS recommendations. Cabinet Secretariat again.
returned (July 2008) the Note to make certain modifications/corrections


22

relating to some deficiencies. A proposal for modification in the Note to
CCEA was approved on 09 July 2008. However, the matter was again re-
examined in MoPNG and it was decided that NTS should consider the
matter once again, with a view to analysing in detail the various alternatives
available along with their financial implications. Thereafter no final decision
was taken.

54. The Ministry replied to the Audit that the matter was re-examined by’
it and it was observed that NTS had earlier not analysed in detail the
alternatives available and had just reiterated the earlier recommendations.
Thus, in order to fully comply with the directions of Cabinet Secretariat,
NTS should consider the matter once again with a view to analyse in detail
the various alternatives available along with the financial implications. It
then detailed various alternatives considered for examination by NTS in the
meeting held on 21 July 2009. Thereafter, MoPNG narrated the sequence
of events. It mentioned about the next NTS meeting which was held
subsequently in June 2013 in which number of issues were raised similar to

- the ones discussed in the past. MoPNG further informed that a CCEA Note

dated 02 May 2014 was sent to the Cabinet Secretariat regarding issues
relating to the finalisation of PSC for R&RS fields. However, due to change
of Government in May 2014, the circulated Note was not considered by

CCEA at that time.

55. Thus; according to the Audit, MoPNG's reply should be seen in the
light of the fact that NTS had categorically submitted (March 2008) clear
recommendations, as desired by the Cabinet Secretariat and thereafter the
same were approved and forwarded by MoPNG (June 2008) for

_ consideration of CCEA. CCEA returned (July 2008) that Note for correction

of some deficiencies in it. MoPNG, also approved the revised Note on 09
July 2008. However, MoPNG’s changed stance again led to series of
deliberations and clarifications which unnecessarily delayed the matter.

56. On the issue, when the Ministry was posed with the queries (i) When
only minor modifications/corrections were to be carried out in the Note, why
the Note was not sent back and no final decision taken at that time only; (ti)
Why did MoPNG once again raised concerns over the issues {viz.


23

analyzing in detail the various alternatives available along with their
financial implications) and asked the NTS to re-examine the matter; and ही)
to state clearly the reasons and explanations for the delay caused in the
both aforesaid cases, the Ministry made their submission as under :-
“A note to CCEA dated 16.6.2008 was sent for appraving signing of
the PSC with awardee consortium of EOL, POL, and ONGC as per
draft PSC. Later, on the advice of Cabinet Secretariat, a revised
note, with the approval of Minister (P&NG), was sent to CCEA on
26.6.2008 for approving signing of the PSC with awardee consortium
of EOL, POL, and ONGC as per draft PSC negotiated by NTS with
old rates of cess and royalty with the condition that the consortium
accepts it with old cost recovery limit bid by them without any
provision for upward revision on account of higher prices. Cabinet
Secretariat vide OM dated 7.7.2008 informed this Ministry on certain
technical deficiencies found in the CCEA note: The matter was Te-
examined in this Ministry. NTS had just re-iterated its earlier
recommendations in its meeting held on 20.3.2008 considering the
relevance of the points. Under the circumstances, in order to fuily
comply with the directions of the Cabinet Secretariat, it was
considered necessary to hold meeting of NTS with a view to
analyzing in detail the various alternatives available along with their
financial implications and accordingly, NTS meeting was held on
21.7.2009. : :

Time taken in the process. of approval, being dependent on many
relevant factors to be considered while taking a cal! on the issue, may
not necessarily be seen as a delay because the decision makers in
the process of final settlement and resolution of matters of
disagreement have to be sure in ali aspects and get satisfactory reply
of their all queries.” ह

57. Further, Audit observed that keeping discovered hydrocarbon fields
idle’ without assigning the production rights to any party had led to
deferment of domestic production of Crude Oil and Natural Gas from the
fields from October 2005 to March 2015 to the tune of USD 5245 million
(equivalent % 26200 crore). Gol's take to the tune of 71105 crore on
account of royalty and cess on Crude Oil and royalty on Natural Gas for the
said period also remained deferred (August 2015). In addition to the above,
the delay had led to idling and non-maintenance of existing facilities at
Ratna R-12 field since September 1994, which has further resulted in an
avoidable financial burden of 1086 crore on re-development of the field.


58.

24

In reply to the query to the Audit's calculation of financial implications

amounting to 26200 crore on account of deferment of domestic production
of Crude 91 and Natural Gas; 1105 crore on account of Royalty and cess;
and €1086‘crore for re-development of R&RS field, the Ministry replied as
under:-

59

“Audit’s calculation based on number of assumptions indicates that
the country could have avoided imports to the tune of हैं 25655.90
crores on account of crude oil and है 552.95 crores on account of
natural gas production. However, computation also indicates that the
Government would have got only € 1050.61 crores on account of
royalty and cess on crude oil, which is only 4 % of the crude oil
valuation.

With the present decision of the Government, cess and royalty would
be realized by the Government at the current rates applicable under
the nomination regime.”

Further, whether any financial assessment on the colossal loss to the

national exchequer on account of indecision on the part of the Government
on R&RS field lying unutilized for the past 22 years (since 1994), the
Ministry stated as under:-

58

“Any exercise to assess financial impact on national exchequer may .
only provide notional figures since no crude oil / natural gas has been
produced from these fields and hydrocarbon reserves from these
fields would stil] be in place. हे

In fact, if we assume the notional value of = 25650 crores of the crude
oil as calculated by CAG, the Government is estimated fo get ¥ 5130
crores as cess and = 2565 crores gas royalty at the current rate
which is far above what Government could have realized by awarding

- ‘the Fields to CoSB.”

During the course of evidence before the Committee on 12 July,

2016, the Secretary, MoPNG on the issue made following remarks as
under :-

“So far as the notional loss is concerned, we are saying it is a
notional loss because oil or gas, whatever is there, in this field is still
there. It could not be extracted at that time. Now a decision has been
taken and the field has been given back fo ONGC. They have already
come out with a plan and they will bring out oil and gas. Whatever
royalty was earned is there and the Government will get it If it was
extracted earlier, the Government would have got it at that time. If it is


25

extracted in the future also, it would be available to the Government.
There is limited amount of oil and gas. That is why we are calling it,
‘notional losses.

Then regarding past cost, whatever ONGC has incurred that issue is
no longer there because the field is going back to ONGC. If it had
gone to some other party, the question of paying the past cost would
have arisen. Now, since the field remains with ONGC, the question of
paying past cost does not arise.

59. Further, on being asked what ४805 are being contemplated for fixing
accountability on the delay for taking final decision on PSC and Whether
accountability has been fixed and action taken against any person so far,
the Ministry has submitted as under:- है
"The contract negotiations with the bidders for the purpose of signing
production sharing contracts did not commence due.fo the following
reasons:

+ C&AG observations on the contracts awarded to private parties in the
4* round of bidding for small and medium sized discovered fields,

+ Public interest litigations before the High Court and Supreme Court
alleging certain irregularities in the award of contract to private
parties,

“+ ONGC's request to compensate for past costs

*» The negative net worth of EOL

(न Mortgaging by EOL even before award of PSC was deliberated
Rates of Royalty and (५855,
Cost Recovery Litnit
» Impact on government revenue.
It has since been decided to revert the filled to ONGC.
In view of above, fixing of accountability may not be व fruitful
exercise,”

te

%
oe

हु
5

Do

Seta


26

SEQUENCE OF EVENTS FOR LAST 25 YEARS (SINCE 1991)

:

: of economic =: introduced.

1993

Gol issued Notice Inviting Offers.

1994

Production in R&RS field was stopped.

1996

CCEA approval for award of contract to CoSB. MoPNG
issued letter of award to CoSB

1999

CCEA approved negotiation by NTS for finalising and
concluding PSC within six months.

2001
2005

‘The draft PSC was initiated by all the parties.

Altorney General advised Gol to proceed with the ©
signing of PSC on the basis of royalty and cess as fixed
in the draft PSC. MoL&J.agreed with the opinion.”

2008

NTS decided that the contract stands concluded with the
issue of letter of award.

2008

NTS gave unambiguous recommendations mbiguous recommendations to conclude conclude
the contract, MoPNG agreed with NTS and sent note for
approval of CCEA. हु

CCEA returned note for correction of deficiencies.
MoPNG first approved the revised note but matter
referred to the new Secretary

‘2009

MoPNG changed its stand and decided that NTS should
consider the matter once again. MOL&J reiterated its
earlier opinion for concluding the contract with CoSB.

2010

DGH submitted its analysis of available alternatives.

MOL&J suggested that MoPNG was bound to act fairly
to decide the present dispute. हे

2011

MoPNG sought advice of CVG on whether the matter
can be consider further by NTS for making
recommendation.,



अल मम

51 पु

27

: advised that it is for the empowered authority in

Gol to take appropriate decision.

“| MoPNG referred the matter to MOL&J for opinion of

| 2
Attorney General.
Attorney General advised that it should be on
a fair and reasonable basis.

2013 Meeting of NTS held and some clarifications were
sought by the NTS from MoPNG.

“12014 “CCEA note was sent by MoPNG regarding issues _
relating to the finalisation of PSC.
Note not considered by the CCEA due to change of
Government

2015 No decision by the government as of August, 2015.

‘+2016 On 10 March, 2016, CCEA approved cancellation of the

award of letter dated 12 March,1996 issued in favour of
the consortium and reverted the R&RS fields to ONGC,
subject to the payment of cess and royalty at current
rates, as applicable under nomination regime.

#ऋ४ ४



28

PART II

RECOMMENDATIONS AND OBSERVATIONS

introductory : The Ratna and R Series (R&RS) medium sized
hydrocarbon fields are located in the Western Offshore area (at an
average water depth of 45 metres) 130 kilometres southwest of
Mumbai city. These fields were discovered and partially developed by
the Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited (ONGC} in November
1979. The Government of India (Gol) in 1991 decided to invite private
parties in upstream oil sector. Accordingly, in 1993, Gof issued notice
inviting offers for development of R&RS fields. Subsequently, ONGC
stopped production of Petroleum from these fields from September,
1994.

Foliowing invitation of bids from private parties by Government
of India (Gol), the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA}
approved (February 1996) award of contract in respect of R&RS fields
to a Consortium of Successful Bidders (CoSB). The consortium
comprised of M/s. Essar Oil Limited (India) (EOL) [50%] and Premier
Oil Pacific (UK) (POL) [10%]. As per terms and conditions for
development of medium sized fields, the Nationai Oit Company (NOC),
1.8., ONGC in this case held 40 percent Participating Interest (Pl) in
R&RS fields. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (०2110)
issued (March 1996) a Letter of award of R&RS fields fo CoSB.
Thereafter, CCEA approved (March 1999) negotiation to be held by the


29

Negotiating Team of Secretaries (NTS) for. finalising and concluding |

Production Sharing Contract (PSC) within six months.

The Committee found serious delays in decision making for
more than 20 years, after the CCEA approval, depriving the country of
the much needed fuel from these oil & gas fields. The Committee on
detailed examination of the decision making process found that the
non-execution of PSC was due to unfruitful deliberations held by NTS
for over 17 years with various stakeholders on the issues that had
already been laid down by the CCEA. Frequent deliberations made on
the issues of techno-legal, royalty and cess and references to various
agencies and consequent delays also necessitated repeated re-
assessment of financial capability of the successful bidders. Other
issues that held-up the signing of PSC related to reimbursement of
past-cost and non-maintenance of idle facilities by the ONGC. The
Committee while dealing with the issues highlighted in the Audit
Report, observe that the exclusive high-powered body i.e.NTS failed
miserably in its mandate and could not conclude PSC for R&RS fields
in 17 years which eventually resulted in CCEA (10 March 2016)
approving cancellation of the award letter (12 March 1996) issued in
favour of the consortium and reverting the R&RS fields to ONGC,
subject to payment of cess and royalty at the current rates, as

applicable under the nomination regime.


30

2. Failure of Negotiating Team of Secretaries (NTS) to execute
Production Sharing Contract (PSC) with respect to R&RS Fields:

The Committee note that Government of India (Gol) in 1993
issued notice inviting offers for development of R&RS fields. The
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (४0719) issued (March 1996) a
Letter of Intent (Lol) for award of R&RS fields to CoSB and in March
1999, CCEA approved negotiations and concluding PSC in respect of
12 discovered fields (11 small sized blocks and one medium sized

_ R&RS block) to be held by the Negotiating Team of Secretaries (NTS)

for negotiating and finalizing Production Sharing Contract {PSC} with
the consortium within six months. PSC in respect of the 11 small
sized fields were signed in February 2001 and February 2004, The
Committee further 106 that NTS,a high-powered body consisting of
Secretary, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas; Finance Secretary;
Secretary, Department of Expenditure; Secretary, Department of
Economic Affairs; Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs and CMD,
ONGC, did not adhere to its own targets of completion of negotiations
within six months and kept setting targets for completion of
negotiations and signing of PSC and held 20 meetings between
November, 1999 to June, 2013. Further, during the period from May,
2010 to July, 2015, only two meetings were held and, on. both the
occasions, it was decided to hold another meeting to take a final

decision in the matter. The Committee observe that the process of

reaching a decision to finalize the PSC was not completed even after

25 years of policy decision, 20 years of award and 17 years of
approval of CCEA. The Ministry in their reply has stated that NTS


31

undertook a series of meetings for deliberating on several complex
issues and for bringing convergence on the technical, commercial,
legal and financial matters and based on these efforts, PSC for 11
small sized fields were signed and the main reasons for non-
finalisation of PSC for R&RS field were financial incapability of EOL
during negotiation stage; creation of charge by EOL (Essar Oil
Limited} with its bankers for refinery project without the approval of

Government and noh-finalisation of issue regarding transfer of

pipeline asset by ONGC to the consortium. Further, even after holding
active negotiations by the.NTS, the terms and conditions to execute.
the formal PSC between the Gol and the Joint Venture of companies
and ONGC, as required under Article 299 of the Constitution of India
and other statues, could not be concluded due to disagreements
between the consortium partners and Government of India. The
Committee note that due to disagreements on multiple issues and
irregularities on the part of the consortium partner after the issuance
of letter of award and the inordinate delay in ‘concluding the contract
resulting into delay in the development of the fields, it was decided
with the approval of CCEA to cancel the contract. The Committee are
of the view that the purpose of formation of such high-powered body
like NTS with as many as six SecretaryiCMD level officers of the
Ministries/NOC was defeated as these highest level officers could not
adhere to their own timelines and reach a decision after several
rounds of meetings. The Committee find that the Ministry has taken
the whole episode casually as Is evident from ifs submission that the
R&RS case may be viewed ‘as one unfortunate case where despite

several! issues the NTS tried the best to resolve them and ultimately


32

the contract could not be concluded. The Committee are of the view
that timely intervention by the Government) CCEA. into the issue
could have helped in taking a decision on the issues of royalty and
cess. The Committee feel that it is high time that the country has a
mechanism to review the efficiency of high-level Government officials
associated/nominated in Inter-Ministerial © Groups/High-Level
Committees independently of the help of regular bureaucracy. The
Committee desire the Government to consider this issue as an eye-
opener and establish adequate mechanism to review the performance
of all such officers nominated on various Committees. The Committee
observe that the delay is mainly attributable fo the anxiety of the
officers fo avoid ‘dispute in future’. However, it seems that no
concern was raised at the fact that no production was happening for
about two decades. The CoSB seems to have climbed down in
August, 2012 to agree to the current rates, yet the contracts were not
signed. The NTS, which itself was a Committee of Secretaries, having
been unable to resolve the issue on its own should have sought the
help of experts or Cabinet Secretary. The Committee strongly
deprecate the rationale of NTS comprising senior Civil Servants
keeping such a calculated silence and inaction, if not indifference.
The Committee while observing that the delays by these officials that
resulted in a huge loss of 726200 crore to the exchequer and deprived
the country of scarce resources for more than two decades
tantamount fo criminal negligence, direct that the responsibility for
causing inordinate delays in decision making may be fixed and action
be taken against fhe officials concerned under intimation to the

Commiftee.


33

3. Delay in decision making leading to repeated assessing financial

capability of bidders:

The Cominittee note that Notice Inviting Offer (NIO) did not
indicate any criteria for evaluating financial capability. Financial:
capability of Consortium of Successful Bidders (CoSBs) was
evaluated in 1995 before award of contract fo it. After assignment
(March 1999} of work to NTS by CCEA for negotiation on the terms
and conditions and signing of PSC with CoSB, NTS carried out re-
assessment of financial capability on three different occasions viz. in
the years 2000, 2004 and in 2041. On first occasion, DGH carried out
(May 2000) assessment of financial capability and informed
(September 2000) NTS that net worth of CoSB was positive and it had
sound financial health. Accordingly, NTS decided (February 2001) to
process the PSC. However, final decision was not taken due to
techno-legal issues. On second occasion in August, 2004, NTS again :
asked DGH. to carry out assessment of financial capability of CoSB.
Based.on the inputs provided (October 2004) by DGH and MoF, NTS
concluded that CoSB was financially capable to meet its obligations
as envisaged in PSC. However, before processing of PSC ‘for
finalisation, NTS raised (April 2005) the issue of applicability of rates
for cess and royalty and final decision could not be taken. And finally
on third occasion, in NTS meeting (October 2011), the issue of
negative net worth of the successful bidder partner was again raised.
and it was decided to freshly ascertain the present nef worth of CoSB.
The issuie was further raised on two occasions by one of the members
of the NTS through letters to MoPNG (November, 2011 and February,


34

2012}. Meanwhile, in January, 2012, the 6058 partners submitted the
net worth certificates issued by their statutory auditors, indicating a
positive and higher net worth than that ascertained in earlier’
assessments. The Ministry submitted that it was not that the financial ,
capacity of CoSB was assessed in respect of only Ratna & R Series
Fields. This was done for bids in respect of other fields as well.
During the NTS meeting held on 02.03.2000, NTS decided that
financial strength of ali the awardee companies should be evaluated
based on the [atest available information. NTS authorized DGH to
obtain necessary information from the awardee companies and
evaluate their financial strength and submit the position. During the
subsequent NTS meeting held on 18.07.2000, NTS noted that
according to the assessment carried out by DGH, all the. awardee
companies, except for Essar Oil, were financially capable. According
to the Ministry, the bidding of field is an important economic decision
and should be taken with due caution after ascertaining all the related
aspects and the reassessment of financial capability was

_necessitated to adjudge the updated financial position and strength of

the CoSB to ensure that they are financially capable to meet the
obligations as envisaged in PSC in the current date. The Committee
are of the view that delays in taking final decision led to the need for
fresh assessments of the financial capability of CoSB, which
contributed to further avoidable delays. The Committee are of the
opinion that PSC for R&RS fields could have been concluded on the
basis of the assessment of financial capability of CoSB carried out by

the DGH in 2000, as was done in case of 11 other fields. The


35

Committee while observing that the NTS unnecessarily dragged the
issue for 17 years, expect a high powered body to be dynamic in their
actions. The Committee feel that the whole process of reassessing
financial health could have been avoided, had the NTS adhered te its
target of 6 months. The Committee also desire to know the exact
details of the extension of mandate given to the NTS beyond their

stipulated time period of six months.

4. Deliberations on the issues - Techno-legal and Royalty and

Cess:

The Committee note that frequent deliberations were held on
certain fechno-legal issues from February, 2001 to April, 2005 among
the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoPNG), the Ministry of .
Law and Justice (MOL&J)} and the Ministry of Finance (MOF). Various
rounds of clarifications and confirmations were sought though the
Secretaries of all these three ministries were the members of NTS.

Further, CCEA had approved (March 1999} freezing of the rates
of levy of royalty and cess prevailing at the time of bidding which had
been applied in 41 other fields (excluding R&RS fields) and
accordingly PSCs signed between February, 2001 and February, 2004
for the same. The Committee note that during deliberations NTS°
observed that a long time had elapsed and there had been significant-
change in the oil price market and advised {April, 2005) that the
stakeholders of R&RS fields may be asked to confirm payments of .
statutory levies at-the current level rather than those prevailing in

1995. Despite initial negation; ONGC (May, 2005) and CoSB (August,


2012) also accepted payment of Royalty and cess af current rates with
updated Cost Recovery Limits (CRL} based on current costs. The

Committee further observe that despite clear opinion on the issue of

“Royalty and cess by the AGI and MoL&J, the issue was repeatedly

raised and referred among various Ministries although the Secretaries
were part of NTS: ह

ONGC in their submission for their acceptance of current rates
of royalty and cess has stated that since ONGC intended to get back
fhe R&RS field, it was strategic decision to agree for the then current
rates of cess and royalty as ONGC would have to pay the statutory

" levies at prevailing rates (as applicable under the Nomination regime)

in case the field was reverted to ONGC. Further, ONGC obtained the
opinion of Solicitor Generat (SG) (20 May, 2005) which advised that
applying earlier rates of cess and royalty would cause huge public
loss.On the eventual acceptance of CoSB for payment of cess and
royalty at current rates with updated cost recovery limit (CRL), the
Ministry in their replies has detailed the sequence of events and
submitted that that number of factors triggered by high ruling prices
of crude oil @58 dollars per barrel in 2005, as compared to when the
field was awarded (@ US $ 16 per barre!) and its significant impact on

the Government revenues in the form of statutory levies eventually

contributed to acceptance by fhe CosB for payment of royalty and
cess at the current rates with updated Cost Recovery Limits (CRL).
The Ministry’s reply need to be seen in the light that the matter that
seemed to have held up the signing of contract was purely technical

and the C&AG report reveals that the delay itself was avoidable. If the


Aiea 191 Xo Sabaicettn

LOR GRERL SOMA NGC HARRIE HE RIB eat aR ER EH TE

37

technical issues including the frequently deliberated issue of

- applicability royalty and cess were so insurmountable, nothing

prevented the issue being resolved through a pane! of technical and
legal experts. The disputes between CoSB and the NTS/Government
of India could have been resolved through a process, similar to
arbitration. The NTS could have concluded the PSC for R&RS fields
with the stakeholders alongwith 14 other fields and complete its
mandate rather than referring and complicating the matter further
thus providing scope for deliberations and disagreement amongst its
own members. The Committee desire to be apprised of fhe reasons
as to why this particular issue was hot brought to notice of the

Cabinet for appropriate and timely decision.

5. Reimbursement of past-cost and non-maintenance of idle

facilities: ~ हि

The Committee note that Audit in their report has referred to the
issue of reimbursement of past-cost and non-maintenance of idle
facilities. The Committee understand that ONGC had created facilities
in Ratna R-12 field at a cost of %472.55 crores. These facilities were -
used by the Company for production since 1983. It obtained a mining
lease for-the field in 1986 with a validity upto February 2001. When
the field was offered for private parties, ONGC stopped production.
with effect from September, 1994. After adjusting the tax benefits and
revenue enjoyed by ONGC from the field, the net past cost that
remained to be compensated to ONGC was %270.46 crores. ft is seen

that CCEA directed the Ministry in March, 1999 for the past cost


38

compensation in consultation with Ministry of Finance and Planning
Commission. The need for settlement of the above compensation
amount was also highlighted in the Report No. 5 of 1996 and follow-up
Audit Report No.6 of 2005 of Union Government (Commercial).
Despite the direction of CCEA in 1999 and the audit observations
twice in 1996 and 2005, the issue remained unresolved. ONGC in its
submission stated. that it had been highlighting the issue of
repairimaintenance of the facilities through its various
communications and during the meeting of Negotiating team of
Secretaries (NTS) and requested for confirmation regarding decision
on re-imbursement of such cost, Though NTS has deliberated on the
need to facility maintenance, but cost re-imbursement issue was
always kept pending and no firm decision in this regard was ever
been conveyed to ONGC. Further, the Ministry (August, 2015) has
acknowledged that the issue of reimbursement of past cost to ONGC
was another significant issue in making the field operational and
monetizing. the field reserves. Also the cost incurred by ONGC on
maintenance and security of R&RS fields over the years would require
consideration based on number of possible alternatives. The
Committee are dismayed to find that despite CCEA directions (March,
1999) ancl clear clause (Article 15.1) mentioned in draft PSC, MoPNG
did not evolve modalities for past cost compensation to ONGC and
neither the NTS forum proved productive and useful for addressing
the significant and important issue of maintenance of the facilities
created at the fields. The Committee observe that even though the
consortium would have been operating the field, stil! ONGC had to ,
hold 40% of its Pl. Tne Committee further note from the observation of


39

the Audit that the ONGC and MoPNG allowed ‘plundering and looting®
of platform utilities and equipment in the absence of appropriate

security system showing lack of their seriousness to preserve and

_ conserve facilities that were created by ONGC (€ 472.55 crore).

Further, the stand taken by ONGC (May, 2005) while agreeing to
current rates of royalty and cess on the grounds that since ONGC
intended to get -back the field, the same ‘strategic’ benefit and

foresightedness could-have been applied by ONGC on maintenance

of the created facilities and thus avoided the expenditure amounting
to 2 1085.7 crore involved in estimated repair cost of the facilities.
Now, with the decision of the Government to cancel the award to the
consortium and reverting the fields to ONGC, the Committee feel that
the ONGC could have pursued the matter more vigorously with the
Ministry and in-turn NTS to get the matter resolved. The Committee
further opine that non-maintenance of oil producing fields by ONGC
and subsequent plundering and looting from the sites is a sheer
failure of a Public Sector Undertaking in looking after the nation's
property. The Committee feel that ONGC should have maintained the
fields as being a PSU it would have anyway recovered all its expenses

‘sooner or later. The Committee, therefore, desire that fhe concerned

_ officials of ONGC be held responsible for this gross negligence and

action be initiated against them.


46

6. Fixing of responsibility towards delay in non-execution of”
mandate: :
The Committee note that the CCEA (March, 1999} approved

conclusion of contract keeping the cess and royalty at the level
prevailing at the time of inviting bids and also asked NTS to finalise

‘the PSC within six months. Despite the above decision of CCEA and

the fact that PSCs for rest of 11 fields from the bundle of 12 fields
offered simultaneously under similar terms and conditions had been
finalised and signed till the end of 2004 and opinion of AGI to go for
finalisation of PSC and recommendation of NTS (April, 2006) for
conclusion of PSC, the Ministry (January, 2008) sent a fresh note to
CCEA for an appropriate decision. CCEA Note was returned by the
Cabinet Secretariat to obtain unambiguous recommendations of NTS
on certain issues. NTS forwarded its unambiguous recommendations
in March 2008. MoPNG submitted (June, 2008) the Note to.CCEA,
agreeing with NTS recommendations. Unfortunately, Cabinet

Secretariat again returned (July, 2008) the Note to make certain.

modifications/corrections relating to some deficiencies. A proposal
for modification in the Note to CCEA was approved on 09 July, 2008.
However, when the new Secretary, MoPNG joined on 01 August, 2008,

_ the matter was again re-examined in MoPNG and it was decided that

NTS should consider the matter once again, with a view to analysing
in detail the various alternatives available along with their financial
implications. The Ministry's changed stance led fo series of

deliberations and clarifications which had ultimately contributed fo

the delay in decision.


Al

Further, Audit while working on financial implications due the
indecision on R&RS fields, have indicated that the country has lost oil
and gas production worth more than & 26,200 crores; Government's
potential revenue to the tune of हैं 1105 crore on account of royalty
and cess and avoidable expenditure of 1085.70 crore towards repair
and re-development of the R&RS fields.

The Ministry in their submission has stated that that the matter
was re-examined (August, 2015) by it and if was observed that NTS
had earlier not analysed in detail the alternatives available and had
just reiterated the earlier recommendations. Thus, in order to fully
comply. with the directions of Cabinet Secretariat, NTS should
consider the matter once again with a view to analyse in defail the
various alfernatives available along with the financial implications.
MoPNG further informed that a CCEA Note dated 02 May, 2014 was
sent fo the Cabinet Secretariat regarding issues relating to the
finalisation of PSC for R&RS fields. However, due to change of
Government in May, 2044, the circulated Note was not considered by
CCEA at that time. Similarly the Ministry in their written submission
fo the issues posed before them in the matter has stated that time
taken in the process of approval, being dependent on many relevant
factors to be considered while taking a call on the issue, may not

necessarily be seen as a delay because the decision makers in the

_ process of final settlement and resolution of matters of disagreement

have to be sure in all aspects and get satisfactory reply of their all
queries. Also while reasoning with the question posed to the Ministry ~

for fixing of responsibility and accountability on taking final decision


42

on PSC, the Ministry has submitted that the R&RS fields have been
reverted to ONGC and in view of the reasons explained it may not be a
fruitful exercise towards fixing of accountability. Further, during the
oral evidence tendered before the Committee, on reference drawn to
the alleged 1016 of particular Joint Secretary (Exploration) during the
negotiation stage ‘of the contract, the Committee sought explanation
from the Ministry. However, the silence of the Ministry and not
providing the details of the information sought by the Committee
speaks volume about the reasons behind the muddle created over the
abnormal and unique delay of over 25 years of the policy decision
(1991), 20 years of award (1996) and 17 years of CCEA approval (1999)
in awarding the contract to the consortium and finally reverting the
R&RS fields to the original allottee i.e., the ONGC again.Further, while
coming to the Audit's calculation of financial implication, the Ministry
has termed it as ‘notional figures’ since no crude oil/natural gas has

_been produced from these fields and hydrocarbon reserves from

these fields would still be in place. The Committee are of the opinion
that the circumstances under which the Cabinet Secretariat returned
the note on piecemeal basis and why the Cabinet Secretariat could
not pursue the implementation of CCEA are required to be examined.
Further, the coming of new Secretary, MoPNG on 1 August, 2008
should have facilitated and expedited the process of concluding and
finalizing the terms of PSC rather than delaying and complicating the
matter further. The Cabinet Secretariat, being the nodal agency for all
matters relating to Cabinet, including implementation of the decisions
by the Cabinet and its committees, as expected should have taken the

lead to resolve the issue when it became evident that the MoPNG was


- 43

- tunable to make up its mind. When there were differences of opinion
between the NTS and the Ministry and between the Ministry and the
Cabinet Secretariat, the inter-departmental consultation should have
been upgraded to Empowered Committee of Secretaries or Group of
Ministers or Empowered Group of Ministers. The Committee are
further dismayed fo nofe as to why Cabinet Secretariat had not taken .
this initiative. The Committee on unfolding and carefully scrutinizing
the sequence of events that took place since the issue of letter of
award (March, 1996} and decisions made either by the Ministry or the
NTS or CCEA or the Cabinet Secretariat in the R&RS field clearly
portrays itself as a classic case of system failure. The Governments
and officials may come and go but the responsibility for execution of
the policy decisions of the Government lies with the efficiency and
‘zeal of executors to implement and pass on the benefits of
sustainable development to future generations of the country. The
Committee, therefore, desire that when decision fo form high-powered
body like NTS are taken in future by the Government for execution of
its decision, adequate monitoring mechanism be put in place and
ensure timely intervention and execittion of decisions taken in the

national interest.

Further, coming to the financial implications calculated by the
Audit and the Ministry terming it as ‘notional loss' 18895 to be seen in
the perspective that country like India, being a net importer of
hydrocarbon resources for ‘fulfilling its energy requirements, the
Committee are of the firm view that the indecision of the Government

till 10 March, 2076 for award of R&RS fields has seriously deprived —


a4

the couritry of-its own resources for more than two decades (since
ONGG “stopped its production in 1994}. Further, expenditure on
repairs due to non-maintenance of fields for more than two decades
will result in actual losses. Further, the Committee are of the strong
opinion that Ministry should have atleast asked ONGC to maintain the
R&RS fields during the period of negotiations. The Committee

“seriously deprecate the Ministry's indecision on ail the related issues

till 10 March, 2016 which has directly compromised the national
interest on energy security and desire that stringent action may be
taken in this matter, The Committee also desire that responsibitity of
all the officials of the Ministry for indecision and their role in this

regard be fixed and action taken against them under intimation to the

Committee.
और और ८ th
NEW DELHI; PROF. K.Y. THOMAS
415 December, 2016 7 Chairperson,
. Public Accounts Committee.

24 Agrahayana, 1938 {Saka)


MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF THE SUB-UUNIN acy SITTING OF THE SU

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2015-16) HELD ON ४ TEDRUAK' ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2015-16) H
2016.

‘The Sub-Committee - Vil (Hydrocarbon Production Sharing Contracts) of Public
Accounts Commiltee sat on Wednesday, 3% February, 2016 fram 1130 hrs. to 1245
hrs. in Committee Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy : - Convenor
MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

2. Shri 5.8. Ahluwalia
3. Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA

4, Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita

5. Shri Vijay Gost

LoK SABHA SECRETARIAT

4. Shri A. ९, Singh - Additional Secretary
2. Shri Tirthankar Das - Additional Director
3 Smt Bharti Tuteja - Deputy Secretary

Huse


REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE OFFIGE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
1 Shri Prasenjit Mukherjee -_ By C&AG cum Chairman, Audit Board

2. Shri A.M. Bajaj - Director General (Commercial}

3: Shri Mala Sinha - Director Generat (ESM)

4, Shri Manish Kumar - Principal Director (PAC)

2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the Members and the Audit Officers to the
First Sitting of the Sub-Committee-Vill. The Convenor, then, apprised the Members on
thé specific mandate given to the Sub-Committee ie., to examine the subjects
“Hydrocarbon Production Sharing Contracts’ based on C&AG Report Nos. 19 of 2011- -
12 and No.24 of 2014 and Report No. 43 of 2015 (Camptiance Audit) on “Ratna and R-
Series Hydrocarbon Fields" and briefly detailed on the back ground to the sittings 50 far

held by the Main Committee of PAC on the C&AG Report Nos. 19 of 2011-12 and
No,.24.0f 2044

3. Thereafter, the Officers of the C&AG of India briefed the Sub-Committee about

the significance of the latest report Le,, Report No.43 of 201 5 on "Ratna and R-series

Hydrocarbon Fields". It was followed by two presentations prepared by the Audit

highlighting important aspects contained in their reports.

XXXK XXXX XXXX XXXX

The second presentation prepared on C&AG's Report No. 43 of 2015 highlighted the
main observations made by the Audit on the various issues covered in the Audil Report
The Members then raised queries particulary on figures of production when ONGC
stopped its commercial production from the oil field in September 1994 and also of the
methods for arriving at the figures while calculating the royalty and cess. The Officers

from the C&AG of India then clarified some of the issues raised by the Members and

o 46-


|

assured that the information as desired by the Members would be furnished to the Sub-

Committee expeditiously. The Convenor then

of the C&AG of India for briefing on important 85
mination of the subject.

thanked the representatives of the Office
pects of the three Audit reports to the

Sub-Committee in connection with exar

4 ‘The Convenor also discussed with the Members of the Sub-Committee about the

"Ratna and R-Series Hydrocarbon Fields

Compliance Audit Report No. 43 of 2015 on
and decided to deal them separalely from the previous lwo Audit Reports on

"Hydrocarbon Production Sharing Contracts" i.e., Report No. 24 of 2014 and Report No.

49 of 2041-12 (Performance Audit).

XAXK * KKXKK XXXX XXKX

The Sub-Committee then adjourned.

- Uy -


MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF The Tie SIXTH_SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2016-17) HELD ON 12 JULY, 2’. HELD ON 12'" JULY, 2016.

The Public Accounts Committee sat on Tuesday, the 127 July, 2016 from 1430

hrs. to 1630 hrs in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. -

PRESENT

| हे Prof. K.V. Thamas oot Chairperson
MEMBERS —

LOK SABHA

2. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra

3... Shri Nishikant Dubey

4... Prof, Richard Hay

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

a

6. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwat
7. Shri Abhishek Singh
8. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur

9. Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA

1 Shri Naresh Agarwal
1 2. . Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
3. Shri Shantaram Naik

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy

ns



LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

1. Shri A. K, Singh - Additianal Secretary
2. Shri SukhiChand Chaudhary - Joint Secretary

3. Shri T. Jayakumar - Director

4. Smt Bharti Tuteja -- Deputy Secretary

REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA हैं ,

i 1. Shit H.Pradeep Rao - Dy. C&AG cum Chairman {Commercial}

2. Shri V. Kurien - Director General (Commercial)

3. Smt Mala Sinha = Director General (ESM)

4. Smt Panna Sen Principal Director (Commercial) -

5. Ms. Roop Rashi Principal Director (Commercial)

REPRESENTATIVES FROM MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL

GAS (MoPNG) AND ONGC

4... Shri KD Tripathi: - Secretary, MoPNG
| ‘2. Shri Ajay Prakash Sawhney - AS
| 3. Shii Amar Nath - JS
। 4... Siwi 016 Sarrat "GMD, ONGC

5. Shr TK Sengupta © - Director, Offshore

2. At the outset, the Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members, the officers of

Comptroller and Auditor General of India, the Secretary, Ministry of Petroleum and

ug.

5


®

Naturat Gas, the CMD, ONGC and other representatives of the Ministry and ONGC to
the sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, the Chairperson apprised the Members of the
Cammiltee that the sitting has beer convened to look into the audit observations on the
subject “Ratna and R Series Hydrocarbon fields” based on C&AG Report No. 43 of
2015.

2. In the introductory remarks, Hon'ble Chairperson made observations specific io
ihe issues raised by the C&AG in the Report and highlighted it as the rarest of rare
cases of extraordinary negligence and inefficiency which inter-alia included (ij} non-
finalisation and conclusion of Production Sharing Contract (PSC) within six months
despite approval of CCEA in March, 1999 for completion of negotiations and signing of
PSC; (ii) depriving the country for over a decade of valuable oil and gas resources due
fo delays in awarding the R &RS fields: {ii} cancellation of contract {awarded fo the
consortium in 1996) in the year 2016; 0४) the disputes between COSB and the
NTS/Government of india that could have been resolved tnrough a process similar to
arbitration, (v) Ministry's changed stance after assuming of charge of new Secretary,
MoPNG in August, 2008 thai has led to series of deliberations and clarifications which
had ultimately contributed to the delay in decision; (vi) circumstances under which the
Cabinet Secretariat returned the CCEA note on piecemeal and why the Cabinet
Secretariat could not pursuc the implementation of CCEA, (vil) the reasons for
avoidable delays that could have been addressed by timely intervention of the NTS and
the Cabinet Secretariat; (viii) the calculated silence and inaction on part of officials of
NTS in resolving the differences on the terms and conditions involved in the Production

Sharing Contract, (ix) perusal of ACRsfAPARs of all officers in the NTS/assisting the

Se


e

NTS for the Committee to examine the co-existence of inefficiency and negligence, 00:
financial impropriety brought out by the audit related to non-maintenance of idle facilities
and issue of past cost compensation to ONGC. Thereafter, the Chairperson asked the
Secretary, MoPNG to give a brief account of the latest status of the follow-up remedial
action taken on the Audit findings and improvements effected so far.
3. - The Secretary, MoPNG, thereafter replied to vatious queries raised by the
“Members during the course of discussion particularly matters related to the delay in
“carrying out the implomentation of decision of CCEA regarding signing of PSC with the
Consortium of Successful Bidders (2058) in a time bound manner, need for reassessing
the financial capabilities of the consortium, reasons behind stopping of: production of

crude oil and gas from 1994 onwards and non-maintenance of fields by ONGC. :

4. However, on reference drawn fo the atleged role of one particular Joint Secretary
during the negotiation stage of the contract, the Members sought explanation from the
Ministry. Afterwards, the Secretary, MoPNG and CMD, ONGC responded to various

queries and clarifications sought by the Members on issues specific to the Audit findings

on the Report.

5. At the concluding stage of deliberations, the Chairperson asked the Secretary,
MoPNG to furnish written’ replies to the points/issues which remained unanswered within
10 days to decide on whether there is need fer one more ‘silting on the subject or

straightway present the report to the Parliament.


श्र

n then thanked the representatives of the Ministry and

8. The Hon'ble Chairperso
g the available information on

ONGC for appearing before the Committee and furnisbin

several issues on the subject.

The witnesses, then, withdrew.

A verbatim copy of the proceedings has been kept on record.

The Committee, then, 8 djourned.



MINUTES OF THE COMMITTEE लक METH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 20617 HELO 8 To Pee aL ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2016-17) HELD ON 15" DECEMBER, 2016,

The Committee sat from 1015 hes. fo 1055 brs. on 157 December, 2046 in
Room No, 551", Parliament House, New Delhi. है

PRESENT
Prof. K. V. Thomas - Chairperson

MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
Shri Nishikant Dubey
Prof. Richard Hay
Smt. Riti Pathak
Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
Shri Abhishek Singh
Dr. Kirit Somaiya
"Shri Shivkumar 0, Udasi

PN Oa pon

RAJYA SABHA
9. Shri Bhupender Yaday
10. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
11. Shri Shantaram Naik
12. Shri Ajay Sancheti

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT हि
Sori S.C. Chaudhary ~ Joint Secretary

2... Shri Tirthankar Das - Additional Director
Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary

REPRESENTATIVES FRom THE OFFICE oF THE COMPTROLLER AND
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA

1... Shri Rakesh Jain - Deputy CAG (RC/LB)
2. Shri Manoj Sahay - Principal Director of Audit (AB)
3... Shri Mukesh P. Singh - DGACE


2. At the outset, the Chairperson, PAC welcomed the Members to the Sitting of
the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft Reports for

consideration: -

ti) sae eet wRE eae kaR

{ii} Draft Report on ‘Ratna and R-series Hydrocarbon Fields’ based on C&AG
Report No. 43 of 2015.

(iti) errs peed ores wee bee

3. The Chairperson invited suggestions of the Members on the above.mentioned
draft Reporls. Atter discussing the draft Reports, the Commiltee adopted draft Reports

at Sl. No. (ii) and (iii) with minor changes/modifications. *** ad oe
4. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the adopted Reports in

the light of verbal discussion and consequential changes arising out of the suggestions
given by the Members and factual verification by the Audit and present the same to

Partiament.

5. It was further decided that henceforth the Public Accounts Commitiee will hold

its sifting every Friday in the week.

‘The Committee then adjourned.

_ sae