PROCUREMENT OF ALLOPATHIC
DRUGS IN CGHS

MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND. FAMILY WELFARE
“(DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH}

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2045-16)

FWENTY-SECOND REPORT

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA |

OK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI हु



PAC NO. 2053
TWENTY-SECOND REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2015-16)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA}

PROCUREMENT OF ALLOPATHIC
DRUGS IN CGHS

MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
(BEPARTMENT OF HEALTH)

Presentedto Lok Sabha on:

-€aid in Rajya Sabha on:

EOK.SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August 20151 Shrayana 1937 {Saka}


GONTENTS

PAGES
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2014-2015)........ (i) .
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2015-2016) (wv)
INTRODUCTION वर्ना फ्न wees >> MD
PART- |
if INTRODUCTORY 1
Il - ORGANISATION हि 1
Ih. PROCEDURE FOR PROCUREMENT OF DRUGS FOR THE CGHS 4
lv” AUDIT REVIEW 3
ov AUDIT FINDINGS 4
AL “Prepatation/revision of drug formulary for Branded drugs a.
8. Procurement of dritgs not listed-in the formulary : 9.
a) Non-finalization of procurement rates of drugs listed in 14
the formulary
b) Inadequate and incomplete drug formulary हि 16
0. Procurement of Generic drugs . 20
a) Generic and Branded Drugs 20
+b) Delays in procurement of drugs listed in formulary 26
: D. -Avoidable Expenditure of हैं 13:52 crore in procurement of 28
formulary drugs in Delhi through HSCC
E. Pilot Project to Streamlining procurement of drugs ; 30
F. Procurement of Life Saving drugs 30
G. Quality Assurance न 32
PART —Il
Observations/Recommendations हि 40-57
‘ANNEXURES ‘68-78
APPENDICES |

व Minutes of the 14” sifting of Public Accounts Committee (2014-15) held on 12.01.2015 :
it. Minutes of the 19" sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2014-15) held on. 09,04,2015

*II|. Minutes of the 5” sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2015-16) held on 11.08.2015

“Not-appénded lo the cyclostyled copy of the report

* % yet - % पु y

i)



* Prof. KV. Thomas -

LENA aAPR OD

11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

16.
17. ©
18.
19. :
20.
21.
22,

Fon a

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

* (2015-16)

Chairperson

MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri 5.5, Ahluwatia

Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
Shri Ranjit-Singh Brahmpura |
Shri Nishikant Dubey

Shri Gajanan Kirtikar

_ Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank"
Shri Neiphiu Rio

Shri Dushyant Singh

Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwat
Dr. Kirit Somaiya

Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
Shri Shivkumar Udasi

Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Naresh Agrawal

Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
Shri Anil Madhav Dave

Shri Vijay Goel
Shri-Bhubaneswar Kalita
Shri Shantaram Naik

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy

SECRETARIAT

Shri A.K. Singh - Additional Secretary
Smt, Anita. Panda - Director

Shri T_Jayakumar Additional Director
Smt. Anju Kukreja “Under Secretary

OY)



COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2014-15)

Prof, K.V. Thomas - . Chairperson
MEMBERS:
LOK SABHA
Shri 8.8. Ahluwalia
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
Shri Ranjit Singh Brakmpura
_ Shri Nishikant Dubey
Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
Shri Bhartrihari Mahtab
. | Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank"
9. Shri Neiphiu Rio
10... Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
11. Shri Jenardan Singh Sigriwal
12... Shri Jayant Sinha
13. Dr. Kirit Somaiya
. 14. Shri Anurag Thakur
Vacant

Aw Rw LD

s

_ RAJYA SABHA
16. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
17. Shri Vijay Goel
- 18. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya
19° Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita _
20. Shri Shantaram Naik
21 ---Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
22. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh

Lv

की पणाा्ंृके0_ृ_तृत(_तस्ततर्ीलजजकस .
Vagant ice Dr. M. Thambidurai ‘who has been chosen ‘as Hon'ile Deputy Spéaker, Lok Sabha and has since
icsigned from the membership of the Corimitter.



- INTRODUCTION

{, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2015-16) faving been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Twenty-second Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha) on “Procurement of Allopathic drugs in CGHS” based on Paragraph 6.3 of
the C&AG Report No. 19 of 2013 related to the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare .

2. The above-mentioned Report of the Comptroller and Auditer General of India
was laid on the Table of the House on 6" September, 2013

3. . The Public Accounts Committee (2014-15) took up the subject for-detailed
examination and report. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of Health) on the subject at their
sitting held on 12” January, 2015. The Committee also took evidence of the
representatives of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of Health) and
Ministry of Chemicals. and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) on 9" April
2015. As the examination of the subject could not be completed due to paucity of time,
the Public Accounts Committee (2015-16) retained the subject to continue the
examination and hereby, present a Report based on the earlier evidences taken by their
predecessor Committee. Accordingly, a Draft Report was prepared and placed before
the Committee for their consideration, The Committee considered and adopted this
Draft Report at their sitting held on 11" August, 2015. The Minutes of the Sittings are
appended to the Report

4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type-and form Part- Il of
the Report.

5. The Committee thank their predecessor Committee for faking oral evidence and
obtaining information on the subject. .

6. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministries of Health and Family Welfare (Department of Health) and Chemicals and
Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) for tendering evidence before them and
furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in connection with the examination
of the subject.

7. The Committee piace on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Coriptroller and Auditor General of India.

NEW DELHI PROF. K.V. THOMAS
412 August,2015 Chairperson,

21 Shravana, 1937 {Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

. पु ' t
4 4 (४१) 5



4

REPORT
PART- I

|. INTRODUCTORY

1. The Ministry of Health and Farnily Welfare provides comprehensive health care
facilities through "Central Government Health Scheme” (CGHS) to MPs, ex MPs,
serving and retired Judges of Supreme Court and retired Judges of High Courts, Central
Government employees and pensioners and their dependents residing in 23 cities
covered under CGHS apart from Delhi NCR. The medical facilities are provided through
250 CGHS Wellness Centres (earlier called as dispensaries) across the country. CGHS
provide consultation at CGHS Wellness Centres and Government Hospitals, and
provides OPD medicines fo its beneficiaries. In addition, inpatient treatment facilities

‘ and investigations are provided at Government hospitals, and empanelled private
hospitals. Medical Stores Organisation (MSO) is entrusted with the task of procurement
of drugs and medicines required for CGHS Hospitals and Wellness Centres outside
Delhi. The MSO operates through seven Medical Stores Depots (MSD). Government
Medicai Store Depot (GMSD), Delhi is the nodal centre for procurement, storage and
distribution of drugs for all CGHS wellness centres in Delhi.

He ORGANISATION

2. CGHS is headed by Director CGHS. Additional Director (Headquarters) is the
administrative head of MSD Delhi and four zona! Offices of CGHS. The zonal offices
exercise. administrative control over CGHS wellness centres in their zone, and are
responsible for processing and making payments of bills relating to local purchase
made by the CGHS weliness centres. In cities outside Delhi, the CGHS is headed by
Joint/Additional Director who exercises overall administrative control over the CGHS
units and authorises payments to the suppliers of medicines against their bills.

Ill, - PROCEDURE FOR PROCUREMENT OF DRUGS FOR THE.CGHS

3... There are four channels of procurement of drugs for the Central Government
Health Scheme (CGHS).. These are briefly enumerated below:

4) Pilot Project. ‘In 2008, based on CGHS data, National ‘Informatics
-Centre (NIC) identified 272 items (branded drugs) which were being



z

procured by the dispensaries from the local chemists. In order to get
better discounts as compared to those given by the chemists, a pilot
project was. started to procure them through manufacturers / distributors.
The indents of these drugs are placed monthly by the CMO Ie online
directly to the suppliers / distributors. The indents themselves are auto
generated based on the consumption pattern of the drugs in the preceding
4 months and availability at Wellness Centre .The drugs-are delivered at
the Wellness Centres. Prior to introduction of this system, these. items
were being procured through local chemists at a discount of up to 15%,
but placing of orders directly on the manufacturers / distributors meant that
the discount rate were increased to the range of 30 to 35%. The
manufacturer / distributors could give a better discount as they could make
a saving on the distribution cost.. The new system also improved the
availability of medicines at the WCs since the medicines. indented through
the local chemists had to be collected on the second or third day, whereas
under this system the medicines were available at the Wellness Centre
itself. Thus, this was an improvement on the existing practice. It is
however true that the 272 items were identified on the basis of their brand
‘name rather than on the basis of the drug composition. Hence, there was
still an opportunity to go for the cheaper branded drug with the same
chemical composition.

2) Procurement through Medical Store Organization (MSO): In the normal
course, MSO procures drugs for the’ CGHS. This organization has two
separate formularies for branded and generic drugs, and undertakes their
procurement through open tender. .

For branded drugs, the formulary initially consisted of 504 items. These
were reviewed by a Committee headed by the Joint Secretary (which has
been referred to in the Audit Para} and 350 items were identified for retention.
In addition, the Committee recommended the inclusion of 382 more items.
Subsequently, however the 272 items identified as part of the pilot project
noted above (instead of the recommended 382) were added to this list
making ‘a total of 622 items which continues till date. For generic drugs, the °
formulary has been reviewed at intervals. It comprised 818 items during the
period covered in the audit para, and was increased to 1128 ॥ 2013. It
presently covers 1447 items. The audit para mentions that a} these
formularies are not broad enough and should be revised more frequently, and
b) the rates for many drugs included for formulary could not. be finalized in
large number of cases, especially in the case of generic drugs. Keeping. this
in view, a Committee headed by the Director General, Health Services, has
considered the revision of the formulary and has identified 1165 drug
compositions for inclusion therein. About 2000 formulations could be
available from these compositions. Tenders for 1261 items have already been
floated. . : :


3 .

3) Procurement of Life Saving Drugs: These medicines are procured by
the Additional Director (Medical Store Depot) in Delhi and by the concerned
Additional Directors of CGHS for cities outside Delhi. These drugs are mainly
required for the treatment of serious illness such as Cancer, Hepatitis etc.
Once a patient approaches MSD / AD with a valid prescription of the
Specialist, and the advice of the CMO In-charge of the Wellness Centre, the
drug is procured directly from the manufacturer / distributor at rates already
finalized. In case a new drug has been prescribed, then the process of rate
enquiry from the manufacturers is undertaken and the drugs are provided to
‘the patients directly after purchase.

It is true that in each of the above methods, various brand names of the
same drug .composition have been included.. This has happened probably
because at the relevant time, the items to be procured were identified on the
basis of brand names rather than on the basis of their drug composition,

- However, it has now been decided that only the item that emerges as L-1 in
the tender floated / to be floated amongst the branded drugs with the same
chemical composition will be procured. Hence, multiple brands of the same
drug composition will not be procured henceforth.

4) Local Purchase: If the required drugs are not obtained through methods
(1) & (2) above, these are purchased by the CMO i/c from the authorised
local chemists. Each dispensary/group of dispensaries has been assigned a
local chemist after following a tender process. Generally a discount of 15% is
offered by these chemists. Purchase through local chemists is also resorted
to when drugs that are to be procured through MSD do not reach the
dispensary in time, due to a variety of reasons. It also becomes necessary
when a new drug has been introduced and is recommended by a Specialist,
which is not yet included in the formulary.

4, This Report is based on Paragraph 6.3 of Report of the CSAG of India for the
year ended March, 2012, Union Government (Civil -Compliance Audit Observations)
No. 19 of 2013 relating tothe subject “Procurement of Allopathic drugs in CGHS”.

lV. Audit Review

5. The Audit covered scrutiny of procurement of allopathic drugs in CGHS by
‘Medical Stores Depots (MSD) and CGHS Wellness Centres in Deihi, Ahmedabad,
Jaipur, Chandigarh, Bhopal, Jabalpur, ‘Kolkata, Chennai, Thiruvyananthapuram,
Hyderabad, Bangalore, Allahabad, Bhubaneswar and Mumbai during 2009-10 to 2011-
12. In. Delhi, related records were examined in offices of Medical Store Organisation

(MSO), MSD and the Ministry. In cities outside Delhi related records were examined at



4

the offices of concerned Joint/Addl. Director CGHS, Central Medical Stores/Medical
Store Depots and at the CGHS Wellness Centres.

Vv. Audit Findings

6... 50186 of the important observations made by Audit are as under:

{i} Audit had noted. that the Committee which prepare the drug formulary,
while identifying the drugs for inclusion in the formulary, opted for
commoniy prescribed brands: of drugs instead of identifying commoniy
prescribed drug composition. Thus, the methodology adopted by the
Committee was predominantly based on the prescription of specific
brands by doctors. The selection of items by adopting the drug
composition approach would have provided many options that would be
cost effective, as there were many brands of same drug composition
available in the market at different rates.

' i) ~~ Test check of 21 cases in the Branded drug formulary revealed availability
of several low cost brands in the same category of drugs. Audit also noted
‘that even the discounted price of the selected brand was much higher
than. the MRP of other low cost brands available in the market. Audit
compared the prices of these 21 test checked brands with other brands of
identical drugs and found that CGHS Delhi incurred avoidable expenditure
of 9.25 crore during 2011-12 by opting for higher priced brands.

{ii} Audit noted that the doctors continued to prescribe drugs outside the
formulary despite the adverse recommendations of the Parliamentary
Committee. As a result, drugs valuing 1119 crore were purchased from
outside the formulary during 2009-12, The fact that 71 per cent of the
expenditure during 2009-12 was spent on drugs outside the formulary
points to drug formulary not being comprehensive enough to cover drugs
for wide-ranging ailments/diseases.

(iv) CGHS procured only 2 to 55 per cent of the generic drugs listed in the
formulary. Further, the expenditure on procurement of generic drugs. in
CGHS, Delhi during 2009-12 constituted a mere 0.19 per cent. Test check
also revealed that 59 drugs: selected for branded drug formulary were.

. already listed in the generic formulary. Further, a cornparison of rates of
30 branded drugs with rates of generic drugs in “Janaushidhi Scheme
revealed that an amount of & 11.81 crore could have been saved by
CGHS Delhi during 2011-12, had generic drugs been procured instead of
branded drugs.

7 Under Janaushidhi Scheme Generic drugs which are available at lower prices but are
equivalent in Potency to the Branded expensive drugs are made available to public through
Janaushidhi stores.


(५) MSD Delhi is the nodal office which procures drugs for all CGHS Wellness
Centres in Delhi. Procurement rates and concerned suppliers of the drug,
listed in the approved drug formulary, are finalized by the Ministry.
However, MSD procures these drugs through Hospital Service
Consultaney Corporation (HSCC) instead of procuring them directly from
notified suppliers. MSD paid consultancy charges of 4.5 per cent to HSCC
for this procurement till October 2008 and 2.5: percent thereafter. Audit
noted that HSCC did not add any vaiue to the procurement process and
simply acted as a conduit between the Ministry and the supplier. This is so
because the rates and suppliers had already been fianlised for drugs
procured through: HSCC

(vi) During 2009-10 10 2014-12, 71 percent of the total expenditure was.
incurred on procurement of drugs not listed in the formulary. Further,
CGHS Delhi procured only 19 percent of items from within the formulary
while 81 per cent items were from outside the formulary. In cities outside

४ Delhi covered in Audit, CGHS incurred about 50 percent of the total
expenditure on procurement of drugs outside the formulary during 2009-
12.

-(vil) Audit noted that drugs were received in MSD after a delay of two to six
months after communication of the requirement to HSCC. Further, issue of
drugs from MSD to CGHS Wellness Centres tock another three to five
months. In effect-the drugs were received in CGHS wellness centres with

- significant delays. The delays in procurement and non-availability of
~formulary ‘drugs at CGHS wellness centres led to procurement of these
drugs by CGHS centres from local chemists at higher rates leading to an
extra expenditure of % 3.06 crore.

(vii) In CGHS Kolkata drugs were issued to the patients before receipt of test
reports, which were later reported as sub-standard by GMSD. In CGHS
Mumbai, medicines worth ₹ 28.45 lakh received from GMSD during 2009-
12 were declared sub-standard. Out of these, medicines. worth = 15.66

- lakh were already issued to patients. Such instances highlight the absence
‘of a-robust mechanism for quality assurance, which exposes the patients
to the hazards of sub-standard medicines and drugs.

7, A performance Audit of the procedure of procurement of medicines and medical
equipments was earlier taken up. and the results included in the Audit Report No. 20 of
2007 of the C&AG of India. The Audit Report, inter-alia, had highlighted several
deficiencies in management of pharmaceutical procurement procedures, which were
examined by the Public Accounts Committee. In the light of Audit findings and evidence
tendered before them, the Public Accounts Commitiee in their 24" Report (15" Lok



6

Sabha) had examined various shortcomings/lapses in the procedure of procurement of

medicines and medical equipment and the Committee had accordingly

given their Observations/Recommendations. Some of the important

Observations/Recommendations with regard to procurement of medicines as-made by
" the Committee in their 24" Report (157 Lok Sabha) were as under:

(i) Ministry should urgently bring in the Codified Purchase Manual so as to ensure
that the entire procurement process becomes more reliable, accountable and
transparent.

(ii) Steps should-be taken by the Ministry to explore the feasibility of doing away with
the local purchases altogether so that exploitation of the system by certain

* vested interests is prevented ahd higher payment towards locally procured
medicines is checked.

(ii) Monitoring mechanism be strengthened and exemplary action taken against the
errant doctors, who take advantage of the helplessness of the patients and
frequently prescribe expensive medicines outside the formulary so that
superfluous local purchase of medicines is avoided.

{iv) Ministry should codify and adopt a defined process for annual updation of
medicine selection and periodical revision of CGHS formutaries.

(४) Periodical inspections should be carried out to ensure that all the CGHS
hospitals/dispensaries maintain their respective formularies and update them
at regular intervals. :

(vi) Effective measures need to be taken to make the MSO corruption free as well as
adequately staffed so that the organization is able to gradually shift its focus
fram procurement to management aspects of medicines and medical
equipments. :

(vil) Supply and distribution of spurious/adulterated drugs are dealt with iron hand
to wipe out the menace of such drugs.

* 8. These recommendations were substantially accepted by the.Government. The
action taken by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare on.these recommendations
are contained in the 847 Report (15"" Lok Sabha). Nevertheless, the deficiencies
pointed out in the previous Audit Report and the recommendations of the PAC were not


7

addressed completely. Shortcomings in the drugs procurement system in CGHS
remained unresolved.

9. Therefore, the Public Accounts Committee (2014-15) further took up the subject
for detailed examination and Report. The representatives of the Ministries of Health’
and Family Welfare, Chemicals and Fertilizers (Departments of Pharmaceuticals and
Petro Chemicals) appeared before the Committee for tendering evidence on 12"
January 2015 and 9" April, 2015. Subsequently, the post-evidence replies were also
received from the Ministries/Departments. Based on all these written and oral
‘deposition by the aforesaid Ministries/Departments, the Committee examined the
subject in detail and identified certain critical issues which are discussed at length in the

succeeding paragraphs.

Audit Findings

8... Preparation/revision of drug formulary for Branded drugs

10. Audit observed that the Ministry of Health and. Family Welfare constituted
{September 2008) a Committee for preparation/revision of the existing drug formulary for
Branded drugs. The Committee decided to include new items in the formulary by
identifying those drugs which were commonly procured in the CGHS, Delhi during 2008
through local purchase. The inclusion of various drugs was further subject to valid drug
licence, registration of the manufacturing firm with MSO. Consequently, the Committee .
recommended (December 2009) inclusion of 382 more drugs over the existing 350
drugs. Subsequently, a total of 622 drugs were notified in the revised formulary in
September 2010.

11. The Committee, while identifying the drugs for inclusion in the formulary, opted for
commonly prescribed brands of drugs instead of identifying commonly prescribed drug
composition. Thus, the methodology adopted by the Committee was predominantly
based on the-prescription of specific brands by doctors. The selection of items by
adopting the drug composition approach would have provided many options that would
be cost.effective, as there were many brands of same drug composition available in the :

market at different rates.



8

12, Test check by Audit of 21 cases in. the Branded drug formulary revealed
availability of several low cost brands in the same category of drugs. Audit also noted
that even the discounted price of the selected brand was much higher than the MRP of
other low cost brands available in the market. Audit compared the prices of these 21
test checked brands with other brands of identical drugs and found.that CGHS Delhi
incurred avoidable expenditure of 7 9.25 crore during 2011-12 by opting for higher priced

brands (Annexure |}

13... Further, on being enquired as to whether the lower cost options of brands in the
same category of drugs was available, the Ministry replied “Yes”,

14. When asked about the reasons for opting the commonly prescribed drugs instead
of identifying commonly prescribed drugs composition that would have been more cost
effective, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in their written submission stated as
under:
“The formulary for proprietary drugs was finalized in 2008-09. At that time it was
noticed that local chemists were giving 10-12% discount on the MRP, and it was

therefore felt that purchasing the commonly prescribed drugs through MSO
would result in large savings.

Following issues were considered while preparing the-formulary in 2008.

1, Expenditure towards local chemist, which was around 85%
of the procurement budget.

2 Supply of MSO was not adequate based on the then
formulary of MSO.

3. हि To reduce the dependency on.local chemist.
4. To supply all the essential medicines on day zero:
§ To reduce the total expenditure on procurement.

Based on the above issues and looking at the prescription pattern at that point of
time the formulary was prepared for both Generic items and Branded items. The
-number of items included in the formulary was 818 and 622 for generic and branded
respectively, The idea was to prepare:-

1. Generic formulary to.inelude in general the medicines with
single composition.

2 Cover all the commonly prescribed drugs through. a
formulary of branded medicines



9

This position is being rectified and it has now been proposed that only the L-1 out of
the tender for branded formulary will be considered and other brands of the same
composition witl not be purchased. The proposal is under examination in the
Ministry.”

15. Apprising the Committee about the present position with regard to prepating

~ branded formulary, the’ Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in their written .note
submitted as under:

“The present proprietary (branded) formulary contains different brands having the

same salt. The revised proposal is to have rate contract with L1 brand alone,

where there are more than one brand having same generic composition. Thus list

of 622 brands will get reduced to 469, as 256 brands can be grouped into 103

medicines based on their chemical composition. The proposal has been

accepted by the Ministry. Rate enquiry has already been invited and bids
received have been opened.”

B. Procurement of drugs not listed in the formulary drugs not listed in the formular:

16. An analysis of.the expenditure incurred by the Ministry on. procurement of
formulary and non-formulary drugs during the years 2009-12 indicated that 71 per cent
of the total expenditure was incurred on procurement of drugs not listed in the formulary.
Further, CGHS Delhi procured only 19 per cent of items from within the formulary while
81 per cent items were outside the formulary (Annexure Il). {n cities outside Delhi
covered in Audit, CGHS incurred about 50 per cant of the total expenditure on
procurement of drugs outside the formulary during 2009-12.

17. The Committee sought to know about the rationale for introducing the local
purchase system and the measures taken to remove the shortcomings in present
system of procurement, distribution and inventory management of drugs so that local
purchase of drugs is avoided. In response, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, in
their written replies stated as follows:
“The need for introducing the local purchase system arises because of the
following: :

1. It is not possible to restrict all prescriptions’ written by
physicians and specialists to the MSO approved drug formulary because no
formulary can at all times be extensive enough fo cover the whole spectrum of
drugs required for treatment of human diseases.



18.

10

2. Pharmaceutical research is a constant process for

introduction of newer and more effective medicines in the market with better
results and lesser side effects. For many diseases, particularly chronic ones like:
Hypertension, Cancer, Heart diseases etc. such drugs are prescribed by doctors.

3. in addition it needs to be pointed out that procurement of

all items in the formulary is always not possible because.of various reasons such
as lack of response etc. Consequently such medicines are not suppfied to WCs
by ‘MSO, necessitating Local Purchase. However, demand for such local
purchase should not be very large.

A certain amount of local purchase may become necessary. However, its quantum
can be brought down significantly

The measures recently taken to improve the system, include the following

i) the formulary has recently been revised to make it
comprehensive,

ii) tenders have been floated for rate contract of more than 1200 items,

ili) computerization both at CGHS. and MSO through web based software has
been completed

iv) all deliveries of Pilot Project medicines are at CGHS WCs, thereby
minimizing the detivery time.

When the Committee desired to know as to whether the Ministry had made any

analysis of the medicines that they were largely buying from the local chemists and

whether those medicines have been entered into formulary list, the Ministry in their post-

evidence replies submitted as under:

19.

“In August 2014, an analysis was made to identify the medicines which are
commonly indented through Authorized Local Chemists (ALCs) These
medicines were not part of the CGHS formulary, could not therefore be procured
centrally and were being indented through ALCs against individual prescriptions.
Based on the data received from NIC of commonly indented items for 06 months
(01/01/2014 to 30/06/2014) from various Wellness Centres from Delhi / NCR,.a
Committee of the CGHS identified the medicines which ‘are indented in large
numbers i.e. 50000 tablets capsules or more during this period. The list of 171
suctt medicines was submitted to MSO for inclusion under CGHS formulary. This
has been done in the proposed revised formulary, and these medicines would
now be procured centrally.” है

As regards the steps taken fo refrain the doctors from prescribing drugs outside

the formulary which led te excessive local purchases, the Ministry informed as under:

"The steps taken by the Ministry generally relate to promotion of genetic drugs in
place of branded drugs. However, it is felt that compliance with following
instructions would also lead to shift to greater prescription of drugs from within the
formulary.


di

1. Use of Generic names of drugs: Medical Council of India (४01) issued guidelines in
this regard that every physician should, as far as possible, prescribe drugs with
generic names and he /she ‘shall ensure that there is a rational prescription and
use of drugs, vide notification dated 11.3.2002

2. Ministry of Health & Family Welfare vide F.No. 39-3/2003-04/CGHS/MSD/RS
Dt.23.7.2009, on the recommendations of an expert committee and DCGI, decided
that:

a.The products manufactured/marketed as food supplements, cosmetics and
Ayurvedic preparations prescribed by allopathic doctors will be inadmissible.

6, Supply of vitamins and antioxidants will be restricted to CGHS formulary only.

c. Vaccines in general will be admissible except Hepatitis B, Influenza and
Leprovac for high risk

3. After detailed discussions with the specialists of the Dr RML Hospital & Safdarjung
Hospital New Delhi they were advised vide O.M. No. 25-1/09-
10/CGHS/MSD/CGHS(P) at. 30.9.2009 to prescribe only those drugs which are
available in the CGHS Wellness Centres, as far as possible, so that immediate .
availability of drugs to beneficiaries can be ensured. It was also provided that
medicines available in CGHS Wellness Centres and having identical formulations
and/or therapeutic values may be issued to the beneficiaries. ©

4. Vide order No. S-11025/45/10-MH-I dt. 26.5.2010 conveyed to all the institutions
under the Ministry. of Health & Family Welfare, it was enjoined that “must provide
only good quality generic medicines. It has therefore, been decided that whenever
any branded drug is prescribed in the above mentioned institutions, it shail
invariably also.be mentioned that any other equivalent generic drug could also be
provided"

5. Ministry of Health & Family’ Welfare has issued guidelines vide Office
Memo. No. “H-11013/4/2010-DFQC dated 19.5,.2011 followed by a circular No.
H-11013/7/2012-CGHS -(P} dated gt February 2013 and No. S-11011/16/2012-
CGHS(P) dated 84.2015 emphasizing the need of prescribing generic drugs. In

’ this regard it was reiterated that all specialists/Dottors working in CGHS were
directed to ensure that generic drugs are: prescribed to the maximum extent
possible with a view to make medical treatment cost effective and affordable.”

20.  Apprising the Committee about the action initiated against those doctors who are
frequently prescribing expensive. branded medicines instead of low cost yet equally
effective drugs, the Ministry informed that a prescription audit was conducted in one of -
the Wellness Centres in the last week of August and show cause notices were issued to



12

two doctors deputed as Medical Specialists, to explain as to why they prescribed
medicines .out of CGHS formulary. While the case is under process, one of the doctors
has resigned. Their deputation as Medical Specialist, was also withdrawn.

21. As regards the keeping an eye on the doctors who prescribe branded drugs, the
representative of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare during his deposition before
the Committee on 12" January, 2015 stated that:

“As far as the Government doctors are concerned, the CGHS, Delhi now has
- been computerized and we are able to identify as to which doctor has prescribed
which medicine. This has been done only recently.”
22. Further, as far.as private doctors are concerned, DGHS deposed during evidence
on 12.01.2015 as under:
“Whole of the Private hospitals are unregulated and for that purpose only the
Government of India brought the Clinical Establishment Act, but that Act.is not
adopted by many of the States. We are not able to take action against them or
de-recognize them.” है
23... #- 0066 to keep check on the prescription pattern of doctors which lead to
unnecessary local purchase of medicine, the Committee in Para $ of the 24" Report of
PAC (15" Lok Sabha) had recommended that the monitoring mechanism be
strengthened and exemplary action taken against the errant doctors, who take
advantage of the helplessness of the“patients and frequently prescribe expensive
medicines outside the formulary, so that superfluous local purchase of medicines is
avoided.

24. While not accepting the Action taken by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
on the abovesaid recommendation, the Committee in Para 12 of their 84" Report (15"
Lok Sabha) had further recommended the Ministry to evolve a transparent and effective
mechanism enabling the aggrieved patients to lodge their complaints against the errant
Doctors without fear or pressure so that more instances of malpractices are detected
and large scale purchase of medicines outside the formulary is avoided. Further,

- explanation may be obtained from these CGHS doctors who make prescriptions which
are regularly at variance. ;



13

25. Audit analysed the approved rates of drugs listed in the formulary and found that
during 2011-12 the Ministry was able to obtain discounts in the range of 12 to 50 per
cent on the Maximum Retail Price (MRP) of these drugs. In comparison, CGHS was
able to obtain discounts in the range of 10 per cent to 30 per cent for drugs outside the
formulary. Thus the drugs listed in the formulary are substantially cheaper. However,
Audit is unable to quantify the exact financial implication on this account as rates of non-
formulary drugs are not maintained and therefore are not available for comparison.

26. Specifying the reasons for CGHS for lagging behind the Ministry in obtaining the
high discount range from suppliers, the Ministry stated as under:

“() “Ministry purchases drugs from the Manufacturer/Importer in bulk quantity
through open fender through Medical Store Organization whereas CGHS
procures drugs not available in the Wellness Centre/Outside the formulary on a
‘day to day basis.

(ii) Percentages of discounts on drugs procured from Authorised Local
Chemists are based on percent of discounts offered by chemists in the tender.
These discounts are based on offer from ALCs and only 11 Quotation is selected
as per Government guidelines,

(ii) | The discounts offered on bulk procurement by Ministry are different as

compared to drugs procured from Local Chemists on the following grounds:

(a) There is marked difference in quantity procured at the Ministry and Local

Chemist level. (b) The. delivery is at single point in case of Ministry and in one go

while Local Chemist has to provide medicine on daily basis in 90 odd Wellness

Centres in-small quantity increasing logistic cost. (०) Ministry purchases from the
Manufacturer/mporter while Local.Chemists fixed by CGHS are retailers.”

27, While taking into consideration large scale procurement of medicines through

local purchase, the Public Accounts Committee in their 24" Report (15" Lok Sabha) had

‘recommended that steps be taken by the Ministry accordingly to explore the feasibility of

doing away with the local purchases altogether so that exploitation of the system by

_ certain vested interests is prevented and _higher payment towards locally procured.

medicines is checked:

28. ~ In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare stated as
under: : | हु :



{a)

29.

14

“In the period prior to the computerisation of the functioning of the CGHS there
was no data base regarding procurement of medicines by the CGHS through
local purchase, After the computerisation of the functioning of CGHS, it was
possible for the CGHS fo monitor the -prescriptions made by Government
specialists, as a result of which 272 drugs which were not in the formulary. of
CGHS, but were being commonly prescribed by specialists were identified.
CGHS has been able to procure such medicines directly from”
manufacturers/suppliers at more competitive rates. All Chief Medical Officers in
charge of the dispensaries have*been authorised to place indents diréctly on the
manufacturers/suppliers on a periodic basis based on the need. This
arrangement has resulted in beneficiaries getting upto 90% of their requirement
of medicines on the same day. The project, which was attempted as a pilot
project in 10 dispensaries, in Delhi, as a result of positive response received, was
extended initially to all dispensaries in Delhi and then subsequently to other
CGHS cities. With the expanded coverage of scheme, the proportion of local
purchase is expected to come down further. Given the need to make medicines
available to beneficiaries without delay and taking note of existing prescription
practices and newer medicines being introduced from time to time, it is not
possible to entirely do away with local purchase, though further effort is being
made to further reduce local purchases.”

Non-finalization of procurement rates of drugs listed in the formulary
One of the most important factors for timely supply of drugs of good quality is the

speedy finalisation of the procurement rates of the drugs listed in the formulary by the
Ministry. Audit noted that the rates of large number of drugs, particularly during 2009-10
and 2010-11, were not finalised by the Ministry. The details are given below:

Totalnes. | Drugfor ~ Percentage of
हु Drug for drugs of
-of.drug which 5 .
Formulary | Year . which rates | which rate
listed in rates
. ५ not finalised | had not been
formulary | finalized हु
finalised
Branded 2009-10 504 350 7 154 30.56
drugs Oo
2010-11 504 339 165 - 32.74 | |

2011-12 622 §92 30 462



३5

30. The reasons for non-finalisation of rates of various drugs were attributed to items
being de-registered by the Drug Controller, rates of drugs not being negotiable, firms

; having changed drug composition to bypass National Phaimaceuticals Pricing Authoirty
(NPPA)*, the firm riot being the manufacturer of the quoted. item, etc. Thus non
availability of rates of drugs within the formulary is likely to lead to procurement of drugs
outside the formulary which in turn would lead to extra expenditure.

31. While observing that one of the reasons for non-finalisation of rates of various
drugs is items being de-registered by the Drug Controller, the Committee wanted’ to ;
know the reasons thereof. In response, the Ministry stated as under:

“It is submitted that the drugs are not de-registered by the Drug Gontroller as
pointed out in the Audit Note, rather the manufacturing firms are de-registered by
the MSO, based on the stipulated guidelines. Drugs when procured, are tested
from two Government approved Labs, before they are distributed to CGHS. If the
drugs are declared not of standard quality by these two labs then the sample is
sent to Central Drug Laboratory (CDL). If drug is declared not of standard quality
by CDL then the drug is de-registered for further procurement.”

32. Further, when asked as to why the rates of drugs were not negotiable, the
Ministry in their written replies submitted as under:
“Issue of non finalization of rates

SI. | Type of formulary | Number of drugs in Number of drugs for |

No. — formulary which rate approved
| 1. | Generic | 818 218
2. | Proprietary or 622 ; 532

Branded

The reasons forless number of drugs for which rates were approved are:

1. Paucity of valid bidders in tender for generic groups
The rate of a firm/company which had been deregistered cannot be considered in
subsequent years हि

3. It is seen that some companies stop manufacturing drug of particular brands.

1 National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Authority {NPPA) is an independent 0009 of experts and is
responsible for implementing the drug price control order (0200), 0700 is an order issue by
the Government for fixing the-prices of some essential bulk drugs and their formulations.



33.

16
It has also been seen that the requirement under CGHS for some drugs is so

small that companies are not interested in finalizing the rate contract for those
brands.”

Upon noticing that the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (D/o

Pharmacetiticals) has been assigned the role of fixing rate on certain drugs, the
Committee desired to know the reasons thereof, number of drugs for which they have

been fixing the rates and why this role was not assigned to the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare being the nodal Ministry for healthcare. In tesponse the Ministry of
Chemicals and Fertilizers (D/o Pharmaceuticals) stated as follows:

34,

“As per the business allocation the prices of medicines are controlled/monitored
by the Department of Pharmaceuticals through National Pharmaceutical Pricing
Authority (NPPA). The Government notified Drugs Prices Control Order (0700),

2013 vide which all the medicines specified in the National List of Essential ©

Medicines 2011 (NLEM) have been brought under price control. There ate 614
formulations specified in the first schedule of DPCO, 2013 covering 27
therapeutic groups including medicines used in the treatment of cancer, Heart
and Kidney. Further, it may be mentioned that while healthcare is under the
domain of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, making available essential

Medicines at affordable prices is under purview of Department of ~

Pharmaceuticals.”

Apprising the Committee about the existing mechanism to fix rates of drugs and

coordination mechanism with. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, the Ministry of
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) in their written replies stated
as follows:

(b)
35.

*Under DPCO 2013, prices are fixed based on market data. National List of
Essential Medicines (NLEM), 2011, published by Ministry of Health and Famity
Welfare and included in the 1४ Schedule of DPCO 2013, forms the basis for
fixation of ceiling prices. For calculation of ceiling prices, all brands and generic
version of the medicines having market share of more than or equal fo 1 percent
of the total market turnover is taken into account. The prices are fixed by NPPA
in its Authority meetings which jinfer-alia has an ex-officio Member from=the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. - This Department also coordinates with
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for revision/updation of the NLEM.
Whenever required, technical input is also taken from, Ministry of Health & Family
Welfare.” हि

Inadequate and incomplete drug formulary

Audit pointed out the doctors continued to prescribe drugs outside the formulary

despite the adverse comments of the Parliamentary Committee. Drugs valuing ¥ 1119



वा

crore were purchased from outside the formulary during 2009-12. The fact that 71 per
cent of the expenditure during 2009-12 was incurred on drugs outside the formulary
points to drug formulary not being comprehensive enough to cover .drugs for wide-
ranging ailmenis/diseases.

36. Explaining about the reasons for prescribing drugs outside the formulary despite
adverse remarks of PAC, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in their written
replies stated that :

“Medical science is an evolving scientific field. Newer drugs/combinations/brands
are added frequently for the treatment of ailments and older brands/drugs
become out dated. Newer drugs are superior to the available drugs in one or the
other aspects like lesser side effects, better efficacy, requirement of lesser
number ef dosage per day, shorter duration of treatment etc. In a large number
of cases the patients are either referred to the Specialist or consult the Specialist
directly for advice. Often, it has been observed that the Specialists of the
Central/State/Private Recognized Hospitals prescribe medicines which are not
included in the existing CGHS formulary. tt becomes difficult for the GDMOs of
the Wellness Centres to overrule the decision of the Specialists due to ethical
and administrative reasons. This is the major cause of increase of expenditure
through local chemist.”

37. When asked as to whether the present formulary is. comprehensive enough to
cover drugs for wide ranging ailments, the Ministry replied that :

“Present formulary is not comprehensive enough to cover drugs for wide ranging
ailments in view of development of new pharmaceutical products in the world. A
Committee under the Chairmanship of DGHS is reviewing the generic formulary.

In fact, during a recent meeting of the above Committee, it was seen that there
ate 397 generic drugs which are generally used in the Wellness Centres, but are
‘not included tn the present formulary."

38. In response to other felated query, the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare in their
written submission stated as under है

‘The CGHS formulary is quite broad, but it cannot be-said that it is fully
comprehensive in view of the: constant evolution of new drug formulations
tequired to-treat disease. The recent one prepared at the level of DGHS will make
the formulary more comprehensive. However, ‘there will always be some
individual beneficiaries requiring medicines, which are not part of the formulary
since new medicines. get added rapidly. In addition it needs to 98 pointed out that



39.

18

actual procurement of all items in the formulary is always not possible because of
various reasons such as lack of response, etc., consequently such medicines are
not supplied to WCs by MSO, necessitating local purchase. However, demand for
such local purchase should nat be very large.”

Apprising the Committee about the process adopted by the Ministry for periodical *

updating of formulary list and when the last revision of formulary fist was undertaken, the

Ministry in their written replies stated as under:

40.

“Updating the formulary is generally carried out by a Committee specially
constituted for this purpose. The Committee comprises Specialists from different
flelds as well as representatives of DCG(!) and CGHS. It considers the existing
formularies and recommends inclusion / deletion of items based on recent
advances in medical field, and also the experience of specialists. The last
revision of the generic formulary was done in June 2013 by a Committee headed
by Addl. Secretary & DG, CGHS. Its revision has been proposed by a Committee
headed by the DGHS. This formulary is approved at the level of Secretary. The
formulary for Branded drugs was finalized by a Committee headed by a Joint
Secretary in the Ministry. The final approval was given by the HFM in September
2010. It was inadvertently, through a typographical mistake, mentioned in the
reply dated the 27" February 2015 that the Branded formulary was finalized in
2008-09. Actually the process was begun in this year and as mentioned above
(and-also in the Audit Note of May 2013 itself) the approval was given in
September 2010. This error is deeply regretted.”

On being enquired as to whether any definite time frame has been fixed for

regular revision of formulary list, the Ministry stated as under:-

41.

“There are no specific instructions on this issue. The generic formulary was
however revised in 2008, then in 2011 and again in 2013. Further revision has
now been done. The branded formulary was fast revised in 2010.”

When the Committee sought to know about the existing mechanism of inspection

in the Ministry so as to ensure that-all the CGHS Wellness Centres maintain their
formularies and-update them at regular intervals for identifying purchasing essential
drugs, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare submitted as follows:-

i)

The broad mechanism for identifying drugs for purchase is as follows:- *

MSO procures medicines centrally from the drugs included in the formulary
based on the indents received from CGHS. Addl. Directors of Cities compile the
requirements from CGHS Wellness Centres for provisioning of medicines and
place online indents to MSO. MSO arranges for delivery of medicines in two
installments in a year.


19

ij) 116 indents for pilot project medicines are calculated through NIC software and
indents are placed to suppliers based on the consumption pattern and the
inventory available

iit) Life saving medicines are procured on case to case basis by
‘AddI.Director,CGHS(MSD) in Delhi and by Addl. Director of concerned city in
other cities.

9४). . Procurement through Authorized Locat Chemist is done by CMO ॥० af CGHS
Wellness Centre and medicines are procured against individual prescriptions

400% Stock verification of CGHS Wellness Centres is done annually, and the
inventory of medicines is also verified.”

42, In response to a query regarding by what time the complete drug formulary would
be made, .Director General of Health Services in his deposition before the Public
Accounts Committee on 12" January, 2015 stated as under:-

“In another three months we will be getting the complete formulary made and
tender done.”

43. He further stated that “now we have made it that it should be looked after every
three months.”

44. Upon noticing that no defined process has been adopted by the Ministry to
update the medicine selections, the Committee in Para 6 of their 24" Report (15" Lok
Sabha) had urged upon the Ministry to codify and adopt a defined process for annual
updation of the medicine selection and periodical revision of the CGHS formularies so as
to ensure that the intended purpose of economical and efficient procurement of
medicines is well served and the emerging therapeutic options and needs are
appropriately catered to.

45. In response thereto, the Ministry in their Action Taken Note stated as follows:

“The Ministry is reviewing/updating the formularies periodically. ‘Current formulary
for Proprietary drugs is approved for one year. 10 revise the proprietary drug
formulary a committee has been constituted on 19.12.2011. The validity of the
current proprietary formulary is extended upto 23.12.2012. The Generic
formulary was revised on 23.05.2011 and is valid for three years. All efforts were
taken to complete the exercise of updating the formulary in time. However, in
case some time gap was there in updating the current formulary, it was extended
with the approval of the competent authority at existing rate contracts. Hence, the
procurement made by the Ministry was always economical and efficient.”



20

46. While commenting on the above said Action Taken Notes the Comrmnittee had in
their 84" Report (150 Lok Sabha) had desired that a defined process and definite time-
frame be prescribed for mandatory annual updation of the medicines.

८, Procurement of Generic drugs
a} Generic and Branded Drugs

47. A Generic drug is defined as any drug marketed under its chemical name without. ©
advertising; therefore Generic drugs are listed as the name of the constituent drug only
eg. Paracetamol. A Branded drug on the other hand is a drug ‘medication sold by a
- pharmaceutical company under a trademark-protected name, e.g. Crocin, Metacin, etc.

— these are tablets of Paracetamol sold under proprietary names.

48. Audit further noted that many drugs are available in both Generic and Branded
version. Generic drugs are substantially cheaper than the Branded version. The
Minister of Heaith and Family Welfare while approving (September 2010) the revised
formulary of Branded drugs, expressed serious concern on prescribing of Branded drugs
by doctors instead of Generic versions and directed for a complete shift towards
Generic drugs, within one year, both in prescriptions and supplies. In order to prornote
Generic drugs the Ministry, in May 2011, revised its Genetic drug formulary from 818 to
1128 drugs.

49. As generic and non-branded drugs are effective enough and cheaper than the
branded drugs, the Committee wanted to know as fo what steps have been faken by the
Ministry to instill faith in the doctors/patients in the efficacy of those drugs. In their reply,
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare responded as under:-
“The Ministry has consistently held that generic drugs, of good quality, are as
effective as branded drugs. The follawing steps have been taken in this regard:

1. After detailed discussions with the specialists of the Dr RML Hospital & Safdarjung
Hospital, New Delhi, O.M. No. 25-1/08-10/CGHS/MSD/CGHS(P) dt. 30.9.2009
was issued with the following directions/advice:

a. Specialists of these hospitals were advised: to prescribe only those drugs
which were available in the CGHS Wellness Centres, as far as possible, so.
that immediate. availability of drugs to beneficiaries can be ensured.



2.

50.

21

b. Medicines available in CGHS Wellness Centres and having identical
formulations and/or therapeutic values may be issued to the beneficiaries.

c. Itis for information of the CGHS beneficiaries that proprietary /oranded drugs
manufactured by different manufacturers and having same generic
composition have same therapeutic effect.

The order No, S-11025/45/10-MH-I dt. 26.5.2010 conveyed to all the institutions
under the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, stipulated that they “must provide
only good quality generic medicines. It has therefore, been decided that whenever
any branded drug is prescribed in the above mentioned institutions, it shall
invariably also be mentioned that any other equivalent generic drug. could also be
provided.

Director, CGHS has also issued instructions in this regard to
Addl. Director(HQ),Addl.DDG (HQ) and Addl.Director{MSD) to analyze and take
necessary steps for better utilization of generic drugs.”

As the Minister of Health and Family Welfare in September, 2010 had directed

for a complete shift towards Generic drugs, within one year, both in prescriptions and

supply, the Committee desired to know about the action taken by the Ministry in this

regard. Jn response, the Ministry submitted as under:

51.

“It is felt that a complete shift towards generics in prescriptions is not possible
presently. More complex medicines, involving more than 3 ingredients, are now
being developed and are giving good results in the fight against disease. Such
drugs are almost always proprietary in nature. It would be unfair to deny patients
the benefits of new advances in medical science by insisting on an absolute
reliance on generic drugs. It is nevertheless correct that there should be a
greater reliance on generic drugs."

Audit further noted that many drugs are available in both Generic and Branded

version. Generic drugs. are substantially cheaper than the Branded version, The

following example would illustrate the point:



Nimesulide | 100mg Tab 10 2,70 a Panacea 29.00
Biotech
Nee | Dr. Reddy Lab 32.06
Amikacin 100mg/2ml | vial 2ml 46.25 | Zycin Zydus Cadila 19.50
vial
Amexel Nicholas 15.10
Piramal

Source :www. janaushidhi.gov.in

1. . The Minister of Health and Family Welfare while approving (September 2010) the
tevised formulary of Branded drugs, expressed serious concern on
prescribing of Branded drugs by doctors instead of Generic versions and
directed for a complete shift towards Generic drugs, within one year, both in
prescriptions and supplies. In order to promote Generic drugs the Ministry, in
May 2011, revised its Generic drug formulary from 818 to 1128 drugs.

ll. Audit further noted that the Ministry did not finalise procurement rates of most of
the drugs listed in the Generic formulary as detailed below:

7 Total nos. of pra fo 7
Formulary Year- - drug fistedin 7 aula

formula 7 Wales” =
iy finalised _-

z rates not.
inialised

II, The reason for non-finalisation of the rates of Generic drugs was mainly
attributed to poor response from the drug manufacturers.

IV. As a result, CGH& procured only 210 55 per cent of the Generic drugs listed’ in
the formulary as detailed in the Table below:



23

2 “Nannie of city é हा -Percentage of dru
है ld : ed from: Generic:

Ahmedabad * 2009-10 है 54.5

be

Bhubaneswar

2009-10

a

Bai:
2011-12 5.07

Further, the expenditure on procurement of Generic drugs in CGHS, Delhi during 2009-
42 constituted a mere 0.19 per cent.

52. {tis seen from above that the percentage of generic drugs procured in Delhi was
only 2 to 5 percent and in Bhubaneswar around 5 to 7 percent during 2009 to 2012.
Further in major cities like Ahmedabad, Kolkata, Chennai and Mumbai graph of
percentage of generic drugs procured has drastically come down from nearly 50 percent
during 2009-10 fo below 10 percent in 2011-12. While specifying the reasons thereof,
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in their-written replies stated as under:

“Drugs procured in bulk after provisioning depend on the availability of drugs for
_ which rates have been approved. As per records, procurement of medicines in
2013-14, through GMSDs was based on the previous formulary containing — 818 | ~
generic and 622 Proprietary Medicines. Out of these, rates were approved for
218 generic and 532 Proprietary Medicines. The approved rates of 99 generic ,
medicines are through 99 PSU companiés, and the rest 119 are through other
companies. One of the main reasons for less procurement of generic drugs by
_CGHS was that rates were approved by MSO for only 25 percent of the generic
drug. formulary and also many of the drugs listed in the generic formulary were



24

only for hospital use and not required in the Wellness Centres. Also MSO could

not supply many of the drugs that were indented by CGHS.

53. Further, with regard to the corrective measures taken by the Ministry to increase
the procurement of generic drugs by CGHS, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
informed as under:

“A cammittee under the Chairmanship of DGHS has-been constituted to revise
the generic formulary of 1447. The Committee in its meeting held on 19.01.2015
. has decided as follows:-

(a) All the drugs, which are presently being procured through
local indent, are to be included’ in the generic formulary.

(b) MSO to take up tendering process for finalization of rate-
contract of drugs. Priority in tendering is to be given to drugs which are presently
being procured through local indent.

The open bid has already been invited in generic form for 27 most commonly
prescribed compositions & technical bid will be opened on 19.02.2015. The open
tender process for over 800 other drugs has already been initiated, and tender
will be floated in the next few weeks.”

54. The details indicating the current status of percentage of drugs procured from
generic drugs list as submitted by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare are given as
under:
“Procurement of medicines in 2013-14, through GMSDs was based on the
previous formulary containing — 818 generic and 622 Proprietary Medicines. Out
of these, rates were approved for 218 generic and 532 Proprietary Medicines.
The approved rates of 99 generic medicines are through 99 PSU companies, and
the rest 119 are through other companies.” *
55... Test check also revealed that 59-drugs selected for Branded drug formulary were
already listed in the Generic formulary (Annexure Ill). Further, a comparison of rates of
30 Branded drugs with fates of Generic drugs in Janaushidhi scheme revealed that an
amount of & 11.81 crore could have been saved by CGHS Delhi during 2011-12, had
Generic drugs been procured instead of Branded drugs. (Annexure IV). ह

56... When asked by the Committee: as to whether the Ministry have explored the
possibility of nexus between doctors and pharma companies fo refrain the doctors from
prescribing generic drugs and whether it is a fact that even foreign trips are sponsored


2s ; wo.
by the pharma companies as a quid pro-quo, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare

in their post-evidence information submitted as follows:

“Two cases have come to the notice of CGHS.

A complaint was received against the then Addl. Director, CGHS, Patna. The
matter is under investigation and the CBI is conducting a Preliminary Enquiry

(PE). In the meantime, the then Addl. Director, CGHS (Patna) has been relieved

of his charge. Another complaint has been received against Addl. Director,

_ CGHS, Thiruvananthapuram and the matter is under examination. The Deptt. of
Pharmaceuticals issued Uniform Code of Conduct for Pharma Companies for
voluntary compliance for a period of 6 months vide OM No 5/3/2009-PI/P-Il
(४०.11) dated the 12" December, 2014.” *

57. The Committee then asked the Ministry about the measures initiated by them to
break the nexus between pharmaceutical companies and doctors. In response the
Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals informed the Committee as under: ,

“From: January, 2015, the Department of Pharmaceuticals has sent new
guidelines to all the pharmaceutical companies that they should follow this
uniform code of. conduct for pharmaceutical companies to break this nexus
between pharmaceutical companies and doctors. They are barred from
conducting many training programmes, sponsoring doctors to foreign tours and
giving them costly gifts and all other things. But this particular Code is to be
adopted voluntarily by all these companies. The MD has to give the statement
saying that we are following this particular Code and we are not giving costly gifts
and all that to doctors. That they have to give every year. This is for the initial six
months’ period. For the first six months' period, we will see how this particular
system works ‘voluntarily code'. After six months, we will review this scheme and
we will see that this is statutorily met for followings in the country. This is what we
have done. Medical Council has also given separate guidelines to all the
doctors. So we are working in close coordination. We are having a meeting very
shortly with MCI to see that both these regulations — regulations given by
pharmaceutical companies and MCI — got together to see that there is very good
- impact in the society.” ;

58.  Apprising the Committee about the steps taken by the Ministry to promote generic
drugs, the Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals during evidence stated as under:

“Att our past efforts to promote generic drugs in a big way did not give that much
yield. Today, we are working on our revised programme to see that for six
therapeutic segments. we want to give 500 generic drugs to.all our public. First of
all, we want to introduce this scheme even in ten different States from June., The
fifst scheme failed to a great extent because we néver approached the doctors to
prescribe the generic drugs. That big. flaw was there. Now, we want to see that
doctors are approached, trained and informed about the advantage. of having



a

26

generic drugs. That is one important strategy that we want to take. Secondly, we
want to educate the patients and common public about the advantages of taking
generic drugs. These two strategies were missing to a great extent in the first
phase programme that we had earlier. Now, with these changes, we are very
confident that we will be able to complete the entire country with jan aushadhi
drugs in a very big way.” हि

59... ॥ this regard, Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare also informed the

Committee during evidence that “as far as prescription of generic drugs is concerned,

that proposal is also under consideration that doctors can only prescribe the generic

medicines.

b) Delays in procurement of drugs listed in formutary

60. Hospital Service Consultancy Corporation (1900) places the supply orders on
vendors at rates already finalized by the Ministry. HSCC provides 60 days to the
suppliers for making drugs ready for inspection and testing. Audit noted that drugs were
feceived in MSD aftér a delay of two to six months after communication of the
requirement to HSCC. Further, issue of drugs from MSD to CGHS Wellness Centres
took another three to five months (Annexure V}. In effect the drugs were received in
CGHS Wellness Centres with significant delays. Similarly in CGHS Chennai, Jaipur,
Kolkata, Chandigarh, Thiruvananthapuram, Hyderabad and Bhubaneswar, drugs were
received from respective MSDs after a delay of two to ten months from placing the
orders. In CGHS Hyderabad, Thiruvananthapuram, Chandigarh, Mumbai and
Bhubaneswar there was a short supply/non-supply up to 85 per cenf of drugs indented
to the GMSD during 2009-10 to 2011-12.

The delays in procurement and non-availability of formulary: drugs at CGHS
Wellness Centres led to procurement of these drugs by CGHS centres from local

chemists at higher ratés léading to an extia expenditure of हैं 3.05 crore as detailed
below: है

~


27

Name of.CGHS covered city: ae

"| Kolkata : 0.18

Jaipur 14.44
11020 $ ; oe
Total 304.80

61. On being asked about fhe steps taken by the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare to obviate the: delays in procurement as well as non-availability of formulary
drugs at CGHS Wellness Centres, the Ministry stated as under: -

{a} ‘To obviate the delay in procuretnent of drugs, the procurement of drugs
for CGHS Delhi has been given to MSO from HSCC.

(b) 272 drugs are being procured directly from manufacturer (at the rates finalized
by MSO) by CMOs In-Charge of CGHS Wellness Centres on monthly
requirement basis through NIC developed software. These drugs are being
directly supplied to the Wellness Centres.

(c) Generic formulary is being revised by a Committee under the Chairmanship of
DGHS and tender is being floated by MSO for finalization of rate contract of
generic drugs shortly.”

62. The Committee also desired to know about the reasoris for procuring drugs
through HSCC instead of MSO. In response, the Ministry submitted as under:

“Mis HSCC is public sector undertaking of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
and has been set up specifically to provide consultancy services in the health
‘sector. Being a specialized organization, they were assigned the task of
procurement of drugs for the CGHS in Delhi in the year 2003. At that time there.
were certain complaints. regarding the functioning of MSO also,

MSO is now capable of procuring drugs and has been entrusted with the same.
It may be noted that GMSD has supplied around 78% of generic and 94% of
Proprietary Medicines indented by the different indentors against the indent of
2043-14.” हु है



28

63. When enquired about the reasons for giving back the procurement of drugs for
CGHS to MSO from HSCC and when such decision was taken , the Ministry replied as
“under:

“Procurement of drugs for CGHS, Delhi was given back to MSO frorn 2014 -
onwards due to the following reasons:

i) Delay in payment to suppliers by HSCC

ii) Consultation fee being-paid to HSCC

ii} Imposition of additional terms: and conditions by HSCC, due to which
suppliers were reluctant to quote.

iv) Inspection & testing of drugs procured through MSO is carried out after
the consignments are received at the GMSDs, whereas in case-of HSCC
inspection and testing were done at the manufacturers/suppliers’ site
since HSCC did not have storage space. It could not therefore be ensured
that the supplier was supplying the same stocks which had been
inspected and tested. Therefore, quality check in case of HSCC was not
fool proof.”

64. Asked to state as to when the Ministry was not satisfied with the functioning of

HSCC, why the services of the same were not terminated earlier, the Ministry did not

reply satisfactorily.

65. When asked as to why the procurement of medicines through MSO instead of
HSCC was made applicable only for CGHS Delhi and what is the present position in
regard to other CGHS centres, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare replied as
under: |

“At that time, it was felt that since MSO had a distribution network outside Delhi
also.they would be in a better position to take up supplies to CGHS units outside
Delhi, whereas HSCC could be made responsible for supply to CGHS units in
Dethi. A decision to this effect was taken on 1.3.2003 under the Chairmanship of
HFM.”

D. Avoidable Expenditure of हैं 13.52 crore in procurement of formulary drugs druc is
in Delhi through 1556

66. 17 terms of Rute 165 of General Financial Rules and Para 1.2.1 of Manual of

Policies and Procedure of Employment of Consultants issued by Ministry of Finance; the
consultants may be emplayed in the condition of absence of required expertise in-house
and when it is felt absolutely essential. MSD Delhi is the nodal office which procures



29

drugs for all CGHS wellness centres in Delhi. Procurement rates and concemed
suppliers of the drug, listed.in the approved drug formulary, are finalized by the Ministry.
However, MSD procures these drugs through HSCC instead of procuring them directly
from notified supptiers. MSD paid consultancy charges of 4.5 per cent to HSCC for this
procurement till October 2008 and 2.5 per cent'thereafter. Audit noted that HSCC did not
add any value fo the procurement process and simply acted as a conduit between the
Ministry and the supplier. This is so because the rates and suppliers had already been .
finalised for drugs procured through HSCC. Thus, MSD Delhi incurred avoidable extra
expenditure of ¥ 13.52 crote on consultancy charges paid to the HSCC during 2002-03
to 2010-11.

67. Upon asking as to whether the Ministry had initiated any measures to procure the
drugs directly from the suppliers at any time for economizing the cost of procurement,
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in their written submission stated as under:

“There are four avenues for procurement of drugs in CGHS;

1. Procurement through GMSD: Demand is uploaded by CGHS to

GMSD, based on the formulary of MSO and CGHS and supply is made by
GMSD. ; ;
2. है Procurement through Pilot Project for 272 most commonly branded

items from the manufacturer directly by CGHS: Rates of these drugs were
negotiated and since then these items are being procured by different CGHS
Wellness Centres on monthly basis through NIC developed programme.
Demand is auto generated by the system based on last four months
consumption. -

3. Procurement through Local Chemists: Those items which are not
included in either MSO list or in the Pilot Project or have been exhausted at the
Wellness Centre jevel are being procured through Local Chemists.

4. Purchase of costly medicines: Procured through MSD CGHS on -
case to case basis.

All drugs included in the generic & proprietary formularies are being procured
directly from manufactures after finalizing the rate-contiact: For further economizing
the. cost of procurement, 272 drugs are being: procured directly from the
manufacturer by CMQs I/c of CGHS Wellness Centres on monthly requirement basis
through NIC developed programme.”



30

E. Pilot Project to Streamline procurement of drugs हे
68. CGHS proposed (January 2007) to implement a Pilot Project to streamline

procurement of drugs in CGHS. The: project envisaged assessment of monthly
consumption of drugs at CGHS centres. Requirements, thus assessed, were to be
intimated to the supplier at the end of month. The drugs were to be delivered ‘at the
beginning of each month directlyto thé CGHS Wellness Centre by the supplier. This
project was supposed to eliminate delays in supply of drugs present in the prevailing
central procurement system through 1800 in Delhi and through GMSDs in. cities
outside Delhi. Audit, however, noted that contrary to the proposal, which envisaged
procurement of both formulary and non-formulary drugs, the approved list under pilot
project contained only non-formulary drugs. It included 235 drugs that were stated to be
commonly prescribed drugs purchased locally in CGHS. The project was extended to all
‘the CGHS centres by September 2009. Later the list of drugs in the pilot project was
revised to 272 drugs and were included in the Branded formulary of the Ministry
(September 2010). Audit also noted that MSD submitted (September 2010) that all the
622 drugs in the new drug formulary as approved by the Ministry may be included in the
Pilot Project. This was meant-to cut down delays in procurement through HSCC as well
as to effect savings of commission of 2.5 per cent being paid to HSCC. The proposal
was, however, not approved by the Ministry, the reasons for which were not on record.
Audit also noted that in CGHS Chennai, Kolkata, Jaipur and Hyderabad, even the drugs
included in the Pilot Project were procured through local purchase at higher rates
_ leading to an extra expenditure of = 85.22 lakh.

F, Procurement of Life Saving drugs of Life Saving drugs

69. MSD finalizes procurement rates of these drugs of the basis of quotations
received from the manufacturers. MSD procures the drugs based. on the prescription
made by the CGHS doctors, on approved rates. ‘As noted in the case of other Branded
drags, there were more than one brand of the same drug composition. Audit noted that
thére were 206 such brands of 72 drug compositions in the list of life saving drugs as on
December 2011. Further, prices of the different brands having same drug composition

varied substantially. Test check of records related to procurement of life saving drugs. in



31

CGHS Delhi, Thiruvananthapuram, Allahabad and Kolkata revealed that CGHS. incurred
avoidable extra expenditure of 76.26 crore on procuring higher priced drug brands
despite availability of low cost brands within the list itself (Annexure VI). CGHS did not
accord reasons for including several brands of the drug of the same composition in the
list ‘of life saving drugs. This led to procurement of drugs in an arbitrary manner, In
CGHS Hyderabad, if was observed that life saving drugs were purchased at rates higher
than the authorised list resulting in avoidable extra expenditure of % 20.22 lakh. Audit
further neted that the MSD Delhi initiated (June 2009) an open tendering process for
procurement of Generic drugs. However, the tender documents could ‘not be finalised
due to issues relating to modification of clauses in the tender documents. Thus, the MSD
‘failed to implement the proposat of procuring life saving drugs through open tender as of
July, 2012.

70. Apprising the Committee about the reasons for delay ‘in finalization of tender
documents process of generic life saving drugs, the Ministry stated as under:

“An open tender for finalizing rate-contract of generic drugs was invited in
October, 2013, but the tender could not be finalized since the response from the
Pharmaceutical industry was very poor..A Committee was constituted fo review
the tender conditions with a view to encourage the industry fo participate in the
tender. Revised terms & conditions of tender recommended by the Committee
have been approved with the concurrence of IFD. A tender for finalizing rate-
contract for 27 drugs has already been floated, and for another 800 drugs tender
would be floated within the next few weeks.”

71. Further, with regard to present position of opening the technical bid for 27 drugs
and floating the tender for another 800 drugs, the Ministry submitted as follows:

“Regarding the tender of 27 drugs it is submitted that the Technical Evaluation
Committee, under the Chairmanship of Sp!. DGHS, held its meeting on 9/4/2015,
and the matter is under process. As on 20.4.2015 tenders have been floated-for
more than 1200 drugs.” हि : :

72. — Providing information regarding current procedure adopted for procurement of life
saving drugs, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in the replies stated that:
“The procedure for purchase of Life Saving Drugs has now been streamlined.

Currently the Life. Saving Drugs are being procured on Li(lowest) rate after
inviting sealed enquiries, Further to have rate contract of Life Saving Drugs, a list



32

of 268 drugs has been finalized after invitation of Expression of Interest (EOI).
The list has been approved by a clinical expert committee and forwarded to the
competent authority for approval for initiating E-tender through MSO.”

73. .When asked as to whether the said list has been approved by the competent
authority and E-tendering has been floated, the Ministry stated that the list of medicines
to be tendered has been approved by the competent authority, and the tendering is
under process.

G. Quality Assurance
74, The drugs procured by MSD are subject to mandatory testing in laboratories

‘before supply to CGHS. In CGHS Kolkata drugs were issued to the patients before
receipt of test reports, which were later reported as sub-standard by GMSD. In CGHS
Mumbai medicines worth हैं 28.45 lakh received from GMSD during 2008-2012 were
declared sub-standard. Out of these, medicines worth = 15.66 lakh were already issued
fo patients. Such instances highlight the absence of a robust mechanism for quality
assurance, which exposes the patients fo the hazards of sub-standard medicines and
drugs. in CGHS Hyderabad drugs worth हैं 21.39 lakh procured from GMSD did not have’
prescribed shelf life and the shortfalls in shelf life were in the range of one to three
months. In Chandigarh drugs valuing हैं 13.53 lakh expired between April 2008 and
November 2011 implying that the requirement of drugs was not assessed properly.

75. Providing details of drugs quality assurance mechanism prevalent in CGHS, the
Ministry submitted as under:

“The medicines procured through MSO have inbuilt quality assurance
mechanism. In house laboratory test reports are provided by the manufacturers.
On receipt of supplies in GMSD (unit of MSO), samples are sent for laboratory
testing. On receipt of OK test reports, suppliés from GMSD. are received in
CGHS (MSD) for distribution of medicines to the Weliness Centers.”

76. On this aspect, the Ministry have also stated that:

“Quality assurance mechanism exists for drugs procured in bulk.. No lab testing is
done on drugs purchased through local chemists since drugs are procured
through local chemists on day fo day basis and issued to beneficiaries on the_-
next working day. No additional quality is indented for quality / laboratory testing.
However‘all manufacturers have an in-house testing.system. Drug Controller of
India also keeps lifting random samples for drugs testing.”



77.

33

The details of sub-standard medicines found in lab testing on all India level during

fast three years as provided by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare are given as

under:

78.

“Financial | No. of Samples | Found of Standard | Found of Sub-standard
year drawn Qualit Quali ;
2011-12 | 1481 1468 13
2012-13 1446 1444 है [5 —sz
2013-14 2066 है 2066 [NI

Drugs when procured, are tested from two Govt. approved Labs, before they are
distributed to CGHS. If the drugs are declared not of standard quality by these
two labs then the sample is sent to Central Drug Laboratory (CDL). [f drug is
declared not of Standard Quality by CDL then the manufacturers of the said drug
is de-registered for further supply of the said drug.”

Apptising the Committee about the steps initiated to ensure proper quality

assurance of drugs procured both centrally and locally, the Ministry submitted as under:

a. “Selection of only those manufacturers, for entering into rate contract, who
fulfill following eligibility criteria:-

i. Annual turnover of more than & 100 crore in manufacturing and sale of drugs
in case of group A drugs {drugs required for cardiovascular, respiratory,
endocrine diseases, cancer and higher antibiotics ) and & 50 crore in case of
other drugs . .

ii. Having three manufacturing and marketing experience of drugs

ii. Having WHO-GMP/GMP under schedule-M
iv, Not being convicted under Drugs and Cosmetics Act |
vy. Having R&D facilitiesfown drug testing facilities

b. Registration ‘of manufacturing unit before supply of drugs to GMSD. Registration
is based on inspection of manufacturing unit by a team consisting a member from
State Drug Controller's office, a. member from Pharmacy college/ Depit. of

- Pharmacology, and a member from GMSD.

c. Testing of all batches of drugs before accepting the supplies from two different
drug testing labs.

d. De-registration/debarment of manufacturer/rate contract holding firm based on
‘following criteria .

Medicines procured through ALCs are against individual beneficiary requirements, and
are therefore tested only as and when complaints are received.”

79.

On being asked as to what extent spuriéus drugs are prevalent in the Indian

Market, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare provided the following details :



उद

‘The results of drug samples tested all over the country in the last six years as
received from State Drug Controllers, reveals that only about 0.1% to 0.3% of
around 58,000 samples per annum (on an average) fall within the category of
spurious drugs

Earlier, a survey to assess the extent of Spurious and Sub-standard drugs in the
country was conducted in the year 2009 by the Ministry of Health, through the
Central Drug Standards Control Organisation (CDSCO). Under this survey
24,136 samples of 62 brands of drugs belonging to 9 therapeutic categories of 30
manufacturers, were collected from over 100. different Pharmacy outlets in
different regions of the country and located in each stratum viz. metros, big cities,
district, towns and villages. The survey has revealed that the extent of drugs
found to be spurious was 0.046% only. The resort on the countrywide survey on
Spurious Drugs is available on the CDSCO website www.cdsco.nic.in.

YEAR-WISE DATA OF SPURIOUS DRUGS AND THE ACTION TAKEN FOR
LAST FIVE YEARS AND CURRENT YEAR (till September, 2014) .

Details of no. of samples tested declared not of Standard Quality, No. of Samples
declared Spurious in the country since 2009-10 to 2014-15 (till September 2014)
are as under:

Percentage of Not of Standard quality drugs and Spurious/ Adulterated drugs for
the years of 2009-10, 2010-11, 2011-12, 2012-13, 2013-14 and 2014-15(upto
September, 2014) as per the feedback. available from the States
No. of % of No. of
No, of drugs drugs drugs % of drugs
7 dru S samples { samples sane les samples
Year 19 declared | declared P declared
No. samples not of not of declared spurious/
tested dard spurious! dulterated
_ | Standard | standard | oo tterated | adulterate
quality | quality
1. . 2009-10 39248 1942 }494 | 117 oz
g, | 2010-11 49682 2372 4.77 ps का
3 [0112 | 1-12 48082 [2186 | [लव | a है 0.27 |
५ [20213 | 58537 [3० | 4.03 70 [०11 |
ता 2013-14 72712 | 3028 | [6 | fe | 0.16
P| 2014-15 (upto
September) sss _| 4823 47 as 00



80.

35

A statement showing No. of samples tested, No. of Samples declared not of
Standard Quality, No. of samples declared spurious, No. of Prosecution
Launched, and No. of cases decided, No. of persons arrested and approximate
value of drugs seized States / UTs wise during the last five years i.e. 2009-10,
2010-11, 2011-2012, 2012-13, 2013-14 and current year 2014-15 (upto
September, 2014), as per the information made available by the States is at
(Annexure Vil).

Recently, a countrywide survey regarding the exient of Spurious and Not of
Standard Quality (NSQ) drugs is being conducted by Ministry of Health & Family
Welfaré, Govt. of India under the guidance and supervision of Director Ic,
National Institute of Biologicals (NIB), Noida and has already been rolled out from
8" April, 2015: Almost 47,000 drugs samples are expected to be drawn under
this survey from Retailers, Govt. Hospitals & Dispensaries which would include
15 therapeutic categories of drugs listed in National List of Essential Medicines
(NLEM), 2011. The survey is being conducted on the basis of statistical design
provided by Indian Statistical Institute (ISI}, Hyderabad & NSSO, New Delhi”

While providing a copy of the WHO's Report on spurious drugs scenario in India

and measures taken by Government to identify and stop spurious drugs in the Indian
market, the Ministry submitted as follow:

{a) “Clarification on WHO report

Reports in the media have been projecting problem of spurious drugs in the
country in a manner which does not provide a balanced perspective and have,
therefore, caused misgivings. .

The figures quoted in the media range from 10% to 25% of drugs in the country
being spurious drugs. These are unsubstantiated reports.

For example,.on the basis of an alleged WHO report, the media frequently
reports that 35% of fake drugs produced in the world come from India. However,
the WHO has denied its authenticity. In this regard WHO has also clarified that
“there is no such study conducted by WHO regarding fake drugs menace in
the past several years.” vide letter dated 31" August 2012.

(b} The measures taken to identify & stop spurious drugs in the Indian market

are given below:
WHISTLE BLOWER SCHEME:-

Whistle Blower Scheme was announced by Government of India to encourage
vigilant public participation in the detection of movement of spurious drugs in the
country. Under this policy the informers would be suitably rewarded for providing
concrete information in respect of movement of spurious drugs to the regulatory
authorities. The salient features of the aforesaid reward scheme are as follows:-

wa



tii.

36

* The reward scheme shall be applicable for whistleblowers in the area of drugs,

cosmetics and medical devices.

* Reward is to be given to the whistleblowers i.e. the informers / officials only

when there is a confirmation of the seizure of spurious, adulterated and
misbranded drugs, cosmetics and medical devices by the designated officers of
the CDSCO

* The reward of maximum of upto 20% of the total cost of consignments seized

will bé payable to the informer /officials which should not in any case’ exceed
₹ 25 Lakh in each case.

« In respect of an officer of the Government / CDSCO, the reward should not in

any case.exceed हैं 5 Lakh for one case and a maximum of हैं 30 Lakh in his / her
entire service. :

e With a view fo ensuring that the informers are not made to wait till the final

disposal of the matter, 25% of the amount will be given at the time of filing of the
charge sheet in the Court of Law.

« Further, with a view to ensure that the informers do not turn hostile during the
trial of the case and continue to assist the court in deciding the matter in favour
of the Government, 25% of the amount will be given to them at the time of
disposal of the case in favour of the Government in the first Court of Law.

«The remaining 50% amount will be paid only when the case has been finally
disposed off and no appeal with respect to the matter is pending in any other
Court of Law in the country.

GUIDELINES FOR TAKING ACTION ON CASES OF SUB-STANDARD
DRUGS:- ह

\n the 407 meeting of Drugs Consultative Committee (DCC) consisting of the
- 060। and all State Drug Controllers held on. 29.6.2009, guidelines for taking
action on samples of drugs declared spurious or not of standard quality in the
light of enhanced penalties under the Drugs & Casmetics (Amendment) Act,
2008 were adopted for the purpose of uniform implementation of the Drugs and
Cosmetic Act in the country. The guidelines have also been placed on the web
site of CDSCO.

STRENGTHENING OF DRUGS TESTING LABORATORIES

Under a Capacity Building Project through World Bank, assistance has been
provided to upgrade testing facilities and to. establish new drug testing
laboratories so as to enhance the capacity of the laboratories to test large
‘number of samples. Under this project 23 States and 6 Central Drug
Laboratories have been strengthened through renovations, extensions and
equipments.

GOOD MANUFACTURING PRACTICES हे
Schedule M to the Drugs and. Cosrietics Rules, 1945, pertaining to Good

Manufacturing Practices was amended in 2001 and made applicable to all
manufacturers in June, 2005 to make jt at par with the international standards


vi.

81.
Secretary Ministry of Health and Family Welfare stated during evidence:

82.
supply and sale of spurious and adulterated drugs, the Ministry in their written replies

37

and it is mandatory for the manufacturers of drugs to comply with the
requirements of this Schedule for quality control of the drugs manufactured by
them.

_ INTRODUCTION OF 6000 LABORATORY PRACTICES

Schedule L-1 specifying the rules relating to Good Laboratory Practices &
Requirements of Premises & Equipment for testing laboratories have become
operative since 11 day of November, 2010.These’ rules provide for Good
fiousekeeping and safety provisions for the maintenance of the laboratory. The
manufacturers having. in-house laboratories are required to conform to the
provisions of the said Schedule.

STRENGTHENING OF DRUG REGULATORY SYSTEM IN THE COUNTRY

The Government has decided to strengthen both the Central and States’ drug
regulatory system during’ the 12'" Five Year Plan enabling them to keep more
effective watch on thesé unscrupulous elements indulging in unlawful activities.
The infrastructure facilities at the head quarter as well as other offices of CDSCO
are being enhanced. In April, 2008 CDSCO had a total of 111 regular posts. The
number of sanctioned posts in Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation
(CDSCO) has been increased from 141{as on April, 2008) to 474 (as on
February, 2015).”

As regards the mechanism put in place to monitor the menace of spurious drugs,

“......-about this spurious drug, there is a scheme called ‘trace and track’ which
we have fo notify in our rules. That scheme has been prepared. It is a software
and it will basically allow that the batch number could be given and from the
website anyone can find out whether this is the original medicine ‘or not. That
software has been developed. Now, the pharmaceutical companies have to do
.that. For that, we have to formally put it under our rules. This is currently under
the consideration of the Drug Technica! Advisory Board.”

As regards the steps initiated to impose stringent penalties on the manufacturing

submitted as follows:

- “NIEASURES TAKEN TO CHECK THE MENACE OF SPURIOUS-DRUGS AND

‘STRENGTHENING OF DRUGS CONTROL INFRASTRUCTURE

AMENDMENTS IN DRUGS AND COSMETICS ACT

The Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 was amended under Drugs & Cosmetics
(Amendment) Act 2008 and had come inforce since 40 August, 2009. The salient

- features of the amended Act are as under: -

(a) Under this Act , any drug deemed to be adulterated or spurious when used by
any person’ for or in the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation, or prevention of any



38

disease or disorder is likely to cause his death or is likely to cause such harm on
his body as would amount to grievous shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which shali not be less than ten years but which may extend to imprisonment
for life and shail also be liable to fine which shail not be less than ten lakh rupees
or three times value of the drugs confiscated, whichever is more.

(b) The fines realized will be paid to the relative of the deceased or the aggrieved
person

(c) Offence for sale and manufacture of spurious and adulterated drugs have been
made cognizable and non bailable

(9) A provision of compounding of minor offences has been introduced to dispose
of them expeditiously. हि

(e) Designating special courts for trial of offences relating to Drugs and Cosmetics
Act. So far, 16 States and UTs namely, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Dethi,
Tripura, Lakshadweep, Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Meghalaya, Bihar, Mizoram,
J&K, Daman & Diu, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Tamil Nadu, Haryana and Andhra
Pradesh have set up designated Special Courts for trial of offences related to
adulterated and spurious drugs.

DETAILS OF ENHANCEMENT OF PENALTIES THROUGH AMENDMENTS IN
DRUGS & COSMETICS ACT IN 2008

omer Penalties before | Enhanced Penalties after

‘| Amendment in 2008 | Amendment 2008 — 1
27{a) | any © drug| imprisonment for a | imprisonment for a term which shall
deemed to be} term which shall not | not be less than ten years but which
adulterated or}be less than five | may extend to a term of life and with

spurious is likely to
cause his death or
is likely to cause
such harm as would
amount to grievous
hurt

years but which may
extend to a term of

life and with fine
which shall not be
jess than fen

thousand rupees;

fine which shall not be less than ten
lakh rupees; or three times values of
the drugs confiscated, whichever is
more.

The fine realized shall be paid to the
victims/relatives.

27(b) any drug
adulterated but not

| being a drug
referred to in clause
{a}, or without a

imprisonment for a
term which shall not
be less than one year
but which may extend
to three years and
with fine which shall

imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than three years but
which may extend to five yéars and |
with fine which shall not be less
than one lakh rupees; or three
times of value of drug confiscated,

valid licence not. be less than five | whichever is more.
हि thousand rupees
27(c)-any drug imprisonment for ‘a | imprisonment for a term which shall

deemed to be

term which shall not
be less than three

not be fess than:7 years but which
may extend to imprisonment for life



Ra.

spurious under
section 17B, but not
being a drug
‘referred fo in clause

(a)

years but which may
extend to five years

cand with fine which

shall not be-less, than
five thousand rupees.

and with fine which shall not be tess
than three lakh rupees or three
times the value of the drug
confiscated, whichever is more

27(d) any drug,
other than'a drug
teferred to in clause
(a) or clause (b) of
clause .(0), in
contravention of any.
other provision of

this Chapter or any

rule made
thereunder,

imprisonment for a
term which shall not
be less than one year
but which may extend
to two years and with
fine. :

imprisonment for a term which shall
not-be less than one year but which
may exténd to two years: and with |’
fine which shall not be less than 20
thousand rupees.

On being asked during evidence on (12.01,2015).as to why the Ministry of Health

before the Committee as follows:

and Famity Welfare do. not have control on the drug manufactures, DGHS admitted

"We do not have a control on the drug manufacture. Up to first five years, when
the drug comes in the country for the first time, at that time, itis under the contro}

of the Drug Controller, Government of India.”

Once the period of five years

expires, then we do not go and evaluate it. Then anybody can manufacture that
drug and that drug license.is given by the State Government, The number of
inspectors for checking these drugs is much less. The Government is now taking
a step to strengthen the Drug Regulatory Authority of the State Government. We
are going to fund them. The EFC has been completed. We will be giving more
inspectors to:the State Governments so that the drug is regulated”.



40

PART =I

OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare provides comprehensive health
care facilities through Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS) to MPs,
- Ex. MPs, serving and retired Judges of Supreme Court and retired Judges of
High Courts, Central Government employees and pensioners and their
dependents residing in 24 cities covered under CGHS apart from Delhi NCR.
The medical facilitles are provided through 250 CGHS Wellness Centres
(earlier called as dispensaries) across the country. CGHS provides
consultation at CGHS Wellness Centres and Government Hospitals and
provides OPD medicines to its beneficiaries. In addition inpatient treatment
facilities and investigations are provided at Government hospitals and
empanelled private hospitals. Medical Stores Organisation (MSO) is
entrusted with the task of procurement of drugs and medicines required for
CGHS Hospitals and Wellness Centres outside Delhi. The MSO operates
through seven Medica! Stores Depots (MSD). Government Medical Store
Depot {GMSD) is the nedal centre for procurement, storage and distribution
of drugs to all CGHS Wellness Centres in Delhi. The MSO procures,
through open tender, drugs as per two separate formularies for branded
and Generic drugs covering 622 and 1447 items respectively at present,
which are reviewed and revised periodically. CGHS, undoubtedly was
launched with a laudable objective to provide basic medical facilities to
Central Government employees and pensioners together with their
dependents, sifting and ex-Members of Parliament etc. However, Audit
scrutiny of procurement of allopathic drugs in CGHS by MSD and 07015
Wellness Centres in Delhi, Ahmedabad, Jaipur, Chandigarh, Bhopal,
Jabalpur, Kolkata, Chennai, Thiruvananthapuram, Hyderabad, Bangalore,
Allahabad, Bhubaneswar and Mumbai during 2009-10 to 2011-12 revealed’

several lacunae/shortcomings in the procurement and distribution of



41

medicines such as opting for commonly prescribed brands of drugs instead
of identifying commonly prescribed drug composition, procurement of
drugs not listed in the formulary, non-finalisation of procurement rates of
drugs listed in the formulary, inadequate and incomplete drug formulary,
delays in procurement of drugs, procuring higher priced branded drugs
despite availability of low cost brands, branded drugs continue to be
preferred over Generic drugs etc. The Committes's examination is based
on the Audit findings as contained-in paragraph 6.3 of the Report of the
C&AG of India for the year ended March 2012, Union Government (Civil-
compliance Audit observations) No. 19 of 2013 relating to the subject
“Procurement of Allopathic drugs in 05115", The Committee's examination
has revealed glaring lapses as discussed in the succeeding Paragraphs in
the procurement and distribution of drugs resulting in huge infructuous and
avoidable expenditure which entails light hearted and skewed approach on
the part of the authorities concerned and call for deprecation. Their
observations/recommendations to bring about systematic improvements
are contained in the succeeding Paragraphs:

This is not for the first time that irregularities in CGHS like the rampant local
purchase of medicines, prescription of branded medicines instead from
‘ approved formulary of medicines, spurious/adulterated medicines/drugs ete
were brought to light by the C&AG and the Public Accounts Committee
examined the same in detail and made serious
-observations/recommendations. In fact, a performance Audit of "the
procedure of procurement of medicines: and medical equipment was done
earlier by Audit and the results included in the C&AG's Report No. 20 of
2007." The subject was thoroughly examined by the Public Accounts
Committee and reported upon in their 24° Report (15 Lok Sabha). on
"Procurement of Medicines and Medical Equipment", wherein the.
Coniitiittee had deliberated upon various shortcomings in the procedure of ©
procurement of medicines/med ical equipment and given ,
observatiohs/recommendations such as bringing in the Codified Purchase



42

Manual, exploring the feasibility of doing away with the local purchase of
drugs altogether, strengthening the Monitoring mechanism, initiating
exemplary action against the errant doctors, codifying and adopting a
defined process for annual updation of medicine selection and periodical
revision of CGHS formularies in order to make the MSO corruption free and
wipe out the menace of spuriousfadulterated drugs etc. These
recommendations though were accepted by the Government as contained
in the 84" Report of PAC (15 Lok Sabha), yet the Committee are inclined to
conclude from the audit findings and subsequent examination of the
subject that their earlier recommendations on the subject have not been
addressed in the right earnest and the shortcomings in the drugs
procurement system in CGHS as discussed threadbare in the succeeding
Paragraphs remained unresolved. Expressing serlous displeasure over the
state of, affairs and non-fulflllment of the commitments made and
assurances given, the Committee feel that the administrative Ministry owes
an explanation to them as to why the CGHS beneficiary still suffer due to
unavailability or poor quality of medicines. They exhort the Ministry to
urgently address the deficiencies pointed out and initiate the requisite and
urgent measures so as to effectively resolve the shortcomings in the drugs
procurement system in CGHS. |

A Committee was constituted by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
in September, 2008 for preparation/revision of the existing drug formulary
for branded drugs. This Committee decided to include new items in the
formulary by identifying those drugs which were commonly procured in the
CGHS, Delhi during 2008 through local purchase. Consequently, in
December, 2009 inclusion of 382 more drugs over the existing 350 drugs
'-was recommended. Therefore, a total of 622 drugs were notified in the
revised formulary in September, 2010. The Committee are concerned to
note that while identifying the drugs for inclusion in the formulary, they |
simply opted for commonly prescribed brands ‘of drugs instead of

identifying commonly prescribed chemical compositions. The Committee



43

are of the firm opinion that the selection of items by adopting the chemical
composition approach would definitely and comprehensively
provide varied and competitive options that would be cost effective as there
are many brands offering same chemical composition available in the
market at different rates.

The Committee are concerned to note that test check by Audit of 21
cases in the Branded drug formulary revealed availability of several low:
@ost brands in the-same category of drugs. It was also found that even the ~
‘discounted price of the selected brand was much higher than the MRP of
other low cost brands available in the market. The Committee are utterly
dismayed to find that the comparison of price of these 21 test checked
-brands with other brands of identical available drugs indicated that CGHS
Delhi incurred avoidable expenditure of % 9.25 crore during 2011-12 by
opting for higher priced brands. The Ministry have conceded that the lower
cost options of brands in the same category were available. The Committee
: wonder what restrained the Ministry for opting for lower cost options of
brands in the same category. The fact remains that the standards of
financial propriety as stipulated under Rule 21 of General Financial Rules
were not adhered to as the Ministry opted for higher priced brands despite
the availability of low cost brands in the market. The Committee are also
deeply distressed that if test check of only 21 brands has revealed as much
as % 9.25 crore of avoidable expenditure in just one year, the amount of loss
in respect of all varieties of medicines for the past several years if checked,
might result in a staggering amount of such expenditure. Now, it has been
‘proposed that only L-I {lowest priced) out of the tender for branded
formulary will be considered and other. brands of the same composition will
not be purchased. The proposal is stated to have been accepted. by the
Ministry and rate enquiry has already been invited and bids received have
been opened, While appreciating the steps taken by the Ministry in this-
direction, the Committee feel that still there is ‘ample scope for. further

improvement in the procurement system, The Committee, therefore, impress



44
upon the Ministry to formulate a comprehensive and more reliable policy for

procurement of drugs in CGHS so as to ensure that the entire procurement
process becomes more transparent.

The Committee are surprised to note that during the years 2009-12, 71
percent of the total expenditure was incurred on procurement of drugs not
listed in the formulary. Further, CGHS Delhi procured only 19 percent of
items from within the formulary, while 81 percent items were outside the
formulary. In cities outside Delhi covered in Audit, CGHS incurred about 50
percent of the total expenditure on procurement of drugs outside the
formulary during 2009-12. This clearly indicates that the drug formulary is
not comprehensive enough to cover drugs for wide-ranging
ailments/diseases. The Committee are given to understand that it is not
possible to restrict all prescriptions written by physicians and specialists to
the MSO approved drug formulary because no formulary can at all times be
extensive enough to cover the whole spectrum of drugs required for
treatment of various diseases. However, some measures are stated to have
been taken by the Ministry so as to avoid local purchase for instance, the
formulary has been revised to make it comprehensive, tenders have been
floated for rate contract of more than 1200 items, computerization both at
CGHS and MSO through web based software has been completed and all
deliveries of Pilot Project medicines (i.e. 272 branded medicines procured
‘through manufacturers/distrlbutors under the pilot project, 2008) are at
-CGHS Wellness Centres, thereby minimizing the delivery time, Further in
August, 2014, an analysis was made fo identify the medicines which are
commonly indented through Authorized Local Chemists (ALCs). The list of
171 such medicines was submitted to MSO for inclusion under CGHS
formulary. This has been done in the proposed revised formulary and these
medicines would now be procured centrally. While taking into
consideration large scale procurement .of medicthes through local
purchase, the Public Accounts Committee in their 24" Report (157 Lok.
Sabha) had recommended steps to be taken by the Ministry to explore the



45

feasibility of doing away with the local purchases altogether so that
exploitation of the system by certain: vested interests is prevented and
higher payment towards locally procured medicines checked. In response,
the Ministry have submitted that given the need to make medicines
available to beneficiaries without delay and taking note of existing
- prescription practices and newer medicines being introduced from time-to
time, it is not possible to entirely do away with local purchase, though
efforts are being made to further reduce local purchase. In the Interest of
eradicating the malaise of freely resorting to local purchase of medicines
resulting in disproportionate, avoidable and infructuous expenditure, the
Committee strongly reiterate their earlier recommendation and-emphasize
that Ministry of Health and Family Welfare should ensure that all the CGHS
Wellness Centres maintain their formularies and update them at regular
Intervals. Since there still is an opportunity to go for the cheaper branded
drug with the same chemical composition. The Committee also emphasize
the Imperative need for regular inspections of the Wellness Centres as well
as prompt action on the complaints/grievances received from CGHS
beneficiaries on the matter. Punitive action may also be taken where laxity
is detected in updating the formulary during inspections.

The Committee observe that the doctors continue to prescribe drugs
outside the formulary despite the adverse recommendations of the
Parllamentary Committee. As a result, the audit revealed that drugs valuing
= 1119 crore were purchased from outside the formulary during 2009-12: As
regards the action taken against those doctors who are frequently
. prescribing expensive branded medicines instead of low cost equally
effective drugs, the Committee have been informed that a prescription Audit
was conducted in one of the Wellness Centres in the last week of August,
2014 and" Show cause -notices were issued to two doctors deputed as
Medical Specialists, for ‘prescribing.medicines out of CGHS formulary.
While the case is under process, one of the doctors has resigned. Their
deputation as Medical Specialist, was also withdrawn, It is surprising that



46

out of total 250 CGHS units operating in 23 cities, prescription Audit has
been conducted in only one Wellness Centre (representing 0.4% of total
units} and.that too was undertaken only after the Audit Report came out and
oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Health and Family
. Welfare was taken by the Public Accounts Committee. The situation of
prescribing drugs outside the formulary, could have been improved had the
- suo-motu inspection/Prescription Audit heen done at regular interval by the
- Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. Sample selection and audit coverage
should also be more extensive. In this connection, the Committee desire to
be apprised of the periodicity and coverage of Prescription Audit. The
Committee have also been informed by the Secretary, Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare that as far as the Government doctors are concerned, the
CGHS, Delhi has recently been computerized and the Ministry is able to
identify as to which doctor has prescribed which medicine. The Committee
would, therefore, desire that immediate steps be taken to computerize all
the 250 CGHS Wellness Centres across the country. A Report indicating
the details of total No. of Wellness Centres in the Country, No. of Centres
computerized, yet to be computerized and by which date all the Centres
would be computerized may be furnished to the Committee within two
months of the presentation of this Report to Parliament, Further, in order to
keep check on the prescription pattern of doctors, the Committee in their
24 Report (157 Lok Sabha} had recommended that the monitoring
mechanism be strengthened and exemplary action taken against the errant -
doctors, who frequently prescribe medicines outside the formulary so that
superfluous local purchase of medicines is avoided, However, while not
accepting the ATN of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare thereon, the
Committee In thelr 84" Report (150 Lok Sabha) presented to Parliament on
30-04-2013 iad further recommended to evolve a transparent and effective
‘mechanism enabling the aggrieved patients to lodge their complaints
against the errant doctors without fear or pressure so that more instances
of malpractices are detected and large scale purchase of medicines outside
the formulary is avoided. The Committee desire to know the number of such



47

cases detected in the Wellness Centres in the last 2 years following this
recommendation. They desire that due explanation may be sought from
those CGHS doctors who make prescriptions which are regularly at
variance. It seems from the latest Audit observation on the subject that the
tecommendations of Public Accounts Committee were not properly
addressed by the Ministry as prescribing expensive medicines by the
doctors is continuing without any check. Fhe Committee would, therefore,

. reiterate that stringent measures for evolving an effective and transparent
mechanism are needed to keep an eye on the errant doctors.

The Committee find that the rates of large number of drugs were not
finalized particularly during the years 2009-10 and 2010-11. Percentage of
branded drugs of which rate had not been finalized is 30.56 % during the
year 2009-10 and 32.74% during 2010-11, However, during the year 2011-12,
it had reduced to 4.82 percent. The reasons, attributed by the Ministry for
non-finalization of rates of various-drugs, are items being de-registered by
the Drug Controller, rates of drugs not being negotiable, firms having
changed drug composition to bypass National Pharmaceuticals Pricing
Authority (NPPA), firm not being the manufacturer of the quoted item etc.
Further, with regard to non-finalization of the rates of Generic drugs, the
Committee find that out of 818 Generic drugs in the formulary, the rates for
only 218 drugs were approved. In this case, the contributory reasons are
paucity of valid bidders in tender for Generic groups, a firm/company being
deregistered subsequently, some companies stopping the manufacturing of
drug of particular brands and meager requirement for some drugs for which
companies are not interested in finalizing the rate contract. The Committee
feel that the aforesaid reasons can be resolved by taking. timely appropriate
action at the Ministry's level. The Committee are surprised to note that
while healthcare is under the domain of Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare, making avallable essential medicines at affordable prices is under’
‘the purview Of Department of Pharmaceuticals, Ministry of Chemicals and

Fertilizers. The Committee have been informed that the prices are fixed by



48

National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Authority (NPPA) in its meetings which
inter-alia has an ex-officio Member from the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare. The Department of Pharmaceuticals atso coordinates with Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare for revision/updation of the National List of
Essential Medicines (NLEM). Whenever required, technical input is also
taken from Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Committee desire
that Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and the Department of
Pharmaceuticals should make earnest and concerted efforts to coordinate
and meet at regular intervals to ensure speedy finalization of procurement
rates of drugs so as to ensure timely delivery of drugs to Wellness Centres
‘thereby reducing the avoidable expenditure on account of local purchase of
medicines. :

The Committee note that many drugs are available in both Generic as well
as Branded versions. Generic drugs are substantially cheaper than the
Branded versions. In September, 2010 the Minister of Health and Family
Welfare, while approving the revised formulary of Branded drugs, had
expressed serious concern on prescribing of Branded drugs by doctors
instead of Generic versions and directed for complete shift towards Generic
drugs, within one year both in prescriptions and supplies. In order to
promote Generic drugs, the Ministry, had revised in May 2011 Generic drag
formulary from 818 to 1128 drugs. Director (CGHS) also inter-alia issued
instructions to analyze and take necessary steps for better utilization of
Generic drugs. However, there has not been tangible progress in the
procurement and distribution of Generic drugs. The Committee note that
during 2009-2012, the percentage of Generic drugs procured in Delhi was
only 2 fo 5 percent and in Bhubaneswar it was around 5 to 7 percent during
the same period. Further, in major cities’ like Ahmadabad, Kolkata, Chennai
and in Mumbai, the graph of percentage of Generic drugs procured has
; drastically come down from nearly 50 percent during 2009-10 to below 10
percent in 2011-12. According to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,

one of the main reasons for less procurement of Generic drugs by CGHS



49

was that rates were approved by MSO for only 25 percent of the Generic
drug formulary and also many of the drugs listed in the Generic formulary
were only for the hospital use and not required in the Wellness Centres,
Test check also revealed that 59 drugs selected for Branded drug formulary
were already listed in the Generic formulary. Further, a comparison of rates
of 30 Branded ‘drugs with the rates of Generle drugs in Janaushadhi
scheme revealed that an amount of % 11:81 crore could have been saved by
CGHS Delhi during 2017-12, had Generic drugs been procured instead of
Branded drugs. The Committee deprecate this apathy on the part of the
concerned authorities towards ensuring financial discipline. With regard to
corrective measures taken by the Ministry to augment the procurement of
Generic drugs, a Committee under the chairmanship of DGHS has since
been constituted to revise the Generic formulary of 1447 drugs. The
Committee in its meeting held on 19.01.2015 has inter-alia decided as
follows:

a) All the drugs, which are presently being procured through local
purchase are to be included in the Generic list.

b) MSO should take up tendering process for finalization of rate contract
of drugs. Priority in tendering is to be given to drugs: which are
presently being procured through local indent.

The Committee, however, deplore the fact that till 2015 no Committee
was constituted for revision of Generic formulary of 1447 drugs. It seems
that the Ministry has taken action only after the matter came under
examination by-the PAC. The Committee deplore the laxity on the part of
the Ministry and desire the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to
continue with appropriate corrective action taken in coordination with.
CGHS Wellness Centres to effectively implement the long-term measures
for complete shift towards the procurement and distribution of Generic
drugs. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the findings of the है
Committee set up under DG (Health Services} and action taken thereon by
the Ministry. Further, the current status regarding finalization of the rates of



50

proposed 1165 drugs for inclusion in Generic formulary along with the copy
of instructions, if any, issued to doctors regarding necessity of completely
shifting towards Generic medicines in their prescriptions may also be

intimated to the Committee at the earliest.

In the Committee's vlew, one reason for slow progress in the procurement
of Generic drugs could be the alleged nexus between doctors and
Pharmaceutical. Companies which refrain the doctors from prescribing
@eneric drugs by luring them with foreign trips and costly gifts. The
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare have apprised the Committee that two
such cases have already come to the notice of CGHS. A complaint was
received against the then Addl. Director, CGHS (Patna}for which the matter
Is under investigation by the CBI. The concerned Addl. Director has since
been relieved of his charge. Another complaint has been received against
the Addl. Director CGHS, Thiruvananthapuram and the matter is under
examination. However, the reply is silent about the dates when such
complaints were received, remedial actlon taken by the Ministry thereon
and present status of both the cases. The Committee feel that much
stricter punishment is required for doctors indulging in such unethlcat
practices since Pharma companies continue to sponsor foreign trips of
doctors and give them expensive gifts which ultimately gets added to the
cost of drugs. The aforesaid two cases should also be vigorously pursued
for conclusive and deterrent action. Further, the Committee are informed
that from January, 2015, the Department of Pharmaceuticals has sent new
' guidelines to all the Pharmaceutical Companies advising them to follow the
Uniform Code of Conduct to break the nexus between them and doctors.
Initially, it is for voluntary compliance for a period of six months. Affer six
months, the matter would be reviewed to see that this statutorily met for
follow up. As the said period is over and the matter should be reviewed
now, the Committee would await the outcome of these measures and
emphasize the need for developing an effective monitoring mechanism for

regular oversight of the appropriate compliance of these guidelines by the



$1

Pharma Companies, failing which the drug’ manufacturing/distribution
licences need to be cancelled for atleast five years. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the outcome of the steps taken in this regard.

Medical Stores Deports (MSD), Delhi is the nodal office which procures
drugs for ail CGHS Wellness Centres in Delhi. The Committee note that
MSD, instead of procuring the required drugs directly, had been procuring
ttie same’ through Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation {HSCC). In
- terms of Rule 165 of General Financial Rules and Para 1.2.1 of Manual of
Policies and Procedure of Employment of Consultants issued by Ministry of
Finance, the consultants may be employed in the condition of absence of
required expertise in house and when it is felt absolutely essential.
Strangely enough, MSD, Delhi incurred an infructuous and avoidabie
expenditure of हैं 13.52 crore as consultancy. charges paid to the HSCC
during 2002-03 to 2010-11. The Committee believe that this huge avoidable
expenditure is absolutely in contravention of the General Financial Rules
particularly when no expertise is required for such procurement. Moreover,
this indlrect procurement is all the more condemnable and incriminating,
when the rates and concerned supplies of the drugs listed in the approved
drug formulary are finalized by the Ministry. HSCC did not add value to the
procurement process and simply acted as a conduit between the Ministry
and supplier, resulting in windfall earning of = 13.52 crore with no efforts
and -expertise on their part. The Ministry explained to the Committee that
HSCC was engaged for Delhi only in 2003 under specific circumstances
when MSO's functioning was being questioned. Besides thls arrangement
lasted till 2014 only after which MSO was. re-assigned its responsiblity of
procuring medicines throughout the country. The Committee find this a
typical instance of a double whammy where due to malfunctioning of MSO,
another institution was brought in, which. simply addéd no value to the
procurement process, thus resulting in wastefut expenditure. The
Committee hope that the Ministry have fearnt valuable lessons from this

episode.



10.

11.

52

The Committee note that in January, 2007 CGHS proposed to implement a
pilot-project to streamline the procurement of drugs in CGHS. This project
was supposed to eliminate delays in supply of drugs present in the
prevailing central procurement system through HSCC in Dethi and through
GMSDs in cities outside Delhi. However, the Committee note that contrary
to the proposal, which envisaged procurement of both formulary and non-
formulary drugs, the approved list under pilot project contained only non-
formulary drugs. The Committee further find that MSD submitted
{September 2010) that all the 622 drugs in the new drug formulary as
approved by the Ministry may be included in the Pilot Project, which was
meant to cut down delays in procurement through HSCC as well as to effect
savings. of commission of 2.5 percent being paid to HSCC. This proposal
was, however; not approved by the Ministry. The Committee are concerned
to note that in CGHS Chennai, Kolkata, Jaipur and Hyderabad even the
drugs included in the Pilot Project were procured through local purchase at
higher rates leading to'an extra expenditure of 85.22 lakh. The Committee
would like to know the specific reasons for not approving the MSD's
proposal, which envisaged to cut down delays in procurement of 622 drugs
and resultant avoldance of extra expenditure and also to effect saving in
commission paid to HSCC.

The Committee are constrained to observe that no definite time frame has
been fixed for regular revision of formulary lists though there is constant .
evolution of new drug formulations required to treat diseases. This is
particularly significant in view of several new diseases being identified now.
The Committee find that the Generic formulary was revised in 2008, then in
2011. and last revision of Generic formulary was done in June, 2013.
Further, as.regard the branded formulary the Committee find that it was last
revised in 2010. Again,‘no mechanism exists in the Ministry for inspection
of CGHS Weliness Centres so as to ensure that these Centres maintain their
formularies and update them at regular intervals for identifying/purchasing
essential drugs. However, Director General of Heaith Services during this



12.

53

deposition before the Committee had admitted the need to do so every
three months. That this was not done is deplorable. The Committee would

- like to know as to why regular inspections cannot be undertaken, They also

recommend that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare should also
consider the setting up of a strong on-line surveillance system as well as a
team of inspectors with emphasis on surprise inspections of the Wellness
Centres.

The Committee notice that for procurement of life saving drugs in CGHS
Delhi, Thiruvananthapuram, Allahabad and Kolkata, CGHS incurred
avoidable extra expenditure of हैं 6.26 crore on procuring high priced drug
brands despite availability of tow cost brands within the list (शा. CGHS
did not accord reasons for including several brands of the drug of the same
composition in the list of life saving drugs which led to procurement of
drugs in an arbitrary manner. In CGHS Hyderabad, the life saving drugs
were purchased at rates higher than the authorized list resulting in
avoidable extra expenditure of € 20.22 lakh. Further, in June, 2009, the MSD
Delhi initiated an.open tendering process for procurement of Generic drugs.
However, the tender documents could not be finalized due to issues relating
to modification of clauses in the tender documents. Thus, the MSD failed to
implement the proposal of procuring life saving drugs through open tender
as of July, 2012. The Committee are informed that the reason attributed for
delay in finalization of tender documents process of Generic life saving
drugs, 19 poor response from the Pharmaceutical industry. However, as on
20.04.2015 tenders have been floated for more than 1200 drugs. This is
something totally unacceptable to the Committee as the Ministry tiave not
specified the conditions which actually dissuaded the pharmaceutical
Industry to come forward as well as measures initiated by them, if any, to
encourage the industry to participate on the tender. The Committee are
concerned to note that if the test check of only four stations had brought
out such huge avoidable expenditure, the quantum of loss could be huge if
va check of all stations is conducted. The Committee also found



13.

54

unconscionable delay in streamlining the procedure for purchase of life
saving drugs. Currently, the life saving drugs are-being procured on L1
(lowest) rate aftér inviting sealed enquiries. Further, to have rate contract of
life saving drugs, tender for which was stated to be yet-not-Issued, a list of
268 drugs has been finalized after invitation of Expression of Interest (EOI).
The list has been approved by a Clinical Expert Committee and forwarded to
the competent authority for approval for initiating E-tender through MSO.
The Committee desire to be apprised of the status thereof. They take a
serious view of arbitrary manner of procurement of life saving drugs which
resulted in avoidable extra expenditure of f 6.26 crore and recommend that
the matter should be examined for fixing responsibility for financiat
impropriety. The Committee desire to be apprised of the action taken In this
regard within two months of presentation of this report,

The drugs procured by MSD are subject to mandatory test in laboratories
before supply to CGHS. The Committee are sad to learn that in CGHS
Kolkata,.drugs were issued to the patients before receipt of test reports,
which were later reported as sub-standard by GMSD. In GGHS Mumbai
medicines worth ₹ 28.45 lakh received from GTMSD during 2009-12 were
declared sub-standard. Out of these, medicines worth ¥ 15.66 lakh stood
already issued to patients. Further, in CGHS Hyderabad drugs worth =
21,39 lakh procured from GMSD did not have prescribed shelf life and the
shortfalls in shelf life were in the-range of one to three months. In

‘Chandigarh drugs valuing हैं 13.53 lakh expired between April 2009 and

November 2011 implying that the requirement of drugs was not assessed
properly. Undoubtedly, such instances highlight the absence of a fool-proof
mechanism for quality assurance which exposes the patients to the life
threatening hazards of sub-standard medicines. However, the Committee
have been informed that the medicines procured through MSO have inbuilt

quality assurance mechanism.. In-house laboratory test Reports are

: provided by the manufacturers, Has if been so, the cases cited in the audit

expose a serious Japse/carelessness on the part of medicine handling



14,

15.

55

personnel in CGHS. The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to probe
as to how inspite of having inbuilt quality mechanism, sub-standard drugs
were Issued to patients by CGHS Kolkata and Mumbai. The Committee also
desire to be apprised of the punitive action taken against the officers/staff
responsible for issuing sub-standard drugs to patients. The Committee are
also given to understand that no lab testing is done on drugs purchased
through local chemists since driigs are procured through local chemists on
day-to-day basis and issued to beneficiaries on the next working day. In
such cases, Drug Controller of India keeps lifting random samples for drug
testing. However, periodicity of lifting random samples has not been
mentioned by the Ministry. Although several. measures are stated to have
been initiated by the Ministry to ensure proper quality assurance of drugs
procured both centrally and locally, the Committee impress upon the

‘Ministry to carry out periodical inspections of manufacturers as well as the

local chemists and exemplary action taken against them so that any
possibility of supply of sub-standard medicines to the patients is
eliminated.

Further, the Committee are extremely concerned that medicines, whose
shelf life has expired, are found to be still available in the stores of several
Wellness Centers and: are being provided to the patients too. As
administering expired drugs to the patients exposes them to severe health
hazards and even, death, the Committee urge upon the Ministry to get the
stores of WCs inspectedichecked regularly and fix responsibillty to take
stringent action against the errant/delinquent officials/WC staff. Periodical
inspections of the stores of Wellness Centres are vital with a view to
prevent the stockpiling of medicines and replacing the expired stock with

the fresh one.

The -Committee believe that the existence of any. amount of
aduiterated/spuriotis drugs is fraught with hazards to the health of patients:
and alt efforts are required to be made to curb the tendency to produce and ~
market such drugs. The Committee note that the percentage of drugs



56

samples declared spurious/adulterated during tne years 2009-10 to 2014-15
{upto September, 2014) has been 0.29, 0.19, 0.27, 0.11, 0.16 and 0.06
respectively. While the trend seems to be coming down, the very existence
of adulterated/spurious drugs, to whatsoever extent, is a crime against
humanity. The Ministry are stated to have taken various steps like
announcing Whistle Blower Scheme, issuing guidelines for taking action on
cases of sub-standard drugs, strengthening of drugs testing iaboratories,
good manufacturing practices, introduction of good laboratory practices,
strengthening of drug regulatory system, amendments in Drugs and
Cosmetics Act etc. Further, in pursuance of the recommendation contained
in their earlier Report, the Comiiittee is happy to note various initiatives
taken like creation of additional Posts for Central Drugs Standard Control
Organisation (00500), launching of the National Pharmaco Vigilance
Programme, issuance of-detailed Guidelines and statutory Directions etc.
were also undertaken by the Ministry to counter the menace of spurious
‘drugs. Since spurious/adulterate drugs have serious ramifications on the
life and health of the beneficiaries, the Committee emphasize the need for
periodical reviews fo strengthen the existing remedial measures and
continuous vigifance to curb and eradicate the existence of even negligible
extent of adulterated/spurious drugs. The Committee also emphasize that
the manufacture, supply and sale of spurious/adulterated drugs are dealt
_with most stringent penaltles In order to eradicate this malaise.

16. To, sum up, the Committee find that there have been several deficiencies in
‘the management of Pharmaceutical procurement procedure for
procurement of allopathic drugs for CGHS. The Committee find that 71
percent of the drugs procured consisted of drugs olitside the formulary
despite the fact that prices of drugs in the formulary are comparatively
lower. CGHS resorted to procurement of higher priced branded drugs
despite availability of low cost brands. Branded drugs continue to -be

preferred over Generic drugs despite adverse ‘comments from the

Parliamentary Committees. This has caused significant additional financial



5?

burden on the exchequer. High incidence of local purchase of drugs and
irregularities has been reported in such procurements. Prescription pattern of the
Doctors is leading to high incidence of local purchase of drugs. Despite there
being a code of ethics in the Indian Medical Council Rules Introduced in December
2009 forbidding doctors from accepting any gift, hospitality, trips to foreign and
domestic destinations etc. from healthcare industry, there is no let-up in thls evil
practice. The delays in procurement and non-avallability of formulary drugs at
_ CGHS Wellness Centres led to procurement of these drugs by CGHS Centres from ~
“local chemists at higher rate. Life saving drugs were purchased at rates higher
than the authorized list, Drugs were issued to the patients before receipt of test
reports, which were later reported as sub-standard by GMSD. Such instances
highlight the absence of a robust mechanism for procurement of Allopathic drugs
in the CGHS which exposes the patients to health hazards and causes significant
financiat burden on the exchequer. The Committee are further constrained to
observe that the money value involved in the cases highlighted by the Audit
Constitute only a small percentage of actual procurement. However, the monetary
impact of such irregular practlce would be much higher if the entire procurement
system is audited. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare to plug the loopholes and take timely corrective action as
-suggested ‘by them In the preceding Paragraphs and recommend that the Ministry
should strengthen thelr internal control system to check Irreguiarlties in
procurement process and ensure procurement of good quality medicines at
affordable prices In accordance with the canons of financial propriety. The
Committee also recommend that the particulars of the CGHS Wellness Centres
performing well and those laggin behind may be furnished to the Committee and
also placed in the Public domain periodically. The Ministry should alse conduct a
study of the best health care systems and models in different countries both
developed and developing countries and try fo emulate them in order to ensure
supply and availability of quality medicines at affordable prices in the Country. ~

NEW DELHI; है PROF. (६.४. THOMAS
42" August,2015 Chairperson,

21 Shravana, 1937 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee



Woo sIpmrapmspsmr adv, boahag,

ea soduins

oom Riva ies 5116 LOT agayreun we alqrTeae saopdo ) 3907 ALOT pure- re hrepntecz03 ‘ut सह pepterq Fo sayex yo upsrredayo

EA ० ade, aged, पा 6) 30204
छह) ०० प्‌ ए 0)
‘hexouy

=~ 8g -

7 7 ™
PI wa re Gm 971) 6
५. | शुष्णप्राए7०श्प्रपप्पव्‌ €(#प 0212 |. ब 1. PORES oa “Bor एदा-
- | s-opesh ५-० O86999T . | ebit Sit एप्छ्प्शुथ्‌ sR | CCS weuegd suaay | + eifory | 19 1021 20% 22024
7 ~ पर 7 श्र्ष्द्र्दा
“hs epizeny
: 1 BIwa . : 7 joropporpsH | op
. ' ‘ye SpeopmeowunEeR (टा+क) : - (sz 1490p) ५ ते _ 30 ob है
-  6108६82 5.0 | 79८८४ट८ | azz STE pope | प्रएणणाप्प०/७ | 15५ छिप ध्पण्य णणाओ | wtehary | cp 98529 ०५५१ भी शीट
नं के — 7 PI - “y ;
~ no PY Song (डा 01) syeopnevemmegd | (But gt) पु उ्णता | ६.
'ट६०86601:: | 0688६ aa 6५ WRI. Fewerong | 8/ 8 womoy | पंडाणाकर | oT “Tetexon |
—— जन - 7
. . 7 sponnaseaEg . CIYVAEVHA | = _ Gur z} ; उ्पट | t
0671५... | 0६8६052 | ६ e's waaoy) aed} mz) श्यांध्यए | ६६ SELNGAY | Ateory | Ter “SpHIcamniD
शा न दुतर FrItpup |. args) न है
la एप्प (जप sRoqnageaney we ' ‘Ber pg न.
'08 ६8 ist gizoost | re. | oy wepoyooweag | 09) coz | ८ 'मण्नणाप्पण्त्‌ >भाप््थ9्पु
3 पु ~ हर sup : पर .
" ttes spam amaanyp Lf. : ui wo
» exnprpaeié | op pammsazd a sempaenarer sapeagra |. samaermoepy | TTPO | MATAR Los ragdemony
sy seaspldey | samompany १०५०4 >उक गण व] aac Jo ग्णण्र Painvon Fponag . ,
कप put aso aomer | PS ! yo
7 PMOL IO



“TatevL
7 7 .। yao].
99879555: gesbeos! | ez 66 T 69 DOABLE
pe pe bo, "शाप SomTOTENOGE'T ax | . है
५89 61550६ 826:४५, (950. 1८० yout | 971 St NALY
1 a :
poogpaet | rbsset | 1६६ 1408 sez CNaLY
ve tesees ‘| #८४६८६ | 980. | 807 a os Ney
tet दा हल यु
. . , $a
८६67068& 0६9/%06 | 67 eS :/|एफस्एव १शु०पु०४ एक | 6८ Lovauve
. . org
91670? “05६66 [६9६ ५69 86.6 ovauyo
. cf a A . of sRopmaswanreg हि - KO].
sergis .’ [0010899  _ set | Sti 9% NOTHY
: y ye *
: मु |. . 09 00 Wh yo
99199 0८8६ beet. pet Esa won TE | -2etEFLORD
O96Tsts -00064tb * rae kas eet. | HIDWSOxXVTO | SNIZIED
है : a a LOTR
891/79६- olpsezt | az gS tg T¥LNOW



09

op" SSTOTSt6
: * | वध gg
PINE हे - | syexpéqmbsag
a . sjeapnesemegg | (Box LAOVARYHE fang |. . प्यणाए०8 | -
91'206:5801 |Beeteor [८9८ ied spose | Gp) ध्यण्ण्यंश्य | ze"p NAS | SOLN¥d| 0701 | atozerdoyey | -
. Co rT epuy Gor) | ‘aunt | sg ; aug] हट
#८८0129 |O2eTeIe | ATI ध्ध्ा Temearg ब्णुण्पण्फय | ६।_ 1४णणप्त | ६८ 8५०४ 0820४ | NotaAY #91.| -शणग?णण्त
| ‘QLISTVOI a |: ae
: LAGOVNYHd |" ह “61
. Sige . ; {3m 06५) | NVIGNI | us HOVE |: . “3 00५
8५६८0/62_ (1.1#76016५5 | 8४0 590 pane | पंप yomy | zz OONVYs | 2०518 pst | प्य्पकशक| ०.
> हु पर षु ल़ हे : 7 Sur op-
Priva) we व ‘GLI Sa oyepAqmbseg et
: oa : sTeoqnacemmeyy + Ge TaOLVuodyT हे हु प्णाप्208 ‘
‘|gospasect | ébteepr | 6८६ 5८1. popmeyl | ob) pureed | psy ॥५/2०:३ ६ | ora bz en 2"
हु . aur 0[-
auopriedmog |...
: Soro: | fy
पी भव पर “AIT sa ayerpAgmbsag enn
an ied a | | sheapmeorciley gy ‘Cot+o7) IMOLYYORYT. | : | “amps हे
9धाध091 | Grosser || vez £ pune | १९४1, ०४०एथए०४ | peg WHaTy | d-Nvad vel} rozedoyaeg -
7 : j BI a ° Sa
रा ह sjeshnsseuey (aux cx| eye au} ot"
88%2//6:: 4 200... | ero erped | su) mpdsas [160 ‘TELITT ASO | FEdSOIT} - ६61 Sd-undsy
: न जन


poload yond soy ०४००० 86"/.6 2 sepHTIUT Q
: ort c Buen Axeqamsz03 aur PEPROTT, :

G0'00L | _SEZPOT ६69८6 | 8८५8६ SE8TE

erie | 1:४8 60:00: टर66258_| tests

9५८६६ | 18 6#६ 9८88 ५# 801 09551

we 829% wot £6'8 ‘Leo

vost | 66881 +0 ६8011 श्र.

008 | v9 tae [[#01 IZZOT 28५५
ह eset | $996 +89दा 9६4५
me - £00 Sex sro 670
610 | 00८ ६90 ved

@essz1

eyo, It-O10z

toe हे हु red 59:93 ul [ s8nxp yo yaama mooxd 10 ० oamproubdrg
(Fk ow ydex8eaed चा 0} parreyay)

ie way

—fa-


हि Mos erpmapad pon aad sarpeg,
*%

bas
- T
| परत wa विज ae हि (Ba gz1) 5
हि : steopneoentey @m 0 दा) . Paar] om -Sarg7r | t
2 OOpesHei..-|.0868991 | ext | sue porpreyy | eageaster | zo vou sua स्यथशाए | 18 lie है
| = ° : ः Far द्रन्टा
“4 . . - reprzerq | -
कि 1 हु 7. PIM, ह न qoroppompagy fb
: qe speoymaovnmegs (S-T1+0b} : हु (६ द[+फ) + 3K OF .
८ | MeToRERT}} 0965पट | 96" ध्ट६ एप्णाण्णुए | प्रएणणप्प्शा, | to's सर धपष्य ्प्णथ |" प्रतथाुकाकश | zp stepesropeL |
हि “he 1° . Pr - : ‘.
~ |e न py] ध्याष्णण्छ (3m 01) | speopnssemmeqg | (a1 pt) न कप 0 |e
Tevessot | 160186 Ea 6६ पुण+फथुष Bpserong | 8६1 = Maroy} पष्यण्णफय | OT जफ़प्ण्प्ण्णाप्‌
ड | हु TR है ही
प : ४५ | शुएरण्प्रा०ःशप्पष्प्व्‌ “aL very ex z) . fae] ८
08&7115९ |. | OEREOST € ES PeueL) wpd| Smzwapry] cg SILNSAY yoeury | Tel spundaning,
"जज कृत एज |... (argy रथ है
. oa : sorpamieyy . (ut s[wotmasemueyy Wk ५ ‘Sor og a
as cetes@e.. | aczopst 1040 Cia पंशएण eter | 09) GOZO | £ डए5०8 | प्एम्ण्प्शत | हद pels
प्र तय जज = हर em
न a Tew . . . ee igte
T-TL08 पु पृण्णण्स्ग9 पु se fe ५ थे
हि रु Breet Lg Armory | गव॑श[ष्र७
weet |. “yoo | caremmeas | UE | awoenoent «| ypsimoat | ipemse का
उ० Aymeng मु pons २प्वर aio | eee penser Pye

ve te ttor reas om. soy ew up aqua suogdo 1४०३ soy pire Are(marsoy ut sSuxp popwerg fo ayer JO uostxeduro3

@EL on qdesSerzed पए 0} parayoy) : . oe



> ny

bs

t : शव शव | | +। पाना, ‘ot
. हे आष्ण्प्रपश्ण्ष्प्पष्पट | - (dom) # ... “CRLLDATT, TYdO |. soy
978४9 551 te S| set puneyt | 00s} pupal | éTy IOEvEAIDOMA | OABLET $8
re _ हि | 1. प्रा somoyexoqeT जीप |... | घ््एाए्प्रपप्राध रा . हे १40
...8१६६०६ 8८858. [960 ८० * “tidy | sz) owner | oct | wrdwo | stacy | 1४८
‘ . ‘PFT isa |. i ; “GIT है “et
. L sot शछप्रप?एष्प्पप्श्पठ्‌ (६८+९५) 1:2:9 (७)०१/१%५ (५०:% ~
+9:9808/1 | reset | tet etl एण्ज़्प्छ्य्‌ दफुणणकर | ६४८2 ee aNSLY a
err) art a
speounsoeueng | 2° (ive छ्चए0प्रपप्रश््ठछ
४97६5६६४ | #८8६/6 | 980 801 एण्ज़्ण्य्य | 09 एप्फायर | bet wuavo } os NaIv 1144
हि yee} Gm ‘CLT VEY | st 1
LOOSEE oesebot -| 6": हर Temeng श्णुण्प्फर | 5) प्पशप | be हा ख0४ | 0एतचए sor 4
ह हि PII] - ‘ * ह 4
. SAO A, TOTEISID - Ga ‘aqliyerryad| ola ‘OT,
91670 +'02६166 ६9६ ५६9. -जपष्णणुश | 00) ब्म्ण्ण्य्य | 866 -_ stungay | ovary. ae
PI Bd. . है . 6
- os sqeonnaseemed (stats) |. . CaUAIT) . HS
5६1816_ 001089 | sey Set एप्णाण्गुथ | * छकप्णुणुप्प्ण् 19८ SaVI  एडणथ | NOTA &
_ a _ PY का Pot — हु
oo . है | शष्ण्प्रा2०शप्पष्प्व्‌ Gul. . Gali} 0900 8
#OTTIOD 0/:७8६ wt ez. -_ sey | 09) _ शरण | Zr'p sav1I Owout| wonyid 54
. : पु ना . . न Gar}. * art arr oe t बह
09&1815 ooosety | pet | zt ्ण्ग्प्राध्यप xo | or Head | ert | HINO WIO | ANIZLE 9६६
् an id : _— eEPIONT 9
हे रा me (Preys EH | (ot+s) |. = “CELIAIT} °. OTE - Ba BS ६-०
1४298... «| 07८6६ Be 6५ ory) ०0 [प्र amzey | ६९ -yIao | T¥LNOW £8 |, WaypaoAaT :



os'ssrorsize | 7
. sonal syepéqeibsag {| “IZ
a हि भृष्ण्प्रप०१९पपश्पूद Gu हु a ..  प्याफ्रण्छ
972062८801 | Breseor | soz 114 52०गणएशए | op) amednyy SOINVd | फा0 | sfozerdoyneg
a PYT eIpoy Gor} ; ‘qamnrt | os surg] oz |
#८5812087 [Oeetete | art EgT [eure sepomIn | 0 (ésopury | oz 889४1 OUODA | NOTA +91| -emdmpormy है
7 FJ T ° =
‘GLI ST VOI
: हि 190॥:/0 ५ )॥:३122॥ “61
ee . (80० 008) | NVIGNI | 8 dove '9प्य 00५
8 5६८0/64 + #60125५ | esa 590 एयपएप जप | xa emt | हट प्‌ Oonwyd | ग०७219 PS | -cremopayay «|
as : | Ba op-
my Prd . |. /GLT sg अध्यु८पाए०8०७ | ogy
. 4 s[bornesecumeyg +. Gu THOLYHORYT हा है mintpog
"| Soopescey | deteepy (66 ट 5८1 poet | op) एप्जमण्च्तु | +६? अत | ov ve bet | भ०ट््यवणण्श्त्‌ ||
. | हि Sur QT-.
4 amopradinog
. “ 1. .. Bao | ना
. PrI Ma a ‘CLI SE arexpaqnbsag we
. ४. शुण्णप्र्ण्ज्ष्ध्पण्प्त॒ (0+पैट TaOLvuogvt : “IEMIPOY
[SEtstostt 10867 “| pee ६ एणअण्णुब | वध्य, wopeyes | pes अपार | एनएएव |! yet] शण्थ्शव0फ्रण्य a
: : PI a y
हे . i ‘ sjeopnsoemreng (पा SEN. - | Boar} “oT
"3878/056 . Presser. | oo | sto FMPED | ५८2 uEdgan | 60 ‘EIT ASN | [8198028 €%. Sé-undsy |

Og


_ Felozd jord एणकु २२००० ६6८6 2 #एएग्णु &)
दानतएट उपाए Arejeanos om ul peprp im,

9EEHOL ६6928 STLBE 51828
Ish 6000८ 566८६ " 1८91६
9५६६ । 186४६ 9८ ५8 57801 09५५1] "tomtom 3 aoa ००7 (it
CST 879% aor Pe EOL + ८:
#0पा | 66687 +0 8011 9110
TLE | 79185 11001 ITZOL TEGL

quasaag

+ (2949-4० Tet te.

110],

दायाएट

itera SHOD UL ssnip yo pusutainsz01d uo sanyipuedxy
(Flr ou ydeaSeaed uf ०) pexrayeyy)

“Exeuny 7



13] Ge Batt Seay padepeng -

: Arefnwaioy nip जुबगा०[3 pre pepuesg णु Towra are yor ‘sinap yo ‘asrT
(SG “गा ydesdesed uy 0) paarayey)

५90टा9 ‘aut STYOMNAOVEV Hd एप्प STL60d
: QwaTeIAL Eadepeugy 2+ beOZLD "ALT STVOMDAOVITSVHA VOWS ~ 1 bE 60a st
धगुपृथ्य Sex ९४% ayeaipyy rordeppagy 1463) ‘ans STYDLLOOVNAY Ha 28038, . 91605
: Serr L, : हु ः a जा पायी
COBH apr] - ४058 120176/21. 0९0 218 #4 WEHOING! Wel (90604: i
हि ve i Jo | art STYOLLAR OVA VHA INS TYOL 180604
धर्मूपूह 20 051ण०्प्यर . ८60८9 ' एप SayORL एप्प एया0ए०? 11060:
sary Sox 01 ब्पवाएणएक * - 9६069 ‘ORLA SavT Qu £5060d
- ; aires,
a ; . ‘ STVOLLASOVInIHA’ SCOR IVI: Pn e960
8ंगपुएू[ Fun, ५ emrdtpopery S€0Z1O OSLDATT तब धर “SSO 790604
, बभुवष्क gar (०४ emdpopay __?६&0619. GLY धहाधे0ए४08९७"7 ।ाग]1:7 li we-avisiganey ” “_ ostéod'

SPIEL am oespeaiow hes Waren 610710 GUTS THOLLAZOVAREVHA 7/ स्व 01. है ८01604

oy अगवा; BEE} apron : ; asi ve,
Joyoursdozg sproydsiepAt ropouesdorg._ 01058, 58187: soak, 8०778 राधा Ma 08060:

अशुपृष्ठ, Sor os Hleumer pproadeyoyq LO0TID: * पाए दा VEY Hd VOSNEZ VELSY ६80604

- HEGEL Sarg¢ Hanes toroxdoian : 900219 + | GL VIGNI VAnTyHd vounaz vay. caodor

1G. Sump T ame 600E0D Lanne ANU CIELIAS OXVID - odteod
Lis seigeg Spar ompemazoxay  sd0c00" “CLE VAVHd SLLNAAY * vs  860604' | y
arbor sarpeusyoxag £00609 ‘CUI Beanie SLINEAV Leacod
: seal Sa



32198] -Baugy eporerdoyrey aur SAMOLVHOSVT Wey

४  ए0टवा20 °

धा098 Ora .
द४0ठ9 ‘aT STVOLLNSOVAYHE एफ्07 ४४४घुएप
झा ह ; “CHL SAV T 0800४ ५ -BOVAOHL
: a t ALT SOMOLYHOSVI NIN SUF LSE
wergeL dung pda “120718 “C1 VEY Hd SLLNEAY | smovaNvo
रण j 1. ‘CELINTT SEV 08णएरए ‘sta VAOH,
WEL Bag'7 dey 080द18 _ छाप SHTAOLYHORYT NIENT SCMVISITVS.
: : cay! “RIDATT AS TRYSTAOTO
भव विपम५/ ext ००702) 8/0ट19 “CLT STYORLOSOVIDIYH INEUOL » Lv igaa

; REISE “pootip! “CLT SITAOLY OAV I WEHINA. SO NTESOT |
$9010 - . j OSLO ASN, suchvraasood
: “GY 6/९: 85): 2 18 24 WEHOINN 0S: ESOL
“an STVOLLAHOVIVEY Had 8101 20 8. १ मे 05 -EVWZOL

हर ‘CSIDIT ... न

5 डिंए४०एण STYDILNSOVWEVHE NOS | "छाप os BOVE
GLI इधा॥00ए40 धर उप पाए 05 "8०१४५ ०2

/CRLIATT
0८१9. SoRISHGN 2 8 TYOLLASO VOEYHa Nos

: Ons7 aDVaRt

“an STHMOLV MOR Y TNHOIND

Sc-MVSOT

“८६604

‘et

“CLT SHOLYAOSVI AXY! cua “

: 5¢-AONVASQ.”

160604

is

wa *& a



mer or मण्णफुयांणेव्‌

1६0४८8

_ CELDT ¥Ido

“sata St 510 mmeyoseadry

_ Store

_ OVI sTyorinsovnayHa INERNIOL

Le sdoncatilig

“OUT STyOLLNAD yA yHa INT TIOL

S00sed. ‘Ls

; CVI smo Loa पाप
अप, ater, 0 jeampazesdpy ८0४८0 ह2/:88॥ &॥ 8 Sav 1 ०1- (७)। ५ ६
._- ELOPZO ‘oma + तबछप्रश्र0

_—CELINT Sava OTN

ri

2188 "वाया जाताण wav
: - “CLT
| Lada © “sTvoRLaSvyeWE आप
511#0810- - 28008 पा छाप 4
1420:1(9॥ aLt VIVE SLLNGAY bEOrod -
WEL Burt apmdomizg « : #0श9. "ORAL VPREVEd छा es ६0 कपल
; ; ‘CBLIALT
2 STVOLLASO VW, _ wooed ‘LY
; Ge : : aii sNrDIENsoxy15" w
87214E} 89:00 tiurpog urxokgy, 0६090 _ ‘QUI शत 010 घ8ए
| ' 8प07.080शबंधरपव N¥IGNI 02्एप
0८20018 “CL VIVE गा प0ए
८0898 . “GY एधरपव SLINGAY:

“Ce aT

SANULSAGNE STVOMNED VAY HE NO

“and बंध छाए शांत,

"न का 7 —_


Pe eBqLTs ६60 9८०0 ' 6tt sey Bugg mepozerdty | sv OnLTXNY की
_५6:191076 ४ cel . ६0 -_ 491 ध्यष्त, Sug: प्यशु०टथ्म्पीए ५0- X¥aaTY [EL
5082201 58... an 1990 | 261 sqel 307५ [ए7श्एप्छ््‌ '_ S SWAN [टी
#ट180685 176#992 OFT . 50 961. ' 3प७1, Bur os [(णण्प्थप | 05 (श्चए2 ए्रय्धध | 1

5 हे कु = * न .. 006
६2८६६ ६1८6६ Ta “| | 260 worl "i squpBanggz Mdozmmegzed | WS TOLazwrt|"Ol
6:26/५09६ . LBIEITET. Sst Lvl ZOE : _ उप 09% vMAoxod | 00 01४00 | 6
0#99८06 . .58006/1# , |: श'ट -_* | 8८50. axa 30701 emzermt “RL - ANIZLEO | 8
seozo.ss "| Ar er6oe SBE : coe 76६ हे 0८ IDO | £
“2<6६56165.. (06८60 | SS. | OPO _-- ६५६ जाप 07 वा a1ozerdourg _ ZENO] 9
SLECSEST —_Bpzzeor ८८६ 8४ aDoLnyd | ५
LEISEST. Oopogp ZEEE: + Seb OvVaoLNYd | ४
1६2६09९5. «0६६४४ Ist +_ ६०1 #£9 eqBL Supp शुण्डशवशुपश्व्‌ orNyd | ६
6905591 100689८ / 1८ ८0... | Brit BU 001 वा SpynssmN 00 IAWIN |Z
se O0T
25698५9 . >+0५६8057 noe * ve'0 86६६ AS Ba 001 A प्ण्णए०७ "्प्यणणत | US NVAHAOA | 7

(3 wy) |! पट * a
+ TANpUsdKD aia 0 2 |

wajKa

fie] G-ou ydeSeied of 0} parsapsyy)

हैं हु , Ki-xcuny

है : हर a



62°6ETZLOBE

O6PR69"

6SZESIZ £6! हु
य्घ्ट्ट्धा9 OSELSOT 60 6r'b!, कुंधा. Sot ACNUaTATIO
(726////: 06960 ८1: a “29८. ड़ : :
sorzsait "| 0६860 ८८ Teg ast Sor परधावाउश्चावाप

O6LTSHT-

Slt

‘gu 9601 42122

#LLELOST 090८0
६8/0६८६ ‘abeores "590 .

- a 5QRL
LL7zB9. 28950 [- शाप 90 Bugos sprommopéy umosey]
| 0066५ OSL6bL. vo L00 ; SQUI वैएा: ५ भणप्पश्‌०09 १७७0 ee"
868८5. OCZEELT me पद
४,6/700] . 00८1६ ‘TEE . 0८
८9858 0८ 0160८8 STE 6
£0,2696615/95209/69%" i! nes BE.
TZ8L69 * 97866 90६6 38 0 S“TRELSTT | LT
NOTEST Sr 80% | OZISET /_ $0. . व 12911:
6101081 5८089 81 sid . ‘ST



.

1००फाघिण aq 7 ‘ noe
ext | , SQu0mM 6 4 T | IT reqmadeg 0} ][ ‘Arentgeg | eyuourg YT (| TL stm  [T “Aenigqaz ie
: ; | f हु TT 1

. डप्रागण्पा go} 1 -Ot #ग्पृष्प?%गप्‌ OL श्प्पा[ः ह or oun
>> ig co
f _ L.
TLOLOT
eyywomt ¢ 6) Z . दाउश्णापू of ABH E 4 - हा पणशुष्र्‌

अ्फुष्व्ण्द्र्णद ८
SAT हा Arenuey

दा APY 07 YOIBPAT

DOSE wanoxtiy s8nzp Jo jueura: and0ad ur feed
(०१ ou ए्‌र्षेएय3ए-3ए)ं पा 0} partayay

ह . है हे कर xny : ‘



. OWS
OOLYN. PNOWINY EL
५9 6788 8200 | हु ALYNOWANOE |: 9 PP Y omiopmeqT
wos uu
OOLYN. FNOUINY ES
a 7 DIOS : DL
५0097 पर्त208 5 : GLYNOUCNOE OS PAV erazopaeqyT
- हे .. 97052 पा
OOL¥N IVNEATOS
YONAZ ह - Loe
८8५0८ VaLsy . 05८ XAMOIS VA _ 054 prezepe qn
OOLYN |  DWst ENVI-X .
: in oe Dist] i ' .
ST OEZ _ Waza : L NDOVAOEY, DST VUE SoMIRT
80107 2 0८ ¥XOCON '
. NOSNOHL : {yermosodry
< | 9'1#56६ | 9 NOSNOHE DWOZ KATAYO TOR TDrqnroxod,
cee DW ZYELTY : ~
OB LISYNY: |

aangipuad
Ba

SHOD Jo sBnrp Burweg ary Jo भा भा] Ul Snap ataus Jo spurns 1००7० छाए JO saje1 Jo wospavdw0
(fj: ou ydesBeacd uy 03 paL1ayay) हि vt

“Tk -xoulry

7817


[_ oecet | Ef... ENEDIOR 7
LE 8६६८८62 | 18 &2'/5८9६ LT LEGGY .
; | ; oat
28876 | _ OOLVN (0५ svat o 2
. ! कफ: Ve |: pos _ Rxeppea |
“[ ge'eopy90e. | १८५: 1० 96 0८६६ 1॥ ४809 | wenoore |. 1: panes प्यप्णावाफ-
: “| “5 | kerorT Sxcawa Ad 0६ X¥LOLIA ह 1
जाए he gets | .
[69६ * fete _eeves'|" | 16छ&ट | “078 | . :
५ ' IT MOLE |... SAdCHY Wd 001 XVLOLDA
; TY ~ ~ gens ve :
BO ६७6६ || THe | PLATS | Oster “TOLSTES _ 001 10% ए4 | 20 00:.001 PAE EL
८ mere = =i
= Bb'ESTe | ___ AXVeNWE ३ ee
89 6&70799 bisa STTLET | * : 79#ट207 | ४६700 प्रष्ठ Wa PMS NILODVC.| : OTA 08 WaedTTEexo
| i ५0६97 j XxvENva | 00 HOMaLrO : me ;
af wl 5 es nes कि ५ a छिफ्ता ; :
5 [1:9690#ट_ [६9६ 6८6७६ | 60008 | SACHA als NELODYC | (900 001 एप्रष्ण्‌ण्ष्प्छ
पर ठ्ज़ठद्छ यु ra
वि - 9s | >> शत पथराव | <
ता a Vavat — : TH ~. (09६88
ESTpROE oslo 580 5६ 5801८ | O18 = SVINT ‘oors LtdOO AI ५9210 4 10000 927
7 9G —
Pp 7 ~ ——a 005
191/५5/6८ 0256 - ५५6+ट 1१008 TOO: STOWE ARIgUTEN AT
= : ध्थ्ट 195० zouLet
५2८'65६८[7८ *| ५०४97 ५8 ६? ST lit SIEEVAON : : ST VUES
en : oo $661 |. | 8002 oor NOWLKAN |
proseooe :..! Bag COLLET ; 9८6० | Mazldd j "001 OLAYD



BIERLONY pur शुध्घज प poonou azo WL दं# ५८ 2 PTE फाथ 05°62 Brom segeo reruns ए०फ्ाएएए We

: [ -BLrecieg TOL
mHOON | 0000 BaaOgE [
» NOSNOHE ~ : : ‘OL
29 -NOSNOHE | __ <'. “00009 XHWaH-| 00007 mpnrodoxptrt
i o00r
aaogy | NonrEoDEIOEN : i
tte NOSNOHEL पु ली py
_ 5901 % NOsNoHe! |: __ ;100% उधवष्त || ५. -1007'णयाएवं००फ
89°SbOT AXVENVY 05 NEZIand :
je: 7 OF है हे “OS हक pM
४8992: बाटप्रच _ 10261: 0 05 “Baise
__ ODLYN 03 LYNED0¢d |.
a STINEAY | a r - |. . oo हु
६८695६ “TSON¥S | कि __08 SATLOXVL DVT 08 ; exe32000
Wanodra OST GaVOOIs
- aaiNOs 7 7
. . TRAV - 6 OST a
|_3 -ToLsrra गांव -WuVd | OPLOsr mpEddqaeg |:
. _ ON : Tey



Number af samples tested und enforcement actions taken 17 Sinte Drugs

f Conwoller during fast six yuars
7 Yer | 3 Na. uf Wa: Prue Na uf Naor | Nuuf
ews | lenge f samples | peuteentton | cuisestas {persons
swoiples | samples | decinred | Heeinched fur |ancmtinwsest | wrresseat
sie | uesliced |. squriowst | mswufucturing, | [0 (॥९
वार्ता भा | adulterated sale sud curler
sundae Ulsiributian af } columns
कं; spurious? | ileeided
auulieridedl
है wens!
[amie | see [as Te | wm | 6 |
a wom | we | » | M47 fs | 2 |
miniz कक | nee | a7 | 2a | 36 1a
पा | sessy | sez | 70 | 2 | 6 | no 4
[rois-ia{ रा? | soze | asa [237 [ae | es |
soraas | आष्छ | 193 | 5 | 6s J 7 [as |



ao

| Number af sarnples tested and enforcement aclions taken by State 01085 Cantaller during 2010-11
Say Stu Nautdsags | Necurdrugy Neuf prosecution — [Nu al pave ( Nu. ut persires
swipes |sunjues declared launched for Mentioned in न]
sunuples | Usclired wit of] — spuriuust ° f maauraciasing, 200 ॥10 | the eweliey ee
texte [#॥॥0॥6/ quality}: Ulsirfbutiqu at smesjouse . ५
५ |" _f
| | t | # |] ai
Nil [४ | गा] Wi
| 5 [7 “1777 a | mt
as Pe छा 7 | CT
Ee 1 [प्रा हछणण|
जज ३ [$ 7 7: / 7 1 a |
| कर Ne CS शा | क्‍ पका
[*। ri | 7 | po“ | po a | | » |
2008 | _t
[| Penna # Tag W [7 | [| jo] | ॥ |
॥४॥॥॥ _  ॥ >
A 7 जाका जला जा शा जाता । [_ Ts पा 7
0 a | ग्रोा“““ आछआऋाोॉ एफ | पा 1]
[| दा] [| pom] Ni Nil nil
edo :
| ० कब [Aa [aa] 7 a 5: |
1 हक _ | | का 1 |/_/ शा ३ |
विज: गान शशि
लाए {om *id
[7 | a
1 [trina] 5 77
[पर [_ शा]
me 1 4 /॥/]
(1 बा
asi | , कर
2 [Tania | ee es |
TB Tipe} 1 ee | NT. ni
[thar Prsdesi | [+ wo | Se एक |
2 [West ihan ni | Mil
3h हिएएछ& | / झा | आऋ || झा ।॥ nt
TF [Winding fo] $ रा] है। [oo . | = ee हि Nit
Migr :
2S |Chanvisarh | Wil + ज्ञा | आ  _]]
रचा | का _॥ 7 1 छा [1 1]
i" | 7 — हु A
awa Men oi a
St Joanne bin fad wil
४ |tamahatncep | झा Mil
TE cr
TR [fil Rit
बाज 1 शा | Re |
VAD शा | 2 [_/“ 7 7]



- fl ॥-32००-०७६- +
० 73 कि
Member of samples tested and cnforcoment actions taken by State Drugs Contratter
during 2011-12

. Sito. States fino, oC drugs|Na. oF drugs] No, af drugs | No. af prosceution [No.of casts] No, of
{ saniples sansples satel ples tnunehed for {as ॥
! lesled [declared ioe}, declared | ornnufacturing, sale | nientianed | arzestedl
} . J efstandard | spurtoyst | and disteibutian of inthe
a qualily , | adulterated: |spurious? ndalterated( —earlior
a पु leogs olin)
: oe नि प Deeitheabs
{ oe os a “एफ by cde BE |: 2510४:
| ndhra Pradesh [ 4758 fia | 2 wil Na Nil

| * | Arunachal 35 | 2 | Wil Nir “NL - Nil
——_t -

| Pads

7 . ~ ry + कक
3 ‘Assan . 4s | oa | Nil Nil FN | omit f
d Bihar WwW | os | Nil 24 Nit | 9 |

as] rom]

| j Gon #&7  - 5. 165 2 Nil Nil Nil Nit
[6 | Gujarat 2874 | iss | 186 | 6 | |. 65 [ 6 1 | 1
/ 1] ५1,140 | 1669 | | 32 | [2 3 Nil | 2? |

1 कि |

ry | | ome { 470 | ४» | | oo | |. । .। । | « | | 0 |

! ; [5 | Danomu & | छक | 7

: jana & ~ हि | .। | : ‘ i

ue Kashmir 133 5 | . Ni Ni
jm | Karnataka. ५268 159 2 3 { Nil Nil
[. 1 [Kenai 394 | 202. | | Nil. Nil _ Nil
Bo. Maghya Pradesh 2617 Jw | Nit nit Nil Nil

. _ —

43 (11 00101 6928 S21 Pow | 7 J 6 | fT Nil
4 [ताला Nike [ow | Nit Nil Nil Nil
| > fitoghadnya /_& | [ ont | Ni. Nil | शा | [wir |
[16 fMFzoram a Nu Nil Nit [_॥ | शा

17 -. [Nagafand “12 Nil
| le | Orissa.

| 9 | Pnnjab | 3091 | 41
LY.
[.» | EJ 1605 / 128 |

| 2 | 6 | |. |
[_ 2 | [Tamilnadu 4110 | 2४ |
2. [Tripwa . है 185 |. 8 | 8
a une Prades|i [38 | 1328 | 152 |
| 3 | 25 West Bengal | 58 | | is |
26 Pondichcery [| ४ । १8 NT
27 Aodaninn & Nil oo है [om | Loy
॥ Nil Nil
Nicobar tshasa : ni | ४ | हि | |
(28 | Chandigarh 19 [ 6 | Nil Nil Nil. Nit
2 {Delhi [| 28 fou f.o fF os | mw | ॥
| = —_
| | Drom Mogi {WP शाला wi Ni Nil Nil
Haveli : | - __-
fo | Daman & Bin jee | 1 Nil Nil “Nil Nil
32 Lakshadweep. Nil Nit Nil Nil Wil “Nil
1. लिखा * 36. 4 Nil- Mil Nil Nil
/ _॥ 1 Jharkhand 21° [ 3 | Hil jf Nil Nil
4s Uttasanchial #80 [3 [| [|| Nil Nil Nit
Total : 48082 286 137 |_2। | 46 [ 14 |



- Ty

Nimber of samples tested nnd enforcement actions takea by State Drugs Coutvolley deriug
. 202-2013 .
$.Ra, Slates [No. of drngs] No, of Urags| Na, of srups Wo. of, Ma. oreases] No. af
snungiles | samples | samples |. jirasecution (as. persous
fesleil  Jeeeloved nal] declared | Janoeledl for mentianed | aryested
ofstandari | rpuriousl | manutactur Ing. in the
quality | adulieratot} sate ancl cadier
हर disirlbution of | column)
spurloust decided
aalulteraled rugs
[| tT [xaaltina Pradesh | a 6327 Ig. fF. | Ean Ew fees |
| 2 | | os | | « | Ni ow | Nit
jPraitesh
[a [ism  |ै | किम eee Co [ow | wi of wil [xi |
4 [Bihar Pala wwatledd
(5 | | ४7 [CUM —— yee a | ॥आ
[6 [Genrer | कक्ष | 581 [4 | 1 fs | mw |
7? |(larynra | [32 | Bb 1.1. | Nib [ i |
| | tinea Practesh fs | ” | ५ | | | | Nil Nit
[> en wo | के (2 ro. | - | [|
[10 100॥0 336 m {2 | 2 mf] | |
[ultra | फछ ae ee आशा का
[a favsabye trades | आफ | ही rs | | -+ |
[33 [atahinrnsltra 8 कक्ष | 71 | की. [_ «|
[it [atanipur [va | शी डर क् आी  ओ॥ | औं
fis |Megtamya pt | 4 fm ee | शा ।
[16 _हिक्रजए ro | wi | mw | —— Nil ee
काका | PA शा शनि] [cn |
| . Pnsinucted 10 file
ld b= | 4005 x a prosecution in Nil | ७ |
spuciows 410७5
हा case
19 [Panjab 3087 +24 1] | का | [|
Tao fRajastian | sees BL [ee Se | शी 2
a1 [oui |. a? | ऐश] T CC a [| औआ ।
गा जया आना: ee ee ee काश
= figura ae tt के [आर | कायल छशो |
बजाए | 1016 | ee ee | भी [3 |
35 wen Deng | vas [35 हक NI 2 ee Oe 71 ३ ऑऋऑ]
[26 fPonticieny [Ni Nil wf NN il
2 See | । | Twa Nil. Hil Nil | ॥ |
ख्ल्तिणयाण | छ | 8३ | N छत ऋ| आई]
29 0क्षा। | +% 9 | का। ओझा [wif |
|] ee |. छा Ni wif PN | ७ |
311 [Dannn-s 2॥_| ss. | है [xi Nil ro im Nil [we |
32 [ealishauweep | “Ni, Nil 4 Hit fm Nil Nil | 1 | Nil
ऊ लिए | 15 | 4 रन खा [wi }
काब्राएए | fos | | [ थी | ओा | शी |
हा ता] m [a { | ee ee ee
Talal ५ 58537 2362 9 | 24 | [ ६ | [10 |



जे
हि इक | No of | No.of [Ao ofdvays] एफ Naat | Naot pApgr]) No.of JAction taken wantna
drugs |. steugs | samples | prasteution | cnses'fas | persons’) ox. | Raids | of raids condueced
saniples | samples deelared launched for | tentioned | arrester | value | Coaducte,
| iested | declared | spurious! [ maaufactering,{ in the of d
nofol f adulterated sale md earlier - | drug
distribution of | eolumo) seized
: 81101 idrd as
| | Andira 7343 2 12 Under 0781 Not [134.6] 16435. [50 umed 290 Canerfatior
Pradesh given | 8 | shops |... आह
2, |Arunachet} 18 | ४ | 8 का NA NA] NA “| NA] NA NA
Pradesh _
0 3... ASSAM . Nike Nik | Nil, |... LN | Nil
a ain |. 1
" बे. शितिश+ : f Nl" | BETS RBs, |. Splenionen oo
जा — — — न ore Toes
j 100 Nil - Nil Nit Nil Nil
| & |Gojorat [9713 | 367 32 ed
7. |Haryana 2494 $2 - 3 | | Nil | | Appr] 6839 | Ong treme aspendd 278
है है का
. Lak ‘Coun case Imined -77 FIR
2Lal bol eeyinered 3.
—__ . 1
Himacha} | 751 28 @ Iiseizere in | Nid का | NA | | NA
Pradesh Ea | | 2011 _
|] Jarmo & | 4550 |” | 6 (03-6 (03-spurfous, | sub-judice | a |] Nil
Kashmir _ spurious, 03/03- Aduttrated)| 7
| 10 | [Karnatok | 966 | 292 — J 1] J | Nil | Nil Nil Nil [NS
arnatoKa ॥| i ue i ॥|
[a | [Kerala 4557 “152 Nil | Ni Nit | Nil | Nil Poni | Nil NA
12. (Madhya 1370 75 | Mt | Nit Nil Nil | ॥ | Nil
Pradesh
13 [Maharasht{ 6097 466 | ” | |“ | Nil 4 [3785] 17 J |
ra —~— 13105
14 [Manipur [7 | Nil | Nil | | Nil | Nil Nil Nit | Ni | NA
35 |Meghatayal. 31 f | | ‘| Nil | Initiated | Initiated Nil | का | Nil | Ni] Nit
i" | Mizoram 15 कि Nil Nil Nif | © | 12 || pfepewuted the nrvestact
lakhs petom ind eed dos
17 |Nogaland 266 | | | 4 | [Ni | [ol | Nil Nil | Nil Nil Nil
18 [Orssa | ae | खा 2 GOL LO खिक्रा Mckee
[४] [शाम 3449 | | | * | | | 42 [| aad | | 0०७49 drug ॥श॥#
है rurpeaded nod 12 deg therm
we enacel
20 |Rajastian | 1516 yf 38 7 7 2 | wie! 1915 147
21 [Sikkia | 109 | | xi | | शा | | शी | Nil NA Nit} Nil SW
‘22 fTamilnaduf 8356 34 | | 4 | Nil ia [54 | 22sarcdion arders have been
५. डा foe Iounelng
prosceutfone beFare the
“concerned court
33 . [Tripura | 798 35 “2 | 1 | | शा | Nil Nal Ni} NA
24 [Ota ~ 2068 336 3 120 Not | 6 | | wae | 1188 ॥ 51 FIR lodge
26 | West | ४ | 2 f Nil Nit Nil 3 je |” | po .
Bengal . - 7
24 {Pondicher) Nit [| ४ | Nil Nil” Nil - Nil Nit | Nil js] Nit
ee JL
27 [Andaman तप Nit | जो: Nil Nit Ni i} Nil
[& Nicobar) ae . :
28° |Chondigar | ४ । | * | | Noe | | Rone -| . | None None | None. 4 ऋण
1) - है
29 [Delhi | [iso | . AP 5 Nil Nit Nil | NA NA NA
%


= Th

Dada & [Nil Nil ha Ni Nil | ४] wil | Nil Po | Nil
Nagar
Daman & |. 33 Nil | ४ | | ४ | 16 | | Nil [Ni NA
____}Diu io
[32 flakshadw | NI | आओ Le wil Nil Nil
[33 [Chattisgar[ 520 | 11 | Ni [Wil शशि [wl
34 .[Thorkliand |_ 402 9 ee | |शे [1 | 2
35 [Uttarakha f 405 31 7 2- Nil fil Gleam supe
ind ; I
ee ki “
i a
Total 72712) 3028 118) a al 4g ad
2
&



4

7

Number of sarmples tested and enforcement actions taken by State Orugs Controller during
April 2014- Septembes 2014

हे | Na. of [५०, of dvngs] No. af No. of Me. afenses] No.of | Approx. |NVo. of Raids] Acti
. drugs {  sampkes drugs froseevtlon fas persons | valueaf | Conducted conducted

declared nol} samples | itunched far ‘|mentioned in} acrested | ४४08 seized

‘alien w.r.Lno, of raids

santgles
tested | of sinngard | declared | maauéacturing, | the carlier
qonlity f spurious! aalennd . [ column)
» |adulicrate]. distribution of wecided
. fe d spuriops!
adulterated we fe
Artong Fi an a - -
acti BES. PSNR | (ड़ Ef, Paiaings डी व॑जकिईड issucdy.
Pradesh | : SHASCHS tinue-S3""
[| ‘Arunachal | $7 | fs | [७ | Nil | ४ | | | Nit] Doesnot } Does not Does nat arise
Pradesh . | arise afise_-| .
3 | Assam | 306) 33 | ww | छा का | कई का | और ____ औ॥ |
[af Bina | oz [it f Ni? nt { श्रा | wi | Ni. व | iss ।
3 7 20s | OS Norof है O1 Not of है i NF Reguler Does nar arise
Standard | Slanderd Quolity . Inspeotians
Quality fe : are cartied
है aut ta detect
. Nol of
standard
. Quolityy
Spurious?
Adulteraled
{ Drugs a
| 6 | Gujernt | 358 | 282 | 2 | ND | Nil y Ni | Nil of ft | Under investigation
7 | Haryana | 1216 2t 2 | Ni Nil. Nil 4599 28- License Canoslted
. 127» License Suspended
-12- Court ease launched
01- warning issued
118+ under investigation where
Show cause notice issued
01- FIRs Registered
Fimachal | | "| 18 Nil | | NA | | ; | हु | ४ | | | °
Pratesh |. : :
|| Jammu &. | 2072 FT] | 0 | Nil | # | | ४ | |“ | बाज | | po | Nil
Kashmir : है 1
[10 | Karnatake | 3776 छा 1 res = | ३ | 8 | .. | | श्र
fir] Kerla [2235] 6 | nif wi |] Ni | owl | Nt |
[४ Madhya [| | | Nil | ™ | [| po ~ | ४: | Na Pom Cs |
tL Pradesh a
| | | 16527 | | ऊफक्रष्णफोआ launched

——
| Mi aa |] a a 04 (Prosecution न
lasder issued inall _J-Pending
J-Pending for investigation

10 cases
[14 | Manipur f 5 | Na | RST OT |
15 | Meghatoya | 1 | “Nil Does notarise f Ni | शी Nil Nil Mil fa |
(16 | Mizoram | 46 | Ni | Ni (| Ni | At | Ni | Ni J Nil Ni
17 | Nepolag [30 [Ni | शा | Nil | कक SA की | शी ।[£ आी |
| ; है NORR-TZ | 04 nos af seiavre हे Nil : As. 97.240 | 389{Upto | (7) 5.C.N. under cule 66 [1] are
हु 8. No. 73 | lave been made . . Sept) being issued agoinst the 101
deiecied | during 2013-14 submitted by the 0.1 nfler
मर during | ondQ2aosof J. - . conducting raid.
2013-14 fseizure have beew tii) Steps have been loken tor drug.
जय during areal! oF W.S.Q. drugs under |
5014-15 >| intirnation to concerned
तन 9,010... lar fisher action at
theirend ard 10 sene their action
Jakea report along with
invesuigorion report for linafisalion
॥॥ + ef further action against”
| हर 1॥#मरोए9010/005 "शो due
recommendolian of the screening
committe of Use Stage 3a
= constitaied in goypolainee 10
| 17 | Punias 1 1268 3 Nil Nil Nil na) 27% [21 Under Process
30 | Rewosihon | 1137 8 34 7 ee .-4 3929097 TF 1]
7 कु क पर 7 रु यू ;



Sikkim | 20. Nil Compe
Tamitneda | 5955 7 7 Fi vids inve| 259 sanction ordes have brea
. been | issued for louncliing acosecutions
conducted | before thé concemed cavit
during the
said peroid
रे ‘against the
sales
premises. 4
: eT os .
Tripura [ere | 7 67 Mis fo
ए0ण Pradesh] 5879 | © | 20,03,785 | * | 56 Fiitvere lodged ang 34 persons] *
"vier smelted ५
West Bengal] 349 | | WA जा [|
Pondicherry | ४ | na | ™ | | ४ | | ४ | Wil
Andomen &| Wid Fest report हे Nil bos
Wieobor | samples | awaited from | awaited .
have |CDL Kalkata | fram COL
deen Kolkols
stat for
testing
to CDL
Kolkata)

8 | Chandigarh | * | | ७ | pe | | ० | Wik
[Dani | 21 | yond {| i Lach |
Tad & | Nit Wil | | Nil Nil

Dagar Haveli

1 | Domen& [35 | ४ | Wil P| Nil | ४ |
09 | हि

2 |Calshadweep] NU wil | | wil ro

3 | Chattisgarh | 217 Nil | ४ | ; । शा] | /४ | | ४ ।
Therkhand | 155 (wr f 2 _| foam | eof रा

Uttarakhand | 138 | | Po rn 3. _
Telongina | 2 Nil 54,20,600(m| Nid Nil
the month of]
April.
7 | | 18818055 J 8966

Total | 38655 |



- 14...

-MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2014-15) HELD ON 9"" APRIL, 2015.

The Committee sat on Thursday the 9" April 2015 from.1430 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in
Committee Room 'D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT .

Prof. K. ५. Thomas - Chairperson
‘MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri 8,5. Ahluwalia

Shri Nishikant Dubey
Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Shri Dushyant Singh
Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi
Dr. Kirit Somaiya

Shri Anurag Thakur
RAJYA SABHA

11. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
12. Shri Shantaram Naik

& Pn or wn.

=
od

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

1 Shri A. K. Singh - Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Anita B. Panda wat - Director

3. Shri T, Jaya Kumar - Additional Director
4. Shri S.L. Singh - Under Secretary
5. छाती. Anju Kukreja - Under Secretary

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND
-- AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA : :

1. | Shri A-K, Singh : | | | Dy. CAG(RC)

2... | Smt:-Shubha Kumar ; | | Director General (RC}
3.. | Shri Satish Loomba हे z Director General
+ | Shri L.S. Singh 7 oo | | Principal Director (PAC)



ee
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY
WELFARE है

1. | Shri B.P. Sharma है | | Secretary
| | Dr. Jagdish Prasad I" | D.G.H.S
e] Shri N.S. Kang | AS&DG (CGHS)

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS |
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS)

1. | Dr. V.K. Subburaj | | Secretary

| | Shri Kalyan Nag | | Adviser (Cost), NPPA

—t

REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS
{DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS)

1. | Shri Surjit K. Chaudhary > | Secretary

2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the representatives of the
Office of the C&AG of India to the Sitting of the Committee. The Chairperson then apprised

the Members that‘during the Sitting, the Committee would take further oral evidence of the
representatives of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and Ministry of Chemicals and
Fertilizers (Departments of Pharmaceuticals and Chemicals and Petrochemicals) on the
subject "Procurement of Allopathic drugs in CGHS” based on Para No. 6.3 of the C&AG
Report No. 19 of 2013 in the first instance. . Thereafter, the Committee would.consider three
draft Reports for adoption

KKK SDE “oe
3: The. officers of the C&AG of India then briefed the Committee on. the issues relating

. to the subject “Procurement of Allopathic drugs in CGHS". ‘Thereafter, the representatives
of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and’ Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers
(Departments of Pharmaceuticals and Chemicals and Petrochemicals) were called in. The
Chairperson during his introductory remarks highlighted’ the. following significant lapses in
procurement of drugs requited for CGHS:

() The Committee constituted by the Ministry for preparation/revision of existing
drug formulary for branded drugs opted for commonly prescribed brands of drugs instead of

4 4 a ५



लय 91--
identifying commonly prescribed drug composition. The methodology adopted by

the Committee was predominantly based on the prescription of specific brands by the
doctors.

(ii) ‘Even the discounted price of the selected brands had been much higher than
the MRP of other low cost brands, available in the market.

(ii) Despite firm and wise directions of the Government, the Ministry could not
finalise the procurement rates of most of the drugs listed in the generic formulary.

(५). The comparison of the rates of 30 branded drugs with the rates of generic
drugs in “Janaushidhi Scheme" revealed that an amount.of हैं 11.81 crore could have been
saved by CGHS, Delhi during 2011-12, had generic drugs been procured instead of
branded drugs.

(v) The delays in procurement and non-availability for formulary drugs at CGHS
Centres led fo procurement of these drugs by CGHS Centres from local chemists at higher
rates, leading to extra expenditure of € 3.05 crore.

(vi) MSD procured these drugs through HSCC, instead of procuring them directly.
As a result, consultancy charges of 4.5% had been paid to HSCC upto October 2008 and at
the rate of 2.5% thereafter. In this process, MSD, Delhi incurred an avoidable expenditure
of 43.52 crore during the period from 2002-03 to 2010-11,

(vil} ‘Despite directions of the Ministry of Finance, issued at the instance of the
PAC, a number of ATNs have not been submitted. ;

(शा) The Pharmaceutical Advisory Forum had not been meeting regularly.

(ix). .. Details of steps taken by the Department -to ensure availability of essential.
“medicines at reasonable price were sought too.

RK DN Oc, : . ™ vod
4. .: The. Chairpersen also expressed displeasure of the Commitiee on the fact that

- though there is a clear prohibition for doctors accepting any gift, hospitality, trips fo foreign
and domestic destinations from health care industry, this evil practice has been continuing _
and the pharma companies contintie to sponsor foreign trips to doctors and appease them
with high value gifts as quid pro १७90, 719, therefore, desired that this unhealthy state of

गे है नं

है डे >



~8an

- affairs should-be brought to the notice of the Government in Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare and also Cabinet Secretary for taking effective and appropriate action against those
responsible for lowering the image of the instittition as well as the Government. Before °
commencing the examination, the Chairperson made it clear that the deliberations of the
Committee were confidential and were not fo be divulged to any outsider until the Report on
the subject was presented to the Parliament. The Committee then proceeded with the
sxamjnation of the subject. ©

5. The Members sought clarifications on various issues which inter-alia included
shoricomings in present system of procurement, flooding of inferior quality Chinese
medicines in the market, distribution and inventory management of drugs and measures
taken by the Government.to remove the same, excessive procurement of drugs through
local purchases, prescribing drugs outside the formulary, steps taken by the Ministry to
refrain the doctors from frequently prescribing expensive brarided medicines instead of low
cost yet equally effective drugs, non-updation of formulary list, ‘non-inclusion of 397 generic
drugs In the present formulary, reasons for giving procurement of drugs for CGHS Delhi to
MSO from HSCC. ‘The Members also sought clarifications about the spurious drugs
prevaient in the Indian market and the steps taken by the Government to identify and stop
those drugs. Thereafter, Members desired to know about the role of Department of
Pharmaceuticals in fixing rate on drugs, total production capacity of drugs in India and steps
taken by the Government to improve the same, measures initiated for making our country ;
self dependent in. regard to production of drugs, role of National Pharmaceutical Pricing
Authority and Pharmaceutical Advisory Committee etc. The representatives of the Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare and Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of
Pharmaceuticals and: Chemicals and: Petroctiemicals) clarified that being a global leader,
India export drugs to 220 countries. They apprised the Committee that 80 per cent of the
raw material for the drugs was imported from China and ‘after: production India export drugs

"ta foreign countries, especially to the entire Africa. They further replied that since January,
2015 the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare introduced a uniform Givil Code: which

- “forbids the doctors from accepting costly gifts, foreign frips-etc. They assured that the
‘information sought by the Committée would be furnished to. them expeditiously.

€ Before concluding, the Chairperson.thanked the representatives of both the Ministries
and aiso asked them to furnish the requisite information that was sought by the Membeis
हर within 10 days. The Chairperson also thanked the representatives of the Office of the



“§3-— .
C&AG of India for providing valuable assistance to the Committee in the

examination of the subject.
The witnesses then withdrew.

A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the Sitting was kept on record.

7. The Committee then took up the following draft Reports one by one for consideration’.
() Draft Report on the subject “Ultra Mega Power Projects under Speciat
Purpose Vehlctas” based on C&AG Report No. 6 of 2012-13.

(i) Draft Report on the subject “Jawaharlal Nehru Natlonal Urban Renewal
Mission” based on C&AG Report No. 15 of 2012-13; and

(il) Draft Report on the subject “Excesses Over Voted Grants and Charged

“Appropriations (2012-13) based on Para 3.4 and 3.5 of C&AG Report No.1

of 2014.
8. Giving an overview of the issues. contained in the draft Reports and comments of the
Committee thereupon, the Chairperson solicited the views/suggestions of the Members.
After some discussions, the Committee adopted the two draft Reports mentioned at SI. Nos.
(ii) and ii} without any modifications. As regards the draft Report meritioned at St. No. (i),
some Members suggested certain modifications and authorized’ the Chairperson to
incorporate them suitably in the Report.

9. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Reporis in the light of
the factual verifications, if any, made by Audit and present them to Parliament on a

convenient date.

The Committee, then, adjourned,