100

COMMERCIAL PUBLICITY IN
INDIAN RAILWAYS

[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their Seventieth Report (16th Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(Railway Board)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2017-18)

HUNDREDTH REPORT
eee

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO.2134
HUNDREDTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2017-18)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

COMMERCIAL PUBLICITY IN
INDIAN RAILWAYS

[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their Seventieth Report (16th Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(Railway Board)

Presented to Lok Sabha on:

Laid in Rajya Sabha on:

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

March, 2018/ Chaitra, 1940 (Saka)


CONTENTS

[PASE |
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS cn |
COMMITTEE (2017-18)
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-II OF PAC(2017-18) (iv)
INTRODUCTION (v)
CHAPTER | ha

CHAPTER II*

Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ..........................

CHAPTER III*

Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
replies received from the Government ................

CHAPTER IV*

Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
Peiteration ..............................-.------ --..-.-

CHAPTER V*

Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which the Government have furnished interim
TEPHOS oo ceccceeseeccsessseecersssceesnsaneess

APPENDICES*

Minutes of the Seventh Sitting of Sub-Committee Il
of the Public Accounts Committee (2017-18) held
on 20 March, 2018.

Minutes of the 22nd Sitting of Public Accounts
Committee (2017-18) held on 23" March, 2018.

Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their Seventieth
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha

* Not appended to the cyclostyled copy ofthe Report. SSS Not appended to the cyclostyled copy of the Report


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2017-18) having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Hundredth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
on action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Seventieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on
"Commercial Publicity in Indian Railways’.

2. The Seventieth Report was presented to Lok Sabhaz/laid in Rajya Sabha on 11
April, 2017. Replies of the Government to the Observations/ Recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 24 November, 2017. The Sub-Committee-ll
of PAC (2017-18) considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 20 March,
2018. The Report was considered by the Public Accounts Committee (2016-17) during
their sitting held on 23 March, 2018. The Minutes of the Sittings form Appendices to the
Report.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the C&AG of India.

5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Seventieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given at
Appendix-Ill.

NEW DELHI; MALLIKARJUN KHARGE
27 March, 2018 Chairperson

06 Chaitra, 1940 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


REPORT
CHAPTER — 1

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their Seventieth Report (16"" Lok Sabha) on the subject "Commercial Publicity in Indian
Railways’ relating to the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board).

2. The Seventieth Report (16" Lok Sabha), which was presented to Lok Sabha/laid
in Rajya Sabha on 117 April, 2017, contained 10 Observations and Recommendations.
Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations and Recommendations have
been received from the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) and are broadly
categorized as under :

(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:

Para Nos. 1-10
Total: 10
Chapter - II

(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in
view of the replies received from the Government:

Para Nos. Nil
Total: Nil
Chapter - Ill

(ii) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government have
not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: .

Para Nos. Nil
Total: Nil
Chapter - IV

(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished
interim replies:
Para Nos. Nil
Total: Nil
Chapter —V

3. The detailed examination of the Subject by the Committee had revealed that
while identifying various media vehicles a series of guidelines for selection of advertising


sites were issued by the Railway Board. The revenue mobilization through Commercial
Publicity during 2007-08 to 2011-12 remained between Rs. 150 crores to Rs. 200
crores. Commercial Directorate of Railway Board is responsible for policy directions
related to Commercial Publicity. Para 6.4.1 of C&AG Report No. CA 19 of 2008-09 had
highlighted deficient implementation of Railway Board's guidelines on Commercial
Publicity. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry had admitted to failure of certain
initiatives owing to poor market response with reference to level crossing gates, freight
wagons etc. In Décember, 2009 the then Minister of Railways tabled in Parliament a
‘White Paper' on Indian Railways where concern was expressed on the slow growth in
earnings from commercial publicity due to poor success of new initiatives, namely, bulk
right contract etc. The Committee had observed that in spite of the 10" Report of
Standing Committee on Railways (May, 2005) during 14 Lok Sabha, C&AG's Report
No. CA 19 of 2008-09 and white Paper on Indian Railways tabled in Parliament in
December, 2009 by the then Railway Minister and the C&AG Report No. 11 of 2013
highlighting the slow growth in earnings from Commercial Publicity, the Ministry of
Railways could not learn any lesson to improve its working. The Ministry of Railways
failed to ensure that a proper assessment of the demand potential was conducted by
the Zonal Railways involving external agencies and market experts. Moreover,
exceedingly high targets were fixed by the Ministry of Railways without consulting the
Zonal Railways with the objective to put pressure on them in making more efforts to
improve their performances rather than focusing on realistic and achievable targets . As
a result there was no incentive or compulsion on Zonal Railways to formulate an action
plan to achieve the prescribed targets for exploitation of identified assets/media for
commercial publicity. Due to lack of focus of Zonal Railways, the tenders floated for
advertising contracts did not elicit adequate response from the targetted parties. The
presence of unauthorized advertisements/hoardings in and around Railway platforms
which points towards connivance of the officials of Railways with advertisers also shows
lack of adequate monitoring and vigilance by the Railway authorities. Moreover, contract
management by the Railways suffered from various deficiencies such as poor record
management leading to missing of escalation clauses from contracts of 32 divisions of
16 Zonal Railways, and in respect of 47 contract cases involving seven Zonal Railways.


The license fee/penalty on delayed payment to the tune of Rs. 7.75 crore were either
not recovered or short recovered. The deficiencies in contracts were also highlighted by
the fact that due to non inclusion of service tax clause, Railway Administration was _
served with a demand notice for Rs. 1.76 crore for non recovery of service tax from
contractors for the period from May 2006 to June 2009. The Ministry of Railways have
failed miserably to exploit the potential of Commercial Publicity in Indian Railways
despite wide reach of network of the Railways across length and breadth of the country.

4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Railways in respect of all the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have been reproduced in the
relevant chapters of this Report. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by
the Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations made in their Sixty-
Ninth Report, which need reiteration or merit comments.

OUT OF HOME POLICY OF SLT OF HOME POLICY OF ADVERTISEMENTS
(Recommendation No.7)

5. The Committee had observed that the menace of unauthorized displays at the
Railway stations has been a constant source of leakage of revenues of the Railways
and it has been found that the problem is particularly severe in case of EMUs/
Passenger trains where contracts had to be foreclosed due to lack of space on account
of unauthorized and illegal display of advertisements on the trains. The main reason
which has been found during the examination by the Committee is poor record
management regarding the details of advertisements displayed at the
EMUs‘trains/stations. The Committee were informed that Station Master maintains
registers regarding the number, location and date of commencement and expiry of all
contracted sites of a commercial publicity/advertisements at the EMUsjtrains/stations
and is responsible for removal of unauthorized advertisements. However, the practice of .
non-maintaining of registers at the stations has been found rampant at many stations of
seven Zonal Railways (CR, ER, NFR, SCR, SWR, WCR and WR) and some Station
Managers were not even aware of requirement of maintaining such registers. Thus, the
-possibility..of collusion between Railway authorities and ‘illegal advertisers cannot be
ruled out. The Committee felt that the Railways had been lax in carrying out adequate


timely inspections of stations and trains for checking and removing unauthorized
advertisements as the Committee were informed that there were no prescribed
schedule or guidelines for inspections to be carried out at the stations and trains by
officers of Railway Board. Although it has been informed that Zonal railways have
formed core teams, inclusive of RPF Personnel and special drives were being
Conducted but the Committee felt that in absence of any ready mechanism for
identifying unauthorized displays such drives may not yield desired results. The
Committee, therefore, recommended that the Railways should explore the feasibility of
hallmarking or branding with authorized symbols on all the contracted advertisements
as one of the conditions for their display at the stations with provision of security deposit
being maintained with the Railways by the advertisers for recovering of the loss of
revenue in case of advertisement being displayed beyond expiry date.

6. The Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) in their action taken note have
furnished as under:
"The new Out-of-Home policy of the Ministry of Railways will now be Rights
based policy rather than a particular site based policy wherein the licensee shall
be sold the right to install advertisements on Railway land or premises subject to
safety and convenience of both trains and passengers. The contracts will be for a
longer period of 10 years. As the contract will not be fora short tenure and will be
tights based, there will not be any situation where advertising displays will go
beyond the scheduled period. The new policy has made the implementation of
the contract conditions much simpler and market friendly while reducing the
Scope of misuse. As specific locations are not being sold to any individual
company, it will be far easier to monitor the implementation of contracts and it will
require few inspections on part of railways."
7. The Committee note that they had recommended for hallmarking or
branding of all the contracted advertisements with authorised symbols as one of
the conditions for their display at the stations with provision of security deposit
which may be used in case of advertisement being displayed beyond expiry date.
However, the Ministry of Railways in their reply have furnished that their new Out-
of-Home policy will now be rights based policy rather than a particular site based
policy wherein the licensee shall be sold the right to install advertisements on

Railway land or premises subject to safety and convenience of both trains and


Passengers. The contracts will be for a longer period of 10 years. As the contract
will not be for a short tenure and will be rights based, there will not be any
situation where advertising displays will go beyond the scheduled period. The
Committee, however, feel that if hallmarking or branding of all the contracted
advertisements is made mandatory it will help in easily identifying the
unauthorised advertisements. Therefore, the Committee reiterate their earlier
recommendation that the Railways should explore the feasibility of hallmarking or
branding with authorized symbols on all the contracted advertisements as one of
the conditions for their display at the stations with provision of security deposit
being maintained with the Railways by the advertisers for recovered of the loss of
revenue in case of advertisement being displayed beyond expiry date.

8... While hoping that the new ‘Out-of-Home’ policy being rights based one for
a longer period of ten years and will reduce the scope of misuse, the Committee
desire that the Ministry of Railways scrupulously monitor implementation of the
contracts under the new policy in a transparent and expeditious manner. The
Committee further would like to be apprised of the financial
advantage/disadvantage of the Ministry in adopting the new ‘Out-of-Home’ Policy
in comparison with the previous advertisement policy within four months of the
presentation of this report.

CVC INQUIRY ON FIRST-COME EMC INQUIRY ON FIRST-COME FIRST-SERVE POLICY
(Recommendation No.9)

9. The Committee had noted that there were irregularities in award of contract of
advertisements on First cum First Serve basis which was prevailing in the Mumbai
divisions of CR and WR for the last 25 - 30 years. There was no clarity on identification
of contracted site, about innovative ideas for selection of new sites and displays of
advertisement. The Committee had noted that there was no transparency in award of
contracts in CR & WR. The Committee note that cases of irregularities in allotment of
advertisements sites and involvement of Railway officials were enquired by the Central
Railway vigilance. After the matter was consulted by CVC action against 06 officials
were initiated and cases of 04 officers were under consideration of disciplinary authority.


Further, in case of role of other Officials, a report has been received by the Railway
Board and was under their consideration. The committee had noted that the CVC
enquiry established that the fraud in award of contract in advertisements was detected
by the CVC and action against the officials of the Railway. are being taken. The
_ Committee had, therefore, desired that (i) All contract which were allotted on the basis
of FCFS should be terminated with immediate effect, 216. (1) CBI enquiry should be
ordered to conduct inquiry in the whole gamut of FCFS policy, in Mumbai Division of
Central Railway and Western Railway.

10. The Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) in their action taken note has furnished
as under:

“All contracts allotted on the basis of FCFS have been terminated in Central
Railway, against which the existing licensees have approached the Mumbai High
‘Court. Since no stay has been granted by the Mumbai High Court, all the
contracts stand terminated on date.

No contracts are now being awarded on the basis of FCFS and a completely
transparent e-auctioning tender system has been adopted. A complaint from Dr.
Kirit Somaiya, Hon'ble MP, was received from CVC vide their letter No.
141/RLY/009/255362 dated 31.07.14. The same was investigated by Central
Railway vigilance. The matter was consulted with CVC which advised major
penalty action against 7 officials, cut-in-pension against 2 officials and
administrative action against one official. As tegards the proposed disciplinary
action, cut-in-pension proceedings upon two charged officials (now retired) have
commenced. Major penalty proceedings have been initiated upon another three
charged officials and administrative action against one is under process in
Central Railway (i.e., action has already been initiated on 6 out of 10 charged
officials). Cases of 4 officers are under consideration of the disciplinary authority.

As regards the role of other officials, a report has been received from Central
Railway and the same is under consideration of the competent authority. The
matter will be consulted with the CVC and action will be initiated on their advice.

The Ministry of Railways have a well established structure for investigation of
vigilance issues. The Vigilance wing of the Ministry and the Zonal Railways are
well aware of the Railway working & competently handled issues related to
Railways due to their technical competence in Railways matters. It is the
considered opinion of the Ministry of Railways that the vigilance directorate of
Railways should carry out a detailed investigation of the issues observed by the
PAC under the guidance of Central Vigilance Commission. The outcome of the
investigation will be duly reported to the PAC for its consideration.”


11. In view of lack of transparency in contracts awarded for advertisements on
First-cum-First Serve basis the Committee had recommended for termination of
all sever contracts with immediate effect. Accordingly, the Railways terminated
all such contracts in Central Railway against which the existing licensees have
approached the Mumbai High Court. No Contracts are now being awarded on the
basis of FCFS anda completely transparent e-auctioning tender system has been
adopted. As recommended by the Committee, the Ministry of Railways is of the
considered opinion that the vigilance directorate of Railways should carry outa
detailed investigation of the whole gamut of FCFS policy, in Mumbai Divisions of
Central Railway and Western Railway under the guidance of Central Vigilance
Commission. The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of the
investigation conducted on FCFS policy ‘and action taken thereon. The
Committee are shocked to note that inspite of its recommendation to terminate all
contracts allotted on the basis of First-cum-First Service Policy in Central Railway
and Western Railway of Mumbai Division, Ministry have taken action only in
Central Railway and not in Western Railway. The Committee are not satisfied
with the reply of the Ministry that Vigilance Directorate of Railways should carry
out a detailed investigation of the issues observed by the PAC under the
guidance of CVC. The Committee are concerned to note that even after a lapse of
more than three and a half years of the receipt of the complaints, the Ministry
could take action only against 6 out of 10 charged officials on the plea that
disciplinary action against the remaining persons is under consideration of the
disciplinary authority. The Committee, while reiterating its earlier
recommendations desire that (i) all contracts allotted on the basis of FCFS Policy
in Western Railway of the Mumbai Division also be terminated forthwith; (ii) CBI
inquiry be conducted into the whole gamut of FCFS Policy in Central Railway and
Western Railway of Mumbai Division of Indian Railways; and (iii) immediate
disciplinary action taken against the four remaining charged officials and others
found guilty or involved in corruption. They also desire the Ministry to ensure
that contractors whose contracts were terminated on the basis of deficient FCFS


policy are barred and put on caution list, including its Director/Partners/Group
companies for future contracts.