74

XIX COMMONWEALTH GAMES, 2010

MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS AND SPORTS

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

SEVENTY-FOURTH REPORT

ee

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

सत्यमेव जयोे

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2107

SEVENTY-FOURTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMIS ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

XIX COMMONWEALTH GAMES,

2010

MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS AND SPORTS

Presented to Lok Sabha on:

Laid in Rajya Sabha on:

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

Aprit 2017 / Chaitra 1939 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2011-12)...... mai
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2012-13)...... (४)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2013-14)...... (vii)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2015-16)...... (ix)
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-VI (XIX COMMONWEALTH
GAMES 2010) OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2015-16).......... (xi)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2016-17)...... (xiii)
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-IV (CIVIL AND
NON-COMPLIANCE OF TIMELY SUBMISSION OF ACTION TAKEN
NOTES) OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2016-17)............ (xv)
॥धाा२000011013............... ..... (xvii)
REPORT
PART- |
1. Chapter 1: Introductory
2 Chapter Il: Role & Responsibility of the Prime Minister's Office (PMO)
Chapter lil: Role and Responsibility of the Ministry of Youth Affairs &
Sports
4. Chapter IV: Role and Responsibility of the Organizing Committee (OC)
5 Chapter V: Role and Responsibility of the Ministry of Urban Development
6. Chapter VI: Role and Responsibility of the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare
Chapter VII: Role and Responsibility of the Ministry of Home Affairs
Chapter VIII: Role and Responsibility of the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting and Prasar Bharati
9. Chapter IX: Role and Responsibility of the Ministry of Communications
and Information Technology (Department of
Telecommunications)
10. Chapter X: Cases referred to the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI)

PART - If

Observations/Recommendations

19
30

56

78

170

193

234

264

278

284


oe |.

व

ऋ IE.

al.

* ML.

= VIL

4 VIN

APPENDICES

Minutes of the Eighth sitting of the PAC (2011-12) held on 10" October,
2011

Minutes of the Sixth sitting of the PAC (2012-13) held on 276 July, 2012

Minutes of the Eighth & Ninth sittings of the PAC (2012-13) held on 30"
July, 2012

Minutes of the Fifteenth, Sixteenth & Seventeenth sittings of the PAC
(2012-13) held on 5" October, 2012

Minutes of the Twenty-third & Twenty-Fourth sittings of the PAC (2012-
13) held on 11 February, 2013

Minutes of the Seventh sitting of the PAC (2015-16) held on 26" August,
2015

Minutes of the First sitting of Sub Committee VI (XIX Commonwealth
Games, 2010) of the PAC (2015-16) held on 13" October, 2015

Minutes of the Third sitting of Sub Committee VI (XIX Commonwealth
Games, 2010) of the PAC (2015-16) held on 57 April, 2016

Minutes of the Sixteenth sitting of the PAC (2016-17) held on 25"
October, 2016

Minutes of the Eighteenth sitting of the PAC (2016-17) held on 107
November, 2016

Minutes of the Eleventh sitting of Sub Committee 1५ (Civil and Non
Compliance of timely submission of Action Taken Notes) of the PAC
(2016-16) held on 7" March, 2017



COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

~

an AF YD

(2011-12)

Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi - Chairman
LOK SABHA

Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
Dr. Baliram

Shri Sandeep Dikshit

Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Shripad Yesso Naik

Shri Sanjay Nirupam

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
Shri Adhi Sankar

Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
Shri है, Sudhakaran

Dr. M. Thambidurai

Dr. Girija Vyas

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Tariq Anwar

Shri Prasanta Chatterjee

Shri Naresh Gujral

Shri Prakash Javadekar

Shri Satish Chandra Misra
*Shri J.D. Seelam

Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz

Elected w.e.f. 29" August 2011 vide the vacancy occurred vice Smt. Jayanti Natarajan appointed
Minister w.e.f. 12” July, 2011


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

~~

awk YY

(2012-13)

Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi - Chairman
LOK SABHA

Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
Dr. Baliram .

Shri Sandeep Dikshit

Dr. M. Thambidurai

Shri T.K.S, Elangovan

Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Sanjay Nirupam

Shri Shripad Yesso Naik

Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
Shri Ashok Tanwar

Dr. Shashi Tharoor

Dr. Girija Vyas

Shri Dharmendra Yadav
RAJYA SABHA.

Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
Shri Prakash Javadekar
Shri Satish Chandra Misra
Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
Shri J.D. Seelam

Shri N.K. Singh

Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMIT“ ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2013-14)

Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi - Chairman
MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shti Anandrao Adsul

Dr. Baliram

Shri Ramen Deka

Shri Sandeep Dikshit

Dr. M. Thambi Durai

Shri T.K.S. Elangovan

Shri Jayaprakash Hegde

Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal

10 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee

12, Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam
13. Shri Ashok Tanwar

14, Shri Ajay Maken

15, Shri Dharmendra Yadav

owe ND A FY

RAJYA SABHA
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee

17. Shri Prakash Javadekar
*1g. Shri Ashwani Kumar

19, Shri Satish Chandra Misra
40. Dr. V. Maitreyan

21. Shri N.K. Singh

22. Smt. Ambika Soni

* Elected w.e.f. 147 August, 2013 vice Dr. Girlja Vyas appointed as Minister of Housing, Urban
Development & Poverty Alleviation w.e.f. 17" June, 2013.

t Elected w.e.f. 3 September, 2013 vice Dr. V. Maitreyan ceased to be a Member upon his retirement as
a Member of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 24" July, 2013.

+ Elected w.e.f. 31 September, 2013 vice Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan appointed as Minister of State
for Commerce and Industry w.e.f. 477 June, 2043.

PG
PUR,


pe ND A SLY YD

ee
- Ss

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMM PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2015-16)
Prof. K.V. Thomas - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura
Shri Nishikant Dubey
Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank"
Shri Neiphiu Rio
Shri Dushyant Singh
Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal

Dr. Kirit Somaiya

Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
Shri Shivkumar Udasi

Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABBA
Shri Naresh Agrawal
Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
Shri Anil Madhav Dave
Shri Vijay Goel
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Shri Shantaram Naik
Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy


Composition of Sub-Committee - VI (XIX Commonwealth Games 2010) of the Public of Sub-Committee - VI (XIX Commonwealth Games 2010) of the Public
Accounts Committee (2015-16)

Sub-Committee — VI (XIX Commonwealth Games 2010) for examination of the subject
"XIX Commonwealth Games 2010" based on the C&AG Report No. 6 of 2011-12.

Shri Shantaram Naik

Shri 5.5. Ahluwalia

Shri Nishikant Dubey

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Shri Vijay Goel

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy

Convenor
Members

9 एफ ४० ०-०



COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

Prof. K.V. Thomas - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2 Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
3. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
4 Shri Nishikant Dubey
5 Prof. Richard Hay
Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar

6

7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

8 Smt. Riti Pathak

9. Shri Neiphiu Rio

10. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
11. Shri Abhishek Singh

12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya

13, Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
14, Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi

15, Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA
16. Shri Naresh Agrawal
17. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
18. शाप Bhupender Yadav
19, Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
20. Shri Shantaram Naik
21, Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
22, Shri Ajay Sancheti

* Elected w.e.f, 09.08.2016 vice Shri Vijay Goel, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f. 05.07.2016.


ONS

Shri A.K. Singh

Shri Sukhi Chand Chaudhary
Shri T. Jayakumar

Shri Paolienlal Haokip

SECRETARIAT

- Additional Secretary
- Joint Secretary

- Director

- Deputy Secretary


Composition of Sub-Committee- IV (Civil and Non-compliance of timely
submission of Action Taken Notes) of the Public Accounts Committee (2016-17)

Convenor
Members

Orkons

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
Shri Nishikant Dubey

Dr. P. Venugopal

Shri Ajay Sancheti

Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi


Introduction

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2016-17) having been
authorized by the Committee, do present this Seventy-fourth Report (Sixteenth
Lok Sabha) on ‘XIXth Commonwealth Games 2010’.

2. Comptroller and Auditor General of India had conducted a performance
Audit of the XIXth Commonwealth Games 2010 which was held in Delhi following
the huge scare the country faces in the run up to the games due to reports of
preparations running way behind schedule and the possibility of failure to hold
the games successfully. The Report was presented to Parliament on 57 August
2011.

3. The PAC had taken a briefing on the subject on 10 October 2011 from the
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports and selected the subject for examination
during it’s the term 2012-13. They have taken evidences of the various Ministries
including Ministries of Home Affairs, Urban Development, Information and
Broadcasting, Communications and IT, Youth Affairs and Sports, Health and
Family Welfare and agencies like NDMC, DDA, ete. on eight occasions during
that term. However the report could not be presented due to paucity of time. The
subject was again selected by the Committee during 2013-14, but could not be
taken up due to other pressing matters before the Committee. During the 16

Lok Sabha, The PAC (2015-18) again took up the subject. It took further oral
evidence of the Ministries of YAS, UD, Home Affairs and the CBI on 26" August
2015. Thereafter, a Sub-Committee headed by Hon'ble Member of Parliament
Shri Shantaram Naik, was constituted to look into the subject. The Sub-
committee went into the progress of the cases investigated by the CBI.

4. During the current term of the Committee, the Committee took further
evidence of the representatives of Ministries of YAS, Home Affairs, UD,
Communications and IT on 25" October, 2016. The Committee also took oral
evidence of the representatives of Cabinet Secretariat, Home Affairs, Delhi
Police, CBI and Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports on 10" November, 2016.
Further, the Sub-Committee on Civil and Non-compliance in timely submission of
ATNs also took evidence of representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs and CBI
on 7 March, 2017.

5. | thank the Chairperson and members of the PAC 2012-13, 2013-14, and
my colleagues in the Committee during the terms 2015-16 and 2016-17 for ali the
hard work and long hours of dedication. | also thank the Convenor and members
of the Sub-Committee-VI (PAC) 2015-16 and Sub-Committee-IV (PAC) 2016-17
for their untiring efforts in examining the subject, which involves taking evidences
of representatives of various Ministries.

5. The Committee also would like to express their gratitude to the
representatives of the Ministries of Youth Affairs and Sports, Home Affairs, Urban


Development, Information and Broadcasting, Communications and IT, Health
and Family Welfare, DDA, NDMC, and CBI, who have deposed before the Sub-
Committee and have provided all the information required by the Committee in
their examination of the subject.

6. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance
tendered to them by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
and the Committee secretariat.

NEW DELHI; PROF. K.V. THOMAS
42" April, 2017 Chairperson,

22 Chaitra, 1939 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


CHAPTER |
L INTRODUCTORY

This report of the Public Accounts Committee is ‘pased on further scrutiny and
evidences taken of concerned Ministries in the organization of the Xixth
Commonwealth Games based on the Comptroller and Auditor Genral’s Report No. 6
of 2011 titled Performance Audit of XiXth Commonwealth Games.

4.1. After Olympics, the Commonwealth Games (CWG) is the second largest sports
festival in the world. The Games were earlier knowns by various names viz. British
Empire Games, Friendly Games and British Commonwealth Games. Since 1978, they
have been known as the Commonwealth Games. The Games are held once in every
four years, but only between the Olympic years. The first Commonwealth Games
were held in 1930 at Hamilton, Canada in which 11 countries participated. Since then
49 editions of the Games have been held. In the year 2001, the Games Movement
adopted the three values of Humanity, Equality and Destiny as the core values of the
Commonwealth Games which inspire and connect crores of people and signify the
broad mandate for holding the Games within the Commonwealth.

1.2 India was the proud host of the Nineteenth edition of the Games ie. the XIX

- Commonwealth Games which were held at New Delhi from 3४ to 14" October 2010.
The Competitions were held in 18 disciplines (including one discipline for Elite Athletes
with Disabilities) and 7572 Athletes/Coaches/Officials from 71 countries & territories of
the Commonwealth participated in these Games.

4.3. The performance of the Indian Sportspersons, particularly that of women, at the
CWG-2010 was exceptional and outstanding resulting in an unprecedented haul of
medals, which were more than double the medals India had won at the CWG -2006
held at Melbourne. India with a total of 101 medals viz. 38 Gold, 27 Silver and 36
Bronze stood second in the medals tally ahead of major sporting nations such as
England, Canada and South Africa. The Opening and closing ceremonies were


2

spectacular and the Country and its management won acclaim for the successful
conduct of the Games.

4.4 The process for hosting the XIX CWG-2010 in New Delhi was initiated through
the submission of the Bid Document by the Indian Olympic Association (IOA) to the
Commonwealth Games Federation (CGF) in May, 2003. The Cabinet in its meeting
held on 11th September 2003, approved entering into the Host City Contract as
provided by the CGF. The then Minister of Youth Affairs & Sports wrote to the
Chairman, CGF on 24th May, 2003 and conveyed support to the bid in the city of Delhi
and further guaranteed that "the Games will be organized in accordance with the
constitution, protocols and regulations of the CGF." The Games were allotted to Delhi
in November, 2003 at the General Assembly of the CGF held at Montego Bay,
Jamaica in November 2003. The Host City Contract (HCC) was entered into by the
CGF with the Indian Olympic Association (IOA), Government of India (through the
Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports) and the Government of the National Capital
Territory of Delhi (GNCTD) on 13th November, 2003. The Organizing Committee
(OC) became a signatory later on, after it was formed.

1.5. The preparation for the mega multi-disciplinary event was categorized as under:

(i) Development of Sports Infrastructures —Completion and Training venues.
(ii) Development of Non-Competition Venues
> Games Village.
> International Broadcasting Centre.
>» Main Press Centre.
> Central Logistics Centre
> Central Accreditation Centre
(iii) Host Broadcasting.
(iv) Upgradation of City Infrastructure.
(v) Augmentation of Tourist Accommodation.
(vi) Conduct of the Games.

1.6 The above categorization was made on the basis of the following advantages of
holding the CWG-2010 as enumerated in the Cabinet Note of 20th May, 2003:


(i) Promotion of tourism on a large scale resulting in the inflow of Foreign
Exchange and exposure of foreigners to the Indian culture;

{ii) Educating the citizens of the Country on the important role that sports
can play for building a homogenous society and to improve the general
health of the citizens;

(iii) | Upgradation of the existing sports infrastructure and creation of new
infrastructure of international standards in the city hosting the Games,

(iv) Improvement of civic amenities in the host city;

(५) Promotion of closer ties between the people of the Commonwealth
Countries and enhancing the prestige of the Country before the
international community; and

(vi) Giving a Boost to the indigenous sports industry.

1.7. The Host City Contract (Protoco! 2 (1.1) of the Games Management Protocols)
stipulated that the Commonwealth Games Federation (CGF) shall entrust the Indian
Olympic Association (IOA) with the organization of the Games. The IOA shail establish
an Organising Committee (OC), which shall have legal status and shall delegate the
organization of the Games to the OC.

4.8 As per the winning Bid Document, the Organising Committee was to have an
Executive Board (EB) at the apex, comprising of the Chairman (Government
appointee), Vice-Chairman (President of 100) and 13 other members, including 2
nominees each of the Central Government, 108, State governments and National

Sports Federations.

4.9 In the Bid document, the cost of preparation for the Games was pegged at USD
266.65 million (₹ 1200 crore) as Capital Expenditure including cost of construction and
repairs of stadia. The Games operating expenditure was estimated at USD 141 million
( 635 crore). The revenue from the Games was estimated at USD 186.59 million (=
839.655 crore)

4.10 The bid amount includes a sum of USD 100,000 (₹ 45,00,000), payable by oc

to each Commonwealth country and territory, participating in the Games.

4.11. Subsequently, the implementation structure was modified and set up as:


4

e Organising Committee, headed by Mr. Suresh Kalmadi, President of
108, as Chairman, for the Conduct of the Games.

« Committee of the Secretaries, chaired by Cabinet Secretary to review
and coordinate all activities, related to the Organising of the
Commonwealth Games.

e Empowered Committee of Delhi Government, chaired by Chief
Secretary, to ensure speedy clearance to the projects.

e Empowered Security Committee, chaired by Home Secretary, to
oversee and approve the security arrangement for CWG 2010.

e Venue Monitoing Committee, chaired by Secretary (Sports) to review
all aspects related to the Games, and coordinate activities of different
stakeholders.

1.12 Initially, a Group of Ministers (GOM) was constituted on 3rd September 2004
under the Chairmanship of Human Resource Development Minister, for coordinating
the work related to the organization of CWG to be held in Delhi in 2010. The other
members of this GOM included Minister of Parliamentary Affairs and Urban
Development, Minister of Information, Broadcasting and Culture, Minister of Finance,
Minister of External Affairs, Minister of Youth Affairs and Sports, MOS(I/C) Non
Resident Indian Affairs, MOS (॥0) Ministry of Tourism, LG Delhi, CM Delhi were

special invitees.

1.13. The composition of the Core Group of Ministers for coordinating the work
related to the organization of the commonwealth Games Delhi 2010 was reconstituted
on 22" March 2007/14" July 2007. While Shri Arjun Singh, the then Minister of
Human Resource Development continued to be Chairman of the Core Group of
Ministers, other Ministers in Group included Minister of Home Affairs, Minister of Urban
Development, Minister of Finance, Minister of Parliamentary Affairs and Information &
Broadcasting, Minister of Youth Affairs & Sports, Minister of Tourism and Culture,
MOS (॥0) Ministry of Women & Child Development. MOS Prime Minister's Office and
MOS, Ministry of Urban Development. Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission was a
Permanent Invitee and the Lieutenant Governor, Delhi Chief Minister, Delhi and
Chairman, OC CWG 2010 were Special invitees. Minister of Home Affairs was co-
Chairman of the GOM and could convene the meeting of the GOM as and when

required. These GOM's held 19 meetings.


5

1.14 Subsequently, on 23 June 2009 a new GOM was formed, under the
Chairmanship of Minister of Urban Development, to review the project and take
decisions as required to facilitate smooth implementation of all activities connected
with the Commonwealth Games. The other members of this GOM were Minister of
Youth Affairs and Sports, Minister of Tourism, MOS (Home) and MOS (Finance). Lt
Governor, Delhi, Chief Minister, Delhi and Chairman, Organising Committee were
special invitees to the meeting of the GOM. Cabined Secretary/Secretary (Coordn.)
also attended to meetings. The GOM discussed, urged and pushed: the OC and
various authorities, for timely and efficient completion of their duties. With the
approach of the CWG 2010 in October, 2010, the GOM increased the frequency of its
meetings, to about once a week. 34 meetings of this GOM were held.

1.15 The role and responsibilities for the preparation and conduct of the Games were
demarcated among the Ministries of Youth Affairs & Sports (Department of Sports),
Urban Development, Home Affairs, Health and Family Welfare, Information and
Broadcasting, Communications & Information Technology (Department of
Telecommunications), Tourism etc., the Organizing Committee (OC) and the Delhi
Government. These are discussed in detail in the succeeding Chapters of this Report.

4.46 The Cabinet Secretariat with the approval of the Prime Minister had constituted
a Core Group of Ministers (GOM) on 3rd September 2004, under the Chairmanship of
the then Minister, HRD, late Shri Arjun Singh, for coordinating the work relating to
organization of the CWG-2010. Its first meeting was held on 25th October, 2004
under the Chairmanship of the Prime Minister. One of the major decisions taken in
this meeting was "setting up of an Organizing Committee under the Chairmanship
of the Minister, Youth Affairs & Sports for creation and development of
infrastructure facilities and conduct of XIX Commonwealth Games, 2010. The
Executive Board shall also be Chaired by the Minister, Youth Affairs & Sports.”
The complete text of the Draft Minutes is at Annexure 1.

4.17. The Cabinet Secretariat, while finalizing the Draft Minutes, submitted by the
MYA&S , changed the above decision as "An Apex Committee on Commonwealth
Games may be set up under the Chairmanship of the Minister of Youth Affairs .&


6

Sports for monitoring and reviewing of activities relating to the conduct and
organizing of the Games and establishment of the required infrastructure". It
was approved by the Prime Minister on 5" November 2004. The complete text of the
Minutes is at Annexure Il. है

1.18 Before the first meeting of the GOM was held on 25th October 2004, Shri
Suresh Kalmadi, President, Indian Olympic Association wrote to the Prime Minister on
23rd October, 2004 inter-alia stating that "Chairman of the Organising Committee as
shown in the initial bid as ‘Government Nominee’ was removed at the time of
evaluation commissions meetings and was also confirmed at the General Assembly of
the Commonwealth Games Federation at Montego Bay.....". The Complete text of the
letter is at Annexure-lll.

4.19 On 26" October, 2004, a day after the GOM's first meeting, Shri Kalmadi, giving
reference to his earlier letter, again wrote to the Prime Minister inter-alia suggesting
that the then Sports Minister, late Shri Sunil Dutt be made the Chairman of the
Steering Committee to oversee the entire ambit of the Games whereas the President,
108 (Shri Kalmadi himself) be made the Chairman of the Organising Committee. The

complete text of the letter is at Annexure IV.

1.20 On 2" November 2004, three days before the Prime Minister accorded his
approval to the final Minutes of the first meeting of the GOM as submitted by the
Cabinet Secretariat, Shri Kalmadi again wrote to the PM inter-alia apprising him that at
the General Assembly Meeting of the Indian Olympic Association held on 1st
November 2004, a Resolution was passed by the House, electing him (Shri Kalmadi)
as the Chairman of the Organising Committee of the Commonwealth Games, 2010 to
be held in Delhi. The full text of the letter is at Annexure ४.

1.21 On 147" November, 2004, late Shri Suni Dutt, the then Sports Minister wrote to
the Prime Minister inter-alia stating that during his stay abroad, he was surprised to
see newspaper reports about a Resolution passed by the 108 tegarding the
appointment of the President 100 as the Chairman of the Organising Committee which
was at variance with the decisions taken in the GOM meeting held on 257 October,
2004. Shri Sunil Dutt also stated that "The Minutes, as issued by the Cabinet


71

Secretariat, do not reflect the decisions taken in the meeting of 25 October,
2004 regarding various aspects of composition of Organizing Committee. It
seems the word 'Apex' instead of the word ‘Organising’ has been used
inadvertently in para 8 (ii) of the minutes. Moreover, the decision regarding
constitution of Executive Board under my Chairmanship has not been
recorded..." Requesting the Prime Minister to consider issuing directions to amend
the Minutes, Shri Sunil Dutt sought the PM's indulgence for withholding the circulation
of the Minutes until a final view was taken on the matter. The full text of the letter is at
Annexure VI.

1.22 01 67" December, 2004, a communication from the PMO stated that institutional
arrangements had been evolved for the conduct of the CWG-2010 and that Shri
Suresh Kalmadi, President IOA‘was to be the Chairman of the Organising Committee
and the Executive Board. It also conveyed the PM's direction that these institutional
arrangements be considered in the next GOM meeting.

4.23 On 14" January, 2005, the second GOM meeting was held, but it did not take a
view regarding the governance structure.

1.24 In its third meeting held on 297 January, 2005, the GOM endorsed the views of
the PMO and decided that the OC would be headed by Shri Kalmadi.

1.25 On 10" February, 2005 the Organizing Committee was registered as a Society
under the Societies Registration Act, 1860. The Rules and Regulations of the oc
indicated Shri Kalmadi by name (and not merely as President, IOA) as the Chairman
of the OC,

4.26 From July 2007 onwards, concerns of the M/o Youth Affairs & Sports
resurfaced at the GOM and PMO levels regarding the lack of Government's control
over the functioning of the OC and the absence of a systematic arrangement to ensure
the reasonableness of expenditure and greater public accountability.

1.27 On 20th July, 2007, the late Shri S.K. Arora, Secretary, MYAS wrote to the
PMO with a copy to the Cabinet Secretary, indicating that the Executive Board had a
very limited management or decision-making authority and the GOI representatives


8

had neither any executive authority nor any means of ensuring that the Government's
view point was acknowledged and complied with as all decision making was
concentrated with the Chairman, OC. Shri Arora highlighted the differences between
the composition of the OC with that followed for the Special Organising Committee for
1982 Asian Games, essentially in terms of the overriding powers of the Chairman of
the CWG OC. Shri Arora flagged the need for balancing the OC's need for
operational flexibility with transparency and public financial accountability and
indicated that in the extant legal framework of the OC, it was unlikely that the
Government representatives would be able to discharge their responsibility of
ensuring transparency and accountability in the management of the OC. In the
above context, Shri Arora had suggested the following three options:

(i) The need for operational flexibility and financial autonomy desired by the
OC may be acknowledged and the role of the Government nominees be
restricted to a largely advisory role in the Executive Board. However, in
such a situation, the GOI should revise its decision to give "bridge
finance" to the OC and discontinue direct financing by the GOI as well as
take a view on the overall ceiling on the commitment to meet any
revenue deficit.

(ii) | The OC should be given a clear signal to vest the decision making in the
EB. The Government could consider retaining some authority for
approving decisions with financial commitment above a certain limit.

(ii) | The OC may be directed to broadbase its EB on the lines of the 1982
Asian Games Special Organising Committee, with representation from
the GOI and GNCTD at the Ministerial level.

The full text of Shri S.K. Arora's letter is at Annexure Vil.

4.28 On 25!" October, 2007, Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar, the then Sports Minister, wrote
to the Prime Minister highlighting the profligacy of the Chairman, OC and the abuse
and scorn heaped at the MYAS by him. Shri Aiyar wrote “But abuse and scorn
continue to be heaped at the Ministry in public statements made by the
Chairman who stoops so low as to describe us as cartoons sitting in one room
in Shastri Bhavan.” He further stated "....the Chairman sees the Ministry as a
milch cow to extract as much money as he can and a rubber stamp to endorse
every spending decision he takes, however outrageous." Urging the imperative
need of recasting the Organising Committee for CWG 2010 and its Organising


9

Committee for CWG 2010 and its Executive Board, Shri Aiyar suggested that "a
Minister of State for International Sporting Events be appointed from our younger MPs
to take over as Chairman of: revamped Executive Board of rejigged Organising
Committee and thus ensure that the Organisation of the Games is delivered
economically, efficiently and with good taste." The full text of Shri Aiyar's letter is at
Annexure VIII,

1.29 In view of the serious concerns expressed and claims and counterclaims made
in different quarters about the state of preparedness for successfully hosting the
prestigious event, largely because of the perceptions about the delay in the
construction of venues and associated infrastructure, the C&AG had decided to
conduct an independent study to assess the progress of projects and preparedness of
different agencies for organizing the Games and to identity the significant risks that
needed to be addressed. Not an audit in the conventional sense, this study was
meant to provide an aid to the Administration as benchmarks for monitoring the
progress of different works and undertaking mid course corrections. After conducting
a study between March and May 2009, a brief Report was prepared and submitted to
the Government in July, 2009, 15 months before the Games were to be held. Copies
of the Report were provided to all the Authorities engaged in the execution of the
complex Games Project. This study Report of the C&AG provided both documentary
and pictorial evidence of the status of the completion of projects in different phases as
of July, 2009. Highlighting that there was no scope for further delays and slippages in
the milestones, the Study Report also suggested that "in view of the complexity and
multiplicity of activities and organizations and the progress till date, there is
need to rethink the governance model for the games project as well as for
similar mega-events in the future." Recognizing the challenges faced by the MYAS,
OC and other agencies involved in completing all stages involved to meet the
immovable deadline of October, 2010, Audit had commented that it was only through
proactive leadership, comprehensive planning and rigorous monitoring that the
challenges could be effectively addressed.

1.30 The summary of the key suggestions/recommendations contained in the Audit
Study Report of July 2009 on "Preparedness for CWG-2010" were as under:


10

In view of the complexity and multiplicity of activities and organizations
and the progress till date, there is a need to rethink the governance
model for the Games Project as well as for similar mega-events in the
future.

The pending basic planning documents, as per the commitments in the
HCC, should be finalized on top priority for CGF's approval. Similarly,
pending operational plans for functional areas should be finalized
immediately, so that these areas are fully activated for delivery as per
schedule.

The web-based Project Monitoring System may be further strengthened
through better validation of data, achieving of past reports, and also by
capturing follow-up action on issues/deficiencies flagged through these
reports.

In view of the exceptional circumstances under which permission for the
basement in Siri Fort Complex was accorded as a fait accompli, ASI may
conduct an assessment of the continued structural soundness of the
protected monument and take appropriate further action.

In view of the fast approaching immovable deadline of October 2010, the
OC should expedite approval of final venue designs and detailed
specifications.

MYAS and SAI should accord heightened priority to the completion of the
SPM Aquatics Complex, which is a high risk venue in Audit's estimation.

MYAS and venue owners should ensure completion of remaining works
at all venues on priority basis by removal of hindrances fike inadequate
funds, delayed clearances, finalization of scope of work and designs etc.

Venue owners should closely monitor work execution by the
implementing agencies.

DDA and JMI may immediately ensure measures for obtaining necessary
clearances, including fire, water and sewage clearances.

Although during the exit conference, MYAS indicated that they did not
have any direct role in the grant of clearances as per the law, Audit
believed it needed to assume leadership role in this regard, as this was
critical to timely completion of venues.

The bottlenecks for the Games Village Project should be addressed on
top priority through better co-ordination within and across Governments.

All efforts should be made to ensure that at least the revised timelines for
the city infrastructure projects were adhered to. Closer monitoring was
essential for this purpose.


il

e The problem of pending clearances/NOCs from variaus agencies should
be addressed on top priority at the highest level.

e Hindrance-free sites have aiso been a major bottleneck, and the issue of
land acquisition needed to be addressed quickly.

e Most of the rooms projects as “definite” are located outside Delhi in
Haryana and Uttar Pradesh. Measures to facilitate smooth movement of
visitors from these locations, including timely completion of road and
infrastructure projects, needed to be ensured.

« Considering the expected shortfall in “definite and likely" rooms, more
work needs to be done on alternative options for accommodation within
defined timelines, including validation of practicability, and preparation of
development plans.

e Steps for generating sponsorship and other revenue should be further
expedited as the window of opportunity in leveraging the Games was fast
shrinking with the passage of time.

e Payment of 5 percent of sponsorship revenue of IOA should be
considered only out of the cash revenue surplus of the Games, if any.

1.31 On 13" September, 2009, Mr. Mike Fennel, President CGF wrote to the OC EB
members and stated that "unless there is significant changes in the management
culture and operation of the OC, theses games will fail from an operational
perspective.” Mr. Fennel aiso met the Prime Minister and reportedly expressed his
doubts about the ability of the OC and its management for staging the Games. The
full text of Mr. Fennel's letter is at Annexure IX.

4.32 In the context of doubts expressed by Mr. Fennel on the ability and capability of
the OC to deliver the Games, Shri M.S. Gill, the then Minister of Youth Affairs and
sports wrote to the Prime Minister on 26th September 2009 inter-alfa stating that "The
original signed document had a government Chairman, but later somehow that
was changed." He further stated that "The OC have 23 Sub-Committees, which have
rarely met, or performed in the situation described above." Apprising the Prime
Minister of the line of action devised to immediately strengthen the Management inside
the OC after discussions with the Chairman-OC, Secretary General- 106, Chief
Minister-Delhi, the Cabinet Secretary and the Principal Secretary to PM, Shri Gill
mentioned that while the structure could not be changed, he was in agreement with


12

the Cabinet Secretary who had identified individuals and it would be necessary that
persons identified to undertake the fire fighting job were fully backed by himself and
the Prime Minister. The full text of Shri Gill's letter is at Annexure-X.

1.33 As mentioned above, the Games were finally and successfully held in Delhi
from 3” to 14" October 2010 and Indian gave its best ever performance in the CWG
by securing second position in the medals tally, next to Australia. Despite such
phenomenal success of the Indian contingent, the events leading to the conduct of the
Games had attracted severe adverse attention. There were reports of irregularities in
the award of contracts; delays in the construction of stadia, Games village and related
infrastructure; procurement of equipment of inferior quality or purchase of routine items
at exorbitantly high prices etc. There were not only veiled allegations of serious
leakage of Government funds and favoritism in the award of contracts, but also direct
indictment of officials in position in the different agencies entrusted with either the
hosting of the Games or developing stadia and associated infrastructure.

1.34 Thus, in view of the concerns expressed by a cross sections of the society with
regard to the perceived inadequacies and shortcomings in different projects and
associated activities with the staging and hosting of the Games, the C&AG decided to
conduct an external audit post completion of the Games in the shortest possible time
so that Parliament and the Country could have the benefit of an independent and
objective assessment of the outcome emanating from the expenditure incurred. The
Audit Report covered the period from May, 2003 (when the bid was submitted) to
December, 2010 (after the conclusion of the Games) as well as a multiplicity of
activities-not just the hosting of the Games per se, but also the development of
sporting venues, the Games village, city infrastructure projects and other
associated/supporting activities, executed by a diverse set. of agencies. The Audit
Team conducted their field work between August and December, 2010, held Entry and
Exit Conferences with the Agencies concerned and issued detailed Statement of Facts
(8079) to them seeking their responses and comments which have been appropriately
considered while finalizing the Report.

1.35 The Audit Report was laid in Parliament on 5h August, 2011. Some of the key
findings of the Audit Report are as under:


()

(i)

(iii)

(iv)

(५)

(vi)

13

Although the bid document of May 2003 envisaged the OC as a
Government-owned registered Society, with the Chairman of. the OC a
Government appointee, and the IOA President being only the EB Vice-
Chairman, the OC was ultimately set up in February 2005 as a non-
Govemment registered Society with the 108 President, Shri Suresh Kalmadi
as the Chairman of the OCEB. This change was orchestrated through a
sequence of events, commencing with a document titled as an “updated bid"
of December, 2009 (which had no legal sanctity or relevance) indicating a
changed structure. This updated bid of December 2003 surfaced only in
September, 2004, viz 16 months after the IOA made its bid and 10 months
after the original bid had already been declared successful.

The decision to appoint Shri Kalmadi as the Chairman, OC on a
recommendation of the PMO in December 2004, despite serious objections
from the erstwhile Minister, MYAS, late Shri Sunil Dutt, facilitated the
conversion of the Originally envisaged Government —owned OC into a Body
outside the Government control, without commensurate accountability to the
Government and concomitant controls to ensure propriety and transparency
(despite full financial guarantee and funding from the Government).

Attempts in 2007 by Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar, the then Minister YAS and
late Shri S.K. Arora, the then Secretary, MYAS with the PMO, GOM and the
Cabinet Secretariat, highlighting the ineffective position of the MYAS in
exercising control over the OC met with strong resistance from the
Chairman, OC and were hence rendered unfruitful.

In the absence of a single point of authority and accountability and the lack
of a clear governance structure, a multiplicity of coordination Committees
were created, disbanded and reconstituted at different points of time leading
to inconsistent and ineffective approach and complete diffusion of
accountability. This was unlike the structure for the Melbourne CWG-2006,
where the Victorian Government oversaw the planning and delivery of the
Games through a specially formed Cabinet Committee.

The seven-year window from the award of CWG-2010 to Delhi in November
2003 to its hosting in October, 2010 was not appropriately uitlised.
Especially, the crucial period from November, 2003 to mid 2006, which
could have been effectively used for planning, clearances and approvals
was wasted resulting in delays in overall planning for the Games and in all
subsequent activities.

The 108 bid of May 2003 estimated an all-inclusive cost of हैं 1200 crore
(after, setting off operational expenses against estimated revenue from
hosting the Games) whereas the overall budget estimate for CWG-2010
from the GOI and the GNCTD (including all other implementing Agencies)
but excluding investments by other Agencies like DMRC and AAI/DIAL, was
% 18,532 crore as of October, 2010. Evidently, the GOI did not have a clear
and realistic assessment of the estimated cost of hosting the Games.
Numerous instances of delays in the grant of budgetary and financial


wii)

(शा)

(x)

(x)

(xi)

(xii)

14

approvals by the GOI resulting in bunching of activities towards the end and
consequential increase in cost were noticed by Audit.

The internal controi environment and decision making structures within the
OC were highly inadequate. Similarly, contract management by the OC was
irregular and deficient. The processing of certain sensitive contracts/cases
was allocated in an ad-hoc manner to certain officials who had no linkages
with the functional areas concerned. The argument of ‘urgency’ was used to
obviate the regular process of tendering for award of contracts. There were
numerous instances of single tendering; award of contracts on ‘nomination
basis' and to ineligible vendors; inconsistent use of restrictive Pre-
Qualification (PQ) conditions to favour particular vendors; inadequate time
for bidding, cancellation and re-tendering of contracts; inexplicable delays in
finalization of contract; etc. which seriously compromised transparency and
economy.

Both MYAS & MOF failed to exercise due diligence ‘and did not seriously
challenge the OC's claim of revenue neutrality. In fact, the premise of
revenue neutrality was used to justify the independence and financial
autonomy of the OC and was seriously flawed, as it was never supported by
robust and appropriately validated revenue projections. The total
committeed revenue was % 682.06 crore and the net revenue actually
realized by OC (after deducting revenue generation cost) was just हैं 173.96
crore.

Three of the five consultancy contracts awarded to Event Knowledge
Services (EKS), during 2005-08, was done on nomination basis, facilitated
by strong patronage form the CGF, with which EKS had a close link.
Tendering conditions for the other two contracts were tailored to suit EKS.

The procurement process followed by OC for award of venue overlays
contracts was highly irregular. OC inexplicably shifted form an item-wise
basis (followed internationally) to a venue-cluster approach, based on
geographical locations. This cluster-based approach, alongwith tailored
eligibility criteria, was used to discourage competition by restricting the
number of vendors. -

Although the ceremonial events of CWG-2010 like the Queen's Baton Relay
(QBR) and the opening and closing ceremonies were widely appreciated,
Audit found numerous irregularities in the appointment of
Contractors/vendors for various ceremonies as well as in the procurement of
accessories, special items, props etc. besides inordinate delay in the
planning of the opening and closing ceremonies.

There were numerous irregularities in the award of the Games Village
Catering Contract. The process of awarding the catering contract took 14
months, with two rounds of tendering, both on single financial bids. The
cancellation of the first tender by the Chairman, OC was not only against the


(xiii)

(xiv)

(xv)

(xvi)

(xvii)

(xviii)

(xix)

15

recommendations of the OC officials but was also done after opening the
single financial bid on the Chairman's verbal orders.

Inordinate delay in the planning for Timing Scoring and Results (TSR)
System, Games Management System (GMS) and Games Time Website
(GTW) and flawed award of contracts for these integrated technical
solutions were also noticed by Audit. There were clear and repeated
intervention at different stages to steer the TSR contract toward Swiss
Timing Omega and eliminate MSL, Spain.

There were several deficiencies in the procurement of sports equipment by
the Sports Functional Area in the OC. Such deficiencies inter-alia included
not following global tendering procedures, purchases on single tender basis
and deficient assessment of requirements.

The exorbitant cost of = 10 crore for the Games News Service (GNS)
contract was due to a decision to go in for outsourcing and also on account
of flawed tendering procedures resulting in the award on a single financial
bid to Infostrada Sports. GNS failed to perform satisfactorily during the
Games.

OC managed the work force in an arbitrary and ad-hoc manner, leaving
ample scope for patronage, favoritism and nepotism in the appointment and
promotion of officials. Security and reference checks were not carried out
for most employees. Certain employees, whose past records should have
rendered them unfit for appointment in the OC, were nevertheless
appointed.

There were delays relating to venue development at all stages —planning
delays on account of late preparation/approval of venue briefs, return briefs
and concept designs; delays in tendering and contract award; and delays in
work execution and handover. Similarly, there were several cases of delays
in achieving the milestones listed in the contract, for which adequate penal
action was not taken and Extension of Time (EOT) was not managed

properly.

Different implementing agencies followed different processes for award of
major construction works. Deficiencies in the process for award of major
works related mainly to pre-qualification and eligibility. The pre-qualification
of bidders separately for each venue not only introduced arbitrariness and
inconsistencies in eligibility criteria, but also delayed the process of award
and execution. ~

Audit found several deficiencies in the process of ‘Justification’ for awarding
works at substantially higher amounts than cost estimates. There were also
numerous instances of deviation i.e. quantity deviations, extra items and
substituted items from the original scope of work, with adverse implications
in terms of increased cost and delays.


16

(xx) Instances of several deficiencies in the application of the fabour wage
escalation clause were also noticed by Audit.

4.36 Before the laying of the abovesaid Audit Report to Parliament and exactly ten
days after the conclusion of the XIX Commonwealth Games, a High Level Committee
(HLC) under the Chairmanship of Shri V.K. Shunglu, former C&AG of India was
constituted by the Government on 25" October, 2010 to look into issues relating to the
organizing and conduct of the CWG-2010, Dethi and lessons to be learnt for the future.
The Shunglu Committee gave six Reports between 29" January, 2011 and 297 March,
2011 on (i) Host Broadcasting (ii) CWG Village (iii) City Infrastructure, (iv) Games
Venues, (v) Organising Committee and (vi) Organisation & Conduct of CWG 2010
pertaining to different stakeholders. The first Report was submitted to the Government
on 29" January, 2011; the second Report on 7" March, 2011; the third Report on 18"
March, 2011; the fourth & fifth Reports on 28" March, 2011; and the sixth & Main
Report on 29" March, 2011. Each of the five Reports discussed governance and its
outcome in respect of the specific areas covered while all generic aspects of
governance were discussed in the Main Report.

4.37 Some of the key findings of the Shunglu Committee Reports are as under:

(i) The Host City Contract, accepted without due consideration, committed
Government to underwrite the Games on the false promise of revenue
neutrality. This premise was the basis on which nearly = 30,000 crore was
secured from the Government between 2003 and 2010 even though, after a
point, it was very clear that the Games would place considerable financial
burden on the Government.

(i) The role of the President, CGF and its CEO was hardly what was expected
form this kind of agency and the kind of authority they enjoyed was not
conducive to good management besides being expensive.

(iii) A period of seven years was available to prepare for the Games. The first
three years were squandered in peripheral activity thereby compressing the
time available to four years. In disregard of time lost, activity picked up
belatedly and reached a feverish pitch so near the Games that most actions
became ‘emergency’ decisions, compromising cost and quality.

(iv) _ Lack of explicit Budgetary ceiling compounded increasing costs and it was
not entirely clear whether the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports, assigned
the function to coordinate, possessed the authority to restrain the entities.
These entities displayed no restraint; one and all overstated costs, misled
the approving authority and wrongdoing became commonplace.


17

(५) The implicit decision to conduct the Games through a private non-profit
society was an ‘error of judgment’ compounded by the personality of its
Chairman for whom the difference between fact and fiction was academic.
His style and interests compromised proper preparation and efficient
conduct of Games. Emergency measures ameliorated the situation, but ata
very high cost.

(vi) The Governance mechanism designed for oversight of what turned out to be
a mammoth undertaking proved unequal to the task and its facilitation
function was often abused by the entities it was meant to assist.

(vil) OC had been able to secure what it wanted from the GOM while the
Government was unable to use the GOM for exercising control over OC. It
would be perhaps not wrong to conclude that the GOM, during the period
2005-2009 was largely supportive of OC and as a result some functions
which did not belong to OC became their preserve. In some cases the GOM
did not decide issues which belonged to it while in other cases it took
decisions on matters not within its ambit. Even if an oversight role was
contemplated for GOM, in practice it was unable to assert that role.

(vii) The dysfunctionality of the Sports Authority of India (SAI) was largely a
result of OC encroaching on territory belonging to the latter. It may well be
that the MYAS having lost every battle had given up the struggie.

(ix) Projects were delayed and got completed in their own time. The
empowerment of the GOM did not seem to have helped even though its
Chairman was the Minister for Urban Development, in charge of CPWD &
DDA.

00 Inspite of all its efforts, even the Committee of Secretaries (COS) was
unable to get the agencies to complete the works in time. Incorrect
reporting and lack of coordination at lower levels prevented the COS form
taking corrective action at stages earlier than they actually did. Early
warnings were ignored by the implementing agencies. Ultimately in August
2010, special Officers had to be appointed to supervise and coordinate work
at different venues and their contribution has been acknowledged and
admired.

1.38 Against the above backdrop and after the laying of the C&AG Report in
Parliament on 50 August, 2011, the Public Accounts Committee (2011-12) took up the
subject for examination and report. In the process, the Committee obtained detailed
written reply and volumes of documents from the Ministries of Youth Affairs & Sports;
Urban Development; Health & Family Welfare; Home Affairs; Communications &
Information Technology (Department of Telecommunications) and Information &
Broadcasting as also form the Organising Committee, the Central Bureau of


18

Investigation and above all the Prime Minister's Office. Between 10" October, 2011
and 13" February, 2013, the Committee took several oral evidences of the above said
Ministries/Departments and the implementing agencies under their Administrative
Control like Sports Authority of India (SAI), CPWD, Delhi Development Authority
(DDA), Safdarjung Hospital/Sports Injury Centre (SIC), NDMC, Delhi Police,
Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Ltd. (MTNL) and Prasar Bharati. Post evidence replies,
wherever required, were also obtained from the Ministries/Departments concerned.

1.39 The Committee obtained written reply also from the Government of National
Capital Territory. Delhi (GNCTD), through the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports.
However, on 25" October, 2012, the Speaker, Delhi Vidhan Sabha wrote to the
Chairman, PAC, apprising that the C&AG had laid another Audit Report on CWG-2010
in Delhi Legislative Assembly on 137" January, 2012 on the issues exclusively
pertaining to the Delhi Government including MCD. The Speaker, Delhi Vidhan Sabha
was of the opinion that it would be most appropriate that the Audit para pertaining to
the different agencies of the Delhi Government are examined in detail by the PAC,
Delhi Legislative Assembly. The full text of the Speaker Delhi Vidhan Sabha's letter is

at Annexure XI.

1.40 In the Committee's sitting held on 1% February, 2013, the Chairman apprised
the Members of the letter received from the Speaker, Delhi Vidhan Sabha and solicited
their opinion/suggestion. ‘After some deliberations on the matter, the Committee
decided to leave the issues pertaining to the Delhi Government and its implementing
agencies as highlighted in the C&AG Report, for examination by the PAC, Delhi
Legislative Assembly,

1.41 Consequentially, in the following Chapters, the role and responsibility assigned
to the Ministries/Departments/Implementing Agencies of the Government of India in
the organization and conduct of the CWG-2010 and their respective performances
have been discussed in detail, based on their written submission/documents furnished
as well as oral evidence tendered before the Committee.


19
CHAPTER Il

ROLE & RESPONSIBILITY OF THE PRIME MINISTER'S OFFICE (PMO)

2.1. As mentioned in the earlier Chapter, the Group of ministers (GoM) held its first
meeting on 25" October, 2004. One of the major decisions taken in this meeting was
"Setting up of an Organising Committee, under the Chairmanship of the Minister,
Youth Affairs & Sports for creation and development of infrastructure facilities and
conduct of 2090 Commonweaith Games, 2010. The Executive Board shail also be
chaired by the Minister, Youth Affairs & Sports".

2.2 But, the Cabinet Secretariat, while finalizing the Draft Minutes as submitted by
the MYA&S, changed the above decisions as "An Apex Committee on Commonwealth
Games may be set up under the Chairmanship of the Minister of Youth Affairs &
Sports for monitoring and reviewing of activities relating to the conduct and organizing
of the Games and establishment of the required infrastructure". It was approved by
the Prime Minister on 57 November 2004.

2.3 In the above context, the Committee sought clarifications from the PMO. In
their written submission, the PMO stated that the draft Minutes of the first meeting of
the GoM, chaired by the Prime Minister were submitted for approval by the Cabinet
Secretary vide his note dated 28" October, 2004. The Cabinet Secretary's note while
enclosing a copy of the draft Minutes prepared by the MYA&S, had stated that based
on the draft Minutes received from the MYA&S, the Cabinet Secretariat had finalized
the Minutes of the meeting and the same be approved by the Prime Minister.

2.4 The Committee then, desired to know the reasons for not issuing the Minutes of
the second Meeting of the GoM, held on 14" January, 2005, where one of the agenda
items was the appointment of the Chairman, OC. In reply, the PMO stated as under:

"The second meeting of the Group of Ministers held on 44" January, 2005 was
chaired by the Minister of Human Resource Development. As per Cabinet
Secretariat's O.M. No. 781/2/12004-Cab dated 3° September, 2004, the Core
Group of Minister's constituted for coordinating the work related to the
organization of the Gommonwealth Games to be held in Delhi in 2010 was
serviced by the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports. As such, the reasons for
not issuing the minutes of the second meeting of the Group of Ministers can be
best explained by the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports."


20

2.5 The agenda item on the appointment of the Chairman, Organising Committee
was prepared before the scheduled Second and Third meetings of the Group of
Ministers which was communicated to the GoM vide the PMO ID dated 6th December
2004.: In the above context, the Committee desired to be apprised of the rationale
behind recommending the appointment of President, Indian Olympic Association as
Chairman of the Organising Committee, CWG 2010. In reply, the PMO stated as
under:

"On 11.09.2003, the Cabinet had accorded ex-post facto approval to the
proposal of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports for allowing the Indian
Olympic Associations (IOA) to bid for the XIX Commonwealth Games and also
to enter into the Host City Contract with the Commonwealth Games Federation
(CGF) in case 108 was successful in its bid. After 1008 was successful in its bid,
the Host City Contract was signed with the CGF by President, 108, Lt.
Governor Delhi on behalf of the host city and Secretary, Ministry of Youth
Affairs and Sports on behalf of the Government of India on 13.11.2003.

Thereafter, on 1.11.2004, the General Assembly of the IOA elected Shri Suresh
Kalmadi to be the Chairman of the Organising Committee (IOC). This was
conveyed to the Prime Minister by the President, [OA vide his letter dated
02.11.2004.

Shri Sunit Dutt, the then Minister of Youth Affairs and Sports in his letter dated
14.11.2004 to Prime Minister had, inter-alia, objected to the resolution of the
IOA electing Shri Kalmadi, President 108 as the Chairman of the OC.

In the context of the submissions of Shri Sunil Dutt, the then Minister of Youth
Affairs and Sports, and the views of Shri Suresh Kalmadi, President IOA,
conveyed to the Prime Minister through his letters 23.10.2004 and 26.10.2004,
that the stand of Shri Sunil Dutt was violative of the Olympic Charter and the
Commonwealth Games protocol, the issue of Chairmanship of the OC of the
Commonwealth Games was examined in the PMO in detail. During such
examination, it was noted that:

(i) The GGF, in its General Assembly held in Jamaica on 13.11.2003, had,
while approving 1008 bid for holding the XIX Commonwealth Games,
2010 at Delhi, resolved to entrust the organising and hosting of the
Games to the IOA.

(ii) The Host City Contract, signed by the previous Government pursuant to
award of the Games to the IOA, and the Games Management Protocol 2
of the Contract clearly stipulated that the 108 shall establish the
Organising Committee (OC) for the conduct of the Games.

(ii) | The CEO of the CGF vide his letter dated 06.09.2004 to the President,
108 had indicated that structure of the Executive Board of the Executive
Committee, its Chairman and members proposed as by the 10/ was
acceptable to the CGF.


(iv)

(v)

21

During the 11 meeting of the GoM held on 25.10.2004, the Finance
Minister had pointed out that the organizational structure for the conduct
of the Asian Games, 1982 may be considered for adoption with suitable
improvements. The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs had also pointed
out that the full involvement of the IOA in the Organisation of the Games
would be essential, since the 10/ had presented the initial bid before the
CGF and sponsorship rights would be with the (08.

The institutional arrangements put in place for the gt Asian Games held
in Delhi in 1982, indicated that a Special Organising Committee was set
up by the IOA and not the Government.

Thus against the background of the above mentioned facts, and in the context
of views expressed at the 1st meeting of the GoM, communications received
from the Minister, Youth Affairs and Sports and President IOA, the following
institutional arrangements were evolved for the conduct of the Commonwealth
Games:

(i)

(ii)

(ii)

(iv)

A Group of Ministers (GoM) headed by Shri Arjun Singh, Minister of HRD
to monitor and oversee the preparations of the Games.

An Empowered Committee to look after the construction of stadia and
any other infrastructure facilities required for the Games. This
Committee may be chaired by the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports
and would comprise of three Vice Chairmen viz Lt. Governor, Delhi Chief
Minister, Delhi and Chairman of the Organising Committee. The
composition of the Empowered Committee, other than the three Vice
Chairmen, may be decided by the GoM or by the Prime Minister, on the
suggestions of the Minister of Youth Affairs and Sports in his capacity as
its Chairman.

An Organising Committee and Executive Board, responsible for the
conduct of the Games and formulation of Sub-Committees, to be chaired
by Shri Suresh Kalmadi, President of OA. The Organising Committee
will deal with the Government of India through the Ministry of Youth
Affairs and Sports and with the Delhi Administration. The Composition of
the Organising Committee may be decided by the GoM or by the Prime
Minister taking into account the suggestions of its Chairman.

A Committee of Secretaries (CoS) headed by the Cabinet Secretary for
implementation of the decisions of the GoM regarding the
Commonwealth Games. The CoS will be responsible for implementation
of the decisions of the GoM which do not fall within the purview of the
Empowered Committee and the Organising Committee.

The abovementioned institutional arrangements were then conveyed by PMO
on 06.12.2004, with Prime Minister's approval, to the Cabinet Secretary with the
request to send the same to Shri Arjun Singh, Minister of HRD who headed the
GoM on the Commonwealth Games, for consideration in the next meeting of
the GoM.”


22

2.6 Asked to state the working papers that were taken into consideration for
recommending the appointment of the President (08 as Chairman of the Organising
Committee, the PMO stated that the working papers taken into consideration while
evolving the suggested institutional arrangements for the conduct and organisation of
the CWG, 2010 for the GoM's consideration were as under:

(i) Late Shri Sunil Dutt's Letters dated 14" November, 2004 to the Prime
Minister.

(ii) Shri Suresh Kalmadi's Letter dated 23 October, 2004; 260" Cctober,
2004; and 24 November, 2004 to the Prime Minister.

(iv) Minutes of the first meeting of the GoM.

(v) 888 1 of the Host City Contract,

(vi) Page 8 21 of the Games Management Protocol 2 of the Host City
Contract.

(vi) CEO, CGF's Letter dated 6"" September 2004 to the President 108.

(viii) Page 1 of the Minutes of the General Assembly meeting of the 108 held
on 6" September 1980.

(ix) Letter dated 6" April, 1981 from Raja Bhalendra Singh, President IOA to
the then Prime Minister.

2.7. The Prime Minister convened a meeting to review the status of the preparation
for CWG 2010 in August 2006 wherein it was desired to establish a system for
providing monthly status reports on the progress on Games related activities.
However, the first such report was generated through the Project Monitoring System in
October 2008.

2.8 In the above context, the Committee desired to be apprised of the reasons for
delay of more than two years in generating the first monthly status report and whether
the PMO had deliberated the delay with the MYA&S and other Ministries/Departments
concerned to ensure that the Prime Minister's decision was followed. In reply, the
PMO submitted as under:

“It may be mentioned that the following institutional arrangements had been put
in place for the organization and conduct of the Commonwealth Games, 2010:


23

(i) A Core Group of Minister's (GoM) for coordinating the work related to the
organisation of the Games. The GoM was serviced by Ministry of Youth
Affairs and Sports,

(ii) An Apex Committee headed by the Minister of Sports having overriding
powers and responsibility for overseeing and coordinating the Games,

(iii)A Organising Committee headed by the President IOA to conduct the
Games,

(iv) A three member Sub-Committee of the GoM, headed by the Finance
Minister to supervise and deal with all financial matters.

(v) LG Delhi having overall responsibility regarding the Games with specific
reference to security, law and order and matters coming under DA,

(vi)A Sub-Committee headed by Chief Minister, Delhi to look after all other
issues coming under the jurisdiction of Government of NCT of Delhi,

(vii) A Committee of Secretaries (CoS) headed by Cabinet Secretary,
responsible for the implementation of the decisions of the GoM regarding
the Commonwealth Games. The CoS was serviced by D/o Sports.

During the meeting held on 7" August, 2006 to review the status of the
preparation for the Commonwealth Games, the Prime Minister had desired that
milestones be set for ensuring timely execution of various key activities,
responsibility be fixed for these activities and a system be established which
gives a monthly status on the progress made on completing these activities.
While the minutes of this meeting had been conveyed to the Ministry of Youth
Affairs & Sports for circulation, Cabinet Secretary had also been requested
separately to take necessary action in this regard.

In this connection, it may be noted that the CoS set up for implementation of the
decisions of the GoM regarding the Games was monitoring the roll-out of a
comprehensive e-enabled monitoring system by the Ministry of Youth Affairs and
Sports. This is evident from the minutes of the six meetings of the CoS held
between 01.09.2006 and 20.032007, copies of which were endorsed to the
Prime Minister's Office. The fact that a comprehensive e-enabled monitoring
system would be developed for monitoring all the projects ensuring that rigorous
quality norms and time schedules are adhered to was also brought to the notice
of the GoM by the M/o Youth Affairs and Sports through the agenda note for the
10" meeting of the GoM. Subsequently, Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports had
also apprised the GoM that the IT based monitoring system had been put in
place through the agenda note for the 11th meeting of the GoM.

Thus, given that the M/o Youth Affairs and Sports was responsible for the setting
up of the Web-based Project Monitoring System, the reasons for delay in
generating the system's first report can be best explained by the Ministry of
Youth Affairs and Sports.

Further, as the roll-out of the Web-based Project Monitoring System was being
regularly monitored by the CoS, as part of the overall institutional arrangements


24

for the organisation and conduct of the Games, there did not appear to be a
need for a separate follow up by the Prime Minister's Office."

2.9 The Committee then asked about the rationale behind assigning duties to ten
special officers at the fag end i.e. 18" August 2010, of the Games preparation. In
response, the PMO stated as under:

"On 14" August, 2010, Prime Minister had convened a high-level meeting to
review the preparations for the Commonwealth Games, 2010. During the
meeting, Prime Minister while observing that there had been slippages in the
time schedules of some of the construction works and that deficiencies had also
been noticed in some of the works, had given several directions. The directions
given included, inter-alia, enpowering the GoM to take all decisions necessary
for the smooth conduct of the Games, according the CoS headed by the
Cabinet Secretary, the status of an Empowered Committee having jurisdiction
over all matter relating to the Organising Committee etc.

One of the points mentioned during the meeting was that some seniors officers
presently working in Delhi in various Ministries be deputed on a part-time basis
to oversee the preparations at the major venues, solve coordination matters
and bring to the notice of the Cabinet Secretary and the Department of Sports,
problems that need to be resolved. Thereafter, Cabinet Secretary vide his note
to the Prime Minister dated 16.08.2010 had discussed this issue and decided
that Cabinet Secretary may select and depute officers for this task with the
approval of the Prime Minister. Accordingly, cabinet Secretary had after
discussing with Secretary, D/o Sports and CEO, Organising Committee,
identified 10 officers for this purpose and sought Prime Minister's approval for
the same. The identified officers were to be allocated specific venues for daily
inspection and report to the Secretary, Sports or Cabinet Secretary and for
solving all coordination problems at the venues. Prime Minister had therefore
approved Cabinet Secretary's proposal."

2.10 The Committee then desired to know the specific action taken by the PMO on
the concerns/reservations raised/expressed by late Shri Sunil Dutt, Shri Mani Shankar
Aiyar, Shri M.S. Gill, all former Ministers of Youth Affairs & Sports, and Shri S.K. Arora,
the then Secretary, MYA&S in their communications to the Prime Minister/Prime
Minister's Office. In reply, the PMO stated as under:

(i) “Action taken_on the letter dated 14.11.2004 from Shri Sunil Dutt the then
Minister of Youth Affairs and Sports.

The GoM constituted for coordinating the work related to the organization of the
Commonwealth games, in its 11 meeting held on 24.10.2004, decided, inter-alia
that:

(i) An 'Apex Committee’ on Commonwealth Games may be set up under
the Chairmanship of Minister of Youth Affairs & Sports for monitoring and


(i)

25

reviewing of activities relating to the conduct and organizing of the
Games and establishment of the required infrastructure.

An Empowered Committee under the Chairmanship of Lt. Governor,
Delhi may be set up with representatives of Central Ministries and other
agencies as well as concerned State Governments to monitor the
construction of required infrastructure within the specified time. The
Empowered Committee will be notified by the Ministry of Youth Affairs.

Thereafter, on 01.11.2004, the General Assembly of the IOA elected Shri
Suresh Kalmadi to be the Chairman of the Organising Committee.

In this connection, Shri Sunil Dutt, the then Minister of Youth Affairs and
Sports in his letter dated 14.11.2004 to Prime Minister had objected to
the resolution of the IOA electing Shri Kalmadi, President IOA as the
Chairman of the OC. He also mentioned that the words 'Apex
Committee’ in the minutes of the 1st meeting of the GoM appeared to
have been used inadvertently instead of 'Organising Committee’ and that
the decision regarding the constitution of the Executive Board under his
chairmanship and that Empowered Committee on Infrastructure would
report to the Organising Committee had not been recorded.

In the context of the submissions of Shri Sunil Dutt, the then Minister of
Youth Affairs and Sports, and the views of Shri Suresh Kalmadi,
President IOA, conveyed to the Prime Minister through his letters
23.10.2004 and 26.10.2004, that the stand of Shri Sunil Dutt was
violative of the Olympic Charter and the Commonwealth Games protocol,
the issue of Chairmanship of the OC of the Commonwealth Games was
examined in the PMO in detail. during such examination, it was noted
that:

(i) The CGF, in its General Assembly held in Jamaica on 13.11.2003,
had, while approving !OA's bid for holding the XIX Commonwealth
Games, 2010 at Delhi, resolved to entrust the organizing and
hosting of the Games to the |OA,

(ii) The Host City Contract signed by the previous Government
pursuant to award of the Games to the IOA and Games
Management Protocol 2 of the Contract clearly stipulated that the
108 shall establish the OC for the conduct of the Games,

(ii) The CEO of the CGF vide his letter dated 06.09.2004 to the
President, 108 had indicated that structure of the Executive Board
of the Executive committee, its Chairman and members proposed .
as by the IOA was acceptable to the CGF.

(iv) During the 1st meeting of the GoM held on 25.10.2004, the
Finance Minister had pointed out that the organisation structure
for the conduct of the Asian Games, 1982 may be considered with
suitable improvements. The Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs


26

had also pointed out that the involvement of the IOA in the
organization of the Games would be essential, given that [0/8 had
presented the initial bid before the CGF and sponsorship rights
would be with the 108.

(v) 685 per the institutional arrangements put in place for the 9th Asian
Games held in Delhi in 1982, a special Organizing Committee was
set up by the IOA and not the Government.

Thus, against the background of the above mentioned facts, and in the
context of views expressed at the ‘ist meeting of the GoM,
communications received from the Minister, Youth Affairs and Sports and
President IOA, the following institutional arrangement were evolved for
the conduct of the Commonwealth Games:

(i) A Group of Ministers (GoM) headed by Shri Arjun Singh, Minister
of HRD to monitor and oversee the preparations of the Games,

(ji) | An Empowered Committee to look after the construction of stadia
and any other infrastructure facilities required for the Games. This
Committee may be chaired by the Minister of Youth Affairs and
Sports and would comprise of three Vice Chairmen viz. Lt.
Governor, Delhi, Chief Minister, Delhi and Chairman of the
Organising Committee. The composition of the Empowered
Committee, other than the three Vice Chairmen, may be decided
by the GoM or by the Prime Minister, on the suggestions of the
Minister of Youth Affairs and Sports in his capacity as its
Chairman,

(iii) | An Organising Committee and Executive Board, responsible for
the conduct of the Games and formulation of Sub-Committees, to
be chaired by Shri Suresh Kalmadi, President of the IOA. The
Organising Committee will deal with the Government of India
through the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports and with the Delhi
Administration. The composition of the Organising Committee
may be decided by the GoM or by the Prime Minister taking into
account the suggestions of its Chairman.

(iv) A Committee of Secretaries (CoS) headed by the Cabinet
Secretary for implementation of the decisions of the GoM
tegarding the Commonwealth Games. The CoS will be
responsible for implementation of the decisions of the GoM which
do not fall within the purview of the Empowered Committee and
the Organising Committee.

The abovementioned institutional arrangements were then conveyed by PMO
on 06.12.2004, with Prime Minister's approval, to the Cabinet Secretary with the
request to send the same to Shri Arjun Singh, Minister of HRD who headed the
GoM on the Commonwealth Games, for consideration in the next meeting of
the GoM. Thereafter, the GoM, in its 30 meeting held on 29.01.2005, decided


27

the institutional arrangements for the organizing and conduct of the
Commonwealth Games.

It may be mentioned here that the decisions taken in the 39 meeting of the GoM
were subsequently confirmed in the 4" meeting of the GoM which was also
attended by Shri Sunil Dutt, the then Minister of Youth Affairs and Sports.

(ii) & (ii) Action taken on the letter dated 20.07.2007 from Shri S.K. Arora,
the then Secretary, Ministry of Youth Affairs_and Sports and letter dated
23.10.2007 from Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar, the then Minister of Youth Affairs and
Sports

Shri S.K. Arora, the then Secretary, Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports vide his
letter dated 20.07.2007 had submitted, inter-afia that it was unlikely that in the
present legai framework of the Organising Committee (OC), the Government of
India representatives would be able to discharge their responsibility of ensuring
transparency and accountability in the management of the Organizing
Committee. in this context, he had suggested the following options:

(i) The need for operational flexibility and financial autonomy desired by the
OC may be acknowledged and the role of the Government nominees be
restricted to a Jargely advisory role in the Executive Board. This would
necessitate a review of the decisions to give bridge finance to the OC
and discontinue direct financing by the Government. A view may also be
required to be taken on the overall ceiling of our (Government's)
commitment to meet any revenue deficit.

(it) The OC is given a clear signal to amend their Memorandum of
Association and the Financial and Administrative Guidelines to vest
decisions-making in the Executive Board. The issue whether
Government may like to retain some authority to approve decisions with
financial commitments above a certain limit may also be considered.

(iii) | The OC may be directed to broadbase their Executive Board on the lines
of the 1982 Asian Games Special Organising Committee. In such an
event, the Central Government and the Delhi Government could be
represented at Ministerial level from concerned Ministries. The officials
could then be special invitees.

Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar, the then Minister of Youth Affairs and Sports, vide his
letter dated 23.10.2007 had expressed concerns regarding the functioning of
the Executive Board and the OC for the Commonwealth Games in the context
of the soaring costs of the Games, and pointed out that any one of the three
alternatives suggested by his Ministry could retrieve the situation. He had also
suggested, vide his subsequent letter dated 25.10.2007, the appointment of a
Minister of State for international Sporting Events as Chairman of the OC with a
revamped executive Board of a rejigged OC. He was also of the view that the
Minister of Youth Affairs and Sports should keep himself distanced from the
day-to-day work of the Games and confine himself to decisions of a policy or
operational kind.


28

Against this background, on 06.08.2007, Cabinet Secretary had been requested
to discuss the three alternatives suggested, with Chairman, OC and the
Secretary, Youth Affairs and Sports and convey his recommendations alongwith
the views of Chairman, OC for the Prime Minister's consideration. The letters
dated 23.10.2007 and 25.10.2007 of Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar, the then Minister
of Youth Affairs & Sports were forwarded to the Cabinet Secretary on
02.11.2007 conveying Prime Minister's desire that he wants to discuss the
matter at an early date.

On 19.10.2007, Cabinet Secretary reverted back stating that the concerns
raised by the then secretary, Youth Affairs and Sports can be addressed by the
following two amendments in the Memorandum & Articles of Association:

(0) Providing that emergency decisions taken by the Chairman taken in the
interests of the society should be approved by the Executive Board, and

(ii) Clearly indicating that administrative and financial guidelines, legal
contracts and agreements, the policy for staff selection and appointment
and procurement procedures should be decided by the Executive Board.

{t was also mentioned that:

(i) As suggested by Secretary, Youth Affairs and Sports, the OC modified
the delegation of financial powers and that the Executive Board is now
the competent authority for approving expenditure beyond हैं crore.

(ii) Appointments of key personne! will now have to be made in pursuance of
the General Organization Plan. While the recruitment function will largely
be outsourced, it would be for the Executive Board to decide how the
selection of the personnel is to be done, approving methods for
constituting selection committees and reserving posts with higher scales
of pay for its own approval.

(iii) | On the suggestion of Secretary, Youth Affairs & Sports, Secretary, Urban
Development has been put on the Audit Committee of the OC,
concurrent audits are proposed to be done and audit reports brought
before the Executive Board.

(iv) Secretary, Expenditure would replace Secretary Urban Development on
the Executive Board.

(v) Once the Executive Board is given supreme power to manage the
activities of the OC, existing nominees of the Government and the Dethi
Government should be in a position to articulate Government's views and
safeguard its interests.

Cabinet Secretary had mentioned that discussions with the Chairman, OC and
his representatives indicated that the OC would be agreeable to the above-
mentioned course of action.


29

Subsequently, Cabinet Secretary after discussing the matter with Shri Mani
Shankar Aiyar, Minister for Youth Affairs & Sports and Shri S.K. Arora, the then
Secretary, Youth Affairs and Sports, reported, vide his note dated 10.03.2008
that they had come to a broad understanding that, inter-alia an apex body,
headed by the Minister for Youth Affairs and Sports should be established
through an enabling legislation which would exercise single window powers.
Cabinet Secretary further reported that he had advised the Ministry of Youth
Affairs and Sports to further develop the idea and submit a note for
consideration.

(iv) Action taken on the letter dated 26.09.2009 from Shri M.S. Gill, the then
Minister of Youth Affairs and Sports.

The letter of the then Minister of Youth Affairs and Sports, M.S. Gill, had been
written in the context of doubts expressed by Mr. Mike Fennell, President
Commonwealth Games Federation on the ability and the capability of the
Organising Committee (OC) to deliver the Games to the quality expected. With
this preface, the Minister had sought to apprise the Prime Minister of the line of
action devised to immediately strengthen the management inside the OC after
discussions with Shri Kalmadi, Chairman OC, Shri Randhir Singh, Secretary
General, 1OA, Chief Minister, Delhi, the Cabinet Secretary and Principal
Secretary to PM. The Minister had also mentioned while the structure cannot be
changed, he was in agreement with the Cabinet Secretary who has identified
individuals in this regard and that this first step needs to be taken without delay.
While mentioning that the Chairman, OC has put in a formal request for
injection of senior staff into the OC, the Minister had mentioned that it would be
necessary that persons asked to undertake this fire fighting job, are fully backed
by himself and the Prime Minister.

On receipt of this letter, Prime Minister reviewed the matter with Chief Minister,
Delhi, Minister, Youth Affairs and Sports. Cabinet Secretary also took follow up
action which included the appointment of Shri Jarnial Singh, IAS (Retd.) as
Chief Executive Officer of the OC and of Shri Sudhir Mittal IAS, Shri Jiji
Thompson, IAS and Shri Sanjeev Mittal, IDAS to the OC to strengthen its
internal management.


30

CHAPTER-III

ROLE AND RESPONSIBILITY OF THE MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS & SPORTS

3.1. The role and responsibility of the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports for
organizing and conduct of the CWG-2010 were reportedly as under:

(i) Preparation of Stadia- | MYAS was involved exclusively in the preparation of
43 main stadia through the Sports Authority of India (SAI), including the flagship
Jawahar Lal Nehru Athletics Stadium, which also hosted the Opening and Closing
Ceremonies. The cost of development of infrastructure by SAI was हैं 2,460 crore. The
executing agency was Central Public Works Department (CPWD) under the Ministry of
Urban Development.

The Ministry had also given grants of = 444.86 crores, to develop stadium
infrastructure; to RK Khanna Tennis Complex, University of Delhi, CRPF Academy at
Kaderpur, Jamia Millia Islamia and Delhi Public School (CPWD), which were

constructed independently by these organizations. These were used as competition
and training facilities during the Games. In addition, an amount of % 15 crore was
provided, to develop Legacy Sports facilities at various educational institutions in the
host city of Delhi.

The Ministry constantly pursued with CPWD for timely completion of Venues with
regular visits to the sites by Minister, YAS and other officers. These venues were
completed in the last 2 years before the Games and handed over to the Organising
Committee on 11 August 2010 to enable it to put in place 'Overlays' (temporary fittings)
and Timing, Scoring and Result (TSR) equipment, necessary for the period of the
Games. No charges were levied on OC for use of these facilities.

(ii) Training of Indian contingent - The Ministry had undertaken a massive and
unprecedented training Programme for the elite sports persons of India, to prepare the
indian contingent for CWG 2010. The Union Cabinet,. on 127 June 2008, approved a
scheme designed to maximize the medals tally for India in CWG 2010. Through
comprehensive and intensive training and exposure to Indian sportspersons, both
domestically and abroad, at a total outlay of € 678 crore, 1140 players, 170 Indian and


31

30 Foreign Coaches, 78 supporting technical personne! were involved in the effort.
The core probables were pruned gradually, to ensure that the best probables were
given further training upto CWG 2010. 3,760 players (repeat visits included) were sent
aboard for training/competition. This had resulted in the best ever performance by
India in any major, multi-discipiinary sports event with a haul of 101 medals (38 Gold,
27 Silver and 36 Bronze) which was more than double the medals India won at the
Commonwealth Games, Melbourne 2006. This achievement placed India 2nd in the
Medals Tally after Australia and ahead of major sporting countries such as England,
Canada, South Africa etc.

(iii) | Web Based Monitoring System- The Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports had
set up a web-based monitoring system, for on-line monitoring of the infrastructure and
other projects, of the Commonwealth Games. Nodes of this website were established
at various levels of Government for monitoring by various stakeholders. The
stakeholders had been provided extensive training for on-line feeding of updated
information. The updated progress was reviewed by the monitoring agencies on-line
and issues/bottlenecks were addressed progressively.

(iv) Funding of Various Projects- 116 MoYAS had provided funding for creation
of Sports Infrastructure to Sports Authority of India (SAI)/CPWD, Delhi University,
Jamia Millia Islamia, All Indian Tennis Association (AITA) etc. Funds were also
provided to MTNL for the Telecom Infrastructure required for the Games. The
Organising Committee (OC) was provided Loan for the Conduct of the Games and for
temporary fitting and fixtures (Overlays). Funds were also provided to the OC through
the Sports Authority of India for Timing Scoring and Result Systems and Games Time
Sports Equipment which were instalied in the Venues. The various projects related to
this funding were thoroughly appraised by Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) and
the Cormmittee on Non-Plan Expenditure (CNE) with representatives of Ministry of
Finance, Planning Commission etc. before they were approved by the
Cabinet/Competent Authority. Adequate budgetary provisions were made and funds
released will in time to the executing agencies.


32

(५) The status of Competitions Venues undertaken by the Ministry of Youth Affairs
& Sports, Ministry of Urban Development and Government of Delhi, is given at
Annexure XIl.

Status of Training Venues is given at Annexure 2(॥.

2.
3. Cost of construction of competition and Training Venues is given at Annexure
XIV,

(vi) The total approved expenditure of Government of India on the Commonwealth
Games 2010 was % 11,687 crore which included % 2,800 crore allocated to
Government of Delhi and % 351 crores to Government of Maharashtra/civil agencies
of Pune for Commonwealth Youth Games, which were held in Pune in October, 2008.

Out of the amount, हैं 688 crore was provided as loan.

1. Approval of IOA for bidding, without obtaining or examining the 108 bid

3.2 Audit pointed out that approval was given to IOA for bidding, without obtaining
or examining the IOA bid. In this context, the Committee desired to know the reasons
for not obtaining the actual bid of the IOA before submitting the Cabinet Note in May,
2003. In reply, the MYAS inter-alia stated that no records were available as to why the
Bid Document was not obtained before submitting the Cabinet Note of May, 2003.
The Ministry presumed that it might have been due to paucity of time.

3.3. The Committee asked whether the reply of the Ministry was indicative of the
fact that the Cabinet Note was prepared without consulting the Bid Documents
submitted to the CGF. In reply, the Ministry stated that the Cabinet Note dated
20.5.2003 was prepared by the Ministry based on the information furnished by the
Indian Olympic Association from time to time through its letters addressed to the
Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports (MYAS) seeking approval to bid for the Games. The
Bid Document required incorporation of certain mandatory guarantees by the
Government of India as per the Constitution, Protocols and Regulations of the
Commonwealth Games Federation to the effect that the Government of India 1)
undertakes to support the bid of Delhi to host the Games, ii) guarantees free entry of
all accredited athletes and delegation of all participating countries, and iii) guarantees
that the Games will be organized in accordance with the Constitution and Protocols &


33

Regulations of the Commonwealth Games Federation. The Cabinet Note dated 20
May, 2003 sought to obtain approval of the Cabinet, amongst other things, to the
incorporation of these mandatory conditions.

3.4. The Ministry further stated that the Cabinet Note dated 20.5.2003 besides
seeking approval for incorporation of certain mandatory guarantees by the
Government of India sought approval for estimated expenditure of €1.62 crore likely
to be incurred on the bidding process for the Games and projected expenditure of
295.50 crore on staging the Games against a projected revenue generation of
%490.00 crore.

3.5 Approval of the PM under Rule 12 of the Government of India (Transaction of
Business) Rules was received on 24.5.2003. The Bid Document incorporating the
mandatory guarantees with letters of support was presented by the [OA in London on
30" May, 2003 to the Chairman of the CGF. The Cabinet Note of September, 2003
incorporated the latest position as received from [OA, in respect of financial

implications.

3.6 The Ministry further submitted that if the Bid Document was ready, the Indian
Olympic Association (IOA) would have furnished a copy of the same to the Ministry.
The fact of the matter was that the IOA sought approval of the Ministry for
incorporation of certain mandatory conditions of the CGF for staging of the Games and
estimated expenditure and revenue figures. it was further submitted that other than
these incorporations, Bid Document for any Games was more in the nature of a
presentation about the city, its tourist destinations, transport and entertainment
facilities, hotel accommodation and technical details of Sports Programme and
anticipated expenditure. The Ministry reasoned that the significance of Bid Document,
in this context, should not be over emphasized.

3.7. The Committee then enquired whether there was a possibility of IOA
changing/altering the Bid Documents at a later stage according to its convenience. In
reply, the Ministry stated that the IOA did change the Bid Document and presented a
revised (updated) Bid Document to the CGF, albeit the country won the right to host
the CWG-2010 on the basis of the first Bid Document.


34

3.8 Asked to furnish the reasons for preparing/submitting the Cabinet Note just ten
days before the deadline ie. 30th May, 2003 for submitting the Bid to the CGF, the
Ministry stated that a letter dated 15.6.2002 regarding a proposal to bid for hosting the
XIX Commonwealth Games in Delhi was received from Indian Olympic Association
addressed to this Ministry. On 2.7.2002 the Ministry conveyed no objection of the
Government of India for making a bid presentation at Manchester during the General
Assembly of the Commonwealth Games Federation by the IOA. Thereafter, the
MYAS reiterated on 5.2.2003, after [OA having made a short presentation at
Manchester in the presence of the then Union Minister, Youth Affairs & Sports,
following discussions by the then Minister, Youth Affairs & Sports with the then Prime
Minister, the Government’s support to the 108 proposal for making bid for the Games.
Subsequently, in the Meeting of the Executive Board of the Commonwealth Games
Federation held at Cape Town, South Africa, from 7 to 10 February, 2003, a
delegation from IOA again made a presentation on India’s proposal to bid for hosting
the XIX Commonwealth Games. [t was during this presentation that the 06
delegation was informed that Bid Documents for staging the Games from all candidate
cities would be received in London on 30" May, 2003. Thereafter, the IOA through its
letter dated 17.3.2003 addressed to the Ministry sought approval of the Government to
bid for staging the Games. The IOA addressed another letter dated 16.4.2003 to
MYAS in which they sought for issue of a Letter of Guarantee by the Government to
enable them to complete all formalities and deposit the Bid Documents to the CGA by
the stipulated date. Thereafter, the process of preparing a Draft Cabinet Note for
obtaining approval of the Cabinet for the proposal started. The Ministry clarified that
there was no inordinate delay on their part in preparing the Draft Cabinet Note for
seeking approval of the Cabinet. However, since the Bid Documents were to be
deposited by IOA on 30.5.2003 at London, approval of the PM under Transaction of
Business (Rules) was initiated and obtained.

3.9 The Committee then asked whether the Ministry should not have prepared the
Cabinet Note in time, thereby giving the Cabinet a reasonable opportunity to deliberate
the proposal as well as the Bid Document, more so when it ws known in February,
2003 during the CGF Executive Board meeting that the Bid Document was to be
received in London on 307 May, 2003. In reply, the MYAS submitted that the Cabinet
Note of 20.5.2003 was prepared based on information received from the IOA.


35

However, since the time available was short, approval of the Prime Minister under
Rule 12 of the Government of India (Transaction of Business) Rules was sought for
and received on 24.5.2003. The Bid Document incorporating the mandatory
guarantees with letters of support was presented by the IOA in London on 307" May,
2003 to the Chairman of the CGF. The Cabinet Note of September, 2003 incorporated
the latest position as received from IOA, in respect of financial implications.

3.10 The Ministry further submitted that it would not be correct to conclude that
because of any shortage of time, the matter could not be properly deliberated either in
the PMO or by the Cabinet.

3.11. The Committee were informed that the Ministry of Finance had commented on
the expenditure of R.1,61,53,600 for the bidding process as at that time this was the
expenditure at stake. The Cabinet Note dated 20.5.2003 clearly laid down (vide Para
2.3) that the financial implication relating to staging of the Games will be further
examined and discussed with the Ministry of Finance and the Indian Olympic
Association in case India was successful in the bid and the Games were allotted to

India.

3.12 in the above context, the Committee asked whether the financial implication
relating to the staging of the Games was further examined and discussed with the MoF
and the IOA, in accord with the Cabinet Note of 20" May, 2003. In reply, the Ministry
submitted that consequent upon submission of India’s bid by the IOA for staging the
XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 at New Delhi on 30.5.2003 to the Chairman of the
CGF at London and furnishing various clarifications and undertakings, in response to
the visit of the Evaluation Commission of the CGF to New Dethi between 3 - 8 August,
2003 to inspect available infrastructure and hold formal discussions with various
Agencies concerned likely to be involved in the staging of the Games and to evaluate
the country’s prospects for award of the Games, the MYAS prepared a detailed
Cabinet Note dated 10" September, 2003, seeking approval of the Cabinet to enter
into Host City Contract, underwrite any shortfall between revenue and expenditure of
the OC, approve setting up of Games Village at a preliminary estimated cost of
186.00 crore and approve cost of construction of indoor and outdoor stadium at
Yamuna Sports Complex and upgradation of existing infrastructure of the DDA at an


36

estimated cost of %32.00 crore. On these proposals, the comments of the Ministries
of Finance, HRD, Law and Ministry of External Affairs were also obtained and
incorporated in the Cabinet Note. Consultation with the Ministry of Finance took place
in the form of obtaining their comments on the Cabinet Note which were incorporated
along with the comments of other Ministries concerned.

3.13 Asked to state categorically whether the financial implications as a whole
relating to the staging of the Games was ever actually deliberated with the MoF, the
MYAS responded that although the Cabinet Note dated 20.5.2003 was prepared
based on information received from the 108, the same could not be considered in the
Cabinet and due to shortage of time, approval of the Prime Minister under Rule 12 of
the Government of India (Transaction of Business) Rules was sought for and received
on 24.5.2003. Thereafter, a detailed Cabinet Note of September, 2003 incorporating
the latest position as received from IOA, in respect of financial implications, was
prepared which was considered and approved by the Cabinet on 11.09.2003. The
comments/opinion of the Ministry of Finance were obtained and incorporated in the
Cabinet Note. The Ministry explained that consultation with the Ministry of Finance
took place in the form of obtaining their comments on the Cabinet Note which were
incorporated along with the comments of other concerned Ministries.

1. Visit of the CGF Evaluation Commission in August, 2003

3.14 The Committee were informed that the 'Letter of Support' was issued by the
GO} in May, 2003, before the IOA preferred the bid on 24" May, 2003. Shri Vikram
Verma, the then Minister for Youth Affairs and Sports, wrote to the Chairman,
Commonwealth Games Federation (CGF) on 24" May, 2003 and conveyed support to
the bid in the city of Delhi and further guaranteed that “the Games will be organized in
accordance with the constitution, protocols and regulations of the CGF”.

3.15 In the above context, the Committee enquired whether the MoF had
commented anything on the amount of donation to be committed by the Country/lIOA
for winning the bid. In reply, the MYAS stated that the Commonwealth Games were
awarded to India on the basis of the Bid Document presented in London in May, 2003.
After the award of the Games to the country, the IOA presented an “Updated
(Revised) Bid” in December, 2003 to the Commonwealth Games Federation. It was in


37

this Updated Bid that the Indian Olympic Association offered to all CGAs (representing
all the 71 Commonwealth Countries) a Training Grant of US $ 100,000 to be handed
over to the CGAs immediately after the Melbourne Commonwealth Games 2006.

3.16 The Ministry further submitted that the commitment of US $ 100,000 as Training
Grant to each of the 71 GGAs and other changes brought about by the Indian Olympic
Association were brought to the notice of the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports for the
first time in the letter dated 67" September, 2004, from Director, Coordination, Indian
Olympic Association. The then Minister, YAS (late Shri Sunil Dutt) in a letter dated
11" November, 2004, addressed to the Chairman, GOM, the then Minister, HRD,
brought this commitment and other changes made by the IOA in the Updated Bid
Document after award of the Commonwealth Games to India to his notice. The
additional financial commitment of US $ 100,000 made in the Updated Bid Document
by the Indian Olympic Association was brought up before the 4" Meeting of the Group
of Ministers held on 17.3.2005 and the GOM decided that for the components of
expenditure that had not formed part of the original Bid Document but were additional
commitments made by the Indian Olympic Association, detailed proposals in this
regard along with the financial implications be placed before the Cabinet for approval.

3.17 These were placed before the Expenditure Finance Committee along with other
financial proposals in its Meeting held on 13.09.2006 and the recommendations of
EFC, were placed before Cabinet and approval obtained on 15.03.2007. Minutes of
the Meeting of the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) formed part of the Cabinet
Note. In the aforesaid Meeting of the EFC chaired by the Finance Secretary, the point
regarding Training Grant of US $ 100,000 to 71 CGAs was minuted. The Finance
Secretary enquired about the need for offering US $ 100,000 to each CGA including
countries like UK, Canada and Australia. The Chairman, OC, who was present in the
EFC Meeting responded by stating that the need to offer training grant arose during
the final bid process to clinch the issue against Canada’s competing offer. Thereafter,
summing up the deliberations, the Finance Secretary stated that international
commitments made by the OC would need to be honoured and could not be opened at
that stage and budget of the OC which included this provision was thus recommended
by the EFC for approval by the Cabinet.


38

3.18 When the Committee specifically desired to know whether the guarantee given
by the Government to underwrite the shortfall between revenue and expenditure was
ever deliberated before the visit of the CGF Evaluation Commission in August, 2003,
the MYAS replied in the negative.

3.19 The Committee were informed that there could be the following three models to
fund mega muiti-disciplinary Games:

(1) Government/Government Agencies commit upfront the amount they would
be ready to provide to the Organizing Committee as grant. The OC can
then mobilize the balance requirement from other non-governmental
sources or loan from financial institutions to be repaid from revenues
generated by the Games.

(2) Government undertakes to organize/conduct the Games itself through a
Government owned Society or Body and funds the Body from its budget and
the revenues generated are credited back to Government. At the end of the
day, the shortfall is borne by the Government.

(3) The Government provides the OC funds as a loan to meet its expenditure.
The revenues generated by the OC are kept in a separate account, to be
repaid to the Government. This keeps open the possibility that if there is
revenue surplus, government can be repaid the principal along with interest.
If there is a deficit, then Government bears the deficit. This was the model
foilowed in the case of the CWG.

3.20 Asked to state the specific grounds on which the third model was preferred and
adopted for funding the CWG -2010, the MYAS stated as under:

"As already submitted, mega multi-disciplinary sports events like the
Commonwealth and Olympic Games are rarely revenue neutral. It is reiterated
that determinants of revenue generation can be many and varied and does not
necessarily depend upon the model adopted for funding of the Games. At the
time of bidding, the Indian Olympic Association projected that the Games would
be revenue neutral. It was only after the Games were awarded to the Country
and the detailed planning process started, the actual impact of the Games in
monetary terms became clearer. At that stage, the reputation of the country in
the eyes of the international community was at stake and there was no going
back on the international commitments already made."

3.21 The Committee then specifically desired to know the possible problematic areas
had one of the other two left out models been adopted. In reply, the MYAS stated that

irrespective of the models adopted, world over, Governments of the host countries
substantially contributed for hosting mega sports events. The Ministry further stated


39

that at a time when the Games had already been held successfully, it was difficult to
analyse what would have been the possible problematic areas had one of the other
two models been adopted. This could be a topic of research and study for adopting
the future course of action for hosting in future any such mega Games events.

lll. Weak Governance Structure

3.22 In the context of the involvement of multiple Agenciés/Authorities in the
preparation, conduct and monitoring of the CWG-2010, the Committee desired to
know the level at which such decision was taken and queried whether it would have
not been more prudent and effective had the overall monitoring task been entrusted
with a single Authority. In reply, the MYAS stated that orders constituting the Group of
Ministers (GoM) for coordinating the work related to organization and conduct of the
CWG 2010 were issued on 3rd September, 2004 by the Government. The GoM in its
37 Meeting held on 29.1.2005 decided to constitute an Apex Committee headed by the
Minister of Sports with overriding power and responsibility for overseeing and
coordinating the work related to CWG 2010. In the same Meeting, the GoM also
decided to constitute a Committee of Secretaries (COS) headed by the Cabinet
Secretary with responsibility for implementation of the decisions of the GoM regarding
the Commonwealth Games. In the same GoM Meeting, it was also decided that OC
shall be headed by the President of the 108, Shri Suresh Kalmadi, and this Committee
would conduct the Games. The Coordination Committee was set up by Minister, YAS.
In fact the Minister, YAS had been taking meetings with the Chief Minister, Delhi,
Chairman, OC CWG 2010 and Officials of OC/DDA/SAI/MYAS to review the progress
of works related to CWG 2010. Later (from 3 Meeting held on 15.7.2008 onwards)
these meetings came to be known as Meetings of the Coordination Committee. Other
Committees like Infrastructure Monitoring Committee, Venue Coordination Committee,
Stadium Committees were constituted by MYAS as per the requirement and: demand
from time to time. Other Agencies like SAI, Delhi Government, CPWD, MTNL, etc.
came into existence as per their sphere of jurisdiction/responsibility. All these
Agencies were mostly Government Agencies.

3.23 Clarifying the involvement of multiple bodies and their defined role and
responsibilities, the Secretary, MYAS apprised:


40

"There were as many as five Committees which were setup. One was the
Organising Committee which is the OC. The second was the Committee of
Secretaries, Chaired by the Cabinet Secretary to review and coordinate all
activities relating to the Organization of the Games. The third was the
Empowered Committee of the Delhi Government, Chaired by the Chief
Secretary to 1006 at their works. Then there was the empowered Security
Committee Chaired by the Home secretary to look at the security arrangements
and there was the venue Monitoring Committee, Chaired by the Secretary,
Sports to review all aspects related to the Games facilities. Then, again each
individual Ministry, OC, their roles, their responsibilities were clearly laid
out....... | cannot evade responsibility for the Games. It has to be on me. But at
the same time, each individual unit is also responsible and you, as a
Committee, would have to look at to what extent the Ministry could have
intervened and to what extent the responsibility should have been carried out at
various levels. We cannot micro-manage this kind of an affair. We can only
take broad decision........ "

3.24 The Ministry candidly admitted that with the involvement of a large number of
agencies and a large number of contractors and sub-contractors under them, lack of
communication and coordination between different agencies and sub agencies could
not be avoided and this resulted in unsynchronized timelines and deadlines leading at
times to stretching of completion schedules. The Ministry submitted that this was an
area where substantial improvements in coordination would have to be brought in for
future such mega events, if any. In addition, substantial improvements in capacity for
project structuring, execution and management was required in the system to ensure
that time and cost delays were minimized.

3.25 Agreeing that coordination and control of the work related to the Games could
have been managed better, the MYAS however, submitted that whether a single
effective control monitoring agency could function effectively was a matter which
needed careful analysis. At the stage when the Games were already over, the
Ministry explained that they could only undertake a broader exercise based on their
past experience to see if a better system could be devised and adopted to improve the
delivery of such mega sports events like the CWG and Olympics in the country in
future.

3.26 In response to a specific query regarding the concrete action
taken/contemplated by the Ministry to devise and adopt a better system, the MYAS
stated that they were trying to get a detailed study conducted by one of the IIMs and


41

funded by the Ministry to look at the management of mega sports events worldwide
and their successes with a view to drawing up a blueprint for India.

3.27 Elaborating the issue, the MYAS stated as under:

"It is submitted that this Ministry is working on the lines of engaging a premier
Management Institute like the Indian Institute of Mangement,
Ahmadabad/Kolkata/Banagalore, to under undertake a__ professional
management study for the Government to articulate and point out on what went
wrong and the deficiencies, if any, found in the orgasniation and conduct of the
Commonwealth Games 2010 at New Delhi. The proposed study would help
create a blueprint regarding the structural, organsiational and management set
up and recommend measures for more efficient future condut of similar mega
multi-discipliancy sports events in the country. The suty will take into account of
experiences of various agencies that were involved in execution of works
related to the CWG 2010. The outcome of the proposed study would be to
recommend a holistic management structure for the conduct of mega
international sporting events. During the course of the study, the deficiencies
pointed out by the Audit, their suggestions, etc. would be considered.

As already submitted before the PAC, the whole exercise is likely to take at
least six months time. ON receipt of the study report of the Management
agency as discussed above, the same will be examined in this Ministry and a
report submitted in this regard to the PAC. "

3.28 On being asked to clarify the stance taken by the Ministry regarding their role
and responsibility when discussions were going on initially in the run up to the Games,
the MYAS clarified that the Group of Ministers, Committee of Secretaries and the Apex
Committee were the main bodies for coordination and monitoring of work related to the
Commonwealth Games and took decisions for staging the Games. The constitution of
these bodies has already been discussed in detail. The MYAS was the administrative
Ministry for the SAI and also the nodal Ministry for ensuring timely flow of funds as
loan from Government for conduct of the Games to the OC.

3.29 The Ministry further stated that they also reviewed and monitored various
arrangements for conducting the Games without interfering into the field of other
stakeholders who were individually responsible for execution of works for the Games

within their respective jurisdictions.

3.30 The Committee specifically desired to know whether the Ministry monitored the
contract management more so when it was represented in various Committees that
approved the contracts. In reply the MYAS stated that the Ministry were represented


42

in the OC Finance Committee and the Finance Sub Committee after 25.11.2008 and
18.11.2009 respectively, which were constituted to examine and recommend the
contracts. The contracts were approved by the competent authorities at appropriate
levels, i.e. Executive Management Committee (EMC) or Executive Board (EB), as the
case may be, based on the recommendations of the Committees depending on the
amounts involved. The Ministry submitted that though they were represented on the
Executive Board, they had no mandate to monitor and micromanage the contracts at

the execution stage.

lV. Action Taken on the Audit's Study Report of 2009 |

3.31. When the Committee desired to know the specific action taken by the Ministyr
on the suggestions of the C&AG's Study Report of 2009, the then Secretary, MYAS
submitted in evidence:

"In 2009, the C&AG submitted a report to the Government on Performance
Audit. It was received by us in July, 2009 and we did take note of all the
observations. But at the same time, the time available for remedial action was
too short to actually make a significant change except to accelerate the various
processes of projects and procurements that were underway. We did debate
on that. The C&AG's team met us and advised us. | would appreciate the
efforts that they put in to give that report. But in my view, at that point of time
things were already far too delayed, the projects were far too delayed, the
procurements were also behind schedule, so in order for the Games to happen,
we could not take as much advantage as we should have.”

Vv. Web-Based Project Monitoring System

3.32 Audit pointed out that the Project Monitoring System (PMS), developed by TCS
in May, 2007 and worked even after the closure of the Games, generated reports for
the period only from October, 2008 to July, 2010.

3.33 In the above context, the Committee desired to be apprised of the delay in
generating reports by the PMS. In reply, the MYAS stated that the on-line monitoring
system was in place for the stakeholders and monitoring agencies by May, 2007. The
Ministry further clarified that a Monitoring System was interactive in nature and evolve
as per the need. With the identification and formulation of teams and individuals within
the executing agencies, the MYAS proactively felt the need to progressively impart
exhaustive training to the concerned Stakeholders and Monitoring agencies. These


43

trainings were conducted with the final sessions being concluded on 15" & 16" Nov.
2007. Thereafter, the stakeholders in consultation with their vendors developed their
respective broad level project plans. These plans were uploaded in the system.
Various views and reports generated by the system were available. Based on realistic
frequency, it was decided that such reports would be sent every month end and
referred to as Month End Reports. These Month End reports were first circulated in
June, 2008. It would thus be seen that the on line system was in place from May 2007
itself.

3.34 The MYAS further stated that the CAG in the study Report of July, 2009, on
preparedness for XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 had appreciated the WEB Based
Monitoring System stating that “In our opinion, the system is well-designed and
provides reports with sufficient levels of detail for various areas e.g. venue and
infrastructure development, accommodation for tourists, host broadcasting, etc.”

3.35 Asked to state the reasons for keeping the OC outside the purview of the PMS,
the MYAS submitted that it was never intended to include the 34 Functional Areas of
the OC in the monitoring system set up by the Ministry. As per para 6.2 (Reports) of
the HCC, the OC was responsible for detailed reporting on the progress of the Games
to the CGF.

3.36 Throwing more light on the aspect, the Secretary, MYAS deposed in evidence:

| ०० Reality is that two separate project monitoring systems were setup, one
was called the EKS and the other was the Project Monitoring System within the
Ministry itself. At any point of time we had at least some information which we
were providing to the Group of Ministers on a monthly basis. What happened
was that the two sets of data were at variation. ....Until finally, literally in
exasperation the then Secretary (MYAS) said that this is not the best way of
going about the job. If the data cannot match then there is something seriously
wrong.”

3.37 Asked to state categorically whose data was more reliable and up-to-date, the
Secretary, MYAS submitted:

“What was happening was that the information in the PMS was much less
detailed than was availabie with the OC through the EKS. The OC data was
more up-to-date and to the extent that towards the end we had to literally
abandon the PMS and work on the EKS mostly. But | do not think it would be a


44

fair statement to say that Mr. Kalmadi was managing everything. There was
nothing on record which indicates as much."

VI. Games Planning Consultancy & Overlays

3.38 On the basis of Audit revealations, the Committee enquired about the reasons
for awarding the contract to Event Knowledge Service (EKS) on negotiation basis and
without inviting tender despite visible patronage of the CGF and conflict of interest
involved in it. In reply, the MYAS stated that out of four contracts awarded by OC to
M/s. EKS, two contracts i.e. (i). Venue brief and preparation of site plan (Part A), (ii)
Project scheduling review and monitoring and delivery review (Part C), were awarded
without inviting tender. The other two contracts (iii) Games planning consultancy (EKS
and E&Y consortium), (iv) Workforce consultancy contract (EKS and E&Y
Consortium), were awarded after inviting tenders. Another contract for Venue
appraisal study, was awarded by DDA. The award of contract for (i) Venue brief and
preparation of site plan (Part A) and (ii) Project scheduling review and monitoring and
delivery review (Part C) was discussed in detail in the Infrastructure Coordination
Committee held on 09.01.2006. Since M/s. EKS was already providing the base line
services on behalf of CGF and had worked with DDA for Venue reappraisal and was
familiar with the local conditions, it was decided that M/s. EKS should be appointed.

3.39 The Committee then specifically desired to know the reasons for the
Ministry/their representatives in the OC succumbing to the intervention of the CEO,
CGE to award the Games Planning Consultancy contract at a higher cost to the EKS.
In reply, the Ministry stated that the matter was considered by the Executive Board in
its meeting held on 8.1.2008. The CEO of the Commonwealth Games Federation, Mr.
Mike Hooper observed that there was no way by which the scope of work could be
modified or altered without jeopardizing the expected deliverables and outcome. He
further emphasized that the decision to appoint the planning, project and risk
management consultants had become very critical taking into account the time
available for operational planning and delivery. He recommended that the Board
should approve the T1 bidder and authorize the Executive Management Committee to
finalize the contract by negotiating the financial proposals with the T1 bidder. Mr.
Michael Fennell endorsed the views of Mr. Hooper. In the light of the above, the
Executive Board decided that the Executive Management Committee would negotiate


45

and conclude the contract as the work of Central Planning had been badly delayed.
The Executive Management Committee negotiated the prices with M/s E&Y and EKS
and brought down the total price from % 31,22,42,480/- to = 29,66,30,356/-.

3.40 When the Committee desired to hear the views of the Secretary, MYAS on the
matter, he submitted in evidence:

" .,.We are not convinced that the appointment or the creation of the EKS was
completely above board. That is why, the matter has been referred to the CBI
investigation and for detailed examination. Prima facie though there are some
things that | need to point out, please keep the first part in mind. At the point
the contract was awarded, Mr. Craig Mclatchey was not part of the Committee.
He became the member later. So, the conflict of interest did not exist at the
point of award of the contract. It came about later. He became a member of
the Committee on 09.08.2006, the contract was awarded in January 2006.
Although ethics demands that when Mr. Mclatchey became a member of the
Committee, he should have immediately informed and sought permission which
he did not. | am not exonerating but | am just putting a technical point on record.
The second thing is that EKS was a very interesting system. At any point of
time, the EKS constantly estimated what would be the time required for
completion of the job. It was not looking at how much of the job was completed
but it looked at how much of the job needed to be completed form this point
onwards...... "

3.41 Asked to state the difference, the Secretary, MYAS submitted:

"The difference is that you may complete 75 percent of the job but you might
still have critical things which have not been completed. It would mean that the
job would not be completed on time and there may be a long delay. The EKS
was for monitoring the critical part of the job than individual items."
3.42 The Committee then pointed out that when the contract was being awarded, at
that time Mr. Craig McLatchey was already a member and it happened not in 2006 but
in 2008. In response the Secretary, MYAS stated:

"You are right. At that point of time there was conflict of interest...... he should
have kept the OC informed, which he did not".
3.43 Asked to state the reasons for the failure on the part of the Ministry to ensure
timely planning and scoping of overlay by OC, the MYAS stated as under:

"Overlays supplement the venues to make them operationally ready for holding
the games events and are required a few months prior to the Games after the
stadia have been completed.

Planning and scoping for Overlays was basically the responsibility of the OC
CWG 2010. International Consultants were appointed by the OC for the


46

purpose and based on the recommendations of the Consultants, a separate
Overlays Department was also set up in the OC.

The issue regarding planning and scoping of Overlays by the OC was
discussed and deliberated in various Meetings of the Coordination Committee
under the chairmanship of the Minister, YAS, Committee of Secretaries chaired
by the Cabinet Secretary and the Group of Ministers for CWG 2010, from time
to time, and it was emphasized in these Meetings that OC should take timely
action for planning, scoping and laying of Overlays. It was also emphasized in
these Meetings that the required specifications should be provided by the OC in
time so as to keep the stadia constructions on track. It is submitted that every
effort was made by the Ministry to monitor and ensure timely planning and
installation of Overlays. Ultimately, in the Meeting of the COS held on
17.8.2010, OC CWG 2010 informed that installation work on Overlays has
commenced at all the Venues and that most of the work would be completed by
31.8.2010 and the balance by 10.9.2010. It is submitted that as a result of
constant monitoring at various levels and in various Meetings as aforesaid,
ultimately the work of installing Overlays was completed in time and no problem
whatsoever was encountered on this count.

It is also submitted that Overlays of the kind, magnitude and complexities
involving over 60 venues, 5000 spaces, 1000 items etc. was being done in the
country for the first time and there was no past experience available to guide
the process or to become a benchmark to evaluate the process, either for
scoping and design, procurement or actual operational issues of Games
Overlays. There were multiple inter-dependencies of very large number of
Functional Areas and Stake Holders. Scoping documents consisted of over
seventy volumes having 7000 pages and over 250 drawings. EOI / RFP
documents consisted of over 17 volumes and over 300 drawings. Four Overlays
contracts consisted of twenty two volumes with over 15000 pages and over 300
drawings.

This Ministry evoived Module II of the Monitoring Systems in close consultation
with stakeholders to ensure that field level dependencies were accounted for
and the work process flows were smooth. In August, 2011, there were as many
as over 50 agencies working at each venue that were tracked through this
Module."
3.44. The Committee then desired to be apprised of the rationale for assigning the
work of procuring overlays to OC instead of to SAl who was the venue owner of the
five major stadia. In reply, the Ministry stated that there was a need for uniformity of
look, consistency and quality across over sixty (60) Competition, Training and Non-
Competition venues which were spread across NCR. Further, Overlays were items
required during Games Time and, therefore, appropriately, integral to Conduct of the
Games that was the responsibility of the OC. Venue Owners including SAI handed
over the stadia to OC through a Venue Use Agreement on August 1, 2010, so that the


47

process of installation and commissioning of Overlays could take place in an
unhindered manner.

3.45 On being asked to state the justification of the change in the pattern of
tendering i.e. from item-wise to cluster-wise approach and the way it encouraged
competitive bidding and protected the interest of the Government, the MYAS
submitted that the decision was driven by the circumstances at that stage as the
venues were not ready & were bare stadiums without soft furnishing and the Overlays
were critical to operational readiness of the venues. There were time constraints as
well. To avoid disconnect in supply and considering limited resources available in OC
for Overlays Contract management, the decision to procure on Turnkey basis in seven
clusters was taken by OC. The Ministry further reasoned that participation by ten (10)
firms in Pre-Qualification and qualification of four (4) firms could not be termed as poor
level of competition in tenders of this size and complexity and considering the
circumstances under which the whole process was gone through. Incomplete venues,
negative publicity, doubts regarding successful holding of the Commonwealth Games
and tight timeline for execution when the RFP was issued, were, in fact, also the
restraining factors in the participation of the Overlays vendors. Overlays delivery in
multi-sports events is complex and there are few International Vendors who provide
these Overlays. Ten (10) firms had submitted the bids against EOI including three from
non-CGF countries. Two other reputed non-CGF Overlays suppliers namely M/s.
Losberger, Germany and M/s. Roder, Germany, though, showed interest and sought
clarifications, but finally they did not submit the bids. These two firms would have
been eligible, had they participated.

3.46 The Committee then asked about the specific action taken by the Ministry to
ensure compliance of GFR and other applicable procedure and rules, given the huge
amount of fund sanctioned for the overlays. In response, the MYAS stated that the
General Financial Rules (GFR) provided rules for purchase / acquiring of goods and
services and execution of work projects by Govt. agencies. The Overlays procurement
by OG was one of a kind, nature and complexity and was for rentals and GFR did not
have rules for rentals of this type. The compliance of the procedures and rules for
similar type of procurement was ensured, taking into consideration critical support
Overlays provided in the conduct and operation of the games; the time constraints; the


48

huge matrix & complexity and multiple interdependencies. The eligibility requirements
being, specifically for experience in Overlays for major sports events, the publicity in
the newspapers, website and through the aforementioned foreign organizations /
bodies were widespread across the countries. It was corroborated by the fact that
even the vendors belonging to non CGF categories namely GL Litmus (France), Nussli
(Switzerland) and EPS GmbH (Germany) participated in the bidding process and’ Los
Berger (Germany) and Roder (Germany) showed interest in the same.

3.47 Asked to comment on the several irregularities in the contract management, as
pointed out by Audit, the MYAS submitted as under:

"OC has informed that it did not flout the norms of Contract Management since
most the contracts were duly vetted by the Legal FA of the OC. The contracts
were drafted based on the Standard Templates developed by the Legal FA of
the OC. Only in exceptional cases, certain amendments/adjustments were
made based on the specific inputs of the Consultants who had the past
experience in the relevant fields and in view of the criticality of the contract and
in order to meet the Games deadlines/timelines. For a variety of reasons,
contracts were also bunched and could be signed in the last six months
preceding the Games.
It is further submitted that the irregularities in the contract management pointed
out in Para 7.3 of the Audit Report are under examination//investigation by the
investigating Agencies. In some cases such as Overlays, Technology (TSR),
etc., where prima facie irregularities were noticed, the Investigating Agencies
are carrying out further investigation and have also registered FIRs in some
cases."

3.48 On the issue fixing responsibility on the Functional Areas of OC for incorrect
certification of taxes to be paid by the contractor, the MYAS apprised as under:

"OC CWG 2010 has informed that Clause 9 of the Contract entered into with
EKS provides that "the Consultant, Sub-consultant and Personnel shall be liable
to pay such direct and indirect taxes, duties, fees and other impositions levelled
under the applicable Laws of India" As such the responsibility to deposit correct
taxes was that of the Contractor i.e. EKS."

3.49 Asked to state categorically the cases where there was short recovery and
measures taken to effect full recovery, the MYAS submitted as under:

"OC CWG 2010 has informed that initially the TDS from the payment of Event ~
Knowledge Services (EKS) at the rate of 10% was deducted, but when EKS
became ‘Permanent Establishment’ status under Section 92F (iiia) of the Income
Tax Act and Article 5 of the Double Tax Avoidance Agreement (DTAA), TDS @
42.23% was required to be deducted. Hence there was a short deduction of =
3.06 Crore as pointed out by CAG Audit. To rectify this, M/s. EKS was served a.


49

Legal notice to pay the Income Tax @ 42.23% with necessary penalty /
charges. Thereafter, since M/s. EKS failed to respond to OC's legal notice, OC
CWG deposited ₹ 2,74,95,748 (equivalent to USD 5,18,592) with Income Tax
department in May 2012, deducting the amount from EKS balance in two
installments due for payment to EKS. Another Legal notice was served to M/s.
EKS to remit immediately the balance amount of % 25,04,259/- to the concerned
Income Tax Authority in India along with Interest & Penalty."

Vil. Quantum Jump in Budget Estimates

3.50 Audit scrutiny revealed that the IOA bid of May 2003 estimated an all-inclusive
cost of 1200 crore (after setting off operational expenses against estimate revenue
from hosting the Games) whereas the overall Budget Estimate for CWG-2010 for the
Government of India and the GNCTD (including all other implementing agencies but
excluding investment by other agencies lie DMRC and AAI/DIAL) was हैं 18,532 crore
as of October, 2010. The details are at Annexure XV. Evidently, the 501 did not
have a clear and realistic assessment of the estimated cost of hosting the Games.

3.51 In the above context, the Committee desired to know whether the projections
made by the IOA in 2003 were grossly inadequate and the basis on which the Ministry
accepted such projections. In reply, the MYAS stated that the projection of
expenditure for an event and that too a mega event like the CWG 2010 more than
seven years hence was a difficult exercise in terms of accuracy of the projections. The
MYAS admitted that the projections made by the IOA turned out to be grossly
inadequate and it appeared that the exercise was not done by professionals who had
experience of earlier Games. The Ministry further clarified that the following reasons
mainly necessitated the revalidation of the OC Budget:

(i) Some heads of expenditure not conceived at the initial stage had to be
included in the revalidated budget as per General Organization Plan (GOP),
Host City Contract, Commonwealth Games Federation Manuals, Bid
Documents and other norms and benchmarks based on Melbourne Games
2006.

(i) Interpolation of Melbourne 2006 model to that of Delhi 2010 context had
necessitated more detailed scope of services, concept of operations and
delivery and execution plans.

(i) Many heads of expenditure which were not provided at the initial stage, such
as Technology, Logistics, Procurement, Security, Accreditation,
Sustainability, Environment and Legal Services were added as they were key
functional areas.


50

(iv)OC failed to generate adequate revenues for the CWG 2010 for a variety of
reasons including bad media publicity.

3.52 Further, the approval of the Government to the budget of the OC was never
conditional to the fact that the OC would generate the equivalent in terms of revenue.
This was because the Government was fully committed to holding international
standard Games and has also committed to meet any shortfall between revenue and
expenditure of OC.

3.53 As regards the Estimates, Allocation, and Expenditure for the CWG-2010, the
then Secretary, MYAS submitted in evidence:

Meee We have with us a total allocation across the Ministries of the
Government of India, the Government of Maharashtra; Municipality of Pune for
the infrastructure connected with the Youth Games and other peripheral
infrastructure-of ¥ 24,368.22 crore. Against this, the expenditure incurred by
the various agencies was = 19,843.06 crore."

3.54 When the Committee desired to know whether the expenditure information was
final, the then Secretary, MYAS stated:

"Sir, | would say that the allocation information is complete, but the expenditure
information might keep changing. The second aspect, which has been
highlighted a great deal in the escalation of cost estimates, and that has been
commented on in the Report that is under discussion also. From our
estimations, the initial estimate was shown as हैं 3,227 crore in 2007, which
escalated to ₹ 9,472.71 crore in 2009-2010. This is for Sports Authority of India
(SAI); Ministry of Urban Development; OC; Government of Maharashtra; and
the amount allocated to the Government of Delhi in those particular years".

3.55 Asked to comment on the timelines of cost escalation, the then Secretary,
MYAS responded:
"There are different timelines in this escalation. One time line starts from 2003
when the bid was preferred. Of course, all of them end in 2010, but at various
times the escalations were seen appraised and approved at various levels in

the city Government and in the national Government at the appropriate levels of
approvals."

3.56 In response to a specific query that all the expenditure was made with the
knowledge of the four Secretaries that were on the Executive Board, the then
Secretary, MYAS responded in the affirmative. Clarifying the matter, she further
stated:


3.57

51

"३०० Financial expenditures of a certain higher value, if my memory is right, |
will correct myself, हैं 6 crore or more would come before the EB. There was no
question as far as | am informed of the Board being bypassed...... "

As regards the loan amount given to the OC and the approval process within

the OC, the then Secretary, MYAS submitted:

3.58

3.59

beets In so far as the Organising Committee was concerned, they were given a
loan for a total amount of = 1813.42 crore plus an amount of हैं 687 crore for
overlays. It was given to them in installments because it was a loan amount.
So, as and when they required it, the Government extended the installments to
them. The approval process within the Organising Committee was
independent. The approval process, within the Organising Committee had its
own mechanism and its own processes.”

The then Secretary, MYAS further submitted:

seve there was a bunching of expenditure within the OC. Contracts had not
been finalized. Contracts were finalized in the last two years; awarded in the
last one year; executed in last six months.....1 would certainly submit that there
were delays in finalising the contracts and award of contracts within the OC."

On being asked to state whether the expenditure went up due to the

inaction/inefficiency of the Organising Committee, the Secretary, MYAS submitted:

3.60

sree it is my considered view that the expenditure went up mainly because of
the inefficiency of the Organising Committee till March, 2009 during which
period, the entire infrastructure and all the works should have been completed
but was not completed. As a result of this, we had to go in for a whole {ot of
tenders at a late stage as has been pointed out by the CAG. This delay by the
Organising committee for a period of nearly 4-5 years was critical in the final
cost of the Games. Unfortunately, | have no way in which | can justify that
delay...... They (OC) were not able to take corrective action. It was only when
the Government following the C&AG Report, took corrective action, pumped in
about 18 officers who started controlling things, that we were able to deliver the
goods."

The Committee asked whether the MYAS agreed that it was only with

Government intervention that finally things fell in line and the Games were successful.

In response, the Secretary, MYAS stated:

3.61

“| cannot agree more”

Elaborating his view point, the Secretary further submitted:


52

"Ultimately, the Government did step in to correct the situation and the situation
was corrected. It is not as if the Government did not do it. We can always
debate as to whether it was done at the right time or it should have been done a
little while ago. Maybe or maybe not, if it had been done in 2008, we would
have had a better situation. Reality is that at least till 2009, to be more precise-
March 2009, we were going about the entire scene in perhaps not as efficient
manner as should have been done. And, perhaps some interventions at that
stage would have made a difference. But that is in hindsight. Let me be very
frank that much of what we are saying is in hindsight. !t is not as if everything
was apparent at that point of time. But certainly it was the intervention of the
Government that saved the day and certainly it is a plausible argument that the
Government could have intervened earlier."

3.62 Asked to state specifically whether the management of the mega Games should
be in Government hand, the Secretary, MYAS responded:

"| would certainly say that management of the Games should not be in
Government scope, even though Government intervention came about....... |
would very strongly urge that it is better to look at institutional arrangement like
the Organising Committee with proper checks and balances rather than try and
do it through Government itself. But, in any case we cannot take over. It is part
of the IOA doctrine and it is mandated that an Organising Committee has to be
set up."

3.63 Drawing the attention of the Secretary, MYAS to the Shunglu Committee
Reports where in it had been recommended that the Government should be running
the Games in future, the Committee sought his comments. In response, the
Secretary, MYAS stated:

1 think what happened was that the roles became a little blurred.
Individuals tended to become more important than roles, and that is always a
dangerous situation. It is something that can be avoided...... In the past, the
Asian Games was an example where things ran much more smoothly but once
again in the Asian Games, if you remember, there was one individual who took
on the overriding responsibility and everybody reported to him."

3.64 On being asked whether it was prudent to give large expenditures to private
bodies for such mega events where national pride was at stake, the Secretary, MYAS
submitted:

५०००० to the query whether such expenditures be given to private bodies, the
answer is that we have done it in the past also; we did it for the Asian Games,
we did it this time. It is not without precedents that private bodies have been
entrusted with such responsibilities. Let us look at the management aspect
more. It is important that we do it because | certainly hope that this is not the
fast international event that India will host."


53

3.65 Pointing out that the administrative and financial Guidelines of the OC were
approved by the Ministry, the Committee queried whether it was not the duty of the
MYAS to monitor their proper adherence. In reply, the Secretary, MYAS stated:

"Somehow, this is one area where | do not really agree with the C&AG Report.
We simply cannot micro manage individual tenders or on an individual basis as
to what is going on in such a large exercise........ "

3.66 Commenting further on the matter, the Secretary deposed:

"As far as overall day-to-day and even week-to-week expenditure is concerned
the Organising Committee had full powers to do so and the Organising
Committee had to follow certain guidelines of expenditure. They had followed
the guidelines and because we felt that it could have been better implemented,
we had ordered a concurrent audit. In addition, wherever we have found even a
breath of suspicion, we have referred the cases to the CBI. But to manage it on
a day-to-day basis, try to intervene and start asking questions is not the best
way of delivering the Games."

3.67 Asked to state categorically the sort of broad sphere monitoring resorted to by
the Ministry, the Secretary, MYAS submitted:

.periodically, the Ministry has expressed its reservation in the manner in
which the entire work was taking place as is evident from the letters of the then
Minister. When that did not work, the Ministry in conjunction with the Ministry of
Finance asked the CAG to do an interim report and the CAG gave us an interim
report. On the basis of that report the entire structure of the OC was revamped,
but then it was done at a stage when only corrective or very limited action could
have been taken.”

3.68 The Secretary, MYAS further stated:

sevens there was never really a difficulty in deciding the things. Most of the times,
difficulty came in implementation of decisions. So if you look at the macro
picture and the monitoring of the macro picture, the Ministry could and did
repeatedly pointed out the slippages that were happening. The Ministry could
and did urge before both the Cabinet Secretary as well as the GOM that things
are going out of hand. When the things started going worse in every financial
sanction the Ministry had issued, it directed that these expenditures will be
monitored by the CAG; it will be audited and will have to follow the normal
rules.”

3.69 The Committee asked whether the final cost of the Games would have been
lower had appropriate planning and its effective implementation been done right from
the beginning. Agreeing, the Secretary, MYAS responded:


54

"Yes, it is presumed that if everything had been done properly earlier on, the
final costs would have been lower."
3.70 During further oral evidence on 25" October 2016, the Committee wished to
know the lessons drawn from the Audit observations on the role of the Ministry in the
organization of the XIXth Commonwealth Games. The representative of the Ministry
submitted as follows.

“| would like to inform the hon. Committee that the Department has taken these
recommendations very seriously and has since then organised two such events
successfully - within time, without any controversy and in an economical way.
First such event, which was organised, was South Asian Games. It was held in
February, 2016 for which the Organising Committee and Executive Committee
both were chaired by the Minister of Youth Affairs and Sports. The Organising
Committee format as well as Executive Committee format ensured that there
were a majority of people in the decision-making who were answerable to the
Parliament and to the Committee. These South Asian Games were organised at
a cost which was much less than for normal National Games which are held
among the States and also much less than the earlier held Lusofonia Games.
These Games were organised at a cost of about Rs. 150 crore and involved
eight countries of the SAARC region and 3,500 athletes took part in these
games. Even these games were arganised at a short notice, but without any
controversy of any kind. This has happened because of the guidance provided
by the Committee and findings of the Audit which we followed thoroughly in
following the procedures and in organising the event.

The second event was BRICS Under-17 Tournament in which five countries -
Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa — took part. This was an
invitational tournament which has been organised successfully, following the
same template that was followed for South Asian Games.

After the South Asian Games were concluded, as suggested by the
Committee, a study was got done from #/, Ahmedabad about the conduct of
games. They have come out with a report appreciating certain steps taken by
the Department post-Commonwealth Games in improving the procedures and

the decision-making system and that this has helped them to organise games


55

in a befitting manner. Now, that report of IIM has now been made a case study
for the sports management capsule at IIM, Ahmedabad.”


56
CHAPTER IV

ROLE AND RESPONSIBILITY OF THE ORGANIZING COMMITTEE (OC)

4.1. The Organising Committee had the sole responsibility to conduct and
successfully deliver the actual Games. The OC is a body created and, promoted by
the 108, under the terms of the Host City Contract, solely for conducting the CWG
2010. It was registered as a society under the Societies Registration Act 1860 with
Registrars of Societies, Government of Delhi on 40" February 2005. It has however,
no assets, and has for all practical purposes, a purely temporary existence, relevant
only for Conduct of the Games and allied purposes. It has a Memorandum of
Association (MOA) and rules under which it functions.

4.2 All the activities of the OC were organized into 34 Functional Areas. There
were 25 Sub-Committees, looking after the various Functional Areas. There was a
staff strength of about 1600 personnel in OC. The functions and responsibilities of
the OC include:

e Queens Baton Relay

e Ticketing and travel arrangements of sports delegations of all participating
counties and technical officials

e Protocol, boarding and lodging and intra-city movement logistics of participants.

* Management and Operation of Games Village.

« Planning and execution of Opening and Closing Ceremonies.

e Installation of overlays.

e Management of venues.

e Catering at Games, Village and Venues.

e Setting up of Central Logistics Centre and Central Accreditation Centre for
accreditation of participants/support personnel/Security personnel and VIP
visitors.

« Technical Conduct of the Games.

e Volunteer Programme.

« Sponsorships and other Revenue Generation.

e Sale of tickets for the events, etc.


57

e It was also responsible for providing technical requirements for design and
construction of competition areas.
e Publicity and Media campaigns.

4.3. The MoYAS/SAI were able to complete all 9 major venues of the Games and
management of these were handed over to OC on 4 August, 2010 to enable OC to
put in place "Overlays" (temporary fittings) and issuing Scoring and Result (TSR)
equipment, necessary during the period of the Games.

4.4. When the Committee desired to hear the views of the then Secretary, MYAS on
the specific role of the indian Olympic Association, she submitted in evidence:

"As regards the role of the Indian Olympic Association, the Indian Olympic
Association as the National Olympic Committee is also the Commonweaith
Games Association (CGA) of India. In their capacity as the Commonwealth
Games Association of India, they were allowed to present a bid for hosting the
Commonwealth Games by the Government in 2002. Then it was formalized in
2003. Once the Games were awarded to Delhi in November, 2003, the Host
City Contract came into existence. It was signed at Jamaica in November,
2003. The signatories to the Host City Contract were the Government of India,
the Government of Delhi and the Indian Olympic Association as the CGA. One
of the clauses of the Host City Contract clearly stipulated that the CGA will set
up an Organizing Committee. The Organizing Committee, once it was set up,
became the signatory to the Host City Contract, a binding international
commitment...... the moment the Organising Committee was formed under the
Societies Registration Act in February, 2005, the IOA did not have a direct role
in the conduct of the Games.....".

4.5. The then Secretary, MYAS further stated:

"In so far as IOA is concerned, the issue is a more complicated. They are an
autonomous society. They work under the International Olympic Committee.
They have certain rights and obligations under the Olympic Charter regarding
autonomy. | would tread very tricky, ground if | venture into that today."

4.6 The Committee then asked whether there was any official endorsement by the
Government of India to the conversion of the originally envisaged Government owned
OC into a body effectively outside the Government control. In reply, the MYAS
submitted that the Original Bid Document submitted by the Indian Olympic Association
to the Commonwealth Games Federation in London in May, 2003, laid down the
structure of the Organising Committee for the Games. According to this stipulation,
the OC was to be a non-profit Government owned Registered Society. It was to be a


58

body of 15 Members including a’ Chairman (Government Appointee) and a Vice
Chairman (IOA President). Games were awarded to the country in the General
Assembly of the CGA in Jamaica on 13.11.2003 based on the said Bid Document
submitted by the 108, Later, however, the IOA presented an Updated (Revised) Bid
Document in December, 2003 to the CGA. In the Revised Bid Document, the
structure of the OC was changed/modified. The Revised Bid Document stipulated that
the OC would be a Non-profit, Non-Government Registered Society. It would have 15
Members including a Chairman and a Vice Chairman but the provision that the
Chairman would be a Government Appointee and the Vice Chairman would be
President of the 10/8 stood removed.

4.7 The Ministry further stated that the aforesaid changes were brought to the
notice of the Ministry for the first time by the 108 through their letter dated 6"
September, 2004. In its 3 Meeting held on 29" January, 2005, the Group of
Ministers, constituted for coordinating the work related to the organization and conduct
of the Commonwealth Games 2010, considered and ratified that the Organizing
Committee shall be headed by President of the Indian Olympic Association, Shri
Suresh Kalmadi. The GOM was the highest body constituted by the Government for
overseeing and monitoring the work related to the Games and, therefore, the Ministry
reasoned that the decision had official endorsement of the Government.

4.8 Pointing out that the GOM was a body constituted to oversee and monitor the
work relating to the Games, the Committee asked whether the GOM was empowered
to ratify such changes made by the JOA in the updated Bid Document. In reply, the
MYAS stated that the members of [OA an autonomous Body, in its Annual General
Meeting held on 17 November, 2004, decided that Shri Suresh Kalmadi would
head the OC, CWG 2010. The GOM on 0४४6 2010 in its 34 Meeting held on 29"
January, 2005, considered and ratified that the Organizing Committee shall be headed
by President of the Indian Olympic Association, Shri Suresh Kalmadi. Thus the
decision of the GOM was only ratification of a decision taken by the IOA in compliance
with the rules and protocols of the CGF. The Ministry clarified that there was thus
nothing abnormal about the said ratification by the GOM. The CGF also confirmed in
writing that the responsibility for final structure of the OC rested with the 108.


59

4.9 Asked to state categorically whether the Government cited any reasons for
overruling the original proposal of appointing a Government representative as the
Chairman, OC and making OC a Government entity. In reply, the Ministry inter-alia
submitted that a communication from the PMO (67 December 2004) stated that
institutional arrangement had been evolved for the conduct of the Games. In this, Shri
Suresh Kalmadi, President 108 was indicated as the Chairman of the Organising
Committee and the Executive Board. It also communicated the Prime Minister's
direction that these institutional arrangements be considered in the next GOM
meeting. The GOM in its meeting held on 29" January, 2005 endorsed the views of
the PMO and decided that the OC would be headed by Shri Kalmadi.

4.10 When the Committee queried about the rational for the change in the structure
of the OC, as envisaged originally, the Secretary, MYAS submitted in evidence:

"Let me try and answer this because a lot of this will be to be on the basis of
educated guess work rather than on documents.”

4.11 Expressing surprise, the Committee asked whether the documents were
missing/untraceable. In reply, the Secretary, MYAS clarified:

"They were never created in many cases. | will come to that and | will be very
frank with this Committee. There will be no ambiguity in what | am trying to say.
The Original Host City Contact provided for a Government Chairman and the
IOA having the vice-Chairman. Subsequently, a decision was taken at the
highest levels of the Government that the Chairman would be Shri Suresh
Kalmadi and the [OA nominated the Vice-Chairman. This was not done with
the concurrence of the Ministry to Youth Affairs and Sports. but it was a
decision taken at the highest level in the interest of getting the work done
expeditiously. The charitable view would be that it was done because it was
decided that a decision making authority would be necessary for hosting such a
huge event and the normal government procedures which are necessarily time
consuming, would be counter-productive. At that point of time it must be
recalled that the Government was not spending money on the Games. It was
giving a Joan, but that loan was to be repaid from the recoveries and throughout
the OC had giving the Ministry a clear understanding."

4.12 Elaborating the matter, the Secretary, MYAS further stated:

beste It was only at a later stage when costs started spiraling that the question
of under-writing the cost cameup. It was decided with the concurrence of the
Ministry of Finance that the cost would ultimately be under-written by the
Government. So, at that point when this decision was taken, the Committee


4.13

4.14

60

may like to appreciate that the Government was not strictly speaking, spending
money and it was giving money as loan. Whether Shri Kalmadi should have
been appointed or whether the Minister for Sports should have been appointed
as Chairman is something upon which | cannot comment on."

In response to a specific related query, the Secretary, MYAS deposed:
"There is nothing on the Ministry's record which indicates the reasoning behind

the change. That is why in the initial stage | had to be a little bit speculative, but
it was educated speculation.”

Asked to state categorically whether somebody outside the Government should

have been put at the helm of the affairs for such a prestigious mega event, the
Secretary, MYAS submitted:

4.15

"For reasons best known to the Government, it was considered more efficient to
take the day to day supervision of the Games outside the purview of the
Government machinery and entrust it to a society called the Organising
Committee. The decision was taken by the Government and it was a decision
ratified by the International Olympic Association."

The Committee asked whether the Ministry to Youth Affairs and Sports itself

was nota part of the Government. In reply, the Secretary, MYAS submitted:

4.16

IL
417

ee The initial decision to set up an Organising Committee was taken with the
concurrence of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports. That the Games would
be entrusted to the Organising Committee was taken in conjunction with the
International Olympic Association, the host City Government and the
Government of India. Subsequently, the issue is being debated as to how did
the Government Chairman get replaced by Shri Kalmadi, it is not how the
Organising Committee came into being. So, my comments were in that
respect. Even if we put some other Government nominee there, who is directly
responsible to the Government, at this moment, | am not able to formally
commit that the expenditure would have been substantially lower."

The Secretary, MYAS further submitted:

"My statement that some decisions were taken at the level of the Government is
only to be interpreted to say that the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports which !
am representing at the moment did not have a direct knowledge of the reasons
of such decisions.... The decisions finally were taken at the level of the Group
of Ministers."

Funding of OC
As regards the funding of OC, the Committee were informed that on 15" March,

2007 Cabinet had approved an amount of = 767 crore, as loan at Government tate of


61

interest to the OC, for Conducting the Games. Subsequently, a 'Revised Budget
Estimate’ of OC, amounting to = 1,857 crore, was considered/appraised by the
Committee on Non-Plan Expenditure (CNE) on 28" July 2009 which recommended an
overali budget of € 1,620 crore. The Union Cabinet, on 57 November 2009, approved
the proposal of ‘Revised Budget Estimate of the OC of = 1,620 crores. The final
allocation to OC for Conduct of the Games had risen from हैं 1620. crore to हैं 1,814
crore, on account of increase in allocation for ‘Ceremonies-Opening and Closing’ by =
194 crore, approved by GOM /Finance Minister. Against the approved amount of &
1814 crore Government has released to OC till date = 1669.42 crores.

4.18 Besides this, a loan of = 687 crore had been sanctioned to OC, for ‘Overlays’,
by the Union Cabinet on 197 March 2010. Overlays are temporary fitting (marquees,
tents, ticket booths/spectator services/security checks, ports-cabins, Diesel Generating
Sets etc.), fixtures, equipments etc. at the various venues, which will be required only
for the period of the Games for fully operationalising the venues for technical conduct
of the Games and for spectators’ services and facilities etc. Against the approved
amount of % 687 crore, Government had released to OC ₹ 557.40 crore. OC had since
refunded to the Government % 234 crore. An additional grant of हैं 87.25 crore had
been sanctioned to OC for Timing, Scoring and Result (TSR) equipment, for use
during the Games. Out of this amount, ¥ 81.00 crore was released to OC. The grand
total amount sanctioned so far to OC, therefore stood at % 2,588 crore out of which हैं
2,501 crore was Loan. The total amount released to OC was & 2307.82 crore out of
which, OC has refunded ₹ 234 crore and returned ¥ 432 crore as revenue generation.

i Revenue Generation by OC

4.19 As regards the revenue generation projections by OC, the Committee were
informed that as per the requirement of the CGF, that the Government of the Host
Country must give an undertaking to underwrite the shortfall, if any, in the Capital and
Revenue Expenditure of the Games. Vide Cabinet decision dated aan September,
2003, the Government of India had underwritten the shortfall, if any, between the
revenue and expenditure of the OC. However, in the event of any surplus accruing to
the OC, the same shall be used by the 108 and the CGF for legacy programmes to
operate Games Venues. OC had indicated that it would raise 1,708 crore as


62

revenue from the Games. Till date, OC had deposited ~ 432 crore in Government

Account as revenue generation.

4.20 In the above context, the Committee asked whether the revenue generation
projections as given by the OC were accepted after ascertaining the basis and
authenticity. In reply, the MYAS stated that it was expected that revenues through
sponsorships and advertisements would be forthcoming in the last year of the run-up
to the Games. However, the global financial crisis in 2008 depressed the economic
outlook in the developed countries. In the last six months in the run up to the Games,
adverse media publicity regarding preparedness of the Games and allegations of
wrong doing carried by the media had an deleterious effect on the revenue prospects
of the OC. For example NTPC had committed % 50 crore but had not paid anything
beyond its first installment of हैं 20 crore. Similarly many other Public Sector

Undertakings also decided to keep away.

4.21 Audit scrutiny revealed that the EFC in its meeting held in September 2006,
recommended that a risk analysis study of the projected revenue streams be
undertaken expeditiously by OC and incorporated in the Cabinet Note on the OC

budget, so as to validate the principle of revenue neutrality. However, the Cabinet
Note of March, 2007 for approval of the OC Budget did not insist on the risk analysis
study on the grounds that the OC had engaged Eamest & Young (E&Y) for a risk
assessment study and a draft report was currently under examination of the OC. The
OC Budget was approved without even obtaining, let alone examining this study.

4.22 In the above context, when the Committee desired to hear the views of the
Secretary, MYAS, he submitted in evidence:
"| think the C&AG did not take into account the studies made by Earnest &
Young, which had given some revenue projection, which had been submitted to
the Finance Department as well.”
4.23 The Committee asked whether it was prudent on the part of the Government to
blindly believe the findings of a merchant banker, appointed by the OC. In reply, the
Secretary, MYAS submitted:
"Let me put it this way that it was not as if the Government was working blindly.

It had some projection figures. Many of the projected figures turned out to be
completely wrong."


63

4.24 The Secretary, MYAS further stated:

"In any case, the draft report was already available at that time. Some amount
of information was available to the Government. It is not as if the Government
was completely unaware or completely blind to what was the requirement.
There was still a semblance of logic in assuming that the Games would
generate a certain amount of revenue. As it happened, those projections were
grossly wrong. The revenue generation was only a fraction of what was
originally estimated. We must remember that expenditure on infrastructure was
not part of the projections. This is the OC's expenditure."

4.25 Asked to state categorically whether MYAS alongwith MoF ever tried to
challenge the veracity of the revenue projections by OC, the Secretary, MYAS
submitted:

“Let us at least accept that while the final figures of revenue generation are far
lower than what was estimated, the effort went haywire primarily because of the
bad publicity that was generated in the year 2009-10."

4.26 Expressing surprise, the Committee asked whether it was appropriate to blame
the media. In response, the Secretary, MYAS stated:

"| am not blaming the press. The reality is that the international financial
situation at that time was in doldrums. Country after Country was coming under
pressure. There was a recessionary trend going along internationally. The
Games themselves were generating a whole lot of bad publicity and the kind of
advertisement revenue that was expected was severely impacted because of
this situation. It is easy to look at the figures now and say that it was very bad,
or that nothing was done. The reality has to be 5861 in the context of what was
happening at that point of time.”

4.27 Asked to state categorically whether the global recession was the only factor
that caused cost escalation in the CWG 2010, the Secretary, MYAS submitted:

Me The reality is that cost escalation happened because, one, we under
estimated what was required and two, we decided to go for much higher levels
than what was ever done before."

4.28 In response to a specific query of the Committee regarding the revenue neutral

character of the Games the CEO, OC submitted in evidence:

"Sir, the Games were not revenue neutral. The total revenue which the OC
contracted had two components. One was the cash which the OC was to get
and the second was value in kind. Some sponsors agreed to give their services
which we could evaluate at their prices. The total contract was ¥ 680.23 crore
out of which we received = 549.87 crore; out of which the cash was ¥ 449 crore


4.29

64
and the value in kind was € 99.92 crore...... As against our Budget of = 1,813

crore, we were released ₹ 1,1669 crore and our expenditure till now has been =
1,581 crore. So, these are not revenue neutral."

Asked to elaborate and give a breakup of the Budget for conducting the Games

and Overlays, the CEO, OC stated:

4.30

4.31

"Our Budget was = 1,813 crore on the conduct of the Games, leaving aside
overlays, for which we were released F 1,669 crore and we have spent हैं 1,581
crore. On the overlays, our budget was ~ 687 crore; we have spent < 323 crore
and the balance fund we have returned back to the Government.”

Intervening, the then Secretary, MYAS stated:
“| may mention here that the revenues of the Organising Committee have been

deposited in the Consolidated Fund. The revenues were not allowed to be
used. They were deposited in the Government account."

The Committee desired to know whether the powers of the CEO, OC were

defined by the Government of India when he was appointed to the post. In reply, the
CEO, OC submitted:

4.32

"No. There was no clarity on that. Can | explain a little bit more on that? The
Chairman, Vice-Chairman, the Secretary-General and the Treasurer were the

- office-bearers of the OC. then, within that, there was a Secretariat headed by

the Director General of the Society and there were some other officers. When |
jointed there, till that time, | did not know what my powers were. But when |
went there, | familiarized myself with the functioning and got to know what my
powers were. Then | told that | do not figure anywhere in the rules of the
Society. Then | suggested to them that i should be given the financial powers
and the powers for the appointments. 1 had given in writing to the Chairman
that it should be given to me. But he did not do it. Also, | told them that |
should figure in the Memorandum of Association of the Society, that the CEO
should be the head of the Secretariat. There was an Annual General Body
meeting of the Society held in December, 2009, where the CEO was included,
but he was not made the head of the Secretariat. In that sense, when we say
the CEO, which we see generally in the case of the Corporations, the CEO's
functions, in which he has the full authority like financial sanctions,
appointments etc. were with the Chairman."

On being asked to state the reasons for the Government not clearly defining the

powers of the CEO, OC the then Secretary, MYAS submitted:

“The appointment of the CEO was by the OC. There was a request from the
Chairman to the Government that he would require the services of some
officials and officers. Some names were given to him; the appointment and the


65

terms and conditions of the appointment were by the Chairman and the OC.
So, the Government did not decide on what powers and functions this should
be done. This was in a manner of strengthening the supervisions arrangements
within the OC."

4.33 Referring to the notes submitted to the Committee wherein it had been
mentioned that "the Government Immediately deputed Shri Jarnail Singh, Secretary to
the Government of India as the CEO of OC", the Committee sought the comments of
the then Secretary, MYAS. In reply, she submitted:

"The Government suggested some names."

4.34 The Committee then asked the CEO, OC whether 18 180 recorded anywhere in
writing that he was not given any power by the Chairman, OC and whether he had
ever brought the matter to the notice of the GOM or any other appropriate Authority.
in reply, the CEO, OC submitted:

"No Sir, | used to discuss it with the Chairman and tell him that if you want me
to do something, give me these powers.”

4.35 Commenting that there was no logic in orally telling this, the Committee desired
to know categorically whether the CEO had recorded it anywhere in writing. In
response, the CEO, OC stated in the negative.

4.36 The Committee then asked whether the CEO, irrespective of the powers given
to him, had at any point of time objected to certain decisions taken, not conforming to
the rules, but overruled by the Chairman, OC. In reply, the CEO, OC submitted:

"There are some cases and files where | objected. One was about catering,
where the file is available. There are some other cases like this. There were
some proposals which were given by the Chairman for awarding contracts by
taking certain routes, to which | did not agree. | stood by that, because the
CEO was made the Chairman of the OC Finance Committee.... So, | used to
take a view, keeping in view the financial propriety, and | did not agree with
some of these cases- | do not know whether | should say it or not here-there
was one case in which they wanted to release one song for Mr. A.R. Rahman,
for which they wanted हैं 50 lakh. | said that we cannot give without estimates,
we could give only & 1-2 lakh. So, it was not done in Delhi. There were similar
such cases where we did not agree to them, in the proposals."


66

4.37 Asked to state the special efforts made by the CEO,OC after he took charge, to
ensure speedy implementation of Projects in accord with the established rules and
regulations, the CEO submitted:

"When | took over on the 167" October, 2009, | was given the work in
November, 2009 after about a month. | noticed that the number of contracts
which were signed by the OC were only about 20, whereas we were supposed
to push through about more than 500 contracts. It is because of my efforts that
we were able to clinch at least 525 contracts including 159 contracts for the
ceremonies. Had | not taken the initiative, as the Chairman of the Fast Track
Committee, it would have been very difficult because most of the functional
areas were not properly manned. We did not have properly trained manpower
who could prepare the estimates iterm-wise and come up with the RFPs and
take a decision. Even the C&AG Report also brings out very clearly, how the
bunching of contracts took place in the year 2010."

4.38 Audit pointed out that while increasing its estimate for revenue through
sponsorship, OC failed to correspondingly revise the contracted commitment of
sponsorship consultant SMAM. When the Committee enquired about the reasons
thereof, OC had responded by stating that the revenue target of USD 120/ 100 Million
mentioned in the SMAM contract was revised by M/s SMAM to USD 240 million
(approx. INR 1080 crore at 1 USD = 45 INR), by a letter dated 04.01.2008.

4.39 Asked to state whether any action had been taken against the persons involved
in the contract with SMAM, the MYAS responded that the High Level Committee had
also commented adversely upon the role of CGF in the appointment of SMAM. A
statement of facts relating to the possible collusion in the appointment of SMAM had
been sent to the Ministry of Law through MYAS in the context of issues relating to
claim of damages from SMAM for non-performance.

4.40 The Committee were informed that the objective of forming the Business Club
of India (BCI) was to facilitate business networking and promote business and
commerce, thereby leveraging India's business prospects. In other words, it was to
help OC in getting national and international sponsorship for the CWG. In that context,
the Committee desired to know whether OC was able to get any sponsorship through
the BCI. In reply, the Ministry submitted that the concept of Business Club was not
new as similar entities were created for the earlier Games at Manchester and
Melbourne. The objective, apart from promoting overall business and commerce


67

prospects in the country by associating Cll and FICCI, was to showcase and market
the Games at national and international levels for raising funds through sponsorships.
Though, the BCI made many efforts in this direction and held Road Shows and
Seminars to provide a platform for business networking, it could not get any
sponsorship. This could also be due to adverse Media publicity of the preparations for
the Games and the prevailing recessionary conditions in the world economy at that
period of time.

4.41 Asked to state the amount involved in providing discounted tickets to the
members of the BCI, the MYAS stated that OC had incurred an expenditure of € 2.36
crore on discounted tickets provided for the BC] members.

Ill. Strengthening of Financial Supervision of OC

4.42 The Committee were informed that in order to strengthen the financial control
and supervision of OC, the OC was advised, with the approval of the Cabinet, to
strengthen its institutional mechanism by adhering to the following measures:

{i) Constituting, on 8" December 2008, a Standing Finance Committee (SFC) with
Joint Secretary & Financial Adviser (Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports), and a
representative of the Department of Sports, as members. All proposals having
financial implications, would be first examined by the SFC, before they were put
up for consideration of the Executive Management Committee (EMC), or the
Executive Board (EB) of the OC.

(ii) Making Additional Secretary (Expenditure), a permanent invitee on the
Executive Board (EB) of the OC, by Cabinet decision of 3" October 2008. The
EB already had 2 representatives of Government of India ~ Secretary, Urban
Development and Secretary, Sports as members as also Chief Secretary, Delhi
and Principal Secretary to CM, Delhi as members.

(iii) A Finance Sub-Committee had been formed, as per decision of Union Cabinet
dated 57 November 2009, to examine all matters before they were put up
before the Executive Board. It comprises of Secretary (Urban Development),
Secretary (Sports), Additional Secretary (Expenditure) and Chief Executive
Officer, OC.

(iv) The Audit Committee of the OC is chaired by the Principal Secretary,
Commonwealth Games, Government of Delhi.

(v) Keeping in view the sensitive/critical nature of the functioning of OC, the MYAS
with each sanction order, releasing funds to OC for conduct of the
Commonwealth Games, 2010 right from June 2004, had been repeatedly
requesting CAG through each fund release order for conducting audit of the
accounting of the OC. Thereafter MYAS Stock up strongly through the


68

Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) Committee, chaired by the Finance
Secretary, in its meeting held on 13.09.2006, while discussing the budget of the
OC, to get the OC EFC to recommend the Concurrent Audit of OC should be
done by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CA&G). This was also
placed before the Cabinet in its meeting held on 15.03.2007. The CAG was
requested by this Ministry to conduct Concurrent Audit of the OC. It was only
thereafter that the CAG commenced Audit of the OC for the first time only on
November 2008.

4.43 Audit scrutiny revealed that the Administrative and Financial Guidelines of the
OC were approved by the MYAS and Government funds were given to OC through the
MYAS. But the MYAS did not monitor the actual implementation of the Guidelines and
proper utilization of the funds granted. At no stage, the Ministry provided any
correction/changes to align it with the GFR and other Government rules.

4.44 In the above context, the Committee desired to be apprised of the reasons for
the MYAS not monitoring the actual implementation of the Administrative and Financial
Guidelines so as to ensure proper utilization of the funds sanctioned. In reply, the
Ministry stated that OC being an autonomous society with an Executive Board framed
its own rules and regulations. However, since the Government had released
substantial funds to the OC through the Ministry for staging the Games, it took all
necessary measures to strengthen the financial system of the OC including systems
for public financial accountability, transparency and audit.

4.45 Asked to state the specific steps taken by the Ministry to ensure financial
accountability and transparency, the MYAS stated that the following measures were

taken for the purpose:

i) From the very beginning, there had been two representatives of the
Government of India viz. Secretary (Sports) and Secretary (Urban
Development) and two representatives of Govt. of National Capital Territory of
Delhi (GNCTD), viz. Chief Secretary and Principal Secretary to the Chief
Minister, as the members of the Executive Board of the OC,

i) There has been an Audit Committee of the EB of the OC, headed by
Secretary, Urban Development, Government of India who was a member of the
Executive Board of the OC. Later, Principal Secretary to the Chief Minister,
GNCTD was made the chairperson of this Audit Committee of the EB of the
oc.

iii) Keeping in view the sensitive/critical nature of the functioning of the OC, this
Ministry, with each sanction order, releasing funds to OC for Conduct of the


69

Commonwealth Games, 2010, right from June, 2004, has been repeatedly
requesting CAG (through the release orders) for conducting audit of the
accounts of the OC. Thereafter, the MYAS took up strongly through the
Expenditure Finance (EFC) Committee, chaired by Finance Secretary, in its
meeting held on 13.09.2006, while discussing the budget of the OC, to get the
EFC to recommend that Concurrent Audit of OC should be done by the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CA&G). This was also placed before
the Cabinet in its meeting held on 15.03.2007. The CAG was requested by
letter dated 31.05.2007 of this Ministry to conduct Concurrent Audit of the OC. It
was only thereafter that the CAG commenced Audit of the OC for the first time,
that too only from November, 2008.

iv) The Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, on 29" May, 2007, had issued
directions, bringing the OC under the preview of the Right to Information Act.
This was challenged by OC before the Delhi High Court. The Ministry filed a
Strong affidavit in 2008 and pressed continuously since 2008 in favour of
brining OC under the ambit of RTI Act. The Hon’ble Delhi High Court, on 7m
January, 2010 ruled in favour of the Ministry. Accordingly, on 1 February,
2010, a fresh order was issued by the Ministry, reaffirming the position. Similar
orders were issued in respect of National Sports Federations and the Indian
Olympic Association.

v) In order to further strengthen the financial contro] and supervision of OC,
the OC has been advised, with the approval of the Cabinet, to strengthen its
institutional mechanism by adhering to some specific measures as mentioned
earlier.

vi) This MYAS has also been making efforts to strengthen the administration of
the OC, which, inter-alia, included the following:

(a) The Government deputed Sri Jarnail Singh, Secretary to the Government of
India (Retd.) as CEO of OC. Two Additional Secretary rank officers — Shri G.C.
Chaturvedi and Shri Sudhir Mittal and two Joint Secretary rank officers - Shri
Jiji Thomson and Shri Sanjeev Mittal, two of whom are Finance experts, were
placed at suitably senior positions in the OC.

(b) The Cabinet Secretary also deployed 11 Senior Officers of the rank of Joint

Secretary and above, in the final run up to the Games to assist and support OC

in getting the Venues ready for the Games in time."
4.46 The Committee then asked whether the Ministry had ever reported any failure
and laxity on the working of the various Functional Areas (FAs) of the OC. In reply,
the MYAS submitted that the working of the Functional Areas was monitored by the
OC which had its own hierarchy and reported to the Executive Board. Progress and
monitoring of various items/issues relating to the Commonwealth Games was being
done at the highest level in the meetings of the GoM on CWG 2010. The meetings of
the GOM used to be attended by the Chairman and the Chief Executive Officer of the
OC. Reports were submitted before the GOM and issues, if any, requiring


70

attention/decision were brought up before the GoM and resolved. Besides, matters
also used to be discussed and solutions found in the Meetings of Committee of
Secretaries (COS) on CWG 2010. The Secretaries or other senior Officials of the
Ministries concerned attended these Meetings as need arose. The MYAS also stated
that, due to their strenuous efforts to strengthen the financial systems of the OC, public
accountability and transparency, as well as the decision to carry out an interim audit,
the expenditure control and management vastly improved by the time the Games took
place.

4.47 Not satisfied, the Committee asked the specific monitoring done by the Ministry
to address the issues of failure and faxity on the part of the Functional Areas of the
OC. In reply, the MYAS submitted that the Ministry were not interfering in the internal
working of the OC and the progress and monitoring of various items/issues relating to
the CWG was being done at the highest level in the meetings of the GOM.

4.48 In response to the Committee's query regarding the entire public perception
against the Games, the then Secretary, MYAS stated:
"_.,.Everything was not wrong with the Games. We were great hosts; the
legendry hospitality, we lived up to it; We were good competitors; we stood
second, and our young sportspersons have gone on to win the same or similar
medals in the Asian Games. We hope they will do quite well at the Olympics
next year. Sir, | speak for myself and a large number of us the greatest thrill

was to see our National Flag go up again and again during the Games, and to
hear our National Anthem being played again and again....."

4.49 The Committee, clarifying that they never opined that everything was wrong in
the CWG-2010, asked the Secretary to say in an unambiguous manner whether she
believed that everything was done in a right manner in organizing and conducting the
Games. In response, the then Secretary submitted:

"Sir as Secretary of the nodal Ministry, | would like to believe that there was
nothing wrong but | also know that it would be foolish of me to say that."

4.50 She further stated:

"In my system of checks and balances the C&AG's report and the examination
by PAC, that is my accountability to the system and | would like certainly to be
advised as to what was right and what was wrong by this august Committee".


71

4.51 On the issue of large public opinion/perception against the Games, the then
Secretary, MYAS deposed:

"....As far as my personal opinion is concerned, | am as mystified or baffled as
you are as to why the entire public opinion and public perception was so much
against the Games, against the Project, | would say. There was a huge amount
of media interest, most of which was against the Games, against the various
aspect of which they say as shortcomings. The only thing | can venture to
suggest at this stage is that perhaps we left too many projects to be completed
too late. There were lot of dug-up roads, lots of dug-up, incomplete stadia
which gave very little time for the final finishing touches which would have in
itself taken about six months. We gave ourselves very little time. We are in the
Government. It is my personal opinion that we were very bad at managing the
media, very poor at marketing our accomplishments."

4.52 Asked to state specifically whether the various shortcomings pointed out in the
Audit Report were unjustified as made out in a few quarters, the then Secretary, MYAS

submitted:

"....A Jot of build up to the Games was on account of delays in the project,
delays we could not recover from in the last couple of years, but despite all odd,
as the report (Audit) has itself recorded, the final outcome was to everybody's
satisfaction. That is not to say that the Games Projects, the various
procurement issues, the various shortcomings which have been noted in the
Audit report of the C&AG were unjustified, not at all i just want to make that
absolutely clear. The C&AG's reports are always based on our own responses
which we furnish to the Audit teams, on which they draw the inferences...... "

4.53 The Committee desired to know whether there was management failure in
organizing and conducting the Games. In reply, the Secretary, MYAS stated:

"The authority for management of the Commonwealth Games lay entirely with
the Organising Committee. The authority of appointment of individuals into the
Organising Committee lay entirely with the Organising Committee. It is when
the Organising Committee faced critical situation, where it was evident that they
could fail, that the Government imposed external officers into the Organising
Committee in order to sort out the matter."

4.54 Asked to state in no uncertain terms as to whether there was overall
management failure or not, the Secretary, MYAS submitted:

मम It is fairly obvious that there was management failure. It is fairly obvious
that delays occurred at the initial stages because of which decisions had to be
taken in haste at times, towards the end through single tenders at some times
and through negotiations at others. It is fairly obvious that some facilities came
up with only days to spare. It should have been there with months to spare.


72

So, if | try to claim that there was no management failure, | would be
completely wrong."

4.55 He further deposed:

"Now, where was the management failure? | think, and | am speculating, let me
be very clear, | am speculating here; | think the failure lay at that point of time
between 2003 and 2006 in recognizing that the alternative to the Government is
not always superior. [t was felt that if we move out of the Government
machinery and take a very straight forward, clear line of decisions making,
everything will fall in place. That it does not always fall in place; that there have
to be checks and balances, was not very well appreciated at that point of time.
Those checks and balances need to be put in and if it had been put in at that
point of time perhaps, the last minute rush could have been avoided to a large
extent. That was, to my mind, as a professional, the biggest failure, of the
management of the Games."

4.56 The Secretary, MYAS summed up:

"Ht was not that somebody was making money. It was not that somebody tried
to do that...... what was much more important was that there was a complete
management failure and because of the management failure, we came to the
brink of defaulting on the Games, which would have created a national shame
across the world and for years. Instead, that we could retrieve the situation says
a great deal about our ability to manage things properly. We did not manage
properly. The systems of checks and balances that needed to have been put in
place between 2006 and 2009 were not there in proper measures....."

4.57 Asked to state the corrective measures taken to put in the system of checks
and balances in view of the shortcomings/deficiencies observed, the Secretary, MYAS
deposed:

" do not think we have done a proper debriefing of the Commonwealth Games
as yet. If the Committee permits, | will hire a set of consultants to actually look
into what went wrong and try to articulate it. It will take a little bit of time,
probably four to five months. | would be very happy to create a debriefing
session on the CWG to pinpoint each of the deficiencies and to suggest
corrective action on that."

IV. Inadequate Documentation

4.58 Audit scrutiny revealed that the documents, particularly relating to the contracts
for goods and services were not properly maintained by the OC. in this context, the
Committee desired to know the reasons for improper maintenance of the documents
and the persons responsible for proper upkeep of the documenis/files. In reply, the
Ministry stated that according to the OC, generally the documents had been


73

maintained properly. Each Functional Area Head was responsible for maintenance of
the documents of their Functional Area. All contracts had been signed by the
Secretary General and one of the original copies used to be retained in his office and
the related files were kept by the respective FAs.

4.59 The MYAS further stated that the Secretary General was responsible for
maintaining the Minutes of the Executive Management Committee. It was further
stated that Minutes had been maintained well except in some cases. The explanation
of the SG was, however, not available.

4.60 The Committee desired to know the specific cases where the Minutes of the
EMC had not been maintained properly and the reasons therefor. In reply, the Ministry
stated that the OC had commented that in the initial days, the practice of issuing
consolidated Minutes for each meeting of the EMC was not followed. For different
agenda items discussed in one meeting on the same day, the Minutes used to be
issued separately for each agenda item. With effect from the meetings of the EMC
held on 21% June, 2010, the practices of issuing consolidated Minutes were started.

4.61 Asked to state the reasons for the non-availability of the explanation of the
Secretary General, the MYAS stated that according to the OC, the EMC meetings
were held as per the requirements of the Functional Areas and Minutes were recorded
properly on item to item basis on separate sheets. The Minutes in original were kept
in a file and copies of the same were also given to the FAs concerned for further
action.

4.62 In the above context, when the Committee desired to hear the views of the
Secretary, MYAS, he submitted in evidence:

" ...To be fair to the OC, they had evolved internal systems. In many cases the
internal systems were IT based and not paper based as is in the Government.
As a result, the record compilation which was available to the CAG sometimes
did not come up and repeatedly the CAG had written that they did not get these
papers. But subsequently those papers were printed out. It was just that it was
in an electronic format most of the times. When it came to the criminal cases,
those papers were all given to the CBI, whenever they had asked for. So, it
was not as if it was completely undocumented. There was a fair amount of
documentation. It was just that within the organisation itself the knowledge as
to where the documents lay in electronic form was in disarray because haif the
people were in jail, some were thrown out and all kinds of things happened.


74

People were in disarray and therefore they could not find it. But slowly they
have been able to piece that through...... "

4.63 On the issue of autonomy to the OC and bringing it under the purview of RTI,

the then Secretary, MYAS submitted in evidence:

Vv.

५.०० The Organising Committee is a Society under the Societies Registration
Act and claimed that it was only a recipient of Government loans and advances
to conduct the Games. In 2007, the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sprots issued
directions to bring the Organising Committee under the purview of the Right to
Information Act as a public authority. This was challenged by the Organising
Committee before the Delhi High Court. The Ministry filed a strong affidavit and
pressed continuously in favour of bringing the Organising Committee under the
ambit of the Right to Information Act as a public authority and as a recipient of
substantial amount of Government funding. Finally, on 7th January, 2010 the
Court ruled in favour of the Ministry and the Organising Committee and the IOA,
by a separate Order, were directed to furnish all information as required under
the Right to information Act under the relevant clauses as public authority.”

CATERING

4.64 Audit scrutiny revealed that a Catering Manager was supposed to be appointed

by June 2007 whereas the first appointment in catering FA was made in January 2009,

that too of an Assistant level. Audit further pointed out that the EO! for catering

services was issued in June 2009.

4.65 In the above context, the Committee sought the comments of the MYAS. In

reply the Ministry submitted as under:

"OC has responded by stating that June, 2007 was the month and year
prescribed for appointment of Manager Catering (subsequently designated as
Director (Catering)) in the General Organization Plan (GOP) of the OC which
was approved by the Executive Board in its meeting held on 44" August, 2007.
As per GOP, Manager Catering was under the charge of ADG (Games
Services) who was supposed to be under Chief Operation Officer (COO). The
COO, namely, Shri. Vijay Kumar Gautam, was appointed w.e.f. 7" September,
2007. The post of ADG (Games Services) was advertised in the Times of India
in August. 2007 but no suitable candidate was found for the post.

In January, 2009, not only one Assistant Project Officer (Mr. Manu Verma) was
appointed but also a Project Officer (Ms. Sharayu Almelkar) was selected and
she joined with effect from 277 February, 2009. She was promoted as Director
(Catering) in June, 2009.

The work was initiated immediately for preparing EO! for Catering Services,
which was issued in June 2009."


75

4.66 Asked to state the specific action taken by the Ministry to ensure timely award
of catering contracts, the MYAS submitted that there were numerous irregularities in
the award of the Games Village catering contract. The process of award took 14
months, with two rounds of tendering, both on single financial bids. The cancellation of
the first tender by the Chairman, OC was not only against the recommendations of OC
officials, but was also done after opening the single financial bid on the Chairman's
verbal orders. This decision to re-tender weakened the OC's negotiation position vis-a-
vis the vendors and resulted in frantic activity upto June 2010 for conclusion of four
separate contracts/ agreements.

4.67 Audit scrutiny revealed that bids were called for without incorporating the clause
on EMD and even the technical and commercial bids were opened without verifying
the EMD as it was recommended for condoning the same by a committee constituted
for the purpose of evaluation.

4.68 Asked to comment on the above Audit observation, the Ministry stated as
under:

" OC has responded by stating that in the NIT for Games Village Catering
published in the newspaper it was mentioned that EMD should be submitted in
the envelope containing the Technical Bid. The EMD was not found by
Technical Evaluation Committee in the envelope containing Technical Bid. In
order to meet the timeline, the Committee recommended that the commercial
bid may be opened condoning the non-submission of EMD."

4.69 Audit further pointed out that the Chairman, OC, instead of signing the file had
given verbal orders in December 2009 for opening of the commercial bid. At a later
stage the Chairman had decided to cancel the bid in January, 2010 and asked for
retender on the ground of non-submission of EMD. Retendering was ordered in
January 2010, which ultimately delayed the whole process.

4.70 Asked to comment on the above Audit observations, the Ministry submitted that
the OC had admitted that Audit observations appeared to be correct and based on
records. The Ministry further stated that there was definite escalation of cost due to
retendering.

Vi. Selection of Flats and Fixation of Prices

4.71 In response to a specific query of the Committee, OC admitted that it did not
follow transparent procedures in selection of flats and fixation of prices which resulted
in hiring of flats at exorbitant rates in excess of requirement.


76

4.72 Asked to specify the other cases where transparency and accountability were
not followed by OC, the Committee were informed that there appeared to be no other
such case.

4.73 When the Committee desired to know the action taken against the OC officials
who were responsible for hiring of flats at exorbitant rates, OC responded that it was
managed by the Secretary General, OC's office.

Vil. Complimentary Tickets

4.74 On the issue of complimentary tickets, the Committee desired to know whether
the MYAS were informed or themselves kept track of the discounted and
complimentary tickets that were to be distributed in order to gauge its effect on
revenue generation. In reply, the Ministry submitted as under:

" It is submitted that Complimentary Tickets as per the approved Seating Plan
for Opening and Closing Ceremonies were distributed to the delegates by the
OC. In addition, OC also distributed complimentary tickets to the Stakeholders,
Sponsors, Right Holder Broadcaster, etc.

Tickets for other sports events were distributed under the “Unsold Tickets
Policy” as “Complimentary” by the OC as approved by the Executive Board to
various stakeholders/venue owners/Govt. Agencies/Police/GO! & Govt. of NCT,
etc. who were involved in the conduct and the staging of the Games.

MYAS did not come into the picture in the matter."

4.75 Not satisfied, the Committee asked in evidence whether the Ministry were not
involved in the approval process of issuing Complimentary Tickets. In response, the
Secretary, MYAS deposed:

tees Some amount of complimentary tickets is always part of any such
ceremony. If you look at the London Olympics, which are going on, look at the
TV pictures and look at the controversy that are going on. Nearly, 40 percent of
the seats are vacant at any point of time."

4.76 The Secretary, MYAS further submitted:

peeeeeee but what is true is that between 20-30 percent of the tickets will always
be complimentary tickets, which are given out. Some of the tickets in addition
will have been sold to corporates in bulk who would have distributed it and
people would not have come. So far, no Olympics or Asian Games for for that
matter anybody else seems to have found out a solution by which such things


77

could be completely eliminated. It is part of the corporate sponsorship, and
sometimes it is part of the deals that are struck in other ways. So this does
happen so far as ticketing is concerned."

4.77 Asked to state the amount involved in terms of money in the distribution of
complimentary tickets, the CEO, OC submitted:

"Sir, the tickets for the opening ceremony were of high value, namely, रे 50,000
each. As per our record, we had given ~ 56 crore worth of tickets as
complimentary tickets. We were under instructions from the Government that
we have to accommodate all the VVIPs on the high value tickets..... The tickets
which were given for the opening and closing ceremonies as complimentary
were worth % 56 crore.” _


78
CHAPTER V

ROLE AND RESPONSIBILITY OF THE MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT

5.1 According to the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, the role and responsibility
of the MoUD was as under:

(i) The 9 stadia of Sports Authority of India, and the Big Bore Shooting Range
at Kaderpur, funded by MoYAS were constructed by the CPWD. The
Ministry of Urban Development as the controlling Ministry supervised and
monitored the work of CPWD in relation to these projects.

(ii) The Ministry of Urban Development through the Delhi development Authority
(DDA), was responsible for the construction of several stadia, notably the
Competition Venues for Badminton, Squash, Table Tennis and archery at
Siri Fort Sports Complex, Yamuna Sports Complex and also a number of
Training Venues.

(iii) The MoUD through the DDA, was also responsible for the development of
the Games Village, situated off NH 24, near the Akshardham Temple. The
Residential Zone, Transport Mall etc were developed by DDA directly. The
Residential Zone comprises 34 Towers and 1168 flats to accommodate
8,000 sportspersons and officials. The flats were furnished by ITDC. Delay
in the timely delivery of the residential flats, resulted in apprehensions for
the Games Time headlines of the Games Village. However, the deployment
of additional manpower and supervisory officers from the Government of
India, Government of Delhi, NDMC and MCD, the Games Village was
brought up to readiness status for hosting the teams from the various
countries.

(iv) The DDA has also constructed some flyovers at key places.

(५) DDA has also constructed flats at Vasant Kunj and Jasola. These were to
be used as accommodation for Tourists and Technical Officials. At the intial
stages 5009 rooms were targeted to be made available at Vasant Kunj
however finally around 1200 rooms were delivered. [TDC was responsible
for furnishing these flats. These were used to accommodate Technical
Officials during the Games.

5.2 As mentioned above, the MYAS apprised the Committee that the Ministry of
Urban Development, as the controlling Ministry, supervised and monitored the work of
CPWD relating to the construction of the nine stadia of Sports Authority of India and

the Big Bore Shooting Range at Kaderpur which were funded by the MYAS.

5.3. In connection with the examination of the subject, the Ministries/Departments
concerned were issued Questionnaires, according to their respective involvement, for


79

written reply to the Committee. A similar Questionnaire was issued to the MoUD, with
copies endorsed to the DDA and CPWD, on 21% October, 2011. While replies
pertaining to the DDA were received from the MOUD on 8" December, 2011, no such
reply pertaining to CPWD was received till 277 July, 2012.

5.4 In the above context, the Committee while taking evidence of the Secretary,
MoUD on 2™ July, 2012 asked him to explain the position. In response, the Secretary,
MoUD submitted.

"...... In so far as the CPWD is concerned right from the inception of this
Commonwealth Game issue, CPWD was reporting directly to the Ministry of
Youth Affairs and Sports and taking advice and guidance from them, the
administrative approvals were accorded by that Ministry. And the MoUD was
not in picture at all. Even the High Level Committee, commonly called Shunglu
Committee, and the Group of Ministers which examined the report of the action
taken on the recommendations and report of the Shunglu Committee, all that
were steered by the Sports Ministry. So, | would submit for your kind
consideration that the entire matter relating to CPWD be referred to the Ministry
of Youth Affairs and Sports. Also because CPWD is servicing not only the
Sports Ministry, it is servicing all the Ministries of the Government of India. And
mostly, the heads of accounts are operated by these Ministries. Very rarely any
head of account of other Ministries is operated by us......”

5.5 Not convinced, the Committee desired to know the stipulations under the Rules
of Transaction of Business in this regard. In reply, the Secretary, MoUD submitted:

“Our understanding is that whichever Head of Account falls in the Demands for
Grants for that Ministry, they answer it."

5.6 Asked to elucidate, the Secretary, MoUD further stated:

"Certain Head of Accounts of CPWD not concerning the Games, in general we
are operating. We are answering Parliament Questions, we are giving
administrative approvals, and we are monitoring projects. Whatever work is
assigned to CPWD by different Ministries, each of those Ministries is monitoring
that independent of us. If there is some issue, they write to us seeking our help
in advising CPWD to speed up the work etc. which is a different matter."

हा Still not satisfied, the Committee asked the Secretary to have relook at the
Rules of Transaction of Business and get back to them later on. Agreeing, the
Secretary, MoUD submitted:

"As you have advised us, we will go through the Allocation of Business Rules
and give a cogent response with the citation of rule etc."


80

5.8 In the meantime, the MYAS in a correspondence dated 23" August, 2012,
reiterating their stance, inter-alia clarified that in all fairness, it is the CPWD and the
MoUD, being the administrative Ministry of CPWD, to attend to the Audit objections
and the PAC Questionnaire like other stakeholders on issues pertaining to the CWG-
2010.

5.9 In his written communication dated 5" October, 2012 the Secretary, MoUD,

inter-alia submitted as under:

"While the Allocation of Business Rules, 1961 place CPWD under the MoUD,
the same need to be read in conjunction with the provisions of Rule 134 of
GFR, 2005 which require the respective Administrative Ministry to set up a
Review Committee to review and monitor the progress of their works.
Accordingly, MoYA&S would need to respond to the PAC Questionnaire.
Further, all the administrative approvals, including recommendations/approvais
of the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) and the Union Cabinet were
accorded/obtained by the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports. Accordingly, the
MoYA&S should be required to vet and handle the response on the PAC
Questionnaire related to CPWD for the CWG matters that were entrusted to the
CPWD by that Ministry."

5.10 The Secretary, MoUD further apprised the Committee that they had written to
the Cabinet Secretariat for a decision on the matter. The Committee on their own also
sought clarifications from the Cabinet Secretariat regarding the jurisdiction over CPWD
so far as CWG 2010 was concerned.

5.11. On6" November 2012, the Cabinet Secretariat clarified the matter as follows:

"The matter has been considered. It is requested that the coordinated response
should go from the Ministry/Department which had sanctioned the
proposals/projects for which necessary inputs would be given by the other
Department(s)/Ministry(ies) concerned. The Ministry/Department which had
provided the information would be responsible for correctness of the information
provided by it."

(I) CENTRAL PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT (CPWD)

1. Venues developed by Central Public Works Department

5.12 CPWD was engaged by the Sports Authority of India (SAI) for
upgradation/renovation of five competition venues- (i) Jawaharial Nehru Stadium; (ii)
Dr. Shyama Prasad Mukherjee Swimming Pool Complex (SPM) ; (iii) Major Dhyan


81

Chand National Stadium; (iv) Indira Gandhi Stadium; and (v) Dr. Karni Singh Shooting
Range, as well as one training venue- DPS, RK Puram. In addition, CPWD renovated
the Kadarpur Shooting Range on behalf of CRPF.

1. Selection of Consulting Engineering Services (India) Ltd. by CPWD as
main consultant in all the five stadia

5.13 Audit security revealed that subsequent to the identification of the venues,
CPWD initiated the work of award/identification of Design Consultants for its venues
during the period June-July 2006. For the engagement of specialized agencies to
consultancy services for works in all the stadia, an Evaluation Committee’, on the
approval of the Additional Director General (TD) - CPWD, was constituted. The
tenders for the main consultancy contracts for the development of the five stadia, for
CWG-2010 were floated by the individual stadiums. M/s Consulting Engineering
Services (India) Ltd. (CES) technically qualified in all the five contracts. In three
stadia, its financial bid was the only one to be opened, effectively denying the benefit
of competitive bidding. The contracts for design consultancy were awarded to M/s
CES in all the five venues. Audit found that M/s CES emerged as the only technically
qualified bidder for three stadia, primarily on account of marks assigned to them on the
parameters of 'concept designs' and other details (which were largely outputs of the
previous set of consultancy contracts for “condition survey" awarded to M/s CES). All
other bidders, despite possessing specific experience in sports stadia, were held to be
technically not qualified, by assigning lower scores to them on the parameters of
‘concept design’.

5.14 Audit further observed that the technical qualification of M/s CES on the basis of
“concept design" is all the more amazing, since the Organising Committee's (OC's)
consultant, EKS was engaged only in November 2006 and thereafter prepared the
venue briefs, on the basis of which “concept designs" were to be prepared. The
performance of M/s CES in almost all the venue consultancy contracts was abysmal

as can be seen from the following table:

[Stadium . | Deficiencies (in brief)

JLN Stadium Defective assessment of the requirement of lump sum contract resulted in
deviations primarily on account of changes in BOQs, resulting in gross 7
deviation of & 41.24 crore.



82

JLN Weighilifting | The scope of roofing work was changed from Zincalume steel to aluminium
Stadium and Dr. SPM | (Kalzip), resulting in extra payment to contractor of € 6.79 crore.
Swimming Pool Complex

Dr. Karni Singh Shooting | There were huge deviations and extra items worth < 20.37 crore due to
Range improper assessment of BOQs for the work. The basic item of excavation in
hard rock could not be envisaged earlier (despite the hilly location of the
venue). Further, rebate of 0.50 crore could not be availed.

IG Stadium Complex In the work of “improvement of roof truss”, there were huge deviations in
steelwork alone, ranging from 83.8 per cent to 139.70 per cent, amounting to
= 15.62 crore.

MDC National Stadium — | Astronomical increase in the quantities of cables, ducts, pipes etc. in the work
of SITC of PA system and electrical component of the main work resulted in
additional financial burden of & 4.11 crore.

5.15 In the above context, the Committee desired to know the rationale for inclusion
of ‘concept design’ in technical bid. In reply, CPWD stated that in concept design of a

proposal the consultant provided the plan, elevation, section and sometimes
perspective of the proposal. The idea of getting concept design was to understand
whether the consultant had assessed and understood the project correctly and its
feasibility during execution. The details provided in the concept design should be
adequate to understand the entire scheme, and it should indicate broadly the
considerations with respect to illuminations, fire protection system, utility services &
other relevant items of work. The functional, structural & aesthetic integrity of the
proposal with the existing structure/features shall be given special emphasis. The
evaluation of concept proposal was done by a committee of experts and this indicated
the technical capability of the consultant.

5.16 Asked to spell out the steps taken by CPWD to ensure level playing field
amongst participating bidders particularly with reference to the advantage M/s CES
had, in the form of prior consultancy assignment with CPWD i.e. condition survey,
CPWD stated that the concept design for the main consultancy contract had nothing to
do with the concept design prepared by M/s CES for repair and renovation of the
existing stadium. The copy of condition survey was provided to all the intending
bidders who bid the main consultancy work to ensure level playing field amongst
participating bidders.



83

5.17 When the Committee desired to be apprised of the difference between condition
survey and concept design, a representative of CPWD deposed during evidence as
under:

“Earlier assignment was only for condition survey and the structural upgradation
of the structures. The concept was to see how he will imagine it in future and
not for the past."

5.18 Justifying the selection of M/s CES, the representative of CPWD further stated

as under:

"The selection was a techno-economic process through combined technical bid
and financial ‘bid, and 80 percent weightage was for technical bid and 20
percent for financial bid. Even in one technical bid, the other bidders got higher
marks but because it was the lowest financially, M/s. CES got the work".

5.19 On the issue of inclusion of concept design in technical bid, he apprised:

"The rationale for inclusion of concept design in technical bid was to compare
the capability of various participating bidders to understand and translate it in
physical forms to meet the prospective functional requirement for holding the
Commonwealth Games. That was the only criterion by which we could have
judged how they are likely to perform. The condition survey contract was limited
to retrofitting of existing structures for structural stability, which was a
prerequisite to main renovation work. There was no exercise for concept. The
condition survey was only a structural requirement for strengthening the existing
structures. The concept was to make it an integral part of the selection
process.”

5.20 He also stated:

"Sir, from our inquiry of the national consultants, none of them was having any
sports architecture as a specialisation or experience. Hence, we have asked
that they will associate with international consultant who is having experience of
sports architecture. CES also associated with a German consultant, who had
already done Melbourne and other stadiums."

5.21 The Committee pointed out that the condition survey agreements were alive
when the main consultancy contracts were entered into and in the absence of
completion of the condition survey contracts, it was not possible for other bidders to
compete with M/s CES which had been awarded contract for condition survey in
different stadia. In reply, CPWD stated that the condition survey contract involved the
preparation of drawings & design for retrofitting of structures. in case of INS & IG


84

stadium the work of retrofitting of work kept on arising due to various requirement
raised by OC from time to time. For example, the work of additional lift for photo finish
lift was entrusted to CPWD in November 2009. For providing this lift, the retrofitting
work jike dismantling of roof slab & addition of slab/beam was to be done for which
methodology & design were obtained from the consultant under this contract.
Accordingly these contract were kept alive till September 2010 to safeguard the
interest of Government.

5.22. M/s CES vide their letter dated 03.10.2012 appealed to the Chairman, PAC
inter-alia stating that CPWD had called for tenders without approval from various
authorities based on the drawings submitted by them which led to frequent changes,
modifications and revisions in drawings/designs which in turn led to delays, significant
variations in the quantities, change in cost, etc. in executing the task.

5.23 When asked to give their comments on the above assertion of M/s CES, CPWD

stated in a note as under:

"The Venue brief from Organising Committee was issued to CPWD from
December 2006 onwards. Thus, the time left for planning and execution of
work by Venue owner was limited from 2007 to 2010. The submission of
design/drawings to local bodies etc. is dependent on the input from clients,
OC/EKS, Sports federations etc. The consultant of the Executing department
has to incorporate all the inputs received from different authorities/bodies.
However, due to non availability of inputs from these agencies and due to time
constraint as and when the design was finalized to a particular stage, CPWD
floated tender as a parallel action to save time, meanwhile necessary action for
approval of drawings from local bodies etc. were taken otherwise work could
have not been completed. There have been some need-based revisions in
design, drawings and BOQ etc. which are a part and parcel of any engineering
contract and are necessitated by the unforeseen factors or purely due to
technical requirement. During execution also number of inputs being received
from Delhi Police, NDMA, UTIPEC, Traffic Police, OC, Technicaj delegates etc
necessitated modification and review of designs/drawings. All such factors
have impact on the project. Although there have been some deviation in
quantities; however overail the total cost of the project remained within the
sanctioned amount. As such there is no increase in the cost. "

5.24 Commenting on the performance of M/s CES, a representative of CPWD,

however, informed the Committee in evidence as under:

"Wherever the performance of CES was found lacking, it has been penalised
also for time-overruns in few venues. At that moment, it (the company) could be
judged as the best among the available ones."


85

ll. Overpayment by Irregularly Treating the Substituted Items of Works as
Extra items

5.25 According to Audit, undue financial favours were extended to the contractor
through irregularly treating items of work in the agreement as ‘extra items’ instead of
‘substituted items'. In Dr. Karni Singh Shooting Range agreement, items of integral
flood were partially modified but instead of deriving rates as per procedure, CPWD
paid market rates treating the item as extra item resulting in overpayment of = 0.31
crore. In SPM treating the item viz. ‘toughened glass’ as extra item instead of
substituted item, 070४0 justified the rate of % 15,955 per sqm in lieu of the rate of <
13,744.45 per sqm already sanctioned as substituted item, with an additional financial
implication of 2.16 crore. The extra payment was justified on grounds of a decision
that for lump sum contract usual substitution of items cannot be operated upon on the
basis of variation rates and therefore such items would be treated as new item for
payment at market rate. However, fact remained that in another case but in the same
agreement, CPWD (Electrical Division) had substituted some items. Hence, CPWD
adopted two different methodologies for adoption of rates in case of substitution of
items in a lump sum contract. ;

5.26 In the above context, the Committee asked the Ministry to explain the reasons
for adopting two different methods for calculation resulting in extra payment to the
contractor. In reply, CPWO inter-alia stated that it had happened due to some different
provisions in the agreements for civil and electrical components particularly regarding
variation rates treated as item rates for electrical components, whereas variation rates
for civil components could not be treated item rate since their amount differed from the
quoted contract lump sum amount but in electrical, the amount based on variation
rates tallied with the contract lump sum amount. It also ensured that the lowest rates
as worked out by these methods were only paid to the agency so as to protect the
interest of the Government.

5.27 CPWD further stated that since this being a lump sum contract there were no
agreement rates available to work out the substituted rates, and accordingly it was
decided by the competent authority that for lump sum contract usual substitution of the
item could not be operated upon rather cost of the item not operated shail be


86

recovered based on the variation rates and cost of new item required shall be paid on
market rates and accordingly structural glazing was treated as extra item and not as
an earlier sanctioned substitute item. The C&AG allegation of overpayment and
additional financia! implication of = 2.16 crore was based on difference of = 15955 per
sqm, the rate proposed as extra item & है 13744.45 per sqm, the rate as substituted
item. The total proposed quantity to be executed for this item was 9750 sqm. The
proposed rate of ₹ै 15955 per sqm was never approved by CPWD and payment to
contractor was restricted to २ 13000 per sqm against a value of हैं 13744.45 sqm
sanctioned earlier as substitute item, thereby ensuring the interest of Government till
the matter was decided finally. However, while finalizing the bill of above work, this
item has actually been paid @ %12976.80/- sqm after scrutiny of item as an extra item.
This would further result into saving of ¥ 0.75 crores (13744.45 - 12976.80) x 9750/- =
% 74,84,588/-) in addition to the saving of = 2.16 crores, a presumptive loss indicated
by audit as above. Thus, the in house scrutiny & proper derivation of rate by CPWD
had resulted into financial saving to the project safeguarding the interest of
Government. As such, it was not correct to say that there was an additional financial
implication of % 2.16 crore.

5.28 Clarifying the matter further, a representative of CPWD deposed in evidence as
under:

" The factual position remains that no overpayment was made by CPWD. The
C&AG allegation of overpayment is based on difference of ¥ 15,955 per square
meter the rate worked out as extra item and % 13,744 per square meter the rate
as substituted item. Payment was restricted in running account bill to only हैं
13,000 per square meter as against a value of = 13,744 per square meter
sanctioned earlier as substitute item thereby ensuring the interest of the
Government at all stages. While finalizing the bill of above work, this item has
actually been paid @ % 12,976.80."

5.29 CPWD further stated that in Dr. Karni Singh Shooting Range, the amount of &

30.73 lakh in respect of integral flood light has already been recovered fully and

adjusted in final bill of the contractor concerned.

5.30 The Committee came to know that the finalisation of bills was made after C&AG
had raised questions and CBI enquiry had started. Asked whether the finalization of
bills at lower rate (¥ 12,976.80 per square meter) later on was done in order to avoid
Audit objections and create confusion, the representative of CPWD submitted:


87

"At that time when Audit has examined the records, the payment was made
only ₹ 13,000 per square meter."

5.31 Conceding that at that time it was not finalized, he further stated as under:

"Sir, | would like to brief you regarding the contract position. It was a lump sum
contract. The provision was made that lump sum quote of the contractor for a
certain specification and scope of the work. That lump sum quote of the
contractor was for a certain specifications as well as for specified scope of
work. There was also a provision in the contract that if quantity of certain item
varies then he has to quote deviation rates, so as such this was not equivalent
to a item rate contract. That means for structural glazing, directly no item rate
was applicable."

5.32 Asked to specify the rational for designing the contract in that manner, the
representative of CPWD submitted:
"Sir, infrastructure projects like flyover etc., when we decided that this much be
the span; this much will be the length; there has been a practice to have called

a lump sum contract. The contractor can decide overall how he will provide all
that." हु

5.33. The witness added:

"Sir, this structure was unique in nature. First time it was being done. The
CPWD was not having the past experience rather no agency or consultant in
India was having such experiences. A foreign consultant was also associated
to brief us the design etc."

5.34 However, on being enquired at what point of time CPWD realised that they did
not have the competence or the technology or even the experience to execute such a
project he deposed in evidence as under:
"Sir, we were competent. That is why we selected a consultant who was having
an international liaisoning and he could provide us such details. Sir, earlier to

that we were not having the precedence but now we get the opportunity to do
that. “

1५४... Laying of synthetic athletic tracks surface

5.35 Audit scrutiny revealed that the Centralised Co-ordination Committee shortlisted
three brands/manufacturers (Conica, Polytan and Rekortan) for laying synthetic
athletic tracks surfaces at five venues- i.e., Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium, Thyagaraj
Stadium, Chhattarsal Stadium, Commonwealth Games Village and Polo Ground of


88

Delhi University, thereby creating grounds for restrictive tendering. A joint tendering
Committee comprising Chief Engineer (CWGP), CPWD (Chairman), Chief Engineer
(PWD, GNCTD), Chief Engineer, DDA, Addl. Chief Engineer, NDMC, University
Engineer, DU; Representative of SAI, SE (C), CPWD was constituted and CPWD was
identified as the nodal agency. In July 2009, Press Notice inviting bids for laying
synthetic athletic track surface at five stadia was issued. The eligibility criteria
included — (i) completion of two works (laying athletic synthetic track surface approved
by IAAF) costing not less than < 4 crore each (in case bidders are the manufacturers
of the shortlisted brands having registered office in India); and (ii) completion of one
work (laying athletic synthetic track surface approved by IAAF) costing not less than हें
4 crore each (in case bidders are the authorized Indian representatives of
manufacturers of the approved brands). Audit found that the relaxation of conditions
from completion of two similar works to one and reduction of value of works to ~ 4
crore each (which was only 10 percent of the estimated cost of the work as against the
generally prescribe 80 percent of estimated cost for one work, which would amount to
% 30.73 crore in case of an authorised Indian representative bidding) was tailor made
to suit only the three bidders (authorised Indian Representative of each brand) who
responded. Clearly, all the bidders just met the much diluted eligibility criteria and the
dilution was probably done only to ensure that these agencies could bid.

5.36 Asked to state the logic for diluting the eligibility criteria, CPWD inter-alja stated
that the eligibility criteria were kept in such a manner that for the required scope of
work, wide range of bidders for execution of work was available. The general criteria
of 80 percent of estimated cost could not be fixed blindly particularly for a specialized
work since, these were applicable for normal civil and electrical works in CPWD. The
eligibility criteria was framed considering that equal opportunity was given to all
prospective bidders and also considering approved limited 3 brands received from the
Organising Committee and also considering in mind that tendering process was
successful in first go so that work might be executed in the remaining availabie time.

5.37 CPWD further stated that in fact all the three bidders (one each for three
approved brands by MoYAS) met these criteria. The eligibility criteria were framed
keeping in view the execution of such type of work in past giving equal opportunity to
all the intending bidders. This was the best suited eligibility criteria considering nature


89

and type of work to be executed under given scenario. Otherwise, no agency would
have qualified if any higher eligibility criteria would have been framed and work could
not have been executed at all. Hence, it was not correct to say that eligibility criteria
was diluted to suit the agencies.

5.38 From the three bids received, the contract was awarded to Shiv Naresh Sports
Pvt. Ltd. (SSPL), which was the [1 bidder at € 60.38 crore for the five venues of which
% 27.61 crore was for Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium alone. Audit found that the restrictive
tendering conditions created around the tendering process by limiting the competition
to three brands only, resulted in a situation where the rate at which the contract was
finally awarded was not at all comparable with the rates of similar works quoted or
intimated at different works/stages as indicated in the following table:

Agency Net Rate Total cost for OO
per sqm normal stress
{in’) area at all venues
as per NIT (48469
sqm) (in” crore
SSPL 7,604.06 36.86 Net rate after rebate of 17.06% and addition

(authorized Indian of service tax @10.30%.

representative of

Conica)

NCCL at DU 7,337.00 35.56 Rates tendered in April 2008 inclusive of all
taxes.

BASF “| 4,928.70 23.88 Rates indicated by the manufacturer and

(Manufacturer) partner of SSPL in September 2009.

SSPL to NCCL at | 2,784.00 13.49 Work completed in January 2009.

Ranchi

Jubilee Sports 4,650.00 22.53 Rates obtained by CPWD in June 2009 for

Technology (I) preparing cost estimates; and

Pvt. Ltd. However, the agency bid at the rate of € 9000

(authorized Indian per sqm in its bid for CWG-2010.

representative of

Rekortan,

Inderjit Mehta 4,516.05 21.89 Rates offered to CPWD in February 2010 for
Construction Pvt. : CRPF campus at Jharoda Kalan;

Ltd. for CRPF

Campus, Jharoda However, the agency bid at the rate of € 8850
Kalan per sqm in its bid for CWG-2010

‘authorized Indian



90

representative of
Polytan)

5.39 The Committee asked CPWD to substantiate that the rates were reasonable in
view of the fact that the rates quoted by the bidders were much higher than the rate

quoted by the same agencies for other similar projects or points of time. In reply,
CPWD inter-alia stated in a note as under:

"It should be noted that in the item rate tender, the overall tendered amount of
the work is compared with the justified cost. The comparison of individual rates
of one work with the individual rates of another work is not correct. Although in
a tender, some rates may be quoted on higher side or lower side but overall
quoted amount need to be compared with justified cost. For example, the item
of synthetic surface at Ranchi National Games was an item in overall contract
value of development of venue for National Games. Similarly, in the work of
development of venue at Delhi University, also there was an item of synthetic
surface. It is interesting to note that same agency M/s. Nagarjuna Construction
Co. Ltd. who have quoted %3,350/- per Sqm. for stadium at Ranchi (Dec 2005),
had quoted %7,337/- per Sqm. for stadium at Delhi University (August 2008),
perhaps on realization of unworkable rate for Ranchi Stadium and also with
time lag. It is also established fact that rate is function of time. If time is
squeezed beyond a limit it will result in higher rate. In case of CPWD,
execution time was got reduced further from the time period mentioned in the
NIT during negotiation while attempting to get reduced the rates........ The
terms & conditions of work at CRPF (CPWD) and Ranchi are not similar to the
work for CWG at Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium. In CRPF, the letter of credit was
opened by the department whereas in CWG works, the entire turnkey work was
done by the contractor. The work also involved the engagement of FOP
consultant maintenance & upkeep of tracks for six months, which is normally
not there in other contracts. Moreover, the item of synthetic surface taken for
other stadiums for comparison cannot be compared as the terms and conditions
and other factors may not be similar in all the works. Here, it is also submitted
that BASF manufacturer (M/s Conica) vide his letter No. Nil dated 22.09.2009
intimated that price differs upon so many varying factors i.e. scope of work,
location, quantities, cost & availability of resources and even profile of the event
itself........ Thus, the work was awarded with due negotiations considering
negotiated amount reasonable and compared to prevailing market rates. The
entire tendering process was done with transparency. The justification for the
work as finalized by the Joint Tendering Committee was further reviewed by two
independent officers of Superintending Engineer level specially deputed by
Directorate. The further negotiation was conducted with lowest bidder by two
independent officers of Chief Engineer level specially deputed from the
Directorate. The CW Board deliberated the matter in detail on each observation
of the members of the Board and of the invitees as well as in regard to
qualifying criteria in particular. After considering all the details i.e. qualifying
criteria, financial capabilities of lowest bidder etc. CW Board approved the


91

proposal for acceptance at the final negotiated amount of = 27,61,47,154/-
pertaining to CPWD in favour of M/s. Shiv Naresh Sports Pvt. Ltd.”

V. Unjustified Inflation of Rates of VVIP/VIP_and Media Chairs Procured for
Five Stadia Resulting in Extra expenditure of % 3.66 crore.

5.40 As pointed out by Audit, Expression of Interests (EOls) were invited in
Decembers 2009 from the manufacturers/suppliers of seats/chairs for supply and
installation of 15,900 VVIP/VIP chairs with arms, cushion and armrest and media
chairs with cushion, folding table and armrest for five venues for CWG-2010. The
manufacturers/ suppliers were to visit the venues to understand the requirement and
submit salient data with brief technical parameters/ specifications, details of turnover,
manufacturing capacity, delivery period and prices (inclusive of installation cost). They
were also required to install their samples at JNS and submit model wise technical
specifications and catalogues, and photos of samples installed along with the
response to 501. Of the 15 agencies that installed their samples at JNS, a committee
of seven senior officers headed by the DG, SAI approved, in December 2009, a total
of 14 samples (11 for VVIP/VIP and 3 for Media) of six manufacturers. In January
2010, NIT was issued inviting agents or manufacturers of the shortlisted
makes/models to bid . Four bids were received. None was from the manufacturers,
except Superior Furniture, who was awarded the contract based on its L1 bid in March
2010.

5.41 Audit scrutiny revealed that though Superior Furniture was the L1 bidder, its
rates were inflated and CPWD justified these inflated rates by हैं 3.66 crore to award
the contract. This was established by the estimates prepared at different points of
time i.e. ₹ै 3130 per WIP/VIP chair, ₹ 3310 per Media chair in December 2009 (EOI); हैं
4300 per VVIP/VIP chair, ₹ 4545 per Media chair in January 2010 (preparation of
estimates); हैं 5452 per VVIP/VIP chair, रे 5650 per Media chair in February/March
2010 (justification of costs).

5.42 Asked to state the reasons for disparity in estimates prepared at different points
of time and also for inflating the justified cost prepared by the Department, CPWD
replied that the detailed specifications and terms/conditions contained in the tender
document were not known to the agencies at the time of EOI. So when superior


92

specifications were asked by the department at the time of actual tendering, the
intending bidder at that time had to quote his rates accordingly. Even though M/s
Superior Furniture while submitting EO! had clearly intimated that their rates did not
include any profit margin but still at the time of preparation of justification, it was
assumed that M/s Superior Furniture must have included their profit margin of 15
percent while quoting their budgetary rates at the stage of EOI. Therefore, the quoted
budgetary rates during EOI were first reduced by 15 percent so that the interest of the
Government was safeguarded. Thereafter, other components as reflected in the
detailed estimate such as applicable taxes on material, service tax on labour
component, cartage, fixing charges, contractor's profit, water charges, labour cess,
additional VAT and cost against quality assurance etc. were added to arrive at a
rational justified cost of the chairs according to terms and conditions of the contract.
CPWD further stated that the reason for this increase in cost on account of superior
specifications had been duly recorded by the Department before award of work.

5.43 On being enquired about the reasons for not disclosing the actual specification
laid down in the tender while inviting Expression of Interest, CPWD stated that type
and model of required chairs were not known. Hence, Expression of Interest (EO!) was
floated to explore the availability of different type of chairs. So the EOI called by the
department for supply of VVIP/VIP chairs and media seats was invited for the purpose
of understanding the wide variety of the chairs and manufacturers available in the
market along with the rough prices available for a particular specification. Since, the
specifications were not known to the department at the time of calling of EOI, so the
question of disclosing or un-disclosing the information at that time did not arise.

5.44 Enquired about the reasons for upgradation of the specification/requirements
later on, CPWD stated that the detailed specifications for the chairs were framed only
at the stage of preparation of detailed estimate of the work before call of tenders
based on the inputs received from various suppliérs and their technical teams during
EOI.

5.45 As informed by CPWD, the exact specifications and requirements that were
upgraded are given below:

> Ail anchor bolts should be non-corrosive galvanized or polyester powder
coated.


93

> All fasteners fixed should be are of HILTI / FISCHER make.

> All metal finishes should be hot dip galvanized. or polyester powder
coated (50 micron thick).

> All plastic components should be UV resistant and complying with
flammability.

Upholstery of the chairs should be fire retardant.
Cushion should be of minimum density 40 kg per cum and fire retardant.
Numbering of all chairs should be done.

vvwvV wv

Fixing of cycling velodrome chairs to be done on risers instead of on
treads.

Chairs to be fixed by the contractor on his own.
Cartage to be borne by the contractor.
3% party QA agency to be paid by the contractor.

vwvv Vv

Maintenance and regular cleaning of chairs is to be carried out by the
contractor on his own up to 31/03/2011.

Vl. Jawaharlal Nehru_Stadium Complex - Construction of Fixed Tensile Tensile
Membrane Roofing Over the Seating Area

5.46 According to Audit, CPWD in December 2007 awarded a lump sum contract for
construction of fixed tensile membrane roofing over the seating area in Jawaharlal
Nehru stadium at a cost of % 308.08 crore to Shapoorji Pallonji & Co. Ltd. (SPCL) for
completion by September 2009. Completion of work was delayed by over eleven
months due to various reasons, attributable at least partly on the contactor/sub-
contractors such as three months delay due to rectification of the defective geometry
of the alignment of head plates of the erected columns; non resolving of the issues
regarding fabrication and erection of ramps and cat walk, erection of cable, casting of
staircase, fixing of railing, drainage pipeline etc. as of December 2009; non-installation
of about 61 curbed beams, 40 RT1 beams, RB beams, flood light most and some
catwalk structure units and the entire parapet even as of 4 January 2010; flaws in
laying of cable; inadequate deployment of manpower, tools and machinery;
inadequate expertise for fabric installation etc. The site became hindrance free by
January 2010 and CPWD issued several.notices including on 28th Apri! 2010, 5 May
2010 and 16 August 2010 holding the contractor responsible for slippages, slow
progress of work and non-achievement of revised milestones. However, CPWD apart


94

from issuing notices for imposition of penalty/compensation, never enforced
contractual remedies against the contractor to levy compensation estimated at a
maximum of % 30.80 crore. CPWD also made payment of % 7.02 crore, as of
September 2010 towards escalation of costs for periods beyond the stipulated date of
completion i.e. 31 September 2009.

5.47 The Committee desired to know the reasons for non-levy of compensation. In
reply, CPWD stated that there were genuine hindrances at site. When the work was
started, the stadium was occupied by the Organising Committee, SAl and a number of
Sports Federations. The last area of stadium was handed over to CPWD in June,
2009, 17 months after the stipulated start of work (January 2008). Other essential
services were to be kept in operation till those offices were occupied by SAI/OC ete.
for their functioning, With 4.5 m wide, 3.5 m height & 160 m long tunnel (equal to 4
subways in Delhi) required minimum 6 months time for planning, designing and
execution and E&M services. Accordingly, it was evident that there had been at least
a delay of around six months (October to April) due to in between introduction of
tunnel work. Both the construction activities accounted for 23 months delay. CPWD
further submitted that considering the above genuine hindrances, which were not
attributable to contractor, it was not made the contractor responsible for delay of 11
months. Therefore, the contractor was not liable for recovery of compensation upto
maximum of = 30.80 crore. All the hindrance for the work were recorded properly.
CPWD had taken action according to the terms and conditions of the agreement. The
extension of time had since been sanctioned, considering various types of hindrances
encountered during execution of work and the escalation for that period had been paid
as per terms and conditions of the agreement.

5.48 According to CPWD, the hindrances were due to the following reasons:

(i) Late handing over of Ramps which caused 179 days delay from 04.01.2008 to
01.07.2008;

(ii) Late handing over of stadium building. [The last area of stadium was handed
over to the CPWD in June 2009 i.e. 17 months after the stipulated data of work
04.01.2008);

(iii) Space constraint;
(iv) Delay due to introduction of tunnel.

(v) Delay due to new requirement of steel; structure for Video Screen and Score
Board; and


95

(vi) Sequencing with other works.

5.49 Throwing further light on the matter, a representative of CPWD deposed in

evidence as under:

"In the case of JNS, if you might recollect as it was very widely known, at the
last minute an underground tunnel had to be constructed for the holding of the
Commonwealth Games. A photo-finish lift was asked for. It was just a couple of
months before the event."

5.50 On being asked whose responsibility was it to provide the complete site for
executing the work, CPWD submitted that when the work was started, the stadium
was occupied by the Organising Committee, Sports Authority of India (SAI), a number
of Sports Federations and offices of Supreme Courts etc. CPWD were doing the
deposit work for SAI / MoYAS. The Organising Committee was the agency who was to
organize the Games in these venues and the. stadia buildings were occupied by them,
which were vacated later on. The handing over was done by SAI in a phased manner
to accommodate all under given situation. SAI/OC could shift to new building only after
getting the alternate accommodation. Hence the delay occured.

5.51 The Committee asked the specific efforts made by CPWD to timely evict those
offices, which continued to occupy the site even after the commencement of the work.
In reply, CPWD explained that perhaps due to non-availability of alternate site space,
the area could not be vacated. However, the same was done in due course of time.
CPWD time and again has requested SAI to get these areas vacated for the work but
due to the number of agencies and Sports Federations occupying the spaces, it had
taken some time. However, all these spaces were vacated subsequently as already
submitted and the venue was completed without any cost overrun to the satisfaction of

all, for successful conduct of games.

5.52 Asked to spell out the steps taken to impress upon the contractor to expedite
the work and achieve the milestones, CPWD stated that notices were served on the
contractor as an administrative measure to accelerate the work and to achieve the
milestone, even though the delay was not on the part of the contractor. The main
objective of issuing such notices was for early completion of the work as required.
Irrespective of good speed and progress of work, notices were served on the agency
for accelerating the work and putting constant pressure to achieve the target and have


96

better performance. Since, this project was time bound, and lot of other activities were
to be carried out after the roof work, CPWD had no option but to adopt the above
method for better results by serving several letters and notices to the contractor time

and again.

Vil. Construction of Weightlifting Auditorium with Two Tier Underground
Parking

5.53 The above work was awarded to Nagarjuna Construction Co. Ltd. (NCCL) at
the tendered cost of € 65.45 crore for completion by June 2009. Audit found that
powers delegated to senior offices in CPWD for modifications in contractual conditions
were used to regularize inadmissible payment of = 1.95 crore to the contractor on
account of escalation in price of steel despite the fact that the same was objected by
them in November 2008. ,

5.54 In this regard, the Committee were informed that the agreement between the
CPWD and the contractor had provision for payment in escalation of prices of
materials under clause 10(CA). In this particular case, the list of material on which 10
(CA) was applicable was inadvertently not included in the NIT/Tender documents. But
this did not mean that the provision of clause 10 (CA) as already applicable in all
CPWD contracts for cement and steei ceased due to the inadvertent clerical error.

5.55 The Ministry further reasoned that the provision of clause 10(CA) was not
incorporated in the original NIT but its applicability was confirmed vide corrigendum
no. 2 when so enquifed by the prospective bidders in the pre-bid conference and
agreed by CPWD as per CPWD Manual & GCC Provisions. Corrigendum no. 2 to this
effect was issued and was a part of the agreement. However while issuing the
corrigendum, the list of material covered under clause 10 (CA), was not specified
probably due to oversight. Corrigendum no. 2 thus remained partially incomplete
causing unintentional inconsistency in the agreement provisions.

5.56 The Ministry also submitted that the said inconsistency had been taken care of
by way of approval of the amendment of the agreement by the competent authority i.e.
ADG, CWG as per delegation of powers as mentioned in CPWD Manual Vol.-Il. This
amendment supplemented corrigendum no. 2 issued earlier. The Ministry clarified
further that the power delegated to CPWD officers to modify agreements within certain


97
specified financial limits was meant and exercised to issue clarifications regarding
genuine omissions/inclusions/errors as might creep in while preparing NiT/agreements
and to remove inconsistencies in the agreement. These powers were exercised
accordingly. है

5.57 The Committee enquired about the need for issuing a corrigendum, which had
the effect of offering payment of escalated prices to the contractor by CPWD. In reply,
CPWD stated in a note as under:

" The NIT of the work was initially silent on provision of clause 10 CA. But in the
pre-bid meeting a specific query was raised by prospective bidders as to
whether clause 10 CA would be applicable. This query was replied as” yes’ by
CPWD and was confirmed vide corrigendum no. 2 before tendering and signing
of the contract thus making this affirmation a part of NIT (tender document) as
well as the agreement/contract. Thereafter, there remained absolutely no
contradiction to the fact that as per the contract clause 10 CA was applicable.
As already submitted, appendage to clause 10 CA in the form of list of material
was inadvertently missed out but it did in no way disqualify the contractor from
being contractually entitled to applicability of clause 10 CA which remained very
much a part of contract. However, it was necessary to issue the corrigendum in
this regard to remove the unintentional inconsistency in the agreement as per
provision contained in para 32.9 of CPWD Manual 2007 (clause 33.9 of CPWD
Manual 2010) which was applicable in the instant case. The para reads as
under in part:

"This clause (10 CA) shall be applicable for allowing adjustment in cost of
work due to variation in prices of costly materials constituting substantial
part of work. The NIT approving authority may consider bringing materials
like cement, steel, structural steel, bitumen etc. under the ambit of this
clause...”

The corrigendum was issued after its approval by the competent authority as
per powers delegated to CPWD officers as mentioned in Appendix 1 (SI. No.
29) of CPWD Manual 2007 and 2010 to reply specific query from the contractor.
Moreover, the corrigendum has not otherwise altered contractual provisions and
in no way had the effect of unilaterally offering payment of escalated prices
since this provision already existed in the contract. Rather, unintentional
inconsistency was removed by way of this corrigendum which as such does not
offer anything new'to the contractor as clause 10 CA was already otherwise
also applicable contractually."

5.58 CPWD further clarified the matter as under:

"The clause 10 CA was introduced in all CPWD contracts for cement and
reinforcement bars vide O.M. No DGW/CON/199 di.02.09.2004. Clause 10 CA
(in GCC 2005) and CPWD manual para 32.7.1 were subsequently amended 10
allow for inclusion of materials other than cement and steel also 1116 ambit of


98

clause 10 CA to further rationalise the provisions in CPWD contracts. It is thus
clear that clause 10 CA was applicable on cement and steel since 02.09.2004 in
all CPWD contracts. Its scope was further widened and was made applicable to
materials other than cement and steel also vide O.M.DGW/CON/230 dt
13.03.2007 (annex 17.6.3 a) meaning thereby that there can be no doubt on
applicability of Clause 10 CA in the instant case and it was a part of the contract.
It is noteworthy that in the instant case, CPWD still limited applicability of clause
10 CA to only cement and steel and did not allow any other material though
otherwise the same were allowable in all CPWD contracts as clarified above. As
clarified above the action taken by CPWD in this case is contractually sound and
is in line with provisions of CPWD manual and there is absolutely no violation."

5.59 On being asked whether the repeated negligence on the part of CPWD leading
to non-specification of the list of materials covered under clause 10 (CA) even after
issuing a corrigendum had weakened CPWD's claim of the ‘mistakes’ being
inadvertent, CPWD submitted that an amendment was issued vide O.M. NO DGW/
CON/230 dated 13.03.2007 regarding provision of clause 10 (CA) and it was a fresh
introduction to list out all the materials including cement, steel and others, if any
covered under clause 10 (CA); while earlier ie. prior to issue of O.M. dated
13.03.2007, there was no need to append such list as only cement and steel were
covered under clause 10 (CA). Probably due to this transition, listing of materials got
an inadvertent miss by human error and not due to negligence. But this in no way put
CPWD at disadvantage as both the NIT as well as the contract otherwise also had a
provision of clause 10 (CA).

VII Dr. Shyama_ Prasad Mukherjee Swimming Pool Compex - Undue
Concessions to Ahluwalia Contracts (India) Limited
5.60 The major work of construction of new insulated metal sheet roof of Dr. Shyama
Prasad Mukherjee Swimming Pool Complex (SPM), alongwith roof supporting
structure, and its integration with the structure, was tendered as a lump sum contract .
This work was awarded to M/s Ahluwalia Contracts (India) Limited (ACIL) at the
tendered cost of = 229.73 crore in December 2007, against an estimated cost of = 176
crore calculated in October 2007. Audit pointed out that the last date for submission of
tenders which was notified as 16" November 2007, was extended four times upto 147"
December 2007. The estimates put to tender were € 176 crore, and the 1.1 bid of ACIL
was = 229.73 crore. The difference in the bid from the estimates was partly justified
by revising the Contractor's Profit and OverHeads (CPOH) from 10 percent to 15


99

percent, permitted on the same date by DG (Works), CPWD as the much-extended
last date to bid ie. 14" December, 2007. The approval of the Ministry of Urban
Development for revision of CPOH was received only in July 2008. In reply, CPWD
stated that the dates were coincidental. However, Audit noted that CPWD irregularly
allowed enhanced CPOH without the prior approval of the Ministry.

5.61 In the above context, CPWD clarified that it was not only M/s AC(I)L but also all
the five prequalified agencies at whose request the last date for submission of tender
was extended 4 times by the competent authority from 16" November 2007 till 14"
December 2007. Given the fact that this kind of roof was being executed for the first
time in the world at such a large scale, the agencies along with associates required
some extra time so as to get more time in understanding such a technical and complex
bid document.

5.62 Elaborating on the issue, CPWD stated that the increase in contractor's profit
was not done on 14" December 2007 as pointed out by Audit but was under
consideration since 2005 and was done due to the demand of the situation in the
changing construction scenario. The proposal of increase in CPOH from 10 per cent to
15 per cent was in place earlier to submission of tender. There was no allowance of
increase in rate of CPOH to the agency M/s AC(I)L. It was a conscious and need
based decision and aiso in line with prevailing practice in other Government
Departments, resulting in no undue benefit to contractor or causing any loss to
Government.

5.63 CPWD further submitted that MoUD took a view that a decision for enhancing
the ceiling of overhead charges allowable to contractors was to be taken by Ministry of
Finance (DoE). Accordingly, Secretary (UD) had suggested that the matter be
discussed appropriately in the Ministry of Finance. The Secretary, Expenditure had
stated that the issue to increase the contractor's over head could be finalized by the
Authority preparing the Schedule of Rates and Justification of Tenders etc and also
directed that it was for the DG, CPWD to invite organizations like MES, MORTH &
DDA etc. who had already gone for increase CPOH and to decide the issue. No such
directions were given by the Secretary, Expenditure that it required prior approval of
MoUD. However, MoUD also approved the proposal subsequently.


100

5.64 The Committee enquired about the inability of CPWD to project a realistic date
for submission of tenders which led to extension of the last date for submission of
tenders four times. In reply, CPWD stated that as and when the details could be
finalised by CPWD, tender for selecting the agency for execution of work were called
by CPWD to expedite the work. The notice to prequalified agencies was issued by
Executive Engineer, Commonwealth Games with last date of receipt of tender as 467
November 2007. The pre-bid meeting for above work was held on 57 November 2007
and 8" November 2007 to discuss the issues and to understand the project by the
prospective bidders. During the pre-bid meeting, the concerns raised by the agencies
were issued in the form of Corrigendum No. 2. Considering the request of the
agencies during the pre-bid meeting the date of receipt of opening of the tender for the
work was extended from 16” November 2007 to 267 November 2007. But M/s
Shapoorji Pallonji & Co. Ltd. vide their letter dated 17" November 2007 requested to
extend tender submission date by at least two more weeks to enable them to submit
their competitive offer. Considering this, the date of submission of tender was
extended upto 3° December 2007. M/s Larsen & Toubro Limited vide their letter
dated 28" November 2007 requested that they were in the process of finalization of
their proposal with specialized agency of strand cable work, VSL India Pvt. Ltd. and
they had sought for some more time to produce the technical documents. It was also
requested by M/s Larsen & Toubro Limited that due date of 3 December 2007 for
tender submission did not provide them with enough time to take the competitive offer
from the specialized agency of cable work and for technically & commercially
evaluating their proposal. Accordingly, they requested the Department to extend
submission date to 147 December 2007 to enable them to give a competitive offer.
M/s Ahluwalia Contracts (1) Ltd., vide their letter dated 18 December 2007, intimated
that in spite of their best efforts, they could not receive the quotations from the Strands
Agencies, instead they had received a regret from M/s VSL asking further time for
submission of their offer and requested the Department to extend the date of
submission of bid at feast upto 10" December 2007. Considering above, the date of
receipt of tender document was extended from 3 December 2007 to 10" December
2007. Subsequently, M/s Ahluwalia Contracts (I) Ltd. vide their letter dated gh
December 2007 intimated that they received the offer from cable / strands associates
(ie. M/s VSL) very late and they wanted some time to understand the system


101

proposed by them and requested to extend the date of submission at least by a week.
M/s 3.6. Shirke Const. Tech. Pvt. Ltd. vide their letter dated 08.12.2007, also
requested to extend the date of submission of tender by at least up to 18.12.2007. M/s
Shapoorji Pailonji & Co. also vide their dated 08.12.2007, requested to extend the
tender submission at least by one week as they were still discussing the issues with
strand work associates to get the offer as per tender requirements. Since, such kind
of complicated roof work in association with specialized associated agencies were
being attempted for first time in India, it was felt essential that appropriate time was to
be given to all the agencies for preparing their offer for the work. Accordingly the bid
submission date was extended upto 14.12.2007, which was not agreed initially to save

time.

5.65 The Committee asked the basis for revising the Contractor's Profit and
OverHeads from 10 percent to 15 percent. In reply, CPWD stated that much before
this tender many other Government Departments and PSU like NHAI, MES, NBCC,
some state PWDs had already adopted the practice of using 15 per cent ~ 25 per cent
CPOH on account of mechanized construction etc. and that the proposal to increase
contractors profit and overhead in CPWD Works was first initiated in May 2005 by the
department which was approved by D.G. (W) on 147 December 2007 in consultation
with the Ministry of Finance for all works in CPWD located at different parts of the
country. Hence, it might be inferred that the increase in contractor's profit was not
done on 14" December 2007 but was under consideration since 2005 and was done
due to the demand of the situation in the changing consiruction scenario. As such, the
proposal of increase in CPOH from 10 per cent to 15 per cent was in place earlier to
submission of tender. The same was considered for preparation of market rate
justification.

IX. Extra Payment of = 4.17 crore for [tems of Work Already Covered in the
Scope of Work of Lumpsum Contract

5.66 Audit scrutiny revealed that despite clear provisions for use of stainless steel!
plates, bolts, nuts etc. in the item of galvanized strands for stainless steel connections
in the drawings, technical specifications and notes below the item in bill of quantity,
CPWD proposed an extra item of stainless steel plates and bolts on the ground that

word “stainless steel” had not been mentioned in the nomenclature of the item of work.


102

Extra payment of %5 crore to ACIL for stainless steel plates and bolts was approved by
the competent authority in February 2010. Payment of %4.17 crore had been made to
ACIL as of November 2010. After continued deliberations/ discussions and reporting
by Audit, CPWD agreed in December 2010 that the item of stainless steel plates and
bolts, etc. was part of the agreement item and nothing extra was payable and assured

to make recovery from ACIL.

5.67 The Committee desired to be apprised of the reasons for making extra payment
of % 4.17 crore for items of work already covered in the scope of work of contract. In
reply, CPWD inter-alia submitted that the Audit observation was not based on facts
and no discussion/ deliberation ever took place with the audit regarding the matter of
stainless steel plates, nuts and bolts with the department officials. Not even an Audit
Requisition Memo (ARM) was ever issued by the audit team on the said matter and
the department had on its own informed the agency M/s AC(I)L regarding non
admissibility of item on 23/10/2010 even though the audit memo was received by the
department only on 27/12/2010. However, the 40"" R.A. Bill had been passed vide C.V.
No. 149 dated 11/4/2011 and an amount of € 4,17,11,069/- had been recovered from
the agency on account of non admissible item of stainless steel plates, bolts, nuts,
washers etc.... thereby safeguarding the interest of the Government.

5.68 .CPWD further stated that the chronological sequence of why the department

changed its view in the treatment of this item was as follows:

5.69 The agency vide letter No.AC(I)L/CPWD/SPM/863/2010 dated 26/04/2010
submitted the financial claim for the execution of the above said item as an extra item.
Since all the division office staff was very busy in the execution of the work, the extra
item could not be processed at the time of execution of the work.

5.70 After completion of the work and successful completion of the Commonwealth
Games 2010, the case for processing of the said item as an extra item was taken up
by CPWD for which all the terms and conditions, specification, BOQ Drawings and
other relevant extract mentioned in the agreement at various places was again
reviewed.


103

5.71. Consequent to review of the contract it was observed that although there was
no specific separate item for the stainless steel plates, bolts, nuts etc. in the BOQ,
there was mention of the same in the item no. 2.7.10 page 441-442 of the agreement.
The relevant extract of the same is reproduced below:
"The above item is deemed to be inclusive of supplying, fabricating and
installing fixed and movable connections between two panels in the secondary
beam structure consisting of elastomeric pads, bolts, shear piece, stainless

steel connections, link plates with slotted holes etc.. as per specifications and
drawings and direction of Engineer-in-charge all complete”

5.72 Thus, it was evident that the said item of stainless steel plates, nuts bolts,
washers etc.. which had been got executed as an extra item was in fact part of the
agreement item No 2.7.10 page 441-442 which is also shown in the GFC drawings no
062, 069, 070, 071,072, 073, 074 and 075 as well as other items like elastomeric pads
etc.. so mentioned would form the part of item & nothing extra could be paid on
account of this, to the agency.

5.73 On being asked whether responsibility had been fixed against the defaulting
officers who sanctioned such items as extra items, CPWD stated that there was no
need of fixing any responsibility as the amount had already been recovered and there
was no loss to the government and its interests were well protected. Moreover at any
stage, work done by the contractor had always been much more than the actual
payment made to the contractor.

xX Change of Roof

5.74 According to Audit, two contracts awarded by CPWD, i.e. (i) Construction of
new insulated metal sheet roof along with supporting structure etc. at Dr. S.P.M.
Swimming Pool Complex and (ii) construction of Weightlifting Auditorium with two tier
underground parking at JNS, included similar item of work “providing and fixing of
double skin insulated roofing system comprising of seam profiled permanently colour
coated gavalume/zincalune steel" at the rate of ¥ 7850 per sqm. and = 2349 per
square meter respectively. In both cases, it was the responsibility of the main
contractor to engage technically competent and capable vendors for the roofing
system.


104

5.75 However, the vendors engaged by the contractors were found to be
incompetent and incapable to provide the committed roofing system. Both the
contractors did not execute the item of work and CPWD decided to provide kalzip
roofing system in both the venues. However, the same authorities in CPWD
sanctioned variable rates of 7316.44 per sqm for Weightlifting Auditorium by treating
the item as ‘substituted item’ and = 9168.35 per sqm for Dr. S.P.M. Swimming Pool
Complex by treating the item as 'extra item’. Instead of executing the agreement items
in both the cases at the risk and cost of contractor under provisions of the agreement,
CPWD made extra payment of % 6.79 crore to the contractors by substituting the

original item.

5.76 In this regard, the Committee were informed that the consultant during
deliberations with the Department had originally envisaged the roof as an aluminium
top sheet but during discussions with the Department it was thought and decided upon
to proceed with a galvalume sheet top roof for techno-economical reasons, since the
galvalume sheets were readily available in India and the Indian firms possessed
experience in working on the galvalume sheet. But, it was not getting technically
feasible with the galvalume sheet material in both the cases due to high curvature and

3 dimensional floating nature of the roof.

5.77 The Ministry further stated that the difference in the rates sanctioned for the
said item in Weightlifting Auditorium and Dr S.P.M Swimming Pool complex was on
account of the following reasons:

¢ Difference in specifications of the roofing item both at Weightlifting Auditorium
and Dr S.P.M Swimming Pool complex.

e In Weightlifting Auditorium the item had been derived and sanctioned as
substitute item (since it was an item rate contract) and in Dr S.P.M Swimming
Pool complex the item has been derived and sanctioned as extra item (since it
was a lump sum contract with variation clause).

5.78 Asked to state the reasons for not carrying out the work at the risk and cost of
the contractor and imposing penalty, CPWD inter-alia responded that the contractor
did actually execute the agreement item to the extent possible by providing agreement
item except top layer which was decided to be substituted due to technical
considerations. Hence getting the work of only the top layer done at risk and cost of


105

contractor was not feasible nor contractually correct. Moreover, such an action would
have reduced overall responsibility of the contractor for the full roofing system as well
as entire building to which the roof was anchored. CPWD further stated that when the
Department decided such things on behalf of the Government as per technical and
contractual necessity in overall interest of the project, getting it done at the risk and
cost of the contractor or penalizing the contractor shall not be in line with the actual
spirit of the contractual provisions. Since the contractor had completed his job
satisfactorily, there was no need to impose any penalty.

5.79 In view of the fact that the technical feasibility of steel profiling was not
considered before justifying their high rates, the Committee asked whether the
contractor was not supposed to verify the feasibility before submitting the rates. In
reply, a representative of CPWD submitted in evidence as under:

"Sir, in the item rate tender, we mention a particular item in the BOQ. There we
prescribed the galvalume roof and it was done to economise the cost. There
was a discussion whether there should be aluminium or steel or Galvalume. But
when actual work started we did a mock model and then we found that it is
susceptible to crack and may lead to leakage. It was harder and brittle and then
the top most level of the roof was made of aluminium and the rest all
arrangements remained the same."

5.80 The Committee then enquired into the reasons for entering into two different
contracts for roofing Dr. Shyama Prasad Mukherjee Swimming Pool Complex (lump
sum contract) and Weightlifting Auditorium (item rate contract). In reply, CPWD
stated that it had not entered into different contracts for roofing work only. Roofing
system was only a part of the building/stadium and was not a complete work by itself
for which different contracts were entered. The type of work involved for Dr. SPM
Swimming Pool Complex was different from the type of work involved in Weightlifting
Auditorium. Even the roofing system was different except that roof sheeting happened
to be the same. The type of contract for each building / work was decided based on
the intricacies involved in the execution of the particular work and thus two different
types of contracts was entered into for the two different works.

5.81 Once a contractor had agreed and signed a contract and failed to execute the
work, the Committee desired to know the reasons for CPWD not forcing the contractor


106

to execute the agreed work at the risk and cost of the contractor under the provisions
of the agreement. In reply, CPWD have stated in a note as under:

"The contract at Dr. SPM Swimming Pool Complex was not a fixed cost contract.
The lump sum quote of contractor was only for a specified scope of work &
specified specifications. Both the contracts of SPM and Weightlifting Auditorium
had provision for galvalume sheet roofing. During the progress of work, it was
found that it was not feasible to create complex 3-D geometry using galvalume
sheets. The contractor arranged mock ups using galvalume sheets, which were
not found acceptable as observed by the consultants and the Department.
Accordingly, it was decided to substitute only the top layer of roof i.e. Only the top
layer was provided in aluminium (to achieve 3-D roof geometry, which was not
found feasible using galvalume sheet) as against agreement/contract provision of
galvalume sheet for both top as well as bottom layer. The contractor acted as per
decision taken by the department purely on technical grounds in the interest of
work. The contractor actually provided bottom layer, fastening system, clips,
insulation etc. as per agreement item only except for top layer which CPWD asked
him to make in aluminium sheet instead of galvalume sheet (as provided in the
agreement) due to technical considerations. It would not have been feasible to get
only a part of the roof i.e. the top layer executed through some other agency as
contractor had overall responsibility for structural soundness, which could not be
effected by allotting part of roof to some other agency at the risk and cost of the
contractor. It was purely a technical decision of CPWD to substitute only the top
layer of roof and contractor acted accordingly. The decision of CPWD is as per
contract and manual provisions without any violation."

Xl. Indoor Cycling Velodrome

5.82 Audit scrutiny revealed that M/s JMC Projects (India) Ltd. was awarded the
contract of composite work for Indoor Cycling Velodrome. However, there were
several irregularities in the bidding procedure viz. compliance with the condition that
the agency should not have incurred any loss for more than two years in the last five
years being circumvented by a change in the accounting period in the year 2004-05;
inconsistent figures of liabilities provided by M/s JMC Projects (India) Ltd.;
astronomical increase ranging from 100 to 1800 percent in the quantities of cables,
conduits and hardware items. Audit also found that although Lloyd Insulations were
the designate sub-agency, the work was finally executed by Bemo Roof System.
Further, the competition for the specialised work of laying permanent timber track for
the velodrome was limited to Indian furniture contractors in association with an
international track design and construction expert by diluting the bid criteria regarding
similar works and turnover.


107

5.83 In reply, CPWD informed that the Profit and Loss figures were not inconsistent
with the general definition of a financial year. They were duly in conformity with the
statutory rules of the Registrar of Companies and hence fulfilling the eligibility
conditions of press notice. It was also stated that there was some inconsistency
noticed by CPWD themselves in figures of liabilities, during the scrutiny stage and this
inconsistency was removed before a decision was taken on the correct figures. The
veracity of the figures was ascertained by CPWD by insisting upon the contractor to
submit a written undertaking that their figures were correct. This was done during
scrutiny of the bid documents.

5.84 As regards the alleged dilution of the bid criteria in respect of the work of laying
permanent timber track for the velodrome, CPWD stated that it was not “dilution” but
rather a modification made with a view to ensure that the tendering process was
materialized in the first go, with adequate competition. The eligibility criteria were
modified to enhance the number of competitors bidding for the tender. The approval
for deviation in pre-qualification criteria vis-a-vis manual provision was taken from the
competent authority (Director General, CPWD).

5.85 With regard to the mid-course change in execution of roof work, CPWD stated
that in the instant case, although the technical problem could not be foreseen at
conceptual / tendering stage, it was rightly foreseen, immediately after preparation of a
real time mock up of the system considered in agreement item. It was rather the
foresight and insistence of the project team for preparation of 3D model and mock up,
much ahead of anticipated commencement of roofing work in the end of 2009 that had
helped in averting a last moment problem in the roofing work and in getting completed

the work in time.

5.86 The Committee desired to know the reasons for an increase ranging from 100
to 1800 percent in the quantities of cable, conduits and hardwire items in the
construction of Indoor Cycle Velodrome. In reply, CPWD stated in a note as under:

"Tender of E&M services at IGI stadium complex were comprised of approx
2660 items. Out of these above mentioned deviations occurred in only few
items (5-10 items). The deviations were based on site specific technical
reasons such as to provide additional outlets & connections to chorded
Microphone and additional console panel in the field of play owing to revised
site requirements. Deviations also occurred due to the diversion of cable routes


108

because of the obstructions of various other E&M/ Air Conditioning Services
coming in route wherein cables/conduits had to be diverted because of fixing of
HVAC ducts, electrical power cables, fire fighting pipes, drainage and drinking
water supply pipes etc. Such changes/deviations could not be envisaged at the
tendering stage due to non availability of sufficient required inputs. It should
also be appreciated that the finalization of different requirement of the games &
services continued to be changed and up-graded till the last moment of
commissioning of works/ services and this was in general the reason behind
occurred deviation of quantities (both positive and negative) in the tender. It is
submitted that due official procedure were followed and accordingly all such
deviations were got approved by the competent authority as per CPWD Works
Manual."

5.87 On being asked to justify this astronomical increase, CPWD submitted that in
such a large quantum of work consisting of approximately 2500 - 3000 items, there
was always likelihood of deviation of few items in the work specially when items were
of cabling/wiring which were dependent on routing of other services inside the building
specially HVAC ducts, fire fighting pipes, power cabling etc. The increased quantities
in cables and conduit were essentially required to complete the work as well as to
make PA system fully functional. Without diverting the routes of cables and conduits
the connectivity of PA system outlets to the main control console was not feasible
meaning thereby functioning of PA system was not possible. Therefore, aforesaid
deviation was inevitable. While working out the financial aspects of such deviations the
Govt. interests had consciously been kept in mind. The rates allowed for the deviated
quantities were below the tender rates. For the total deviations in the items of cables,
conduit and hardware the amount paid to the contractor was restricted to हैं 89 lakh as
against the cost of deviated quantities of 165 lakh had it been paid at the tender
tates. Thus, the deviations were justified to make sure the perfect functioning of PA
System needed for events of International importance as well as without any financial
loss to the Government.

5.88 The Committee also desired to know the factors that necessitated the mid-
course change in execution of roof work of the Indoor Cycling Velodrome. In reply,
CPWD stated in a note as under:

"The factor that necessitated change in roof specification was, the technical
infeasibility of execution of the agreement item, which could not be foreseen at
tender stage in the absence of experience of planning and execution of such
three dimensional roofs. Exact shop drawings and 3 D mock up were to be


109

prepared, as per the specifications of the tendered item, by the contractor to
whom the work would be awarded. It was only when the shop drawings were
submitted by the contractor M/s JMC projects Limited through M/s Lloyd
Insulations, for the agreement item, it could be seen that the agreement item
with conventional rectangular profiled sheets was resulting in so much of patch
work, flashings, ete, in the finished roof surface, which might be prone for water
seepages and other maintenance problems. Also it may not be aesthetically
appealing. This peculiar technical problem occurred because the roof surface
has curvatures in different directions, unlike the case of other roofs where
curvatures are not there or they are there in only one direction. This technical
limitation of executing the agreement item, was also re-ascertained through a 3
D mock up made by the contractor. It was at this stage, before start of actual
work, that improved system of roofing with “Tapered profiled sheets” instead of
conventional “Rectangular profiled sheets”, were enquired and found to be
offering solution for the above mentioned technical problems. And it was
decided to go for the alternative roofing system."

5.89 When asked whether this midcourse change had any financial implication,

CPWD stated in a note as under:
"From the agreement items and preliminary drawings enclosed with the tender
documents, there is no specific indication for use of tapered profile sheets. But
during the preparation of 3D mock up etc, it was realized that the required
geometry can only be achieved with tapered profile sheets. The system of M/s
Llyod, as visualized in the contract, was not able to provide the tapered
geometry. Therefore, the changed roofing system with tapered profiled sheets,
which was of superior geometry, was adopted in the work. Cost of this superior
system was derived as per the procedure laid down in clause 12 of the contract
document and CPWD Work Manuals, based on reasonable market rates. Thus,
there is no undue advantage or financial implication extended to the agency."

5.90 Asked to state the reasons for the change of the executing agency from Lloyd
Insulations to Bemo Roof System, CPWD submitted that to the best of information that
could be gathered, at that point of time, only the agencies M/s BEMO and M/s Kalzip
Ltd. were found to be having the expertise of both manufacturing “tapered profiled
sheets” as well as installing the specialized roofing system. M/s Llyod insulations did
not have this expertise. Cost of the system of M/s BEMO with Galvalume sheeting was
lower than that of M/s Kalzip, who provided systems only with Aluminium sheeting.
Execution was therefore got done through M/s BEMO with galvalume sheeting.

5.91 Regarding the work of laying permanent timber track for the velodrome, marked
by lack of domestic experience and complexity of the task, the Committee sought the


110

reasons for restricting the competitions to the Indian furniture contractors. In reply,
CPWD stated in a note as under:

"It is not a correct interpretation that bidding was restricted to Indian Furniture
Contractors only. The main eligibility criteria laid down in Notice Inviting Tender
was that lead contractor may be any company incorporated in India and the
lead contractor shall compulsorily associate an International Track Design and
Construction Expert for the design and construction of track. Thus the criteria
ensured that there was competition at global level. Indian contractor was made
a lead contractor, keeping in view smooth coordination at International level in
terms of monitoring of project, international transactions like opening of letter of
credit arranging visas, payment. of taxes, etc. and subsequently legal
complications, if any, in case of dispute considering the small time available for
the project. The eligibility criteria for an International track expert as required
by the Games Federation was so stringent that very few International experts
only met the criteria like completion of designed and executed the construction
of at least one permanent or demountable timber cycling track for International
event of category-I (Elite World championship and Olympic Games). It may also
be noted that CPWD ensured competition among International Track Expert, in
spite of the fact that name of only one agency was recommended by the
Organising Committee, CWG-2010, in view of highly specialized nature of the
track and the consequent approval from International Cycling Federation before
conduct of Games.

5.92 Asked to name the contractor that was awarded the work of laying permanent

timber track for the Indoor Cycling Velodrome, CPWD have stated in a note as under:
"M/s Comfort Net Traders (India) Pvt. Ltd. was the contractor that was awarded
the work as Indian lead contractor, in association with the International Track
Expert M/s World Record tracks, USA. As per the bid conditions, the Indian lead

contractor shall compulsorily associate with an approved International Track
Expert."

5.93 CPWD further informed that 11 Indian lead contractors were issued bid
documents. Out of these, three submitted their bids. These three bidders, who could

secure mandatory association with any of the six international track experts,
tesponded to the Expression of Interest.

XIl. {Gl Gymnastics Stadium - Selection of Swadeshi Construction Company

5.94 Audit found that there were several relaxations in the tendering process, which
resulted in the selection of Swadeshi Construction Co. as the successful bidder in the
work ‘Improvement of roof of the Gymnastics Stadium’. The eligibility criteria were
diluted on grounds of the work being of specialized nature, although the procedure to


111

be followed in the case of specialized works was by passed completely. Neither was
an evaluation done nor was the bidding capacity assessed as was required by the
CPWD rules.

5.95 When the Committee desired to hear the views fo CPWD on the aforesaid Audit
observations, they stated that the modification of bid criteria was in terms of
experience of similar works. Accordingly, instead of 2 works each of ¥ 16.73 crore, 2
works each of % 10 crore was stipulated and instead of 1 work of € 26.76 crore one
work of % 15 crore was stipulated. These modified criteria were applicable to all the
intending bidders who could have participated in bidding in response to press notice.
Even after this modification, although 10 agencies purchased the tender paper, only
two had submitted their bid, which indicated that there would not have been any
eligible agency available if any other higher bid criteria would have been chosen.
Thus, this modification was inevitable to ensure that there was competitive response
among good number of bidders, so that the work could be started in the exigent
situation. CPWD contended that hence it should not be termed as diluted bid criteria.
5.96 The Committee enquired into the reasons for relaxation in the tendering
process relating to the work ‘Improvement of roof of the Gymnastics Stadium’ thereby
benefitting M/s Swadeshi Construction Company. In reply, CPWD reasoned that the
tendering process was not relaxed. The eligibility criteria were however modified
before inviting tenders. The tendering process was duly followed with the spirit of
transparency and competitive bidding, after wide publicity through press. The process
that was specified in the tender documents or Press Notice, was applicable to and was
followed in case of all the intending bidders. No benefit was, therefore, extended to
Swadeshi Construction Company. Moreover, CPWD could not have known the lowest
bidder, at the time of modification of eligibility criteria.

5.97 On being asked to justify the dilution of the eligibility criteria for the above work,
CPWD inter-alia stated that the modification in eligibility criteria was made to ensure
that there was reasonable competition among good number of bidders. In fact, the
standard eligibility criteria specified in the CPWD Manual was not for specialised
works. The eligibility criteria for specialised works, was to be decided by the NIT
approving authority (Chief Engineer in this case), considering the nature of the work,
quantum of work, potential availability of agencies to carry out such work and


112

accordingly it was done. Therefore, in the instant case, although it appeared to be a
case of modification of eligibility criteria, when seen with reference to standard criteria
for normal works, it was in fact the only applicable eligibility criteria approved by the
competent authority. CPWD further apprised that it was apprehended that not many
contractors, with experience of having executed similar steel works ‘of magnitude as
prescribed in the CPWD Manual 2003, in the preceding 7 years, would be available
and forthcoming for taking up this complex work, as not many steel structures are
frequently erected in India, in comparison to RCC structures.

5.98 The Committee then desired to have the information on the number bidders
applied before and after diluting the eligibility criteria. In reply, CPWD submitted that
there was only one call of tenders, with extension of time for receiving bids, after
prebid meetings and site visits by the intending bidders. Apprehending poor response,
the modified eligibility criteria was only followed in the first call of tenders. With the
modified eligibility criteria, 10 bidders applied for and 6 bidders attended pre-bid
meetings and site visits and finally 2 bidders submitted their bids. The fact that only 2
bidders finally submitted their bids, even after this modification, indicated the
complexities and risks involved in the work and the inevitability of such modification.
CPWD contented that had the criteria been exactly as it was specified for normal
works in the CPWD Manual, the final response to bidding might have been further
poorer, resulting into uncompetitive rates or nil response.

5.99 On being asked to state the reasons for bypassing the procedure to be followed
in the case of specialized works, CPWD replied in a note as under:

" Procedure to be followed in case of specialised works, was not bypassed. The
modification of eligibility criteria was done with the approval of the competent
authority of CPWD, for specialised works, as explained in previous replies.
Further , inviting simultaneous bids, instead of Pre qualification system was
adopted for better competition. In fact, it has now been laid down in the
CPWD Work Manuals 2010 onwards, that "the system specifies for
simultaneous call of technical and financial bids” In prequalification system, the
number of financial bids to be received, is likely to be less than the
prequalification bids, depending on how many are going to be prequalified. In
simultaneous bids, it is not so. The number of financial bids would be exactly,
as many as and not less than, the number of eligibility bids. Thus competition
would be corresponding to more number of bids, in case they are
simultaneously received. In the instant case, both the technical and financial
bids were received simultaneously, rather than first prequalifying the bidders


113

and then seeking financial bids only from those prequalified bidders. As
already problem was anticipated with adequate response, this method of
calling technical and financial bids simultaneously was done and this ensured
adequate competition. Also eligibility criteria were duly evaluated in technical
bids and financial bids of those bidders who qualified in technical bids, were
opened."

XII Hostel/Media Centre and Roads, Storm Water Drain and Boundary Wall

5.100 Audit while bringing out the facts relating to the award of "Construction of
hostel" and "Construction of roads, storm water drains and boundary wall" to Swadeshi
Construction Co., pointed out that the tender for construction of hostel was
tendered/retendered five times, between January 2008 to July 2008 when the contract
was finally awarded. Audit found several deficiencies in the selection of Swadeshi
Construction Co. for this work viz. non-fulfillment of the .condition for experience in
similar works, non-attachment of the details of profit and loss account and balance
sheet as requested etc. Audit further pointed out that M/s Swadeshi Construction Co.
was also ineligible for award of work for construction of roads, storm water drains and
boundary wall but for a series of relaxations given to it during the evaluation at the pre-
qualification stage as indicated below:

(i) The figures of turnover submitted by it did not separately indicate the
amounts attributable to construction works though required; audited
financial statements were also not submitted for independent verification;

(ii) The turnover of 2007-08 was based on unaudited accounts, if the
unaudited furnover of 2007-08 were to be excluded, Swadeshi
construction co. was not eligible on this parameter. In addition, the
percentage of completion of the two works in progress was not indicated
in the performance report; and

(iii) | Except two, none of the seven works completed in the last seven years
were certified by the competent authority.

5.101 When the Committee desired to be apprised of the reasons for the inordinate
delay in completing the bidding process, CPWD stated that the bid process in case of
construction of hostel building took time because of re-invitation of bids which was to
be done because of ack of adequate response from the bidders, some ambiguities in
the documents and also due to high rates received during the earlier cail. Ultimately
tenders were awarded after there was a proper response from the bidders.


114

5.102 On being asked to state the reasons for not strictly enforcing the condition
regarding experience of similar works which in the instant case was ‘Building works
with RCC framed structures; CPWD stated in a note as under:

"The eligibility condition of the work defines that work experience may contain
three works of € 4.92 Crore, or two works of = 7.38 Crore or one work of & 9.84
Crore. Thus the contractor can submit his work experience certificate based on
these eligibility criteria. The contractor submitted three works of 0॥ | HAAT, 64
Bedded Hospital at Nasirpur and President House Auditorium with value more
than % 9.84 Crore. Thus the contractor was eligible in any one of the three
works.

The contractor was eligible since all the works listed above were building works
with RCC framed structure. The calculation of quantum of RCC work from
schedule of quantities was never part of eligibility criteria.

In view of above the condition of similar work imposed was strictly enforced."

5.103 When asked the logic for accepting the turnover of 2007-08, based on
unaudited accounts, as reliabie, CPWD stated in a note as under:

"The turnover was given by the Chartered Accountant with a note that the
records of 2007-08 are under audit. As per the CPWD Works Manual for pre-
qualification average annual turnover of last three years is to be considered.

As per income tax act section 139 sub - section 1, the return for proprietorship
firm can be submitted upto 311 October (the date has now been amended upto
307 September). Thus the contractor was to submit the audited balance sheet
to income tax department by this date. The department cannot ask to submit
the audited report before this date and accordingly the un-audited balance
sheet turnover figure given by the Chartered Accountant was accepted. It can
be seen that the Chartered Accountant has provided provisional annual
turnover as हैं 33,28,61,733/- and provisional net profit as हैं 1,49,78,778/-
whereas the final figures of turnover and profit are ¥ 27,63,70,918/- and =
1,56,39,593.58/- respectively. It can however be seen that, even after
considering that audited figure of turnover, of हैं 27.63 Crore, the average
turnover is much higher than that required as per NIT conditions.

₹ 6.15 Crore

% 25.98 Crore
र₹ 24.10 Crore

Required average turnover for last 3 years
Actual average turnover as per CA certified
Actual average turnover considering audited report

॥ ॥ ॥

Year ending Actual turnover ( ॥ Cr.) Remarks

March, 2006 48.54 FO

March, 2007 26.13 Po



115

March, 2008 27.63 Un-audited figure was % 33.29 Cr.
Average ₹ 24.10 Crore (considering audited | ¥ 26.99 Crore (considering un-audited
report) report) है

The mere presentation of un-audited turnover that can be legally given by 31%
October of that particular year cannot be treated as un-justified. Every tenderer
was asked to submit the certificate of Chartered Accountant stating turnover of
last three years and the same was provided by them."

XIV. Extra Items of 2.48 crore Awarded to Swadeshi Construction Co.

5.104 Audit pointed out that M/s Swadeshi Construction Co. was awarded extra items
of works at market rates, without bidding. These included cabling/feeder pillars work
for CCTV at the Hostel, Wrestling Stadium and Gymnastics Stadium (% 0.77 crore) and
temporary structure in the Wrestling Stadium (% 1.71 crore) where the main contractor
was Era Infra Engineering Ltd. In addition, an amount of € 0.38 crore was paid to M/s
Swadeshi Construction Co. for removal of lime, moorum and building rubbish which
was contractually to be done free of cost by the agency.

5.105 Clarifying the matter, CPWD informed that the agency M/s Era Infra
Engineering Ltd. would not have been able to complete this extra work as they were
busy in their own work and the available resources were not at all sufficient to execute
the additional work. Finally the work was executed by M/s Swadeshi Construction Co.
after considering their performance in the structural steel works, as an extra item at a
lower rate compared with the other agencies present in the campus i.e. M/s Era Infra
Engineering Ltd. and M/s JMC Projects (I) Ltd. There was requirement of temporary
structure in between the main hall and warm up hall to provide for temporary
demountable seats. The type of structure to be provided required the specification of
chairs to be finalised before the arrangement of steps to be provided in the structure
could be finalized. The process of finalisation of chairs was completed during the
period July 2009 to December 2009 on receipt of detail from the SAI/Ministry of Youth
Affairs and Sports. There was no time left for inviting fresh tenders and selecting new
agency with a new set of staff, supervisors, and co-ordination problems. The only
option left was to elect a suitable agency, who could execute the work within available

time frame.


116

XV. Major Dhyan Chand Stadium - Dilution of bid Criteria

5.106 According to Audit, in response to RFQ issued in March 2007 for
prequalification of the work of the "Upgradation and Remodelling" of Major Dhyan
Chand Stadium, seven firms responded out of which two were disqualified. Audit found
that the Project Manager diluted, without any recorded reasons, the pre-qualification
criteria for eligible works in the NIT from that specified in the General Conditions
Contract (GCC)-2005. As it stood, the GCC-2005 prescribed that for all works costing
more than % 10 crore, experience of completion of at least two similar works equal to
60 percent of the estimated cost would make the contractor eligible. This was diluted
to 'two similar works of only 50 percent of the estimated cost’. This dilution directly
benefited M/s Unity Infraprojects Ltd. and M/s ACIL, which would not have been
eligible had the standard criteria been retained.

5.107 The Committee sought explanation for the dilution of the bid criteria as specified
in the General Conditions Contract (GCC) 2005 at the prequalification stage. In reply,
CPWD submitted as under:

"As per Para 16.12 of CPWD Manual 2007, A.D.G will approve the eligibility
criteria and technical bids for works costing more than 210 cores. As it was
one of the first tender so invited by CPWD with estimated cost, nearly ¥ 95
Crore, accordingly competent authority decided to have the eligibility
condition so as to have more participation as well as competent agency as
the work was of international importance, and CPWD in past has never
called any work of this magnitude and hence the eligibility criteria was
decided in full wisdom by the competent authority for composite work as per
CPWD Manual.

The press notice based on above criteria was framed and wide publicity was
given in all the leading newspapers in ali metros. In response to above
publicity seven bidders submitted their bid documents out of which following
five agencies were pre-qualified. है

1. Ahluwalia Contracts (India) Ltd.

Shapoorji Pallonji & Co. Ltd.

L&T Ltd.

Unity Infra projects Ltd.

B.G. Shirke Construction Technology Pvt. Ltd.

aA FYON

it would be wrong to say that because of so called dilution of eligibility criteria,
M/s Unity Infra Projects Ltd. was benefited as Ahluwalia Contracts (India) Ltd.
above was also qualified due to modified criteria. All these agency are of


117

repute and accordingly no favourism was made in isolation, but to have real
competition and transparent tendering. If CPWD had gone with the so called
magnitude only three agencies would have qualified, whereas because of this
realistic approach of adopting lower work experience criteria five agencies
qualified and accordingly more competition has held. It is worth mentioning
that out of these five prequalified agencies, two agencies did not submit their
financial bid resultantly which would have otherwise only one agency. It might
have also resulted into much higher rates.

It is to mention that most of this work was completed well within time and
Hockey World Cup was held successfully in Feb.-March 2010. Therefore
question on capability and eligibility of agency at this stage is not proper. It is
also submitted that prequalification process with P.Q. documents so submitted
by agencies are already scrutinized by CTE, the technical wing of CVC,
before this audit and no such point for any dilution of eligibility criteria are

raised. Therefore it is again requested that Para may be dropped."

5.108 Asked to state categorically, whether M/s Unity Infra Projects Ltd. and M/s ACIL
were benefitted after dilution of bid criteria, CPWD stated as under:

"No. The bids were called

‘or selection / prequalification of agencies. In response

to given press notice only seven bidders submitted their bids for prequalification.
Out of which only five agencies prequalified for submitting their financial bids. If

CPWD had gone with the

so called higher eligibility criteria only three agencies

would have qualified out of which two agencies had not submitted their financial
bids. Resultantly there would have otherwise been only one agency and it might
have also resulted into uncompetitive bid. Because of this modified and realistic

approach of adopting lowe!

r work experience criteria five agencies qualified and

accordingly more competition has held. M/s Unity Infra projects and M/s ACIL
were in these five pre - qualified agencies and they submitted their financial bids.

Therefore due to this mod
Unity Infra Projects Ltd. a

ified criteria, more number of agencies including M/s
ind M/s ACIL could got qualified resulting into more

competition without any benefit to any agency.”

5.109 On being asked whether the award of contract to these firms, instead of

awarding to bigger firms resulted in economy, CPWD stated in a note as under:

" Out of the five pre - qualified agencies, the following three agencies submitted

their bid as below:

Tendered Amount

1 M/s Ahluwalia Contracts (I) Ltd. %158,40,58,366.00

2 Mis B.G. Shirke Con

struction Tech. Pvt. Ltd. % 157,87,36,558.00



118

3 Mis Unity Infra Projects Ltd. % 181 ,90,86,758.00

If the two firms might have not been qualified in prequalification, financial bid of
only one agency would have been received and obviously in that situation rates
could have been non-competitive. In the present situation financial bid of that
assumed single bidder (M/s B. G. Shirke Construction Tech. Pvt. Ltd.) was =
157.67 Crore, which is higher than the quoted amount of = 151.91 Crore by the
lowest bidder M/s Unity Infra project Ltd. Thus apparently, it has led to saving
money. However it is purely imaginary & hypothetical to say that such award
would have resulted in saving money or so."
5.110 Audit highlighted several indicators, which suggested that the bidding process
for the work of upgradation and remodeling of Major Dhyan Chand Stadium was not
fully reliable, and consequently the rates obtained through the bid may not be the
reasonable cost of the work. Though five bidders had been pre-qualified, only three
finally bid. The two which did not evince interest (L&T with an average annual turnover
of = 6941 crore and Shapoorji Pallonji with an average turnover of = 585 crore) were
having much higher average annual turnover than the three firms that bid which had
average annual turnover ragging only between हैं 236-321 crore. Besides, there was
fluctuation in the estimated costs of the project at different stages - € 95 crore at the
RFQ stage (when seven firms responded) reduced to % 88.97 crore at the RFP stage
(when three firms responded) and the final award at ¥ 147.82 crore. The justification
of costs in response to the lowest quoted bid of € 151.91 crore vis-a-vis an estimate of
% 88.97 crore prepared by the Department on market rates did not truly reflect the
market as was evident from the much lower rates obtained for components of the main
works by Unity Infra Projects Ltd. from outsourced market agencies.

5.111 Audit further pointed out that the rates obtained for electrical works awarded
separately ranged from 4.88 to 43.74 per cent below the estimated cost whereas the
electrical works which formed a part of the composite tender were awarded at 32.43 to
106.70 per cent above the estimated cost.

5.112 The Committee desired to know the reasons for projecting the estimated cost at
lower side at the final tendering stage against the higher projections at the Rough
Estimate stage and the final award of the contract. In reply, CPWD stated in a note as

under:


119

"The rough cost estimate were prepared well before pre-qualification process
was undertaken and when drawings were prepared by consultant initially which
were further modified based on the venue brief so provided by Organizing
Committee as well as local bodies and accordingly detailed estimate amounting
to Rs 88.97 crores was prepared on the basis of CPWD DSR 2002 for
scheduled items and market rates for unscheduled items on the basis of
preliminary drawings so submitted to local bodies and hence, there was
difference between rough cost estimate and that made on the basis of
preliminary drawings. Further, the difference between estimated cost and
tendered cost so received was also due to difference in DSR 2002 and market
rates in 2007. The process was followed as per the CPWD Manual. The rates
in DSR 2002 are the rates considered upto December 2001. There is a
difference of six years, hence difference in rates.”

5.113 The Committee then asked how could the Ministry substantiate that the
justification of rates was done on market rates when it was found that the main
contractor outsourced the work to the market agencies at much lower rates. In reply,
CPWD stated in a note as under:

"Rates for the material and labour were taken on the basis of market so
prevalent at that time and accordingly the justifications were prepared based on
which the tender were accepted. Rates so quoted by tenderer included various
cost components so elaborated due to various NIT conditions and specifications
and the whole responsibility and deliverance of the project lies with the main
contractor. It is very much incorrect to compare the rates so quoted by main
contractor and the outsourced smaller agencies so used by main agency for the
construction as the smaller contractor so associated does not have to take
various cost components like safety of labourer, transportation of labourer,
guarantee, availability of water and electricity at site, VAT, Technical
infrastructure, defect: liability, material shifting to site of execution by heavy
machinery like crane etc, Malba removal etc. All these factors has to be borne
by main agency in totality and onus of the project lies with the main contractor."

5.114 On being asked about the failure of CPWD in judging that the rate obtained for
electrical works awarded separately were far lesser than the estimated cost, whereas
the electrical works which formed a part of the composite tender were awarded at
rates far above the estimated cost, CPWD stated in a note as under:
"The concept of composite works was followed in accordance with the provision
of applicable CPWD Works Manual 2003, Para 15.6.1

The tenders for composite work (Civil works and Electrical & Mechanical works)
were accepted after comparing the composite tendered cost with the composite
justified cost. In such a situation, deciding tenders on the basis of justification of
individual components or subheads is not possible. It may happen that some
components may have been quoted at rates much higher or lower than the


120

justified rates. However, the reasonableness of the tender is judged on the
basis of overall tendered cost vis ~ a — vis overall justified cost.

Hence, in a composite work, it is not correct to say that a particular component
(ie. any sub-head of Electrical & Mechanical works) has been awarded at a
higher rate as the fact is that the component has not been awarded in isolation
but the composite tender as a whole has been awarded. For the same reason,
it is equally not correct to compare the rates of a component of a composite
tender with the rates of another tender, which has been invited for that
component only. Otherwise there is no sanctity of tendering process.

The figures of the labour so engaged by main agency is taken in Fortnightly
Labour Report (FLR) so provided by main contractor which does not include
labour so engaged by number of petty contractor so employed by main agency
to complete the work and hence, there is no statement which provide number of
labourers employed by petty contractors, but while preparing justifications the
tentative labour part is considered based on the manual."

5.115 Asked to state categorically the procedure followed to ensure that the rates as
quoted by the bidders and agreed upon by CPWD were as realistic as the market
rates, CPWD stated in a note as under:

"Once the bids are received in a transparent and competitive bidding process, the
L1 rates or the lowest rates are identified. It is felt that, this rate has been quoted
by the L1 bidder taking into consideration what he anticipates as the cost of the
work based on the work specifications indicated in the tender documents, costs to
be incurred based on specific conditions attached to the work e.g. time period of
execution, typical site rated conditions, and his profit margins & likely risks. It is
also to be appreciated that since the rate obtained is through a competitive
process, it is arguably the best rate available.

As per CPWD procedure, after receipt of the tenders, the competent authority can
either accept the bid at the L1 rate or negotiate with L1 or reject the tender.
Justification statement of tender is prepared for checking the reasonability of rates.
There is no need for preparing justification in case the lowest tender is less than
the estimated cost put to tender + 10%. However, in case the bid exceeds this
limit, in order to assist competent authority for arriving at a decision whether to
accept the L1 tender or to reject it, the cost of work on the basis of prevailing
market rate at the time of receipt of tender are once again worked out and also
after factoring in cost of other components of work / conditions that may not have
been taken in to consideration at the time of preparation of detailed estimate.

The total cost of work, worked out by CPWD (based on market rate) is compared
with total cost, worked out based on the quoted rates of bidders. In this process
many times situation arises when the quoted rates of some items of bidder is
higher than the market rate (M. R) assessed by CPWD and in some items quoted
rates of bidder is lower than: the market rate (M. R) assessed by CPWD. Therefore
overall cost of work is worked out and compared to ensure the realisticness of
quoted rates of bidder. The quoted rates/ agreement rates of bidder cannot be
declared as high or low by assessing only few items of an agreement of high


121

value. In fact overall tender cost is to be compared considering the
reasonableness of market rate."

XVIL Major Dhayan Chand Stadium - Non levy of Compensation

5.116 Audit pointed out that despite delayed completion/ slow progress of the project,
10 compensation had been levied for slow progress of work amounting to हैं 16.49
crore. Further, since proper record of the hindrances attributable to the contractor had
not been maintained, it was difficult to determine the regularity of the provisional
extension of time issued from time to time.

5.117 Asked to comment on the above findings of Audit, CPWD stated that the work
so carried out was a composite work. Accordingly, the work was monitored by Civil &
Electrical team simultaneously. Based on the justified hindrances in Civil & Electrical
side, maintained in hindrance register, as well the various correspondences and mails
so available, the delays which were found justified were considered while granting the
extension of time, as recommended from Civil and Electrical side and Extension of
Time (EOT) was granted without levy of compensation.

XVII. Non-completion of training facilities at_Jharoda Kalan for Police
Sportsperson

5.118 Audit scrutiny revealed that in August 2009, the Ministry of Home Affairs
sanctioned construction of 5 permanent barracks and providing and laying of synthetic
athletic track surface at CRPF campus, Jharoda Kalan by CPWD at a cost of & 7.77
crore. The infrastructural facilities were required for imparting intensive training
facilities to 120 selected police sportspersons for participation in CWG-2010 in the
shooting, swimming, athletics, archery, gymnastics, weightlifting and wrestling
disciplines. The CPWD awarded two contracts in March 2010 for completion of work
by July 2010, but the work had not been completed as of January 2011. Thus, the
primary objective of imparting training facilities to police sportspersons for participation
in the Commonwealth Games (CWG) 2010 had been defeated.

5.119 Asked to state the reasons for non-completion of the training facilities, CPWD
stated that the preliminary estimate for the above said work was sent to CRPF on
August 2007 but nothing was heard from the CRPF side. On a subsequent request of


122

CRPF, revised preliminary estimate was again submitted in December 2008. In regard
to above said work, IG, Northern Sector, CRPF held a meeting on 22.07.2009 in his
chamber and he desired that these works at Jharoda Kalan be dropped, in view of
likely non-completion of these works before CWG - 2010. The opinion of non-
completion of works before CWG was formed after due deliberation with CPWD.
However, the sanction of the above said work was surprisingly received in August
2009 and sanction was given to both works combined. The process of tendering as
per manual provision was started in October 2009 and both works awarded together in
the month of March 2010 with likely date of completion as July 2010. CPWD further
submitted that because of various hindrances and excessive rainfall in the month of
July, the work could not be started in full flow as the synthetic track work site was fully
submerged in water due to the heavy rain. So the works could not be completed
before CWG 2010. CPWD also clarified that it was nowhere mentioned that these
facilities were likely to be utilized by the potential sports person of Police Force.

5.120 Asked to state the present status, CPWD submitted that at present, both works
stood completed. Both the facilities were permanent facilities and these infrastructures
would be used judiciously by the client department.

5.121 For a work, which was sanctioned in August 2009, the Committee enquired
about the reasons for awarding the contract as late as March 2010, that too without
factoring in the uncertainties of the monsoon season. In reply, CPWD stated in a note

as under:

"The preliminary estimate of Synthetic Athletic Track surface & 5 permanent
barracks were submitted earlier to CRPF on 19-12-2007 & 20-12-2007,
respectively. On request of CRPF authorities to revise the estimate as per
latest Cost-index, the preliminary estimates of the two works were modified and
re-submitted after a period of one year on 23-12-2008. The work of construction
of 5 permanent barracks and providing & laying of synthetic athletic track
surface at CRPF Campus, Jharoda Kalan, amounting to %7.77 crore was
sanctioned by the M/o Home Affairs in August, 2009. The issue of these two
works became irrelevant to CWG, 2010, is apparent from the fact that in the
quarterly meeting of CRPF & CPWD officers held on 22-7-2009 at Northern
Sector Headquarter, CRPF, West Block, New Delhi, it was discussed & decided
that the work would not be completed upto CWG, 2010. Therefore, IGP, NS,
CRPF desired that it would be appropriate to drop the proposal. Therefore, no
advance action for tendering was warranted on the part of CPWD. However, in
routine, the tenders comprising of Technical & Financial bids for Synthetic Track
were invited on 24.10.2009 and the work was awarded on 6-3-2010. The


123

tenders of 5 permanent barracks were invited on 1-1-2010 and awarded on 17-
3-2010. CPWD is required to follow the laid-down procedure for framing the
detailed estimate, technical sanction, preparation of NIT, publicity in the press
and acceptance of the tender by the competent authority for awarding the
tender. Therefore, it was not at all possible for CPWD to award the tender at
once on receipt of sanction in August, 2009. The exceptional prolonged
heavy rains in the month of July & August, 2010 delayed the construction work.
The CPWD took immediate necessary action for call of tenders to facilitate
earliest commencement of the construction and therefore no delay on the part
of CPWD."

XIX. Award of Work to Ineligible Contractor

5.122 Audit pointed out that due to failure of M/s Era Infra Engineering Limited (EIEL)
to complete the work in time, CPWD decided in August 2009 to execute the work of
trap and skeet numbers 4,5 and 6 and underground tank at Dr. Karni Singh Shooting
Range through other agencies. Of the six offers received in response to the press
notice, none, including M/s JMC, qualified the eligibility criteria of having completed at
feast 3 works valuing % 3. crore and above during the last five years and completion of
each such work within the stipulated date of completion. Despite the failure of M/s
JMC to qualify the criteria, CPWD awarded the works to M/s JMC, after relaxing the
criteria to one similar work of one crore per month at an extra cost of € 0.20 crore over
the rates of original contractor. Moreover, M/s JMC failed to complete the work in

time.

5.123 Asked to comment on the dilution of the eligibility criteria after calling and
evaluation of tender despite the fact that none of the agencies qualified, CPWD stated

in a note as under:

" A note was given in the press to invite expression of interest from CPWD,
Class-| registered contractors so as to prepare a short list of willing &
competent contractors with the eligibility criteria of having executed three similar
works of 3 crore or more in last 5 years. In response, 6 applications were
received but none of the applicants fulfilled the eligibility criteria set out in the
EOI notice. This response revealed that the eligibility criterion was too stringent
and there was no agency, which could meet this criterion. If no agency
qualified in this first call that does not mean that work is not to be done. There
was such an acute emergency that work had to be done in any circumstances
for the success of test event.

Then the alternative available was to change condition / reduce eligibility
criteria to having executed one similar work of 1.0 crore which is minimum
needed for construction of Trap & Skeet so that CPWD can get some agency
working at site. Further as per CPWD Works Manual, there was no such


124

testriction of the condition of %3 crore (as stated in Audit Report) and the part
work was awarded by the competent Authority as per the due procedure
prescribed in CPWD work manual. Further the work awarded to JMC was the
one which was beyond the Deviation Limit of M/s EIEL contract and thus the
Audit observation of extra cost of Rs 0.20 Crore is not rational.

Had the eligibility criterion been not changed by the CPWD, CPWD would not
have got the Agency, and then who else would have executed the project. Thus
the decision of CPWD to change the eligibility criterion was rational and
necessary to get the work completed by available next best agency.”

XX. Delay in Execution of CWG Projects

5.124 The Commonwealth Games, 2010 were awarded to the city of New Delhi in
November 2003 but CPWD could start the work in January 2007, when they were
assigned the job. Asked to state action taken between 2003 and 2007, the
representative of CPWD stated in evidence that in June 2004, the first meeting was
called by the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports (MYAS), where CPWD was
nominated as a principal consultant. They intended to develop all these venues.

5.125 When the Committee desired to hear the views of the Secretary, MYAS on the

above matter, he deposed in evidence as under:

“Between 2003 and 2007 the delay that occurred had resulted in disruption at
every later stage. That is the delay that was avoidable, which should not have
happened."

5.126 Asked to state the precise reasons for such delay, the Secretary, Sports further

stated:

"It is little difficult to pinpoint at this point of time. There were a large number of
teasons why those delays had occurred. Partly there was the question of who
would be in-charge of the entire exercise. First, it was the Ministry and then it
was the Organizing Committee. Even earlier, there was delay in decision-
making. The question of what we would need to do had undergone a complete
change but let me be very frank. It is very difficult to assign the responsibility at
this stage. There was a delay of four years which could have been cut down
considerably, and if it had been streamlined from the very beginning the kind of
last minute decisions that had to be taken would not have been necessary.”

He added:

"Sir, with effect from June, 2007, CPWD was broadly aware that these works
needed to be taken up by them. By September or October, we started sending
out the venue briefs and other requirements on which they could start the work."

He also stated:


125

"Sir, it is a fact that - we should have completed most of the works at least a
year before the date they were finally completed. Take, for example, the entire
issue of getting the timing system and in place, it was done only in the last three
or four months, and it should have been in place there a year ago. That
happened because the stadium had not been completed at that time. So, they
were concerned and quite rightly so because internationally they manage to do
it a little ahead of schedule. In the London Olympics, the preparations were
compiete in about a year and a half in advance of the actual event. lf
you look at the time span taken for construction and other works and if you take
into account the first four years delay, the delay that resulted after 2007 had
been relatively less than what was caused by the initial four years delay.
CPWD needed three years to do this kind of works."

5.127 On being specifically asked whether the delay had resulted in cost escalation,

the Secretary, Sports submitted as under:

“...from the management perspective, any delay leads to certain extra costs
inevitably. To that extent, | cannot deny that the delay that took place in placing
the work with CPWD must have resulted in a certain amount of cost escalation,
which was avoidable."

(li) Delhi Development Authority (BDA)

1. Non Compliance with the Conditional Clearance by the Ministry of
Environment and Forests
5.128 According to Audit, although the location of the Games Village was known since
August 2003, DDA approached the Ministry of Environment and Forest (MoEF) for
environmental clearance only in September 2006. In December 2006, MoEF cleared
the project on the condition that as far as possible, the works should not be of a
permanent nature and unless the detailed studies suggested otherwise, the riverbed
would have to be restored to the river. In January 2007, DDA reported that it intended
to commission a study on "Hydraulic Mode! Studies for assessing the effect of
Akshardham Bund on the flow conditions in the River Yamuna at Delhi" through the
Central Water and Power Research Station, Pune (CWPRS); the study report was
submitted to MoEF on 6" March 2007. The MoEF finally cleared the project on 2"
April 2007 permitting construction of permanent nature after progressively relaxing the
conditions subject to completion of the mitigating/abatement measures identified by
CWPRS, Pune before completion of the buildings. The main mitigation and abatement
measures identified by CWPRS in its report were; () raising and strengthening the
embankments along the river in Delhi to ensure safe discharge and check over


126

topping; (ii) strengthening the existing embankments and guide bund to check flood
discharge; (iii) one layer of stone crates on sloping portion as well as an apron over
geofabric filter to be laid to protect various bunds and bridges; (iv) protection of the
existing bridge piers and strengthening of guide bunds of other structures existing
between the Indraprastha barrage and the Nizamuddin road bridge; and (v)
arrangements to protect flooding area due to back flow of water on the upstream side
of the Akshadham temple on both sides of the river. However, DDA completely
abdicated its responsibility. Audit could not verify compliance with the conditions
stipulated by the MoEF.

5.129 The Committee desired to know the reasons for a delay of more than three
years on the part of DDA to approach the Ministry of Environment and Forests for
environmental clearance. In reply, the Ministry of Urban Development inter-alia stated
that to apply for the Environment Clearance from the MoEF, the basic data of
projected population, requirement of water, generation of sewerage, amount of
consumption of electricity etc. were required. The basic requirements of facilities
needed in the Games Village along with residential accommodation were to be given
by the Organizing Committee, which was constituted on 10" February, 2005. The
tentative plan along with basic requirements of facilities was provided by the
consultants of OC in August, 2006 and thereafter it was only possible to approach
MoEF for the environment clearance. Thus, the delay in approaching MoEF for EC
was beyond the control of DDA.

5.130 On being asked to state the conditions cited by the Ministry of Environment and
Forests while allowing DDA to carry out permanent construction, the Ministry of Urban
Development have stated in a note as under:

"After receiving the letter dated 14.12.2006 from MoEF, DDA represented that
8000 persons could not be accommodated in the temporary structures. It was
also clarified to the MoEF that the Akshardham Bund had already been created
to segregate the site from the Yamuna Flood Plain and Akshardham Temple
had already been constructed in the part portion of the site. In reference to
these presentation of DDA, MoEF vide letter dated 22.01.2007 directed to get
detailed studies conducted to ascertain increased risk of flooding to the
upstream areas because of the new bund constructed in the year 2000 in
addition to the old bund, which was constructed on the bank of River Yamuna
from Mayur Vihar to Vikas Marg. It was further stated by the MoEF that the
project proposal was examined considering the old bund only. The


127

recommendation arising out of the studies would relate to river drainage,
dredging etc. and would need to be undertaken under the aegis of DDA. As, the
nature of magnitude of risk mitigation/abatement would be known only after the
studies, the Environment Clearance conditions would need to be enhanced
suitably.

Subsequent to above direction of MoEF, DDA entrusted the study to Central
Water & Research Station, Pune (CWPRS) to identify the risk of upstream
flooding and mitigation measures thereof. CWPRS after conducting modal
studies, concluded in its report that there was hardly 5 to 10 centimeter rise of
water in the upstream and the same diminishes upto ITO barrage. Thus, there
was no risk of upstream of flooding due to Akshardham bund. CWPRS also
suggested some strengthening measures to Akshardham Bund, right marginal
bund of River Yamuna etc.

After studying the report of CWPRS, which had concluded that there was no
risk of upstream flooding due to creation of Akshardham Bund & reclamation of
land for CWG Village, the MOEF modified the condition of construction of only
temporary structures and permitted DDA to plan the construction either
temporary or permanent."

5.131 The Committee then wanted to know the reasons for not undertaking the flood
mitigation and abatement measures. In reply, the Ministry of Urban Development
stated that all mitigation/abatement measures identified by the CWPRS, Pune were
not related to the jurisdiction of 008, The responsibility to host the Commonwealth
Games was the joint responsibility of various Government Departments. Therefore,
after receipt of report of CWPRS, DDA had requested the Chief Secretary, GNCTD
vide letter dated 6" March 2007 to take up the work relating to the Government of
Delhi. The Government of Delhi vide letter PS/PWD/40 dated 16" March 2007 had
intimated that the strengthening of Akshardham Bund Road should be done by DDA
and other works shall be taken up by the Government of Defhi. in the said letter, it had
also been stated that DDA might write to Railways to take up the work related to piers
of Nizamuddin Rail Bridge. DDA had also written to the Northern Railways on 150
March 2007 to take up the works related to Nizamuddin Rail Bridge. It was observed
from the site that GNCTD had completed the works of Guide bunds of Nizamuddin
Road Bridge and right marginal bund from Nizamuddin Rail Bridge to Nizamuddin
Road Bridge. It had been enquired from the Railway. about providing the stone crates
around the piers of Nizamuddin Rail Bridge. It was informed by railways that the same
was not required as per their assessment. DDA completed the work of strengthening


128

of Akshardham Bund before the Games. DDA had not left any stone unturned to
implement the mitigation measures identified by the CWPRS.

I. Erection of Noise Barriers along the flyover on NH-24

5.132 The contract to erect noise barriers along the flyover on NH-24 was awarded to
Construction Catalyser Pvt. Ltd. in May 2010 for € 3 crore. The contract specified the
physical characteristics of the plexiglass noise barrier that was to be installed. Audit
observed that the samples sent for testing to the third party laboratory (Shriram
Institute for Industrial Research) failed to meet the desired criteria subsequently.
Although the samples were sent in June 2010, the report was received from the
laboratory only on 29" October 2010, well after the conclusion of the Commonwealth
Games, 2010; this effectively eliminated all chances of taking corrective measures in a

timely manner.

5.133 The Committee enquired whether any penalty had been imposed on the agency
for failure to meet the physical characteristics. In reply, the Ministry of Urban
Development stated that the noise barrier had passed in Acoustic Properties which as
per protocol was the priority area but failed in some physical properties. A penalty of
%15 lakh was approved and would be recovered from the final bill of the agency which
was still pending and an amount of 1 crore approximately is available with the DDA.

5.134 On being asked whether DDA approached and pursued with the Laboratory,
after submitting the samples, for furnishing its report expeditiously, the Ministry of
Urban Development stated that the plexiglas used for the noise barrier was imported
from the Germany. The contract was awarded in May, 2010 and the material arrived in
the last week of June, 2010. The same was immediately sent to Sri Ram Institute for
testing. A letter dated 10” August 2010 was also written to the laboratory for
submission of report at the earliest.

5.135 Asked to state the reasons for not ensuring the receipt of the report of
the third party laboratory before installing the noise barriers, the Ministry of
Urban Development submitted that this noise barrier was to be installed on the top
of anti-crash barrier of the flyover constructed on NH-24 near CWG Village. The
stipulated date of completion of this flyover was 3" September 2010 but it was actually


129

completed on 277 August 2010. The work of crash barrier started in July, 2010 and
installation of noise barrier was also done simultaneously. The material, which came
from Germany, also started reaching at site in June/July, 2010. Thus, there was no
time to hold the work till test reports were received from the laboratory. However, the
acoustic properties, which were the priority area, had been achieved as per test report.
All efforts were done by the field staff but due to circumstances, the results could not
be received before the installation of noise barrier.

5.136 A perusal of DDA's letter dated 100 August 2010 however, revealed that 008
vide this very letter had sought duplicate copies of the test report already sent to them
citing the reasons that the report was not traceable with them. This signified that
before 10" August 2010 ie. commencement of the Commonwealth Games 2010, the
test report was received by DDA but no follow up action was taken up by them.

5.137 When asked whether it was not strange and a dangerous phenomenon that
equipment was installed before obtaining quality test reports, the Ministry of Urban
Development clarified that plexiglas used for the noise barrier was an imported
material, manufactured in Germany. This noise barrier was fixed on the crash barrier
of the flyover. The tender for the same was invited in February 2010. However, only a
single tender was received. The product carried sufficient brand equity and given the
constraint of time, the rates were negotiated with the tenderer. The work was awarded
in May, 2010 and the material arrived in the last week of June, 2010. The same was
immediately sent to Sri Ram Institute for testing. Simultaneously erection of noise
barrier was started to complete the same in time. However, this noise barrier had
passed in acoustic properties, which was the priority protocol, but it failed in some
physical properties such as tensile strength, bending, elongation, etc. for which an
amount of 715.95 lakh from the total cost of = 2.45 crore of the plexiglas has been
recovered from the contractor. The Ministry further reasoned that it could not be
considered a dangerous phenomenon as the noise barriers were not dynamic
equipment but static installations.

Ill. Appointment of Financial Consultant for the Games Village Project

5.138 Audit pointed out that in June 2006, DDA awarded a contract for 4.73 crore for
financial consultancy for the Games Village Project to a consortium led by


130

Pricewaterhouse Coopers Pvt. Ltd. (PWC) with James La Salle Property Consultants
Pvt. (I) Ltd. (international expert). The scope of work of the financial consultant
included advice on development options for the Games village on a Public Private
Partnership (PPP) mode or any other appropriate mode involving development
through auction of plots for developing hotel/service apartment, and the possibility of
private participation in development of Games Village /competition venues. Since the
last two options were not pursued, a note was put up to the High Powered Committee
(HPC) of DDA in September 2008 for foreclosure of the consultancy as per the
agreement, for works no longer required to be undertaken by the financial consultant
and restricting the consultancy fee on pro rata basis. In addition, it was also indicated
that the key personnel promised by the consultant were either not deployed or
replaced without prior permission of DDA, as required. Audit found that the HPC,
instead of restricting the payments to be made to the financial consultant, avoided
taking a decision. Ultimately, the financial consultant was paid ¥ 4.02 crore, which

included payment for services actually not rendered.

5.139 Asked to state the reasons for not restricting the consultancy fee on prorata
basis by the HPC when the proposal for the same was submitted in September, 2008,
the Ministry of Urban Development inter-alia stated that the Financial Consuitants
were selected by DDA based on a competitive tendering process. The contract for
consultancy was signed with M/s PricewaterhouseCoopers (PWC) in consortium with
JLL on June 2006. Since then, the consultants were associated with DDA at all times
including pre-games period (planning, construction), during games (miscellaneous
support) and post games (various support). The main scope of work for financial
consultants included advising DDA on financial matters relating to PPP projects
including market analysis, financial modeling, PPP structuring, bid process
management, financial and legal advice, disposal strategy etc. The Financial
Consultants had completed the work for the development of residential facility, hotels
as well as for the competition venues as envisaged in their scope of work. Also, any
additional work as requested by DDA from time to time, monitoring, assistance in
supervision, support in meetings, coordination between internal and external agencies
was provided by the Financial Consultants. The MoUD accordingly reasoned that no
deductions were found to be valid on this accord.


5.140

131

On being enquired whether DDA took any action against the financial

consultant for not deploying the key personnel and replacing them without prior

permission of DDA, the Ministry of Urban Development have stated in a Note as

under:

5.141

in the

"The deployment plan was given by the Financial Consultants as part of their
bid and preliminary report. As per the deployment plan, certain members were
proposed on full time whereas other experts were working from the back office
and provided inputs as and when required. These included legal experts,
foreign experts etc. Also the team members were to be deployed as on need
basis depending on the requirement of the project.

DDA vide their letter had sought details of deployment of key personnel
promised by the consultant from time to time. In response to the letter above,
consultants vide their letter submitted the proof of deployment and also the
mode of deployment of key personnel by them. It was explained by consultant
that all the team members proposed were not required to operate from DDA’s
office on a full time basis for such a long duration assignment. Whereas the
core team of the consultants was always made available and worked full time
on the assignment from DDA’s office. The experts were called in as and when
required. Other experts (including foreign experts) had provided their input
through conferencing, emails and in person meetings wherever required. It was
noted by DDA that a core team was deployed full time by the Financial
Consultants and all the other experts required to be provided, including those
from JLL & Amarchand Mangaldas, were available as and when required, for
the project or requested so by DDA. Later on during the monitoring phase, a
larger team was deployed by the Financial Consultant at each venue for daily,
weekly and monthly monitoring of the project.

The Financial Consultants had deployed all the personnel as indicated and
required to be provided by them in their proposal. The proof of deployment was
evident in crucial meetings also wherein the experts were present. DDA had
satisfied itself to the evidence of deployment of personnel by them."

When asked to state specific assistance rendered by the Financial Consultants
disposal of assets after the Games and to the extent it facilitated disposal of

assets by DDA, the Ministry of Urban Development stated that the disposal strategy

for the Games assets was spelt out by Consultants in the project structure, which

envisaged the following measures:

e Games village residential apartments: 4/3 flats belonging to DDA (later
increased to 2/3" after financial assistance to developer) were to be sold by
DDA at market price

e Sports facilities and stadium: to be operated by 008 as sports complex and
used as sports venues for various sporting events, training grounds,
national and international events etc.


132

5.142 Asked to state whether the suggestions of the Consultants were accepted, the
Ministry replied that the assets were being used/ disposed post games as per the
suggestions of the consultants.

lV. Undue Favour Shown to EMAAR MGF in Pre-qualification and Tecnnical Pre-qualification and Technical
Evaluation.

5.143 Audit scrutiny revealed that as per the RFQ, existing incorporated entities could
apply either individually or as a consortium. While an un-incorporated consortium
could apply on the basis of an MoU, which would also identify a lead partner holding
not less than 26 per cent equity shareholding and voting rights, a separate
incorporated entity was to be formed before bidding, on the same pattern of
shareholding as indicated in the MoU. The critical PQ requirements were: {i)
Experience of three years of residential facility/property development; (ii) Minimum
average annual turnover of % 200 crore over the last three years; and (iii) Net worth of
% 100 crore on the last day of the latest financial year. In case of a consortium, the
lead member was to fulfil conditions (i) and (ii); and all members holding more than or
equal to 26 percent of shareholding had to fulfil condition (ili) Incidentally, the
Guidelines for PPP on Request for Qualifications of the Government of India do not
stipulate the formation of an incorporated entity before award of the contract, but
merely require the submission of a binding Joint Bidding Agreement by the consortium
partners, undertaking to constitute a Special Purpose Vehicle for entering into the PPP
concession agreement. The RFQ floated by DDA, however, required a separate
incorporated entity to be formed (with the same shareholding pattern as indicated in
the MoU submitted in response to the RFQ) before submission of bids. An un-
incoporated consortium with Emaar Properties PJSC, Dubai, Emaar MGF Land Pvt.
Ltd., MGF Developments Ltd., and Discovery Estates Pvt. Ltd. applied at the RFQ
stage on the basis of an MoU that projected Emaar Properties PJSC, Dubai as the
lead member that would hold 26 percent shareholding in the Special Purpose
Company (SPC) to be set up before making a bid at the RFP stage (the other
members of the consortium holding 25 percent, 25 percent and 24 percent
shareholding, respectively) of the four consortium members, only the lead member
fulfilled the pre-qualification criteria, and on its strength the consortium was shortlisted,
along with 10 other agencies.


133

5.144 In response to the RFP, two bids were received ie. from Emaar MGF
Construction Pvt. Ltd., the SPC for the consortium led by Emaar Properties PJSC,
Dubai and DLF Ltd; both the bids were conditional and to that extent deficient.

5.145 Emaar MGF Construction Pvt. Ltd. was a company existing at the RFQ stage;
but ineligible on the three PO criteria in its individual capacity. Further, Emaar
Properties 2080, Dubai did not directly hold 26 percent interest in this company,
instead, 73 per cent was held by Emaar MGF Land Pvt. Ltd. again a company which
could not qualify as the lead partner on the PO criteria. It was indicated that Emaar
Properties Dubai indirectly held 26 per cent-share in the SPC through its shareholding
in Emaar MGF Land Pvt. Ltd. This was not as per the PO criteria, which required a

direct investment of at least 26 per cent by the lead partner.

5.146 The technical proposals were opened on 15 June 2007 and between 15 and 27
June 2007, there were a series of communications between the Evaluation
Committee, financial consultant, chief legal advisor of DDA, two other legal agencies-
Amarchand Mangaldas and Shri Gaurav Sarin - and Emaar MGF Constructions Pvt.
Ltd. (but not directly with Emaar Properties PJSC, Dubai, the lead member) regarding

the deficiencies with regard to:

e SPC being an existing company on the RFQ date;

e change in the shareholding pattern of the SPC as compared with that indicated
in MoU; and

e absence of 26 percent direct shareholding of the lead member (Emaar
Properties PSC, Dubai) in the SPC.

5.147 On 27 June 2007, Shri Gaurav Sarin, the Standing Counsel wrote to DDA,
indicating that permitting indirect shareholding of the lead member would amount to
deviation from the requirements of the RFP documents. Further, Shri Sarin indicated
that Emaar MGF Construction Pvt. Ltd had indicated the inability of the lead member
(Emaar Properties PJSC, Dubai) to give the undertaking, but had expressed its
willingness to give an undertaking (that Emaar Properties 2350, Dubai would make
the necessary investment). Shri Sarin indicated that the undertaking given by the
bidding company should be forwarded by DDA to the lead member (Emaar Properties

PJSC, Dubai) and their confirmation/ acceptance.


134

5.148 Audit pointed out that the undertaking by Emaar MGF Construction Pvt. Ltd was
not complied with and no penal action was initiated. Eventually, in April 2008, nine
months after the issue of Lol and six months after the award of the work, it was
clarified that Emaar Properties PJSC, Dubai held 100 percent shares, though
indirectly, through various other subsidiaries in Emaar Holding ॥ Mauritius, which in
turn held 26 percent in the SPC.

5.149 Audit found a series of misrepresentations and accommodations at the RFQ
and RFP stages that resulted in Emaar MGF Constructions Pvt. Ltd, an existing
company at the RFQ stage but not qualified on any of the three conditions, to emerge
as a successful bidder through the consortium route for the Commonwealth Games
Village Residential Complex. Emaar Properties PJSC, presented at the RFQ stage
as the lead partner with the requisite experience, turnover and net worth, faded
behind layers of subsidiaries, effectively making a mockery of the premise that it
would bring the necessary experience and financial strength, directly to the
consortium led Special Purpose Company (SPC).

5.150 As mentioned above, in response to the RFP, two bids were received i.e. from
Emaar MGF Construction Pvt. Ltd., the SPC for the consortium led by Emaar
Properties PJSC, Dubai and 017 Ltd. Both the bids were conditional and to that
extent deficient. However, DDA's Evaluation Committee for technical proposal, which
first considered the two technical proposals on 15 June 2007, summarily rejected the
proposal of DLF Ltd., but chose to engage in a series of correspondence with its
financial consultants/chief legal advisor/ legal agencies and Emaar MGF Construction
Pvt. Ltd to find solutions to address the deficiencies in the technical proposal of
Emaar MGF. Finally, on 28 June 2007, Emaar MGF Construction Pvt. Ltd. was
declared technically qualified for opening the financial bid on the strength of an
undertaking, rather than actual compliance with the terms of the RFP and RFQ, by
accepting the conditional! proposal of Emaar MGF Construction Pvt. Ltd. while
rejecting the bid of DLF Ltd, the technical evaluation committee effectively eliminated
financial competition, with the approval of VC, DDA.

5.151 In view of the Audit findings that both the bids of M/s Emaar MGF consortium
and 017 Ltd. were conditionai/deficient, the Committee desired to know the reasons


135

for out rightly rejecting the bid of DLF while the bid of M/S Emaar MGF consortium was
accepted for consideration. In reply, the Ministry of Urban Development inter-alia
stated that M/s DLF Limited submitted conditional bid and hence was rejected. The
bid of M/s Emaar MGF consortium was not conditional/deficient and they were
declared successful only after ensuring that they fulfilled the bid parameters and no
relaxation/concession was granted to them.

5.152 Explaining the reasons for rejecting the bid of DLF Ltd., a representative of DDA
deposed in evidence as under:

"they wanted that the performance security should be reduced to %100
crore. They wanted the share of flats, not two-third and one-third; they wanted
to increase their share up to 80 percent. And the third is, the most crucial is,
they wanted 28 months to complete the project. By that, we would have
exceeded the final Games dates, Sir. These are the three conditions with which
the DDA had to reject the DLF.”

5.153 Asked to indicate the reasons for not rejecting the bid of Emaar Consortium
when DDA came to know that Emaar MGF Consortium Private Ltd. (SPC of Emaar
MGF Consortium) was an existing company at RFQ stage and ineligible on three pre
qualification criteria in its individual capacity, the Ministry of Urban Development inter-
alia stated that Emaar MGF Construction Pvt. Ltd Company, a Shell Company, which
was existing before the RFQ stage was owned by Emaar MGF Land Pvt. Ltd. (99.99
per cent share) whereas it was the consortium of 4 companies including Emaar MGF
Land Pvt. Ltd that had submitted their application for pre-qualification at RFQ stage.
The consortium fulfilled the parameters of RFQ and hence was pre-qualified along with
10 other companies. The same consortium came as a company (viz. Emaar MGF
Construction Pvt. Ltd.) at RFP stage in the shape and the manner indicated by them in
the MOU at RFQ stage. The Ministry further reasoned that any company on its own
had no character but legal constitution of shareholder. Therefore, although M/s Emaar
MGF Construction Pvt. Ltd was existing at RFQ stage, it was only a name given to the
company primarily held by M/s Emaar MGF Land Pvt. Ltd. The real character of M/s
Emaar MGF Construction Pvt. Ltd. came into existence as and when the 4 entities
buy/subscribe share in this company. Hence, M/s Emaar MGF Construction Pvt. Ltd
prior to this date of buying/subscribing of shares by 4 consortium members was a


136

company different from the bidder company. It was the consortium of 4 companies
which had submitted application at RFQ stage and found eligible.

5.154 Not convinced, the Committee categorically desired to know the reasons for not
disqualifying/rejecting the bid of Emaar consortium when DDA came to know that the
lead member did not directly hold 26 percent interest in the SPC. In reply, the Ministry
of Urban Development have stated in a note as under:

"Both the RFQ and RFP had merely indicated that the lead bidder should hold
26% equity in the Special Purpose Company (SPC). Nowhere the RFQ and
REP mentioned that the lead member should hold 26% direct equity in the SPC.
in any case at RFP stage, the lead partner held indirect 26% equity in the SPC.
Requirement of lead bidder to have 26% equity in the company was prescribed
with a view to ensure that the lead partner exercises voting rights pertaining to
26% of the total voting right in the company. Further, the eligibility parameters
for the consortium were so fixed with a view to ensure that the (i) same
consortium, if selected, execute the project and (ii) lead partner exercised the
voting rights pertaining to his 26% equity. In the present case, as required,
Emaar Properties PUSC, the lead partner, exercised the voting rights pertaining
to his 26% equity of the total voting right in the Emaar MGF Construction
Private Limited, which was the main requirement for becoming lead partner.
Further, the company selected for the project, implement the project with the
same consortium members including lead member, who had 26% equity in the
company.

As regards the issue of indirect equity at the RFP stage is concerned, it may be
mentioned that as per press note no 2(2005) of Department of Industrial Policy
and Promotion, SIA (FC Division), Ministry of Commerce and Industries, Gol
allows foreign investors to invest in India in real estate project only when a
project, which meets certain minimum criteria has been awarded to the
company. As such, it was not possible for a lead member of foreign origin to
bring in direct equity during RFP stage. Further, nowhere the RFQ and RFP
had mentioned that the lead member should hold 26% direct equity in the
Special Purpose Company (SPC). At RFP stage lead member had the
requisite 26% shareholding indirectly in the company. Thereafter based on the
legal advice the lead member was asked to bring the direct equity within 6
months of award of project. Further, the said company had not undertaken any
project before the RFP stage. It acted as a SPC only for the Games Village
Project.

DDA qualified Emaar MGF Construction Pvt. Ltd after the legal advice was
received from M/s Amarchand Mangaldas and Shri Gaurav Sarin wherein it was
opined that the bid submitted by M/s Emaar MGF Construction Pvt. Ltd. can be
accepted and project awarded to them after an undertaking is given that the
lead member namely Emaar Properties PJSC, Dubai shall own 26% of the


137

direct equity share capital of M/s Emaar MGF Construction Pvt Ltd within a
period of 6 months from the date it received the letter of intent from DDA. ॥ was
further opined the above decision of DDA is valid, legal and fair in the light of
RFP, RFQ and applicable laws.”

5.155 The Committee then desired to know whether the undertaking of 26 per cent
direct shareholding by lead member was obtained from the lead member. In reply, the
Ministry of Urban Development submitted that the undertaking of 26 per cent of direct
shareholding by the lead member was obtained from the bidder company, namely,
Emaar MGF Construction Pvt. Ltd. of which M/s Emaar Properties PJSC was a lead
member. Based on the legal opinion of M/s Amarchand Mangal Das and views of
Chief Legal Advisor, DDA (from Delhi Higher Judicial Services of the rank of Addl.
Distt. Judge) as member of the Evaluation Committee, an undertaking obtained from
the bidder company was considered just and adequate.

5.156 On being asked whether the Ministry/DDA had assessed the reasons for having
only one consortium in the fray for such a prestigious project, the Ministry of Urban
Development clarified that 11 parties were pre-qualified. However no party had
submitted its bid by the due date and time. Discussions with pre-qualified bidders had
revealed the need for amending some terms and conditions of RFP. However, despite
the amendments, only two bidders had submitted their bid. One bid was conditional

and hence rejected.

5.157 On being enquired about the main reasons cited by the pre-qualified bidders for
not submitting bids at RFP stage, the Ministry of Urban Development responded as
under:-
e At the time of RFP market conditions were quite adverse and the
developers did not find it very attractive anymore.

e The environmental issues for the development of village on that site
was undecided by that time.

e. Strict terms and conditions laid by OC/Event Knowledge Services
(EKS) was conceived as a potential financial and operational risk by
the developers."


138

5.158 During evidence, the Committee enquired about the reasons for not re-

tendering when the number of bidders of the project of this nature had gone down from

15 to 2. In reply, the Secretary, Urban Development deposed as under:

"Sir, it is quite obvious to me looking into the records that two things were
weighing throughout the procedure. One was the extreme time constraint. It
had to happen on a certain date. It was unusual as compared to the normal
Government project where there is no very definite date. | am talking about a
project of this nature. Secondly, the whole thing was a novelty for the
Government as a whole like hosting a game of this nature and that too in the
capital city, which was generally developed very well already. To create de
novo a lot of facilities in a big scale are the two things which were weighing
heavily."

5.159 The Committee asked whether time constraint and delay in the overall planning

and projections resulted in restricting the number of prospective bidders. In reply, the

Secretary, Urban Development Submitted:

५४.

"On this issue, the time constraint was not an issue. It is the market response,
which was there. | made an overall submission for over-arching issues. We
examined case-by-case and we are not taking shelter behind time constraint for
every single activity. In some activity, it may be there. Here, there is no time
constraint and it was the market response, which was like that. Terms and
conditions were designed and only two bidders felt confident to respond to the
call and that is how, we got only two bidders."

Short time for bidding after addendum

5.160 According to Audit, the addendum to RFP issued on 8 June 2007, introduced
significant changes to the bid conditions. The addendum was approved by VC, DDA

who also recorded on file that LG, Delhi had been informed about the changes. The

changes in the conditions brought in by the addendum were as follows:

DDA's share in the FAR reduced to one third from half;
Bank Guarantee reduced from Rs 500 crore to % 400 crore;

Penalty for delays in achieving milestones reduced from हैं 15-50 lakh
per day to ₹ 15-20 lakh per day, along with relaxation in quantum of work and
time for the 1*tand 2™ Milestone;

The time allowed to bid was only 7 days. DDA stated it considered the number
of days allowed enough for adjusting bids to these amendments. However,
Audit found that two agencies indicated that the time allowed for bidding was
insufficient;


139

e The consortium of Namkwang-SPSL-PDI-CMCL lodged a complaint with DDA
indicating that due to insufficient time, the consortium, despite being keenly
interested, was unable to bid; and

e DLE Ltd, while submitting the financial proposal on the due date, requested for
an extension of time for 21 days to submit its technical proposal.

5.161 Audit pointed out that the short period permitted for submitting bids acted as a
deterrent to competition. Strangely, of the 11 shortlisted parties, many of whom were
established construction companies, only two responded on the last date of
submission of bid. Moreover, the responsibility for obtaining statutory approvals was
cast on the bidder, while DLF had sought assurance from DDA in this regard. Finally,
only one financial bid was opened and accepted, effectively denying DDA the benefit
of competition that would have ensured that it secured the maximum upfront amount.

5.162 The Committee desired to know the rationale for granting only seven days to
the pre-qualified agencies, after inclusion of addendum through which significant
changes were made. In reply, the Ministry of Uroan Development inter-alia stated as
under:

"The RFP was issued to pre-qualified bidders on April 24, 2007. A pre-bid
conference was held on May 15 2007 and final date for submission of bid was
June 15, 2007. Thus, the bidders had the RFP document for about 45 days
before the final amendment of June 8, 2007 and 8 days thereafter prior to
submission of bid. Further, the bidders were on board at all key stages during
discussion, pre-bid matters and other meetings.

Considering that the original RFP was issued 45 days earlier and that the
amendments issued were in consultation with bidders and that too only in
respect of certain provision of RFP, 8 days thereafter were considered sufficient
for the pre-qualified bidders to submit the bid."

5.163 The Committee then enquired whether any prequalified bidder made request for
extension of time. In reply, the Ministry of Urban Development stated that no
prequalified bidder except M/s CMCL requested for extension of time limit for
submission of date after the issue of addendum.

5.164 Asked to state whether the request of M/s Namkwang SPSL-PDI-CMCL for
extension of time was considered, the Ministry of Urban Development stated that M/s
CMCL made a complaint only on 157 June 2007 i.e. on the last date of bid
submission, requesting for more time to bid and at the same time also expressed
requirement of additional relaxations of bid parameters like higher share in


140

apartments, jower upfront amount, etc. The question of extending time for submission
of bid that too with relaxation of bid parameters could not be agreed to when DDA had
already received two bids on June 15, 2007.

VI. Floor Area Ratio Violation

5.165 Audit found that Emaar-MGF constructed Floor Area Ratio (FAR) in excess of
the sanctioned plan as well as the maximum permissible limits under the Master Plan
of Dethi as indicated in the following table:

Parameter FAR achievable/achieved
As per agreement 201280 sqm
As per sanctioned plan 205140 sqm
Maximum permissible under the Master Plan 220005 sqm
for Delhi-2021
Completion plan 231000 sqm

5.166 Audit also pointed out that Emaar MGF failed to notify DDA, as per the building
by-laws, of the completion of work up to plinth level to enable DDA to confirm that it
was in accordance with the sanctioned plan. All construction in excess of the FAR
permissible under the Master Plan of Delhi was unauthorised. In case the FAR as
constructed in excess of the sanctioned plan, but within the Master Plan limits, was
regularised by following due process, DDA should secure its one third share in it and
the proportionate increase in upfront money as contracted, as it should do for FAR
achieved in excess of the agreement as well (action on which was still pending as of
January 2011). However, the FAR constructed by the Developer was in excess of that
permitted under the MPD -2021, valued at ¥ 130.17 crore @ Rs 11000 /sqft and it
amounted to an undue benefit to the Developer, unless DDA decided to impound or

demolish it.

5.167 The Committee desired to be apprised of the reasons for allowing the developer
to construct excess FAR, even beyond the permissible/compoundable limit. In reply,
the Ministry of Urban Development inter-alia stated in a note as under:

“As per the practice in building Department of DDA, the measurement of FAR is

taken at the time when the completion plan is submitted by the proponent.
Similarly in the case of the Games Village joint measurement were undertaken


141

after the project developer submitted the completion plan to DDA. It was at this
movement of time that the excess FAR came to notice. DDA had taken action
as under:

() The excess 17 dwelling units, which were being constructed in the basement,
were demolished by the Project Developer as per the inspection carried out on
17.06.2011.

(ji) Regarding the excess FAR which is coming within the compoundable limit the
compounding charges and the upfront amount has already been demanded
from the Project Developer.

(iii) For excess FAR, beyond compounding, the matter has been referred to the
Ministry of Urban Development vide letter dated 10.08.2011 for taking a
decision in this matter."

5.168 Not satisfied, the Committee asked whether any action was taken against the

developer for not notifying DDA about the work up to plinth level to enable DDA to

confirm that it was in accordance with the sanctioned plans. In reply, the Ministry of

Urban Development stated in a note as under:

“Keeping in view the fact that the work of Development / Construction of the
CWG Village was of prime importance, the work was started in anticipation of
the approval of the building plans. The ex-post-facto approval of the Hon'ble Lt.
Governor of Delhi was taken on 12.03.2008 for start of the work prior to the
sanction of building plans. Since the construction work had already started, no
notice for commencement of work as required under provision of BBL 1983
under clause 7.2.1 was given. No notice was given for B-1 plinth level permit
under BBL Clause 7.2.2. Under the provisions of BBL-83, under clause
No.6.2.7 a supervision Certificate from the Architect is taken under clear
assurance that the construction shall be carried out under his supervision and
the work shall be carried out according to the Sanction Plan. Therefore, under
the said provision, it was the responsibility of the Project Developer and the
Architect to make constructions as per the provision of BBL and sanctioned
Building Plan Action against Developer has been taken for such violations.
Action against the architect for not abiding by clause 6.2.7 of the BBL 83 is
contemplated to be taken. "

5.169 In the Audit Report No. 23 of 2009-10, Union Government (Civil) Autonomous
Bodies, the C&AG of India had already commented that the developer had constructed

excess FAR and DDA should recover the proportionate upfront amount. Asked to state

whether the Audit observation was taken into consideration by DDA, the Ministry of

Urban Development stated in a note as under:

"It is true that the Audit Report No.23 of 2009-10 had commented that the
Developer had constructed excess FAR and DDA should recover the


142

proportionate upfront amount but the fact is that it is only at the time when the
completion certificate is applied for that the total measurement of the building
constructed at site undertaken and excess FAR if any calculated. In this
particular case, also excess FAR was revealed when a joint inspection was
carried out by DDA and the Project Developer. A decision has therefore been
taken that FAR as per the sanctioned plan plus 5% compounding is to be
regularized after payment of upfront amount as well as compounding charges.
Demand has already been raised in this regard upon the Project Developer."
5.170 The Committee further desired to know the specific action taken by 008 10 - (i)
recover proportionally increased upfront amount; (ii) secure/get one third portion in the
residential project; and (iii) recover the amount (over हैं 100.00 crore) from the
developer on account of construction of FAR beyond permissible/compoundable limit.

In reply, the Ministry of Urban Development responded as under:

"008 has taken the following action:

(i) Demand for recovery of upfront amount has already been raised against the
Project Developer. However, the payment is yet to be received.

(ii) As per the draw of lots, 41/3" share of the apartments was apportioned to
DDA. These apartments are in possession of DDA and would be disposed
off once the completion certificate is obtained.

(ii) | For recovery from the Developer on account of construction of FAR beyond
permissible/ compoundable limit the matter has been referred to the
Ministry of Urban Development for taking a view."

5.171 On being enquired whether any sealing/demolition had been initiated by DDA
on account of FAR constructed by the developer beyond permissible limit, the Ministry
of Urban Development clarified that sealing orders were issued on 10.08.2011 for an
area measuring 11964.71 sq. mtrs. which was beyond the compoundable limit, for
which the Developer moved to the Court of Hon’ble ATMCD. The ATMCD further
directed the DDA to consider these sealing orders as Show Cause Notice.
Accordingly, hearing was given to the project Developer. Thereafter, ‘the Speaking
Orders were issued on 27.10.2011’ as per direction of Hon'ble ATMCD and the sealing
was done on 31.10.2011.

5.172 In view of the Ministry of Urban Development's statement that the Monitoring
Committee was responsible for overseeing the quality of construction only, the
Committee asked whether the Monitoring Committee did justice to its assigned role
considering the adverse media reports on the poor quality of construction when the


143

athletes started moving in. In reply, the Ministry of Urban Development stated as

under:

"The media reports highlighted the following two things:

(i) The flats were not made fit for habitation even till a time very close to the
mega international event;

(ii) There were instances of seepage in the basement of the building.

The monitoring committee has discussed the reports of the 3” party and
taken the compliance from the Project Developer of the rectification
work. These compliance reports were given to the 3 party for
verification, which have been taken note by them in the subsequent
reports. Thus, the Monitoring Committee did everything possible to
attend to these problems to the entire satisfaction of all concerned.”

5.173 The Committee were informed that for excess FAR beyond compounding, the

matter had been referred to the Ministry of Urban Development by DDA in August,

2011 for taking a decision. Asked to state the decision taken by the Ministry in this

regard, the Ministry of Urban Development clarified under:

Vu.

“For the excess area beyond compoundable limit, DDA referred the matter to
the Ministry of Urban Development on 10.8.2011. The matter was also
considered by the designated Group of Ministers who, in their meeting held on
16.1.2012 decided that Ministry of Urban Development should direct DDA to
resolve the outstanding contractual issues in accordance with the law.
Accordingly, MoUD has directed DDA vide letter No.K-1201 1/3/2011-DD-iB dt.
09.02.2012 that outstanding contractual issues including that of permissible
area be resolved in accordance with relevant provisions of Master Plan,
Building bye-laws/regulations, and the Project Development agreement, by
obtaining the legal opinion and keeping in view the financial implications for the
Authority in respect of various available options. It may also be stated that the
project developer had filed an appeal before Appellate Tribunal of MCD
(ATMCD) challenging the decision of DDA not to grant completion certificate to
the whole constructed area. ATMCD vide order dated 14.5.2012 has remanded
the matter back to DDA. In compliance to above orders of ATMCD, a show
cause notice vide No. F.7(54)/2012/Bldg/55 dt. 13.7.2012 has been issued to
the project developer. In the mean time, project developer has also filed an
appeal before the District Judge on 19.7.2012 against the orders of ATMCD,
which has been dismissed. Now the matter is before the Joint Director (Bldg.)
and High Court of Delhi. Action shall be taken by DDA after outcome of above
court cases.”

Revision of Milestones

5.174 As pointed out by Audit, the developer could achieve only the 6" and 7"

milestones (of the total 9 milestones) as per the original schedule. Liquidated


144

damages were leviable for delays in achieving of 4° to 57 milestones and thereafter for
the 8 and 9" milestones. However, the HPC extended the dates for the 1% to 4"
milestones, but the developer could still not achieve the revised 4" and the unrevised
5" milestones. Audit found that हैं 81.85 crore liquidated damages refundable on the
achievement of the 6'" milestones, were not recovered from the developer resulting in
an undue benefit of ¥ 7.36 crore toward interest costs.

5.175 Further, non-achievement of the 8 and g milestones attracted a non-
refundable liquidated damage of %108.9 crore, of which DDA recovered Rs 90 crore in
October 2010, by invoking the Bank Guarantee of हैं 183 crore at the direction of
Ministry of Urban Development, Government of India. DDA had assured that it would
recover interest on the liquidated damages for delays in achieving the 2™, 4" and 5"
milestones and the claim for remaining liquidated damages of 16.90 crore for non
achievement of the 8" and 9" milestones had been raised.

5.176 The Committee enquired about the rationale for revision of milestones by DDA
instead of imposing liquidated damages when the developer was fully responsible for
developing the project, and DDA was there only for monitoring the project. In reply,
the Ministry Urban Development infer-alia stated as under:

"1. A request was received from Project Developer (PD)in February 2008 for
revision of milestones on the following grounds:

a. The milestones mentioned in the RFP document were based on
the assumption that no basement will be constructed and thus
minimal excavation is required. However due to various
indeterminable issues, which include height restrictions, minimum
4000 rooms and configuration of flats from saleability point of view
and parking as per MPD 2021, the PD had to construct double
basement. This required an additional excavation of about 4 lakhs
cubic meter.

b. The first milestone did not account for site mobilization, soil
investigation, test piles etc. which itself takes 2 months.

0. The progress of works has been hampered due to various
reasons, including onsite protests by NGOs, pending court cases
etc.

d. Since DDA delayed the issue of NOC to the PD for mortgage and
assignment, the pace of work could not be expedited due to
paucity of resources.


vi.

vii.

viii.

ix.

145

e. Approval of building dept. was received as late as in February
2008, the prerequisite for sanction of building plan are clearance
from Delhi Fire Services and DUAC as such it takes 4 to 5 months
to clear the building plans.

The request of PD was discussed at length in DDA and placed before
High Powered Committee (HPC) for consideration.

HPC, in its meeting held on 08.04.08, took into account the plea of PD
and the facts of the matter such as height restrictions due to an objection
from Akshardham authorities and protests by NGO, pending cases etc
and desired CE (SEZ) to submit detailed calculations indicating on-site
physical and financial progress of works.

In response, CE (SEZ) submitted the calculations showing the on-site
physical as well as financial volume of work done on the date of 14
milestone, which was found to be more than what was required to be
achieved on date of 1* milestone i.e. 11.02.08 as per RFP document. It
was also submitted that going by the proposed program given by PD and
the current progress of work, the PD will be able to achieve physical as
well as financial volume of work which will be more than what is required
to be done as per the 2™ milestone also 1.8. 11.05.08, but they will not be
able to achieve specific physical features mentioned in the 27% milestone
as per the RFP.

Based on the above calculations and the facts of the matter, HPC, in its
meeting on 21.04.2008 recommended for revision of first two milestones
to 11.05.08 and 30.07.08 respectively with a proviso that in case the PD
defaults on achievement of any revised milestone, penalty would be
levied as per PDA.

Based on the above recommendation of HPC, milestone 1 & 2 were
extended by DDA after receiving approval from competent authority.

The first and second milestone were achieved by PD on 10 May 2008
and 10 August 2008 (delay of 11 days) respectively.

In August 2008, a request was received from PD vide his letter dated
August 21, 2008 for extension of milestones 3 & 4 to 30 Jan 2009 and 15
dune 2009 respectively mentioning several reasons.

The request was discussed at length in DDA and in the HPC meeting
dated November 5, 2008.

It was clarified that PD required 180 days for completion of milestone 3. Due to
extension of milestone 1 & 2, the time gap has reduced to 100 days. Since
shuttering takes 20 days time cycle for completing one floor structure, the time
gap of 100 days is not adequate. As per the calculation, the time required for
achieving the 3 milestone is 6 months i.e. 20.02.09. However, PD had asked


146

for time till 30 Jan 2009, which is lesser. It was also noted that this period
cannot be contracted even after deploying more resources.

Similarly, as per RFP, time required for achieving 4" milestone was 180 days.
After rescheduling of 3% milestone, the time remaining between 37 and 41
milestone was 96 days against the original period of 180 days. PD had asked
for 136 days instead of 180 days. It was also stated that for proper execution of
work, the request was justified since the speed depended on cycle of supply of
1 flooring and other materials, which was already maximized.

HPC, in its meeting on 23.10.2008, considered the above explanation and
recommended agreed to revise the 3% and 47" milestone to 30" Jan 2009 and
15" June 2009 respectively. PD had also stated that the milestones would be
converging on 30.06.09 and there was no change in completion date. HPC
agreed to recommend the extension of milestone with a proviso that this would
not be further extended and penal action in case of non-achievement of
milestones.

x. Based on the above recommendation of HPC, milestone 3 & 4 were

extended by DDA after receiving approval from competent authority.

xi. During the course of execution of assignment, PD had delayed the
achievement of milestone 2, 4, 5, 8 and 9. Accordingly, DDA had levied
the following penalties from the Project Developer towards the above-
mentioned delays.

° Milestone 2: Rs 1.65 Cr. Since the PD had not paid the said
damages within 7 days, DDA had taken a Bank Guarantee
towards the same, which was returned subsequently on
achievement of milestone 3 by Project Developer within the
stipulated time.

° Milestone 4: Rs 17.85 Cr. Since the PD had not paid the said
damages within 7 days, DDA had taken a Bank Guarantee
towards the same, which was returned subsequently on
achievement of milestone 6 by Project Developer within the
stipulated time.

e Milestone 5:- Milestone 5 & 6 were certified by Monitoring
Completion on the same day i.e. 29.01.10. Since the next
milestone i.e. 6 was already achieved within the stipulated time,
DDA had decided not to levy the LD.

० Milestone 8 & 9- Rs 83.70 Cr on 16.10.10. Since PD had not paid
the required amount, DDA had invoked the performance security
of Rs 183 Cr out of which Rs 90 Cr had been encashed on
23.10.10 due to status quo ordered by Hon'ble High Court.
Further claim of Rs 16.9 Cr (Rs 106.9Cr of LD as on 13.12.10
less 90 Cr encashment permitted by Honb’ble HC) was also


147

made by DDA on 28.01.11 after certification of achievement of
milestone 8 & 9."

5.177 On being asked whether the recovery of = 16.90 crore and interest amount on
account of liquidated damages had been received from the developer, the Ministry of

Urban Development have stated as under:

" As per the Project Development Agreement M/s Emaar MGF Construction
Pvt, Ltd. could not meet the 8" and 9" milestone. Therefore, liquidated
damages as per the agreement were to be enforced. Total liquated damages
(LD) of %106.90 crores have been worked out against the PD for delayed
completion of the project. DDA encashed the performance bank guarantee of
%183 crores to adjust this claim. The Hon'ble High Court of Delhi permitted DDA
credit of $90 crores and has stayed the encashment of balance of %93 crores.
Thus, %16.90 crores of balance LD could not be encashed due to intervention
by Hon'ble High Court. The court case is still pending in the High Court of Delhi.
Thus, DDA acted in the matter but due to the court case could not realisé this
amount of 716.90 crores.

From the above explanation, it is clear that DDA acted swiftly and in
accordance with PDA but due to the court case, same amount could not be
realised. However, claims are filed in the Hon'ble High Court in the pending
litigation with PD on encashment of the Bank Guarantee of $183 crores."

Vill. Non recovery of Infrastructure Charges

5.178 According to Audit, DDA failed to recover infrastructure charges from the
developer in respect of its share of the cost of the Water Treatment Plant and Sewage
Treatment Plant created by DJB and demanded from DDA.

5.179 Asked to state the current status of the recovery of infrastructure charges i.e.
on account of STP, WTP/water charges ete, the Ministry of Urban Development inter-
alia clarified that DDA had encashed the bank guarantee of %183 crores to realize the
liquidated damages and infrastructure charges payable by the Project Developer in
October, 2010. Against above encashment, the project developer had approached
High Court of Delhi. Credit of ¥90 crore was permitted by the High Court and credit of
293 crore was kept in abeyance. These claims of infrastructure charges were the part
of arguments of the DDA before the Hon'ble High Court.

IX. Expenditure on Installation of Signages

5.180 Audit scrutiny revealed that the contract with the developer included installation


148

of signages to be decided by the Monitoring Committee in consultation with the
Organising Committee. However, a separate contract for installing signages in the
residential complex was also given by 008 to M/s Meroform india Pvt. Ltd. for 0.11
crore without any corresponding recovery from the developer.

5.181 The Committee enquired about the reasons for installation of the signages in
the residential complex by DDA when these were to be installed by the Developer as
per the agreement. In reply, the Ministry of Urban Development submitted that the
signages required by the Organizing Committee were provided in the open areas of
the residential complex for look of the game. These signages were not covered under
PDA. The developer was to provide signages in the towers, staircases and apartments
and the same had been provided by the developer. However, as pointed by the Audit,
DDA had raised this claim against the PD. This claim has been included in the court
case where PD had challenged the decision of DDA to encash the performance bank
guarantee. Further action shall be taken after disposal of the case by the Hon'ble High
Court.

x Quality of Construction

5.182 According to Audit, Emaar MGF awarded most of the construction work for the
residential complex to Ahluwalia Contracts (India) Ltd. Central Building Research
Institute, Roorkee (CBRI) was appointed as the Third Party Independent Quality
Inspection Agency only in May 2008, eight months after the start of work, by which
time most of the foundation work had been executed. As such, CBRI was unable to
assure the quality of the foundation laid. CBRI submitted thirteen reports between
June 2008 and October 2010 based on its inspection of the construction in which it
reported serious lapses in construction work. Some of the major deficiencies reported
by CBRI included:

(i) Deficiencies in ductile detailing of secondary reinforcement (providing

appropriate hooks for the stirrups and lateral ties);

(ii) Lack of cover to reinforcing steel;

(iii) Improper beam-column joints;

(iv) Improper alignment of columns;

(५) Improper water-proofing treatment in retaining walls and Grade slab; and


149

(vi) Difference in the levels of grade slabs.

5.183 CBRI, in its report of July 2009, concluded that "on seeing the permeability of
the concrete and the corrosion of reinforcing steel, it gives an impression that the
service life of these towers cannot be more than 20 years These towers demand a lot
more expenditure for the repair and retrofitting beyond this period." DDA, however,
failed to take timely action against the developer/contractor and negligence on the part
of the contractor continued.

5.184 The Committee enquired about the reasons for delay in the appointment of third
party independent quality inspection agency. In reply, the Ministry of Urban
Development stated that the Project Development Agreement was signed on 14"
September 2007 and at least a period of 3 months was needed to mobilize the
resources. As such, the provision in PDA was made vide clause No.2.39 on page 206
to appoint the 3rd Party Quality Assurance Agency within 3 months of signing of the
PDA. The process was started by DDA in mid November, 2007 and 2 quotations ie.
one from M/s RITES and the other from CBRI were received in December, 2007. M/s
RITES quoted a fee of ३ crore and M/s CBRI quoted %4 crore. The case was initiated
for the approval of the Competent Authority in 1st week of January, 2008. The Ministry
further stated that when the case was under process of approval, M/s CBRI voluntarily
at its own sent an e-mail dated 23.01.2008 reducing its fee from %4 crore to 71.40
crore. Owing to above situation, the file was withdrawn and it was decided to invite
open quotations through wide press publicity from Government Institutions for the sake
of transparent and fair process of selection. This time also only above 2 agencies
quoted for the project. The rate quoted by M/s RITES was %2.96 crore and M/s CBRI
21.45 crore. The case was again initiated for the approval of the Competent Authority.
This resulted in the delay in appointment of 3° party quality assurance agency. This
also resulted in saving of %1.5 crore.

5.185 On being asked whether the delay was a serious lacuna considering the
location of the site and height of the structure, the Ministry of Urban Development
responded that it was true that CBRI, Roorkee, was appointed in May, 2008 as a third
party quality assurance agency. The CBRI conducted non-destructive tests on the
quality of pile/foundations and certified that the quality of piles/foundations was within


150

the acceptable norms. These certifications were included in their report No.2. Further,
before CBRI, in house quality test checks were also carried out regularly by the quality
control laboratory set up onsite by the developer along with DDA engineers who also
certified that the quality of work was as per norms prescribe under the BIS codes. The
fact about existence of the QA/QC laboratory was confirmed by the CBRI in its 2nd
report in para 6. The developers also carried out non-destructive tests on the piles
casted before CBRI through an Independent Agency. The tests were also conducted
on the materials and all these records were given to CBRI, which they mentioned in
their report No.6. Thus, the quality of the work executed before CBRI was

ascertained.

5.186 When asked whether DDA/Monitoring Committee ensured that the developer
took timely and effective action on the lapses reported by CBRI, Roorkee, the Ministry
of Urban Development clarified that the Monitoring Committee of the Project had
discussed the reports of 37 party quality assurance agency and directed the PD to the
rectify deficiencies and submit action taken reports. The PD after doing the needful
had submitted the ATR, which had been handed over to CBRI for verification. The
CBRI in subsequent reports noted the contents of ATR. It showed that Monitoring
Committee appointed by DDA had taken action on the reports of 3° party quality
assurance agency. The major defects had been rectified by the PD but in such huge
construction recurrence of some routine defects could not be ruled out.

XI. Unfinished Games Village

5.187 Audit pointed out that Emaar MGF was to hand over the completed project
(including landscaping work) on 1 April 2010, in a ready to use/liveable condition, with
no pending construction, unfinished work, construction equipment debris, construction
material etc. on the site. The project could not be completed even at the time of the
Commonwealth Games, 2010 and the towers were handed over to DDA between June
and August 2010 for furnishing of the flats by Indian Tourism Development
Corporation (ITDC) and the Organising Committee. These flats were not
completed/finished and numerous defects were noticed by DDA. These deficiencies
were in addition to the various structural issues pointed out by CBRI in its report. The
main defects noticed by DDA were as under:


151

e Undulating basement floor and absence of flooring (which was hidden under
debris);

° .Heavy leakage of ground water in all the lift pits (73 in number) indicating that
no water treatment had been done in the lift pits;
¢ Defective water proofing of terrace, resulting in seepage in apartments;
e Improper slope of floor in bathrooms;
e Shafts not covered, leading to collection of water in basements;
e Supply of single phase power in some apartments;
° {mproper coverage of expansion joints;
e Gunny bags embedded in concrete surfaces in the basement,
e Chokages in the drain pipes; and
e Landscaping not completed and no arrangement of water for the landscaped
area.
5.188 Some of these deficiencies were attended to, in an emergent situation, by DDA
and agencies of the Government of NCT of Delhi (Audit were unable to determine the
amount spent by these agencies on this activity separately). Major construction
defects remained unattended during the Commonwealth Games, 2010. Till date, Audit
did not have any record to indicate that these defects were subsequently rectified by
the developer, nor did Audit have any evidence that monetary adjustments had been

made.

5.189 Due to the unfinished condition of the residential complex, the Organising
Committee made alternate arrangements for the accommodation of the delegations of
41 countries that were entitled to stay at the Games Village during the period 16" to
290 September 2010, at a cost of %0.84 crore.

5.190 An additional expenditure of % 4.16 crore was also incurred for shifting the
polyclinic, dope control centre and resident centre from its originaily identified location
in the lower ground floor to a temporary structure (overlay) due to likelihood of
flooding; sewerage and drainage problem; circuitous approach and low height of ramp
which hindered entrance of ambulances.

5.191 On being asked about the reasons for these defects and the action taken
against the developer and officers (supervising/monitoring the project) responsible for


152

this situation, the Ministry of Urban Development have stated that the
defect/deficiencies mentioned by the C&AG team such as supply of single phase in
some of the rooms, in proper coverage of extension joints, chokage in drain pipes and
inadequate arrange of water for landscaping were mostly operational deficiencies
which were generally noticed when the building was put to use. Majority of these
deficiencies were rectified by the Project Developer (PD) after these were notified by
DDA before the buildings were occupied by the players/officials. With regard to
seepage in basement, DDA constituted a Committee after the Games for the
Technical and Quality Audit of the project headed by Dr. P.S. Rana, Former Chairman,
HUDCO. The defects of basement water proofing and other defects pointed by this
Committee were being rectified by the PD. The staff of DDA was only responsible for
monitoring the progress and not for execution, as such no action was warranted
against anyone. DDA staff at the time of taking over its share of the apartment shall
check the work thoroughly. However, the PD had been penalized but he had
approached the court.

5.192 The Committee then desired to know the penal action taken against the
developer for not providing clear space for polyclinic. In reply, the Ministry of Urban
Development submitted that the construction of polyclinic in the basement was
opposed by the Health Department of Government of NCT of Delhi. The Minister of
Health, Government of NCT of Delhi had requested the Vice Chairman, DDA to shift
the polyclinic to the surface from the basement. The team of Doctors of the OC had
also objected to the location of polyciinic in the basement. The Organizing Committee
had also objected to its location in the basement with the plea that it did not have
‘ disposal of the sewer and water. DDA’s proposal to provide automatic pumping
arrangement of sewer was also doubted by the OC as it might be a nuisance in case
of failure of the pumping system. Since, it was an international event, no chance was
taken by the OC. Owing to above reason, the polyclinic was relocated to the ground.

5.193 The Ministry further stated that the objection of the OC and the Health
Department was received in January, 2010 while seepage of water in the basement
had taken place in August, 2010. Thus, the decision to relocate polyclinic was not due
to condition of the basement but due to the reasons that the agencies responsible for
the operation of health services during the games did not accept it in the basement. In


153

PD Agreement the project developer of the residential apartments, no sewerage
system/disposal was to be provided in the basement. Thus, no action against the PD
could be taken on this account.

5.194 Asked to state the current status of the project, the Ministry of Urban
Development clarified that there was no problem in the apartments and they were
structurally safe. The work of repainting inside the apartments, repair of basement,
waterproofing and upgradation of outer services such as road, parks and landscaping
were being done by the Project Developer.

XI. Non-residential Permanent Structure (Practice Area)- Selection of Suresh of Suresh
Goyal and Associates as Design Consultant

5.195 In February 2006, an RFP for engaging a consultant for designing the Games
Village was issued. Of the 12 bids received, ‘5 were shortlisted based on the
presentations and the contract was awarded to the agency that scored highest on the
basis of a techno-commercial evaluation in February 2007. Audit found that despite
M/s Suresh Goyal and Associates (SGA) being declared the L1 bidder in June 2006,
the issue of Letter of Intent (Lol) was delayed by six months. During this time, the High
Powered Committee (HPC) entered into a rate negotiation with the L1 bidder; (the L1
bidder had quoted Rs 17.25 crore which was reduced to = 15.65 crore) and thereafter
took another three months to issue the Lol. Such inexplicable delays post tendering
were not only detrimental to timelines, but also indicated lack of transparency.

5.196 Further, SGA's high score on technical evaluation was primarily due to the
inclusion of Decathlon SA (with experience of Athens Olympics) as the master planner
and sports architecture specialist, in its consortium and हैं 6.10 crore of the consultants'
fee was justified on the grounds of its engaging international expertise. Subsequently,
Decathlon SA was not associated with the execution of the contract, thus vitiating the
very premise on which SGA was selected. In November 2007, Decathlon SA informed
DDA that despite being a member of the consortium, it had not been associated with
the project due to an unresolved dispute with Suresh Goyal and Associates on the
scope of work and associated fees. Subsequently, as late as May 2008, Suresh Goyal
and Associates informed DDA that the contract deliverables till date had been
submitted without the association of Decathlon SA and sought an ex-post facto
approval of replacement of Decathlon's staff with certain staff which it had already


154

engaged. This was contrary to the agreed terms, which required any replacement of
the staff would be done only with prior consent of DDA.

5.197 Further, in February 2008, HPC directed retaining 25 percent of the fee of SGA,
but subsequently released the retained amount between May 2008 and October 2008,
on the plea that work was suffering and also considering the overall work done by the
design consultant.

5.198 The Committee enquired about the delay on the part of DDA in issuing LOI to
M/s Suresh Goyal and Associates after the consultant had been declared L1. In reply,
the Ministry of Urban Development submitted that the design consultancy bids were
opened on 4% June, 2006. In the consortium of the consultancy, foreign firms were
also involved due to which the period of negotiation took little extra time and prolonged
till September, 2006. This type of consultancy was being hired by the DDA for the first

time.

5.199 Asked whether any action had been taken against M/s Suresh Goyal and
Associates for not informing in time non-association of the Decathlon SA, the Ministry
of Urban Development submitted that as per the Memorandum of Understanding
(MOU) submitted by the consortium at the time of prequalification, the role of M/s
Decathlon SA was mainly in the master planning. The consortium had utilized more
man-days of other foreign consultants from Australia to deliver the satisfactory
services. For the fault of not informing DDA about non-association of Decathlon in

time, the consultants had been warned.

5.200 The Ministry further clarified that due to non-association of Decathlon SA with
the consortium, no financial joss was caused to DDA as the consortium had delivered
satisfactory services by utilizing more man-days of other international consultants
associated with the consortium.

5.201 As regards the replacement of the staff of Decathlon, the Ministry further
clarified that there was a provision in the agreement for replacement of any partner of
the consortium with equal level of skill personnel which had been deployed by the
consultants and delivered the required services. In view of above, no other action was

required.


155

5.202 On being asked to state the circumstances under which the withheld amount
was released, the Ministry of Urban Development apprised that since satisfactory
services had been provided by the consortium after deployment of other personnel of
equal experience and competence, the withheld payment was released after the
decision of the High Powered Committee meeting held on 23 October, 2008.

XII. Deficiencies in Preparation of Designs, Drawings, Bill of Quantities and and
Estimates

5.203 The design consultant, M/s Suresh Goyal and Associates was responsible for
preparation of designs, drawings, bill of quantities and estimates. Based on a test
check of records, Audit found that several deviations of work/ extra items had to be
undertaken due to the following deficiencies attributable to the design consultant:

¢ Defective estimates (7 cases of = 8.97 crore);

¢ Mismatch in original and working drawings and BOQs (one case of हैं 0.43
crore);

¢ Estimates not prepared as per site requirement (5 cases of 7 5.41 crore);

¢ Slab of the underground reservoir not designed as per vehicular load (one case
of € 0.52 crore); and

e Deviation due to change of specification and scope of work (one case - हैं 1.05
crore)
5.204 On being asked about the action taken by the DDA against SGA (design
consultant) for the deficiencies, the Ministry of Urban Development submitted that.a
penalty of $25 lakh had been deducted from the running bills of the consultants.
Balance penalty was being examined and shall be deducted from the final bill, which
was yet to be paid.

XIV. Selection of Sportina Payce Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. as Developer

5.205 The contract for construction of athletic track, swimming pool, fitness centre and
training hall at the Games Village and three other projects related to venue
development was awarded to M/s Sportina Payce Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. (L1 bidder)
on 17" April, 2008 at a negotiated amount of % 63.10 crore with the approval of the
Works Advisory Board and concurrence of LG, Delhi.


156

5.206 The entire tendering process took 10 months, of which 3 months were spent in
examining the eligibility of the applicants. However, Audit found that M/s Sportina
Payce Construction (India) Pvt. Ltd. (the SPV representing the consortium led by
Payce Consolidated Ltd., Australia; Pynter Dixon Construction Pty. Ltd., Australia;
Sportina Exim Pvt. Ltd., India and Robertson + Marks Architect Pty. Ltd, Australia),
submitted an un-notarised MoU evidencing the consortium, contrary to the RFQ
requirement. Though all four member of the consortium were purportedly incorporated
bodies, only two signed with the companies' common seal. Despite a scrutiny process
of three months, this agency was declared pre-qualified by the Evaluation Committee.
Further, though the company pre-qualified was M/s Sportina Payce Construction
(India) Pvt. Ltd, the tender documents were bought by M/s Sportina Payce
Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd., a different legal entity, registered only on 16 January 2008, but
applied for the tender document on 15 January 2008;

5.207 Audit also observed that as per RFQ condition, any consortium member holding
more than or equal to 26 per cent of the equity shareholding or voting rights, was
required to have net worth equal to 40 percent of the estimated project cost. Sportina
Exim Pvt. Ltd. did not meet these criteria, and circumvented it by showing a
shareholding of 25 percent at the MoU stage. However, it increased its holding to 26
percent shareholding in Sportina Payce Infrastructure (P) Ltd., the company which was
finally awarded the contract. Subsequently, in October 2009, after a payment of हैं
17.79 crore had been made, the contract was terminated on the grounds of
mismanagement, lack of resources, lack of will and vision, engineering skill and
management expertise ~ thus confirming the agencies' ineligibility in the first instance.
Liquidated damages of Rs 5.75 crore were levied on the contractor, but had not yet
been recovered. The balance work of Rs 45.31 crore was re-awarded to Sam (India)
Built Pvt. Ltd. for ₹ 29.59 crore (including an additional work of % 1.18 crore) and to
Shiv Naresh Sports Pvt. Ltd. for हैं 8.93 crore.

5.208 Audit pointed out that evidently the MoU was manipulated to ensure that M/s
Sportina Payce Construction (India) Pvt. Ltd. was prequalified. Ultimately, the
successful bidder was an entity, different from the pre-qualified agency without any
confirmed association with Payce Consolidated Ltd., Australia - the projected lead
member with experience of design and construction of mixed-use development in


157

Australia, on the basis of which the consortium was pre-qualified. DDA also could not
produce any evidence of the association of Payce Consolidated Ltd. in execution
stage as per MoU. |

5.209 The Committee enquired about the action taken against the members of the
Committee who made an ineligible agency qualified as well as against the officials who
were responsible for issuing tender documents and awarding the contract. In reply,
the Ministry of Urban Development clarified that the matter was already under
investigation by the Vigilance Department of DDA. Moreover relevant records had
already been taken by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) and the officers
involved in the tendering process were being questioned by CBI.

5.210 As regards action taken against M/s Sportina Payce Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd, the
Ministry stated that the security deposit amounting to %1.78 crore and performance
guarantee amounting to %3.16 crore of the agency had been forfeited. Apart from
above, the case for debarring future business by the consortium members had been

initiated.

5.211 Asked whether the recovery of Liquidated Damages of हैं 5.75 crore had been
made form M/s Sportina Payce Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd., the Ministry responded that out
of र 5.75 crore imposed as compensation upon the agency, हैं 4.62 crore had been
adjusted from the amount of the final bill which was available with DDA. For the
tecovery of balance amount of %1.13 crore, recovery suit No. CS (OS) No.1240 of
2011 had been filed in the High Court of Delhi as the agency declined to deposit the

same.

XV. Alternate Accommodation at Vasant Kunj-Incomplete Upgradation of Upgradation of
Flats

5.212 According to Audit, in November 2008, DDA in consultation with GM, ITDC,
decided to upgrade 1904 flats already under construction (10-15 percent complete)
and 805 LIG flats (97 percent complete) to the level of three star hotels by March
2010. In April 2009, specifications for the upgrade were finalised and Indian Tourism
Development Corporation Ltd. (100) was engaged on nomination basis for furnishing
the flats. Audit found that of the 2709 flats, only 805 LIG and 182 HIG flats could be


158

upgraded and handed over to ITDC for furnishing. The remaining flats were only 28 to
50 percent complete till November 2010. This was despite an attempt in July 2010 to
fast track the completion of 576 flats by issuing work orders at a premium of 10
percent over justified cost, as approved by LG, Delhi.

5.213 In the above context, when the Committee desired to know the views of the
Ministry of Urban Development, they responded as under:

"In order to meet the shortage of accommodation for visitors during
Commonwealth Games-2010, it was decided by the Group of Ministers (GOM)
on 16.12.2008 and Committee of Secretaries on 22.12.2008 that DDA being the
largest housing construction agency, should be able to deliver 4500 rooms in
Vasant Kunj area. This was besides the fact that lot of approvals were still
pending, but keeping in mind the nation’s prestige/image and in the absence of
no other alternative available at that point of time that DDA came forward for
undertaking this daunting task.

2709 DDA flats were being constructed at Vasant Kunj as a normal housing
scheme and were to be complete by December end, 2010. Revised
specifications were accordingly drawn up and approved by DDA which also,
inter-alia, included installation of lifts etc. A further development, which took
place in June, 2010 was that the Organising Committee put forward a proposal
to house 1600 technical delegates (Referees, Umpires, Anti-doping experts
etc.) in these flats, citing the reason that under the Games Federation
Regulations they could not stay in the Games Village meant for Athletes and,
therefore, would have to be housed separately. To cope with this situation, it
was suggested that out of the 40 towers in the D-6 complex covering 1904 flats
and 4195 rooms, 16 towers comprising 576 flats and 4102 rooms should be
immediately taken up by DDA on as-is-where-is basis and assigned to other
contractors to undertake the remaining work in a time-bound manner. Instead of
going in for calling of tenders for specific packages of work, it was considered
appropriate that reliable construction agencies in whom there is confidence vis-
a-vis their ability to complete the project in time may be authorized by the
Project Chief Engineer to undertake the remaining work as per the CPWD rates
schedule approved in 2007 and further updated upto 2010 by CPWD, with a
further special margin of 10% to cover extra cost involved in time-compression
for project completion."

5.214 The Ministry of Urban Development further apprised:

"For each of these 16 towers withdrawn from the original contractors, an
Executive Engineer will be specifically designated. The 16 XENs will be
supervised by 4 Superintending Engineer, who in turn will work under the
overall control and direction of the Project Chief Engineer. That even after the
great efforts, work order could be complete due to heavy rains during this
period. The work order for remaining one given only for seven towers in Gr.l
and two towers in 0.11. However, work could not be complete due to heavy
rains during this period. The work order for remaining one tower in छा. and six


159

towers in Grill could not be taken up. DDA had put in all its resources at ail
levels, even by taking hard decisions, so that required accommodation could be
made ready before the start of Commonwealth Games-2010. Project was
monitored at the level of the Hon'ble Lt. Governor of Delhi, Cabinet Secretary,
Secretary Tourism, Secretary /UD, VC/ DDA. It is also a well known fact that
during that point of time when the works were going on a war footing not only in
Delhi but also in NCR related to Commonwealth Games-2010, there had been
acute shortage of executing agencies, labour, men and material, storage space,
space for labourer huts, difficulty in achieving required progress was further
compounded by heavy and unprecedented/prolonged monsoon. In-spite of all
these impediments every concerned officer contributed its best in timely
completion of this Project.

It was also clarified that for any work which remains incomplete beyond
September, 2010 or a maximum grace period of 4 days viz. beyond September
14, the 10% premium over the CPWD justified rates would not be payable since
the requirement of completion in time for the Commonwealth Games starting 3
October, 2010 would not be served.

It ig relevant to point out that at this juncture that total number of 1362 rooms
were made available by DDA out of which ITDC furnished only 778 rooms and
only 445 rooms were occupied which clearly shows that it was the ITDC which
was not able to furnish the apartments given to them fully. It was recorded that
as per the information available from Organising Committee, the number of
rooms required shall only be 938, against which DDA had already made ready
1362 rooms with alll fittings and fixtures duly inspected by 0.0. and ITDC. It
needs to be further mentioned here that 0.0. occupied 445 rooms only whereas
the remaining 917 rooms completed by DDA in all respects remained un-
utilized. It is also a matter of record that there was no booking for these
accommodations for the tourists with ITDC in spite of publicizing the same by
ITDC on its website and advertisement in the Press.

In view of above, it is apparently seen that against the revised requirement of
445 rooms, DDA provided 1362 rooms. ITDC furnished 778 rooms only. As
such, there was no shortage of accommodation at D-6, Vasant Kunj vis-a-vis
requirement during the Games. All out efforts were made by the DDA towards
meeting the dead line date and thus there is no slackness in completion of
upgradation of works on the part of DDA.

From the above it is quite evident that there was no slackness in putting

concerted efforts of DDA in completing this Project.”
5.215 As regards action taken against the DDA officials the Ministry of Urban
Development submitted that the requirement of the number of flats for housing the
National Technical Officers and International Technical Officers was received from the
Organizing Committee, Commonwealth Games only on 187 August, 2010. In the said
letter of CEO, CWG the total requirement of rooms was 4500. The number of rooms,
which were made available by DDA, was more than the requirement of the OC, CWG.


160

Therefore, no action was being contemplated to be taken against any officers of the
DDA.

XVI. Furnishing of Flats by ITDC ITDC

5.216 Audit pointed out that DDA entrusted ITDC, a PSU, the work of supply and
installation of furniture and fixtures. This covered furnishing of 1101 flats at the Games
Village, bifurcated into two schemes (Towers 1-17 and 18-34); 4285 LIG, 416 MIG and
1008 HIG flats at Vasant Kunj (of which only 805 LIG and 182 HIG flats could be
handed over by DDA). ITDC was to be reimbursed the full cost of supply/ work orders
plus 10 per cent departmental charges. In turn, as of November 2010, ITDC awarded
work orders for supply of furniture and fixtures for ₹ 49.41 crore. However, it made
payments of = 27.89 crore against the advance payment of & 46 crore (inclusive of
departmental charges) to ITDC. Audit found the following deficiencies in the award
and execution of work orders by TDC:

e The rates quoted by the same supplier for the same items under the two
schemes for the Games Village flats differed in respect of 9 items. ITDC failed
to negotiate appropriate reduction with potential savings of upto हैं 1.08 crore.

e [TDC had not initiated compensation claims for ₹ 1.52 crore from suppliers for
delayed/short supplies.

e Furniture worth हैं 3.19 crore and % 10.31 crore had not yet been installed at the
Games Village and Vasant Kunj flats respectively. [TDC stated that sirice DDA
failed to construct. the flats in time at Vasant Kunj and handed over far fewer
flats than envisaged, it was compelled to store the furniture supplied in semi-
constructed flats as well as a hangar created for this purpose.

« The stock of linen items at Vasant Kunj was found to be short by ₹ 0.77 crore at
the time of audit.

5.217 The Committee wanted to know whether any action had been taken against the
officials who could not negotiate potential saving in the supply of furniture items. in
reply, ITDC stated in a note as under:

“For the work of supply and installation of the furnishing and fixtures in the flats
at the Games Village at Akshardham, procurement process was carried out
through a designated procurement committee comprising members from DDA,
MOT and ITDC. Separate tenders were invited for articles under Scheme-I and
Scheme-ll. The items to be procured under these two schemes were of
different specifications as stated below:-


161

vo | | tone | Specifications
No. | Schemel _ ] | Scheme |
1. Sofa Set Consists of 3+1+1 seats | Consists of two seats
3 seater sofa are of size only
1960x830x595mm and 2)« 2 seater size is
no. single seat sofa of size 1550x800x780mm
960x830x595mm e Out upholstery of
Outer upholstery of fabric (cloth)
leatherite
2, Centre Table Size 100x500x500mm e Size
4200x600x460mm
e Has grooves in legs
and frames
3. Dining table & Size of dining table|e Size of dining table
chairs set 1500x900x740mm 4525x911 2x750mm
Size of dining chairs] Size of dining chairs
440x400x450mm 510x500x430mm
Chairs are of complex thin |e Chairs are of simple
elements design design
4, Study chair Size of study chair} Size of study chair
440x400x450mm with 520x570x400mm_ with
complex thin design simple design
| | Additional Size of chair} e Size of chair
chair/easy 620x560x860mm 625x620x200mm
chair Chair is of complex,)« Chair is of simple
artistic circular design design
| Twin bed Size of bed|e Size of bed
2000x960x360mm 2000x950x525mm
Made up of rubber wood | Made up completely of
and hard wood MDF board
7. Wardrobe Size of  wardrobe|* Size of wardrobe
814x615x2100mm 920x610x2100mm
Consists of shoe rack at
botiom
| | Study table Size of study table|e Size of study table
1100x500x760mm 4220x600x770mm
with different design
- Bed Extension Size of bed exlension|* Size of bed extension

960x360x250mm and
made up of rubber wood
and hard wood

955x525x250mm and
made up of 25 mm
MDF of — different
design

Due to difference in specifications of the items as stated above, under Scheme-
1 and ॥ for Games Village at Akshardham, the rates received against these
articles were also different. वि



_ 162

It is therefore submitted that since the specification of these furnishing items
were different for both the schemes, the rates quoted by agencies were bound
to be different and were not comparable.

It is pertinent to mention that the rates quoted by the L1 bidders under both the
schemes, were lower than the estimated costs. Still negotiation was carried out
with 1.1 bidders and rates in respect of one item for Scheme-Il was lowered by
the lowest bidder.

In view of the above, it may not be appropriate to infer that the rates with the
lower bidder were not negotiated and by not doing so 71.08 crore would have
been saved. Thus with the above facts on record, it was not desired to initiate
any action against the concerned officials."

5.218 The Committee asked whether measures had been initiated for claiming हैं 1.52
crore compensation from the suppliers. In reply, 100 and DDA stated that penalties
for delay had been worked out provisionally and the same shall be imposed on the
different vendors as per terms and conditions of the contract agreement. ITDC had so
far released only part payments to the extent of 50 to 60 percent of the total value of
supply of articles to different vendors and substantial amounts were yet to be paid to
them. Compensation for delay shall be recovered from the balance amount payable to
these vendors.

5.219 Regarding: the reasons for not initiating action towards exact claim of
compensation, ITDC/DDA submitted that the actual amount of compensation could
only be ascertained after placement of the furniture in flats as per contract.

5.220 On being enquired about the reasons for the purchase of excess furniture over
and above the actual requirement, [TDC and DDA submitted that DDA assigned the
task of procurement of furniture for 2709 flats to 100 as deposit work and a
procurement committee was constituted which comprised members from DDA, MOT
and ITDC. The work orders issued for the same were based on 2709 number of flats
as per the instructions and planning of 008, DDA completed 1362 rooms, which were
made available out of which [TDC furnished 778 rooms. Only 445 rooms were utilized
by the Organizing Committee whereas the remaining 917 rooms completed by DDA in
all respects were not occupied by the Organizing Committee for Technical delegates.
ITDC was instructed by DDA to accept the supply of furniture received only till
15.09.2010. For the remaining quantity the vendors were not allowed to supply. Thus
no excess furniture over and above the actual requirement was purchased by ITDC.


163

5.221 The Committee desired to know the current position of the idle furniture. In
reply, the Ministry of Urban Development submitted that 789 flats {639 LIG (1 B/R), 40
MIG(2 B/R) and 110 HIG (3 B/R) } were furnished with designated furniture by ITDC
upto 15.9.2010 which was fixed as cut-off date. 299 number of more flats (97 MIG (2
B/R) and 202 HIG (3 B/R) could be furnished by the ITDC with designated furniture
available at site in packed boxes or in knocked down condition after procuring few
additional furniture items to complete the set. The installation of furniture was stated
to be in progress.

5.222 The Committee then asked about the action taken by ITDC for the missing linen
items. In reply, ITDC stated that the actual amount of missing linen items at Vasant
Kunj was %79,736/- only not %0.77 crore as observed by the audit. Considering the
magnitude of operations, turnover and the fact that the flats were converted into guest
tooms wherein multiple agencies were involved, [TDC reasoned that the stated
amount of missing linen items was not significant. Therefore, this amount was written
off by ITDC in the Books of Accounts as per the Purchase and Stores Procedure of the
company.

5.223 When asked whether any responsibility had been fixed, ITDC submitted that in
view of the fact that the quantum of missing linen items was not material, it was not
considered desirable to fix the responsibility.

5.224 Further asked, whether any recovery of missing items had been made, ITDC
clarified that in view of the non-materiality of quantum of the missing linen items, no
recovery was made.

§.225 Asked to state categorically the rationale for writing off the amount, instead of
fixing responsibility or taking measures to recover the value of the missing linen items,
ITDC responded as under:

" Following facts are enumerated relating to the shortage and its writing off:

i) Running the alternative accommodation in the newly constructed residential
flats spread over a huge area was a mammoth task. Such type of activity was
never undertaken earlier by the ITDC.

ii) Casual staff was employed on temporary basis for running the operational
services such as House Keeping and servicing of rooms. The casual staff so


164

employed was disengaged after the operational period of CWG Games, Delhi
2010. Besides, other multiple agencies were involved in the operational area.
Therefore, it was not possible to pinpoint the individuals and make any
recoveries.

ii) In such type of operations, the amount of shortage is treated as one of the cost
in running the operations. It is pertinent to mention that the total cost of linen
articles procured by the ITDC for Vasant Kunj was हैं 79, 81,506/- against which
the amount of shortage was & 79,736/- which is 1% approximately.

In view of Mega Operations at Vasant Kunj during CWG 2010 and all other factors
mentioned above, the amount of = 79,736/- in respect of linen shortages was
written off after taking necessary approval in accordance with ITDC Purchase and
Stores Procedure. The matter was further reported to the Board of Directors of the
Company for information."

XVI Selection of Peddle Thorp Melbourne

5.226 According to Audit, in February 2006, a joint RFP was issued for engaging
design consultants for the Games Venues (competition and training venues for squash
and badminton at Siri Fort Sports Complex/table tennis at Yamuna Sports Compiex)
and Games Village (practice area). Audit found that there was an inexplicable delay of
nearly a year from the date of declaration of L1 bidder (Peddle Thorp Melbourne) in
June 2006 and the final award of contract to it in May 2007. This resulted in cascading
delays in execution of work due to the time required for finalisation of designs and
preparation of estimates for issuing RFP.

5.227 Asked to state the reasons behind the inexplicable delay, the Ministry of Urban
Development submitted that the design consultancy bids were opened on 1४ June,
2006. This being a consortium consisting mainly foreign firms, the period of negotiation
took little extra time and prolonged till September, 2006. This also resulted in bringing
the quoted rates from %21.11 crores to 716.60 crores. Finally, the acceptance letter
was issued on 26.12.2006 after getting it approved from DDA’s Authority.

5.228 The Committee then desired to know whether any action had been taken/policy
had been framed by DDA to avoid recurrence of such delay. In reply, the Ministry of
Urban Development responded that this type consultancy was being undertaken by
the DDA for the first time. Therefore, references were made to CVC in order to take
their advice that the procedure that was being followed by DDA was justifiable. The


165

experience gained has helped DDA to develop an in house capacity to deal with such

cases in future.

XVII Selection of Architect Bureau - Group GSA Consortium

5.229 The work of design consultancy for the archery stadium competition venue at
Yamuna Sports Complex and refurbishment of existing training facilities at Siri Fort
Sports Complex, Yamuna Sports Complex and Saket Sports Complex was awarded to
Architect Bureau — Group GSA consortium (AB consortium) on 12 November 2007 at
% 6.25 crore and the agreement was signed on 15 November 2007.

5.230 Audit found that the MoU submitted by AB consortium was dated September
2001 and evidenced a strategic alliance between the two parties to identify projects
and opportunities and work together, but was not specific to the project under
consideration. This was not challenged by DDA. Further, as per the agreement with
DDA, 70 percent of the work was to be done by Group GSA, its representatives were
to visit India 10 times and technical representative of GSA deputed to India for two
months. Although DDA stated that the project was conceived, conceptual plan
prepared and presented before the OC and the department predominantly by Group
GSA, Audit found no evidence of deputation of Group GSA's representatives on
record.

5.231 Audit also found deficiencies in the performance of AB, as detailed below:

e AB delayed submission of drawings. 61 drawings for the archery competition
venue at YSC. These were issued between Apri] and May 2010 against the
target date of March 2009, with delays ranging from 1 to 15 months.

e Though the requirement for providing toughened glass was indicated in the
drawings for YSC, the same was not included in BOQ due to non finalisation of
design and specifications by AB. The work had to be awarded as an extra item
at % 2.29 crore.

e The BOQ required providing and installation of Yonex court mat/Taraflex
synthetic flooring of 9mm thickness, which is not as per Yonex brand
specifications. This item had to be subsequently executed as a separate
item at a cost of € 1.54 crore.

e AB was also required to get detailed soil investigation done for the archery
venue at its cost, but this was done by DDA at a cost of 0.02 crore resulting in
undue benefit to AB.


166

5.232 The Committee queried about the number of officials deputed in India (Delhi) by
GSA Group for the project and the frequency of visits made by them. In reply, the
Ministry of Urban Development stated that as per record available with the DDA, four
employees of GSA Group visited India on seven occasions and stayed for one to nine
days each and their requirement was completed. No further visit was made.

5.233 Asked to spell out the action taken by DDA against the agency for the delay in
submission of drawing and defective estimates, the Ministry of Urban Development
submitted that of the case was being examined in detail for final action against the
agency for delays/deficiencies in the services. For this purpose deduction items
amounting to ₹ 24 lakh had already been sanctioned and shall be recovered from the

final bill of the consultants.

XIX. Unreliable justification of rates

5.234 Audit found that the justification of rates was unreliable in the following cases of
procurement of chairs/synthetic surfaces,

¢ Inthe contract with Nussli-Comfort Net for providing and fixing 2,336 retractable
chairs at a total cost of % 4.63 crore, the justified rates of = 17,566 per chair was
prepared based on a market quotation of Nussli-Comfort Net itself. Audit found
that the actual cost of these chairs as stated in the tax invoice was only = 1,850
per chair with a cost implication of extra expenditure of % 2.74 crore (for 1,746
chairs actually installed).

e Brahmaputra Infrastructure Ltd. installed 211 upholstered chairs at the archery
venue in YSC at a cost of Rs 17,470 per chair for which justification was
prepared at 713,764 without obtaining market quotations; similarly justification
of @ 7,184 per chair for 1,818 ordinary chairs procured at a cost of = 9,890 per
chair was also prepared without obtaining any market quotation; and

e As per OC's specifications of April 2009, only Taraflex and Nagase Kenko make
of synthetic surfaces were to be laid in the table tennis court. Consequently,
‘combined tendering for these was done for YSC and JMIU and the contract was
awarded to Freewill Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. at a tendered cost of हैं 1.29 crore.
Audit found that while the awarded rate per sqm was % 2,943.25, the justified
cost on the basis of actual cost of import by the agency worked out to 71,188.52
per sqm, indicating exorbitant margins of 148 per cent.

5.235 In the above context, the Committee enquired whether any action was taken
against the officers who prepared and accepted the escalated justification. In reply,
the Ministry of Urban Development stated in a note as under:


167

"Case of temporary seating at Siri Fort:
The CAG report No.6 dt.2011-12 at Para 18.4.1 states that “justification of %

17566 / chair was prepared while as per Tax Invoice the actual cost was
%1850/- “In this regard it is submitted that the invoice which CAG has referred
and relied for this observation was only for HDPE seat, a component of the
work to be executed under the item i.e. the scope of work was not only limited
to provide HDPE seat but was comprising of the entire 9 tiers Temp. seating
system as shown in photograph/drawings. Entire seating system was
considered in one item on TURN-KEY basis with unit of measurement ONE
SEAT The total cost of complete system was converted into %17566.00 per
seat. As already explained the rate = 1850.00 is for one of the component (the
cost of HDPE seat and back shells) out of the entire seating system. Therefore,
the rates of each seat include the cost of entire sub-structures consisting of
steel frame work, wooden platform finished with special paint, protection railing,
Access stair cases, Pathways, Fire Proof cladding around the structure, fixture
accessories to fix the seats etc. including cost of design, installation at site,
transportation and all Govt. levies and Taxes. This item is PROPRIETARY
ITEM with each manufacturer/supplier having its own patented design and
specifications. The final design and shop drawings were to be submitted by
successful tenderer based on general arrangement drawing provided by DDA
after award of work based upon the site conditions. It was not possible to
freeze a particular design before call of tenders as it would have resulted in
restricted tendering causing unhealthy competition. Therefore, it was not
possible to prepare component wise justification.

In this tendering process which was invited in two bids (technical and financial
bids), 7 Nos. tenders were sold and 5 bids were received, out of which only 2 .
bids qualified in technical bids. The L-1, M/s Consortium Nussli Comfort net
quoted %4,69,99,260.00 and L-2 M/s Godrej & Boyce Mfg. Co. Ltd. (a reputed
agency) quoted as %5,64,97,924.00 . The participation of 5 agencies in bidding
itself shows a competitive bidding. Here it is pertinent to mention that the entire
system was imported as was clarified by L-1 during negotiation except hand
rails, plywood, hardware and fitting and fixtures. L-1 was to bear freight, custom
duty, exchange rate fluctuation, VAT, labour cess besides design of system,
manufacturing/fabrication, erection.

Details of work executed at site is as under:-

1 | Estimated cost %3,65,34,000.00
Negotiation cost of L-1 ie. Mis | %4,62,94,271.00 Item No. 1 (A)
Consortium comfort net %3,58,51 664.00
Item No. 1 (8)
₹_ 813,807.00
Item No.2(A)

%_99,28,800.00



168

i.e. Total:
=%4,62,94.271.00

3 | Total Cost of actual work done at site | %3,94,58,591.00
(Item No.2(A}Not executed at site).
4 | Deduction on alc of discrepancies | (-) ¥ 62,34,432.00
noticed in work
[5 | Net value of work done %3,32,24,159.00

5.236 The Ministry further submitted:

"From above it is very clear that CAG has not been able to appreciate the scope
of work covered in item before coming to the observation and therefore no
action lies against the officers who prepared and accepted the justification for
work “providing and fixing of Temporary seating at Siri Fort Indoor Sports
Centre for Commonwealth Games 2011” as work was awarded at competitive
price."

5.237 As regards the case of providing Taraflex flooring at Yamuna Sports Complex,
the Ministry clarified as under:

"The rates awarded were the same as already awarded by Sports Department
of Government of Maharashtra for Pune Youth CW Games-2008.

it has to be appreciated that decision on any issue is taken by an authority on
the basis of the fact and information available at that time or which can be
possibly collected and there is nothing more one can do about it. The Tender
was accordingly accepted after negotiation on the basis of similar work awarded
by another Government Body and it can hardly be faulted. CAG's surmise
based on a post Tender invoice therefore appears to be misplaced. Further, this
invoice cannot be held as a material evidence to cast a doubt on the
reasonableness of the rate accepted as possibility of extraneous reasons for
the invoice being low rated cannot be ruled out and there are umpteen numbers
of such cases in the record of the concerned department.

In view of above, no action is warranted against the officers who prepared the
justification as they have followed due procedure and no irregularity was
noticed by the Department."

5.238 On being asked whether any policy regarding preparation of justification after
obtaining rates form open market had been made and instruction issued, the Ministry
of Urban Development submitted that DDA already had a Committee of
Superintending Engineers to determine the market rates for the building works which
met time to time and after market survey circulated the prevailing market tates. For the
items which were not available in the routing building work, the open quotations were
obtained from the manufacturers or their authorized dealers to arrive at justified rates.


169

XX. Installation of Maple Wood Flooring in Three Venues

5.239 Audit found that during the installation of wooden flooring in the table tennis
venue at Yamuna Sports Complex, an extra item of Rs 0.38 crore was permitted for
fastening padded sleepers anchored to the floor below the wooden flooring because of
bending of floating floor system. According to Audit, this was a rectification, the cost of
which should either be borne by Parquet Furniture Pvt. Ltd. or the original contractor
that executed the civil work underlying the wooden flooring.

5.240 The Committee asked whether the Ministry factored that the cost of the
rectification work should be borne by the original contractor. In reply, the Ministry of
Urban Development clarified that it was not a rectification but additional work to
convert floating flooring to fixed flooring by providing ply board over the entire surface
of the wooding slippers. In fact in the agreement of the agency the provision was to
provide maple wood flooring directly over the slippers which is called floating flooring.
DDA for the legacy use decided to have restrained flooring so that this stadium could
be used for other sports such as Badminton, Basket Ball etc. which caused vibrations.
The sketches of the systems clearly identified the additional work of providing of 12mm
ply board. According to the item of work of M/s Parquet, the maple wood flooring was
to be directly laid over the wooden slippers. By providing restrained system, the
spacing of the wooden slippers had been increased which had reduced the cost of

original item.

5.241 To a pointed query as to whether recovery of € 0.38 crore had been made from
the parquet/original contractor on account of fastening padded slippers, the Ministry
stated that no recovery was to be made from any of the agency.


170

CHAPTER VI

ROLE AND RESPONSIBILITY OF THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY
WELFARE

6.1. The responsibility for arrangements for healthcare facilities for the
Commonwealth Games, 2010 was entrusted to the Delhi Government initially. The
Delhi Government chalked out a plan for upgrading health care services both at the
Central and at the State levels. This was considered by the Committee of Secretaries
(CoS) and the CoS felt that it was desirable to bring in the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare to ensure overall coordination. So, in addition to the Empowered
Committee set up under the OC, a cell was set up with DGHS as the Chairperson in
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. This group identified the major health
facilities in the public sector in Dethi; Safdarjung and RML Hostpitals of the Central
Government were identified for upgradation, for providing assistance and treatment to
sportsmen coming to the CWG. AIIMS which was an autonomous institution was the
third identified entity.

1, Partial Commissioning of the Sports Injury Centre

6.2 Audit scrutiny revealed that in June 2008, the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare (MOHFW) decided to establish a Sports Injury Centre (SIC) which would be
comparable to any other facility internationally at Safdarjung (SJ) Hospital, New Deihi
in time for CWG-2010, by upgrading the existing anthroscopy and sports injury unit.
The project was to be completed by May 2010. A budget of हैं 70.72 crore was
allocated for the SIC from out of a XI Plan provision for development of sports
medicine in the country on a pilot basis. As of November 2010, the expenditure
incurred on the SIC was % 61.11 crore. Out of this, हैं 46.84 crore was given as
advance to Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation (HSCC), a PSU which was
appointed on nomination basis as the implementing agency in June 2008, and
expenditure of हैं 14.27 crore was incurred by the SJ Hospital for procurement of
equipment. Against the stipulated deadline of May 2010, the SIC was officially
inaugurated by the Prime Minister of India on 267 September 2010. However, it was


171

not fully commissioned, as revealed by the status of different activities as on 300
November 2010 as summarised below:

Activity Status as on 300 November 2010
Construction of Substantially complete - minor works left, completion certificate not yet
building teceived.
Installation of . Partially complete - 15 equipment yet to be purchased, final installation of and
equipment training on some equipment still due.

Appointment of staff 47 posts vacant as against sanctioned strength of 138.

Wet leasing of high end | installation of machine for MRI and CT scan yet to be done.
equipment

Central Sterile Tender for outsourcing CSSD yet to be finalised.
Supply Department
(CSSD)

6.3 In the above context, the Committee desired to know the reasons for partial
commissioning of Sports Injury Centre before the commencement of the
Commonwealth games 2010. In reply, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
submitted that the Centre was made operational to provide tertiary health care
services during the Commonwealth games, 2010. Infact, the first surgery was
conducted on the 17" of September 2010 as a trial run to check the preparedness of
the centre. The reasons which have been stated by the Audit for partially non-
commissioning of certain activities like construction of building, installation of
equipment, appointment of staff etc. did not affect the functioning of the objective of
the Centre to provide Health Care Services/Facilities to the participants of the

Commonwealth Games.

6.4 In their vetting comments, Audit questioned the basis on which the Ministry
considered that tertiary healthcare of international standard could be provided while
some of the important facilities/items such as radio-diagnosis, qualified man power
Central Sterile Supply Department (CSSD), Kitchen, lift etc. were not available at the
Sports Injury Centre (SIC) during the Games. It was also questionable as to how did
SIC provide super specialised medical care to international and domestic guests
without testing the various facilities available at SIC before commencement of the



172

Commonwealth Games, 2010. Further, whether one surgery reported to be conducted
on 17 September 2010 constituted testing of all facilities at SIC was debatable.

6.5 Responding to the above points, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
submitted that the radio-diagnosis and imaging services at the Centre were fully
functional. The vendor had placed the required MRI and CT Scan from his
stock/shifting of these equipment from his other sites. Further, the Sports Injury
Centre was in the vicinity of the Safdarjung Hospital and all radiology and imaging
services as well as laboratory services were also available at the Safdarjung Hospital.
Similarly, the trained and experienced manpower from the Sports Injury Centre as well
as Safdarjung Hospital was available at beck and call. The CSSD and Kitchen
services were made available by the Hospital. The lifts at the Sports Injury Centre
were fully functional before the inauguration of the building i.e. 267" September 2010
well before the onset of Commonwealth Games.

6.6 The Ministry further clarified that the surgery conducted on 17" September,
2010 resulted in testing of various services of operation theatre, its equipments,
medical gas manifold systems, anaesthesia, AC, electrical, plumbing, water supply
and preparedness of manpower in general. The independent testing of various
systems/services required as per contract was undertaken by the HSCC(|) through the
respective contractor/agencies. However, more surgeries were not carried out
because on the day of inauguration VVIP's were to be shown the facility and the OT to

remain in sterile conditions.

6.7 The Committee queried about the reasons for not foreseeing the requirement of
time for full commissioning of the Sports Injury Centre. In reply, the Ministry submitted
that what was normaily foreseeable was duly taken into account. It was, however, not
possible to foresee the litigation pertaining to the possession of the land and to factor
the same into the time frame estimates. It could also not 08 foreseen that the tender
for selecting the construction contractor would need to be floated twice. The Ministry
further stated that another factor that could not be factored in was that the pressure of
the CWG projects would syphon off both manpower and material from the market.
Alternate materials had to be sourced for approval. With the constant monitoring at the


173

level of Secretary & HFM, the Centre was made operational to provide tertiary health
care services during the Commonwealth Games, 2010.

6.8 As regards delay in the receipt and installation of equipment and posting of
specialized staff, the Ministry apprised that most of the equipments were imported and
the same were procured in time but only in few cases, the equipments could not be
received on time. The selection of staff for the various posts required a proper
selection procedure to be followed. In order to fill up the posts on urgent basis, two
walk in interviews were held after giving advertisement in the leading newspapers.
However, unfortunately no eligible candidates turned up for the various posts."

I Delay in Construction of the SIC building

6.9 Audit pointed out that the award and execution of the work for SIC (in particular
the SIC building) was beset by delays. Although the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare approved the setting up of SIC in July 2008, tendering for construction of the
SIC building started only in December 2008 and the work awarded by the
implementing agency, HSCC to the successful contractor (Bhayana Builders) only in
May 2009, leaving only twelve months for the construction of the project which was
evidently inadequate. As of 307 November 2010, the construction of the building had
not been completed and the contractor had claimed for further extension of time for
completion till 29" December 2010. Further, as part of this work, HSCC had
irregularly charged ₹ 46.03 lakh on consultancy services for certain items for which it

did not provide any such services.

6.10 In the above context, when the Committee desired to know the reasons for
delay of five months between the approval of the setting up of SIC and tendering for
the construction of the building, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare responded
that the EFC approval for the setting up of SIC was received in June, 2008. The
1500 (I) Ltd, a Government of India undertaking were nominated as Project
Consultants for the Sports Injury Centre. In the meanwhile, the land identified for the
SIC building was put under litigation. This issue was not known at the time of EFC
approval. The permission, for use of this land under litigation, by the High Court of
Delhi for construction of the SIC building was available only in November, 2008.
Subsequently, an agreement for project implementation was signed with the HSCC (1)


174

Ltd. The work order could be issued to the building contractor M/s Bhayana Builders
Pvt. Ltd. in May 2009 after following the due procedure of tendering twice and getting
the necessary statutory clearances form various agencies viz Delhi Fire Service, Delhi
Urban Art Commission, NDMC etc. by the HSCC(I). Subsequently, the letter of
commencement of work was issued to the contractor on 1* June 2009.

6.11 On being asked whether the Ministry had examined the feasibility of completion
of the SIC building in twelve months before issuing notification of award to the
contractor, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare clarified that the feasibility of
completion of the SIC building in twelve months was considered by the Project
Monitoring Committee headed by the Joint Secretary in charge of the Hospital in the
Ministry. The pre-qualification conditions laid down by 15000) in the tender while
inviting bids for selection of a contractor for construction of the SIC building included
- that the applicant should meet the minimum criteria of completing at least one similar
work having completion period not more than twelve months. The various milestones
for completion of the civil/electrical work were drawn by the 15000), the project
consultants to accomplish the work within the stipulated period of twelve months. The
HSCC(I), a Government of India undertaking was well experienced in undertaking the
work of the Hospital/Medical Colleges building.

6.12 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare thus reasoned that the feasibility of
the completion of the SIC building was examined, accordingly, as per the tender
conditions and a period of 12 months was fixed for completing the building. The same
was accepted by the contractor by signing the contract.

6.13 The Committee desired to know whether the Ministry had ensured before award
of the work that relaxed pre-qualification norms would not result in selection of a
contractor not competent to complete the work within the stipulated time. In reply, the
Ministry clarified that the pre-qualification norms had to be relaxed since in the first
tender only one agency was substantially meeting the prequalification criteria and the
Tender Specification Committee recommended a fresh invitation for prequalification
criteria. It was considered, keeping in view that by floating a fresh tender, the entire
process of determining the eligibility would have to be taken afresh and this would


175

further reduce the time available for construction of the Centre which had to be
completed by April 2010 for the Commonweaith Games.

6.14 The Committee then asked about the level at which the decision was taken not
to invite fresh tender. In reply, the Ministry submitted that the decision to relax the PQ
criteria was taken in the meeting of the Project Monitoring Committee (PMC) of the
Sports Injury Centre appointed by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare in its
meeting held on 19" February 2009.

6.15 On being enquired whether it was justified to ignore the recommendations of
the Tender Specification Committee on the ground that the construction of SIC would
be delayed, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare clarified as under:

" The recommendations of the Tender Specification Committee(TSC) and views
of the Hospital Service Consultancy Corporation Limited (Project Consultant) for
the Project were discussed in detail in the meeting of the PMC held on
19/02/2009. It was brought to the notice of the PMC that while no relaxation to
the terms & conditions of the pre-qualification documents was made by the
TSC, it has been stated that different interpretation on the minimum PQ criteria
could be drawn and hence to avoid any possible compiaints and to save further
delays in the process, TSC has recommended that fresh bids may be invited
after suitably modifying the PQ criteria. The issue was deliberated in detail and
it was noticed that the bidding process was already one month behind
schedule. By floating afresh tender, the entire process of determining the
eligibility would have to be taken afresh. This would further reduce the time
available for construction of the Centre, which has to be completed for the
Commonwealth Games. It was also considered that a provision under the
clause-10 of the PQ document already exists as under:-

“The competent authority to prequalify shall have the power to relax any
condition/criterion for prequalification, if, it considers expedient to do so.”

In view of the position explained above, it was decided in public interest to relax
the minimum criteria for PQ to avoid further delays in the process without
compromising the quality of the work.”

6.16 Asked whether there was any delay on the part of the Ministry in issuing the first
tender, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare clarified as under.

"The land for construction of the building was allotted in July, 2008. Immediately
thereafter, a court case was filed in the High Court about the ownership of land
and a stay was granted. The decision of the Court for disposal of the petition
was given on 6.11.2008. Thereafter, signing of the agreement with the 18000)
was completed on 21.11.2008. The Notice Inviting Tender was issued on
11.12.2008. Thus, it may be seen that there was no delay. The delay whatever
is attributed only due to the Court case filed in the High Court of Dethi.”


176

6.17 The Committee then asked whether the contractor selected with relaxed
prequalification norms was able to complete the work satisfactorily within the stipulated
time. In reply, the Ministry submitted that the original scheduled date of completion
was 311 May 2010. However, the works were substantially completed by 20"
September 2010 and NDMC had given the Provisional Occupancy Certificate on 21
September 2010.

6.18 Justifying the relaxation accorded in pre-qualification norms, the Ministry further
stated that the works were substantially completed in 15 months 20 days against the
original completion period of 12 months. Moreover, reasons for delay are not
attributable to the contractor, except for the delays in achieving the 5" & 7" milestones
(original target dates being 40 March 2010 and 311 March 2010 respectively but
actually achieved on 31 August 2010).

6.19 When asked to state the actual date of handing over of the SIC building by the
contractor to the Government, the Ministry responded that the SIC building
construction work was actually completed on 147 September, 2010 and the building
was put to use since then.

6.20 Elaborating further, the Ministry stated that the SIC building was made
operational on 20" September 2010. The provisional occupancy certificate was issued
by the NDMC on 21° September 2010. Though the building was in use since the date
of substantial completion but it was yet to be formally taken over for want of
completion certificate and water connection from NDMC. The completion certificate
from NDMC was received on 17" October 2011 but the permanent water connection
was still awaited, which was given by NDMC only after submission of completion

certificate/plan.

6.21 Asked whether the Ministry had adjusted the consultancy fee overcharged by
HSCC, the Ministry clarified that the final accounts of SIC had not yet been settled with
the HSCC(I). Therefore, the final settlement of the consultancy charges payable to
HSCC (I) shall be made strictly as per the agreement.


177

6.22 In the same context, apprising the Committee that consultancy fee to be paid to
HSGC had not yet been finalised, the Additional Secretary, Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare deposed in evidence as under:

"Sir, it is true that they have not been finalised yet. There are two components.
One is the civil construction and the other is the modular OT........ because there
was a delay of three months and therefore it is being examined and it is at
different stages to find as to why was that delay there........ but it will be settled
once it is found to whom the delay is attributable to. | think that is something
which is being finalised."

6.23 Asked to state the quantum of the consultation fee and the likely time by which
it would be settled, the Additional Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
submitted: हु

“Sir, the consultancy fee was fixed at 7 percent but now the internal finance
division has fixed the guideline that we should give them at cost price basis and
whichever is the least will be given to them. We have still not settled it as
yet....Sir, once the issues regarding the manifold gas pipeline is settled, | think
we will be able to reach at a point as to how much we have spent and
depending upon the calculations we would be able to settle it."

6.24 Explaining the reasons for the delay in payment, another representative of the
Ministry attributed it to the three months delay in completing the SIC Building, which
according to him was caused by scarcity of labour at that time because of
simultaneous execution of so many Commonwealth Games Projects. in this regard,
he deposed in evidence as under:

"Sir, everything is on record including the decision that liquidated damages for
these three months delay should not be imposed on the contractor and his case
would be considered favourably. As on date this decision is yet to be taken"

6.25 As informed by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, the services of
Facility Management Services which included housekeeping, sanitation, horticulture
and security and cafeteria are outsourced. However, no consultancy fee had been

paid so far.

6.26 In the above context, the Committee desired to be apprised of the reasons for
the non-finalisaitons of the issue of consultancy fee for outsourced services of SIC. In
reply, the Ministry submitted that the fee structure for providing consultancy fee for


178
outsourced services was not a part of the initial agreement signed with the Project
Implementing agency.

6.27 The Ministry further submitted that the final bill of the building contractor had
already been made ready and the matter regarding sanctioning of the difference
amount of the final cost of construction of 34.00 cr against the awarded value of =
32.86 cr. was under process. Similarly, the final payment to Modular Operation
Theatre & Medical Gases Pipeline System could not be settled in view of observations
made by the C&AG and also complaints against the supplier firm, which were under
examination in the CVC/ Competition Appellate Tribunal. The final bill would be settled

once those issues were settled.

VI. Delay in Installation of Equipment

6.28 As against the stipulated date of May 2010 for procurement and installation of
medical equipment, Audit found that out of 72 equipment procured for SIC, 35
equipment valuing % 6.83 crore were yet to be formally installed by November 2010.
Nine equipment ordered at a cost of = 2.62 crore were yet to be supplied to the SIC.
Purchase of three equipment with approximate cost of हैं 1.30 crore and three high
value equipment (costing more than % one crore) was still in progress. Further, training
of doctors and staff by the equipment suppliers had not commenced as of 30
November 2010.

6.29 Jn the above context, the Committee desired to know the reasons for delay in
procurement and installation of equipment for Sports Injury Centre. In reply, the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare submitted that all major and minor equipments
which were essential for undertaking the major and minor surgeries including
rehabilitation and physiotherapy at Sports Injury Centre were available for use. In fact,
few trial surgeries were also undertaken before inauguration of the Sports Injury
Centre. However, in some cases which had been shown by Audit as delay in
installation of the equipments were basically on the basis of non-signing of the
installation reports. in this regard, the Ministry clarified that the installation reports of
the equipment were basically procedural formalities and as per practice, the final
installation reports were signed after satisfactory performance of the equipments even


179
sometime after one/two months of their use by the end users. The Ministry further
stated that wherever required, the equipment from Safdarjung Hospital were also
utilised for treating the patients. No compromise was made to provide super
speciality, tertiary medical care to the patients during the Commonwealth Games
2010.

6.30 In view of the fact that 12 equipment were supplied in the month of September
2010 and 13 equipment were received/started functioning after commencement of
Games, the Committee sought the basis of the Ministry's statement that all essential
equipment of SIC were in position before commencement of Games.

6.31. In reply, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare clarified that in the case of
majority of the equipment (more than 50 percent of the major equipment) required for
proper functioning of OT, Wards and Emergency of SIC, formal installation reports
were signed before the commissioning of the Sports Injury Centre. Regarding 12
equipment which were received in September 2010, the Ministry clarified that these
equipment mainly comprised of the OT tables, beds and physiotherapy equipment
including couches etc. All these equipment were functional for the treatment of
patients. With regard to the equipment received after commencement of the games,
the Ministry apprised that alternative equipment/method were put into use either from
Safdarjung Hospital/Vendor form their alternate sites.

6.32 As regards the details of utilisation of equipment from Safdarjung Hospital, the
Ministry submitted that the Sports Injury Centre was in the vicinity of the Safdarjung
Hospital and all major equipment required for the surgery/treatment of the patients
were utilised to provide the necessary care to the participants. Four Anaesthesia
machines with all its accessories were obtained from the Department of Anaesthesia,
Safdarjung hospital on temporary basis.

6.33 The status of procurement and installation of equipment at the Sports Injury
Centre as on 277 January 2012 as furnished by the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare indicated that nine equipment were installed in 2011 and two equipment were
installed as fate as in 2012. Further, installation report in respect of Mobile C-ARM,
Mobile C-ARM (upgradable to DSA and 3D CT), Microwave therapy, Extracorporeal
shock wave therapy and Hydrotherapy pool had not yet been signed and training for


180

these equipments was pending. When asked to state the reason for not signing the
installation report in respect of these equipment, the Ministry clarified that a decision
was taken that the principal supplier of the equipment should impart formal training to
the doctors/nurses. Therefore, as training had not been provided in regard to these
equipment, the installation report in respect of these equipment could not be signed,
though these equipment were functional and in use for providing patient care services.

6.34 Asked to state the reasons for the failure on the part of the suppliers to impart
training to the doctors and staff to handle the equipment and whether any penalty had
been imposed upon them, the Ministry explained that the training by the foreign
principal was not a part of the agreement to supply these equipment. However, the
then Secretary (H&FW) observed that it should be mandatory for all the suppliers of
the equipments to impart training to the medical/para-medical personnel at SIC from
the foreign principal/manufacturers. In compliance with the directions of the Secretary
(H&FW), necessary imparting of training was undertaken by all the suppliers barring
few for which the final payments had not been made to them.

6.35 On the issue of completing the pending training, the Ministry apprised that the
issue regarding pending training was being monitored by the Director, SIC /MS, SJ
Hospital. Already in the case of Hydrotherapy pool, the training had been imparted. In
the remaining four cases, it was expected that the training would be completed within
one month/six weeks.

6.36 On being asked to state the reasons for not incorporating compulsory training
by the foreign/principal manufacturer in the agreement itself, the Ministry clarified that
as per terms and conditions of the contract, the training was generally imparted to the
users viz. doctors/nurses/technicians by the supplier firms concerned or their
authorized dealer. However, in this specific case, the then Secretary (Health & Family
Welfare), keeping in view of the fact that principal supplier was better equipped to
provide comprehensive training in handling of imported equipments by virtue of their
expertise in manufacturing of that particular equipment wanted the training to be
imparted by the foreign principal supplier only. Generally, the provision that training be
provided by the principal manufacture was not included in the terms and conditions for
supply of the imported equipments as their authorized agents/ distributors were also


181

competent to provide training as they handled warranty support as well as the
comprehensive maintenance contract after expiry of the warranty period. This was the
practice in all the institutions/hospitals. :

6.37. When asked about the action taken against the defaulting principal suppliers,
the Ministry stated that there was no contractual obligation on the part of the principal
suppliers to provide training to the end users, therefore, it was not possible to take any

action against them.

6.38 The Committee then desired to know about the utilisation of the five equipment
in respect of which the requisite training had not been imparted to the doctors/nurses
handling them. In reply, the Ministry submitted that the doctors and nurses were well
conversant with every aspect of their equipment by virtue of their familiarity used on
earlier occasion during their training and as such no risk was envisaged despite the
fact that the formal training could not be imparted to them.

6.39 On being asked to explain the distinct advantages foreseen while entrusting the
training responsibility to the foreign/principal supplier, the Ministry submitted that it was
an established fact that the principal suppliers were better equipped to provide
comprehensive training in handling of imported equipment by virtue of their expertise
in manufacturing of a particular equipment.

6.40 Considering that installation reports were pending in respect of five equipment
pursuant to this decision, the Committee asked about the actual benefits obtained from
this new policy. In reply, the Ministry explained that the installation reports were
usually signed after using these equipment for their efficacy after 1 to 2 months of their
installation. The end user was able to locate any minor/major shortcomings of
manufacturing defects by handling these equipment personally for some time.

6.41 Replying to a query as to whether the foreign/principal suppliers agreed in
principle to impart the requisite training as decided, the Ministry clarified that some of
the suppliers did not agree in principle to impart the requisite training since it was not a
part of the agreement. However, in majority of the cases, the principal suppliers
agreed to impart the training.


182

6.42 In a subsequent information, the Ministry apprised that proper training by the
principal supplier in all the cases had since been imparted.

Vil. Delay in Appointment of Staff for Sports Injury Centre Injury Centre

6.43 According to Audit, out of 138 sanctioned posts, 47 posts remained vacant as of
44 December 2010. The vacancy was noteworthy in respect of specialist doctors of
sports medicine and rehabilitation, the sports psychologist and the dietician, wherein
all the sanctioned post remained vacant.

6.44 In the above context, the Committee enquired about the reasons for vacancy in
ali the sanctioned posts of specialist doctors. In reply, the Ministry submitted that out
of the 138 posts as many as 91 posts were filled up. The 47 posts shown vacant
included 18 posts of Nurses, 19 posts of Senior/Junior Residents, 8 posts in the field
of Sports Medicine, Sports Injury and Rehabilitation besides one post of an OT
Technician and one post of Dietician. The suitable candidates in respect of Specialist
Doctors in Sports Medicine, Sports Injury and rehabilitation could not be selected due
to non-availability of the eligible candidates inspite of holding two walk-in-interviews by
giving advertisement in the leading newspapers. The Sports Psychologist could only
join in November, 2010 after following the due codai formalities. The post of Junior
Residents/Senior Residents were fixed tenure post and the vacancies continued to
occur due to the incumbent's resignation on getting a regular job or for pursing higher
studies. The Ministry further submitted that the work of the Sports Injury Centre did
not suffer due to nor-filling up of these posts and the staff of Safdarjung Hospital as
well as Ministry of Defence were utilised for the purpose to meet the objective."

6.45 Asked to intimate the steps contemplated by the Ministry to fill up vacancies in
respect of important posts such as specialists in the fields of Sports Medicine, Sports
Injury and Rehabilitation and that of Dietician, the Ministry stated that two posts of
Assistant Professor (Orthopaedics), Sports Injury Centre had already been filled up.
The selection committee proceedings in respect of other two posts had been sent to
the Ministry for seeking their approval. It was proposed to re-advertise the posts in the
speciality of Sports Medicine, Rehabilitation and Dietician in the leading newspapers
shortly.


183

6.66 Replying to a query, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare also stated in a
note that out of the total sanctioned strength of 137 regular posts, at present 119 posts
were filled up on regular basis and 14 posts were filled up on contract basis. The
breakup was an under:

4. Assistant Professor, Sport Injury Centre 3
2. Assistant Professor, Sports Psychologist 4
3. Assistant Professor, Anaesthesia 2
4. Physiotherapists 8

6.67 Asked to state categorically the reasons for delay in selection and appointment
of staff for the Centre, the Ministry explained that the reasons for delay in appointment
of the staff were mainly attributed to the non-availability of the eligible candidates for
the various posts of specialist doctors inspite of holding two walk-in-interviews by
giving advertisement in the leading newspapers. Similarly, regarding the recruitment
of Nurses, the necessary selection was made by the AIIMS and it took quite some time
to complete the administrative formalities for selection of the eligible and suitable
candidates for the posts. In the meanwhile, since SIC was an integral part of the
Safdarjung Hospital, the work was fully managed by the internal adjustment through
the deployment of staff from Safdarjung Hospital.

6.68 In this regard, a representative of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
deposed in evidence as under:
"Sir, 138 posts were sanctioned and | think there were a lot of things which
were initiated simultaneously. Therefore, these positions were sanctioned well
in time and the recruitment process was indeed initiated. 134 are in position
today. So, today it is a fully staffed unit. Now, so far as that time is concerned,

indeed there were certain posts which were vacant. Generally in health
department there is lot of attrition too and staff position is dynamic."

6.69 The Committee desired to be apprised of the attrition position in SIC. In
response, the Ministry stated that so far as the Sports Injury Centre was concerned,
none of the faculty had resigned or left the job.

6.70 The Committee desired to know whether the cramped schedule of recruitment
was responsible for the non-availability of the eligible candidates for the various posts


184

in the Sports Injury Centre. In reply, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
submitted:
" All out efforts were made to fill-up ail the administrative/technical posts created
to run the newly set-up of Sports Injury Centre in time. The recruitment process
was concurrently initiated with the construction of the building and
infrastructure. However, in spite of holding walk-in-interview twice, the post of

Asstt. Professor (Rehabilitation) & Specialist in Sports Medicine could not be
filled up due to non-availability of suitable candidate.”

6.71 On being asked about the extra and concerted efforts required to fill up the |
vacant posts of specialised doctors, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare stated

in a note as under:

"At present almost all the posts of specialized doctors are filled up on regular/
contractual basis. The recruitment rules for these newly created posts are
already under process for finalization in consultation with the DoP&T & UPSC.
After notification of the recruitment rules, all post of the specialized doctors will
be filled up through UPSC on regular basis."

6.72 Justifying the action of entrusting the responsibility for selection of the eligible
and suitable nurses to AIIMS, the Ministry explained that the recruitment process of
the nurses at AIIMS was already going on and an advantage was taken of from their
recruitment process in order to compress the timeline and also avoid repetition of the
same process at SIC/SJH. However, SIC was running short of time to place the
infrastructure support with requisite manpower to commence its activities prior to onset
of Commonwealth Games 2010. Therefore, a conscious decision was taken to take an
advantage from the on-going process of selection of nurses at AIIMS in order to
ensure availability of Nurses at SIC. This decision was taken in the meeting of
Empowered Committee for SIC held on 307 July 2010. This had helped SIC not only
to avoid the repetition of dilatory process but also help in getting the Nurses in time.

6.73 Further asked to indicate the reasons for entrusting the responsibility of
recruitment of nurses to AIIMS and not to Safdarjung Hospital, the Ministry stated as
under:

“Earlier it was agreed to appoint nurses through outsourcing. However, later on
it was felt that it may be better to have regular nurses for the Centre and quality
service in this field may not be available by having personnel from a private
agency. Therefore, it was decided to select the nurses for the Sports Injury
Centre by holding campus interview etc. Since, there was shortage of time for


185

-such an exercise, the responsibility of recruitment of nurses was entrusted to
AIIMS where recruitment process had been initiated.”

Vill. Irregularities in Award of Work for Modular Operation Theatre and Medical
Gas Manifold System

(a) Unreliability of the bid amount

6.74 Out of ten bidders who purchased the bid document, only three bids were
received, of which only two bids were technically responsive. In view of the low
response to the bid and lowest bid price remaining 38 per cent higher than the budget,
the MoHFW examined reasonability of rates of the L-1 bidder by comparing the
different items of supply with similar supplies to other Government and private
hospitals. However, the prices of different supply orders quoted in  like-to-like
comparison were provided by the supplier itself and were not verified from any
independent source. The Ministry had not examined the bids in respect of possible
cartelisation. It is pertinent that for two items costing = 1.33 crore the supplier had
made the supplies to SIC by purchasing the same from the second responsive bidder.

6.75 Explaining on the like-to-like comparison of the cost, the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare stated in a note as under:

"In Sports Injury Centre, the equipments for Modular Operation Theatre (MOT)
and Medical Gas Pipeline System (MGPS) were highly technical and
specialised in nature. The different Government Hospitals/Institutes have
varying configurations and lay outs and also the specifications of the
equipments differ in many aspects. Accordingly, the like-to-like comparison
could be initially works out for = 5.28 crores on the basis of the orders placed by
the Government Hospitals/Institutes. After detailed deliberations in the
Integrated Purchase Committee meetings, it was decided to make further
efforts to prepare like-to-like comparison on the basis of the orders placed by
the reputed Private Hospitals as well. Thereafter, the like-to-like comparison
was worked out for a total cost of = 10.32 crores on the basis of the orders
placed by reputed Hospitals like Dr. RMLH, ILBS- New Delhi, SGPGIMS-
Lucknow the Asian Institute of Medical Sciences-Faridabad. On the basis of
like-to-like comparison, the prices quoted in case of Sports Injury Centre were
found to be lower by 18.72 percent. In respect of some of the items where the
quoted prices were higher compared to contracts considered in the like-to-like
comparison, a counter offer was made to the firm for agreeing the supply these
items at lower prices. It has already been explained that all out efforts were
made to work out the like-to-like comparison for maximum value, however, due
to limitations of non-availability of orders for similar configuration equipments,
the like—to-like comparison could be worked out only to the extent of हैं 10.32
crores out of total capital cost of 14.69 crores. The contract was placed after


186

due deliberations and with the approval of the competent authority. It is
mentioned that the like-to-like comparison was made on the basis of orders
placed by different Institutes having done combined or separate work. There is
not even a single Institute who has done work of similar nature of this
magnitude and specifications either separately or combined for MOT and
MGPS."
6.76 The configuration of the equipment imported by the Ministry in the instant case
was different from similar other imported equipment. In this context, the Committee
enquired whether it was prudent on the part of the Ministry to place the orders on the
basis of the price determined by other Government/Private Hospitals/Institutes. In their
reply, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare submitted that as part of the standard
procedure adopted by all the Government Hospitals /institutes, an attempt was made
to work out the like-to-like comparison for the equipments proposed to be procured
with the orders placed by other Hospitals/ Institutes so as to assess the
reasonableness of price. Since the configuration of equipments in terms of
accessories, add-ons, warranty terms etc. ordered by the hospitals varied depending
upon the usage and expertise available with them; sometimes it was not possible to
make full comparison particularly for specialised equipments. In the case of 810, the
equipments for MOT and MGPS were state-of-the-art and on the basis of orders
placed by other reputed hospitals/Institutes, the like-to-like comparison was worked
out for = 10.32 crore out of total capital cost of € 14.69 crore and prices quoted by L-1
bidder were lower by 18.72 per cent and for some items where, the prices were higher,
counter offer was made to accept the lower prices. The Ministry further submitted that
they had made all out efforts to examine and establish the reasonableness of prices.

(b) Direct Payment of Customs Duty to the Foreign Supplier

6.77. Audit found serious deficiencies in scrutiny by MoHFW of the suppliers’
invoices. MoHFW allowed customs duty to be paid directly to the foreign supplier
(without ensuring the actual payment of the same to the custom authorities) and also
failed to deduct Indian Agent commission from the Cost Insurance and Freight (CIF)
price quoted by the supplier while calculating the customs duty. Further, the supplier
had shown हैं 40.17 lakh paid as VAT in their invoices claiming payment for imported
goods, which rendered the invoices doubtful, as VAT was not Ttequired to be paid for
imported goods.


187

6.78 The Committee enquired about the procedure followed by the Ministry to ensure
the correctness of the custom duty reimbursed to the supplier without verifying the
original bill of entry. In reply, the Ministry clarified that it was a standard practice
followed in all the Government Departments that in case the contract price excluded
the Custom Duty and payable extra on actual, the purchaser verified the payable
amount of Custom Duty. However, when contracts were in Rupees on all inclusive and
FOR destination basis (for Goods of foreign origin), no such exercise was undertaken
as in such cases the entire responsibility for opening of L/C, import, payment of
custom Duty, custom clearance, handling, inland transportation/insurance and
incidental services including warranty obligations rested with the supplier only.

6.79 On being asked whether non-verification of the custom bills by the Ministry
rendered actual cost of import of those items doubtful, the Ministry mentioned that in
the case of the contract where the goods were to be supplied in rupees on all inclusive
and FOR destination basis, the exercise for verifying the amount of custom duty paid
is not undertaken as in such cases the entire responsibility for import of the goods,
custom clearance, handling, payment of inland freight including warranty obligation
rested with the supplier only.

6.80 The Committee then asked about the authenticity of the cost of imported items
without the verification of the invoice of foreign principal as required under the original
terms of the contract. In reply, the Ministry clarified that against any contract
irrespective of the currency of the contract value, it was imperative for the claimant to
raise an invoice seeking payment on the fulfilment of contractual obligations i.e. supply
of Goods /Service. When the payment was to be made through L/C, the foreign
principal was required to raise an Invoice and therefore the same was one the
documents for claiming payment. Similarly, in Indian Rupee order, the Indian Supplier
raised invoice to claim such payment. in this case, the detailed justification of prices
was worked out on the basis of the orders placed by the other Government / Private
Hospitals / institutions, before award of the contract.

6.81 The Ministry further clarified that the invoice was raised in order to claim the
payments either by the foreign principal in foreign exchange for direct supplies or by
the Indian contractor in INR for supplies on rupee payment. Since the contract for


188

parts supplies was amended from foreign exchange payment to INR payment, the
invoices from the foreign principal were not asked as per payment terms applicable for
the rupees payment supplies.

6.82 The Ministry further submitted that with the competition and like-to-like
comparison, the price reasonableness could be assured to a great extent. This held
good even for the indigenous equipments.

6.83 When asked whether it was not surprising that without verifying the original bill
of entry the Ministry had reimbursed the custom duty claimed by the supplier, the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare stated as under:

"It is submitted that in rupee payment contract it comprises of many
components viz import value, air freight & insurance, customs duty, Lic
charges, inland handling charges, financing cost to import the equipments,
Warranty obligations for 5 years , profit margin of the supplier. It is difficult to
have the exact break up of cost and operate the contract on that basis.
Accordingly, all the organisations including DGS&D as a standard practice are
not verifying such details and payments are made as per the final INR price
payable as per the contract. MOHFW also followed the same practice.”

6.84 When asked whether the Ministry ensured payment of VAT on imported items
by the suppliers, as claimed in invoices, to the VAT Department, the Ministry have
stated as under:

" In this regard, M/s MDD Medical Systems (India) Pvt. Ltd. have furnished a
certificate stating that they had deposited 5% DVAT/Sale Tax with the
concerned authorities for the various invoices pertaining to the supply of MOT &
MGPS at Sports Injury Centre, enclosing therewith copies of the Sale Tax
Return receipts, Sale Tax Challans deposited in the bank and various invoices
related to SIC "

6.85 The Ministry further clarified as under:

“It is submitted that as requested earlier by Audit, the Department had furnished
copies of the sales tax return, receipts, sales tax challans deposited in the bank
by contractor towards 5% DVAT/sales tax. It is mentioned that the contract
prices were firm and fixed and the Department had paid the prices as per the
contract including the VAT element.”

6.86 Since the contractor had paid the VAT from his/her own pocket after the
amendment of the contract, the Committee asked whether there could be a possibility
that the contractor had imported the goods at a price lower than those quoted in the


189

original contract. In reply, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare submitted as
under:

"It is submitted that the contractor had submitted copies of sales tax return,
receipts and sales tax challans deposited in the Bank towards 5% DVAT/Sales
Tax. From the Govt perspective, the prices were firm and fixed and the Deptt.
did not pay sales tax extra although the sales tax was payable for the
transaction since billing was done in India. In present scenario when there is
unprecedented appreciation in all the foreign currencies, the suppliers in case
of rupee payment contacts are adhering to the supplies on firm and fixed price
basis, must be squeezing their margins. In the private open market, the
suppliers have liberty to increase the prices as is happening in case of most of
the imported products but in Govt. such liberty is not available."

6.87 When asked whether the Ministry were aware of the actual price of the imported
equipment in the instant case, the Ministry explained that the bidder quoted some of
the equipments on rupee payment and some in foreign currency. In respect of two
foreign principais, the supplies on rupee payment were allowed subsequently due to

urgency,

6.88 The Ministry summed up as under:

“It is submitted that before placement of the order, a like to like comparison of
the price of the quoted imported equipments was worked out with the contracts
placed by Government/Reputed Private Hospitals and the prices quoted were
found to be lower by 18.72%. Accordingly, the reasonableness of the price was
established before award of the contract to the supplier firm."

IX. Utilisation of SIC

6.89 In an evidence held on 307" July, 2012 the Committee asked whether the Sports
Injury Centre (SIC) was meant for utilisation by the sports persons only. In response,
the representative of the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare submitted:

“It is not exclusively for sports people. Suppose, you are playing golf or some
other game and you get an injury that would be attended to."

6.90 On 11" September 2012, the PAC Branch received from Anonymous source a
Note Annexure-XVI purportedly mooted by the Office of the Director, SIC, Safdarjung
Hospital wherein the Director had inter-alia written that the Members (PAC) also opined
that the Sports Injury Centre should be dedicated exclusively for Sports and Related
Injuries only and not general Orthopaedic treatment Joint Replacement Surgeries etc.
that could be performed by the regular Orthopaedic Department. The Director, SIC in


190

the said Note had accordingly recommended that "the Centre should be dedicated to
treating Sports related injuries only and Joint Replacement etc. should not be a part of
this Centre.”

6.91 Taking serious exception to complete distortion of facts in the said Note and
presenting facts just opposite to what was recorded in the verbatim, the Committee
asked the Ministry to verify the authenticity of the Note and their stance on it. In reply,
the Ministry in their communication dated 26" September 2012 Annexure-XVIl
submitted as under:

« While the department has taken cognizance of the Note, the Department

would be solely guided, on the ultimate action to be taken in the matter, on the
basis of the report of the Hon'ble Committee."

6.92 The Committee then desired to know whether it would not be prudent to
combine the two super specialities ie. Arthroscopy and Joint Replacement keeping in
view the worldwide prevalent trend. In reply, the Ministry stated that the suggested
combination of the Arthroscopy and Joint Replacement needs to be seen in the
context of the approved objective of the Centre, which is the management of sports
injuries. It is for this reason that the Centre has been structured as a facility for treating
sports injuries through Arthroscopy and other Rehabilitative measures. However, the
Joint Replacement surgery was started at SIC in a limited manner. Given the fact, the
sports injury Centre is a state-of-the-art-facility and many specialities in Safdarjung
Hospital would like to use the facilities available here, however, the solution lies in
upgrading facilities in Safdarjung Hospital. In this context, proposal for Re-
development Plan of Safdarjung Hospital in under consideration.

6.93 Asked to state the number of surgeries performed in both Arthroscopy and Joint
Replacement since the inception of the Centre, the Ministry furnished the following

year-wise information:

YEAR ARTHROSCOPY JOINT REPLACEMENT
2017 1096 97
2012 1046 CO
2013 294 श्र
Total |... 6... | ; 233



191

6.94 The Ministry further stated that the bed occupancy of the Arthroscopy Unit was
more than 90 percent whereas that of the Joint Replacement Unit was about 40

percent.

6.95 In response to a specific query, the Ministry submitted that no separate staff
had been earmarked for Arthroscopy and Joint Replacement Units. The Ministry
further stated that the staff had been internally diverted from the overall strength of SIC.

6.96 Asked to state categorically the constraints being faced in the operation of the
Center due to inadequacy of staff and equipment, the Ministry submitted that as staff
and space had been provided for Joint Replacement from within the sanctioned
strength of SIC, further development and future growth of SIC would require additional
space and staff.

6.97 The Committee sought the views of the Ministry in rechristening the Centre as
‘Sports Injury, Arthroscopy and Joint Replacement Centre’ so as to reflect the full
spectrum of the available services. In response, the Ministry submitted that as per the
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) recommendations and subsequent approval,
the Centre had been established to provide specialised treatment to all Sports injuries
and other joint injuries under one roof. The Ministry, therefore, reasoned that the
existing nomenclature appeared to be appropriate.

6.98 The Committee then asked whether it would be prudent to appoint one of the
four Additional Medica! Superintendents as the Administrative Head of the Centre so
as to enable the two specialists i.e. Arthroscopy and Joint Replacement to devote full
time to their core job. In reply, the Ministry submitted that a consensus decision at the
level of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare was taken that the Sports Injury
Centre shall not function as a routine sub-ordinate office of DGHS. For this reason an
Empowered Committee under the chairmanship of the Secretary (Health and Family
Welfare) was setup. After dissolution of the Empowered Committee, the channel of
decision making is through the Director, who has been given the powers of Head of
Office to the Medical Superintendent who has the delegated powers of Head of the
Department. Decisions above the level of the Medical Superintendent are taken at the
level of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The suggestion to appoint one of


192

the four Additional Medical Superintendents as the Administration Head of SIC has
recently been examined in the Ministry but the same was not found feasible in the
overall interest of the development of SIC and the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare vide Letter No. 28015/46/2008-H dated 26" July 2012, reiterated their decision
to continue Dr. Deepak Chaudhary as the Director of SIC to function as the
Administrative Head. There are five Additional Medical Superintendents presently
posted at Safdarjung Hospital and assisting the Medical Superintendent in the
administrative work of Hospital. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare have
appointed one Deputy Director of Administration (Under Secretary level officer)
exclusively for the Sports Injury Centre for assisting the Director and looking after the
administrative work. The administrative structure formation in the Vardhaman Mahavir
Medical College and Safdarjung Hospital including SIC is the prerogative of the Medical
Superintendent.


193

CHAPTER VII
ROLE AND RESPONSIBILITY OF THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS

7.1. The security arrangements for the Commonwealth Games, 2010 were
coordinated by the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) through the Empowered Security
Committee (ESC). The Ministry was also responsible for overseeing the work allocated
to New Delhi Municipal Corporation.

A. Integrated Security System (ISS) for Commonwealth Games 2010

7.2 An Integrated Security System (ISS) was envisaged to ensure effective
surveillance to cover events, open areas, lanes/important traffic junctions, and highly
sensitive and crowded areas in Delhi. The major components of the ISS were:
perimeter security; vehicle access control; pedestrian access control for accredited
cardholders and spectators; and venue security command centre.

7.3 The decision to provide ISS for all competition and non-competition/training
venues for CWG-2010 through M/s Electronics Corporation of India Ltd. (ECIL), a
PSU, on “nomination basis” was taken by the Cabinet in its meeting held on 8 May
2009. Thereafter, on the direction of ESC, the existing Joint Committee considered the
technical solution proposed by M/s ECIL for each venue in terms of its 'spread’; the
Joint Committee's recommendations were then examined by the Steering Committee
(headed by Shri R. Narayanswami) for the essentiality and reasonableness of the Bill
of Quantities (BOQs); the reasonableness of M/s ECIL's commercial offer prepared on
the basis of the approved BOQ was then examined by an Inter-Ministerial Financial
Advisers Committee constituted by the Ministry of Home Affairs, and approved by the
EFC in September 2009 for 23 venues and March 2010 for 10 venues; Thereafter,
each venue owner entered into a separate agreement with M/s ECIL for supply and
installation of equipment. The approved cost of providing ISS at 33 competition and
training venue was @ 345.70 crore


194

1. Inflated Estimates of M/s ECIL Resulting in Exorbitant Profit एस 126.38 of = 126.38
crore
7.4 Audit scrutiny revealed that although the Inter-Ministerial FA's Committee was
not convinced of the reasonableness of the estimates proposed by M/s ECIL, it
recommended its approval with an across-the-board cut of 10 per cent on the
estimates, subject to the following:
e the production costs of items produced in-house by M/s ECIL were to be

assessed by the Cost Accounts Branch of the Ministry of Finance and savings
in excess of 2 per cent were to be passed on to the Government of India.

e Volume discounts, if any, would be to the benefit of the Government of India.

e The estimates approved were the absolute cap.

7.5 M/s ECIL provided equipment against 50 approved 8009 - 43 equipment to be
procured by M/s ECIL and 7 in-house items. Audit compared the purchase price of
items procured under the 43 BOQs with their EFC-approved rates and found that in 41
of these BOQs, the actual purchase price of the items was lower than the EFC
approved rates. Overall, M/s ECIL procured items in the 43 BOQs for just = 100.65
crore against the EFC approved estimate of € 227.04 crore thus securing a profit of है
4126.38 crore (126 percent) on these items.

7.6 In respect of the seven BOQs for items manufactured in-house, M/s ECIL did
not provide Audit with their cost analysis. Further, Audit found that this analysis had
not been sent to the Cost Accounts Branch of the Ministry of Finance, as of March
2011. Consequently, Audit could not ascertain whether there were savings in excess
of 2 per cent, which should have been passed on to the Government of India. Further,
M/s ECIL was required to test individual ISS equipment and issue a job completion
certificate, for which it charged % 10 crore. However, it did not produce the relevant

records to Audit.

7.7. In the above context, the Committee desired to know the steps taken by the
Ministry to restrict the profit of M/s ECIL on the project to a reasonable limit. In reply,
the Ministry of Home Affairs stated as under:

" The proposal for the Integrated Security System (ISS) was approved by the
Cabinet in its meeting held on 19.10.2009. The proposal had been examined
and recommended by the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) in its meeting
held on 30.09.2009, in which mark up at the rate of 14.44% of project cost


195

including profit @ 7.1% of project cost had been built in. Further, the
commercial proposal of M/s Electronics Corporation of India Limited (ECIL) had
been capped by the EFC after imposing an across the board cut of 10% as
recommended by the Financial Advisors’ Committee.

After audit scrutinised the Accounts of ECIL in this connection and determined
that ECIL had made excessive profits, in the first instance MHA issued a stop-
payment order on 17.02.2011 to all concerned in order to prevent excess
payments, if any, till the resolution of the issue.

Thereafter, on 20.04.2011 a Committee under the chairmanship of Special
Secretary & Financial Advisor (Home) comprising of Financial Advisors of the
Ministries of Youth Affairs & Sports, Urban Development and Delhi
Development Authority, as well as Joint Secretary (Police Modernisation) and
Joint Secretary (Policy Planning) of MHA as members, was set up to examine
the issues raised by CAG and to give its report, inter-alia, on the purchase price
of equipment, cost of services like installation etc vis-a-vis the bills raised by
Mis ECIL.

The said Committee determined, inter-alia, that as against the estimated project
cost of 7345.70 crore, the project cost actually amounted to %200.06 crore
including 28.89 crore as markup, which in turn included a profit of 7.1%. This
was accordingly communicated on 21.07.2011 to all venue owners, who had
incurred the expenditure and made the payments for the ISS, to release
pending payments/ recover/ adjust excess payments to M/s ECIL according to
the recommendations of the Committee.”

7.8 | Enquired whether the Ministry had obtained cost-analysis of the seven items
manufactured in house by M/s ECIL, the Ministry submitted that the EFC
recommendations placed before the Cabinet, endorsed the recommendations of the
Inter-Ministerial Committee of Financial Advisors made in its meeting held on 3°
September 2009, that the actual cost of the following equipment manufactured in-
house by M/s ECIL for the 155, would be subject to detailed assessment by the Cost
Accounts Branch of the Ministry of Finance:

(i) Under-Vehicle Scanning System (UVSS) & License Plate Reader(LPR);

(iii) Active Bollards (set of 2);

(५) Active Bollards (set of 3);

(iv) Active Bollards (set of 4);

(v) Passive Bollards.
7.9 Accordingly, a reference had been made to the Ministry of Finance, Cost
Accounts Branch by MHA on 16" December 2009. The Ministry of Finance, Cost
Accounts Branch (renamed as Office of the Chief Advisor Cost), vide letter dated 21
October 2011, has submitted its Report on Costing of Bollards and UVSS supplied by
M/s ECIL.


196

7.10 On being enquired about the steps taken to ascertain whether there were
savings in excess of 2 percent in the rates of the in-house manufactured items and
that they have been passed on to the Government of India, the Ministry clarified that in
case of Active Bollards (Set of 2), Active Bollards (Set of 3) and Active Bollards (Set of
4), actual cost was less by 16.79 per cent, 9.49 per cent and 13.07 per cent
respectively than cost per unit approved by EFC. Since it was less by more than 2 per
cent, as per EFC the benefit would be passed on to the Government. The matter had
been examined in the Ministry and accordingly, on 80 November 2011 and 17"
November 2011, all the venue owners had been intimated and asked to recover /
adjust payments on account of these items as per the recommendations of the Office
of Chief Advisor (Cost), Ministry of Finance and in terms of the contract agreement
between Venue Owners and M/s ECIL.

7.11 M/s ECIL was required to test individual [SS equipment and issue a job
completion certificate for which it charged ₹ 10 crore. However, it did not produce the
relevant records to Audit. Asked for the reasons for non-production of the records to
Audit, the Ministry of Home Affairs submitted that there were a total of 33 venues
under the control of different Ministries/Departments/Organizations viz. the Ministry of
Youth Affairs & Sports, the Ministry of Urban Development, the Ministry of information
and Broadcasting, Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi and New Dethi
Municipal Council. Separate Agreements had to be signed in respect of each venue.
Each venue owner consulted its own law and finance departments and signed the
Agreement only after satisfying itself on the legal and financial issues involved. Thus,
the dates of signing of Agreements between M/s ECIL and the venue owners ranged
from 7" December 2009 to 5" August 2010.

7.12. The Ministry further explained that there was also delay on the part of venue
owners in completing the required works relating to construction/overlays etc. prior to
the installation, testing and commissioning of 158 equipment by M/s ECIL. Although
originally the venues were to be handed over to M/s ECIL by 14 April 2010, the venues
were actually made available to M/s ECIL for completing their work as late as mid-
September, 2010 in some cases. Even then, most venues were handed over in a
partial state of readiness for installation of ISS equipment. M/s ECIL had to commence


197

their work concurrently with the construction work being carried out by other agencies.
Although these delays in turn meant that there was insufficient time for M/s ECIL to
carry out a thorough and complete testing process of each and every piece of
equipment installed by them at each venue. M/s ECIL had stated that due to time
constraints, venue owners could not constitute any ‘Site Acceptance Test’ (SAT) team
as provided in the contract. However, M/s ECIL had done testing of individual
equipment and integrated system before putting them into operation for the Games
event. M/s ECIL had constituted Quality Assurance team which conducted tests for
each venue. M/s ECIL has further stated that Job Completion/ commissioning/ handing
over certificates were received from 23 venues. However, the requirement of
conducting of the ‘Site Acceptance Test’ before the ‘SAT Committee’ and obtaining of
Job Completion Certificate from the ‘SAT Committee’ was not fulfilled by M/s ECIL.

7.13 On being asked about the decision taken on paying the amount for testing in
the absence of testing certificate, the Ministry of Home Affairs submitted that as
regards payment/adjustment/recovery of amount charged by M/s ECIL as testing
charges, a view was separately being taken in consultation with the venue owners
concerned as well as M/s ECIL.

7.14 Explaining the remedial measures taken by the Ministry on the issue of inflated
estimates of M/s ECIL, the Home Secretary deposed in evidence as under:

" One major issue pointed out by C&AG was the inflated estimates given by the
ECIL which were approved and excess advance given to ECIL. When the
C8&AG report came to us, after that we set up a Committee under our Special
Secretary and Financial Advisor with members from the relevant Ministries.
That Committee went through all the costs involved and against € 350 odd crore
which was approved for this and which the ECIL had bid for, the Committee
came to a figure of = 200 and odd crore and they said that this is the right
amount which should be paid to ECIL inclusive of profit. Thereafter we wrote to
the relevant Ministries and to the venue owners because the contract was
between the ECIL and the venue owners and the relevant Ministries and MHA
was, as | was said, not the principal in this. We wrote to the concerned venue
owners and the Ministries that this is what we have found that the costs are to
be limited to this amount, = 200 odd crore, and so please make payments only
to that amount. So, the excess payment issue and excess advance issue also
has been taken care of. Our Committee found that the excess advance given
was to the tune of 2 85 crore and that also we wrote to the venue owners and
the relevant Ministries that this is the excess advance given as per the findings
of the Committee which we had set up and therefore they need to recover the
interest on the advance. Thereafter the venue owners started taking action and


7.15

198

the relevant Ministries also started taking action. But the ECIL have contested
this finding of the Committee and they have gone in for arbitration. The matter is
currently in arbitration. The ECIL does not agree to this finding of the
Committee that the costs plus profits should be limited to € 200 odd crore and
they have gone to arbitration and the arbitrator will decide."

Asked to state the level at which the dispute was being arbitrated, the Home

Secretary submitted:

7.16

"Sir, the contract between the venue owners and the ECIL itself provided for a
mechanism of arbitration. The mechanism provided that an officer of the DPE
will be arbitrator. An officer of the Department of Public Enterprises is
conducting the arbitration."

In this context, a representative of the Department of Atomic Energy, the parent

Department of M/s ECIL, in evidence contested the findings on the inflated estimates

as under:

7.17

7.18

under:

" Basically, the difference is because of the difference in presumption. The
CAG observation is with the presumption that probably ECIL was acting as a
trading agency only whereas it was not a trading agency. It was a service
provider for the entire integrated security system. | would like to quote a few
examples. In the case of flap barriers, ECIL not only procured the items but
rather the ECIL developed RIM card and associated from the manufactured
wired and interphased with the firm barriers. These were done by the ECIL per
se. Then, in the case of boom barriers, tyre barriers, road blockers and wedge
barriers, ECIL had developed custom built imbedded PLC programme and the
software was also developed. The man power was engaged and for the entire
man power and the software, there is always a cost attached to them. ECIL
had invested in that and because of that particular thing, there is a difference."

He added:
"In fact, as per the CAG observation, the profit margin comes to 126 per cent
whereas as per the ECIL calculation it is 30 per cent."

Elaborating on the matter, a representative of M/s ECIL deposed in evidence as

“What ECIL has done is that they procured the items. Then they developed the
software and integrated that into the things. For this entire thing, certain
amount of fixed price has been given. Today we are not asking for any
additional price or any item which is beyond the contract. What the hon. C&AG
has done is that they have taken one particular item out of that and said that the
procurement price is this, whereas the final price is this. This is where we are
trying to differ and express our opinion saying that this whole thing is a fixed
contract. The entire thing should be taken into consideration. So, do not take


199

only. one portion and then say that in this there is 126 per cent profit. If you look
into the whole thing, the entire material cost is this much, the manpower cost is
this and then the final cost is this, That is the entire cost of the solution provider.
So, in that case it is not more than thirty per cent. That is the calculation and
perception which we are trying to put forward."

7.49 Commenting on the issue of overcharging by M/s ECIL, the Home Secretary
apprised the Committee in evidence as under:

"When this complaint came about over-charging, to assess the cost we
requested the Cost Accounts Branch of the Ministry of Finance to carry out an
exercise. After we got the cost, as assessed by the Cost Accounts Branch of
the Ministry of Finance, we again wrote to the venue owners and the Ministries
concerned that these are the costs which have been calculated by the cost
accounts branch for the equipment which was supposed to be manufactured by
the ECIL. Therefore, for that equipment you limit your payment only to this
amount.”

7.20 The Home Secretary summed up the difference in the interpretation between
M/s ECIL and C&AG as under:
" What the ECIL has been telling and what they are telling the hon. Committee
is this. When they gave the quote, their figures included the cost of the building
of the software as well as installation as well as integration to give a complete
solution. That is why their quote was = 340 and odd crore whereas what the
C&AG has done is that they have taken only the bare cost price of the
equipment and not added the cost of integration, the cost of developing a
software and providing the services maintenance, etc. whatever. So, therefore,
the C&AG’s calculations of an excess profit are not correct. That has been their
(ECIL's) submission which they are placing before the arbitrator. The arbitrator
will take a decision.”
7.21. Subsequently, the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports vide their communication
dated 30" January, 2014 have informed that the Arbitrator has held that there was a
specific agreement entered into between the parties and, therefore, payments due as
per the rates and terms included in the agreement becomes due and have to be made
to the contractor. The Ministry further informed that they are exploring and examining

the possibility of filing an Appeal against the Award before the Law Secretary.

IL. Excess Cash Advance of २ 37 crore to M/s ECIL

7.22 Audit found that M/s ECIL received excess cash advance of % 37.08 crore (out
of the total cash advance claim of हैं 137.32 crore) for imported items. This was on

account of mis-classification of items imported / procured indigenously. M/s ECIL was


200

eligible for advance of 70 per cent of the CIF value of imported equipment and 40 per

cent on indigenously procured equipment. However, out of the equipment to be

imported, equipment worth % 123.60 crore (at EFC rates) was actually procured

indigenously, resulting in inflated cash advances to M/s ECIL.

7.23 The Committee enquired whether the Ministry had developed a mechanism to

ensure that the payment of advance was made only after examination of classification

of equipment as imported and indigenous. In reply, the Ministry of Home Affairs stated

in a note as under:

"The role of the Ministry of Home Affairs was restricted to coordinating the
finalisation of requirements of various equipments for the 155, finalisation and
obtaining approvals for the financial proposals for the same, freezing
documentation (Contract Agreement) and finally monitoring the progress in
implementation of the ISS as part of the overall security arrangements for the
CWG-2010. Venue owners as Buyers and M/s ECIL as the seller, were required
to adhere to the Contract signed between them on the basis of the Proforma
finalised and circulated by the MHA. As per the approved contract document,
the venue owners were to pay 70% of value of imported items and 40% of value
of indigenous items to M/s ECIL. Ensuring that the implementation of the
contract agreement between the venue owner and M/s ECIL was made as per
the agreed terms, is the responsibility of the Buyer (venue owner) and the Seller
(M/s ECIL). It was the responsibility of M/s ECIL to submit proper documents
and claim advance strictly as per the contract agreement between ECIL and the
venue owners."

7.24 Asked to state the measures taken to recover/adjust the excess advance drawn

by M/s ECIL, the Ministry of Home Affairs submitted as under:

"the terms of the contract agreement between the Buyer and the Seller were to
be adhered to by both the venue owner concerned as well as by M/s ECIL.
MHA has no role to play in the matter. However, the FA’s Committee
constituted under the chairmanship of Spl. Secretary & F.A. (Home) after the
findings of Audit were communicated, examined this issue as well and
determined that the excess advance obtained by M/s ECIL from the venue
owners amounted to %85.22 crore. Accordingly, venue owners have been
advised on 21.07.2011 and on 17.11.2011 to recover/adjust . the excess
advance drawn by M/s ECIL."

Procurement of Equipment in Excess of Requirement

7.25 According to Audit, despite being informed by the Delhi Police in July 2009 and
reiterated in August and September 2010 that Portable Explosive Detectors (PEDs)
should be removed from the BOQs as these were being procured separately, M/s
ECIL did not delete this item from the BOQs nor did it seek any clarifications from the


201

Ministry of Home Affairs. This issue was also not discussed in any subsequent
meeting of the Steering Committee. In March 2010, M/s ECIL procured 176 PEDs at a
total cost of % 38.55 crore for supply to the venues. During joint physical verification of
Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium, Audit found 42 PEDs still in packed condition. M/s ECIL
informed Audit that Dethi Police did not use these PEDs at any of the venues. The
shelf life of PED equipment was 7 years and that of its consumables six months.

7.26 The Committee enquired the basis on which the PEDs were procured when
Delhi Police had refused to use them. In reply, the Ministry of Home Affairs infer-alia
stated that in a meeting held by Union Home Secretary on 15" May 2009, a decision
was taken to constitute a Joint Committee comprising representatives from Delhi
Police, Intelligence Bureau and the Organizing Committee (OC), supported by Mis
ECIL, to give necessary expert oversight on the proposals made by M/s ECIL,
following their field surveys at various competitions, training and other CWG.- related
venues. The recommendations of the Joint Committee, which included statements of
security gadgets, including PEDs and RF-ID Tags, duly signed by all members of the
Committee including Delhi Police, were forwarded by Delhi Police to the Steering
Committee headed by Shri R. Narayanaswami, Special Advisor, CWG, Government of
NCT of Delhi.

7.27. The Ministry of Home Affairs further clarified that the commercial proposal of
Ms ECIL for the Integrated Security System (ISS) which included PEDs and RF-ID
Tags was sent on 14" October 2009 to the Cabinet for their consideration. The
Cabinet in its meeting held on 19" October 2009 approved the said proposal. It was
informed by Shri R. Narayanaswami, Special Advisor, CWG, GNCTD that at none of
the Steering Committee meetings [Chaired by Special Advisor (CWG) Shri
Narayanaswami], which were invariably attended by knowledgeable Delhi Police
officers fully conversant with the preceding Joint Committee deliberations, there was
any issue raised regarding the exclusion of the item of Portable Explosives Detectors
from the proposed list of,items to be procured by M/s ECIL. Such communications
were initiated later by Delhi Police through isolated letters to M/s ECIL outside the
Steering Committee mechanism. In case, Delhi Police did not want PEDs to be
procured through M/s ECIL, the same could have been excluded from the purview of
the Joint Committee meetings which were in any case being convened by Delhi Police


202

themselves, before feeding these lists to the Steering Committee. ECIL intimated that
a letter dated 317 July 2009 from Delhi Police requesting deletion of PEDs from the
BOQ was received after the commercial offer of M/s ECIL, which included PEDs, had
already been submitted to the Steering Committee. Delhi Police also did not raise the
matter in any of the meetings of Committee. M/s ECIL, in accordance with approval of
EFC, procured PEDs in the month of January, 2010 as per the contractual obligations

and thereafter delivered them to the venues.

7.28 When the Committee desired to hear the views of the Home Secretary on the

above issue, he deposed in evidence as under:

"On the Portable Explosive Detectors (PED), we have investigated the matter. |
believe this requires a bit more of looking into because a Steering Committee
had been set up under the Ex-Chief Secretary of Delhi to monitor all the
procurement and setting up of the integrated security system. Now, the Steering
Committee’s response to the Ministry of Home Affairs was that this issue was
nat raised in the meeting of the Steering Committee and, therefore, the PEDs
were procured. But the Delhi Police has shown to us a letter which they wrote
on the 31° of July 2009 that PEDs are not required and that they will manage
with the PEDs that they already have and by borrowing from CPMFs and that
letter has been shown to ECIL. But we will have to look into this matter again.”

7.29 When asked to explain the fate of the 176 PEDs procured by M/s ECIL, the
Ministry of Home Affairs responded that as per the contract agreement between M/s
ECIL and venue owners, the buyer (venue owner) wauld decide legacy and non-
legacy items within 30 days of completion of the event and venue owners would
decide as to their subsequent usage and retention. The responsibility for the utilisation
of non-fegacy items laid with the venue owners and Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports
(MoYAS). The Ministry of Home Affairs was only assisting MoYAS based on their
request. On the basis of the list of surplus legacy/non-legacy items furnished by the
MoYAS in February 2010, the Ministry of Home Affairs had tried to ensure utilisation of
all the surplus items including the PEDs procured by M/s ECIL. The Ministry further
apprised that during the ICC Cricket World Cup 2011 held in the sub-continent, 67
PEDs were handed over to various State Police Organsations as follows for their use
during the Cricket World Cup which were still with the State Police authorities.

Delhi Police- 8 nos.
Mohali Police- 18 nos.
Chennai Police- 16 nos.
Bengaluru Police- 20 nos.
Kolkata Police- 5 nos.


203

7.30 In addition to the above, 18 nos. PEDs were handed over to the Ahmedabad
Police, which had since been returned after the said event. The Ministry also stated
that they were making all efforts to ensure utilisation of all surplus equipment, including
PEDs, through absorption by State and Central Police and Security Organisations.

7.31 Asked to state categorically the short and long term plannings for utilisation of
the surplus PEDs, the Ministry of Home Affairs stated as under:

"The matter of utilisation of all PEDs to meet the requirements of the States,
Union Territories and Central Police and Security organisations, is under
process in MHA. Requests have already been received as follows:

Name of State/UT/ Organisation Requirement projected
Dept. of Atomic Energy FCO
CISF §3
CRPF 450
BSF 100
NSG 20
West Bengal 20
Andaman & Nicobar 4
Punjab 2
TOTAL 354
The surplus determined is only 155 nos. of PEDs and sanction for their transfer
to the above agencies on a pro-rata basis is under process."
7.32 On being enquired about the alternative arrangements made by Delhi Police for

explosive detection, the Ministry of Home Affairs stated that it had been informed by
Delhi Police that they had 17 nos. of MO-8 explosive detectors procured during the
year 2008. The shortage was made good by temporarily borrowing PED from SPG
and the CPMF namely ITBP, CISF and NSG."

IV. Non-Utilisation of RFID Tags

7.33 Audit scrutiny revealed that Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) tags,
containing details of the accredited vehicles, were to be fixed on the front windshield of
the vehicle for easy reading by RFID reader fixed at the venue entry gates to control
access. The Organising Committee was to give the list of accredited vehicles with the
required details and ECIL was to prepare RFID tags. ECIL procured 18,700 RFID tags,


204

but only 3,610 tags were used during the Games and the remaining 15,090 tags
(worth हैं 4.41 crore) were lying unutilised with ECIL. This indicated that the BOQ was
not realistically prepared by the ECIL and approved by the Steering Committee.

7.34 The Committee desired to be apprised of the reasons for an unrealistic
assessment of the requirement of RFID tags. In reply, the Ministry of Home Affairs
submitted that it was the CWG-2010 Organising Committee (OC), which was
responsible for estimating the numbers of RFID tags etc. required as the OC was the
body which was issuing accreditation for access to the Games venues. 18,700
numbers of RFID tags were procured and supplied by M/s ECIL as per the
Tequirements intimated by the OC to the Steering Committee for various venues.
Subsequently, BOQ was approved by EFC and Cabinet. Even as late as 23 January
2010, the OC had indicated a requirement of 17000 RF Tags to ECIL.

7.35 Asked about the linkage of the supply of tags to their utilisation, the Ministry of
Home Affairs clarified that M/s ECIL procured the approved quantity as per the
requirement of the OC. M/s ECIL had stated that much after they had procured the
RFID tags between 18" February 2010 and 311 May 2010 as per requirements
intimated by the OC and approval received, the OC informed during August, 2010 that
vehicle-RFID tags were required for 5000 vehicles and ultimately only 3,610 nos. of
RFID tags were used. As regards the unused RFID tags lying in stock with M/s
EClL/venue owners, their utilization for meeting the requirements of CAPFs/Security
Agencies/ State Police/UT Police Forces was in process.

7.36 Asked to furnish the complete details in this regard, the Ministry of Home Affairs
submitted complete details of the requirement received from various
organisations/offices.

५. Poor Legacy Planning and Non-utilisation of Non-legacy Equipment

7.37 M/s ECIL's agreements with the venue owners merely stipulated that legacy
and non-legacy items were to be decided within 30 days of completion of the events.
M/s ECIL would reconfigure all legacy equipment and make them workable in the
venue, while non-legacy equipment was to be handed over to the venue owners for
subsequent usage and retention. In its report to the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) of


205

November 2010, M/s ECIL identified legacy equipment of % 86.47 crore and non-
legacy equipment of % 186.18 crore at the 31 venues.

7.38 Audit however, pointed out that MHA did not have an approved legacy plan for
the utilisation/redeployment of the security equipment. Further, there was no “a priori”
identification of ISS items as legacy items, non-legacy items and consumables. Audit
also found that the legacy and non-legacy equipment amounting to ¥ 272.65 crore was
lying unutilized. M/s ECIL had dismantled all the equipment (legacy and non-legacy) in
all stadiums, except Thyagaraj Stadium. These were retained in packed condition in
the venues under M/s ECIL's custody. The legacy items had not been reconfigured, as
various network switches and cables required to operate them had been provided by
the OC as a part of overlays, and had since been removed. Although the OC had
undertaken to provide these again after CWG-2010, this was yet to be done. Also, no
utilisation plans for the non-legacy items had been prepared by MHA.

7.39 In the above context, the Committee enquired about the non-finalisation of the
legacy and non-legacy items well in advance and even within 30 days after the
Commonwealth Games were over. In reply, the Ministry of Home Affairs clarified that
the role of MHA was restricted to coordinating the implementation of the Integrated
Security System for CWG- 2010. In the approved standard contract format, which was
signed between ali venue owners and M/s ECIL, the decision as to determination of
legacy / non-legacy items was to be taken by the buyer (venue owner) within 30 days
of the completion of the Games and thereafter M/s ECIL would decommission all non-
legacy equipment. The legacy items would be reconfigured and made workable in
the venue, while usage/retention/disposal of non-legacy items was to be done by the
venue owners. Therefore, it was not MHA but the venue owners who were required to
identify and decide about the legacy/non-iegacy items. However, on the request made
by the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports, MHA was coordinating and helping the venue
owners in the utilisation of surplus legacy/non-legacy items. :

7.40 The Ministry further apprised that list of legacy and non-legacy items was
received from the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports on 10" February, 2011.
Immediately upon receipt, the list was circulated on 22" February 2011 and 14"
March 2011 to all State Governments/UT Administrations, State Police forces, Central


206

Armed Police Forces, Delhi Police and other security organisations to ascertain their

respective requirements.

7.41 As regards the utilization of surplus non-legacy item, the Ministry of Home
Affairs informed that the process of disposal of surplus/non-legacy security items
procured in connection with Commonwealth Games 2010, was initiated in February
2011. The CAPFs, Delhi Police and the State Police Organisations (SPOs) were
requested to indicate their requirements of available surplus items as per list received
from Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports (MYAS). In this connection a video conference
was also held on 25" March 2011 with the State Governments. Meetings on the issue
had also been held at the level of Additional Secretary and Home Secretary.
Requisitions had already been received from various agencies. These items were to
be physically transferred as per the requirements of CPAFs/ State Governments/ UT
Administration/Delhi Police. Since it was a government to government transfer,
necessary adjustment were to be made subsequently. The Ministry further stated that
the bulk of the items such as cameras and surveillance equipments had been
transferred and the process of sanction for the transfer to the agencies was underway.

7.42 When the Committee asked the Home Secretary to comment on the above

issue, he deposed in evidence as under:

" It was decided that after the Games were over, many of the equipment which
were not required may be utilised elsewhere. PED was one such equipment
which was required at many places. Out of 155, 67 were given out to different
organisations for use and they are there with different organisations and they
are using them. We will have to either recover the cost from them or show it as

_ issues. Right now they are shown as loan. The remaining PEDs are with us. We
have asked the different organisations as to whether they need PEDs. If they
need them, then these will be made available to them. One organisation said
that they need about 18 PEDs. That will make it 85. So, in the disposal of the
legacy items, we are helping the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports and the
Ministry of Urban Development in the disposal of non-legacy items."

VI. Security Arrangement at Kadarpur Shooting Range

7.43 Kadarpur Shooting Range in Gurgaon, Haryana was one of the competition
venues for CWG 2010. MHA released (February 2010) a special grant of हैं 23.23
crore, under the Modernisation of Police Forces Scheme, to Haryana Government for
making security arrangements for GWG-2010. Audit found that although ¢ 21.96 crore


207

had been drawn from the treasury during July-October 2010 and deposited with the
executing/ procurement agencies, no equipment had been received as of November
2010, even after CWG-2010 was over. In addition, 39 fabricated police assistance
booths worth = 0.74 crore were procured by Haryana Police Department, but these
were not handed over to the Gurgaon and Faridabad traffic police in time for CWG-
2010.

7.44 The Committee enquired whether the Ministry have taken up the matter with the
Haryana Government for not timely providing the security equipment for the Games.
In reply, the Ministry of Home Affairs clarified that they, in compliance with the
observations of CAG, had intimated to the Government of Haryana, vide letter no.
21011/45/2011-PM-I dated 197" October 2011, that the amount of ¥ 23.23 crore would
be adjusted from the Central allocations to be made to Haryana under the Scheme for
Modernisation of State Police Forces in the financial year 2011-12 (© 19.10 crore was
the allocation to the State in 2011-12 and the balance in the next financial year i.e.
2012-13).

7.45 Clarifying the matter further, the Home Secretary apprised the Committee in
evidence as under:

"As far as the Haryana Government is concerned, we gave an amount of =
23.23 crore, as the Chairman pointed out, and when they did not utilise that
money for procurement of equipment within time for the use during the
Commonwealth Games, we recovered = 19 odd crore during the next
instalment of the police modernisation funds that we give. So, we have
recovered ₹ 19 odd crore, % 4 odd crore needs to be recovered. The Haryana
Government has got back to us and they said that it is not correct to say that
they have not spent any money. They spent 7 odd crore on equipment which
they utilised for the Commonwealth Games. We have asked them to refer the
case to us and the dates of procurement of equipment, how they utilised it and
then we shall take a view on that. These are the two major points.”

7.46 When the Committee desired to hear the views of Haryana police in this regard,
a representative of that organisation submitted in evidence:

"Basically, equipment for Commonwealth Games fall under three categories.
Firstly, traffic equipment which was normally equipment like cranes, traffic
booths, recovery vans, etc. secondly, bomb disposal equipment and thirdly,
surveillance equipment. Both second and third were technical equipment and
were to be imported while traffic equipment was purchased within the country.
Actually we got the funds in August only. One month prior to Games. So, we in


208

fact tried our best to put in place whatever things before Games. Traffic booths
and equipments provided to Gurgaon and Faridabad and they actually utilised
it. But surveillance and bomb disposal equipment which were to be imported
from outside, that in fact got delayed because it takes five to six months to
complete all the formalities, tendering, various other equipments, testing
equipments, placement of orders. These equipments got delayed because we
had only one month and it takes minimum five to six months to complete the
formalities."

7.47 He further apprised:

"Actually, out of 22.23 crore, we actually spent %7 crore, out of this $1.37 crore
was spent before-the Games started, for the remaining हैं 5.7 crore we placed
the orders but supplies got delayed.”

7.48 Asked about the alternate arrangements made by Haryana Government for
Commonwealth Games, 2010 in the absence of the equipment, the Ministry of Home
Affairs submitted that the equipment to be purchased under the Modernization of
Police Force Grant was also to upgrade general policing in the two cities. Traffic
equipments, vehicles and other equipments were purchased before the CWG-2010
and were utilized during the Games. The surveillance system and other equipment
whose procurement process was very lengthy could not be procured because of
shortage of time. Haryana Police, however diverted additional resources and
additional manpower to Gurgaon and Faridabad to ensure that security arrangement
for the CWG 2010 were made properly. The Ministry also apprised that no untoward
incident occurred in any of the venues/places associated with CWG-2010, including
Gurgaon and Faridabad, during the Games.

7.49 On being asked whether Haryana Government had taken any action against the
suppliers for delay, the Ministry of Home Affairs clarified that Haryana Government
had cancelled the order of surveillance project allotted to M/s Zicom, and had also
forfeited & 3 lakh deposited by the Company with the Government, for not completing

the project as per the agreement.

7.50 When asked about the delay in sanctioning the amount, the representative of
Haryana Police submitted in evidence as under: :
“First of all, let me clarify that the Government of Haryana was not, in any way,

involved in the Commonwealth Games and we did not get separate funds for
the Commonwealth Games. We, in fact, submitted our proposals for collateral


209

areas in policing to develop in Gurgaon and Faridabad that would help players
and other officials and guests in going to Agra or in going to Gurgaon and that it
would help in the security of these persons. It was realised in late 2009 that
Gurgaon and Faridabad also need some upgradation of policing to facilitate the
security arrangement for the Commonwealth Games. So, in the late 2009 our
demand was accepted and funds were made available only in February 2010,
but that was again the end of the Budget year. So, we again approached the
Ministry of Home Affairs to revalidate. It was again revalidated but again certain _
clarifications were needed as to what equipment was required, what was the
cost, etc, Every authority was exercising the care and caution that the funds
needed by police were genuine. It took certain periods in coming to our
requirement and coming to the decision that yes these are the equipment, this
is the demand and the demand is genuine. That period, of course, was taken
but because we got funds late in the month of August, approximately 23 lakh
were available on the 27" July and the majority of the funds we got only in
August 2010."

7.51 He added:

"we floated tenders early thinking that funds would come to us. So, we
took precautions to complete all the formalities, but again we got
frequency supports only in February 2010."

VIL. Ill-conceived Decision for Legacy use of TETRA

7.52 Terrestrial Trunk Radio (TETRA) is a professional mobile communication
service which permits communication either through a network of base stations or
point to point communication like a walkie-talkie. HCL-Motorola was awarded the
contract in December 2009 on wet lease basis for 799.81 crore for an 87 month period
from January 2010 to March 2017 (i.e., not only covering the CWG period but also for
legacy use.) Audit pointed out that right at the outset (in September 2008), TETRA
was envisaged to cover not only CWG-2010, but also legacy use, on a wet-lease basis
for an additional period of 7 years. Delhi Police (DP) was the largest user of TETRA
both during the Commonwealth Games, 2010 and the legacy period. In September
2009, they indicated to limit their participation in TETRA system only to CWG-2010
and withdraw the previously projected requirement for the legacy period. Despite its
reluctance to join TETRA for legacy use, DP did not take a decision on the matter in
time, and was effectively forced to go along with the proposal. Audit further pointed
out that although DP. was represented in the Inter Agency Group (IAG), they chose to
withdraw only at a very late stage. The existing radio communication system of DP
comprised of 10894 sets (with a life of at least 15 years) covering police stations,
police posts, pickets, border check posts, Police Control Room (PCR)


210

vans/motorcycles and tourist PCRs. Delhi Police had also 42 hotlines connecting with
Central Control Rooms (CCRs), hospitals, civic bodies, Government agencies and
satellite audio phones for CCRs at selected Delhi Fire stations, mobile control rooms
and rescue and relief teams. Audit found it incomprehensible as to how just 3656
rented sets would meet the legacy requirements of Delhi Police, especially when
TETRA would not be connected or integrated with the existing communication system
(as per the DoT's stipulation). This effectively meant that TETRA users in the DP
would also have to carry the existing analogue sets for communication across the DP
network.

7.53 The Committee enquired about the inaction/indecisiveness on the part of DP in
voicing their concern early enough on the usefulness of TETRA. In reply, the Ministry
of Home Affairs clarified that Delhi Police had highlighted its operational requirements
in different IAG meetings including that the TETRA system should be capable of
transmitting signals all over Delhi and especially at bordering areas of Delhi as well
as inside buildings and the system should be able to handle peak load traffic without
being jammed. The TETRA sets were proposed to supplement and not replace the
existing communication network of Delhi Police.

7.54 On being asked about the planning/proposal of the DP to use TETRA sets,
which were not integrated with its existing communication system, the Ministry of
Home Affairs submitted that Delhi Police communication network operates through
multiple technology systems in different frequency plans. Upgradation of the
Communications network was a continuous process keeping pace with the emergence
of new technologies in telecommunication field to meet the enhanced communication
requirements from time to time. The Ministry further clarified that TETRA system
introduced during CWG 2010 was to supplement the various existing technologies
deployed for different purposes. Integration of the systems was a long drawn process,
which might be carried out in phased manner as per the actual requirement.

B. Venues developed by New Delhi Municipal Corporation

1. Selection of Raja Aederi Consultants Private Limited 38 Architect
Consultant :

7.55 Audit scrutiny revealed that none of the respondents to Notice Inving Tender
(NIT) issued by New Delhi Municipal Corporation (NDMC) for appointment of architect


211

consultant for Shivaji and Talkatora Stadia was technically eligible. Despite ample
time being available for retendering, NDMC appointed Raja Aederi Consultants Private
Limited, one of the ineligible respondents whose technical bid was ineligible on the
following points:

e {t had submitted the bid on the basis of an unregistered MoU (written on an
ordinary paper) with Sterling Engineering Consultancy Services Pvt. Ltd. dated
18" May 2006, signed five days before the opening of the bid ie. 23° May
2006. Interestingly, the original last date of submission of bids was 16" and 17
May 2006, which was extended on the request of the potential bidders;

e Raja Aederi Consultants (Pvt.) Ltd., as such, had no independent experience in
providing architectural services for sports venues of the prescribed contracted
value; and

¢ Sterling Engineering Consultancy Services Pvt. Ltd. provided an undated
experience certificate issued by another architect Shashi Prabhu & Associates,
instead of the client, stating that the former had rendered structural and design
engineering services for an indoor stadium project of National Sports Club of
7.56 In the above context, the Committee enquired about the rationale for appointing
an ineligible consultant despite sufficient time to go for retendering. In reply, NDMC
submitted that based on the documents submitted and the presentation made, the
Board of Assessor (Technical Evaluation Committee) comprising of Engineer-in-Chief
NDMC, ADG (Architect Retd.) CPWD, ADG CPWD, Chief Architect NDMC, Supdtg.
Eng. NDMC & Executive Engineer NDMC evaluated the technical bid and observed
that both M/s Kothari & Associates & M/s Raja Aederi Consultants Pvt. Ltd. qualified
the minimum requirement of Technical bid, after which the financial bid was opened
and the work was awarded lowest bidder i.e. M/s Raja Aederi Consultants Pvt. Ltd.

7.57 On being enquired whether responsibility had been fixed for selecting a firm
from a pool of ineligible bidders as consultant, NDMC clarified that intensive
examination of this project was undertaken by the Central Vigilance Commission who
had concluded that the process of award of the said consultancy to M/s Raja Aederi
Consultants Pvt. Ltd. was not in order. Accordingly, case for seeking first stage advice
of the Central Vigilance Commission in the matter had been processed. On receipt of
their advice, further action would be initiated by NDMC.


212

7.58 Asked about the outcome of CBI investigation in the matter, NDMC stated that
chargesheet had been filed by the CBI regarding appointment of consultant for Shivaji
Stadium in the court of Special Judge, CBI, Patiala House Court, New Delhi.

i. Selection of China Railway Shisiju_ Group Corporation (CRSGC) as
Contractor for Shivaji Stadium

7.59 Audit pointed out that the main contractor hired for improvement/upgradation
works at Shivaji Stadium in May 2008 was a foreign company i.e. China Railway
Shisiju Group Corporation (CRSGC) with no existing established base in India when it
was apparent from the conditions of NIT that such was not the intention. Shivaji
Stadium could not be completed in time for the Games and the completed hockey
pitch in the stadium had an East-West orientation as against the required North-South
orientation.

7.60 Audit observed that CRSGC's bid should have been rejected at the technical
evaluation stage itself for the reasons listed below:

. No global tender was issued; the NIT was only published in national
newspapers, loaded on NDMC website and circulated to a panel of 18
Indian contractors;

. The primary eligibility condition was experience of execution of
construction of new multi-storied block of Central Government or State
Government departments/ Municipal Boards/Autonomous Bodies /
PSUs, indicating an Indian context. CRSGC produced similar experience
of working in China instead of India;

° CRSGC did not produce requisite registration certificates from competent
authorities for local taxation and registered place of business in India.
These were produced only post opening of the financial bid; and

. Generally, when foreign participation is envisaged, formation of JV with a
local company or creation of a separate legal entity in India is insisted
upon to ensure compliance with local law, familiarity with local conditions
and facilitate settlement of ‘egal disputes, if any. No such provisions
were made in this NIT.

7.61 The- Committee, then, enquired about the rationale for selecting a foreign
contractor though this was not the intention of NIT. In reply, NDMC submitted that the
technical bids of all six firms had been evaluated as per eligibility criteria in the NIT.
All the documents submitted by M/s. CRSGC were attested by the Indian Embassy at
China. M/s CRSGC had given undertaking regarding ongoing registration. Further,


213

M/s CRSGC subsequently submitted a certificate of the Registrar of company, NCT of
Delhi and Haryana for establishing business in India. The eligibility of the firm was
evaluated and approval of Competent Authority on evaluation of the technical sub-
Committee was accorded.

7.62 The Committee desired to know whether CRSGC's inability to deliver in Indian
conditions was one of the main reasons for Shivaji Stadium remaining incomplete. In
reply, NDMC stated that the work was delayed due to the following main reasons:

(i) There were shops, restaurants, kiosks etc. falling in the alignment of the
project while making arrangements of their allotment, cancellation or its
shifting, the allottee of Clock Tower Restaurant went to the court against
NDMG. The delay in clearance of Court case and possession of
encumbrance free site caused major constrain in completion of the work
as per planned schedule.

(ii) The existing Elect-Sub-Station and Municipal Under Ground
Reservoir/Water Boosting Station on this plot of land, feeding adjoining
area were also to be constructed in the basement of Shivaji Stadium and
were to be made functional before demolishing and clearing this site for
construction of stadium. The project site is very restrictive and that
needed extra efforts due to double handling of materials.

(ii) Extra ordinary rains during the year 2010.

7,63 NDMC further apprised that extension of time shail be regulated with or without
levy of compensation on merit of the case and in terms of the relevant clause of the
agreement.

7.64 On being asked about the inability of NDMC to provide hindrance free site to
CRSGC by removing shops, restaurants, kiosks etc. in time, NDMC stated as under:

“The venue brief requiring development of Shivaji Stadium along with
administrative block was received only on 12.05.07, as a result NDMC had to
rework the plans according to the requirements of venue brief, which was taken
up on priority and return brief was forwarded to OC, 0४४5 णा 10.12.2007.
Simultaneously, these plans were also forwarded to DUAC on 24.08.2007,
Delhi Fire Services on 24.08.07 so as to avoid delays and ensuring timely
clearances from the statutory authorities. The issue of eviction/removal of
shops/kiosks/restaurant space etc. in and around Shivaji Stadium came up only
after the revised plans, as per venue brief were drawn. Further, since the
properties are Public Premises, any eviction action is required to be initiated
under Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants) Act, 1971, as per
the laid down procedure. With a view to expedite action for removal of these
units a decision was taken to relocate licensees with valid licences and


214

accordingly, draw of lots for 14 units out of the 17 was held in October, 2008
itself after which these units were got vacated. Even in remaining 3 cases, the
matter was followed up in the Court of Estate Officer, who passed eviction order
in all 3 cases in Sept., 2008 and these units were also got vacated on 24.9.08,
25.9.08 and 10.11.08 respectively.

The eviction proceedings against the Clock Tower Restaurant, the unauthorized
occupant were pending before the ADJ and the Hon'ble Court remanded it back
to the Estate Officer on 15.07.2008 with the directions to decide the matter
afresh and after giving proper and effective hearing to the applicant and after
recording the evidence of the party. The Estate Deptt. made special efforts and
requested for regular hearings at the level of Estate Officer. Eviction Order in
this case was passed by the Estate Officer on 11.12.08 against the
unauthorized occupant of Clock Tower Restaurant.

This order of the Estate Officer was challenged by the unauthorized occupant of
Clock Tower Restaurant through an appeal before the Ld. ADJ-IV, Patiala
House Court on 22.12.08 and the Ld. ADJ stayed the operation of order of
Estate Officer. On 7.1.09, NDMC filed a writ in High Court for quashing of
interim stay order of ADJ-IV. However, since the appeal for regular hearing
before the ADJ was listed on 9.2.09, Hon’ble High Court vide order dated
30.1.09 disposed off the writ advising NDMC to request ADJ for early disposal
of the case keeping in view the urgency involved.

The appeal was finally dismissed by ADJ on 3.3.09. The premise was taken
over the same day and the structure was got demolished by 4.3.09.

The work for redevelopment of Shivaji Stadium was awarded on 28.04.2008

and the work was to be completed within 18 months from the stipulated date of

start ie. 29.05.2008 and therefore, both the issues were taken up

simuitaneously i.e. eviction/vacation of the units and construction work. [t may

be observed here that ail the units in and around Shivaji Stadium except Clock

Tower Restaurant which went into prolonged litigation were got evicted and
- handed over to the construction agency by November, 2012."

7.65 As regards NDMC's failure to anticipate court cases and other hindrances and
plan the time schedule of Shivaji Stadium work accordingly, NDMC submitted that it
had originally resolved for upgradation of Talkatora Indoor Stadium and Shivaji
Stadium to international standards in July, 2005 itself. Accordingly, Consultant was
appointed in June, 2006. However, since the venue brief for Shivaji Stadium was
provided by OC, CWG only in May, 2007 the whole upgradation process was required
to be reviewed and it was only due to the revised plan which was in conformity with the
requirements of the venue brief, it was essential to remove/demolish the stalls/kiosks
etc. NDMC further apprised that since these properties of NDMC were Public
Premises, any eviction action was required to be initiated under Public Premises


215

(Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants) Act, 1971 which was a quasi judicial process
and a laid down procedure for eviction in all such cases was required to be followed.

4.66 The Committee then enquired about the period of extension of time given to
CRSGC for completion of Shivaji Stadium and the quantum of total money paid or
levied due to delay in completion of the stadium. In reply, NDMC clarified that as per
the letter of award the stipulated date of start and completion were 29" May 2008 and
287 November 2009 respectively. To keep the contract alive, provisional extension
was being granted from time to time by the competent authority as per the codal
procedure laid down in CPWD Manual. The provision for extension of contract was
also provided in Clause 5 of the Agreement. As per record, the provisional extension
had been accorded upto December, 2012 and the exact extension of time would be
decided only after completion of the work.

7.67 NDMC further apprised that ail civil and electrical works had been physically
completed at site and NOC for lifts has already been received from the electrical
inspector of the Government of NCT of Delhi.

7.68 As regards recoveries for delay in completion of the stadium, NDMC submitted
that Clause 2 of the Agreement provided for levy of compensation in case of delay by
the agency, which was not attributable to the department. Quantifiable levy would be
deducted at the time of settling the final bill. However, to safeguard the interest of
NDMC, an amount of % 3.44 crore had been withheld on account of extension of time

from the running bill of the agency.

Il. Engagement of Simplex Projects Ltd. as the Main Contractor for Talkatora
Indoor Stadium

7.69 According to Audit, there were two major civil works to be undertaken at
Talkatora Indoor Stadium - Sports Facility Block and Additions and Alterations. Though
the tender was advertised in the newspapers, NDMC website and circulated among
the panel of contractors, in both contracts only one bidder, Simplex Projects Ltd.
responded. While NDMC chose to retender the contract for additions/alterations, it
decided ‘to accept the single bid for the construction of the sports facility block. It is
pertinent to note here that the period of execution of the contract was 18 months
(sports facility block) and 12 months (addition/alteration work), and, therefore, there


216

was scope for rebidding. Further, on analysis of justified rates of items constituting 44
percent of the justified cost, Audit found that these were 16 per cent higher than
CPWD DSR rates applicable. Under the circumstances, it was desirable to re-bid and
test the market once again. In the absence of competitive bidding and difference in
the justified costs and those worked out in audit on a test check basis, it was difficult
for Audit to conclude that the best price was determined for the work in a competitive
market, The quality of construction was also found deficient by CTE, CVC at the
evaluation stage itself.

7.70 In the above context, the Committee asked about the procedure followed by
NDMC to justify that the best price was determined for the work in a competitive
market. In reply, NDMC apprised as under:

"The work of Addition/Alternation at Talkatora Indoor Stadium was awarded
after second call of the tender. In the first call single tender was received which
was rejected. The Tender was re-invited and only a single bid was received
again inspite of due publicity. Further, single tender was considered at
negotiated rates (81 percent above EC) than justified rates (65.42 percent
above EC) for timely completion of the project before the trial games. The two
trial games were successfully organised in the month of March 2010 and July
2010.

The work of new block was awarded on first call inspite of being single tender
as the target date for completion of competition venue was fixed as December
2009.

The work was awarded @ 88.05 percent above EC as against justified rates
@74.39 percent above EC in the month of December 2007 with stipulated
completion period of 18 months as it was considered that retendering may
consume time, which is going to effect the target date of completion of
competition venue. It is also submitted that there were number of projects on
wayllikely to start including in NCR for preparation for CWG and there is a
probability of getting even higher rates in future besides loss of precious time
and as such department has considered the case of acceptance."

7.71 On being asked about the delay on the part of NDMC in starting the tendering
process well in advance, NDMC submitted that the venue brief for both the works of
Talkatora Stadium was received on 3 November 2006 from the OC, CWG. Return
brief was forwarded to the OC on 22"4 November 2006. Subsequently, the conditional
approval of the OC to the plans forwarded by NDMC was received on 50 July 2007.
Approval of the Council for award of work for Construction of Utility Block with two
level basement parking was obtained vide Resolution No. 1 (A-47) dated 5" November


217

2007. Further, for upgradation of Talkatora Indoor Stadium, a single tender was
received on first call and as there was substantial difference between the justified and
quoted rates, it was decided to go in for retendering.

7.72 When asked about the reasons for not attracting a reasonable number of
bidders for its tenders, NDMC clarified that the only probable reason for non-
participation of large number of bidders seemed to be that during that period due to
boom in construction industry and due to CWG-2010, almost all the agencies in the
field of construction were having sufficient work in hand.

7.73 The Committee then desired to be apprised of the reasons for awarding the two
works pertaining to Talkatora Indoor Stadium much above the estimated cost. In
reply, NDMC ciarified that it followed the CPWD Works Manual for all works, as per
which the detailed estimated cost for both these works was prepared on the basis of
Schedule of Rate circulated by CPWD plus Cost Index prevailing then. In both these
cases, estimates were prepared on the basis of DSR 2002 plus Cost Index. Tenders
were invited on the basis of estimated cost. Further, while processing the tender for
award of work, justification of rates based on prevailing market rate at the time of call
of tenders was taken into account as per Clause 19.4.3.2 of CPWD Works Manual.
The work was then awarded after taking into account the justification of rates. The
same procedure was adopted in both these cases.

7.74 NDMC further submitted that the CPWD Manual provided that works between 5
to 10 per cent above that justified rates could be considered after recording reasons.
In both these cases, the works awarded were strictly within the aforesaid laid down
norm of the CPWD Works Manual.

IV. Work of Upgradation of Street Lighting - Calling of Design Based Tender
by NDMC and Consequent Loss

7.75 NDMC opted for a “design based approach”, wherein each bidder was asked to
submit road wise design and compute the quantity for each item required to meet the
target illumination level and to quote the rates for items required. The lighting standard
did not provide for calling tenders on design basis. Audit were of the view that design
based tender did not ensure procurement of items at the lowest cost. “Design based
tender’ had also actually placed M/s Philips at an advantageous position with respect


218

to other bidders, as despite quoting higher (item wise) for each of the key items, M/s
Philips managed to be the lowest (L-1) bidder due to proposed use of lower quantities
of various items. For instance, the design proposed by M/s Philips involved use of
3815 poles and 4166 luminaries (at a cost of हैं 34.40 crore) against the estimated
quantity of 6364 and 9329 respectively, while the quantities quoted by the second
lowest bidder (Space Age) were 6492 poles and 7126 luminaries (at a cost of हैं 37.32
crore). Audit observed that the second lowest bidder i.e. Space Age at the quoted
quantity of M/s Philips could have executed the work at हैं 28.69 crore, which would

have less than been the amount quoted by M/s Philips by हैं 6.77 crore.

7.76 In the above context, the Committee enquired about the reasons for opting
design based tenders though these were not provided for in the lighting standards. In
reply, NDMC ciarified that performance standards for the work of upgradation of street
lighting in NCT Delhi circulated in December, 2006, categorized roads in three
categories namely category-A1, category-A2 and category-A3. For each category of
road, the standards prescribed separate specifications of luminaries. These were
binding on all the road owning agencies taking up upgradation work of street lighting in
their respective areas. NDMC further apprised that their area was unique due to
dense trees, thick foliage on its roads. This feature was not common to roads in
MCD/PWD areas. "Standards for integrated street lighting project for Delhi" also
mandated that NDMC would approve the design on case to case basis. However,
lighting levels would need to be met as per specification. The earlier lighting system
on these roads had already served its useful life of 15 years. The lighting standard
provided by NCT, Govt. of Delhi was a guiding factor to achieve best possible lighting
in NDMC areas in most cost effective manner. So, item rate integrated design based
performance linked tenders were invited and processed.

7.77 Asked whether such tendering left NDMC with no control over how and where
the lights would be placed, NDMC inter-alia stated as under:

"Specific provisions, were made in the NIT to ensure that the design offered by
the tenderer, gives light output as per the “Standards for Integrated Street
Lighting Project for Delhi”. हे

Compared to the existing 6400 poles and 6748 luminaries now 4738 poles and
5094 luminaries have been installed in the new system. Further NDMC and
Third party quality assurance agency alongwith contractor conducted the lux


219

level measurements and it was found that [ux level at two roads and 333 zebra
crossing/bus queue shelters is unsatisfactory. The contractor was directed to
provide the additional infrastructure for achieving the required tux level but the
contractor has not responded. LD amounting to %61,40,086/- has been levied
and recovery has been effected on this account."

7.78 On being asked whether the Technical Evaluation Committee (TEC) assessed
the different designs, NDMC submitted that Technical evaluations of the bids was
carried out by a team comprising of Engineers from NDMC, MCD and PWD before the
price bids were opened. Three meetings of TEC were held on 13" May 2009, 57 June
2009 and 127 June 2009 respectively. Technical Comparative statement prepared by
the Department of the Data’s / Parameters, supplied by each tenderer, in their
technical bid were discussed among the members of the TEC. While the design
submitted by the tenderers were broadly discussed and being a design based tender
the thrust was on achieving minimum lux level as mentioned in the standards. After
due discussions and deliberations the TEC gave final recommendations for opening of
Price bids.

7.79 The Committee then desired to know the reasons for not doing the design ‘in-
house’ or executed through consultancy thereby giving equal opportunity to all the
bidders. In reply, NDMC stated as under:
"The designing of lighting with required lux level on NDMC roads is a
specialized work due to tree lined avenues, thick foliage on its toads,
necessitating specific design of poles, bracket and luminaries & was being done

for the first time for which the Electricity Department was not having prior
experience.

Another possibility was of getting the lighting system designed through
consultancy, separately & thereafter calling BOQ (Bill of Quantity) based
tenders. Even in this eventuality, the contractor could not have been held liable
in case the required lighting level was not achieved, if something was faulty in
the design."

7.80 When asked whether the defective street lighting on the 2 roads and 333 zebra
crossings/bus queue shelters had been rectified, NDMC apprised that the contractor
had not yet achieved the required lux level/ performance parameters fixed as per NIT
specifications/conditions, on two roads and 333 zebra crossings/bus queue shelters.
The contractor was required to provide additional infrastructure for improving the
performance parameters on two roads and 333 zebra crossings/bus queue shelters,


220

however the contractor has not yet provided the same in spite of having witnessed
lighting measurements done by M/s PDIL a third party, independent quality assurance
agency and department advising to achieve the required lux level as per the contract.

7.81 Asked to state the action taken against the contractor, NDMC submitted that in
case the contractor did not provide the additional infrastructure at his own cost, to
achieve the required performance parameters on two roads and 333 zebra
crossings/bus queue shelters, as per NIT, the work shall be got done on actual cost
basis through another agency at the risk and cost of the contractor and recovery would
be affected alongwith damages, as per the terms of the contract.

Vv. Irregular Award of Work in NDMC Under Deviation Clause Leading to Loss Leading to Loss

7.82 According to Audit, the Chairman, NDMC gave approval for additional work of
18.45 km for 14 roads and service/ slip roads, which were not part of the original
agreement. The works were awarded on the same rates as the existing contract for
street lighting with M/s Philips (awarded in August 2009) under the deviation clause
stating that the increase in quantity was under the deviation limit of 25 percent. In this
case, the additional work valuing हैं 7.38 crore was for new roads not covered by the
original agreement, and hence could not be construed as deviation in quantity alone.
Award of additional work to M/s Philips at its quoted (higher) item rates led to an
additional loss of € 1.45 crore, when compared with the rates of second lowest bidder.
As per the tentative execution data provided by NDMC, the additional work on 14
roads led to an excess expenditure of % 1.30 crore beyond what would have entailed if
the roads had originally been included in the contract, and optimally designed.
Against the pro-rata cost of = 7.37 crore, M/s Philips had submitted a bill of हैं 11.05
crore. The full execution/consideration of proposal of M/s Philips as per the claim
submitted would finally entail a total cost of 12.06 crore for additional work, leading to
an increase in the currently computed loss figure of 71.30 crore to % 4.68 crore, in
addition to the loss of % 1.45 crore incurred on account of higher rates of M/s Philips
during award of additional work. The total loss on account of award of work was,
therefore, estimated at ¥ 6.13 crore.

7.83 In the above context, the Committee queried about the rationale for giving
approval for additional work of 18.45 km for 14 roads and service/slip roads, which


221

were not part of the original agreement. In reply, NDMC clarified that all the 14 roads
in the additional work of 18.45 km, which were included for upgradation of street
lighting, were prominent roads in NDMC area and they were originally planned to be
upgraded under Phase-lil of the project work for upgradation of street lighting on 81
roads, for which the Council had already sanctioned an estimate of = 29,45,49,000/-
vide Res. No. 08(B-25) dated 31 December 2008.

7.84 NDMC further clarified that the additional work on these 14 roads was approved
by the Chairman being within 25 per cent deviation limit of the contract agreement with:
M/s Philips Electronics India Ltd., awarded on pro-rata basis, on the same term
conditions and specification of the original contract and NDMC council vide Res.No.
08(B-39) dated 23" February 2011 ratified the award of additional work on 14 roads.

7.85 Apprising that the payment for additional work was restricted on pro-rata basis
or on the actual quantity executed, whichever was less, NDMC stated that for
additional work the approved pro-rata cost of the work was %7,37,89,874/-. As against
this, an amount of €7,26,17,889/- was payable to the firm being the amount calculated

on pro-rata basis or on actual quantity executed whichever was less.

7.86 Asked to state the amount of actual payment made against the bill of हैं 11.05
crore submitted by M/s Phillips Electronic India Ltd., NDMC responded that the final
bill had not been paid to the supplier. M/s Phillips Electronics India Ltd. had submitted
a bill of € 11.05 crore for the additional work. However, payment for additional work
was to be made on pro rata basis or for actual quantity executed whichever was less.
NDMC on its part had worked out an amount of = 7,26, 17,889/- for the additional work
done. Further, M/s Phillips Electronics India Ltd. has gone in arbitration which was
being contested by NDMC.

Vi. Delay in Project Initiation and Completion - Delays in NDMC

7.87 Audit scrutiny revealed that after approval of estimate (December 2007), NDMC
delayed the tendering process. Tenders were invited in March 2009 i.e. after a delay of
14 months, and it took another five months to award the work. The contractor was
given additional work for 18.45 km between December 2009 and October 2010, which
would imply a proportionate increase in the time period up to November 2010. The


222

execution of work was delayed by more than two months and NDMC had neither
issued completion certificate nor recorded the final measurement. Further,
compensation for delay valuing हैं 1.25 crore was also not levied.

7.88 In the above context, the Committee enquired about the failure on the apart of

NDMC in issuing the completion certificate and recording the final measurement. In

reply, NDMC inter-alia stated in a note as under:
"The “Standards for Integrated Street Lighting Project for Delhi” stipulates that
lighting measurements shall be done between April-Sept. The installation work
on all 81 roads (including work on additional 14 roads) was physically
completed by Phillips on 30.08.2010 as per the contractual provisions.
However the lighting measurements were to be completed between April-Sept
2011 in compliance with the provisions of standards. The final measurements
of the work done and recording of completion certificate was thus only possible
after the completion of lighting measurement work and ensuring that the
provisions of undertaking furnished by the firm, , are duly complied with. M/s
PDIL a govt. of India undertaking, the 3rd party quality assurance agency,
engaged by NDMC, had done the lighting measurements on all the 81 roads
and submitted report of test results for the lux measurement on 12/09/2011.
The final measurements of the work done and completion certificate have
accordingly been recorded in September 2011."

7.89 On being enquired whether liquidated damages have been levied for delay of
more than two months in completion of the work, NDMC clarified that liquidated
damages were not leviable for delay in completion of the work as the work was
physically completed by the stipulated date of completion i.e. 30!" August 2010.

Vil. Renovation and Restoration of Connaught Place

7.90 Redevelopment of Connaught Place Project was awarded to M/s Engineers
India Limited, a Public Sector Undertaking/Govt. of India (EIL) as Turnkey Consultant,
for Planning, Designing, Tendering, Procurement, Erection, Scheduling, Execution,
Monitoring and Successful Completion and Commissioning of the Project in fully
operational state after obtaining all clearances needed for the purpose.

(i) Traffic Management

7.91 According to Audit, eight additional subways were planned under the plan for
renovation and restoration of Connaught Place (CP) and the work of construction was


223

simultaneously started causing traffic constraints and protests from the shopkeepers
represented by New Delhi Traders Assoicaitons. Consequently, in a meeting in
January 2010 called by the Lieutenant Governor, Delhi to discuss traffic problems and
access issues during renovation works in CP, the Commissioner of Police opined that

_ the requirement of subways needed to be revisited. Some sub-ways had been planned
on either side of the intersection, and some, for example the one at Panchkuian Road,
at areas where not much of pedestrian movement existed. Some of the relatively less
important subways could be taken up after the Commonwealth Games, and concreting
of the outer circle road should be done lane-wise. The project for renovation and
restoration of Connaught Place was still nowhere near completion, given the difficulties
of traffic management and ill-conceived planning. Audit found it difficult to assess the
timeline by which this project was likely to be completed to provide necessary benefits
to the citizens of Delhi.

7.92 Contesting the Audit observations, NDMC stated in a note that the project was

not ill conceived on account of the following reasons:

“(a)The project required several statutory clearances like clearances from
Council, Heritage Conservation Committee, Delhi Urban Art Commission
(DUAC) , Ministry of Environment & Forests, Delhi Pollution Control Board,
DDA Technical Committee & clearance from MoUD for execution under
JNNURM. To get these statuary clearances lot of effort is involved & is time
consuming. All these clearances were obtained & final clearances by DUAC
were received only on 27-Nov-2008. The comprehensive restoration plan was
submitted to DUAC in Feb.’06 which was approved in Nov.’08. So DUAC took
nearly three years to give clearance for restoration project. Thereafter final
traffic clearance for construction of subway/ service corridor/ development of
parking lots etc. was given by Traffic Police in Dec.’09, withdrawn in first week
Jan.10 and then again given towards end of Jan.’10. So primary reasons for
delay were clearances from various departments. The revised schedule has
been drawn for completion of balance work and project is likely to be completed

_ by Dec.’12. The total scope of work was divided in 13 packages most suitable
and manageable package to execute the work taking into account
completeness and inter-dependence of work. Further Division of two major
packages i.e. service corridor and subways would have resulted in time and
cost overruns besides inconvenience to stakeholders for longer duration.

(b)The delay was primarily on account of late and very limited stage wise
clearance by Delhi Traffic Police, unprecedented & prolonged rains last year &
limited time available for execution of work (27-Jan-10 to 31-July-10) and
stoppage of works from 31-July-10 due to Commonwealth Games. Further in
view of cycling event though Connaught Place made it necessary to execute
and complete surface development works along the, route of cycling event. This


224

could only be achieved as works were awarded in manageable packages with
least traffic disruption across whole C.P. as well as least inconvenience to
stakeholders. The target set for completion of works before CWG was
achieved. The cycling event was held successfully and appreciated by all
concerned."

7.93 The Committee enquired whether NDMC ever tried to find out why Delhi Urban
Art Commission (DUAC) was taking too much time in giving clearance for Connaught
Place renovation and restoration project and the efforts made by NDMC to get timely
response from DUAC. In reply, NDMC submitted that timely replies to the DUAC’s
observations were given and presentations were also made by Engineers India
Limited before DUAC for early clearance for the Redevelopment of Connaught Place
Project. For this purpose, EIL had engaged subject experts in various fields to guide it
through this process of getting clearance from DUAC. NDMC also made efforts
alongwith the EIL for pursuing the DUAC for early clearance of the project.

7.94 On being asked about NDMC's approach to Delhi Traffic Police for obtaining
traffic clearance for construction of subways/service corridor/development of parking
lots etc. in connection with Connaught Place Renovation and Restoration Project,
NDMC clarified that EIL along with NDMC approached Delhi Traffic Police during
planning stage in December 2008 and also immediately after award of work in March
2009. Further, presentation for Traffic Circulation Plan was also made to various
officers of Traffic Police by EIL being a “Trunkey Consultant” and follow-ups were
made by Ell. and NDMC. The modifications suggested by Delhi Traffic Police were
also incorporated. Requests were also made for early permission for proposed Traffic
Circulation Plan during construction period.

7.95 The Committee then desired to know the reasons for delay on the part of the
Delhi Traffic Police in giving clearance only in January 2010 and the efforts made by
NDWMC to receive the final clearance from Delhi Traffic Police in time. In reply, NDMC
submitted that after continuous interaction, Delhi Traffic Police had given initial
clearance wef. 1% January 2010 vide their letter No.1720/SO/DCP/T-NDR dated 29"
December 2009. However, Traffic Police withdrew the permission after reports of
traffic congestion in Outer Circle and permission was finally accorded on 27" January
2010 after study of traffic movement.


225

7.96 The Committee enquired whether the requirement for subway was being
revisited as suggested by the Commissioner of Police based on pedestrian
movements in the areas where the subways had been planned. In reply, NDMC
apprised that the work in balance subways would be started only after the study of
pedestrian movements. The pedestrian movements under construction subways on
either side of Panchkuian Road and Barakhamba Road would be evaluated.

7.97 When asked whether the study on pedestrian movements had been completed

and report evaluated and decision taken on the construction of balance subways,

NDMC stated in a note as under:
"NDMC had engaged M/s RITES Ltd. to prepare Traffic Engineering and
Management Plan for Connaught Place and Central Secretariat Areas.
Accordingly, RITES submitted its report to NDMC in November, 2005, which
had duly addressed the issue of pedestrian facilities in Connaught Place area.
This report was considered by the EIL before taking further action. Keeping the
study in view, 8 additional subways were planned under the Redevelopment
Plan for Connaught Place. However, considering the site constraints and
recommendation/objections raised by the stakeholders, and experience gained
from the operations of the existing subways now, it has been decided to
construct only 4 new subways viz near Statesman building, Gopaldas Bhawan,
Panchkuian Road intersection (two) and accordingly the revised timelines for
completion of the project has been set as December, 2012.”

(ii) Contract Management

7.98 Audit pointed out that granite was used as flooring material in the pilot project
for 'C' Block, contrary to the initial DUAC approval of November 2006. Consequently,
after inspection, the DUAC ordered sandblasting of granite flooring in November 2008
to reduce the colour contrast, resulting in avoidable expenditure of Rs 0.19 crore. In
area development works for inner and outer circles of Connaught Place, granite stone
kerb was used instead of concrete kerb stipulated by the DSR, with a difference in
expenditure of Rs 5.97 crore. This included avoidable expenditure of Rs 0.61 crore,
due to an unjustified change in colour of granite stone kerb from 'Sindoori Red’ colour
to 'Rajashri Red' colour. Audit also noticed award of work of Polymer Concrete Drain
Costing हैं 2.44 crore along the circumference of Central Park. According to Audit, the
expenditure is unnecessary, due to the existing road side drains. Further, Audit
inspection revealed choking of polymer drain in some places with mud due to its
narrow width.


226

7.99 Commenting on the Audit observations, NDMC stated in a note as under:

"(a) Restoration of facade and improvement of Corridor and surrounding open
space of 'C' Block was taken up as the Pilot Project in Nov.’05. The proposal
was approved by Heritage Conservation Committee of MoUD vide its letter No.
6(4)/2005-HCC dated 22 Mar. '06 and Delhi Urban Art Commission vide its
letter No. 13(1)/2006-DUAC dated 01 Nov.’06. HCC and DUAG, both approved
the NDMC’s proposal as proposed, without any suggestion and amendment.
NDMC's proposal dated 28th Sept. 2006/25th Oct. 2006 included laying of
granite stone flooring in the corridor. Accordingly, the granite was used as
flooring material for pilot project. No sand blasting has been carried out in the
flooring and no expenditure has been incurred on this account hence it is
incorrect to say that % 0.19 Crore has been incurred on this account.

(b) There is no extravagance in use of granite kerb stones as granite is often
used for street-curbing keeping in view the fact that granite is more durable than
that made of concrete & provides decorative appearance in such a Heritage
Complex of national importance which cannot be compared to normal kerb
stones of other roads. Besides such upgradation of Heritage Complex is carried
out once in sixty to seventy years. So the longitivity of materials has to be kept
in mind besides aesthetic & durability. So no extra cost has been incurred.
Only 1.63 crores would be the cost on granite kerb stone & not % 5.97 crores as
stated by audit.

(c) The “Rajshree Granite” kerbstone was used taking into account uniformity
with paving material duly approved in addition to its texture, density and
durability. Therefore change in colour/texture from Sinduri Red to Rajshree
Red is justified being the similar category and expenditure thereon is
reasonable and as per contract.”

7.100 NDMC further stated that 'Rajashri Red' was provided in kerb stone to match
the colour of footpath granite stone.

7.101 On being asked to state the reason for laying the polymer concrete drain along
the circumference of Central Park when roadside drains had already been provided,
1010 stated as under:

" The polymer concrete drain has been provided as per requirement of the site.
The footfalls are high and in providing any other type of drain with grating was not
found suitable for this area having limited width/ space. This drain has been
designed on the edge of footpath between railing of Central Park and planter. It is
not out of place to mention that the polymer concrete drain provided ail around *
the Central Park in footpath was found necessary due to the reason that this area
has high footfalls and need to be frequently cleaned and washed as importance
of the area and aesthetic also. The polymer drain shall help in trapping silted
water flowing to planters. "


227

7.102 Even if the footfalls are high, the area had already been provided with road side
drains. The Committee asked whether the roadside drains could have taken care of
the area. In reply, NDMC submitted that drain at the side of footpath had been
provided to take care of surface drainage in a scientific manner so that the water
flowing from footpath might not damage the greenery. The designers in their wisdom
thought to provide best provision.

Vill. Creation of Park and Ride Facility at Safdarjung Airport

(i) Removal of Paver Blocks

7.103 Audit pointed out that pavers blocks costing %10.91 crore, that were to be
dismantled and reused by DTC, had still not been removed despite repeated request
of NDMC; DTC had not responded after the initial assurance of July 2010 for lifting of
paver blocks.

7.104 In the above context, the Committee enquired whether the paver blocks had
been removed by the DTC for its use. In reply, NDMC clarified that DTC lifted 4.10
lakh pavers till date. For the rest of pavers, NDMC was pursuing regularly with DTC to
{ift out the pavers urgently and in this regard, D.O. Letters had been written to DTC by
the Chairperson and the Secretary, NDMC on various occasions. NDMC further
apprised that a letter had been received from CMD, DTC wherein it had mentioned
that NDMC might make arrangement for shifting of pavers at different locations in DTC
depots for which cost would be borne by DTC.

7.105 Enquired about the latest status of utilisation of paver blocks by DTC, NDMC
explained that in all 35 fakh pavers were proposed to be lifted from Park & Ride facility
at Safdarjung Airport. DTC till date had lifted 5.56 lakh pavers. As DTC could not lift
the pavers further, efforts were made to use them in NDMC area where ever required.
18.66 lakh pavers had been removed and used till date by NDMC and balance of
around 11 lakh pavers would be removed in near future, for which planning had
already been done.

7.106 In this regard, Audit commented that despite one year having passed, the paver
blocks had not been utilised. Further, Airports Authority of India had also warned


228

NDMC that it would levy demurrage charges against NDMC as construction material
ying in airfield was a safety hazard for aircraft operations.

7.107 The Committee asked whether all the construction material lying in the airfield
had been removed and the area had been restored to its original position. In reply,
NDMC clarified that more than 55 per cent area utilized for Commonwealth Games
has been restored as per the requirement of Airports Authority of India. Now, the
balance pavers, utility structures and jersey barriers from the area were being lifted
out. DTC had deposited हैं 19 lakh on 18" October 2012 only for shifting the balance
jersey barriers and utility structures to their depots at Ghummanhera, Rajghat and

Naraina. Now the action for removing these structures/ remaining jersey barriers and
utility structures was proposed to be taken at the earliest.

{ii) Reutilisation of Signages

7.108 Signages were provided at an estimated cost of % 2.17 crore for the Games
period. Audit observed that providing steel//aluminium signages for the short duration
of Games period appeared to be unjustified.

7.109 The Committee enquired how have the signages been re-used. In reply, NDMC
stated as under:

"Being an international event the Signages were provided inside the airport and
outside the airport along the roads upto Jawahar Lal Nehru Stadium as per the
approved transport plan. The Signages provided on the roads outside are
permanent and there is no need to remove these Signages. Therefore, most of
the signages are still being used/utilising their purpose. The Signages fixed
inside the Airport are being re-used after making some modifications except
stainless steel frame as per site location requirements. The 46 Signages have
been re-used out of 97 Signages used inside the Airport. Rest shall be used
shortly."

7.110 Asked whether all the 97 signages originally used inside the airport have since
been reused elsewhere, NDMC apprised as under:

"46 signages out of 97 have already been reinstalled in NDMC area. Further,
26 signages are being used after some modification as per site requirement.
The remaining 25 customized signages for Games like Mascots, Inauguration
Board etc. are taken in stock. The size of these remaining 25 signages is odd
and these cannot be used directly and needs substantial modification. However,
these will also be utilized as and when required.”


229

7.111 In this regard, NDMC stated that the 46 parking signages had been te-installed
at in and around Multilevel Car Parking at Sarojini Nagar, at various locations of Vinay
Marg and Satya Marg, and Nehru Park and parking area at Tilak Marg Radial Road.
NDMC also informed that the total amount spent on the 97 signages was हैं 50.46 lakh.

(iii) Appointment of Consultants for Routine Jobs Like Laying of Roads and Jobs Like Laying of Roads and

Interlocking Paver Blocks in Park and Ride Facility at Safdarjung Airport Safdarjung Airport
Area

7.112 As pointed out by Audit, NDMC paid & 0.13 crore to Central Road Research
Institute (CRRI) and Design Action Group for consultancy services for routine jobs like
laying of roads and interlocking paver blocks in Park and Ride facility at Safdarjung
Airport area. According to Audit, this was unjustified as the nature of work was laying
roads and interlocking paver blocks, which are commonly executed works in Delhi and
Government of NCT of Delhi had objected to this expenditure.

7.113 The Committee enquired why were consultants appointed for routine jabs like
laying of roads and interlocking paver blocks. In reply, NDMC stated as under:

“Being important work related to Common Wealth Games 2010, CRRI a
premier Government of India Institute was engaged for Design and
Specificaitons for Parking Area and the roads within the parking to be
developed in Consultation with Airport Authority of India as recorded during the
meeting held on 18th April, 2009 with Chairman Airport Authority of India.
Since this was the largest parking lot for public i.e. 1,70,000 Sqm catering to
3000 cars, 6000 two wheelers and 450 buses so there was a need to have a
specialist consultant who could design and give specifications of the such huge
parking lot. The design of roads and pavers, the base and sub base courses
their type, material and thickness were designed by CRRI depending upon the
nature of soil and other related technical parameters. %4.0 lacs only was paid to
CRR! for this work. The Design Action Group was engaged for Preparation of
conceptual plan, layout plan, DE, NIT, and preparation of design and the
drawing for utility structures for optimizing the space and to cater the utility at
the time of events. GNCTD has sanctioned the expenditure and released the
payment हैं 13 lacs for the same.”

7.114 The Committee specifically asked whether NDMC with ail the engineering
expertise at its disposal could not do such routine jobs as laying of roads and
interlocking paver blocks instead of appointing the consultants with exorbitant fees. In
reply, NDMC stated as under:

"For development of pavement for parking, for an international event, an
Agency with expertise in designing was needed. An efficient design was


(४)

230

required for optimizing the space, for safety and convenience to delegates/
commuters etc.. Keeping in view the above facts and the importance of the
Airport site, the consultant was appointed. The Consultant's fee of हैं 13 180 is
about 0.3% of the project cost of about हैं 40 crores. Even as per the routine
practice, all the pavements in NDMC area i.e. rigid pavement or flexible
pavement of bituminous macadam are improved in consultation with CRRI
which is an expert central govt. agency on road issues."

Non levy of Liquidated Damages

7.115 Audit scrutiny revealed that though the contractor, KR Anand delayed the

execution of work by 70 days, liquidated damages of %0.92 crore were not levied on

the plea of delay due to VIP movements at Safdarjung airport; however the

hindrance register showed only 5 % days of delay due to VVIP movements and the

major reason recorded was rains. According to Audit, that did not hold good since the

works were initially to be completed in mid July, before the onset of monsoons.

7.116 With regard to non-recovery of liquidated damages from the contractor for delay

in completing the work, NDMC stated as under:

"The work was to be executed on operational airport where regular flights of AAI
and VIP's flights were operating form adjacent runway. The regular
maintenance flights of AAI were operating approx. on daily basis. Apart from
this the helicopter of military/BSF/PAWAN HANS was also operating from the
airport. Instruction was given to the contractor to prevent any casualties
suitable cautionary action may be taken at site. Majority of the work was
completed before 16" July, 2010 but due to technical reason of air traffic control
the remaining work was completed only after closure of runway by Airports
Authority of India three weeks before commencement of Commonwealth
Games. As per instruction issued by Ministry of Home Affiars vide their letter
dated 1% July, 2009 based on request from Chief Secretary, Government of
Delhi letter dated 5" May, 2009 certain activities like installation of fencing,
jersey barriers and Signages were to commence after 7" September, 2010 i.e.
three weeks before the commencement of Commonwealth Games. This has
also been recorded in the minutes of meeting dated 30th April 2010 with
Chairman, Airport Authority of India. There is no way work could have been
completed before 25" September, 2010 ie. three weeks before the
commencement of the Common Wealth Games. Accordingly, after closure of
runway balance work was completed on 25'" September, 2010 since there was
no delay on the part of contractor so no compensation for delay has been levied
against the agency. It reveals from above that the main reason for delay of
work was not only the rains and bad weather but the aforementioned facts were
also there to complete the work. The site for installation of fencing, jersey
barriers and signages etc. was cleared by Airports Authority of India only on 7
September, 2010 when airport was closed for fixed wing aircraft movement
from 7" September, 2010 to 317 October, 2010. The second phase of the work


231

is still in progress due to non-lifting of interlocking pavers by DTC. Extension of
time will be finalized after completion of the complete work as per the contract.
However, sufficient amount has been withheld as part rate and other heads and
payment will be made to contractor only after completing all the formalities as
per contract."

7.117 In this regard, Audit commented that NDMC issued a show cause notice to the
contractor on 16 July 2010 for wrongful delay/slow progress of work. The hindrances
register maintained by NDMC reflected hindrance for VVIP movements for 5% days
and main reasons for delay was reflected as rains/bad weather, which was not
acceptable as the work, was supposed to be completed by mid July 2010. Further,
while calculating the liquidated damages, Audit had already considered the hindrances
due to VVIP movements/security instructions. NDMC's contention that sufficient
amount had been withheld, was not acceptable as more than 95 percent payment had
already been made to the contractor despite non completion of whole work.

7.118 The Committee enquired whether liquidated damages had been recovered from
the contractor for wrongful delay and slow progress of work for which show cause
notice was issued to the contractor by NDMC on 167 July 2010. In reply, NDMC
stated in a note as under:

४ No liquidated damages have been recovered from the contractor so far as the

work is not yet completed and time extension case of the contractor is not yet
finalized."

7.119 Reminding that the work was supposed to be completed on 197 January 2011,
the Committee desired to know the reasons for DTC's failure to lift interlocking pavers
because of which the second phase of the work was still in progress. In reply, NDMC
stated in a note as under:

" The DTC have tried to lift pavers through own vehicles and have been able to
lift 5.56 lakh pavers."

7.120 When asked about the action being contemplated against DTC for its failure to
lift the interlocking pavers because of which payment of extra money to the contractor
was imminent, NDMC had stated as under:

" A letter was issued to DTC vide ref. No.EE(R-II)/D/1808-13 dated 11.05.2012
regarding the expenditure towards shifting of jersey barriers to DTC Depots at
Ghummanhera and utility structures at Naraina Depot and Rajghat Depot


232

respectively. The payment of हैं 19 lakh has been received by NDMC on
19.10.2012."

(v) Engagement of Ineligible Contractor

7.121 Audit pointed out that the contractor, M/s Fiber Fill engaged for constructing
public utility services was technically ineligible at the time of opening of financial bids.
The required experience certificate was received post opening of financial bids; and
other bidder, KR Anand who was otherwise eligible, was declared ineligible.

7.122 The Committee desired to know the reasons for selecting था ineligible
contractor while rejecting an eligible contractor. In reply, NDMC stated as under:

“(a) M/s Fiberfill was technically eligible for opening of Financial bid at the time
of evaluation of bids in December 2009 as the agency had completed the
requisite work as per the certificate submitted with the bid. The amount of
completed work was calculated as per CPWD OM NO. DGQ/MAN/160 dated 31
July 2008 where it has been mentioned that the value of executed works are
required to be brought to current level by enhancing the actual value of works at
the simple rate of 7 percent per annum calculated from the date of completion
to last date of receipt of tenders for works executed in last Seven Years. In fact
the work executed by the agency till 30 December 2009 is more than the
eligibility criteria as per letter dated 08 February, 2010 issued by Airport
Authority of India. Therefore, the agency fully meets the Eligibility Criteria.

(b) The bid of M/s Anand was technically disqualified based on the fact that they
did not submit the Mutual Agreement between M/s K.R. Anand and M/s Puja
Enterprises, which was an essential condition of NIT. As can be seen from the
document this is one-sided affidavit signed by M/s Puja Enterprises and not a
Mutual Agreement between M/s K.R. Anand and M/s Puja Enterprises and
therefore was accordingly disqualified. So there is no question of favouring M/s
Fiberfill on the subject matter."

(vi) Excess Payment to Dethi College of Engineering

7.123 As pointed out by Audit, Delhi College of Engineering (DCE) was engaged as
Third Party Quality Inspection Agency (TPQIA) on offer basis for a fee of €0.38 crore,
but no agreement determining its scope of work and terms of payments linked to
milestones achieved by the contractors was signed. DCE was paid ₹ 3.58 lakh in
excess of 1 percent of tendered cost as sanctioned by EFC.

7.124 The Committee enquired why was DCE paid over and above the sanction given
by the EFC. In reply, NDMC stated as under:


233

(a) Delhi Government had sanctioned < 31.25 crore in 1st Phase and vide
letter dated 27 August, 2010 had sanctioned additional amount for हैं 8.75 crore
in second phase which includes 40.00 lacs for Third Party Quality Assurance
(1 percent of ¥ 40.00 crore) against which हैं 31.63 lakh has been paid till date.

(b) So it is evident from above that Delhi College of Engineering carried out
inspections and submitted the reports as per terms and conditions of the
engagements and no payments above the sanctioned amount of Government
of Delhi has been made stated in Para (b) above. Since the statutory taxes are
obligatory payment so these were made to the agency and there is no
irregularity in payment of statutory taxes to the Delhi College of Engineering in
the form of Service Tax and is within the revised amount sanctioned by
Government of Delhi."

7.125 On being asked whether the excess payment made to DCE had since been
recovered, NDMC stated that no excess payment had been made to Delhi College of
Engineering and therefore, no recovery was required to be made.


234

CHAPTER VIII

ROLE AND RESPONSIBILITY OF THE MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND
BROADCASTING AND PRASAR BHARATI

8.1 Prasar Bharati was designated as the Host Broadcaster for the Commonwealth
Games, 2010. Ministry of Information and Broadcasting (1&B) through Prasar Bharati,
set up the centralised Host Broadcasting and International Centre Hub and the Main
Press Centre (Press Information Bureau) at Pragati Maidan at a cost of = 482.57 crore
out of this = 187 crore was provided as loan to Prasar Bharati by the Government to be
tepaid to the Government by Prasar Bharati through revenue sharing with the
Organising Committee. The balance amount was provided as grant to Prasar Bharati,
PIB and ITPO. The recording and broadcast was done in High Definition TV format.
Broadcast compounds were also established at all Games Venues. Prasar Bharati
had engaged International Consultant for this purpose. As the Host Broadcaster,
Prasar Bharati (PB) /Doordarshan was given the role and functions of television and
tadio production; broadcast venue operations and services; and setting up the
International Broadcasting Centre (IBC).

1. Broadcasting Services by Prasar Bharati - Cost Estimation

8.2 According to Audit, Prasar Bharati's initial budget estimate of July 2007 of 557
crore for broadcasting services was not found to be realistic by the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting (MIB). Further, OC's Advisor — Broadcasting, Shri
Patrick Furlong advised PB to prepare a realistic budget estimate after issuing a
Request for Information (RFI). In October 2007, PB issued an RFI, to which only one
complete response from International Games Broadcasting Services (IGBS) was
received, After receipt of this response, PB prepared a revised budget of € 445 crore
for broadcasting services in November 2007. This was finally reduced to % 366 crore in
the approved Cabinet estimate of October 2008. Audit could not derive assurance as
to the reasonableness and reliability of the approved budget estimate of % 366 crore
for broadcasting services. The award of the contract for production and coverage’ to
M/s SIS Live for हैं 246 crore on a single financial bid basis and its back to back sub-
contracting to Zoom Communications Ltd. for हैं 177.30 crore confirmed the unreliability

of the estimates.


235

8.3. The Committee enquired about the reasons for Prasar Bharati not preparing its
initial estimates realistically on basis of a timely issued RFI instead of doing so quite
late on direction of Ministry, which resulted in estimates being hurriedly prepared on
the basis of only one complete response to RFI. In reply, the Ministry of Information
and Broadcasting stated that the initial estimate from PB was sent without any delay,
to the ] & B Ministry on 3 July 2007 even though the OC had formally communicated
appointment of Prasar Bharati as Host Broadcaster only on 267 March 2007. It was
also stated that the HB Service Agreement between the OC and Prasar Bharati was
signed only on 157 May 2009 by which time Prasar Bharati had already taken advance
action for not only EFC approval but also had gone ahead with the processing of EOI
for short-listing of Entities for various HB activities. Thus due diligence and scrutiny at
various levels was exercised while framing cost estimates, and advance action
initiated accordingly considering the acute shortage of time for such activities.

8.4 The Ministry also stated that the firming up of cost estimates and budgetary
approvals of a project of this scale for which the requisite prior experience and in-
house expertise was not available either in PB or in the Government, required due
diligence and scrutiny at multiple levels in PB and Government, as per the prescribed
norms and procedures, which was bound to take time, given the processes involved.
A number of queries got raised during the process of examination, which needed to be
replied to after seeking inputs from PB.

8.5 Responding further to the vetting remarks of Audit, the Ministry of Information
and Broadcasting jinter-alia stated that this was the first time ever in the
Commonwealth Games history that the entire Games coverage would be in HDTV
format and it was quite a time taking exercise for Prasar Bharati to formulate estimate
of coverage of the Games, yet Prasar Bharati managed to do a detailed exercise and
within three months, forwarded an estimate for ¥557 Crore for CWG 2010. This was
examined by the Ministry of | & B and thereafter, pursuant to the decisions taken in the
meeting held on 287 September 2007 under the chairmanship of Secretary, | & B,
Prasar Bharati went through an exercise of revising the estimates and submitted an
EFC proposal for % 445 Crore for CWG 2010 to the Ministry of | & 8 on 30" November
2007. The IFD of the Ministry of | & B after analysis of the estimate, recommended a
further deduction of % 79 Crore in the total cost component of 7445 Crore proposed by


236

PB. The reduced proposal for € 366 Crore for CWG 2010 was thereafter considered by
the EFC in its meeting on 19" March 2008. Based on the recommendations of EFC, a
Cost Estimates Committee (CEC) was constituted under the then AS & FA Ministry of |
& 8 with JS (8), Economic Advisor, Director (Fin) and Dir (BD) from Ministry of | & 8,
JS from Min of Youth Affairs & Sports, Chief Advisor (Costs) in Department of
Expenditure and DDG (PD-CWG), PB as Members. The committee in its
recommendations dated 16" May 2008 confirmed the cost estimates of ₹366 crore for
CWG 2010, and this was finally approved by the CCEA on 3% October 2008. The
same was communicated to Prasar Bharati by the Ministry of | & 8 on 311 December
2008.

ll, Undue Delays in the Award of Contract for Production and Coverage

8.6 Audit pointed out that the process for tendering and award of the contract for
production and coverage to M/s SIS Live took inexplicably long. PB proposed
Expression of Interest (EOI) in October 2008 but took three months to finalise it in
December 2008. PB submitted the 501 to the Ministry of Information Broadcasting
(MIB) twice in October 2008 and December 2008. MIB insisted that PB send the
proposal and revisions through CEO, PB. However, PB did not comply and sent the
revisions through DG, DD. After the receipt of EOI responses from five technically
eligible firms in January 2009, PB issued the Request for Proposal (RFP) only in July
2009 and the Letter of Award in October 2009. There was further delay in signing the
contract which took place in March 2010. PB submitted the draft RFP to MIB thrice in
May, June and July 2009. According to Audit, MIB's observations, which necessitated
multiple revisions of the RFP, were on relatively trivial aspects, which did not cover the
rigid conditions and other core issues in the RFP. Further, the delay in approval of
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) and finalisation of EOI and RFP resulted in
paucity of time due to which re-tendering in the context of a single financial bid was not

feasible.

8.7 The Committee asked the reasons for which the Ministry took more than one
year in approving their budget for broadcasting of the Commonwealth Games, 2010
through EFC memo. In reply, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting submitted
that an elaborate examination of the overall cost estimates for Host Broadcasting
activities for CWG 2010 was done at multiple levels in Prasar Bharati and the


237

Government as per the prescribed norms and procedure. Prasar Bharati had on 36
July 2007 initially forwarded an estimate of हैं 557 crore for CWG 2010. This was
examined in the Ministry and in the meeting held on 28'" September 2007 chaired by
the Secretary, |&B, PB and attended by Mr Patrick Furlong, PB was directed to float
RFl's to seek information from service providers on the basis of which the cost
estimates could be firmed up. Pursuant to the decision, the RFI's were sought from
four international entities as suggested by the OC media consultant. Two of them (i.e.
IMG-TWI and HBS) gave a joint response in the name of IGBS. The third i.e. BBC
Resources responded for only a partial set of activities and the fourth i.e. ISB in its
reply declined to offer any quote. On the basis of RFI's received, the estimates were
further bought down to % 445 crore in the EFC proposal. The IFD in the Ministry
recommended a further cut of ¥ 79 crore and recommended it far consideration of
EFC chaired by Secretary (Expenditure). To further scrutinise and firm up the costs
estimates for the projects, a Cost Estimates Committee was canstituted by EFC as

mentioned above.

8.8 The Ministry further submitted that the linkages between the RFI's received
from BBC (OB), UK and IGBS, Switzerland and the cost estimates prepared by PB
were examined by CEC. It was clarified by PB that since RFI's did not include cost
estimates with regard to a number of items as envisaged for completion of the Host
Broadcasting activities as also the dollar rate variations and other load factors, these
needed to be extrapolated along with other relevant items extracted from RFls.
Accordingly, an item wise cost table was prepared by PB and placed before the CEC.
The item wise cost table in its 'Remarks" column explained the extrapolations from the
RFl's estimates and also justifies inclusion, wherever made of the new items. The
Cost Estimates Committee in its recommendations dated 16.05.2008 confirmed the
cost estimates of = 49 crore for CWYG, Pune, 2008 and ₹ 366 crore for CWG, Delhi
2010 and this was finally approved by the CCEA. The Financial Evaluation Committee
of Prasar Bharati, at the time of evaluation of financial bids for production and
coverage tender, found the price quoted by M/s SIS Live to be 17 percent lower than
the similar components/activities in the CCEA approved budget of about हैं 254 crore

(after taking the impact of foreign exchange variations into account.)


238

8.9 In short, according to the Ministry, elaborate examination ‘of overall cost
estimates for Host Broadcast activities, further scrutiny of the cost estimates of PB in
the Ministry to firm up the cost estimates for the projects, constitution of Cost Estimate
Committee by EFC, preparation of contracts, terms and conditions, preparation of item
wise cost table by PB and its extrapolations with the item wise cost table and its
examination by the Ministry and various meetings conducted at higher level for
finalisation of the estimates etc. took much time for finalising the estimates which
resulted in delay in finalising the estimates.

8.10 The Committee asked the reasons for the non-intervention by the Ministry when
Prasar Bharati took more than six months, after award of contract, to sign the contract
with the selected entity. In reply, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting inter-
alia stated that the Ministry's authorization to Prasar Bharati (given on 22707 October
2009) to finalize and execute the contract was clear that it should be in accordance
with the draft contract annexed to the RFP, as approved by the Competent Authority,
subject to such legal vetting as deemed necessary. However, the entity desired a
number of changes on which differences did crop up amongst Members of Host
Broadcast Management Committee (HBMC) and accordingly the issues were referred
by Prasar Bharati to the Ld. Solicitor General who ultimately settled the draft vide his
letter of 13" January 2010. The draft so settled was also subsequently approved in the
HBMC meeting. Subsequently, on the draft settled by the Solicitor General, only two
amendments, one relating to the change in the payment schedule from 30:70 (pre-
games: post games) to 40:60 and the other relating to the waiver of bank guarantees
for the first two payments of 5 per cent each, were referred to Prasar Bharati by HBMG
and considered in the fourth meeting of the Oversight Committee held on 10"
February 2010. The Oversight Committee took note of the progress as reported by
DG, Doordarshan during the meeting that most of the deliverables which were
required to be completed for the release of the first two installments had already been
completed by the entity even though no payment could be released to the entity by
then. The Oversight Committee recommended the waiver of the bank guarantee
subject to the entity dropping the demand to change the payment schedule from 30:70
to 40:60 and further subject to Prasar Bharati satisfying itself that requirement for BGs
no longer existed and that the performance guarantee of 10 per cent be obtained in
terms of the contract so as to ensure the necessary safeguard. The approval of the


239

Competent Authority was accordingly conveyed to Prasar Bharati on 16" February
2010.

UL. Pre-Bid Meeting and Delay in Finalisation of Contract with SIS Live

8.11 Audit scrutiny revealed that PB held a pre-bid meeting with the five technically
eligibie bidders on 247 July 2009. The shortlisted respondents expressed serious
concerns about the terms and conditions of the contract, financial conditions/ payment
schedule, vague clarifications and difficult deadlines. During the pre-bid meeting, PB
took a very rigid stand against making any changes in the payment schedule.
Contrarily, PB also committed that the “draft contract would be finalized with the
zeroed-in entity mutually”. Subsequently, all the shortlisted respondents, other than
M/s SIS Live, expressed their inability to submit a bid under the given terms and
conditions. In particular, International Games Broadcasting Services (IGBS) (whose
response to the RFI was the basis for cost estimation) indicated their unwillingness to
submit a bid on account of tough financial conditions, unfair and one-sided draft
contract, unreasonable and unrealistic RFP conditions (regarding scope of services
and provision of technical and personnel specifications) and inadequate clarifications.
As a result, 1585 withdrew from bidding for the Commonweaith Games, 2010.
However, many significant conditions/provisions of the contract were later changed by
the Host Broadcaster (HB) at the draft contract stage or subsequently in favour of M/s

SIS Live as given below:

[Area Pre-bid query by bidders Response of PB | Actual implementation by PB

Payment Considering 10 percent | No

After the first two instalments, the

schedule

performance guarantee, 80 per
cent of payment is not due until
completion of the games. This is
at variance with the payment
schedule for similar events
anywhere in the — world,
Considering that the most
significant part of budget is spent
prior to the event, we - would
request DD for

negotiation on this.

payment schedule was changed in
September 2010 from 30 percent
before the Games to 60 percent
before the Games.

Could you confirm that the
payment schedule can be
discussed and negotiated as part
of the

contract negotiation with . the

_



240

successful bidder?

Please advise on date and time
frame for releasing payments
once the deliverables are
submitted

As per draft

contract

Would HB consider lowering the
timeframe of payment from 30

Accordance — to
clause 6.3 (b) of

This was changed while finalising
the contract to 10 working days of

days to 7 days after submission | draft contract. submission of invoice along with
of deliverables? inspection certificate.

Equipment Would HB consider a later date 7 Timeline for installation of
for equipment and core teams at site
equipment to arrive, if delivery of 31 August 2010 was converted
guarantees were offered? to proof of despatch of equipment

while changing the schedule of
payment in Sept 2010,
Eventually, SIS Live was allowed
to delay the timeline for successful
installation of equipment to 27%
September 2010.
As per Form Tech 7, details of | The entity has to} In August 2040, SIS Live
equipments as accurately as | provide the list of | approached HB for change in
would be actually deployed for | equipment and in | make/medel of certain equipment
the games with makes and|rare cases can | from those approved in the
models of every piece of | substitute production plan, which was,
equipment for every OB. equipment with | however, not accepted by HB.
similar or better | During inspection carried out by
specification with | the team of technical experts in
proper justification | September 2010, substantial
and approval of | deviations in the
HB. manufacturer/specifications of
equipment were noticed but no
action was taken. Incidentally, the
DG DD stated that, as per opinion
of the Additional SG, the details of
make and model of equipment
given by entity (in the production
plan) was only illustrative to meet
technical specificatioris.
Please clarify if the timeline in | Ithas to be Timeline for installation of
Appendix VI must be used to | in accordance equipment and core teams at site
construct the financial bid or can | with Appendix by 31 August 2010 was converted
alternative dates be proposed for | VI to proof of despatch of equipment
equipment personne! _ arrival while changing the schedule of
normally associated with payment in Sept 2010.
international games.

Consortium If the entity A substantial part of contract was

happens to outsourced to Zoom

be a consortium

Communications and



241

no addition can be
11908 and
composi-

responsibilities and profits were
shared equally by both, which
essentially makes it a partnership,

tion of consortium
shall remain the
same as on
submission

of EO! responses.

Coverage of | Will the contract be awarded well | Contract Letter of award was issued to SIS
QBR in advance to enable the bidder to | would be Live on 22 Oct 2009, just six days
plan and prepare to cover the | awarded before QBR.
QBR? well in
advance of
the QBR

8.12 As would be seen from the above, the favour extended to M/s SIS Live included
change in payment schedule in September 2010 from 30 percent before the Games to

60 percent before the Games, lowering the time frame of payment from 30 days to 10
days, allowing delay in timeline for successful installation of equipment from
31* August 2010 to 27" September 2010; allowing substantial deviations in the
manufacturer/specifications of equipment, conversion of timeline for installation of
equipment and core teams at site by 31% August, 2010 to proof of despatch of
equipment; allowing outsourcing of a substantial part of contract to M/s Zoom
Communications Ltd.; issuing of Letter of Award to M/s SIS Live on 22 October 2009
just six days before the Queen's Baton Relay (QBR) etc.

8.13 Audit further pointed out that the accepted financial bid included %10 crore for
consultancy (wherever required), which M/s SIS Live had stated to be its project profit.
In addition, £10 crore was provided for incidental/ contingency expenses, which M/s
SIS Live stated to be pre-operative expenses and unspecified contingencies. Although
the Host Broadcast Management Committee (HBMC) negotiated with M/s SIS Live, it
could not effect any deduction under these heads. Thus, the contract was ab initio
overpriced by Rs 20 crore.

8.14 Audit scrutiny also revealed that finalisation of the contract between PB and M/s
SIS Live inexplicably took five months - from 22™ Qctober 2009 (when the LoA was
issued) to 5° March 2010. The final contract at a cost of हैं 246 crore differed
substantially from the draft contract circulated at the RFP stage, with all the changes
favouring M/s SIS Live and to the detriment of PB/Government of India. These



242

changes were finalized as a result of “negotiations” between PB and M/s SIS Live and
direct consultations with the Solicitor General without routing through MIB. The
Solicitor General vetted the contract and settled the changes, amidst the conflicting
views of HBMC members.

8.15 In particular, the new provision allowing M/s SIS Live to utilise sub-contractors/
production associates changed the fundamental nature of the contract and paved the
way for M/s SIS Live to outsource almost the entire work to M/s Zoom
Communications Ltd. on the same day as the main contract i.e. 50 March 2010.

8.16 In the above context, the Committee enquired about Prasar Bharati's rigid stand
on change in payment schedule and conditions relating to equipment, etc. which was
later changed in favour of the selected entity, M/s SIS Live. In reply, Prasar Bharati
inter-alia submitted that all bidders were clearly informed that there would be no
change in the schedule of payment. After getting Ministry of 1488 approval on 2a"
October 2009, the LOA was issued to M/s SIS Live on 22nd October, 2009. The
entity, despite having given an unconditional bid, insisted that several changes not
limited to changes in payment schedule be made to the contract. A series of meetings
took place between PB and M/s SIS Live but the contract could not be signed. _
Subsequently the Ministry of 1&B on February 16, 2010 authorised Prasar Bharati to
waive off the requirement of Bank Guarantee for first two payments of 5 percent each,
provided that (i) the Performance Bank Guarantee of 10 percent in terms of the
contract was taken and (ii) Prasar Bharati was fully satisfied that the requirement of
Bank Guarantee no longer existed after recording the detailed reasons for the same.
The Ministry of Information & Broadcasting categorically stated that they did not agree
to change in the Schedule of payments. Hence, in the final contract signed with M/s
SIS Live on 05.03.2010, the original schedule of payment of 30:70 (pre-games : post-
games) was retained.

8.17 The Ministry further stated that there was a delay in handing over the venues by
OC & Venue owners. The first venue was handed over on September 4, 2010 and all
other venues were handed over subsequently. In view of this, SIS Live repeatedly
insisted for change in payment schedule due to delay in handing over the venues and
demanded 100 percent payment before the Games. The entity was also threatening


243

just before the Games, that they were considering termination of the contract, if
payment was not released.

8.18 The Ministry apprised that as the coverage of the Games became a concern,
the payment schedule and conditions relating to equipment were changed in favour of
M/s SIS Live in a series of developments as described under:

"M/s SIS Live was advised that 100 percent payment pre-games was not
acceptable. However, a meeting of HBMC took place on 30.08.2010 to decide
on the issue. It was proposed therein that the 3rd tranche payment due to be
released to M/s SIS Live by 31.08.2010 may be allowed against "proof of
dispatch/airway bill of imported equipment and self certification of
equipment/system hired or procured in India for completing the production and
coverage as per the approved plan for the purpose” instead of “successful
installation of required equipment, facilities, technical infrastructure at all venues
including the Athlete Village and MPC". Further it was also proposed that 30
percent of total contract payment which was due to be paid as per the contract
on 15th October, 2010 after successful completion of the Games may be
advanced to 20th September 2010 after “installation of all equipments and
verified as per the production plan". Accordingly, balance payment of 20
percent was proposed to be paid on 15th October 2010 (as per the contract 50
percent of the total payment was to be released on October 15, 2010). The
method of payment was also proposed to be changed and it was proposed to
issue LC in favour of M/s SIS Live on the 20th October, 2010, 10th November,
2010, and 10th January 2011 to cover payments under S.No. 4,5 and 6 of the
contract. It was also proposed that the release of payment under LC will be
automatic except in case of failure to meet the deliverables (to be intimated to
the bank by the DG) or to permit auto debit in favour of M/s SIS Live on the
defined dates unless an adverse comment is communicated by DG, (with the
approval of CEO).

This proposal was sent to Ministry of 1&B on September 1, 2010 having
recommendations of HBMC for the proposed changes in the payment schedule
of the contract with M/s SIS Live and for allowing issue of LC as the mode of
payment. Ministry of [&B then made amendments to the Schedule of payment
on September 3, 2010 for third deliverable as "proof of dispatch/airway bil! of
imported equipment and self certification of equipment/system hired or procured
in India for completing the production and coverage as per the approved plan
for the purpose" instead of "successful installation of required equipment,
facilities, technical infrastructure at all venues including the Athlete Village and
MPC" and thereafter change in schedule of Payment for remaining deliverable
vide Ministry O.M. no.10/24/2008-B(Fin.) Vol. XI dated September 8, 2010
subject to the following conditions:

(i) M/s SIS Live would bear the bank charges for the payments though the LC
mechanism.

(ii) The terms and condition of the LC should be got duly approved by the Finance
wing of Prasar Bharati.


244

(iii) DG, DD would ensure that the necessary inspections/certifications from various
inspecting officers are obtained not after than two days from the date of raising
the invoice and a decision taken with the approval of the CEO, prior to the date
of invocation of LC, as to whether all the deliverables have been delivered and
work completed as per terms of the contract within the stipulated time to the
satisfaction of HB and whether there is a need to stop the payment or make any
deductions as per the contract.

(iv)DG, DD and CEO, PB would be personally responsible to ensure that a
decision to stop the payment of or make any deductions from an instalment
is received by the Bank well before the due date of payment through LC and
that the payment is stopped or deductions made.

These amendments in ‘schedule of payments’ envisaged amendment in the
contract, which required an Addendum to be signed between SIS Live and Prasar
Bharati. SIS Live provided a draft addendum to HB, but that was not finalised.
Doordarshan sent draft addendum to Min. of 1&B for approval on October 15, 2010.
On October 22, 2010 Min. of I&B sent a reply with direction to Prasar Bharati to
finalise the proposed addendum in consultation with its Finance Wing with the
approval of HBMC. However, no such HBMC meeting took place to finalise the
addendum. There could be no agreement on the clauses of the draft addendum,
which provided for material changes on the condition of the original contract.
Accordingly, the approval for change in payment terms as given on September 8,
2010 was not given effect to.

Meanwhile 4th tranche payment was due as per the O.M. dated September 8,
2010. Since LC was not opened by the due date of 4th tranche payment, a
reference was made to the Ministry and it conveyed its approval on September 27,
2010 for making the payment for the 4th tranche as per procedure adopted for
making the earlier three payments to SIS Live. The entity had been pressing very
hard for a payment and also sent e-mails on 24th & 28th September, 2010
threatening withdrawal, if payment was not made by September 28, 2010.

In view of this extra-ordinary situation, the matter was discussed in an emergent
meeting of HBMC on 28th September, 2010 at 18.30 hrs. After detailed
deliberations the HBMC decided to release the payment for 4th Tranche
immediately in view of the extraordinary situation and lack of alternatives. The
sanction order was issued and payment made to M/s SIS Live as 4th Tranche
payment amounting to 30 percent of contract price. It was however stipulated that
steps were required to be taken to made an assessment and claim compensation
and recover damages from the Entity in terms of the contractual provisions and
these were to be adjusted against subsequent payments.”

8.19 The Committee enquired about the rationale for releasing the fourth tranche
payment of % 73.80 crore to M/s SIS Live despite the irregularities like change in
made/model of equipment stipulated in the contract and short supply of equipment,
mentioned in the inspection report by technical experts of Prasar Bharati. In reply, the
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting stated in a note as under:


245

"Regarding the release of 4th Tranche payment amounting to हैं 73.80 crore, it
may be stated that as per the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting's OM
dated September 08, 2010 the time frame for raising the invoice for 4th Tranche
of payment was September 20, 2010 and the mode of payment was through LC
by September 27, 2010. Since LC was not opened by the due date of 4th
tranche payment, a reference was made to the Ministry and it had conveyed its
approval on September 27, 2010:for making the payment for the 4" tranche as
per procedure adopted for making the earlier three payments to SIS Live. The
entity had been pressing very hard for payment and also sent e-mails on 24th &
28th September, 2010 threatening withdrawal, if payment was not made by
September 28, 2010. In view of this extra-ordinary situation, the matter was
discussed in an emergent meeting of HBMC on 28th September, 2010 at 18:30
hrs. After detailed deliberations the HBMC decided to release the payment for
4th tranche immediately in view of the extraordinary situation and lack of
alternatives, with the stipulation that steps were required to be taken to make an
assessment and claim compensation and recover damages from the Entity in
terms of the contractual provisions and these were to the adjusted against
subsequent payments. The sanction order was issued and payment made to
Mis SIS Live as 4th tranche payment amounting to 30 percent of contract price.
The inspecting officers had noted down the details of equipment and shortfall
therein, hence no payment has been made to SIS Live after the fourth tranche
payment. Moreover, due to performance related issues and deficiencies by 515
Live including changes in made/model of equipment while executing the Host
Broadcaster assignment as per the contract, the Performance Bank Guarantee
(10 percent) of SIS Live amounting to हैं 24.60 crores was encashed on March
31, 2011 by HB.”

8.20 Drawing attention of the Ministry of 1&B/PB to the adverse comments made in
the matter by the Shunglu Committee and consequential CBI inquiry, the Committee
pointed out that there must be something seriously wrong on the award of contract.
Responding, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting apprised as under:

"The issues pertaining to Production & Coverage of the Commonwealth games
2010, wherein Doordarshan was Host Broadcaster and had entered into a
contract with SIS Live, UK for this purpose, have been examined in detail by the
High level Committee (Shunglu Committee). The recommendations of the
Committee were considered by Government and a CBI inquiry has been
ordered in the matter, which is going on. Further, the Enforcement Directorate
is conducting a probe into some financial aspects of the contract under PMLA
and FEMA. Separately, the income tax authorities have ordered provisional
attachment of the unreleased amount of contract amount of = 246 crore to SIS
Live, UK for a period of 6 months form 11.02.2012. To date, an amount of =
147.60 crore has been paid to the entity, amounting to 60 percent of the
contract value and balance 40 percent payment amounting to € 98.40 crores is
withheld. On account of deficiencies and shortfalls in performing their
contractual obligations, the Performance Bank guarantee submitted by the
entity has also been invoked by Prasad Bharati and the entire amount of हैँ
24.60 crore, credited into the account of Prasad Bharati. The entity has invoked


246

Arbitration, seeking release of payment with liquidated damages. The matter is
pending before the Arbitral Tribunal."
8.21 Asked to state the rationale for agreeing to the demand of M/s SIS Live for 60
per cent advance payment while as per the contract only 30 percent advance payment
was to be made, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting explained that the
changes made was not a routine envisaged change but a response to an emergent
situation that had arisen during the execution of the project.

8.22 During evidence, the Chief Executive Officer, Prasar Bharati elucidated the

matter as under:
"The CBI had been referred all these matters. But once after referral, we left it
to them. | would submit in confidentiality that | had personally spoken to the CBI

saying that this case has to be taken to its logical conclusions. | have letters to
prove it."

8.23 When the Committee desired to hear the views of the Secretary, Information
and Broadcasting, he submitted in evidence:

"About re-definition on the role of Government and the Prasar Bharati and the
recovery of excess amount, the CEO, Prasar Bharati has explained. Out of the
% 246 crore for which the contract was, the actual payment made was ¥147.60
crore which is 60 per cent of the total contract. What was withheld was %98.40
crore which amounts to 40 per cent of the contract amount. In addition, 10 per
cent of the Performance Guarantee which was offered by M/s. SIS Live by way
of a bank guarantee which amounted to %26.40 crore was already forfeited. So,
this is what the exact financial dimensions of the whole transaction is."

lV. Sub-Contracting by SIS Live to Zoom Communications Ltd.

8.24 As mentioned above, PB entered into a contract on 5" March 2010 with M/s
SIS Live for production and coverage of the Commonwealth Games, 2010 at a cost of
% 246 crore. On the same day M/s SIS Live entered into a sub-contract with M/s Zoom
Communications Ltd. at a cost of € 177.30 crore, covering almost the entire scope of
work, viz.: Generation of basic feed; Broadcast venue operations services; and
Training. Audit found that M/s SIS Live and M/s Zoom Communications Ltd. were in
alliance much before the signing of the main contract and sub-contract on 50 March
2010: M/s SIS Live utilized the services of M/s Zoom Communication Ltd. for coverage
of the QBR, which was launched on 28" October 2009; On 5" March 2010, Shri
Dehlvi signed as a witness to the main contract between PB and Mis SIS Live and


247

also as the authorized representative of M/s Zoom Communications in the sub-
contract between M/s SIS Live and M/s Zoom Communications on the same day.
Subsequently, Shri Dehlvi corresponded with PB as the Resident Project Director of
M/s SIS Live. Clearly, the entire set of contractual services was being practically
executed by M/s Zoom Communications Ltd. through a back-to-back contract with M/s
SIS Live acting essentially as a conduit. The amended clauses of the main PB
contract, thus, enabled the back door entry of M/s Zoom Communications Ltd, which
was ineligible for bidding for this contract.

8.25 In this regard, Audit specifically pointed out that news about outsourcing of
contract by M/s SIS Live to M/s Zoom Communications Ltd. was already out in March
2009 and as representative of Government, the Host Broadcaster did not take any
cognizance and necessary action against M/s SIS Live.

8.26 In the above context, the Committee enquired what prevented Prasar Bharati
from taking any action against M/s SIS Live for subcontracting when the information in
this regard was already available in media and also on website of M/s SIS Live. In
reply, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting clarified that the HB was not aware
of any subcontract by M/s SIS Live to any entity, till a copy of the contract between M/s
SIS Live and M/s Zoom Communications Ltd, forwarded by Income Tax department,
was received by HB on 27" October 2010.

8.27 Asked to state the action taken thereafter, the Ministry submitted that in view of
the non-performance related issues by M/s SIS Live in executing the Host Broadcaster
assignment as per the contract, 40 per cent of the contract amount, amounting to Rs
98.40 crore, had not been released by HB. In addition, due to deficiencies by M/s SIS
Live in executing the Host Broadcaster assignment as per the contract, the
Performance Bank Guarantee (10 per cent) amounting to Rs 24.60 crore was
encashed on 31° March 2011 by HB. M/s SIS Live had invoked Arbitration. As per the
legal opinion obtained, Prasar Bharati had filed a counter claim before the arbitral
tribunal on grounds of inter alia, misrepresentation, deviations, transfer of assignment
in violation of the contract conditions.

8.28 Admitting the wrong doings, the Chief Executive Officer, Prasar Bharati

deposed in evidence:


248

"Assignment of contract is another issue on which there appears to be no
finality. This assignment and sub-contracting were issues on which we were
equally interested in proving that whatever has happened was perhaps not the
best way of doing things. We have withheld that amount. We have lodged
claim against M/s SIS Live for € 137 crore."

४. Non-deployment of Approved Key Technical Personnel by SIS Live Key Technical Personnel by SIS Live

8.29 Against the 61 key technical personne! for production and coverage of the
Commonwealth Games, 2010 as stipulated in the contract, Audit found that the list of
the Organising Committee accredited personnel of M/s SIS Live included only 22
persons. Clearly, PB did not make any efforts to verify and ensure that the key
personnel approved by it actually executed the assigned task.

8.30 The Committee enquired about the efforts made by PB to verify the actual
deployment of key technical personnel by M/s SIS Live as already approved by them
during finalisation of the contract. In reply, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
clarified that the Organising Committee had provided direct login access to M/s SIS
Live for accreditation of M/s SIS Live personnel, so the verification of the personnel at
the time of accreditation by HB was not possible. The Ministry further submitted that
the entity was adopting a confrontational approach ali along, and refused to give an
offer for inspection as per standard practice. There were constant threats by the entity
to terminate the contract and complete non-cooperation, despite which HB personnel
managed to record details of personnel and equipment deployed by M/s SIS Live. As
per the records of HB, 29 key Persons were deployed by M/s SIS Live instead of 61
personnel indicated in the contract, which was communicated, to M/s SIS Live on 17"
February 2011 and 11 March 2011 with a request to provide details of deployment of
key personnel. M/s SIS Live vide their letter no. nil dated March 10, 2011 refused to
provide the details quoting that there was no reference to the clause in the contract
under which PB was entitled to receive information pertaining to key personnel and
further stated that if PB considered that it had suffered loss arising from a breach on
the part of M/s SIS Live (which was denied), the appropriate remedy was a claim in
liquidated damages in Arbitration. HB again requested M/s SIS Live on 18th March
2011 to provide details of key personnel quoting clause 4.3 of the contract to which
M/s SIS Live did not respond. The entity had invoked Arbitration, seeking release of
payment with liquidated damages. The matter was pending before the Arbitral


249

Tribunal. As per the legal opinion obtained, Prasar Bharati had filed a counter claim
before the Arbitral Tribunal on grounds of inter-alia, misrepresentation, deviations,
assignment in violation of the contract conditions, including non-deployment of key
personnel.

VI. Undue Favour to SIS Live Resulting in Extra-expenditure by Host
Broadcaster

8.31 Audit scrutiny revealed that undue favours irregularly granted by PB to M/s SIS
Live involved extra expenditure of = 3.22 crore on the following tasks:

(a) _ Hiring of lighting consultant - Despite the fact that M/s SIS Live had charged
Rs 10 crore for consultancy over and above the consultants already hired
under the contract, PB hired a lighting consultant at a cost of ¥ 21.95 lakhs.
Legal opinion in this regard received on 16 August 2010 stated that in the
absence of a relevant contractual clause, it was PB's responsibility to hire a
lighting expert.

(b) | Supply of Power Cables - Contractually, M/s SIS Live was to provide for
laying of power cables to interconnect various functional areas at all venues;
this was also clarified at the pre-bid meeting. However, in July 2010, M/s
SIS Live stated that this was not in its scope of work and refused to
undertake this task. Consequently, in August 2010, PB hired M/s BECIL to
execute this work at the cost of = 0.96 crore, envisaged at M/s SIS Live's
risk and cost (as per legal advice). The ultimate cost incurred by M/s BECIL
amounted to £1.30 crore. This approach was reversed by HBMC in August
2010, which decided to impose the responsibility on the OC. Inexplicably,
OC agreed to bear these costs. Clearly, PB showed undue favour to M/s
SIS Live on this account.

(c) Special camera mounting - PB incurred an additional liability of Rs 1.70
crore on special camera mountings, on account of ambiguities in the
contract clauses and divided legal opinion.

8.32 In the above context, the Committee enquired about the rationale for allowing
Mis SIS Live to charge हैं 10 crore for consultancy over and above the consultants
already hired under the contract. In reply, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
clarified that the contract with M/s SIS Live was a turnkey project and all aspects of
production and coverage including engagement of consultants was the responsibility
of M/s SIS Live. Subsequently, a conflict arose as to the responsibility for engagement
of Lighting consultant. HBMC, in its meeting on 307 July 2010 decided that the entity
namely M/s SIS Live was to engage the Lighting Consultant. This was deliberated
again by HBMC in its meeting on 16" August 2010. The Committee was informed that
M/s SIS Live was not agreeing to engage the Lighting Consultant. After detailed


250

deliberations, and considering the shortage of time and the essentiality of engaging
the Lighting Consultant, HBMC in its above meeting on 16" August 2010 decided to
engage the Lighting Consultant and deduct the amount from M/s SIS Live’s payment.
Further, no payment had been made to M/s SIS Live after the fourth tranche and 40
per cent amount of the contract value is withheld. Moreover, due to performance |
related issues and deficiencies by M/s SIS Live in executing the Host Broadcaster
assignment as per the contract, including cost of hiring lighting consultant, the
Performance Bank Guarantee (10 per cent) of M/s SIS Live amounting to Rs 24.60
crore was encashed on 31st March 2011 by Prasar Bharati. As mentioned above, the
entity had filed a claim for arbitration and Prasar Bharati had filed counter claim in the
Arbitral Tribunal wherein it has been reiterated that engagement of Lighting Consultant
was the responsibility of M/s SIS Live as per the contract.

8.33 The Ministry further apprised that legal opinion was sought on various issues
from time to time including evaluation of EOI, formulation of RFP, vetting of contract,
catering, lighting consultant, power supply, special camera mountings and transfer of
assignment. Keeping in view these legal opinions, administrative decisions were taken
by PB.

8.34 Expressing surprise, the Committee desired to know the reasons for seeking
legal opinion instead of imposing penalty under the clauses of agreement upon Mis
SIS Live for not fulfilling its contractual commitments. In reply, the Ministry of
information and Broadcasting stated in a note as under:

"To get the benefit of legal advice on these issues, legal opinion was sought as
and when required as to interpretation of various provisions in the Contract.
After completion of the Games, Prasar Bharati took note of non-performance of
the entity in various activities, deficiencies and shortfalls in deployment of
equipment and personnel and encashed the Performance Bank Guarantee of
SIS Live. Prasar Bharati has sought legal opinion on apparent assignment of
the contract by SIS Live to Zoom Communication Ltd. and in the light of advice
received from the ASG a counter claim has been filed in the Arbitral Tribunal"

VII. Deficiencies in Queen's Baton Relay Deliverables

8.35 According to Audit, the entire payment for coverage of the Queen's Baton Relay
(QBR) was released to M/s SIS Live, despite non-receipt of tapes relating to 5 out of
21 countries and delayed receipt of the other tapes relating to 16 countries vis-a-vis


251

the stipulated time schedule, which ranged from two days to two months. No tape was
received in time and the event was therefore telecast late.

8.36 In the above context, the Committee desired to know the reason for releasing
entire payment for coverage of the Queen's Baton Relay to M/s SIS Live despite non-
receipt and delayed receipt of tapes. In reply, the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting explained that as per the clause A 32.7.3 of the contract, M/s SIS Live
had to cover the Queen's Baton Relay in 21 countries. However, M/s SIS Live only:
covered the relay in 16 countries. On 42" July 2010, the second invoice was received
from the entity. The deliverables for which the second invoice had been raised also
included the international coverage of the Queen's Baton Relay. Vide mail dated 16"
July 2010, HB had pointed out to the entity that it had only covered the Queen's Baton
Relay in 16 countries. Subsequently, HB vide its mail dated 270 August 2010 called
upon the entity to submit the tapes concerning the coverage of Queen's Baton Relay in
five more countries so that its invoice could be processed. The entity did not submit
tapes having coverage of QBR in 5 more countries. The matter was also considered
by the Host Broadcast Management Committee (HBMC) in its meeting held on 24th
August 2010. The HBMC decided that an amount of सै 24 lakh (Rupees twenty-four
lakh only) should be withheld on account of the shortfall in the coverage of the
Queen's Baton Relay and only the balance amount of the invoice should be released
to the entity. Accordingly, this amount was withheld. Subsequently this amount was
released to the entity.

VII. Legacy of the Games- Non upgradation to HDTV

8.37 Audit have pointed out that despite incurring huge expenditure from the
Government of India funds, the legacy value of HDTV coverage of CWG-2010 to PB,
both in terms of improvement of infrastructure and development of in-house skills was
insignificant. PB failed to upgrade itself to HDTV, even. partially if not fully, by CWG-
2010. Against funds of 7185 crore (out of which हैं 114.61 crore was to be spent up to
2010-11) sanctioned by the Government of India to Doordarshan (DD) for production
facilities for HDTV content and terrestrial and satellite transmission, DD could spend
only ₹ 6.84 crore for the up linking facility.


252

8.38 The Committee queried about the meagre expenditure of only % 6.84 crore by
Doordarshan for HDTV despite the fact that in the Cabinet Note, Doordarshan
proposed to incur an expenditure of = 114.61 crore till 2010-11 out of the total हैं 165
crore sanctioned by the Government of India. In reply, the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting stated in a note as under:

"Expenditure of = 165 crore on HDTV scheme as part of xh plan approved
schemes was planned to be incurred in 4 years. Approval of scheme was
however received in August 2009 only. Implementation of various projects
approved as part of HDTV scheme is at different stages and the projects are
expected to be complete, in phases by 2012-13. Expenditure incurred, so far,
on HDTV scheme is % 22.64 crore (up to February 2012). DD HDTV uplink was
commissioned on 30.09.2010 before the start of Commonwealth Games Delhi
2010."

8.39 In a subsequent information, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting

apprised that the total expenditure incurred under the Plan Scheme for HDTV till

January 2013 was & 37.25 crore.

8.40 Asked to state categorically the current HDTV transmission capability of DD, the
Director General, Doordarshan submitted in evidence:

"We still broadcast in a standard definition format. We have learnt something
in terms of HDTV telecast nation-wide, our infrastructure is not yet in place."

He added:

“During the Games, we had a full-fledged HD-enabled OB Van through which
we were doing telecast. We still have the HDTV channel, which, of course runs
very minimal programmes."
8.41. On being enquired whether Doordarshan had complete infrastructure and
equipment for going ahead with HDTV Channel, the Director General, Doordarshan
explained in evidence as under:
" Under the Twelfth Plan and as a continuing scheme of the Eleventh Plan, we
have some proposals for setting up studios which are under upgradation to our
High Definition level. Even about the other production facilities, we already have

moved into HD cameras. We have ordered new HD cameras for our ENG
coverage as well as the studio coverage. We are moving in."

8.42 About the availability of funds in this regard, the Chief Executive Officer, Prasar
Bharati deposed during evidence as under: |


253

"About the status of High Definition, under the 41" Plan, our positioning was
%128 crore. HD studios and vans, in the 12" Plan, 7770 core, which makes the
total of HD transition — 898 crore. Even if we get half of it, we are on. That is
dependant on overall resource position. Projections have been made..."

IX. Outsourcing of Sporting Events

8.43 Audit scrutiny revealed that in July 2007, PB proposed that seven sporting
events, besides the opening and closing ceremonies would be outsourced, and the
remaining ten events would be covered in-house. This was reduced in November 2007
to cover only three events in-house out of the 17 events. Finally, PB participated in
production of only three events in CWG 2010, and coverage of all 17 events was

outsourced.

8.44 In the above context, the Committee desired to be apprised of the pressing
reasons for a drastic change in the PB's original plan from covering ten events in
house to outsourcing coverage of all the 17 events. In reply, the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting explained as under:

“Initially the plan was to cover 10 events in-house by hiring the specialised
coverage equipment. However on the basis of the decisions taken in the
meeting taken by the then Secretary, [&B on 28.09.2007 and the opinion of
Broadcast Consultant of OC, it was felt desirable and advantageous for HB to
outsource the entire scope of work to minimise the cost. The Commonwealth
Games Delhi 2010 had 17 sports events besides the Opening and the Closing
ceremonies. Individual sport events demanded, according to the grammar of
the sport event, 'specialised coverage equipment’, apart from the associated
highly skilled and renowned production team. As per the international practice
for the multilateral Sport events coverages like Olympic Games, Asian Games,
Commonwealth Games, etc., Host Broadcaster outsourced the activities for
equipment and the production teams from internationally renowned Production
Companies/Service Providers/Broadcasters. Similar line of action was adopted
for Delhi 2010 Games. As per the 'Host Broadcaster Guidelines’, the Host
Broadcaster was required to provide the entire coverage on HDTV format for
the first time in the history of Commonwealth Games. Since Doordarshan had
limited sports equipment even on SDTV (Standard Definition TV) format, the
HDTV Sports coverage equipment were required to be arranged either through
procurement or on hire-out basis to carry out the Host Broadcaster's task.
Since sports coverage of this magnitude that too on HDTV format is only a once
in a while activity and as very high capital cost is involved in procurement of
such ‘Specialised Sports coverage Equipment that too on HDTV’, it became
prudent to arrange the equipment on hire-out basis. Prasar Bharati as Host
Broadcaster itself envisaged production of three sports events by in house
teams, in which Doordarshan was professionally comfortable and wished to
further develop its own production teams through rigorous training to reach the


254

level of International repute to stake claim to future opportunities as well across
the globe. The above sequence of events clearly reflects that the decisions
were taken after due discussion and deliberations at all levels in Government
and OC for ‘quality, unbiased coverage’ in accordance with international
practice, keeping in mind the mandate given by OC to Doordarshan as HB,
Doordarshan's internal staff strength and their exposure, prestige of the country,
etc."

XxX. Training of Prasar Bharati Staff on HDTV equipment

8.45 Audit pointed out that Prasar Bharati spent हैं 7.85 crore for training their staff by
Mis SIS Live (outsourced agency) on HDTV equipment. Training was imparted to staff
on non-Games venues as the venues were not ready. No records were available to
establish that the training was imparted on the same highly specialised OB Vans that
were used by M/s SIS Live for production and coverage of the Games. Consequently,
the training received by Prasar Bharati personnel from M/s SIS Live would also
become largely redundant, in the absence of HDTV equipment in Prasar Bharati.

8.46 In the above context, the Committee asked about the number of trained and
skilled manpower with the Prasar Bharati/Doordarshan to engage in the operation of
HDTV. In reply, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting stated in a note as
under:

"PB has informed that, under the terms of the contract, M/s SIS Live had
provided the production facilities and personnel to cover 17 different sports
events across 12 venues in New Delhi as well as the Games opening and
closing ceremonies using HDTV technology. Also, SIS Live imparted
comprehensive training to about 500 Doordarshan and All India Radio officials
(production and engineering) during the period December 2009 to August 2010
at New Delhi and surrounding areas, which included class room as well as on-
field training, thereby making the trainees familiar with the advanced HDTV
equipment and its operations. Out of this group of 500, 15 officers have since
retired and Prasar Bharati thus have 485 such trained personnel available as on
date. The training was on similar HDTV OB Kit and the specialised equipment
that was used by the entity during the Games. Selective officials of
Doordarshan were also associated with Production of three sports events
namely Boxing, Wrestling and Weightlifting during the Games. As per its
financial bid, the entity M/s SIS Live had indicated an amount of हैं 7.85 crore
under the terms of Contract as the cost for the said training. As a result of this
training, Doordarshan (DD) personnel got some firsthand practical exposure to
HDTV technology and other specialised equipment as well as some experience
in the coverage of mega sports events. This helped to enhance the capabilities
of Doordarshan personnel and this experience was of significant help to DD
personnel during the coverage of London Olympic by them in 2012."


255

XI. Inordinate Delay in Upgradation of Hostel Facilities

8.47 According to Audit, sanction of % 3.49 crore, in June 2010 for
improvement/upgradation of hostel facilities at the Staff Training Institute (STI),
Kingsway Camp, Delhi in view of the Commonwealth Games, 2010 turned out to be
redundant despite expenditure of $1.72 crore till December 2010. The upgraded hostel
facilities were not ready even as of March 2011 and staff brought from outside Delhi
were ultimately accommodated in private hotels during Games time at an extra cost of
0.19 crore.

8.48 The Committee desired to know the reasons for delay in upgradation of hostel
facilities despite availability of funds. In reply, the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting submitted that due to unforeseen incessant rains ‘and bad weather
conditions the upgradation could not be completed in time. The upgradation of
facilities at STI (T) had since been completed. The Ministry further apprised that STI
(T) was one of the training Institutes of Prasar Bharati which served as a training
centre for officials recruited at various levels and working in AIR as well Doordarshan.
The renovated residential blocks at the STI (T) were being used for the trainees for
various courses of STi (T) and STI (P) as well.

XI Broadcast facility at yenues-Non-utilisation of furniture.

8.49 Audit scrutiny revealed that PB awarded a lump sum contract to M/s BECIL for
‘provision and customization of broadcast facilities at venues' at = 19.81 crore. This
included hire of items worth हैं 1.77 crore. However, in July 2010, PB asked M/s BECIL
to go ahead with outright purchase of furniture without concurrence of HBMC, anda
work order for ₹ 1.94 crore was issued in August 2010. The ultimate cost, however,
was ₹ 2.20 crore. Out of this procurement, furniture amounting to % 0.92 crore were

still lying in PB's godowns as of December 2010.

8.50 In the above context, when the Committee desired to hear the views of the
Ministry, they stated as under:

"The furniture was procured from the point of view of creation of assets for the
organisation. Some of the furniture items, whose delivery got somewhat
delayed, could not be delivered at the venues due to security lock down at the
venues. Part payment to the vendor is still withheld. The utilisation plan for the


256

furniture is based on the demands and requirements of all the Kendras. It is a
detailed plan and takes into account future development plans of Doordarshan.
The part utilisation plan was approved by competent authority on 16/11/2010
and the diversion order was issued on the same day. The final utilisation plan
was approved by competent authority on 22.12.2010 and the relevant diversion
order issued on 06.01.2011."

8.51 When asked about the present status of the utilisation of the furniture, the

Ministry of Information and Broadcasting apprised that the furniture had since been

dispatched to the concerned Kendras and the furniture was not lying unused in the

Prasar Bharati godown.

XIll. Irregularities in Award of IBC Contract

8.52 Prasar Bharati issued an EOI in May 2009 for the construction and operation of
International Broadcast Centre (IBC) facilities and services; nine responses were
received in June 2009. Audit found that two entities (Shaf Broadcast and Anytime
Pictures Ltd.), which had been found ineligible on account of lack of experience at the
EOI stage by the Evaluation Committee, were irregularly included in the shortlist. The
contract was finally awarded to Shaf Broadcast at a cost of हैं 65.91 crore which was
much higher than the CCEA estimates of Rs 45.67 crore. Further, the PB failed to
adequately negotiate reductions on account of reduced requirements from RHBs
(estimated at ₹ 7-8 crore) as well as duplication in air conditioning and fire fighting
systems (sanctioned by ITPO at % 9.87 crore) and obtained a negotiated reduction of

only ₹ 4.61 crore.

8.53 In the above context, the Committee enquired about the reasons for inclusion of
the two entities namely Shaf Broadcast and Anytime Pictures Ltd., which were found
ineligible on technical grounds in the short listed entities by HBMC. In reply, the
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting jinfer-alia stated that on an
evaluation/consideration of the recommendations, it was noted that in respect of the
two entities viz. M/s Shaf Broadcasting Pvt. Ltd and M/s Anytime Pictures Ltd. certain
clarifications of technical nature which would have helped to arrive at proper and
complete assessment of the various officers had not been obtained. It was observed
that the offers of these two parties who were otherwise qualified should be considered
subject to certain clarification (which were subsequently received). While considering


257

the proposal it was also observed that as per the financial rules, the EOI exercise was
exploratory in nature and the attempt should be to expand the field of competition to
facilitate competitive bidding rather than restrict it. Such expanded competition would
tend to significantly lower the overall cost at which the services could be procured. A
reference was also drawn to Prasar Bharati Circular No. PB/B&F/56-A/2004-05 dated
47 May, 2005 spelling out the norms in this regard allowing for ignoring deviations of a
minor nature. HBMC in its meetings held on 6" August 2009 and 12" August 2009
deliberated extensively and recommended five bidders out of which two (i) M/s Shaf
Broadcast Pvt. Ltd. and (ii) M/s Any Time Pictures Ltd were recommended on the
basis of minor deviations without compromising the basic criteria spelt out in the EOI
document to expand the field of completion. The Ministry vide letter no. 10/12/2009-B
(Fin) Pt | dated 25th August 2009 approved the recommendation of HBMC for
issuance of RFP to the shortlisted entities. Accordingly, RFP was issued to all five
shortlisted entities.

8.54 On being asked about the failure on the part of PB to adequately negotiate
reductions on account of reduced requirements from Right Holding Broadcasters
estimated at हैं 7-8 crore and air conditioning and fire fighting systems worth हैं 9.87
crore, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting inter-alia stated that the HBMC in
its meetings dated 9", 10,11" and 211 December 2009 had negotiated with entity
and deliberated in length the reduction in technical equipment and crew with reduction
in customisation work in Hall 10. The total reduction as given by the entity came to %
4, 37, 38, 446. The total revised bid amount came to  66,14,95,954. After correction,
the cost reduction in Fin 2 A worked out to be = 3,94,77,405 instead of € 3,70,78,438.
Accordingly, after corrections the total reduction came to %4,61,37,414 and the revised
bid amount placed at & 65,90,96,986 inclusive of service tax. HBMC decided to further
negotiate with the entity in order to again explore the possibility of bringing down the
cost of the work relating to customisation. While the customisation cost of Halls 8,9,10
& 11 as per Financial Bid was हैं 18.5 crore, the estimate for reduction on account of
reduced space requirement, if taken on pro-rata basis, came to हैं 3.08 crore. Vide
their letter dated 117 December 2009, the entity had reiterated that linear deduction
was not possible because the same was not related to area but related to scope of
work. The Ministry further stated that the reduction in area did not necessarily reduce
the scope of work and thus the cost. According to the entity, the reduction of bookable


258

space could only reduce the work and cost relating to construction of cubicles/cabins
for bookable facilities and did not reduce the scope of work relating to technical

design, management etc.

8.55 Asked to furnish the reasons for the approval of the contract, which was much
higher than the CCEA approved estimates, the Ministry explained that they found from
the minutes of HBMC, the FEC reports and other papers made available and the
comparisons provided vis a vis the RF] submitted by IGBS, the Doha Asian Games
2006, and the CCEA approved estimates that it was difficult to categorically establish
the reasonability of the rates quoted. The Ministry also took into account the fact that
the process of selection of the consultant had been widely publicised and transparent,
starting with 9 EOI responses and short listing of 5 entities at the RFP stage. Thus,
the two entities who filed their bids did so in an extremely competitive environment.
The Ministry further apprised that they took note of the fact that one of the entities had
quoted a lump sum price of % 206.37 crore as against the negotiated price of हैं 65.94
crore by M/s Shaf Broadcast Pvt. Ltd. It was also noted that as against the original
estimates, the L1 bid was not way off as was brought out by Member (Finance) in his
notings and in the HBMC minutes. The Ministry also took note of the fact that other
options were fraught with risks, which could not be afforded since the coverage of
Commonwealth Games was an activity where national prestige was at stake. Under
the given circumstances the only course of option left was to agree to the HBMC
recommendation of accepting the L1 bid.

XIV. Unspent Balances Lying with India Trade Promotion Organisation/CPWD

8.56 ITPO was awarded a budget of € 28 crore for upgradation of [TPO through
Cabinet Note in October 2008. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting approved
the revised estimates at हैं 75.77 crore (including % 16.77 crore available for rent,
electricity and water charges and fuel expenses) for augmentation and replacement of
AC plant, development of food plaza for the use of press, renovation of toilets, hiring of
DG sets, fire fighting works, and other miscellaneous works. Audit found that ITPO
and CPWD (the implementing agency) had unspent balances of % 21.30 crore. ITPO
had retained % 3.95 crore, while issuing sanctions of हैं 55.05 crore for civil and
electrical works to CPWD. As of December 2010, CPWD had awarded works/incurred
actual expenditure of = 37.70 crore, with an unspent balance of % 17.35 crore.


259

8.57 The Committee enquired whether the Ministry verified the actual expenditure
and unspent balance lying with ITPO out of the total grant and asked for the refund of
unspent balance. In reply, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting stated as
under:

" [[ needs to be appreciated that the booking of expenditure and settlements of
accounts takes time even after the works are completed. An amount of €75.77
crore was released for ITPO to PB as per the approved cost. Out of this amount
PB had released %75 crore to ITPO. ITPO has returned an amount of
%6,60,20,187/- crore to Prasar Bharati. PB has returned an amount of
27,37,20,187/- (₹ 6,60,20,187/- returned by ITPO and %77,00,000/- as lying with
PB, which were not released to 1720), to PAO (Main Secretariat), M/o 1&B on
30.11.2011 in favor of PAO (Main Secretariat), M/o 188 and PAO has also
confirmed that an amount of %7,3,20,187/- has been sent to the Bank on
07.12.2011 vide Challan No. 1097."

XV. Lack of consensus within Host _Broadcast_Management Committee
(HBMC)

8.58 Prasar Bharati Board formally appointed a Host Broadcast Management
Committee (HBMC) in May 2009. HBMC was granted the authority to accord the
requisite approvals and take all steps for successful completion of PB's role as HB in
the CWG, 2010. Of the .55 meetings between February 2009 and October 2010,
records of only 40 were made available to Audit, who found that there was no
consensus among HBMC Members for finalising the draft contract. Vigorous
objections by the Member (Finance) and Member (Personnel) were ignored; Minutes
of only two out of 40 meetings were signed by all the members of HBMC; in the
meeting held on 26 August 2010, several major decisions were taken, but the minutes
were signed by only four of seven members; in three meetings, two sets of minutes
with different streams of opinions were issued - one by the PB Secretariat and another
by the Member (Finance), along with the Member (Personnel). Due to conflicts of
opinion, legal opinion had to be sought on several key issues relating to drafting of the
contract, hiring of lighting consultant, supply of power cables, special camera mounting

ete.

8.59 In the above context, the Committee enquired about the action taken by the
Ministry to resolve the issue of continuous and persisting non-consensus among
HBMG members which was adversely affecting the implementation of the


260

Commonwealth Games, 2010 projects relating to Prasar Bharati. In reply, the Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting submitted that it was a fact that there was a lack of
consensus and teamwork within Prasar Bharati due to serious interpersonal
differences between the CEO, Member (F) and Member (P) which led to delays,
dysfunctionality and systemic distrust. This was also one of the reasons for referral of
various matters for legal opinion. The Ministry admitted that unfortunately, in the case
of HBMC, the minutes of the meetings itself, on many occasions, became a matter of
dispute. Therefore, the officers implementing the project also remained clueless
whether a proposal was approved or not and what further course of action was to be
taken. Given the chaotic working in PB and the style of functioning of the CEO, the
Ministry of [&B had to step in and devise suitable mechanisms to ensure that the due
processes were followed on the one hand and telecast of the Games was not put into
serious jeopardy on the other. At crucial stages of processing of the proposals and
wherever considered necessary, the Law Ministry was consulted. Similarly the CVC
was consulted by the Ministry on the matter of a single valid bid and later while
granting approval on the changes in the schedule of payments. Finally, the Ministry
also set up an Oversight Committee co-chaired by the Minister of 1&B and the Minister
of Law and Justice, recognising the need to expeditiously address various issues that
might come in the way of conforming to the CWG deadlines while following prescribed

norms and procedures.

8.60 The tendering/ award and management of the production and coverage
contract was submitted for the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting'’s (MIB's)
approval at various stages - EOI, RFP, approval of the single financial bid, as well as
relaxation of the payment schedule in September 2010 in favour of M/s SIS Live. Audit
pointed out that the MIB did not show adequate urgency in finalisation of budget
estimates, nor in quick finalisation of 501 and RFP. These delays left no time for re-
tendering in the context of the single financial bid. Regarding major decisions relating
to M/s SIS Live, the MIB chose to go along with the recommendations of PB,
particularly, while approving the award of contract to M/s SIS Live on a single financial
bid. The Secretary, MIB noted that "given the circumstances and the fact that there is
no time to initiate a fresh process and no certainty as to a better and more acceptable
outcome, the Ministry does not have the option of revisiting the issue at this stage.
Moreover, we cannot rule that making any substantive changes in RFP documents


261

following the pre-bid meeting could have led to objections and complaints." Further,
approval to the revised payment schedule was accorded by MIB, primarily on the
ground that they were left with no alternative but to accede to the demands (of M/s SIS
Live), since non-telecast of the Games would have been a matter of international
embarrassment.

8.61 The Committee desired to be apprised of the reasons for which the Ministry
mostly choose to go alongwith the proposal of Prasar Bharati despite recording its
dissatisfaction in this regard, thereby abdicating its responsibility of ensuring a
transparent, efficient and timely implementation of project approved by the Cabinet. In
reply, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting submitted that it would be unfair
and factually incorrect to say that the MIB largely went alongwith the recommendations
of PB especially relating to major decisions concerning M/s SIS Live. The decision to
invite RFl's to ascertain costs was based on the Ministry's direction. Reduction of cost
estimates for CWG 2010 to the tune of % 79 crore i.e. from % 445 crore to हैं 366 crore
was based on a deduction proposed by the Ministry. It was only on the instance of the
Ministry that five entities instead of four recommended by PB (of which two were
conditionally recommend) were shortlisted. Noticing a number of shortcomings in the
RFP document forwarded by PB, the Ministry got the RFP document prepared by a
drafting committee with outside experts. The Ministry further submitted that during the
technical and financial evaluation of the bids also, it was on a number of occasions
that the issues were referred back to PB/HBMC for further clarifications and
deliberations. Post award of contract it was only on two occasions that the matter
relating to SIS Live got referred to the Ministry. The first occasion was prior to the
signing of the contract when after the settling of the draft contract by SG, decision on
two matters got referred to the Ministry. The Ministry did not agree to changing the
payment schedule from 30:70 (pre games : post games) to 40:60. It however allowed
the waiver of bank guarantee for the release of first two instalments of 5 percent each
for the reasons detailed. On the second occasion, when there was a request for
changing the payment schedule prior to the Games, the Ministry did not grant its
approval on changing the deliverables and the mechanism to release the payment in
the manner desired by PB. The proposals were independently examined and it was
only after providing sufficient safeguards to protect the interest of PB and Government
that approvals were granted.


262

XVI. Oversight Committee

8.62 As pointed out by Audit, the oversight committee chaired by the Minister of
Information and Broadcasting and co-chaired by the Minister of Law and Justice was
constituted on 21 September 2009 by the MIB to monitor the progress of activities
relating to production and coverage of the Games, expedite decision making at various
levels, and resolve inter-ministerial issues. its constitution was essentially at the same
time as the receipt of the single financial bid from M/s SIS Live. The oversight
committee met six times between September 2009 and July 2010. Audit found that it
chose to largely accept the proposals put forward by PB, in particular, on the decisions
to award contracts to M/s SIS Live and Shaf Broadcast, as well as the changes in the
draft contract (which were largely in favour of M/s SIS Live). In a meeting of the
oversight committee in February 2010, the Minister of Law and Justice opined that
prima facie, the changes in the payment schedule could not be considered at that
stage and if insisted, re-tendering might have to be considered. The Minister of
Information and Broadcasting also objected to the change in payment schedule citing
that some parties chose to opt out of the bidding process because of the terms and
conditions of the payment schedule and changing it then might leave the field open for
legal intervention by other parties. However, in September 2010, the payment
schedule was changed to 60 percent before the Games from the stipulated 30 per
cent.

8.63 The Committee enquired whether the oversight committee was initially in favour
of changing the payment schedule. in reply, the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting clarified that the oversight committee did not agree to the demand for
changing the payment schedule from 30:70 to 40:60 despite Solicitor General (SG)'s
recommendation for the same. The oversight committee strongly felt that making
changes in schedule of Payment at that stage would not be an equitable treatment to
the other entities which participated in the production and coverage bid and which also
had raised the issue of schedule of payment. Changing it post completion of tender
would not only be violative of CVC guidelines but would also leave the field open for
legal intervention by other parties. 1. was also observed that M/s SIS Live had
furnished an undertaking on the requisite form stating that the bid was unconditional.


263

If these conditionalities had been indicated at that stage, the bid of M/s SIS Live might
not even have been considered. The oversight committee therefore rejected the

proposal for changing the schedule of payment.

8.64 The Committee then asked the compulsion on the part of the Ministry do agree
to change the provision relating to payment schedule when the same was not agreed
to by the oversight committee earlier. in reply, the Ministry of explained that as Prasar
Bharati could not finalise the contract because of the differences of opinion between
the Finance Wing and the Doordarshan Directorate with regard to the proposed
changes in the Draft contract as requested by M/s SIS Live, the issue was discussed
in the third meeting of the oversight committee dated 16" December 2009. It was
argued by Member (Finance) that while forwarding the matter for opinion of Solicitor
General, only selected documents were furnished and the RFP document was not
provided and that changes were being made in a number of clauses which should not
be agreed to. It was decided by the oversight committee that DG, DD and Member
(Finance) alongwith the Additional Solicitor General should meet the Solicitor General
in a day or two, apprise him of the relevant documents and their respective views and

seek his considered opinion.

8.65 Apprising further status, the Ministry submitted that subsequently, in respect of
the draft settled by the Solicitor General, only two amendment, one relating to the
change in the payment schedule from 30:70 (pre-games: post games) to 40:60 and
the other relating to the waiver of bank guarantees for the first two payments of 5
percent each, were referred to Prasar Bharati by HBMC and considered in the fourth
meeting of the oversight committee held on 107" February 2012.


264
CHAPTER IX

ROLE AND RESPONSIBILITY OF THE MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS)

9.1 For the successful conduct and delivery of the Games, it was necessary to put
in place robust, effective and fool proof telecommunications services catering to the
requirements for bulk transmission of Games data, security data, High Definition TV
(HDTV) broadcast video signals, and broadcast audio signals between different
locations - competition and other venues, the International Broadcasting Centre (IBC),
the Main Press Centre (MPC) (located at ITPO), and master control facilities. MTNL
was formally appointed on nomination basis in October 2009 by the Ministry of Youth
Affairs and Sports as the Telecommunications Service Provider for CWG-2010 at an
estimate of = 270.70 crore as prepared by Group of the Officers

|. Selection of शा, to Provide Telecommunications Services for
Commonwealth Games, 2010

9.2 The formal appointment of Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Limited (MTNL) as the
telecom partner by the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports in October 2009 was the
culmination of an extended engagement process between the Organising Committee
and MTNL at the highest levels, beginning March 2009. Audit found that the selection
of MTNL on nomination basis was justified to the Government of India on the grounds
of it being a Public Sector Undertaking (PSU), which would follow all norms and
procedures for public accountability. Given the limited time available, the selection of a
PSU for service delivery would have been understandable, if it was delivering services
directly. However, the telecommunications services were actually delivered by the M/s
HCL/ Cisco team. Audit observed that essentially, MTNL acted as a conduit for
placement of a contract on a back-to-back basis, in a non-transparent manner on the
M/s HCL/ Cisco team and the underlying premise of a PSU following public financial

accountability norms was jettisoned.

9.3 In the above context, the Committee asked the Department of
Telecommunications to furnish a brief chronology of events and justifications that led
to the nomination of MTNL as the telecommunication service provider for the
Commonwealth Games 2010. In reply, the Department submitted as under:


265

"MTNL started interacting with Organizing Committee (OC) CWG by giving a
corporate presentation to Chief Operating Officer (COO)(OC) Mr. Vijay Gautam
in September 2008 in Olympic Bhawan Institutional Area. Vide letter no.
COO/TEC/J-1/3/2009 dated 6"" June 2009 MTNL was informed by COO/OC
that it had been decided to engage MTNL as Telecom Service Provider for
CWG 2010 subject to such terms and conditions including the scope of work,
service level norms and other commercials as would be finalized on the basis of
detailed negotiation between OC and MTNL. Scope of Work (SOW) document
was signed between MTNL and OC in August 2009. The tender specifications
were made by MTNL as per scope of work discussed in various meetings with
the technical team of OC based on game specific applications, security
considerations and the stringent HDTV broadcast requirements given by OC.
The proposed solution by MTNL was discussed in August 2009 by a Group of
Officers (GOO) set up by the Cabinet Secretariat. GOO consisted of officers
from Ministry of Finance, Ministry of |&B, Department of Sports, Department of
Telecom. The Group of Ministers (GOM), constituted for the Commonwealth
Games in the meeting held on 11-09-2009, approved the nomination of
Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Limited (MTNL) as the Telecom Service Provider
for the Commonwealth Games. The GOM also directed that further action at
Official level be initiated by Secretary, Sports.”

9.4 In this regard, Audit found that on 28'" August 2009 [when the Cabinet
Secretariat had already appointed a Group of Officers (GOO) in connetion with
MTNL's proposals], Airtel approached the Organing Committee with a proposal to
provide telecommunications services for the Commonwealth Games, 2010 worth zg
100 crore as the Lead Sponsor. This proposal was validated by the technology team of
the Organing Committee. Shri Suresh Kalmadi, Shri A.K. Mattoo and Shri T.S. Darbari
of the Organing Committee continued to engage with Airtel on the proposal till early
January 2010, during which period Airtel's offer changed from provision of
telecommunications services during Commonwealth Games, 2010 worth % 100 crore
as the lead Sponsor to an offer of telecommunication services at a cost हैं 160 crore
(excluding taxes) offset by हैं 100 crore as sponsorship.

Il. Choice of Technology

9.5 According to Audit, MTNL suggested a technical solution based on Internet
Protocol (IP)/ Multi Protocol Label Switching (MPLS) technology for all networked
services viz. Security Data Network (SDN), Games Data Network (GDN), Broadcast
Video Network (BVN) and Broadcast Audio Network (BAN). While for data
transmission IP/MPLS was a robust solution, it was a more expensive technical
solution for broadcast video and audio services and had not been tried and tested in


266

past Games. In contrast, in the earlier Games, broadcast video/ audio telecom
services had been delivered through “point to point dark fibre”, which was a tried and
tested solution and was also far less expensive. Audit further pointed out that the
scope of work prepared by the OC for the GOO's consideration indicated the IP/MPLS
solution only for data networking and not for broadcasting, whereas MTNL, in its
presentations, offered an IP/MPLS based solution for al networks. In its report, the
GOO noted that it had relied on the technical knowledge, expertise and judgement of
experts from Prasar Bharati (the host broadcaster), MTNL and the OC, and accepted
the projected infrastructure requirements (including IP/MPLS for broadcast video and
audio services).

9.6 In October 2009, during the first World Broadcasters Meet (WBM) , some of the
Rights Holder Broadcasters (RHBs) raised concerns on the adoption of the IP/MPLS

technology for video broadcasting in place of the “point-to-point dark fibre” broadcast
technology. In a review meeting held on 6 January 2010, to discuss this issue, Mr.
Patrick Furlong (Advisor, Broadcasting to the OC) observed that IP/MPLS technology
had not been proven or tested yet on such a large scale in multi sports environment.
Eventually, on the insistence of RHBs, in February 2010, MTNL agreed, in February
2010, to provide “point to point dark fibre” as the primary solution, along with the
IP/MPLS based solution.

9.7 Audit pointed out that reverting to the existing “point to point dark fibre”
technology solution for broadcasting video and audio completely changed the cost
dynamics as under:

e In July 2009 itself, Mr. Brian Nourse, the Technology Consultant for the OC,
had indicated that the estimated cost for providing similar services in Melbourne
CWG-2006 had been only ₹ 33 crore (as against % 270.70 crore estimated by
the GOO) and flagged the need to engage the Host Broadcaster (Prasar
Bharati) and RHBs.

e The cost of data transmisson was a fraction of the cost of audio/video
transmission, as noted by ADG (Technology), OC in January 2010.

e MTNL was asked by the OC (January 2010) to provide details to rework the
costs based on provision of broadcast video/ audio services on “point-to-point
dark fibre solution”, however, MTNL did not do so, and merely agreed to
provide “point-to-point dark fibre” solution to RHBs at no additional cost.


267

9.8 Clearly, MTNL, a PSU, chose not to adopt a more judicious and cost effective
approach in selecting the technology solution, and the OC did not persuade MTNL to
do so in the larger interest of optimal utilisation of Government of India funds.
Eventually, in addition to IP/ MPLS, the tested and existing technical solution (“point-
to-point dark fibre”) was provided to meet the requirements of RHBs. Even
Doordarshan made use of dark fibre as its primary solution for its audio/video
broadcast requirements, with the IP/ MPLS solution used only for the broadcast
disaster recovery site. This solution would have been vastly cheaper, with ultimately
less cost to the public exchequer.

9.9 Asked to comment on the above findings of Audit, the Department of
Telecommunications stated that the decision to set up an IP/MPLS based network for
CWG 2010 was the outcome of a series of technical discussions that were held
between technical teams of MTNL and OC. Mr. Brian Norse, Technical Consultant
rom OC, CWG also participated in most of the discussions. It was also indicated by
OC that HDTV technology (High Definition) was going to be used for the Games for
he first time and this technology required huge bandwidth of the order of 1.6 GB per
channel compared to 270 MB per channel in SD (Standard Definition) and
approximately 15 MBs per channels in MPEG2 (Moving Picture Experts Group)

echnology which was used in previous Commonwealth Games. OC/CWG had signed
the scope of work Document with MTNL.

9.10 The Committee enquired about the circumstances for MTNL in opting for a
costlier and unfamiliar solution instead of going for ‘point to point dark fibre’ which was
a tried and tested solution and was less expensive too. in reply, the Department of
Telecommunications stated in a note as under:

"MTNL has intimated that in the Scope of work, OC/CWG desired a fully
redundant system with very high network availability and a multi path failure
proof system. DWDM(Dense Wave Division Multiplexing)/dark fibre solution
with inherent weaknesses does not have the scalability and multi path
redundancy that is why IP (Internet Protocol) MPLS (Multi Protocol Label
Switching) solution was proposed which has scalabilities, high redundancy
features and in-built intelligent routing capabilities. A Group of Officers
(GOO) consisting of officers from DoT, Ministry of 1&B and Ministry of Finance,
under the chairmanship of Secretary, Sports had seen the architecture of the
network, critically examined the comparison of DWDM (Dense Wavelength
Division Multiplexing) Vs IP MPLS technology and Bills of Material (BoM) and


268

recommended IP MPLS over DWDM because of efficiency and service quality

of the network.”
9.11 On being enquired whether the concerns of the Rights Holder Broadcasters
(RHBs) regarding the adoption of the IP/MPLS technology for video broadcasting
addressed, the Department of Telecommunications explained that many RHBs who
had not used IP/MPLS technology in the past had apprehensions about timely
implementation and proper testing of this solution based on new technology and
insisted in DWDM based dark fiber solution for their broadcast application. As per para
6.2 of the Cabinet Note No. F 70-89/2009 CWG-I dated 12" February, 2010 of Ministry
of Youth Affairs & Sports, a technical presentation was made by MTNL before the
RHBs on 28" January 2010. The Chairman, OC, vide his letter dated 47 February
2010 while informing that the RHBs expressed their concern over the IP/MPLS based
solution and their preference for the Broadcast Network (BN) on point to point Dark
Fibre, stated that the solution proposed by MTNL of providing Dark Fibre alongwith
IP/MPLS at no additional cost should address the concerns of the RHBs. Back to back
commitment from vendor was also taken for this purpose. However, other two
networks namely, SDN, GDN and Audio commentary and CATV part of broadcast
application was still run for the whole of the game duration on IP/MPLS solution only.

lll. frregularities in the Award of Back to Back Contract by MTNL_to
HCLICISCO

{i} Non-extension of Dead Line and Award of Contract on a Single Bid

9.12 Audit pointed out that despite requests from the prospective bidders (and the
last pre bid clarification being issued as late as 34 November 2010), the last date of
submission of bid was not extended beyond 10" November 2010. This rigidity in
adhering to the stipulated date was belied by the subsequent delay of three months in
actual award of the contract. Consequently, among the 18 agencies that had evinced
interest at the RFP stage, of which four had the requisite experience in
Olympics/Commonwealth/FIFA Games, only one, M/s Cisco, teaming with M/s HCL,
submitted a financial bid.

9.13 On receipt of a single financial bid, Director (Finance), MTNL had advised
(December 2009) short-tendering (against the option of negotiation) to ensure that


269

best rates were secured, as the estimates were unreliable. She, further,
recommended that if negotiations were to be conducted with a single bidder, the Price
Negotiation Committee should have Government representatives from the Department
of Telecommunications and the Ministry of Finance. However, MTNL conducted price
negotiations through an internally constituted committee, thus making the process

even more non-transparent.

9.14 The Committee enquired about the circumstances for which only one company
ie. M/s Cisco teaming with M/s HCL submitted the financial bid. in reply, the
Department of Telecommunications stated as under:

(a)  MTNL has intimated that a vendor conference was held on 13.10.2009.
Eighteen bidders participated in the conference and nearly 650 queries were
received before and after the conference were addressed. Only One vendor
requested to reduce the bidders’ experience requirement of implementation
from 60 nodes to 15 nodes in a single network, while two other vendors
requested to make this requirement from single network to multiple networks.
The TEC also met the four known Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) of
routers namely M/s Huawei, M/s Cisco, M/s Alcatel and M/s Juniper to know
their comfort level on the tender. All the Four OEMs said in a meeting with
MTNL that they were meeting all the eligibility and commercial conditions of the
tender. However, two OEMs namely M/s Alcatel and M/s Juniper had some
issues on the technical conditions. These technical issues were addressed in a
meeting of MTNL Management held on 28.10.2009 with these two vendors. The
last date of submission of tender was accordingly extended upto 10.11.2009.

MTNL tried to ensure participation from maximum number of vendors by
addressing their concerns suitably.

(b) MTNL has stated that no comments can be made regarding the reasons for
non-participation of other vendors who were otherwise meeting the tender
conditions. The only possible reason could be presumed the time factor which
was very short for installation, commissioning and operation of such a huge and
complex network."
9.15 When asked whether it was appropriate to award the work on a single financial
bid, the Department of Telecommunications clarified that the nature of work being time
bound, the Tender Evaluation Committee at MTNL recommended negotiations with
M/s HCL and to have a Price Negotiation Committee with members from the
Department of Telecommunications, MTNL (Director level) and Ministry of Youth
Affairs & Sports (MYAS). Subsequently, MTNL requested the Department of
Telecommunications to nominate representatives in the negotiation committee. The
Department of Telecommunications conveyed to MTNL on 22™ December 2009 that


270

“it is not understood as to why the matter has been referred to Department of
Telecommunications. MTNL, being a Navratna Company, should take its own decision
in such matters, keeping in view relevant regulations, procedures, & instructions,
issued from time to time by relevant agencies of Government and the national
importance of the project’. The Department of Telecommunications further directed
that MTNL should ensure that technical specification did not favour any particular

company.

9.16 The Department of Telecommunications further stated that award of work on
basis of single financial bid was made taking into account the CVC guidelines on the
subject and the case had been earlier examined by Independent External Monitors
attached with MTNL, as well as MTNL Board.

9.17 Asked to state the level at which MTNL was advised to take decision on its own,
the Department of Telecommunications clarified that the letter dated 22") December
2009 advising MTNL to take its own decision in the matter was issued with the
approval of the then Secretary, Department of Telecommunications.

9.148 The Committee enquired whether it was proper to comment that MTNL being a
Navratna company had to take its own decision. In reply, the Department of
Telecommunications submitted that implementation of any project squarely fell within
the ambit of normal functioning of PSU (in this case MTNL). MTNL, being Navratna
company, enjoyed the enhanced operational and financial autonomy and all
operational decisions were taken by MTNL on its own through its Board of Directors

which included two Government nominee Directors.

9.19 The Committee then queried whether the reply of the Department of
Telecommunications implied that all the agencies under the administrative control of
the Department be allowed to take their own decisions on important matters, without
consulting the Department, the nodal Ministry. In reply, the Department of
Telecommunications clarified that all the operational decisions were taken by PSUs on
their own through Board of Directors in accordance with the provisions contained in
the Memorandum of Association (MOA) and Articles of Association (AOA) of MTNL
and the guidelines issued by the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) from time to


274

time. However, as per Articles 69, 70 and 71 of the AOA of MTNL, there were certain
issues in respect of which prior approval of President was required to be obtained.

9.20 Not satisfied, the Committee desired to hear the views of the Secretary, the
Department of Telecommunications in this regard. In response the Secretary, the
Department of Telecommunications deposed as under:

" Sir, normally, the Department does not get into the commercial decision-
making of these organisations. In my opinion, that is an entirely desirable
practice because there are a number of commercial decisions taken by the
organisation and it is not advisable for the Ministries to get involved in
commercial decisions. Of course, navratna companies have a special status
because they also have certain additional powers in decision-making, which are
under the guidelines of the Department of Public Enterprises. In this case, in the
process of finalising a commercial transaction, the MTNL sought, with the
background, which the CMD and Director just mentioned, that the DoT should
send a nominee. As DoT, | may mention that board of MTNL includes two
representatives from the DoT in the Board itself. Normally, the Joint-Secretary
of Department of Telecommunications is one Board Director and a senior
Tepresentative from the DoT’s Finance Wing is another Director. There are
already two Directors from the DoT on the Board. So, the DoT rightly in my
opinion, though | was not Secretary at that time, said that the DoT asa
Department should not get into the decision-making. Whatever representation
DoT has on the Board remains and it is for the Board to take a suitable
decision. That was conveyed to them saying that in accordance with the rules
and regulations as applicable to a navratna company, they should decide. It is
not an exemption of CVC or Ministry of Finance's guidelines. In accordance
with those guidelines, they were advised to take a decision. That.is what was
conveyed. So, the request of MTNL that DoT should involve itself and engage
in the decision-making of the MTNL was not accepted. This was a considered
decision."

9.21 The Committee further asked about the methodology followed by MTNL in
conducting the price negotiations with M/s HCL/CISCO, the company that was
awarded the contract. in reply, the the Department of Telecommunications stated that
MTNL constituted a Price Negotiation Committee consisting of CGM (SW & Plg) CO,
PGM (Dev) Delhi, GM (MM) CO, GM (BB & IA) CO, GM (TF-CWG) Delhi, DGM (TF-
CWG) Delhi with the approval of the competent authority to negotiate the price with
M/s HCL.

9.22 However, in this Price Negotiation Committee, there was not any Government
representative from the Department of Telecommunications and the Ministry of
Finance as was recommended by the Director (Finance), MTNL.


272

9.23 On being asked the efforts made by the Department of Telecommunications in
ensuring that favour was not made by MTNL to any particular company in the award of
the contracts, the Department of Telecommunications submitted as under:
" DoT conveyed to MTNL on 22"! December 2009 that MTNL, being a Navratna
Company, should take its own decision in such matters, keeping in view
relevant regulations, procedures & instructions issued from time to time by
relevant agencies of Government and the national importance of the project.

MTNL was further directed to ensure that the technical specifications do not
favour any particular company.

While issuing any directions to PSUs/ Government Agencies, it is expected that
the organizations will abide by all the relevant regulations, procedures &
instructions issued on the subject from time to time by the relevant agencies of
Government.

Moreover, MTNL stated that Award of work on basis of single financial bid was
made taking into account the CVC guidelines on the subject & the case had
been earlier examined by Independent External Monitors attached with MTNL,
as well as MTNL Board."

(ii) Reasonability of Costs for Providing Telecommunication Infrastructure

9.24 Financial competition was imperative to ensure reasonability of the rates
secured. It was particularly important in the instant case as the estimates were
unreliable ie. = 450 crore at the stage of the first presentation to the Organising
Committee, reduced to हैं 343.11 crore in MTNL's proposal to the Group of Officers
(GOO). GOO anticipating a further reduction of 21 per cent through competitive
bidding, reduced the estimates to % 270.70 crore. After post-bid negotiations and
including additional equipment worth & 40.50 crore, MTNL finally placed an order of &
387.19 crore on HCL/Cisco with the supplier contractually entitled to take back
equipment worth % 33 crore. In the opinion of Audit, the cost ‘of providing
telecommunication services at 387.17 crore in CWG-2010 was unreasonably high for
the following reasons:

e The Chief Operating Officer (COO), OC at the time of receiving the first
estimate at the MTNL presentation in March 2009 had observed that the
estimate of = 450 crore was 17-18 times that of the expenditure at Melbourne
CWG-2006;

e As noted by the Consultant (Technology), OC, in July 2009, the estimated
comparative cost of providing telecommunication services in Melbourne CWG-
2006 was % 33 crore;


9.25

273

Airtel had offered a technologically acceptable solution for हैं 160 crore
(excluding taxes) offset by ₹ 100 crore sponsorship; and

The inappropriate choice of IP/MPLS technology for broadcast video/ audio
services at a vastly higher cost.

The contract awarded by MTNL to HCL/Cisco team for % 387.19 crore
(excluding taxes) far exceeded the GOO estimates and, in the absence of
financial competition, there was no comparative check.

In this context, the Committee enquired whether the award of back to back

contract to HCL/CISCO for % 387.19 crore excluding CenVATable taxes) against the

Group of Officers (GOO) estimate of ¥ 270.70 crore was not a testimony of one of the

many demerits of a single financial bid. In reply, the Department of

Telecommunications stated in a note as under:

9.26

" MTNL has stated that award of work to M/s.HCL/Cisco for ¥ 387.19 crore
(excluding CenVATable taxes) is very much in line with estimate of the Group of
Officers, amounting to € 270.70 cr. The difference of approximately %117 crore,
is on account of various additional items which were not covered under the
estimate prepared by the Group of Officers, as per approximate details as
below:-

1. Cost of additional warranty 316 Cr

2. Cost of additional items (Hardware) %40 Cr

3. Security Data Network 21 Cr

4. VOIP =7Cr

5. Redeployment T9Cr

6, Non CENVATable duties २24 Cr
Total २117 Cr"

In this regard, a representative of MTNL deposed in evidence as under:

"the cost of basic network worked out by independent GOO committee was
%270 crore, which does not include the cost of SDN. There was SDN where
2500 cameras were put in all the stadia. They were connected to the police
headquarters in Delhi because they wanted to keep a watch on the stadia. Then
there was a network of VOIP, which they wanted to use for their internal
communication. Then, some CENVAT-able taxes were there. They were not
included in the estimate of 270 crore. There is also warranty because this
network was to be redeployed for MTNL. After that warranty was to be given;
that cost was not included in that. The redeployment cost was not included in
that."


274

9.27. On being asked to state categorically the reasons for not including the various
additional items as mentioned above in the GOO's estimate, the witness responded as

under:

" Sir, with your permission, if | may explain, the Group of Officers had met much
before the tendering stage."

He added:

" Sir, we will give the details but just one example. This network was deployed
in Delhi in 54 venues and Pragati Maidan but after the Games were over,
almost haif of this network was shifted to Mumbai and redeployed there and half
of it was shifted to the MTNL offices in Delhi. So, thé re-deployment cost was
almost 11 crore.”

9.28 The Committee further asked whether any comparative cost analysis study was
made before awarding the contract to HCL/CISCO and whether it was ensured that
the award of contract at a cost of = 387.19 crore was not unreasonably high. In reply,
the Department of Telecommunications stated in a note as under:

"It has been stated by MTNL that neither it had executed any similar project in
the past, nor any other references were available to MTNL from any other
agencies who had ever built up such a network in the past. In such
circumstances, the estimate prepared by the ‘Group of Officers’ at = 270 Cr. in
competitive bidding environment was the major reference available to the Price
Negotiation Committee. Accordingly, negotiations were conducted."

9.29 In this context, the Committee desired to know the Heads under which the ,
Group of Officers made an estimate of = 270.70 crore and also the Heads under which
payments to the tune of = 387 crore were made. In reply, the Department of
Telecommunications submitted as under:

“As intimated by MTNL, the Heads under which the Group of Officers made an
estimate of ¥ 270.70 crore is as under:

| 5.10 | 00915 of the items Price estimated by GOO in Rs Cr.
1_ | Routers 155.00
2. | Software customization cost 29.56
3 _| Professional services 43,26
[4 | Installation materials [ ti‘ ‘COC
| 5 | VOIP solutions [ o/|
| 6 | Video gateways and CATV 11,38
7 | NOC equipment 15.85
Total cost 270.70



275

(b) The heads under which costs to the tune of € 387 crore were committed in the
purchase order are as below:

[SI.No. | Details of the items Cost payable by MTNL in &
1. | Indigenous Equipment (outright 31,38,36,266
purchased
2 _ | Imported Equipment (outright purchased 2,86,31,77,292
3 _| Indigenous Equipment (wet leased 8,39,01,773
[4 _| Imported Equipment (wet leased 24,09,69,930
5 _| Installation, testing and commissioning 83,16,000
[6 | CWG professional services 27,40,81,500
7 | Redeployment & Integration with existing 8,76,46,000
IP/MPLS network of MTNL.
Total 3,87,19,28,762

It is further stated that payments of % 332 Cr. only have been released so far to
M/s HCL."

WV. Legacy Plan

9.30 Audit had enquired from MTNL regarding their long term business plans/
strategies for high speed (10 Gbps) IP/MPLS solutions for identification of the market
size and potential clients, for re-deployment of the equipment purchased for CWG-
2010 to ensure that it is optimally utilised post- Games. In response, MTNL provided a
one-page listing of tangible and intangible benefits/ advantages, and indicated that this
network wouid facilitate provision of wholesale bandwidth to other operators, banks,
corporate houses and various other Government agencies on lease or rental basis
(without details). MTNL also stated that the equipment purchased for CWG-2010 was
“being redeployed” to augment the capacity and expand the IP/ MPLS network,
without, however, indicating any specific details or establishing how the equipment
procured for a high speed 10 Gbps IP/ MPLS solution would be optimally used on the
existing lower speed IP/ MPLS network. MTNL also drew reference to a paragraph in
the tender documents, which indicated network capacity to handle 1,00,000 customers

each in Delhi and Mumbai.

9.31 In the above context, the Committee enquired about MTNL's specific long term
plans and projections and the time line to redeploy and utilise the high cost
technology/equipment procured for the Commonwealth Games 2010. In reply, the
Department of Telecommunications stated as under.


276

"As stated by MTNL, CWG equipment redeployed in Delhi and Mumbai has
been commissioned on 24.10.2011 & 16.01.2012 respectively. Utilization and
loading of the equipment shall be gradually increased due to the following:

Broadband traffic is being carried on this network.

MTNL plans to gradually migrate from TDM fixed line switches currently
deployed in the network to new NGN/ IMS based network, IP/MPLS
transport network derived from CWG equipment will be used for carrying
the traffic of fixed line subscribers after their migration to NGN/ IMS.

MTNL is in the process of expanding its GSM network. Aggregated traffic
from BTS / node -Bs from core elements will be transported on the said IP/
MPLS network.

Future Telecom/ IT services / Value Added Services are expected to be
largely IP based and their traffic will also be conveniently transported on the
said IP / MPLS network.

Due to obsolescence of technology, current SDH based TDM transmission
network is being no more procured / expanded. The current traffic on SDH
network shall slowly be migrated to the said IP / MPLS network in phases.

Through redeployed CWG IP / MPLS network the Point of Presence (POP)
on IP / MPLS network has been increased to around 45 in Delhi and 56 in
Mumbai as against earlier POPs of 11 in Dethi and 12 in Mumbai. This has
given much better coverage of the two cities by MTNL’s high speed network
and it is much more economical and convenient to provide high speed /
high capacity leased circuit services at any location in these cities.

MTNL is planning to float an EOI! for long term leasing out (initially for 5
years) of redeployed IP/MPLS network. In the proposed EOI, a minimum
base price of 100 Crores per city has been kept and this base price will
increase by 15% every year. Besides this, all MTNL’s internal as well as
commercial requirements will be met free of cost.”

9.32 On being asked about the revenue earning of MTNL from the provisioning of

Telecommunication Services for the Commonwealth Games 2010, the Department of

Telecommunications submitted as under:

"As submitted by MTNL, total Rs 285 Crs has been booked out of which रैं242
Cr has been realized and balance is being pursued. Out of 242 Cr, हैं 182 Cr has
been received from Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports (MYAS), € 30 Cr from
Organizing Committee (OC) and % 30 Cr from Ministry of Home Affairs which is
recognized as income on account of Security Data Network (SDN).”

9.33 In this regard, a representative of MTNL apprised the Committee in evidence as

under:


9.34

9.35

9.36

277

" Already on this network, we have booked a revenue of %285 crore, out of
which, 7242 crore has been realised and the rest will be paid. If we see the
total cost of the network, including cenvatable duties, it is ¥411 crore, out of this
if we remove the cenvatable duty, it comes to %387 crore. Out of 7387 crore,
we have already earned $285 crore. So, the network, which we have got now
in Delhi and Mumbai, is a world class and a very high capacity network. It has
cost us only 7102 crore."

He added:

“the utilisation and loading of this network will gradually increase. We have
about ten lakh customers of broad-band service and they are being carried on
this network."

The representative of MTNL further apprised:

"Sir, basically this is a transmission network and all our GSM service,
broadband service and mobile service are running on this network or they will
be running on this network."

On a specific query regarding leasing out of spare capacity, the representative

of MTNL deposed in evidence as under:

9.37

" Another thing is that we have recently planned to lease out the spare capacity
and for which we have made a plan with a minimum base price of 100 crore in
Delhi and 7100 crore in Mumbai per annum. For this, we will try to lease out
the spare capacity to other operators. But it is definitely being used for our own
requirement and it will be used for our future requirement also which is growing
day-by-day.”

He summed up:

"Sir, it (state-of-the-art network) is working now and it is being used for our own
traffic. We are using it to provide leased lines; to carry our broadband traffic; to
carry our mobile traffic and we are also using it to carry partly our landline traffic
and partly it will be used for the new telecom policy. The new Telecom Policy
2012 provides for a converged network, which will be capable of carrying voice
data and video on the same network. Our earlier TDM networks are not
capable of carrying all kinds of services on the same network. This is a
converged network which is in tune with the New Telecom Policy. It is the
state-of-the-art network on which all the services will be carried on the same
network. They are being used today.”


278

CHAPTER-X
CASES REFERRED TO THE CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (CBI)

10.1 The Committee were informed that the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI)
registered 29 cases i.e. 19 Regular Cases (RC) and 10 Preliminary Enquiry (PE) in
connection with the CWG matters. These cases were registered on the basis of the
source information as well as complaints received from various sources. The issues
covered in these complaints and the source information were also dealt by the
Shunglu Committee and the C&AG.

10.2 Out of the total number of 29 cases, 11 cases were registered against the
Organising Committee, five cases against NDMC, four cases each against DDA &
PWD, two cases against CPWD and one each against MTNL, MCD and Prasar Bharti.
The details and breakup summary of the CWG cases in a tabular form are as under:

E Agency Total | Reguiar | Preliminary Closed Under Under legal | Under trial
No. Cases | Cases | Enquiry (PE) investigationfunder | Scrutiny
RC. Enqui
| | RC 78 | RC PE {RC |} PE |RC | PE

4, | DDA je | 02 02 Em jot | on 91 ja | [= | i= | =
2. | PWD 04 ja 03 01 | 03 [=| (5 is । [=| [=| x
3. | MINE 91 of [=| ot [=| [= | [=| [= | [= | [= | =
4. | GPWD | | 02 [I= | l= | I= | o4 [=| o4 [= | [=| =
[5 | NOMC js 03 02 01 En I= 02 | 01 [=| 91 |=
| | MCD ot 91 Iz [= | En [= | [5 | [=| [= | 0 j=
7. | Organising | 11 P| 03 F 03 | | a F | | 04 | =

Committee
- | Prasar 01 01 F | 91 | गाना F | P| P| | =

Bharti

Total 29 19 10 [५४ | iid [se | (0 | Em [= | [xe | डे

10.3 Giving an overview of the CBI cases in the CWG matters, the DIG (Anti-
Corruption), CBI submitted in evidence as under:

"Out of the ten preliminary inquiries, one was converted into a regular case. In
five matters, CBI recommended departmental action against the public servants
and also recommended for systemic improvements to avert any procedural
irregularity in the future.


10.4

279

One of the ‘preliminary inquiries was closed for lack of evidence: and three
enquiries are still continuing which are likely to be finalised very shortly. Out of
the 19 regular cases which CBI registered in CWG matters, six cases have
been charge-sheeted. In four cases, no criminality was found and closure
reports were filed in trial court. In nine cases, the investigation is still continuing
and is at different stage of investigation. Some are under the legal scrutiny and
some are still under field inquiry.

As regards the departments which we covered in CWG, the inquiries and the
cases are registered against the officials of the Organising Committee, MCD,
NDMC, DDA, CPWD, PWD, Prasar Bharathi and MTNL: Maximum number of
cases were registered in the matters related to the Organising Committee.
Eight regular cases and three preliminary inquiries pertain to the matter relating
to the Organising Committee, followed by NDMC where we registered three
cases and two preliminary inquiries, in DDA matters two regular cases and two
preliminary inquiries, and against CPWD we registered two regular cases. One
case each was registered in respect of PWD, Prasar Bharati, MTNL and MCD
matters."

The DIG further stated:

“In terms of the percentage of cases, 42 per cent of the regular cases and 30
per cent of the preliminary inquiries belong to the Organising Committee
whereas 11 percent of regular cases and 20 per cent of PE belong to DDA. The
rest are evenly distributed among various other Departments.

As regards the number of accused who are named in these inquiries, maximum
are from DDA-24, GPWD-18, NDMC-9, and PWD-14. Rest are from the other
Departments.

As regards the matters covered, nine matters were related to procurement
contracts. Twelve were related to construction related issues. One was
regarding the recruitment issue; five were consultancy related issues; and one
was regarding the misuse of facilities by the officials.

The important matter of CPWD which we have covered in CWG include lawn
ball contracts, updation of Shyamaprasad Mukherjee Swimming pool etc.

As regards the MCD, we took up matters relating to street-lighting, a case which
has been charge-sheeted and seven accused are facing trial. In the DDA, we
took up matters related to contracts for the sports items for games village and
the bail out package for CWG village, Siri Fort Indoor stadium, laying of
synthetic tracks etc.; some of these matters are still under investigation or at
different levels of legal scrutiny. As regards NDMC, we took up issues relating
to street lighting, redevelopment of Connaught Place, consultancy work of
Talkatora Stadium and Sivaji Stadium, and upgradation of Talkotra Stadium and
renovation of Sivaji Stadium. Regarding the OC, we took up issues related to
games workforce contract, appointments in OC, issue of complementary tickets,
games news service contract, merchandizing contract and the overlays
contract.


280

One matter was related to the host-broadcasting contract in Prasar Bharti which
has been closed and the closure report has been filed in the trial court, for lack
of evidence or criminality on the part of the concerned officials. However, we
have recommended to the Department for certain systemic improvements in the
case. As regards PWD, we took up issues relating to Salimgarh Fort by-pass
construction; Gazipur three-level grade separator construction and street
lighting. Also, one matter in related to MTNL regarding the telecom services
contract. All the allegations can be broadly classified in three categories — one
is regarding irregularities in award of contracts where either there is a problem
in the selection of firms or the flouting of guidelines or procedures in selection or
favouring a particular firm over others. The second set of allegations pertain to
the infrastructure related matters where there is a faulty preparation of estimate
by the construction agencies; there has been cost inflation and justification for
that inflation, use of sub-standard material in construction, faulty construction
and sub-contracting of work by the main contractor. The third set of allegations
relate to undue gains to the private parties and consultants without performance
of any substantial work. These are broadly the allegations which we have
covered."

10.5 Asked to furnish the details of the Regular Cases/Preliminary Enquiry closed
indicating inter-alia the allegation in brief, the source of complaint, the name of the
accused, the reasons for closure, acceptance of the closure report by the Trial Court
and estimated joss, if any, caused to the Government, a detailed information was
furnished to the Committee which is shown at Annexure-XVII.

10.6 When the Committee desired to know the reasons for the inordinate delay on
the part of the CBI in the completion of the investigation of cases, the Director, CBI
submitted in evidence as follows:

"Sir, you have rightly said that delay in investigation of cases potrays some sort
of sluggishness on our part. But | can assure you, as you have said, probably
you have a feeling that a large number of cases are pending in the CBI. The
actual position is that we are keeping track of all the cases which are under
investigation and which have become more than one year old. They all come to
the Head Office and we take very serious note of it. The exact number, | will be
giving to you because | do not have readily available the number of cases which
are older than two years. But whatever cases become older than two years, we
regularly monitor the progress of the cases. The pendency of cases is because
the investigation has to be done in foreign countries. You will agree that what is
in our hands is to send letter rogataries. The execution of letter rogataries is in
the hands of foreign agencies and we keep them reminding about those cases.
Sometimes, our officers visit those places after consulting their counterparts.
There are not large number of cases which are pending with us. Unfortunately,
all these high profile cases which come to the public notice, they involve
investigation in foreign countries because we do not get adequate response


10.7

281

from those countries because of political or financial reasons. This is one of the
reasons why cases remain pending.

The other aspect is, as you know, we are terribly short of manpower strength.
CBI is a deputationist organisation. We get officers from different organisations
who come on deputation to us and not many police officers are willing to come
to the CBI. That has been a perennial problem with us. The hon. Supreme
Court has taken up this matter and they are giving instructions to the
Government of India in response to which several Special Courts have been set
up and our manpower strength has also been strengthened. But the fact is that
not large numbers of cases are pending with us. Unfortunately, only high profile
cases about which public giare is there, only in those cases we have not been
able to proceed further."

The Committee then drew the attention of the Director, CBI to a particular case

registered wherein three close aides of Shri Suresh Kalmadi, namely S/Shri

T.S.Darbari, Sanjay Mahendru and Jayachandran were arrested in November 2010,

but the CBI could not file the chargesheet within the stipulated time of 60 days for

which the accused persons were released on bail. Asked to respond for the failure of

the CBI in filing the chargesheet within the stipulated time, the Director, CBI responded

as under:

10.8

10.9

" Regarding the specific case, | think my DIG will respond. About the general
observations that you have made, | fully agree with you that in certain cases
delay does take place. But there are reasons which you are all aware about
those things. For example, if we have to take any action against an officer of the
rank of Joint Secretary or above, we have to seek the approval of the
competent authority. Again, if you have to file a charge-sheet against an officer
of the rank of Joint Secretary and above, again a prosecution sanction has to
be given by the competent authority. In many of the issues, what has happened
is that we have sent the report to the concerned Ministry and they keep on
examining it for long periods."

Supplementing the Director, CBI, the DIG, Anti Corruption deposed: ;

"Sir, if | understand correctly, you are referring to the case relating to the
Queens Baton Relay. This event was conducted in U.K. In this case, | would
like to inform you that we had to conduct some foreign investigation in U.K. and
the LR is still pending and only a part execution has come from U.K. and the
other part is still pending. So, the delay was only on account of the foreign
investigation. But we have already filed charge sheet in that case. Now during
the course of trial, the court would expect from us to get the result of LR from
UK which we are pursuing with the UK authorities.”

Referring to the lack of cooperation from the foreign countries in a large number

of Letters Rogatory, the Committee asked whether in the last few years there had


282

been any distinct improvement in view of India’s subscription to the International
Transparency standards. In reply, the Director, CBI submitted as under:

ए The reason why we do not get ready response from foreign countries in
execution of LRs to some extent is because of the fact that the legal system is
different in different countries. We do not have the experts who prepare Letters
Rogatory in the manner in which those countries would like to have it.
Therefore, sometimes it so happens that our legal officers prepare LRs and say
it is sent to a country in Latin America or the USA, they would come back to us
saying that they need further information on such and such issues. So, in a
number of cases, a lot of communication keeps on taking place. Now what we
have suggested to the Government is that in those countries to which we have
sent Letters Rogatory, our emissary through MEA can take on contract some
legal person who will advice us how to prepare LRs which is in compliance with
their legal requirements. We have also invited some of their officers from those
countries to train our boys and legal officers how to prepare Letters Rogatory
which are in conformity with the legal requirements of those countries. So, it is
not that we are not acting upon to improve the system but somehow there are
some lacuna and | think we will be able to fill them up."

10.10 The Committee then enquired whether any cadre restructuring proposal had
been formulated by the CBI to overcome the shortage of manpower that was
reportedly hampering timely investigation of cases. In response, the Director, CBI
explained:

"Regarding the cadre management that you have stated, it is in the purview of
DoPT and we have already sent a modernisation plan. According to that, some
strength has already been increased. The problem is that even when this
strength is increased, we do not get suitable officers to fill them up. As you
know, we do a lot of internal inquiries before officers are inducted at different
levels. The procedure is also long because if an officer of the level of DSP is to
be inducted, we have to go through UPSC. It is not that Director on his own
can induct. | can induct officers only up to the rank of Inspector. If the officer is
of the gazetted cadre, it has to come through UPSC. We have sent a proposal
that the Director should be given power to at least induct officers of the rank of
DSPs. The Officers of the rank of SPs and above, of course, we have to go
through CVC and then DoPT. So, those procedural delays are there and the
Ministry says that unless you fill up the strength that they have already
sanctioned to us, why you are asking for more strength. So, that is the problem
but | think we will deal with it."

10.11 Another representative of the CBI submitted:

".,,.Our main problem is the enormity of the case which comes to sometimes to
the extent of examining 400 witnesses and we sometimes collect upto 3000
files.....Inspite of all these odds, we used to have a yardstick of two years
pendency in our CBI, but over a period of time we have brought it down to one


283

year. We have prescribed that beyond one year we will not tolerate. As a
result, the number of two years old cases pending for investigation has come
down drastically and we are even trying to work out cases within one year.”

10.12 In response to a specific query of the Committee, a representative of the CBI
submitted:

"Sir, | would like to assure you here that during the investigation of ail these
cases, all relevant recommendations and conclusions of the Shunglu
Committee and also of C&AG, including that of special audits conducted by
C&AG wherever concerned had been fully taken into account while reaching
our own conclusions".

10.13 During a series fresh evidences taken, it came to the notice of the Committee
that the number of cases under CBI investigation had increased from 29 to 33
and there had been progress in several cases. The statement of
department/agency-wise details of CBI cases and their status is annexed.


284

PART - Il
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS

INTRODUCTORY

4. The XIX Commonwealth Games were held in Delhi from 3 to 14" October,
2010. The competitions were held in 18 disciplines (including one discipline for Elite
Athletes with Disabilities), 7572 Athletes/Coaches/Officials from 71 Countries and
territories of the Commonwealth participated in these Games. India with a total of
101 medals viz. 38 Gold, 27 Silver and 36 Bronze stood second in the medals tally
ahead of major sporting nations such as England, Canada and South Africa. The
exceptional and outstanding performance of the Indian Sportspersons made the
country proud and the successful conduct of the Games, including the spectacular
Opening and Closing ceremonies, won national/international acclaim. However,
there was a serious scare on the eve of the games that preparations might not be
completed in time, with various delays prompting a fire-fight towards the fag end of
the preparation period. This prompted the C&AG to ga in for a performance Audit. In
their Report No. 6 of 2011-‘Performance Audit of XIXTH Commonwealth Games’ they
have outlined the rationale for taking up the performance audit thus the events
leading to the conduct of the games had attracted severe adverse attention. There
were reports of irregularities in the award of contracts, delays in construction of
stadia, games village and related infrastructure, procurement of equipments of
inferior quality or purchase of routine items at exorbitantly high prices. The Media
as also other agencies, were vociferously pointing fingers at Government and the
OC on account of both delays in the preparedness and also excessive expenditure.
There were not only veiled allegations of serious leakage of Government funds and
favouritism in award of contracts, but also direct indictments of officials in positions
in the different agencies entrusted with either the hosting of the games or
developing stadia and associated infrastructure. Such adverse publicity undermined
the tremendous achievements of our sports persons, and indeed, even the
successful conduct of the games.” The Games were allotted to Delhi in November,
2003 at the General Assembly of the Commonwealth Games Federation (CGF) held
at Montego Bay, Jamaica. The Host City Contract (HCC) was entered into by the
CGF with the Indian Olympic Association (IOA), Government of India (through the


285

Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports) and the Government of National Capital Territory
of Delhi (GNCTD) on 13" November, 2003. The Organising Committee (OC) became
a Signatory later on, after it was formed. A Group of Ministers, under the
Chairmanship of the Human Resource Development Minister, was constituted on 374
September, 2004 for coordinating the work relating to the organization of CWG-2010.
This GOM was reconstituted on 220 March 2007 and 117 July, 2007, with the HRD
Minister continuing as Chairman. These GOMs held 14 meetings. On 23 June,
2009 a new GOM was formed under the Chairmanship of the Urban Development
Minister to review the projects and take decisions as required to facilitate smooth
implementation of all activities connected with the CWG. This new GOM held 34
meetings, increasing the frequency of its meetings to about once a week, in view of
the fast approach of the CWG-2010. The role and responsibilities of the preparation
and conduct of the Games were demarcated among the Ministries of Youth Affairs &
Sports (Department of Sports), Urban Development, Home Affairs, Health and
Family Welfare, Information & Broadcasting, Communications & Information
Technology (Department of Telecommunications), Tourism etc., the Organising
Committee and the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi. The
Committee's examination of the subject based on the Audit findings and with
special reference to the demarcated responsibilities amongst the various
Ministries/Departments of the Government of India, including the PMO, and the
Agencies/Departments under their administrative control besides the Organising
Committee, has revealed certain systemic flaws viz. undue delays in decision
making process, overlapping of powers and functions; ambiguities in designation of
the responsibilities, delineation of boundaries by individuals and entities etc. While
unanimously acclaiming the success of the CWG 2010 and the highly commendable
performance of the Indian Sportspersons and acknowledging the effective
intervention by the Government in deputing 10 Joint Secretary/Additional Secretary
level Officers to accelerate the Games readiness, the Committee record their
considered opinion and recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.

However, the Committee would like to make a special mention that these projects
were approved in principle in 2005, and, the valuable time of 2 years was lost, and
no steps taken to conceptualize the projects. It was during 2007 that the projects


286

were conceptualised and keeping in view the paucity of time, hurried stps were
taken to complete these projects. If these projects were completed in time and the
games not held, it would have become a matter of Nationa! shame. The Committee
therefore noted that while the departments who completed the projects could be
advised to be more careful in future, at the same time the officers who completed
these projects running against the time, are to be appreciated as well. The
Committee have also noted that the sanitation and general cleanliness of the towers
was the responsibility of DDA, who had constructed those towers on PPP model.
However, when these towers were visited by the team from Commonwealth Games
Secretariat, it was observed that the towers were not even in habitable condition.
DDA, MCD and ITDC raised their hands and expressed their inability to clean up the
towers and make them habitable.

ROLE AND RESPONSIBILITY OF THE PRIME MINISTER'S OFFICE (PMO)

Distortion of the Minutes of the First Meeting of the GOM

2. The Committee note that as per the draft Minutes prepared by MYAS, one of
the major decisions taken in the first meeting of the GOM held on 257" October, 2004
and chaired by the Prime Minister was "Setting up of an Organising Committee
under the Chairmanship of the Minister, Youth Affairs & Sports for creation and
development of infrastructure facilities and conduct of XIX Commonwealth Games,
2010. The Executive Board shall also be chaired by the Minister, Youth Affairs &
Sports." Strangely, the Cabinet Secretariat while finalizing the Draft Minutes, as
submitted by the MYAS, changed the above decisions as "An Apex Committee on
Commonwealth Games may be set up under the Chairmanship of the Minister of
Youth Affairs & Sports for monitoring and reviewing of activities relating to the |
conduct and organizing of the Games and establishment of the required
infrastructure." The Prime Minister approved the Minutes on 5" November, 2004.
The Committee also find that the President of IOA had also written letters to the PM