110 
 
'EXAMINATION OF ACCOUNTS OF ICAR' 
'NON ACHIEVEMENT OF STATED 
OBJECTIVE' AND 'BLOCKING OF FUNDS OF 
COCONUT DEVELOPMENT BOARD'  
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
(DEPARTMENTS OF AGRI CULTURAL RESEARCH & 
EDUCATION AND AGRICULTURE, COOPERATION & FARMERS 
WELFARE) 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND TENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
              
  
                      
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 

-2- 
 
PAC No.2144 
 
O N E  H U N D R E D  A N D  T E N T H  R E P O R T  
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(201 8-19) 
 
(SIXTEENTH  LOK SABHA)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                            
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
(DEPARTMENTS OF AGRI CULTURAL RESEARCH & 
EDUCATION AND AGRICULTURE, COOPERATION & FARMERS 
WELFARE) 
 
                                       
                                  
Presented to Lok Sabha on:  ………….…… 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   ………………. 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
August 2018/ Shravana 1940 (Saka)  
 
'EXAMINATION OF ACCOUNTS OF ICAR' 'NON 
ACHIEVEMENT OF STATED OBJECTIVE' AND 
'BLOCKING OF  FUNDS OF COCONUT 
DEVELOPMENT BOARD' 
 

-3- 
 
C O N T E N T S  
REPORT  
 
          PAGE 
                                                                         Part – I  
I. INTRODUCTORY 1 
II. Significant Observations on the Accounts of Individual Central Autonomous 
Bodies 
2 
III. Non-achievement of stated objectives 7 
IV. Blocking of Funds 13 
              
Part – II 
 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS              22 
 
 
APPENDICES * 
 
I. Minutes of the Thirtieth Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2016 -17) 
held on 24-04-2017. 
II. Minutes of the Second Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2017 -18) 
held on 19-05-2018. 
III. Minutes of the Eleventh Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2018 -19) 
held on 07-08-2018. 
 
 
 
* Not appended 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

-4- 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shri Mallikarjun Kharge   - Chairperson 
 
 M E M B E R S  
 
L O K  S A B H A  
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria  
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra 
5.    Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar   
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
7. Smt. Riti Pathak 
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank” 
9. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
10. Shri Abhishek Singh 
11. Shri Gopal Shetty 
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya  
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
15. Dr. Ponnusamy  Venugopal 
 R A J Y A  S A B H A  
 
16. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda 
17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
18. Shri Shwait Malik 
19. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
21. Vacant 
 
22. Vacant 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh                   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Sanjeev Sharma                      - Additional Director 
3. Shri Paolienlal Haokip                  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Shankarnath Sharma Laimayum -    Committee Assistant 

-5- 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2018-19) having been authorised by 
the Committee, do present this  One Hundred and Tenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 
'Examination of Accounts of ICAR' 'Non Achievement of Stated Objective' and 
'Blocking of Funds of Coconut Development Board'  based on Para 1.4.2 (serial no. T 
and U) of C&AG Report No. 33 of 2011 -12 and Para Nos. 2 .2 & 2.1 of the C&AG Report 
No. 11 of 2016  relating to the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare ( Department of 
Agricultural Research and Education) & (Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers 
Welfare).   
2. The above-mentioned Reports of the  Comptroller and Auditor General of India was 
laid on the Table of the House on 8th May, 2012 and 2nd August, 2016. 
3. The Public Accounts Committee  (2016-17) & (2017 -18) took up the subject for 
detailed examination and report. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare ( Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education) & (Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare) on the subject at 
their sittings held on 24 th April, 2017 & 09 th May, 2018. Accordingly, a Draft Report was 
prepared and placed before the Public Accounts Committee (2018 -19) for their 
consideration. The Committee considered and adopted this Draft Report at their sitting held 
on 7th August, 2018. The Minutes of the Sittings are appended to the Report. 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and  Recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in thick type and form Part- II of the Report. 
5. The Committee thank their predecessor Committee for taking oral evidence and 
obtaining information on the subject. 
6. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministry of Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare ( Department of Agricultural 
Research and Education ) & ( Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare ) 
for tendering evidence before them and furnishing the requisite information to the 
Committee in connection with the examination of the subject. 
7. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the as sistance rendered to 
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                             MALLIKARJUN KHARGE 
7 August, 2018                                                                                            Chairperson,   
16 Shravana,1940 (Saka)                                                  Public Accounts Committee 
       
 

-6- 
 
REPORT 
PART – I 
I      INTRODUCTORY 
The Committee's examination of this subject is based on Para 1.4.2 (serial no. T and 
U) of C&AG Report No. 33 of 2011-12 on the compliance Audit on 'Significant observations 
on the Accounts of Individual Central Autonomous Bodies' and Para No. 2.2 of C&AG 
Report No. 11 of 2016 on 'Non -achievement of Stated Ob jectives' relating to  the 
Department of Agricultural Research  and Education and Para No. 2.1 of the C&AG Report 
No. 11 of 2016 on 'Blocking of Funds' relating to the Coconut Development Board of the 
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare , Ministry of Agriculture & 
Farmers Welfare.  
 
2. The Public Accounts Committee (2016 -17 and 2017 -18) took up the subject for 
detailed examination and took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministries of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Department of  Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers 
Welfare and Department of Agricultural  Research and Education  on 24.04.2017  and 
19.05.2017 respectively and obtained written replies on the subjects. Based on these oral 
evidences and written replies, the Committee exa mined the subject s in detail  which are 
enumerated in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
3. Para 1.4.2 (t & u) deals with fixed assets of Indian Council for Agricultural Research 
(ICAR), New Delhi wherein value of land (free hold and lease hold) of five institutes of ICAR 
was not included in the fixed assets of ICAR . Grants and subsidies worth ` 133.60 crore 
were being carried forward (unspent balance) to be adjusted in future grants refundable to 
Government of India. There was also overstatement of the interest accru ed on the General 
Provident Fund  (GPF) accounts of ICAR by ` 66.54 crore.  Para 2.1 pertains to poor 
monitoring of a project resulting  in blocking/idling of Government fund amounting to ` 1.61 
crore for more than six years without serving the purpose for wh ich it was sanctioned. Para 
2.2 highlights the non-synchronisation of the building works of Feed Technology Processing 
Unit and Poultry Processing Lab with electricity and water supply works by Central Avian 

-7- 
 
Research Institute, Bareilly resulting in non-operationalisation even after completion of civil 
work at the cost of ` 135.12 lakhs and non-realisation of the stated objective of the project. 
 
II. Significant Observations on the Accounts of Individual Central Autonomous 
Bodies 
 
4. The Committee have found t hat in Para 1.4.2 (serial no. T and U ) C&AG Report No. 
33 of 2011 -12 it has been brought out that  the fixed assets of the Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research, New Delhi of ` 2591.35 crore did not include huge areas of land for 
utilisation on research f or agriculture and other related activities and residential purpose in 
respect of various Institutes of ICAR  and also the  value of land (free hold and lease hold)  
was not shown in the accounts of five Institutes. Adequate records for the land were  also 
not maintained and included in the accounts. There were cases of land which were 
received as grants/gifts, however, the same were either not valued or not included in the 
assets registers at the token price for control purposes.  The Committee also found that 
there was also overstatement of ` 133.60 crore as the amount was being carried forward 
(unspent balance) and was to be adjusted in future grants or refundable to Government 
resulting in understatement of Liability by the same amount. The Council showed unutilized 
grants to be refunded as ` 67.99 crore under Schedule 4 Current Liabilities & Provisions. 
However, as per detailed account of all units of ICAR, a total of unutilized grant refundable 
to Government of India worked out to be ` 245.67 crore (Plan: ` 216.97 crore, Non -plan: 
23.68 crore and AP Cess: ` 5.02 crore), leading to a difference of 177.68 crore.  There was 
overstatement in the figures of interest accrued of ` 99.24 crore for the year 2010 -11 in the 
Income and Expenditure account by ` 66.54 crore  in the ICAR GPF Accounts. This 
comprised of ` 59.97 crore on interest on bank fixed deposits and ` 6.57 crore on bonds and 
other investments due to errors and misstatement in the estimation of accrued interest. 
 
5. When asked to explain the reasons as to why  value of land (free hold) was not 
shown in the accounts of five test checked institutes, the Department of Agricultural 
Research submitted that the significant Accounting Policies developed in 2003 -04, forming 

-8- 
 
the basis/guiding principles for preparation of annual accounts by ICAR and its constituent 
units, contained a provision that "No depreciation is provided on Land and Livestock". 
Accordingly, many of the units were already depicting the value of land and were not 
charging any depreciation as per the accounting policy of ICAR. However, the 5 units which 
were not depicting the value of land in their schedule of Assets were instructed to do so in 
the subsequent years. Consequently, a policy was framed on treatment of lease hold lands 
and its amortization with the approval of the Governing Body in its 236 th meeting based on 
the concerns of Audit and also to improve the accounting of assets of ICAR, which were 
being followed by the ICAR units for depiction of leasehold lands and their amortization.  
Subsequently, while preparing the annual accounts of 2016 -17, these units were depicting 
the value of lands in their respective accounts. Moreover , according to Department of 
Agricultural Research , since the details of all types of land had now been digitized and 
brought on record, all concerted efforts would be made for reconciliation/depiction of such 
assets by the units in the Annual Accounts of the year 2017 -18 to address the concern of 
audit and that of the Public Accounts Committee (PAC). 
 
6. When the Committee desired the Department to furnish the detailed list of allocation 
of land of the various institutes of ICAR, it was submitted through a written note that the 
land details  were already available/uploaded on the website of Minis try of Urban 
Development. Further, it was informed that all concerted e fforts would be made for 
reconciliation/depiction of such assets by the units in the Annual Accounts of the year 2017-
18. 
 
7. When the Committee further asked the reasons for non -maintenance of land records 
and also no n-inclusion of the same in the accounts in the test checked institutes, the 
Department submitted that the land records were being maintained at unit level even 
though those were not depicted in the Annual Accounts of the units. However, corrective 
measures had been taken and the units were showing su ch land in their annual accounts 
as per accounting policies of ICAR. They had also included the details of such lands in their 
note of accounts in their respective Annual Accounts of 2016-17. In reference to digitization 
and reconciliation, identical reply was provided by the Department as state d in Paras 5 and 
6 supra. 
 
8. When the Committee asked the reasons as to why  the land received as grants/gifts 
were either not valued or not included in the assets registers at the token price for control 

-9- 
 
purposes, the Department intimated that as per the prevalent practice  in ICAR, the entries 
in the assets registers were made on the basis of the vouchers/actual payments. However, 
the details of such gifted lands were invaria bly maintained separately at each unit's level. 
This may also be ascertained from the land details which had been uploaded on the 
website of Ministry of Urban Development. Hence, the mechanism of control h as been in 
place in ICAR. In this reply also, the i dentical reply was furnished to the Committee in 
regard to digitization, reconciliation/depiction of assets. 
 
9. When asked about the reason for overstating the grant and subsidies of ` 4806.94 
crore by ` 133.60 crore though the amount carried forward was to be adjusted in future 
grants and refundable to Government which resulted in understatement of liability of the 
same amount, the Department through written reply submitted that there had not been any 
overstatement of Grants and Subsidies as such in ICAR's annual accounts . The 
consolidated annual accounts of ICAR depicted the exact 'Grants received from 
Government of India (GOI) ' as 'Grants received' in Schedule -9A. However, the value of 
such grants as depicted by the ICAR units as shown in the detailed acco unts of ICAR units 
carries the component of grants received from other ICAR units in respect of certain plan 
and non -plan schemes as well. Thus, due to multiple release points, the grants received 
figures were duplicated. Hence, in order to work out exact unspent amount, the precise 
value of Grants received from GOI were taken and the utilization done by all ICAR Units 
were taken into account to work out the exact amount refundable to the GOI, the details of 
which were always shown to the external audit dur ing the time of certification audit. In other 
words, ICAR carries out necessary adjustments in its consolidated annual accounts every 
year in Schedule 9 -A of Government Grants to reflect the Governments Grants received 
from the Ministry of Finance, balance s carried forward to be refunded to the GOI and the 
unspent balances of the financial year for which Annual Accounts we re prepared. As such, 
the grants were refunded in full, only after Separate Audit Report was received from the 
auditors which certify the  grants refundable therein. There had never been any comments 
regarding refundable grants to GOI from the auditors as such . It was also informed that the 
details of such adjustments were elaborated in the notes to accounts every year since the 
year 2012-13 onwards. The reasons of differences in the figures of Institute data and that of 
the consolidated annual accounts of ICAR were due to precisely multiple releases factor 
and also due to the fact that the ICAR units refund amount to the source either in the  same 

-10- 
 
year or in subsequent years. There were 119 accounting units which prepared their own 
balance sheets which were summed up to prepare consolidated annual accounts of ICAR 
although the 'Grants' value were modified to the extent grants received from the  
Government of India to work out the unspent amount to be refunded to the GOI which was 
refunded every year after the certification audit was over and separate Audit report was 
received from the C&AG indicating the value of refundable grants to Government of India. 
However, ICAR had been constantly working on addressing such concerns of the audit. 
 
10. The Committee wanted to know whether the unutilized amount of ` 245.67 crore 
were recovered and if not, what was the reasons of the same , the Department s ubmitted 
that as per prevalent practice in ICAR  all the unspent balances of the previous year were 
recovered in the next financial year and as such ` 245.67 crores were recovered from units 
in the subsequent year. Further, it was also submitted that after the cer tification audit of the 
consolidated annual accounts of ICAR every year, ICAR refunded the unu tilized grants to 
the Government of India on the basis of 'Grants Refundable' certified by C&AG. 
Accordingly, the unutilized portion of grants for the year 2010 -11 had also been refunded to 
the GOI. As such, as per the provisions of GFRs, ICAR draws the funds beyond 75% of the 
budget after submission of Audited Utilization Certificate based on the certified Separate 
Audit Report (SAR) issued by the office of the C&AG. 
 
11. When the Committee asked the reasons for the overstatement of interest accrued of 
` 99.24 crore for the year 2010 -11 as shown in the Income and Expenditure account by ` 
66.54 crore, the Department through written submission intimated that it was a cal culation 
mistake of working out the accrued interest  and corrective measures were taken to correct 
the accounts in the GPF accounts of subsequent year, i.e. 2011-12. The concern was taken 
into cognizance and the schedule of accrued interest was recast whil e preparing the GPF 
Annual Accounts of 2011 -12. The investment ins truments and the detailed interest 
calculations were shown to the Auditors during certification Audit of 2011 -12. Subsequent 
to this, no adverse comments regarding this concern was received from the office of C&AG 
until now with regard to GPF accounts of ICAR. 
 
 
 
12. In this regard, a representative of the Department during evidence stated as under: 

-11- 
 
"Concern over the ICAR account including that of the accrued interest, it is stated 
that the conce rn shown by the audit has been taken into cognizance, all the 
corrective measures were taken to make all rectification in 2011 -12, and 2 012-13, 
and the audit was given all required assistance at the time of certification audit about 
re-casting of account i n consultation with concerned officer. After that, no adverse 
comments post 2012 had been received by CAG. That was the mistake and we got it 
corrected." 
 
13. Asked whether any responsibility had  been fixed  or not  for the errors and mis -
statement in the estima tion of accrued interest on bank deposits, bonds  and other 
investment, the Department submitted that prima facie, while calculating the accrued 
interest, there occurred some mistake without any malafide intention of anyone. Moreover, 
due to this, the inter est disbursed to the subscribers was not more than the prescribed rate 
of interest then. However, changes were made in the accounts to depict the correct values 
of accrued interest to present the true and fair picture of ICAR GPF Accounts during 2011 -
12 and the concerned officers have been advised to be careful in future. ICAR continued to 
take utmost care regarding the calculation of accrued interest on each of the investment 
instruments and gave detailed sub -schedules in the annual accounts since 2011 -12. As 
such, no adverse comments had been received in this regard from C&AG since then. 
 
14. When the Committee asked as to whether any accountability has been fixed for 
rectifying the errors in the implementation of Significant Accounting Policy (SAP) after Audi t 
objection, the Department submitted that  all ICAR Units had been following significant 
Accounting Policies to prepare their annual accounts since 2003-04. Hence, there had not 
been any errors as such in implementation of Significant Accounting Policies i n ICAR and 
its constituent units. It i s also pertinent to mention here that ICAR was preparing its 
accounts on cash basis until 2002 -03 when it was asked to switch over to the accrual 
system of accounting. Hence, the Significant Accounting Policies (the gu iding principles for 
preparation of Annual Accounts by ICAR and its units) were framed for the first time in the 
year 2003 -04 for preparation of its financial statements at ICAR units' level. As such, 
ICAR's accounts have progressed in a better way since i ts shifting to accrual accounting 
system from the year 2002 -03, i.e. a lot of accounting reforms have taken place which also 
included the reforms suggested by the  Audit from time to time. Since  the revision in 
Significant Accounting Policies were felt necessary post change in the rates of depreciation, 
a consultant, well versed in the accounting for Autonomous Bodies, was hired to look into 
the accounting reforms that were needed and as such, the accounting policies were 
modified for change of rates of depreciation and leasehold land and its amortization in the 

-12- 
 
year 2015-16. ICAR continued to undertake such reforms for continuous improvement and 
to prepare accounts to the satisfaction of external auditors/all stakeholders. 
 
III. Non-achievement of stated objectives 
 
15. The Committee have found that the  C&AG Para No. 2.2 of Report No. 11 of 2016 
highlights the proposed construction of Experimental Poultry Feed Technology and quality 
control Lab (Feed Technology Processing Unit) in January, 2004 and Experimental P oultry 
Processing Lab (Poultry Processing Unit) in July, 2004 at Bareilly in order to create modern 
infrastructure for human resource development in terms of teaching, to impart practical 
training to PG diploma holders and Ph .D students of poultry science discipline by the 
Central Avian Research Institute, Bareilly. Accordingly, on the request of Institute, CPWD 
submitted (February 2004) preliminary estimates for the Feed Technology Processing Unit 
at an amount of ` 18.40 lakh and for Poultry Processing Uni t (October 2004) at an amount 
of ` 33.67 lakh. The approval for the same was communicated by Institute in March 2004 
and November 2004 and one third advance for the same amounting to ` 17.35 lakh was 
released to CPWD alongwith the same. The Council then decided (March 2005) to shift the 
Institute at a new site at Pilibhit road. Consequently, a fresh requisition for construction of 
these buildings (Feed Technology Processing Unit and Poultry Processing Lab) was sent 
(April 2007) to CPWD as per approved Maste r Plan without making provisions for electrical 
and water supply works. CPWD submitted (August 2007) the revised estimates for both 
buildings at the revised cost of ` 57.46 lakh and ` 63.52 lakh respectively, which were vetted 
by Director (Works) and appro ved by the Council under XI Plan, but no provisions for 
electrical and water supply works were made in the estimates. Thus, due to non -
synchronisation of the building works of Feed Technology Processing Unit and Poultry 
Processing Lab with the electricity and water supply works, resulted in non -
operationalisation even after completion of civil work at the cost of ` 135.12 lakh and 
thereby non-realisation of the stated objective of the project. 
 
16. When the Committee asked the reasons for the non -inclusion of provision for water 
and electricity in the Master Plan for the c onstruction of the Feed Technology Processing 
Unit and the Poultry Processing Unit at Central Avian Research Institue ( CARI), the 

-13- 
 
Department of Agricultural Research submitted that  Feed Technology Processing Unit and 
the Poultry Processing Unit at CARI  were originally to be constructed during X -Plan at the 
existing old site of CARI, where facilities for electric and water supply already existed. In the 
meantime decision was taken to expand and s hift CARI at new site within IVRI campus. 
Accordingly, both these labs were constructed at the new site during XI -Plan prior to the 
construction of other buildings at new site as per Master Plan. The component of electric 
sub-station and water supply syste m including overhead tank were the part of Institute’s 
Master Plan but were not taken in the first phase during XI Plan as sufficient electric load 
and water supply was made available temporarily from IVRI for both these structures till the 
completion of all other buildings at the new site. 
 
17. When asked about the reasons for escalation of costs in shifting  in regard to 
electricity and water supply,  the Secretary, Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education during evidence deposed as under: 
"In respect of Bareilly institute, I would like to say that it was again conceived that 
electricity and water supply will be taken from the parent institute of IBRI. Now, 
subsequently, because of the overload, it was decided that a separate electrical 
connection should be made. That is why a new project has been sanctioned for new 
water and electrical connection and that will be completed." 
 
18. When the Committee desired to  be apprised of the compelling circumstances which 
made the Council to shift the Institute at a new site at Pilibhit Road ultimately leading to 
cost revision/escalation from ` 52.07 lakh to ` 120.98 lakh in 2007, the Department 
submitted that the buildings under reference were originally planned to be constructed at 
the present (OLD) location of the Inst itute with limited availability of space at an estimated 
cost of ` 55.07 lakh sanctioned during 2004 (X Plan), which later increased to ` 120.98 lakh 
during the year 2007 (XI Plan) at new site due to scope enhancement, design improvement 
and associated tim e lag of 3 years in approval of EFC of XI Plan. In view of the old 
infrastructure facilities and severe space shortage in the Institute at the old site and with the 
expansion of research and associated activities besides catering to the needs of the even 
expanding Indian poultry sector , it was considered necessary to establish new 
infrastructure with independent entry on additional land on Pilibhit Road which was 
provided by the Indian Veterinary Research Institute (IVRI) in March 2005. 
 
19. Clarifying the position, the Director of the Institute during evidence stated as under: 

-14- 
 
"With due permission from the hon. Chairman, IVRI is a big campus and within the 
IVRI, another institute called CARI was created. When these two proposals were 
submitted, they were within  the same premises. But it was felt that it was too small. 
So, extra land was given to it by IVRI within its campus. That area is called as 
Philibhit Road." 
 
20. When asked why the estimates prepared by the CPWD without provision for 
electrical and water suppl y works was approved by the Council under XI plan, the 
Department submitted that the buildings under reference were originally approved to be 
constructed in X Plan at existing old site where facilities for electricity and water supply 
already existed. Cons equently with the approval of new site for CARI, it was decided to 
construct these facilities at the new site as per the allocation of budget without electricity 
and water supply for the time being and made these facilities operational taking temporary 
electricity and water supply from IVRI till all the infrastructure is developed fully at the new 
site as per Master Plan .  It is submitted here that provision for providing electricity and 
water supply for both the buildings alongwith other buildings was made in the Master Plan. 
 
21. The Department further submitted that the estimates for electrical and water supply 
works for both the facilities were not included in the XI Plan as sufficient electric load and 
water supply was available from IVRI to cater the resea rch needs of CARI during XI Plan 
including both these buildings. The construction of electric sub -station and water supply 
system during XI plan would have resulted in blocking of funds as the demand for electricity 
and water supply would have increased on ly after construction of approved buildings and 
infrastructure in XII Plan. In fact, Institute would have to pay recurring fixed charges to local 
electricity supplier (Uttar Pradesh Power Corporation Ltd.) and water supply department 
even without using the  same to fullest extent. Rather, with proper planning and 
prioritization, this infructuous expenditure had been avoided by the Institute. However, the 
component of electric sub -station and water supply system and overhead tank were the 
part of master plan for the new site and accordingly were taken up in XII Plan. 
22. When the Committee wanted to know whether any responsibility ha d been fixed for 
the non-availability of records for the proposals of water and electricity of the building, the 
Department in a writ ten reply submitted that all the relevant records were available at the 
time of inspection. However, some of the required records could not be located and 
presented at that juncture of time, hence no responsibility needs to be fixed.  
 

-15- 
 
23. Audit further pointed out that both the works were completed by CPWD and handed 
over (April 2011) to the institute after incurring an expenditure of `135.12 lakh. 
Subsequently proposal for electrical and water supply was sent to the Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research (IC AR) in March 2014 by the Institute and administrative and 
financial sanction for water supply and electrical system was accorded in September 2015 
and November 2015 respectively. As a result, both the buildings were yet to be 
operationalised. Thus, due to non synchronization of the building works of Feed 
Technology Processing Unit and Poultry Processing Lab, with the electricity and water 
supply works, resulted in non -operationalisation even after completion of civil work at the 
cost of ` 135.12 lakh and thereby non-realization of the stated objective of the project. After 
completion of the civil work of both the labs in 2011 at new site, temporary arrangements 
were made in 2012 to make these labs/buildings functional with the help of IVRI. Therefore, 
the buildings were used for the intended purposes of research and trainings. 
 
24. When asked about the reasons for the delay in sending the proposal for electrical 
and water supply works to ICAR in March, 2014 only though the civil work of both the Feed 
Technology Processing Unit and Poultry Processing lab were completed in April, 2011 , the 
Department intimated that the delay in sending the proposal for electrical and water supply 
works to ICAR was due to allocation of funds on 28.01.2014 under XII – Plan. However, 
after completion of the civil work of both the labs in 2011 at new site temporary 
arrangements were made in 2012 to make these labs functional pending the civil work at 
the new site as per the approved Master Plan. 
 
25. In this regard a representative of the Department clarified during evidence as under: 
"Sir, there are two buildings. One is for processing and another is feed preparation 
plant. Obviously, feed processing building will store the feed ingredients. In poultry, 
we take different ingredients. They ar e stored in those buildings. In the processing, 
we are still working with the available electricity and water from IVRI." 
 
26. When the Committee asked as to whether the works of electricity and water ha d 
been completed till date, the Department submitted that  the work of water supply system 
had been initiated through CPWD after approval of the same in XII Plan EFC. The work 
pertaining to construction of overhead water tank and water supply gird in the campus had 
been completed by the CPWD. The work of electric al cabling and providing service 
connection was near completion. Further the Electric Sub -station was targeted to be 

-16- 
 
completed by the CPWD by July, 2018. The transformers, control panels and other 
accessories for the sub -station had already been delivered on site by the CPWD.  The 
installation of the same was in progress. The Instituted had also installed a 70.4 KWp solar 
power unit in the new campus to augment the existing electricity supply. 
 
27. A representative of the Department during evidence further added: 
"The present status is that the work on electrical and water supply for the new 
building has been approved. The civil work on water supply is in progress and is 
expected to be completed within three months." 
 
28. When asked further as to whether the buildin g is being used for intended purpose, 
the Department informed that after connecting Feed Technology Processing Unit and 
Poultry Processing Lab with electrical and water supply from IVRI in October 2012 both 
these facilities were being used for their intend ed purposes. The Feed Technology 
Processing Unit was being used for the intended purpose, that is, for preparing 
compounded feeds for various species of poultry such as Japanese quails, Turkey, Guinea 
fowl and native fowls etc. besides preparing experiment al rations for research work of the 
students/scientists. The capacity of the unit for preparing/processing of poultry feed had 
also been increased with installation of higher capacity mixer and grinder (16 tons in 8 
hours). The demonstrations for the physical quality evaluation of feed ingredients were also 
given to the trainees and students.   Similarly, Poultry Processing Lab was being used for 
its intended purpose that is, for quality evaluation of dressed poultry carcass, evaluation of 
innovative methods for decontamination of pathogens from the carcasses besides carrying 
out experiments for conducting  research work of scientists and students and  
demonstration to the trainees. 
 
29. The Department further submitted that the earlier reply submitted by the Ins titute on 
07.01.2016 inadvertently overlooked some of the documents which were available in the 
Institute to substantiate that the arrangements for electricity and water supply were actually 
made in October 2012 itself with the help of IVRI and the buildin gs were put to intended 
use. Moreover, the Institute had also installed recently a 70.4 KWp solar power unit in the 
new campus to augment the existing electricity supply. After connecting Feed Technology 
Processing Unit and Poultry Processing Lab with elec trical and water supply for IVRI in 
October 2012 both these facilities were being used to their intended purposes. The Feed 
Technology Processing Unit was being used for the intended purpose, that is, for preparing 

-17- 
 
compounded fees for various species of po ultry such as Japanese quails, Turkey, Guineas 
fowl and native fowls etc. besides preparing experimental rations for research work of the 
students/scientists. The capacity of the unit for preparing/processing of poultry feed has 
also been increased with in stallation of higher capacity mixer and grinder (16 tons in 8 
hours). The demonstrations for the physical quality evaluation of feed ingredients were also 
given to the trainees and students.  Similarly, Poultry Processing Lab was being used for its 
intended purpose that is, for quality evaluation of dressed poultry carcass, evaluation of 
innovative methods for decontamination of pathogens from the carcasses besides carrying 
out experiments for conducting research work of scientists and students and dem onstration 
to the trainees. 
 
30. When categorically asked whether the basic objective of imparting training has been 
achieved through the Feed Technology Processing Unit and Poultry Processing Lab as the 
same have been used for storage of feed product , the Departme nt through written reply 
intimated that the basic objective of imparting training had been achieved by using both 
these facilities. During last 5 years (2012-13 to 2016-17), a total of 44 training courses were 
organized in which 908 farmers/entrepreneurs w ere trained as per information available in 
the annual reports of the Institute. In the same d uration a total of 49 M.V. Sc. a nd 32 Ph.D 
completed their degree courses. Besides this, a total of 49 M.V. Sc. and 32 Ph.D. scholars 
had used these facilities fo r experimentation and research work from time to time. During 
2017-18 a total of 335 farmers/unemployed youth/entrepreneurs etc. have been imparted 
training on various aspects of poultry farming by the Institute. In all 14 training pogrammes 
were organized. Further, during 2017 -18, 7 M.V.Sc. and 5 PhD scholars have used these 
facilities for experimentation and research work. 
 
IV. Blocking of Funds 
 
31. The Committee considered and found that Para No. 2.1 of the C&AG Report No. 11 
of 2016 pertained to the approval of a project of the Department of Agriculture, Cooperation 
and Farmer Welfare and the Coconut Development Board CDB "Control of Eriophyid Mite 
on coconut on pilot basis during 2007 -08" to the Department of Agriculture, Government of 
Tamil Nadu in October 2007. Envisaging treatment of 94.892 lakh mite infected palms in 10 
districts of the State by adopting root feeding of Azadirachtin at the rate of 10 mille litre/tree 
for three rounds at an interval of 45 days. The total cost of the project was ` 22.77 crore with 

-18- 
 
` 5.69 crore (25 per cent) as Board’s share. As per Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) 
of December 2007 signed between the Chairman, Coconut Development Board CDB and 
the Department of Agriculture, Government of Tamil Nadu, the due date of complet ion of 
the project and submission of final project report was on or before 31 March 2009 and 31 
May 2009 respectively. The Joint field inspection conducted (November 2008) by CDB and 
the Department of Agriculture revealed that due to good rainfall during 2 008-09 and less 
occurrence of mite attack, the demand for chemical was less. Hence, the Department of 
Agriculture decided (2009) to stop further procurement of chemicals. Thus, out of ` 2.85 
crore released by CDB only ` 1.23 crore could be utilised for the project leaving a balance of 
` 1.61 crore as unspent with the Government of Tamil Nadu from 2009 onwards. 
 
32. When asked as to whether any documents had been relied upon to consider 
favorably the project for 'Control of Eriopyid Mite in Coconut on Pilot basi s during 2007-08' 
from Government of Tamil Nadu, the Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers 
Welfare submitted that the project report "Control of Eriophyid Mite in Coconut on Pilot 
Basis" submitted by the Government of Tamil Nadu had been relied upon. 
 
33. Giving background and clarifications on Audit findings the  Secretary, Ministry of 
Agricultrue and Farmers Welfare during evidence stated as under: 
"........... The C&AG had observed regarding poor monitoring by the Coconut 
Development Board for an  amount which was released to the Tamil Nadu 
Government and it was lying for more than six years. Actually, this amount was 
released to control the eriophyid mite which manifested in the coconut plantations in 
the year 2007. In 2007, due to widespread infe station of coconut plantation, the then 
Government of Tamil Nadu formulated a programme and submitted it to the Coconut 
Development Board which is in charge of overall development of coconut in the 
country. This project was prepared at a cost of Rs. 22.77 crore and the CDB’s share 
in it was 25 per cent which meant Rs, 5.69 crore. The CDB approved this project and 
released a sum of Rs. 2.84 crore in 2007. The Tamil Nadu Government spent a total 
of Rs. 4.93 crore and our share in Rs. 4.93 crore would have bee n Rs. 1.23 crore. 
So, the remaining amount of Rs. 1.61 crore was supposed to be returned back to the 
CDB. The Tamil Nadu Government did not return this amount in time for which the 
audit has made an observation." 
 
34. When the Committee asked the Department to  explain as to how the CDB satisfy 
itself about the number of mite infected palms, it was submitted that Coconut Development 
Board (CDB) vide letter no: 1272/2006 -Dev (Mite -TN) dated 10.12.2007 requested to 

-19- 
 
furnish the details of the clusters and schedule with milestones for monitoring of the 
implementing of the project. Accordingly Department of Agriculture Tamil Nadu vide letter 
no. OSC 1/120174/05 dated 27.12.2007 and letter no.  OSC1/198828/07 dated 10.03.2008 
submitted the details. 
 
35. When the Committee d esired to know as to how compliance with the GFRs by an 
autonomous body was being ensured, the amount allowed to remain with the recipient 
Department for so many years without monitoring the utilization of the same and the receipt 
of the utilization certificate, the Department submitted that the Coconut Development Board 
complied with the GFRs by obtaining utilization certificate from the implementing agency for 
considering the release of fund. The State Government of Tamil Nad u informed that since 
Eriophyid-Mite was airborne in nature, there could be recurrence of the attack at any time 
hence the State Government adopted the 'wait and watch' policy during 2011-12 and 2012-
13. But fortunately there was no severe damage noticed by Mite that could cause damage  
beyond economic threshold level in those two years. Hence the time limit could not be 
adhered to refund the unutilized amount.  The progress of the project was reviewed on 28 th 
February 2013. Considering the justification for the delay discussed in the rev iew meeting 
the State Department was permitted to submit the final report by 31.03.2013. The utilization 
certificate showing the unspent balance of the fund released was submitted vide letter vide 
letter No.OPC3/198828/07 dated 17-9-2013. After that the subsequent follow up was made 
by the Board vide letters dated 17.10.2013, 05.02.2014, 30.06.2014, 24.07.2015  and dated 
31.12.2015. 
 
36. Elaborating further on the background, the Chairman Coconut Development Board 
during evidence stated as under: 
"The Tamil Nadu Government was supposed to give us the report on account of the 
utilization of fund and also how this has helped farmers in combating this particular 
menace of the insect. Sir, mite is a very tiny insect but the effect of that is very 
mighty. After the app lication of the recommendation of the Tamil Nadu Agriculture 
University, Coimbatore, the effectiveness was noticed in the field because the 
number of trees were more than 95 lakhs. If I convert the whole number of trees into 
area, that is a massive area th at was occupied by coconut which was badly affected 
and most of the farmers to our information, by the State Government were either 
small farmers or the medium sized farmers. After we noticed, there is a change in 
the attack of the insect and farmers have started reporting this also that damage has 
minimized and fruiting and flowering both has improved over a period of time. Then, 
we wrote a letter. Since the control is tune of more than 80 per cent or something, 
then you should prepare a report and submit to us and submit the utilization 
certificate. But in some areas, there were some sporadic incidents of the mite 

-20- 
 
because there was change in the environmental conditions. Then, they told us that 
let us apply a policy of wait and watch for few more years and  that period was 
extended to five years, after their request. After 2013, we have written six letters and 
reminders to them that lease return the money but they continued saying that you 
have seen that the re -occurrence of mites although at a smaller areas  in some 
regions, so let us again re-adopt the policy of the wait and watch policy for more time 
in more areas also." 
 
37. The Committee enquired as to when the requirement of submission of utilization 
certificate was decided for the project and whether the sa me was submitted as late as 
February 2013, the Department stated that the Department ha d submitted the progress 
report up to Sept ember 2008 showing both physic al and financial vide letter no.  
OPC3/198828/06 dated 29 th September 2008 and provisional utiliza tion certificate vide 
letter no . OPC3/198828/2006 dated 03.11.2008 against the fund utilized by them not 
indicating the unspent balance. However, the utilization certificate showing the unspent 
balance of the fund released was submitted vide letter No.OPC3 /198828/07 dated 
17.09.2013. 
 
38. When the Committee desired to know as to why penal interest as per section 14 of 
MoU had not been imposed even though there was considerably delay in submission of 
project report, the Department in a post evidence reply submitted as under:-  
"No penal interest as per section 14 of Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) ha d 
been imposed keeping in view of the following explanations as submitted by the 
Department of Agriculture, Govt. of Tamil Nadu : – 
(i). 25% of the total requiremen t of Azadirachtin i.e 71169 liters was taken for 
distribution among farmers in 2008 -09. He pointed out that Tamil Nadu received 
good south West monsoon rain in 2008 -09 and incidence of mite attack was under 
natural check and farmers showed less interest in  taking up control measures as  
50% was the farmers share in the project and hence the pace of scheme slowed 
down. The department informed that the validity of chemical expired by 2008 -09 and 
firms were directed to take back botanicals and new batch was su pplied only in 
2009-10.  
(ii). The department further informed that before placing the indent for next supply a 
quick survey to assess the incidence of mite was undertaken by the Joint Directors 
of Agriculture in 10 districts. Based on the survey report th at the incidence of mite 
attack has been considerable reduced in 2009, department decided that further 
purchase of chemicals need not be taken up. However the entire quantity of 71159.5 
litres of Azadirachtin procured has been distributed to farmers. At th e same time the 
Department has adopted wait and watch policy and final utilization certificate for the 
fund released by the Board may be submitted by 31-3-2013. 
 Moreover, the objective of the project was achieved and the fund released 
was utilized for the  purpose to which it has been sanctioned. Since the project was 
sanctioned to State Government, the penal interest was not imposed." 
 

-21- 
 
39. On a specific query the Secretary was candid during evidence to admit: 
 "So far, not a single paisa of penal interest has been collected." 
 
40. The Secretary further deposed as under: 
"......... So far as, charging of interest is concerned, the Coconut Development Board 
is still insisting on getting this amount from Tamil Nadu Government. But, the Tamil 
Nadu Government has again written a letter to waive this off in terms of the 
agreement and we have not taken a decision so far." 
 
41. When the Committee desired the Ministry to clarify the nature of follow up that had 
been resorted to for non -imposition of penalty by the Board since the scheme was       
regularly followed up , it was submitted that the Board was regularly monitoring from 2009 
onwards with the state Government Vide DO letters dated  03.07.2009 and 30.09.2009 and 
letters dated 21.12.2012, 17.10.2013, 05.02.2014, 30.06.2014 , 24.07.2015  and DO letter 
dated 31.12.2015. 
 
42. In this regard the Secretary further deposed as under: 
".......... In the interim, the Coconut Development Board held a meeting with Tamil 
Nadu Government on 30.03.2009 and subsequently, we have written to them  on 
3.7.09, 13.9.09, 28.2.13, 17.10.13, 5.2.14, 30.6.14, 24.7.15, 31.12.15. All these 
letters have been marked and we are submitting them separately. As a result of our 
continuous efforts, this amount was finally returned on 14.3.16." 
 
43. Throwing light on th e subject, the Chairman Coconut Development Board during 
evidence stated as under: 
"Sir, after 2009, the Tamil Nadu Government adopted a policy for wait and watch. 
They said that first of all in 2009 they wanted to increase the share of the Coconut 
Board. As per the agreed MoU, 25 per cent is from Coconut Board; 25 per cent is 
from the Tamil Nadu Government; and 50 per cent from the farmers side. This is the 
sharing pattern. So, the Tamil Nadu Government moved saying that can the Coconut 
Board increase the share of Coconut Board, which then the Chairman written to 
Chief Secretary said that we could not increase. Then, they have also been told to 
study the impact by Tamil Nadu Agricultural University (TNAU)  in 2009. After that, 
the University did a study on i ts impact and the Tamil Nadu Government wanted to 
exercise a wait and watch policy because the damage was very extensive as 
2,23,000,00 plants were infested initially and steps were taken for 10 Districts in 
Tamil Nadu covering 123 blocks, that is, almost 94 lakh plants. Since the damage 
was extensive, the State Government requested for having a wait and watch policy 
and a study by TNAU." 
 
44. When Committee sought the reasons for delay in distribution of Azadirictin chemicals 
which were procured in 2007 -08 and distributed up to 2010 -11 though the Department of 
Agriculture, Tamil Nadu decided (2009) to stop further procurement , the Department 

-22- 
 
submitted that as per the project approved by the Project Approval Committee under 
TMoC, the financial assistance of the Board was 25% and the balance 25% wa s the share 
of Tamil Nadu Government and 50% was the contribution of beneficiary farmers. During the 
year 2008, Tamil Nadu received good South West monsoon rain and Eriophyid mite attack 
was much less and hence the response from coconut growers for the purchase of pesticide 
@ 50% rate , being their share , was poor. The farmer was not coming forward for the 
purchase of the pesticide since the loss occurred is below the economic threshold level. 
The same matter was informed by the Government of Tamil Nadu in the review meeting 
held on 28.02.2013 at CDB, Kochi that though the Department of Agriculture, Tamil Nadu 
decided (2009) to stop further procurement, the balance stock procured only was 
distributed. Hence delay happened in distribution of chemicals. 
 
45. To a pointed query of the Committee as whether the project has been a success, the 
representative of the Department during evidence deposed as under: 
"It has been successful. That is why, the incidence was reduced to less than  20 per 
cent. However, with the change in the humidity and dryness periodically, in some 
new areas, the emergence of these attack appeared and then requested let us give 
more time for wait and watch policy and then we will submit the report. We will 
enquire about it. If you permit me Sir, then I would state here one here. During that 
time, the production and productivity of coconut in Tamil Nadu was very low but now 
with the changes that have been brought into the production process, now in Tamil 
Nadu the g rowth of coconut is very high and the second highest productivity has 
been registered in the country. The quality of the nut which is being produced in 
Tamil Nadu is giving a very tough competition to the traditional producers like 
Karnataka and even Keral a also. As a result, our total production of coconut has 
gone very high and we attained the highest position in the world. We are now 
producing 22 billion nuts every year and the share of Tamil Nadu is more than 27 per 
cent. We feel this technology has rea lly helped to contain the incidence of mite and 
for various details we will conduct an inquiry and a study to report." 
 
46. The Committee desired to know as to whether any action was initiated by CDB to 
either get the remaining funds back/monitor subsequent ut ilization by the Department after 
the joint inspection was conducted in November by CDB and the Department of Agriculture, 
Tamil Nadu which indicated less occurrence of mite attack due to rain fall, hence demand 
for chemical was less . In response  the Depar tment in post evidence reply submitted as 
under:  
"After the joint field the joint field inspection during November 2008, Board had taken 
action vide letter No. 1272/2006 -Dev Mite TN dated 12.12.2008 to convene the 
monitoring committee meeting under the Ch airmanship of APC to decide  future 
course of action for further continuation of the project. Accordingly the state level 

-23- 
 
high level monitoring committee meeting held on 05.01.2009 where representative of 
CDB also attended. The committee had taken the following decisions:- 
 
• In the districts where  60% distribution of chemicals wa s completed, the 
remaining quantity will be supplied. 
• Since the chemicals purchased we re due for expiry in Feb ruary 2009/ March 
2009, t ook up speedy action in re - distributing th e chemicals without any further 
delay.  
• Placing the indent for further supplier 70% of the chemicals might be 
considered on completion of the entire distribution of 71,1680.75 litres of chemicals." 
 
47. When the Committee asked as to whether the Department o f Agriculture, Tamil 
Nadu communicated to the CDB to stop further procurement of chemicals in 2009 and 
whether the same was not a requirement of the MoU that CDB would be kept informed 
about the progress in utilization, the Department submitted in the affirmative and stated that 
as per the Clause No. 8, 9 and 10 of MoU a state level high level monitoring committee was 
constituted vide Order No. GO Ms. No.126 dated 18.03.2008 to monitor the implementation 
of the project. Accordingly the Government of Tamil Nadu communicated the minutes of the 
state level high level monitoring committee meeting held on 05.01.2009. The committee 
had taken the following decisions:- 
 
• In the districts where 60% distribution of chemicals was completed, the remaining 
quantity will be supplied. 
• Since the chemicals purchased we re due for expiry in Feb ruary, 2009/ March 2009, 
took up speedy action in re- distributing the chemicals without any further delay.  
• Placing the indent for further supplier 70% of the chemicals m ight be considered on 
completion of the entire distribution of 71,1680.75 litres of chemicals.  
  
Also vide letter OPC3/198828/06 from Commissioner of Agriculture, Government  of Tamil 
Nadu dated 19.01.2009 informed that on completion of the distribution of the entire  quantity 
of 71,168.75 litres of chemical purchased further action would be taken in this regard.  
 
48. When the Committee wished to know whether the MoU between the CDB and 
Government of Tamil Nadu, Department of Agriculture was drafted after taking into 
consideration of technical experts so as to the effect of monsoon in controlling the Eriophyid 
Mite infestation, the Department submitted that a common MoU was designed for 
implementation of TMoC scheme and was being executed between CDB and the 
implementing agency after approval of the project by the Project Approval Committee of the 

-24- 
 
TMoC consisting of Technical expert. Besides the state level high level committee formed 
for monitoring the implementation of the project reviewed the project in their meeting hel d 
on 05.01.2009. In the meeting, the Director of Research, Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University, Coimbatore being the member of the committee informed that due to good 
monsoon rain the level of mite infestation came down to a larger extent. 
 
49. A representative of the Department during evidence further elaborated as under: 
"Sir, regarding non -anticipation of effect of monsoon, I would like to clarify that the 
whole project was taken up by a study funded by the CDB undertaken by TNAU and 
what would be the methodo logy and package of practice for addressing the 
Eriophyid Mite infestation, it was done on the recommendation of the TNAU – the 
whole project. I am not a technical person, but technically, it is said that the heat, 
temperature and humidity has an impact on multiplication of Eriophyrid." 
 
50. When the Committee asked through a post evidence reply the reasons for delay in 
initiating action by CDB to get the unutilized amount refunded, the Department reiterated its 
earlier response by stating that the State Govern ment of Tamil Nadu informed that since 
Eriophyid-Mite was airborne in nature, there could be recurrence of the attack at any time. 
Hence the State Government adopted the wait and watch policy during 2011 -12 and 2012-
13. However, the Board issued letters as  follow up vide letters dated 17.10.2013, 
05.02.2014, 30.06.2014, 24.07.2015 and dated 31.12.2015. 
 
51. When the Committee asked the Department to furnish details of any efforts made by 
CDB to get the amount refunded over the peiod when the funds remained bloc ked, it was 
submitted that the Board had been regularly follwing up the matter with the Government of 
Tamil Nadu. It was noticed that the progress of implementation of the project was slow, 
Chairman, CDB vide D.O letters no.1272/2006 -Dev dated 3.07.2009 an d 30.09.2009 
requested the State  Government to issue necessary instructions to the concerned either to 
chalk out time bound action plan for completing implementation of the project or to refund 
the entire amount  sanctioned by the Board. The matter ha d been taken up with the State 
Government vide letters dated Vide letters dated 21.12.2012 and review of the project was 
conducted on 28.02.2013 at CDB, Kochi where in the following decisions were taken:- 
 
(i). The final report alon g with full beneficiary list  and outcome of the project to be  
submitted by Department of Agriculture Tamil Nadu before 31.03.2013 
(ii). The final utilization certificate for the funds released may be furnished by 31.03.2013  

-25- 
 
(iii). The unspent balance available with Dep artment of Agriculture, Tamil Nadu may be 
refunded. 
 
 In this regard, continuous follow up were made vide letters dated 17.10.2013, 
05.02.2014, 30.06.2014, 24.07.2015 and dated 31.12.2015. 
 
52. When the Committee asked whether the amount of ` 1,61,41,212 refunded recently 
by the Government of Tamil Nadu to CDB been refunded to the Ministry or been utilized for 
some other purpose as the amount was refunded by the Tamil Nadu Government recently, 
the Department submitted that the amount refunded by the state Government was 
deposited in the unspent Grant in aid account maintained by the Board and the same was 
utilized during 2016-17. 
 
53. In this connection the Secretary during evidence stated as under: 
"It goes once and for all. It belongs to the corpus of the Coconut Development 
Board. They do not return that money to us. Because it is grant -in-aid. This is our 
organization. This organization is directly under us. Every year, they receive certain 
funds like ` 50 crores or ` 100 crores depending on what the action plan they submit. 
Once it goes, it becomes their fund.  When they give it to third parties, they obtain 
the details and it is credited back to them. They do not return it to us. Regarding the 
State Governments, we give the funds to them and they give the UCs to us, then we 
release the next installment. Sir, I do agree with what you are saying. Unutilized fund 
is definitely accounted for. I am not denying that. But we do not get it back from that. 
That is all I am saying. Sir, the liabilities and everything are reflected in th e annual 
accounts and the audited statement of the annual accounts. I want to distinguish that 
we are not getting back the money. That is all I wanted to say. I did not mean that we 
are not monitoring." 
 
54. When the Committee asked as to whether there is any system of monitoring 
currently in place in CDB to ensure that such blocking of funds does not recur elsewhere, 
as had happened in the project involving Department of Agriculture, Government of Tamil 
Nadu, the Department submitted that as per the Mo U execut ing with the 
Government/private agencies the agency has to submit quarterly progress report showing 
the physical and financial achievements to the Board. Besides there was an Internal 
Screening Committee as well as Project Approval Committee was there unde r TMoC to 
monitor the progress of the schemes sanctioned under TMoC. 
 
55. When the Committee desired the Department to explain the reasons for the poor 
monitoring of the funds earmarked to CDB by the Department of Agriculture, Cooperation 
and Farmers Welfare, it was submitted that before releasing funds to CDB, this Department 

-26- 
 
was asking for utilization certificates of previous release along with Physical and financial 
progress is taken. Besides, review meetings were held to review progress. 
 
56. When the Committee  enquired whether the CDB made it mandatory requirement in 
all schemes for timely submission of utilization certificates now and how it was being 
ensured that the money had actually been utilized for the purpose for which it was intended, 
the Department su bmitted in the affirmative and was based on the audited  utilization 
certificate along with the quarterly physical and financial progress report submitted by the 
implementing agencies to whom the project is sanctioned on approval of PAC of 
Technology Mission on Coconut Scheme of Board. 

-27- 
 
 
  PART II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
1) The  Committee's examination of the subject is based on 3 Audit Paragraphs 
on 'Significant observations on the Accounts of Individual Central 
Autonomous Bodies', 'Non-achievement of Stated Objectives' and 'Blocking of 
Funds'. Out of these three, the first and the third Audit Paragraphs/subjects 
fall within the purview of Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
and the second paragraph falls within the purview of Department of 
Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare, Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers 
Welfare. Accordingly, the Committee’s examination h as proceeded in that 
sequence. 
 
Significant observations on the Accounts of Individual Central Autonomous 
Bodies 
 
2) On gleaning through the oral evidence tendered before the Committee and the 
material/information supplied, they are perturbed to note that the test checked 
five units/Institutes of ICAR were not depicting the value of land (free hold and 
lease hold)  in their schedule of  assets in contravention of the Significant 
Accounting Policies (SAP) developed as early as in the year  2003-04. The 
Committee, are, also astonished to note that the Department of Ag ricultural 
Research instructed five  units/institutions to depict the value  of land in their 
schedule of assets only after the audit observation and the same have been 
reflected in their annual accounts from 2016 -17 only. The Committee find that 
the Ministry have assured that all types of lands have now been digitalized and 
brought on record, so all concerted efforts would be made for 
reconciliation/depiction of such assets by the units in the annual accounts of 
the year 2017-18.  It is evident that such an assurance is primarily consequent 
to the audit findings and subsequently t he Committee’s intervention. The 
Committee, therefore, in no uncertain words, at this stage, can only aver that 
such concerted efforts should bring fruits and the annual accounts of not only 
the year 2017 -18 but for the coming years also invariably depict a true 

-28- 
 
reconciled picture of lands  and put in place a system for integrated data of 
assets. 
3) It is disconcerting for t he Committee to find that the overstating of grant and 
subsidies of ` 4806.94 crore by ` 133.60 crore in the annual accounts of ICAR , 
though the amount carried forward was to be adjusted in future grants and 
refunded to the Government , resulted in understatement of liability.  The 
Committee also  note that the consolidated annu al accounts of ICAR depicts  
the value of grants received from the G overnment of India and carry the 
component of grants received from other I CAR units and as such due to  
multiple release points the figures of grants received were duplicated. The 
precise value of grants received from the Government of India and the 
utilization done by all ICAR units  are taken into account to work out the  exact 
unspent amount refundable to the Government of India. The Committee note 
with concern that the differences in the figures of ICAR Institute data and the 
consolidated annual accounts o f ICAR were due to multiple release factor and 
refunding of the amount either in the same year or in subsequent years. The 
Committee therefore, recommend the Department/ICAR to put a mechanism in 
place to streamline/reconcile the difference in the figures of ICAR units and the 
consolidated annual accounts of ICAR. 
 
4) Upon examining the subject, t he Committee are further perturbed to note that 
there are errors and mis -statements in the estimation of accrued interest on 
bank deposits, bonds and other investment s in the ICAR GPF accounts.  The 
Department while admitting the above observation  submitted that  necessary 
changes have been made  in the ICAR GPF accounts during 2011 -12 and the 
officers concerned have been advised to be vigilant in calculating accrued 
interest from the investment s/instruments. However, the Committee are not 
satisfied with the m ere advisory issued in this regard and  desire the 
Department/ICAR to fix responsibility for the lapse/errors in the estimation of 
accrued interest of ICAR GPF account s and also  to devise a foolproof 
mechanism to avoid recurrences of this nature in future. 
 
5) During the course of examination, the Committee find that since the year 2003-
04, ICAR units have undergone substantive change in their accounting 

-29- 
 
system. They have switched over from cash accounting basis to the accrual 
system and have been implementing significant accounting policy (SAP) after 
audit objection. The Committee trust the assertion of ICAR that their accounts 
have progressed in a better way due to shifti ng to accrual accounting system  
and also take note of the fact that a consultant well -versed in accounting of 
Autonomous Bodies has been hired to look into the accounting reforms and 
as such the accounting policies were modified for change of rates of 
depreciation and lease -hold lands and its amortization in the year 2015 -16. 
Nevertheless, the Committee would desire that such a trend should continue 
and ICAR moves abreast with more modern and up -to-date accounting 
methodology to adhere to the best accountin g principles. Significant progress 
since the year 2015 -16 be intimated to the Committee while fur nishing the 
action taken notes. 
 
Non-achievement of Stated Objectives 
 
6) The Committee find that the proposal to create modern infrastructure for 
human resource development at Central Avian Research Institute, Bareilly and 
its eventual construction was fraught with lack of planning, foresight and 
lackadaisical attitude ab initio. Moreover, the time factor, in the opinion of the 
Committee, is also important as the approval for new infrastructure was 
communicated as early as in March 2004 and November 2004, nevertheless the 
works were completed and hand over in April, 2011 and that too without the 
sanction for supply and electrical system which was accorded in Septem ber, 
2015 and November, 2015 respectively.  
 
 Coming back to the core issue, t he Committee find that Central Avian 
Research Institute, Bareilly  decided to shift the Institute in March, 2005 to a 
new site at Pilibhit Road. In the sequel, it sent a fresh req uisition for 
construction of the Feed Technology Unit and the Poultry Processing lab in 
April 2007 to CPWD at a revised cost of ` 57.46 lakh and ` 63.52 lakh 
respectively. The Committee note with concern that while sending the original 
proposal provisions were not made for electrical and water supply as the same 
were decided to be used from  Indian Veterinary Research Institute ( IVRI). The 

-30- 
 
Committee are astounded to note that the Feed Technology Unit and the 
Poultry Processing Unit which are very important p art of the Institute, creating 
modern infrastructure for human resource development in terms of teaching, 
imparting practical training to PG diploma holders and Ph.D students of 
Poultry Science was initially built without any provision for electrical and water 
supply which are undoubtedly basic requirements for such facilities. The 
Committee also observe that the civil work for both the Feed Technology 
Processing Unit and the Poultry Processing Lab were completed by CPWD and 
handed over to the Institute aft er incurring an expenditure of ` 135.2 lakh in 
April 2011. What can be more appalling to t he Committee than to note that the 
proposal for electrical and water supply was sent to the Indian Council for 
Agricultural Research ICAR only in March 2014 by the In stitute and  approved 
in 2015. The Department submitted that the delay in sending the proposal for 
the same was due to allocation of funds in January 2014 only under XII plan 
and temporary arrangements were made from IVRI in 2012 to make the labs 
functional pending the civil work. The Committee are of the opinion that the 
plea of the Ministry that provisions for electricity and water supply were not 
incorporated as it was decided to source them from IVRI, and their subsequent 
contention that a new project f or electricity and water supply had to b e 
conceived due to overload at the IVRI supply source is untenable because the 
capacity of supply at IVRI and the additional requirement that would arise from 
the supply to the new units/Laboratories could have been worked out at the 
planning stage  itself. The lapse in plan ning and the oversight in approval 
without independent electricity and water supply evidently resulted  in 
inordinate delay  which needs to be  taken serious note of so that such 
instances do not recur  in future and the stated objectives are achieved in 
scientific studies such as the one in question.  At this stage, the Committee 
has no option but to recommend in unequivocal terms that an in-house inquiry 
be instituted within timeframe which should look  into the feasibility of fixing 
responsibility for the lapses. 
 
 
 
 

-31- 
 
Blocking of Funds 
 
7) In regard to the Committee’s enquiry on Blocking of Funds, they find that their 
exist not only lack of planning, implementation but also a non -serious 
approach in leading  to this issue to finality.  It is disturbing to note that the 
settlement/refund of funds took more than six years during which Coconut 
Development Board (CDB) remained a mute spectator and could not effectively 
watch its own interests. The Committee’s rendition of the enquiry is discussed 
in the subsequent paragraphs.  
 
 The Committee note  that in 2007 , the Department of Agriculture, 
Cooperation and Farmer's Welfare through the Coconut Development Board 
had sanctioned a project "Control of Eriophyid Mite o n Coconut to be carried 
out by  the Department of Agriculture, Government of Tamil Nadu .  The total 
cost of the Project was estimated to be Rs. 22.77 crores and the CDB had 
released 50% of its share amounting to Rs. 2.85 crore.   It envisaged treatment 
of 94.892 lakh palms in 10 districts. The date of completion of the project was 
to be before 31 March 2009 and final project report was to be submitted on or 
before 31 May 2009. Out of the sanctioned amount, only 1.23 crore was utilized 
and the balance of Rs. 1.61 crore remained unspent with Government of Tamil 
Nadu for over 6 years. The Committee note  with constraint  that the 
Government of Tamil Nadu had, in breach of the Farms of the terms of the 
MoU, retained the unutilized amount for a "wait and watch" polic y during 2011-
12 and 2012-13 and returned the sum only on 14.03.2016, while all accounts of 
the projects should have been set tled in May 2009. The Committee, therefore, 
express their grave concern at the serious lapse on the part of CDB to closely 
monitor the project implementation. The Committee understands that good 
rains created propitious conditions during the project tenure  in the form of 
good rains which  largely controlled the mite infestation . This led to savings  
and obviated spending of the entire p roject funds . However, the Committee 
feels that holding of funds for over six years as an aberration and lapse on the 
part of administrative authorities for timely realizing the same. In the normal 
case and in the interest of public financial probity, the unutilized project grant 
received from CDB should have been returned within the stipulated time 

-32- 
 
frame. The Committee , therefore, recommend that  the Ministry should 
contemplate on the elements of lapses in this regard and fix responsibility in 
the CDB for f ailure to monitor the implementation of the project under 
intimation to the Committee.  
 Further, the Committee recommend ed that since retention of unspent 
balance by Government of Tamil Nadu was intentional, the accrued 
interests/penalties must be recover ed, pending which no further sanctions be 
released to the State Government. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                    MALLIKARJUN KHARGE 
7 August, 2018                                                                                            Chairperson,  
16 Shravana, 1940 (Saka)                                                 Public Accounts Committee 