      117  
 
 
EXCESSES OVER VOTED GRANTS AND CHARGED 
APPROPRIATIONS (2014-15) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their 68th Report (16th Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEETNH LOK SABHA 
 
 
               
                      
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  


2 
 
PAC NO.  2156 
 
 
O N E  H U N D R E D  A N D   
S E V E N T E E N T H  R E P O R T 
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(2018 -19)  
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their 68th Report (16th Lok Sabha)] 
 
 
                                           
                                                                              
 Presented to Lok Sabha on:  14.12.2018 
 
             Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   14.12.2018 
 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
December, 2018 /Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)  
  
 
  
EXCESSES OVER VOTED GRANTS AND 
CHARGED APPROPRIATIONS (2014-15) 
 
 
 

3 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS  
COMMITTEE (2018-19)      
(iii) 
 
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………... …………………….. 
  
(iv) 
CHAPTER I              
  
Report ………………………………………………. 1 
CHAPTER II* Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government …………………….. 
 
CHAPTER III* Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
replies received from the Government ..………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV* Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration ……………………………………………. 
 
 
CHAPTER V* Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which the Government have furnished interim 
replies ………………………………………………… 
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES* 
 
I 
 
Minutes of the 20 th sitting of the Public Accounts 
Committee (2018 -19) held on   
5th December, 2018 
 
 
II Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public 
Accounts Committee contained in their  Sixty -
eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
   
 
________________________________________________________________  
*Not appended to the cyclostyled copy of the Report 
 
  

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge   - Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria  
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra 
5.    Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar   
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
7. Smt. Riti Pathak 
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank” 
9. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
10. Shri Abhishek Singh 
11. Shri Gopal Shetty 
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya  
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
15. Dr. Ponnusamy  Venugopal 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda 
17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
18. Shri Shwait Malik 
19. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
21. Shri C.M. Ramesh 
 
22. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Director 
3. Smt. Anju Kukreja - Under Secretary 

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2018 -19), having been authorised by 
the Committee, do present this One Hundred and Seventeenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) 
on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Sixty -eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Excess Over 
Voted Grants and Charged Appropriations (2014 -15)" relating to various 
Ministries/Departments.  
 
2. The Sixty -eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Ra jya Sabha on  
31st July, 2017. Replies of the Government to all the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report were received.  The Public Accounts Committee considered and 
adopted the One hundred and Seventeenth Report at their sitting held on  
5th December, 2018.  Minutes of the sitting are given at Appendix I. 
 
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
4. The Committee place on r ecord their appreciation of the assistance rendered to them 
in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Sixty -eighth Report (Sixt eenth Lok Sabha) is given at 
Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                          MALLIKARJUN KHARGE 
12th December, 2018                                                           Chairperson, 
21 Agrahayana,1940 (Saka)                                               Public Accounts Committee 
 
  

6 
 
R E P O R T 
PART – I 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action  Taken by the 
Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Sixty-eighth Report (1 6th Lok Sabha) on " Excesses over Voted Grants and Charged 
Appropriations (2014-15)". 
 
2. The Sixty-eighth Report (16th Lok Sabha), which was presented to Lok Sabha/ laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 31st March, 2017, contained 15 Observations and Recommendations. Action 
Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations and Recommendations have been received 
from the Ministries/Departments concerned are broadly categorized as under :   
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
 
Para Nos. 1-15 
Total: 15 
Chapter - II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
of the replies received from the Government:   
Para No.  NIL 
Total: NIL 
Chapter - III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
 
Para No.  NIL 
                Total: NIL  
Chapter - IV 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished 
interim replies: 
 
Para No. NIL 
Total: NIL  
Chapter – V 
 
 

7 
 
3. While observing that the various Civil Ministries/Departments, Ministry of Defence and 
the Ministry of Railways have been incurring excess expenditure year , after year, the 
Committee had made the following observations/Recommendations: 
a) Ministry of Finance make it incumbent upon the Financial Advisers and Budget 
Controlling Authorities to monitor the pace of expenditure and to invoke the provision of 
supplementary demands judiciously to ensure observance of strict fiscal discipline in order to 
avoid recurrence of excess expenditure in future. 
b) Ministry/Department concerned to constitute Expert Groups in each and every Ministry 
and furnish Report thereof to the C ommittee indicating the reasons for such a high excess 
expenditure and suggestions to obviate the same in future. 
c) Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) should establish a suitable 
mechanism at their own level and issue instructions to all Mi nistries/ Departments so that 
stricter exchequer control could be exercised by them. 
d) Ministries/Departments concerned should probe into the causes of this chronic 
malaise and find effective ways and means to make the mechanism of obtaining 
supplementary Grants more realistic and budget controlling officers be made responsible for 
this act of omission.  
e) Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) to give serious attention to this 
aspect and evolve an effective mechanism in corrdination with budget c ell of all the 
Ministries/Departments, C&AG of India and CGA in the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Expenditure) to restrict the use of Supplementary Demands only to rare and emergent cases. 
f) A high-level Committee be constituted consisting the budget controlling authorities of 
Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) as well as the 
officers from the CGA (Department of Expenditure) to identify loopholes in the budgeting 
procedures of the Ministry of Defence and to obviat e the same in order to avoid the recurring 
phenomenon of excess expenditure under the Grants operated by them. 
g) Ministry of Railway should  look into the matter and take some stringent measures 
apart from the above to tighten their budgetary control so as to  leave little scope for excess 
expenditure being incurred under various Grants/Appropriations operated by them. 
 
4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministries/Departments concerned to each of 
the Observation/Recommendation of the Committee contained i n their Sixty -eighth Report 
(16th Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant chapters of this Report. The 

8 
 
Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of their 
Observations/Recommendations which either need reiteration or merit comments. 
A. Excess expenditure incurred despite obtaining supplementary Grants 
 (Recommendation Para No. 4) 
5. While observing that out of 13 cases of excess registering Grants/Appropriations, the 
excess expenditure had been incurred even after obtaining Supplementary Grants in as 
many as 10 cases, the Committee in their 68th Report (16 th Lok Sabha) had recommended 
that the Ministries/Departments concerned should probe into the causes of this chronic 
malaise and  find effective ways and means to make the mechanism of obtaining 
Supplementary Grants  more realistic and budget controlling officers be m ade responsible for 
this act of omission.  The Committee would also like the Ministry of Finance  (Department of 
Economic Affairs) to give serious attention to this aspect and evolve an effective  mechanism 
in coordination with budget cell of all the Ministries/Departments, C&AG of India and CGA in 
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) to restrict the use of Supplementary  
Demands only to rare and emergent cases. 
6. In their Action Taken Note to the aforesaid recommendation, the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Economic Affairs) submitted as follows: 
"Although use of Supplementary Demands must only be for rare and emergent cases 
and that's why this Department issues instructio ns while seeking supplementary  
proposals from Ministries/Departments clearly advising to submit supplementary 
proposals only in respect of under mentioned cases;- 
a) Cases where advances from the Contingency Fund of India have been granted, 
which are required to be recouped to the Fund; 
b) Payments against Court decrees, which cannot be postponed; 
c) Additional funds immediately required which can be met by re -appropriation of 
savings in the grant but require prior approval of Parliament under the New 
Service/New Instrument of Service Rules; 
d) Cases where Ministry of Finance has specifically advised to propose 
Supplementary Demand; 
e) In cases where savings are available within the Grant to meet any excess 
requirement but the savings cannot be re -appropriated under existing rules e.g. 
from the Revenue Section to the Capital Section and vice versa or from 'Voted 
expenditure' to 'Charged expenditure' and vice versa. 
f) In cases where the approved Revised Estimates would result in excess over 
the sanctioned provision in the Grant (In cases where R E of the Mi nistry is 
increased); 
g) Cases where excess expenditure has been allowed by MoF as per Appendix 10 
below Rule No. 61 and 69 of GFRs, 2017. 
However, it may be appreciated that the Supplementary Demands are also very 
useful stage for review of spendings by the Ministries and effective and efficient use of 
budgetary resources. 

9 
 
 It is further mentioned that this Deptt has also requested National Institute of 
Financial Management (NIFM) , Faridabad to conduct a study and document the 
fact/trend of excess expenditures in Government of India for the period since 2000 -01, 
including Ministry/Department-wise; Analyse major cases of public excess expenditure 
(exceeding ` 100 crore) over this period, including ascertaining reasons for such 
excess expenditure and whether suc h excess expenditure could have avoided. It has 
also been requested to conduct a table study of five (5) major 'federal countries' in the 
world and bring out the trends/facts of excess expenditure of these countries at federal 
level and to document the sys tem of how excess expenditure are dealt with in these 
countries. It has been expected from NIFM to propose an informed system of 
budgeting and controlling excess expenditure based on analysis of Indian experience 
and global best practices. 
 
7. The Committee a ppreciate the steps taken by the Ministry o f Finance 
(Department of Economic Affairs) to obviate the excess expenditure  in Government of 
India in future. However, the Action Taken Notes are silent about the period and date 
as to when the Department of Economic Affairs requested the National Institute of 
Financial Management (NIFM) Faridabad to conduct the aforesaid study to suggest for 
an informed system of budgeting and controlling excess expenditure based on 
analysis of Indian experience and best practices in the world . The Committee, 
therefore, desire the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) to furnish 
the results of the said study, the recommendations made therein by the NIFM and the 
steps taken by the Ministry thereon as soon as the report is submitted. The Committee 
would also desire to be apprised of the table study report of five major federal 
countries, when completed, and the system formulated by the Ministry after analysing 
the trend of excess expenditure in these countries and as to how these countries dealt 
with such a malaise . The Committee would like to be informed of such details within 
three months of the presentation of this Report to Parliament. 
 
B. Recurring excess expenditure incurred by the Ministry of Defence 
 (Recommendation Para No. 6) 
8. While observing incurring of excess expenditure recurringly for the past five years by 
the Ministry of Defence, the Committee in Para 6 of 68 th Report (16 th Lok Sabha) had 
expected the Ministry to constitute a high -level Committee consisting the budget controlling 
authorities of Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) as 
well as the officers from the CGA (Department of Expenditure) to identify loopholes in the 
budgeting procedures of the Ministry of Defence  and to obviate the same in order to avoid 
the recurring phenomenon of excess expenditure under the Grants operated by them. 

10 
 
9. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Defence stated as follows: 
"A high level Committee with AS&FA (Acquisition) as Chairperson and representative 
from Army, Navy, Air Force, IDS, DGAFMS & representative s from Department of 
Economic Affairs and Controller General of Accounts has been set up." 
 
10. The Committee note that in pursuance of their recommendation the Ministry of 
Defence have constituted a high level Committee to identify the loopholes in the 
budgeting procedures of the Ministry of Defence. However, the Action Taken Notes 
have not informed  about the date of constitution of such Committee, loopholes 
identified by them in the budgeting procedures and the action taken thereon by the 
Ministry of Defence. The Committee desire to be apprised of such details and the 
steps initiated to avoid the re curring phenomenon of excess expenditure under the 
Grants operated by the Ministry of Defence. 
 
Excess Expenditure incurred by the Ministry of Railways 
(Recommendation Para No. 1) 
11. The Committee in Para 1 of their 68th Report (16th Lok Sabha) had impressed upon the 
Ministries/Departments to constitute an Expert Group in each and every Ministry for 
investigating the reasons for such a high excess expenditure and suggestions to obviate the 
same in future. 
12. In response thereto, the Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Note have 
submitted as under: 
"Pursuant to Committee's recommendation, an Expert Group to study persistent trend 
of excess expenditure with a view to find out reasons for the same and evolve a 
mechanism to curb instances of excess expenditure has been constituted vide Order 
No. ERB-I/2016/23/37 dated 20.07.2016. The report of the same was submitted to the 
Audit vide letter No. 2016/BC/XVI/36 dated 01.02.2017." 
 
13. The Committee note that in pu rsuance of their recommendation , the Ministry of 
Railways have constituted an Expert Group to study persisting trend of excess 
expenditure incurred by the Ministry. The Committee observe that the Expert Group 
made certain recommendations for controlling the excess expenditure by the Min istry 
of Railways such as accurate budget estimation is the key  in avoiding excess 
expenditure; real time access to relevant information and trend of booking can 
contribute significantly in t his direction;  Ministry of Railways should sensitize the 
executives and DDOS to respect the Budget allotment;  the concerned executive 
should check the incurrence of liability and refuse the payments unless they are 

11 
 
backed by the Budget availability;  in case of urgent expenditure, the matter should be 
brought before the competent authority including the Board;  Passing of bills needs to 
be linked to budget provision; Budget for charged Appropriations should be asked for 
in full details, FA & CAOs alongwith PHODs should have the com plete list of the 
ongoing cases  likely dat es of their decree and the amou nt involved in each of the 
case; Passing of bills needs to be linked to budget provision etc. The Committee are 
optimistic that the aforesaid recommendations of the Expert Group would be 
implemented by the Ministry of Railways in letter and spirit which would go a long way 
in controlling the incurring of excess expenditure in future. The Committee would, 
therefore, like to be apprised of the action taken by the M inistry on the 
recommendations made by the Expert Group and outcome thereof in preventing the 
excess expenditure. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                               MALLIKARJUN KHARGE 
12th December, 2018                                                           Chairperson, 
21 Agrahayana,1940 (Saka)                                               Public Accounts Committee 
 
 
********* 
  

12 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
CONTAINED IN THEIR SIXTY-EIGHTH REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations  15 
 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee  Total : 15  
which have been accepted by the Government:  Percentage: 100% 
 Para Nos. 1 to 15  
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the    Total : 0  
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of   Percentage: 0 
 the reply of the Government: 
 
 Para Nos.  -Nil 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of   Total : 0 
which replies of the Government have not been   Percentage: 0 
 accepted by the Committee and which require  
 reiteration: 
  
 Para Nos.  -Nil 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of   Total : 0 
which the Government have furnished interim replies:  Percentage: 0 
  
 Para Nos.    -Nil 
 
 