39

PROTECTION AND CONSERVATION
OF MONUMENTS AND ANTIQUITIES

MINISTRY OF CULTURE

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2015-16)

THIRTY-NINTH REPORT

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


“PAC No.2074

THIRTY-NINTHREPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2015-16)

{SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

‘PROTECTION AND CONSERVATION OF
MONUMENTS AND ANTIQUITIES

MINISTRY OF CULTURE

Presented fo Lok Sabha on: we
Laid in Rajya Sabha on: ४9;
a —_ LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT”

NEW DELHI.
April 2015/ Vaisakha 1938 (Saka}


CONTENT. _

Observations and recommendations

Cs /|ऋ Page Numbers
Composition of Public Accounts Committee (2013-14 _ Git
Composition of Public Accounts Committee (2014-15 (iv)
Composition of Public Accounts Committee (2015-15) [| wy
Introduction vi
Report Part-A
Chapter-1: Background 1
Chapter-IJ: Policy level issues and concerns 4
Chapter-Iil: Human Resources Manageinent 14
Chapter-IV; Financial Management 23
Chapter-V: Functional issues 28
: Report Part B
44-59

[..Srt~<CSSSC Aneres ee S—SC—idzY



COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

~ (2015-18)
Prof. K.V. Thomas : Chairperson
MEMBERS
~~ LOK SABHA TO

16.

7.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

- Shri S.S.-Ahluwalia

Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay

* Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura

Shri Nishikant Dubey
Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

- Shri Rarmesh Pokhriyal “Nishank"

Shri Neiphiu Rio

Shri Dushyant Singh

Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal ‘
Dr. Kirit Somatya

- Shri Anurag Singh Thakur

Shri Shivkumar Udasi
Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA
Shri Naresh Agrawal

Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
Shri Anil Madhav Dave

_ Shri Vijay Goel

Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Shri Shantaram Naik
Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy

SECRETARIAT ,

Shri A.K. Singh - Additional Secretary
Shri Tirthankar 0858. - Additional Director
Shri Paolienlal Haokip - Deputy Secretary


INTRODUCTION

॥ the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2015-16) having been
authorized by the Committee, do present this Thirty-ninth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
on ‘Preservation and Conservation of Monuments and Antiquities’ based on CRAG

Report No. 18 of 2013 relating to the Ministry of Culture

20°" The Comptroller and-Auditor General of India-vide Report-No-18 of 2013 Union
Govt. (Civit) Performance’ Audit’ था “Preservation and Conservation of Monuments
and Antiquities” had assessed the performance of the Ministry of Culfure in preserving
and conserving precious monuments and antiquities which are of great importance to
the country's rich cultural history and heritage. In the report, they have pointed out
several areas of concern that need to be addressed by the Ministry to buttress their
efforts so far. The Public Accounts Committee (2013-14) had felt the need fo further
scrutinize the shortcomings that were brought to the fore by the C&AG and monitor the
actions taken by the Ministry following Audit's observation. हु हु

3. The Public Accounts Committee (2013-14) took oral evidence of representatives

of Ministry of Culture and Archaeological Survey of India {ASI) on 26" November, 2013.

As the report could not be finalized, the subject was selected ७५ the PAC (2014-15)
“Which took further oral evidence of the Ministry and ASI representatives on 27" March,

2015. However, the report could not be finalized by PAC (2014-15) as well due to

paucity of time. The PAC (2015-16) again re-selected the subject for examination and
._ finalization of the report. The draft report was considered and adopted by the Committee
at their sitting held on 01.04.2018. The Minutes of the sittings are appended fo the
Report.

4. For facility of reference and canvenience, fhe Observations and
- Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type and form part Il of
the Report.

5. | extend gratitude to my predecessor Chairperson, Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi, and
members of the PAC past and present who have spared their time and effort in
examining the subject thoroughly and making it possible for this Committee to finally give
its report. .

6. |, on behalf of the Committee, would also like to express gratitude fo the
representatives of the Ministry of Culture and Archaeological Survey of India who have
deposed before the Committee and have provided all the information required by the *

Committee in their examination of the subject.

7. - The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to

them in the matter by the Office of the Coimptroller and Auditor General of India and the

Committee Secretariat in preparation of the report.

NEW DELH); PROF. K.V. THOMAS
___ April, 2016 हे Chairperson, |

Vaisakha, 1938 . Public Accounts Committee


Report

Parti
[, ह Background

1.4 The Comptroller and Auditor General of India in their Report No. 18 of
2013 Union Govt. (Civil) Performance Audit on “Preservation and
Conservation of Monuments and Antiquities” had assessed the performance
of the Ministry of Culture in preserving and conserving important monuments and
antiquities which are of great importance to the country’s history and heritage. In
the report, they have pointed out several areas of concern that need to be
addressed by the Ministry to buttress thetr efforts so far.

1.2. The Committee on Public Accounts had felt the need to further scrutinize
the shartcomings that were brought to fore by the C&AG and monitor the actions
taken by the Ministry following Audit's observation.

1.3 The Ministry of Culture had been in existence as early as 1961 and yet
certain basic procedural and institutional lacunae still remain in its efforts to
preserve and conserve a sich heritage of historical monuments and antiquities in
the country, which is one of the largest depositories of such treasures of world
civilization, Beyond their national importance, historical monuments and
antiquities are a shared heritage of the world, of humanity, and therefore,
national governments not only have a national responsibility in proper
preservation and conservation of such valuable souvenirs of the past but also
have a universal obligation to humanity as a whole.

1.4 The Archaeological Survey of India (ASI), which today js under the
Ministry of Culture, and continues to be the premier organization for the
archaeological researches and protection of the cultural heritage of the nation,
precedes the emergence of the Indian republic. It predates the Ministry of Culture


by a century, as in 1851 Cunningham was appointed as the first Archeological
Surveyor.

4.5. From the antiquity of ASI itself and the fact that the Ministry of Culture had
been created as far back as 1961 to protect and conserve ancient historical
monuments and valuable relics of the past, the amount of public money spent
over the years has been huge by any standard. However, has it been prudently
done, can the country 10099 take pride in our accomplishments towards such
preservation and conservation of our heritage? If not, as the Audit observations
seem to indicate, what needs to be done? It is in this frame that the Committee
decided (9 further examine the subject.

1.6 The Committee, therefore, would take on from the Audit Report having
considered the Ministry's replies to 81078 observations without going back into
issues that the Ministry had resolved satisfactorily with Audit. Broadly, the subject’
is being further examined under the broad frameworks of policy related issues,
issues related to Human Resources, Financial management and functional
issues that stood out and still call for further remedial action. The focus of the
report is on such issues over which the Ministry and the various agencies,
particularly the Archeological Survey of india (ASN, have yet to take concrete
temedial action on the lacunae identified by Audit and the findings of the
Committee through their interaction with the representatives of the concerned

organizations.

4.7 The Report No. 18 of 2013 of the C&AG on Performance Audit in respect
of ASI and some of the museums contains a total of 197 paras. 90 to 95 per cent
of these paras pertain to the functioning of ASI and the Audit Report has
commented upen the deficiencies found in the working of all the wings of ASI,
namely, conservation, museums, epigraphy, ह excavations, notification of
protected monuments, manpower, budgetary allocation etc. The major findings
of the audit relate to missing monuments, lack of reliable database of the exact
number of protected monuments, absence of conservation policy, less


expenditure on exploration and excavation and poor documentation of
excavation works, absence of comprehensive policy guidelines for management
. of antiquities, shortcomings in acquisition, documentation and conservation of
antiquities by museums, improper record management in museums, absence of
ratation policy for displaying artefacts in museums, shortage of manpower, etc.

ll.- Chapter Il: Policy and statutory issues

2.1. The committee note that Audit had pointed out several shortcomings on
even basic issues like evolving a National Policy on Conservation, having
Acquisition Policies for antiquities and artifacts adopted at the Museums,
evolving heritage by-laws, etc. Considering the fact that the Ministry of Culture’
had come into existence since 1961, and the ASI being an inheritance from
British India, Audit had rightly pointed out that the public expenditure over the
years does not appear to be fully justified by the achievements. The Committee,

therefore, decided to examine the matter further.

National Conservation Policy

2.2. Taking note of Audit's observation in their report, the Committee enquired
whether the ASI truly did not have a conservation policy, to which the Ministry

feplied as under;

“The conservation policy has now been prepared. The draft policy was
placed on the ASI website for inviting of comments from different
stakeholders, professionals and public. The observations have been
evaluated and incorporated in the new policy“

2.3 Asked as to why the finalization of conservation policy by the ASI took so

long and what the hurdles had been, they replied;

“Preparation of the "National Policy for the Conservation of Ancient
Monuments and Archaeological Sites" under the jurisdiction of ASI has
been a long and thorough process which is time consuming. For this
purpose, a National Committee for Conservation Policy (NCCP) was


created to assist ASI towards the preparation of the Policy. The draft
Policy once prepared, after the approval of the Ministry of Culture, was put
up in public domain for two months to invite comments. Comments
received were carefully scrutinized and subsequently a day long workshop
was organized to discuss them further. These comments were accordingly
incorporated to the Draft Policy. Draft Conservation Policy was also
circulated to the members of the PAC as per their advice. The Policy has
now been approved.”

2.4 During evidence of the Ministry before the Committee, the Ministry
representative stated:

3७ conservation policy for conservation and preservation of monuments in
archaeological sites has been finalised... The guidelines on notification
and de-notification of monuments have been drafted and uploaded on the
websites for public comments.”

Exploration and excavation:

2.5 Exploration and excavation of monument of national importance heing one
of the central responsibilities of the Ministry of Culture, and taking cognizance of
the importance of having an effective policy in place for concerted activities to
achieve desired outcomes, the Committee wanted to know as to why the Ministry
had not finalized the national policy on excavation and exploration so far. The
Ministry replied as under;

‘The National Policy of Arctiaeological Expioration/Excavations is in the
process of being finalized...... awaiting approval."
2.68 According to Audit, ASI is spending less than one percent of its
expenditure on exploration and excavation activities. Asked if this help. in
achieving the intended goals, the Ministry replied;
“The ASI is taking an excavation work based upon the potential of the site
as well as problem oriented research project covering various time period
of our past. Archaeological field works taken not alone by the ASI but by
most of the State Archaeological Departments, Universities and other
Research Organizations. Efforts are also on 0 augment the resources of


ASI with the enhanced resources at its disposal ASI would be able to

focus more on Excavation & Exploration as and where required."

2.7 When further asked whether due to fund crunch any excavation has been
stopped mid-way or not taken up in a year despite proven potential, the Ministry
teplied

“As per the CAG report, the Survey is spending only 1% of its total
budget on exploration/excavation.. Now, it has been decided by the
Ministry to increase it to 5% of total budget in first phase. Due to crunch
of fund, no excavation has been stopped mid-way or not taken up in a
year despite proven potential till date.”

2.8 Asked about the reasons for delay in finalization of National Policy on
Archaeological Excavation and Explorations, the Ministry submitted,

‘The delay in finalization of National Policy on Archaeological Excavation
and Explorations was due to in depth consultation required with various
stake holders and is in the final stages of approval. 5

2.9 During the oral evidence taken by the Committee on 237 March, 2015, the
Ministry submitted as follows;

Simitarly, the policy on excavation and explorations has béen
finalised.” .

2.10 Picking up from the Audit's observation of the absence of a common
policy of museums for acquisition, preservation, conservation, etc. the Committee
asked to be apprised of the reasons therefore. The Ministry in their reply stated;

“Although ‘there is no uniform policy for acquisition, preservation and
conservation of antiquities, the Museums do follow clear guidelines for
acquisition, preservation and conservation. A Draft Acquisition Policy has
been framed and is-in the process of finalization after which, it will be
followed. uniformly by all the Museums under the Ministry of Culture. In
addition regarding conservation of antiquities the best practices being
followed by CSMVS Museum have been communicated to all Museums
for compliance.” है


2.11 On why the Ministry has not been able to amend the Antiquities and Art
Treasure act 1972, the process of which had started in 1997, the Ministry replied;

"8 committee of Experts under the Chairmanship of Dr. Karan Singh has
been constituted to look into all aspects pertaining to Antiquities and to
suggest a suitable frame work of amendments to the AAT Act, 1972."

2.12. Upon further probing, the Ministry submitted that a retired LR has been
appointed to draft the following Acts and Rules in Hindi and English: Antiquities
and Art Treasures Export and Import Contrel Act, 2013-14-and Indian Antiquities
and Art Treasures Act, 2013-14 (To regulate and to promote domestic art
market) which task is likely to be completed shortly.

2.13 The committee during evidence expressed concem over the huge illegal
trade in antiquities and artifacts both inside the country and in the export market.
Asked about the measures initiated to tackle the problem and prevent valuable
antiquities and artifacts 1011 landing in foreign shores, the ministry representative

replied; wee ५ --

“For illegal exports, separately we have an Antiquities Act. One of the
reasons for smuggling is that antiquity prices are very depressed in India.
One of the reasons for depressed prices is that under the law you have to
register and take pertnission. Every one year, the last 100 years become
antiquity. So, it is very difficult for people though modern art sells at a very
high cost in India. We are re-drafting the Act. One of the objectives 18 to
make trade in antiquities within the..country free. Otherwise, even if a
person wants to buy and donate to a museum a fot of issues are there.
We will get the final draft out very quickly.”

214 On the efforts fo evolve a structured policy on acquisition of Antiquities,
the representative of the Ministry during evidence before the Committee stated;

"A legal consultant has been engaged for drafting the new Antiquities and
“Art Treasures Act for facilitating domestic trade in antiquities though the
export would continue fo be prohibited.”


Living Monuments, And Ancient Mounds

2.15 On the guidelines that are prevalent for the management of living
monuments, the Ministry submitted;

"Conservation policy proposed for protected monuments under ASI
recommends conservation works on fiving monuments as a joint
responsibility of owner of the monument and ASI. Field offices remain in a
constant dialogue with owners of living monuments to ensure that no
improper additions/alterations are carried out by them. However, in the
revised Policy for the Conservation of Monuments and Archaeological
Sites proposed by the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI} this aspect has
been further reinforced. Instructions have been issued to all field offices
reiterating that MoUs should be signed between ASI and owners of living
monuments,

More effective measures will be taken for monitoring of signing of MoUs
with the management of living monuments.”

« 2.16 Asked what the long term plan of the ASI is for the protection of ancient
mounds, the Ministry replied;

"The excavations on the centrally protected sites are normally taken on its
potential. Most of the excavated sites are fully fenced and some
unexcavated sites are fo be fenced in due course. All the excavated
structures are fully conserved properly with the help of combination
material and open for public view like ~ Nalanda, Rajgir, Sarnath,

’ Sringverapura, Vairat, Basenagar, Bhangarh, Sanghol, Sravasti, Lothal,
Suryapahar, Purola, Chandpurgarhi, Kanshipur, etc.

On the basis of the recommendations of the committee constituted by
the ASI, the ancient mounds are protected on the basis of their
potential.”

2.17 The Committee also desired fo know if there are any guidelines prepared
for their upkeep. In reply, the Ministry stated;

"The conservation manual by Sir John Marshall provided guidelines for the
protection and preservation of the ancient monuments/sites with structural
remains unearthed from the excavations. The proper preservation and
conservation of the site has also been addressed in the new National
Policy on conservation and preservation of monuments/sites"


2.18 Upon further comments of C&AG on their reply, the Ministry submitted;

"...... National Policy for Conservation of the Ancient Monuments,
Aichaeological Sites and Remains (NPC — AMASR} for protected
monuments/sites by the Archaeological Survey of India has been made in

Apri] 2014."
2.19 On why the ASI has not prepared and implement any policy specially

designed for the 12 mote monuments that were more than 2000 years old, the
Ministry replied;

"The protection of the monuments can be taken up on the basis of the
study carried out by field officers. keeping in view of the
archaeologicaVhistorical and the significance of the said monument:...A
draft policy for protection of monuments has been prepared. It is
applicable to ali the proposals.”

2.20 (Asked if there is any specific policy for preservation/conservation of Rock
Edicts, the Ministry stated;

"There is no specific policy for preservation/conservation of Rock Edicts.
The conservation of the rock edict is being ‘taken up on the basis of
requirement after examining the condition of the same.”

2.21 The Commitiee desired to kriow ‘whether ASI has devised any

comprehensive policy for the management of the antiquities. The Ministry

responded as follows;

"The policy is envisaged in various clauses of the AAT Act, 1972 and
Rules 1973. DG, ASI is the statutory authority for the implementation of
the Act.”

2.22 Asked if there are any uniform procedures developed for the museums for
different aspects of their functioning, the Ministry in reply wrote,

“There -are’ uniform procedures adopted for all Archaeological Site
Museums in respect of opening/closing of the museum, inventory of
collections, display, and security and reserve collections, The museum in-
charge maintains opening/closing registers, gallery registers, accession
registers, efc. A broad policy of 1915 for the site museums is now being


re-examined and re-defined. A Memorandum of Understanding has been
signed between ASI-NGF-Getty Trust-BM for organizing a Capacity
Building Programme for ASI professionals. The first workshop on ‘Best
Practices on ASI Museums’ has been held on 19-21 November 2013 at
Samath. . A draft document on vision, mission and guidelines for
Archaeological Museums has been prepared and has been submitted to
the Ministry of Culture......The digitization and documentation of. art
objects in the site museums is being done as per Jatan software in 2

~ Archaeological site museums. Further, six more site museums have been
identified. The completion of digitization and documentation of Art objects
as per NMMA template is also being undertaken, The time-frame for
completion of work in all site museums depends on the availability of
human and financial resources.

Presently no uniform laid down procedures are being followed in other
Museums under MoC as they are independent entities working under the
directions of their Board of Trustees/ Societies. However, by and large,
there is a certain uniformity in the procedures being followed by them in
different aspects of their functioning. MoC is, however, considering to
standardize and implement uniform procedures/ practices in r/o important
issues in all these Museums. In this regard the following steps have been
taken by‘MoC so far:

1 A uniform policy for acquisition of art objects by Museums under MoG
has been drafted which is under finalization.

ii) A Committee has been constituted by MoC to work out a uniform
‘Security Policy’ which could be implemented in all Museums under
MoC/ASI ..

iii) A Committee has been constituted by MoC under the Chairmanship of
Director, Indian Museum, Kolkata to prepare a standard ‘Manual of
Pracedures’. for Indian Museum. Once this Manual is prepared it may,
with suitable modifications, also be implemented in other Museums under
Moc.

iv) A Museum Stake-holders’ Consultation meeting was organized by MoC
in February 2014. Important recommendations, which emerged out of the
discussions therein, have been approved by the Ministry and
communicated to all its Museums for implementation.

v) Uniform Guidelines for holding international exhibitions by the Museums
have been framed by MoC and communicated to all the Museums under it
for compliance and implementation.

vi) A set of instructions on the shifting of Museum objects has also been
sent fo various Museums under MoC for compliance.”


10

2.23 On whether there is a policy evolved by the Ministry for evaluation of the
genuineness of the art abjacts acquired/possessed by the Museums, the Ministry
submitted;

"The collections in the Archaeological Site Museums are mostly the
Archaeological material retrieved through explorations and excavations
These antiquities are meticulously examined by the Archaeologists.
However, it is submitted that there is no notified policy for evaluation of the
genuineness of the art objects acquired/possessed by the Museums under
ASI. A committee of experts with sufficient experience in the concerned
fields besides NLRC could be constituted to evaluate the genuineness of
the art objects that may be acquired/ possessed by the museums under
ASI in future. Presently there is no uniform policy for evaluation of the
genuineness of the art objects acquired./ possessed by the Museums
under the Ministry of Culture. However, each Museum Is verifying the
genuineness of the objects while carrying out physical verification of its
objects by utilizing the services of the experts in the field. Recently, the
Ministry has asked all the Museums to formulate guidelines for evaluation
of the genuineness of art objects acquired by them.”

2.24 ‘Asked about the steps taken for adopting a prescribed procedure in
respect of the maintenance of accession registers for Museums, the Ministry

replied;

“The Archaeological Site Museums have accession registers as per
prescribed proforma which includes SI. No., Accession No., Source or field
register No., Made of Acquisition, Description, Period, Locality, Price and
Location in the museurn (Display/ Reserve). The Museurms under the
Ministry of Culture are having standard Accession Registers which contain
details of its collections. However, as a part of the digitization process and
in order to have a computerized collections management system in the
Museums, the Ministry has embarked upon a comprehensive
computerization programme, Under this programme ‘Jatan Collections
Management Software’ developed by C-DAC, Pune has been
implemented in 10 Museums under the Ministry of Culture/ Archaeological
Survey of India in the first phase, There 10 Museums are: National
Museum; Indian Museum; Allahabad Museum; NGMA, New Delhi; NGMA,
Mumbalt; NGMA, Bengaluru; Goa Museum, ASI; Nagarjunakonda
Museum, ASI; Salar Jung Museum, Hyderabatt and Victoria Memorial
Hall, Kolkata. In the second phase of the programme it is also proposed
to implement the Jatan software in all site Museums of the ASI in a
phased manner. The implementation of Jatan programme will ensure that


41

fhe standard digitat Accession Register is maintained in all the museums
uniformly apart from having the physical Acquisition Registers.

Apart from the manual Accession Register being maintained by Museums
it has been decided to digitize the collections of ail the Museum under
MoC/ASI in a phased manner. Accordingly, in the first phase the
collections of 10 selected Museums of MoC/AS/ viz: Allahabad Museum, .
Nationat Museum, Indian Museum, Victoria Memorial Hall, Salar Jung
Museum, Goa’ Museum, Nagarjunakonda ‘Museum, NGMA, New Delhi,
NGMA, Mumbai, NGMA, Bengaluru are being digitized with the help of
Jatan Museum Builder Software, which has been developed by C-DAC,
Pune. Digitization of the collections of Museurns will automatically ensure
that a uniform set of Accession Register covering all aspects of the art
objects is available in the Museum."

2.25 On what policy is in vogue for the functioning and establishment of site
museums in the ASI, the Ministry submitted as follows;

“A broad policy of 1915 for site museums is now being re-examined and
‘redefined. A Memorandurn of Understanding has been signed between
ASI-NCF-Getty Trust-BM for organising a Capacity Building Programme
for ASI professionals. The first workshop on ‘Best Practices on ASI
Museums’ was held on 20th-21st Navember, 2013 at Sarnath. A draft
document on vision, mission, and guideline for Archaeological Museums is
being prepared.

A broad policy for site museums was set-up.in the year 1915 is now being
re-examined and re-defined, Based on these guidelines a draft document
on vision, mission, and guideline for Archaeological Museums has been
prepared which is being finalised.

2.26 Asked if any steps have been taken to evolve a rotation policy for the
display of artifacts at the Museums, the Ministry replied;

"The matter is being dealt in the draft document on vision, mission and
guidelines for Archaealogical Site Museums. Various Museums under the
Ministry are rotating objects as per internal decisions being taken by them
keeping in view the sensitivity of the objects to light and other elements of
nature. The Indian Museum, Salarjung Museum, Allahabad Museum, etc.
are regularly rotating the objects and bringing out new abjects for public
display. The National Museum has re-opened three galleries in 2012-13
and has brought out objects from its reserve collections to display in these
galleries. The Museums are also taking steps to ‘display abjects from their


12

reserve collection by curating special exhibitions e.g. the Ram Katha
Exhibition mounted at the National Museurn in 2013 exhibited several
miniature paintings from its reserve collections for the first time. Also, the
Salarjung Museum has opened a new ‘Walking Stick’ gallery and the new
‘Children’s Gallery’ is to be opened soon. The opening of the new galleries
will ensure that more of the museum's collections are made available to
the public for viewing.

ASI- A broad policy for site museums was set-up in the year 1915 is now
being re-examined and re-defined. Based on these guidelines a draft
document on vision, mission, and guideline for Archaeological Museums
has been prepared which is being finalised.

Museum Division {MOG)- Rotation of objects in various Museums is an
on-going process. Keeping in mind the need to bring new objects for
public viewing and the conservation needs of the displayed objects,
decisions on rotation of objects are taken by the concerned Museum
Directors and the conservators. Many of the Museums are opening their
galleries after renovation as well as new galleries, which would
automatically ensure that new objects are brought to display for public
viewing. A new ‘Coin Gallery’ has been opened in the Indian Museum,
Kolkata and the coins in its possession have been displayed. In the

National Museum, the Bronze Gallery, Jewellary Gallery and Manuscripts: - ~

Gallery are undergoing renovation. Once the renovation work is
completed and the new galleries are opened to the public more of the
Museum’s objects, which have been lying in the store, would be on display
for public viewing. In the Salar Jung Museum a new ‘Coin Gallery’ and a
‘Children Gallery’ is being developed.” हि

227 The Committee desired to know what steps were taken fo maintain 8
proper reserve collection with suitable conditions for preservation and storing.

The Ministry submitted as follows;

“The proper storage of objects in reserve collection as per 14 museum
reforms identified by Ministry of Culture are being undertaken as part of
annual works program’as per availability of funds. Further, ASI officials
have been provided training on ‘Collection Management and Preventive
Care’ at Art Institufe of Chicago under Vivekananda Memorial Programme
for Museum ‘Excellence. The Museums under the Ministry have taken
several steps to maintain a proper reserve collection like purchase of
movable compactors, storage tacks and other appropriate storage devices
specific to the artifacts. The reserve collections are inspected and cleaned
regularly to keep them in proper shape. In some of the Museums, Hygro
Meters and Data Loggers have been installed to monitor the temperature
_ and humidity controls in the reserve collections. ....”


13

lil. . Chapter Ill: Human Resources Management

Shortage of Manpower

3.4. The Committee noted Audit's observation that the overall position of
sanctioned strength vis-a-vis men in posifion in different cadres revealed an
acute shortage of staff. With the passage of time, the work profile and scope of
work had undergone sea change in the ASI. This, according to Audit, has
adversely affected the performance and output of the organization.

3.2. The Committee found the manpower management in ASI and other
subordinate agencies extremely unsatisfactory. In AS!, there was a shortage of
2,448 officials, including 229 in Group A and B. Four posts of Additional Director
General (Archaeology) and 18 pasts of Joint Director General created in 2011
remain unfilled. 159 posts out of 757 sanctioned posts for Conservation
Branches remain vacant. [n addition, out of 1,267 posts of Garden Attendants fn
Horticulture Branch, 246 posts are vacant. Out of 3,458 sanctioned posts of
- Monument Attendants, 1,279 (37 per cent) are vacant.

3.3. Manpower management in Museums was found to be still worse. 122 out
of 276 posts are vacant in National Museum. 15 out of 86 in Allahabad Museum,
39 out of 166.in Salarjung Museum, 60 out of 209 in Indian Museum, 53 out of
176 in Victoria Memorial Hall and 45 out of 257 posts are vacant in Asiatic

- Society.

3.4. Some posts are vacant for the past 30 years, some for the past 25 years
and a few for the past three years. In fact, it was found that the National Museum
functioned without a full time Director General for four long years from 2007 to
2011. In these posts, not even ad-hoc arrangements have been made.


14

3.5 Capacity building of staff through proper training and deployment is crucial
for the proper execution of conservation works. The sanctioned strength of the
three main conservation branches mainly included the technical posts of
archaeologist, engineers, horticulturists and chemists. Out of the 757 sanctioned
posts for conservation works, 159 posts (21 per cent) were vacant. Besides this,
out of the 1267 posts of Garden attendants, in the Horticulture Branch, 246 posts
(19 per cent} were vacant. Also ASI had 3678 existing monuments for which
there were 3458 sanctioned posts of monument. attendants, however 1279 (37
per cent) were vacant. The distribution of work was uneven. In some cases
Conservation Assistants (CAs) had as many as 50 monuments under their
control which made the task of regular supervision and close monitoring
practically impossible. The CAs were also burdened with administrative works
viz daily receipts and deposit of revenue, monitoring of security, handling of legal
cases, issue of notices to unauthorized constructions and other routine work.

- These additional responsibilities significantly reduced the’ time available with
them for their prime responsibility of documentation, execution and supervision of
ongoing conservation works

3.6 Asked as to why several posts in ASI are lying vacant, the Ministry in their

reply submitted;

"The shortage of manpower has happened owing fo lengthy process for
finalization of Recruitment Rules various court cases/ representations and
resultant delay in the process of recruitment by UPSC, SSC and also by
the Department. Non-availability of eligible candidates in Epigraphy and
Conservation cadre is alsa a reason. Roster points have been issued for
recruitment to 300 vacant non-gazetted posts other than ershtwhile Group
‘D’ through SSC and Circles/Branch offices. All efforts have been made to
overcome the situation.”

3.7 On Audit's contention that the time frame may be ‘fixed to complete the

restructuring process, the Ministry stated;

“A concerted effort in the form of revision of RRs, recruitment against
vacancies and restructuring of ASI has been undertaken. Vacancies are
being filled regularly.”


3.8

15

The Committee desired to be apprised of the steps taken by ASI to recruit

personnel for the understaffed Museurns of ASI. The Ministry in their written

submissions stated;

3.9

“ASI has no separate cadre for staffing its Site Museums. These posts
are filled by Atchaeologists. The recruitment of a large number of posts of
Assistant Archaeologists was held up in SSC due to court case. Recently,
SSC has declared results recommending 66 candidates. All of them have
been given offer of appointment. Out of them 45 have joined. ASI has
been pursuing with SSC to recommend candidates for appointment of
Assistant Archaeologists fo posts requisitioned subsequently. Owing to
shortage of Assistant Archaeologists Site Museums of ASI was
understaffed, which was resolved temporarily providing staff and
administrative support by Circle Offices of ASI. In the restructuring
proposal a separate cadre has been proposed for Site Museums of ASI."

On when the restructuring proposal of the ASI will be finalized, the Ministry

submitted in writing as follows;

4

"The draft restructuring proposal has been approved by Ministry of
Culture. However restructuring involves approvals by DoPT/Ministry of
Finance,” है

3.10 Asked as to why there has been acute shortage in the crucial cadre for

conservation works, the Ministry in reply wrote;

3.11

"ASI has always faced the problem of shortage in sanctioned strength
across all cadres primarily in case of Monument Attendants and Garden
Attendants which was addressed through outsourcing to some extent.
However, this has been addressed in the re-structuring exercise in hand
Other issues like making pay scale and career opportunifies attractive
have also been addressed.”

Further commenting on the audit's comment on the need to set a

timeframe for the re-structuring, the Ministry reptied,

“The observations of Ministry of Finance have been addressed and a
Tevised proposal has been submitted to MOF"


6

3.12 Asked as to why no recruitment was being made for administrative works

so that technical cadres could focus on their primary responsibilities, the Ministry

replied;

3.13

3.14

“The problem in the administration wing of ASI is due fo shortage of
sanctioned strength and delay in filling up of existing vacancies. While the
former is being addressed through restructuring the later is being tackled
by better liaison with DoPT & SSC, etc.”

On the issue of fixing a timeline, the Ministry replied;

"The observations of Ministry of Finance have been addressed and a
revised proposal has been submitted fo MOF. No fime frame can be fixed
at present."

During evidence, the Committee raised the issue of manpower shortage

facing the ASI and sought the comments of the Ministry. The representative of

the- Ministry stated;

4

“As regards manpower | would like to assure you that we have been very
active on recruitment and promotion. Department of Personnel has been
very helpful fo us. They designated an officer especially for the Ministry of
Culture to sort out our problems and they sat with us. The problem, as you
know, is that if a post is vacant for more than two years it is deemed
abolished. So, we have to go the Ministry of Finance. Then the RRs
become old, Every three years the RRs have to be changed. So, we went
through that whole precess of redoing our RRs also. Then what had
happened was that there was still Class IV in ASI which had been
abolished in 1990s. We had never moved for multitasking staff. So again
almost after 15 years we had to go to DOPT and to Finance. Then again
they agreed on it, So, almost 1877 staff of ours in the lower category have
agreed for. recruitment. Now we have segregated them into two. One is
around | think 400 which are those who want to be regularised, and there
ate some issues of age and otherwise which is with DOPT. The remaining
1400 and odd we have sent to the Staff Service Commission. They have
fo finalise the date but we hope that within this year even those 1400 will
come. At officer level the main problem was of Deputy SA. We have
sorted that out. We have approached UPSC for giving the date for their
DPCs. Other DPCs and RRs also we are in the process of doing. Sir,
Ministry of Culture has a large number of HOD posts which were vacant
for many years. We have successfully vacated all the stay orders. Now
DG Anthropological Survey, which was pending | think for ten years, we
have vacated it. This month only the Cabinet Secretary is doing the


Vv

appointment. Similarly, OG National Archives has been cleared. Salarjung
Museum DG was pending for six years. That has been cleared. NLRC
OPCs have been held. So, wherever the number one was vacant, and
these were vacant for many years, in all those cases either the stay has
been vacated or they have been appointed. The prime example is in front
of you. So, we are in the process today. There is no HOD who is nat in the
process of being nominated in the sense the ad has been issued and we
are all in the process of doing that.”

3.15 Asked about the steps taken by the Ministry to augment Staff strength of
ASI, the Ministry replied;

"The Ministry has adopted a three pronged approach to augment the staff
strength of ASI. The restructuring exercise in hand would address the
issue of encadered posts and strengthen all wings of ASI at all levels. In
addition the Ministry has worked out a comprehensive outsourcing model
that would look after the problem of professionals other than those
involved directly in ‘ archaeology/conservation/ excavation, etc. i.e.
monument attendants/garden attendants/IT professionals, etc. In addition
fo the above the Ministry has also worked on MOUs with
fechnical/educational institutions such as IITs/SPAs and Universities for
sharing of professionals on deputation and training basis.”

3.16 On the efforfs made by the Ministry to provide sufficient manpower to
horticulture branch to carry out their works after this was highlighted by the
; _ parliamentary committee, fhe Ministry submitted as follow,

“Efforts are being made by the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) to
augment the requirements of Horticulture Branch through the filling up of
vacant pasts which ‘have recently been revived. This aspect is further
being strengthened through the ongoing restructuring exercise.”

3.17 Asked about the steps taken by ASI to fill in the crucial posts of garden
attendants, monument attendants, eic., the Ministry replied;

"As an ad-hoc measure the shortage of Garden Attendants is being
regularly addressed through outsourcing of casual labourers though given

1 the scale of operation of AS} and the limited financial resources certain
shortage remains. The shortage of Monument Attendants is partly met by
exservicemen, State Police and CISF {in Red Fort and Taj Mahal only}
and private security guards. Here again outsourcing is subject to available
financial resources.”


18

3.18 On the issue of fixing a timeline, the Ministry reptied;

- “Approval has been obtained from DOP&T to fill the vacancies. Due
process for recruitment has been initiated.”

3.19 Asked as to why there was an inordinate delay in establishment of NMA
and competent authority, the Ministry replied;

"After the notification of AMASR (Amendment and Validation Act, 2010) on
30 March, 2010, the process of filling up of the posts of whole time
Member and Part-time Member in National Monuments Authority was
initiated. The Member Secretary, NMA was appointed on 19 November
2010. A Selection Committee undet the Chairmanship of Cabinet
Secretary was constituted for selection of whole-time / Part-time Members
of NMA who recommended some names.

Thereafter, necessary clearances in respect of the selected Members
were obtained. from various authorities before sending the case to ACC.
The Appointment Committee of Cabinet (ACC) considered the candidature
of the recommended candidates and communicated their approval on
48.11.2011 for appointment of one Whole-time Member and two Part-time
Members. Thereafter, notification for these appointments was issued on
56.12.2011"

3.20 On why there was a delay in processing of applications by NMA, the
Ministry replied stating;

“Although initially there had been delays in the grant of NOC's to the
applicants by the NMA due to various reasons now the work has picked
up speed. The NMA has held 94 meetings till date and had received 2592
applications. Out of these, 2092 applications have been considered by the
NMA in its meetings and ‘it has recommended 1982 cases. All the
applications are checked for completeness at the time of processing and
NMA has also deferred 79 cases for the requirement of additional
inforrnation. Further, in 31 cases the applications received by the NMA
have been rejected or decided otherwise. 394 applications have also been
returned on account of being incomplete.”

3.21 Asked to explain as why only one whole time member and two part time
members were appointed instead of five each as per the validation Act for the
NMA, the Ministry submitted as follows;


ig

"(n order to fill up the remaining vacancies, ail the preliminary formalities
before convening the meeting of the Selection Committee were
completed. The Selection Committee interviewed the shortlisted six
candidates. On the basis of the recommendations of the Selection
Committee, one more post af Whole time Member and 2 Part time
Member in NMA have been filted up with the approval of ACC. Thus, at
present NMA has.2 whole time Members and 4 part-time Members. The
approval of ACC in respect of appointment of one more Part-time Member
in NMA has been received. Action to fill up the remaining vacancies of
Whole Time in NMA has also been initiated with the issuance of
advertisement for the same in the Employment News dated 16-22
November, 2013 ह है

3.22 On Audit’s comment that efforts may be made to. complete the process at
the earliest, the Ministry further submitted;

“Meeting of the Selection Committee was held on 11.12.2014 in Cabinet

Secretariat. No applicant was found suitable by the Selection Committee

headed by Cabinet Secretary. Vacancies will be advertised after minutes
‘of the meeting are received.”

3.23 Security of monuments identified for preservation is क primary
responsibility. Audit has pointed out several shortcomings in the management of
providing proper security to monuments resulting in encroachments. Asked
whether the Ministry has put in place proper safeguard/security mechanism from
unauthorized construction, risk arising from visitors and terrorists attacks, the
Ministry submitted in writing the following;

“All efforts are made by ASI to provide adequate security: within the
available manpower and resources. The Security personal are deployed
for the safety and security of some of the important monuments. CISF is
also deployed at Taj Mahal, Agra and Red Fort, Delhi"

3.24 Upon Audit's comment that proper assessment needs to be done to
access the total requirement of security staff, the Ministry submitted;

“A committee formed under the Additional Secretary (Ministry of Culture)
fo suggest Security measures at the monuments has submitted report and
is being implemented.”


20

3.25 During evidence, the Ministry representative submitted before the
Committee the steps initiated to strengthen security arrangements around

protected monuments in the following words;

«the Committee for the manpower infrastructure has recommended

engagement of 7000 additional security personnel for these monuments.”
3.26 Proper training of personnel is a critical area of Human resource
management. The Committee find that availability of trained manpower in
adequate strength was found to be a problem within ASI. Asked if AS| conduct
any training for its staff fo make them aware of the site management plans, the
Ministry replied as follow; है

“New proposed HRD policy includes training on SMPs at various levels
starting from induction training and continuing through mid-career tratning
programs.” हु

3.27. Upon Audit's comment that final outcome of the HRD policy may be
intimated to PAC, the Ministry replied;

“ASI has formulated a HRD/Training policy which has been uploaded on
its website.”

3.28 The Committee desired to know the follow up action taken by the Ministry
on the recommendations of expert groups such as Mirdha Committee,
Parliamentary Standing Committee, Moily Committee. The Ministry submitted the

following reply;

“As a follow up of the recommendations of the Moily Committee the
Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act was
amended in the year 2010 and a National Monuments Authority was
constituted for the purpose of categorization of the protected monuments
into various categories and for giving permissions for renovation and
construction of building in Prohibited monuments of ASI. Further, for
ensuring better protection and security of the protected monuments 1877
Group 10' posts which had been treated as deemed abolished have been
got revived and these are to be filled up soon after the finalization of their
recruitment rules. Also, in order fo enhance its manpower, as


21

tecommended by the Moily Committee, the ASI has prepared a
comprehensive proposal for its restructuring to enable it to discharge its
mandate more effectively. Similarly in compliance of the recommendation
of the Yechury Commitfee, the collections management in the National
Museum: is proposed to be digitized by the implementation of the Jatan
software developed by C DAC Pune

3.29 Addressing one of the core concerns raised in the Audit report relating to
lack of adequate raining facilities and trained personnel for technical positions in
the ASI, the representative of the Ministry, during evidence highlighted the efforts
of the Ministry thus;

“As a part of the capacity building measures, the Ministry has taken up the
training of museum professionals for wholesome improvement of
museums in the country. The Ministry has entered into an agreement with
some of the most advanced and popular museums in the world like the
British Museum, the Louvre Museum, the Art Institute of Chicago, the
Metropolitan Museum of New York, the Getty Foundation, etc., and has
created unique training courses and workshops for its museums
professionals. ..Similarty, Sir, we are setting up a training institute under
ASI in Red Fort which is getting UNESCO recognition. We have
forwarded our proposal to UNESCO. So this will become a regional
training centre not only for our own AS! personnel but the whole of East
Asia."

IV. Chapter IV: Financial Management

Inadequate Funding

4.1 Audit observed that the Ministry rade budgetary allotments to the AS|
without assessing their funds requirement and absorptive capacity. The
requirement of funds should be commensurate with the number of centrally
protected monuments and the need for preservation and conservation of these
monuments. It was noted that the Ministry had made significant reductions in the

funds requirement projected by the ASI

4.2 The Committee desired to know if this observation holds true. The Ministry

in their reply stated;


22

“The Ministry makes budgetary allotment to the AS! annually based on the
budget requirement projected by the ASI. It may be appreciated that
besides Ministry of culture (Secretariat) the allocation made to the Ministry
are to be further distributed amongst 43 attached/subordinate/autonomous
organizations. On an average, approximately, 20% of the Ministry's
financial allocation goes towards the ASI." i

4.3. When Audit commented further that the total requirement of ASI was
never assessed, the Ministry replied;

"The funds requirement for major Heads of accounts in use in ASI is
based on projections made by field offices both for revenue and capital
outlay in the ensuing financial year. Therefare MOC allocate to AS] from
the available resources.”

4.4 Asked to explain the reasons for reducing the Budget of ASI, the Ministry
stated as follows;

"There has never been a unilateral budgetary reduction of ASI allocation
made by the Ministry. Budgetary cut imposed by Ministry of Finance has
to be absorbed equitably by all 43 attached/subordinate/autonomous
organizations under MOC." .

Revenue Generation

4.5 Audit has observed that there were deficiencies in the efforts made by ASI
for augmenting revenue generation. Asked if the Ministry concurs with Audit's

view, they replied;

“All efforts are made fo generate the revenue through the monument. In

- addition to entry fee revenue is also generated through granting
permissions for film shooting, culture events, sale of publications, grass
auction, fruit auction, sale of photographs etc. There is a proposal to bring
more centrally protected monuments under the category of ticketed
monument.”

4.6 To Audi's vetting remarks that the PAC may like to know the final
outcome of the proposal to bring more centrally protected monuments under the
category of ticketed monuments, the Ministry's reply given below seem

diversionary at best.


AT

23

_ "A decision has been taken to open Souvenir shops at select monuments.

Sn this direction a MoU has been signed with Handicrafts and Exports
Corporation (Ministry of Textiles). Initially shops will be opened at Qutub
Minar and Sarnath.”

Asked if any criteria or guidelines been fixed for categorization of a

ficketed monument, the Ministry submitted as follows;

48

"There is no guideline fixed for categorization of a ticketed monument.
Generally, footfall of the visitors at the monument is taken _ into
consideration while identifying new monument to be brought under
category of ticketed monuments. This issue will be addressed in the
categorization of monuments presently in hand.”

To this reply, Auctit commented that no 18004 is being maintained {or

even prescribed to be maintained) at any monument in respect of the footfall of

visitors, and hence, the reply is not tenable. The Ministry then submitted as

follows;

4.9

"Yes. No record is maintained at any monument in respected footfall of
visitors. Earlier ticketed monuments were categorized based on
information from field offices. Presently, various stakeholders such as
Ministry of Tourism, 100, and state departments will be consulted before
increasing the entry fee or bringing more monuments under this category.”

Asked if the Ministry think that rates charged for filming operations at a

protected monument by the ASI is abysmally low in comparison to comparative

rates, and what action has been taken in this regard, the Ministry replied;

“Revision of Rates for film shooting is under process. A balance has to be
tnaintained between revenue generation from a monument and the impact
that film shooting has on popularizing the monument amongst tourists...
A decision will be taken in FY 2015-16"

4.10 Asked as fo why the rates of film shooting riot revised affer 1991 rejecting

4915 proposal in his regard, the Ministry informed;


24

"#& balance has to be maintained between revenue generation from a
monument and the impact that film shooting has on popularizing the
monument amongst tourists.”

4.41 Asked if there is any new proposal underway in this regards, they
submitted;

“Yes, the proposal is under consideration. The Secretary (Culture has also
taken up the issue with all the Chief Secretary of State Governments). ...A
decision will be taken in FY 2015-16,"

Non-Budget Funding

4.12 Apart from Budgetary allocations, the Committee are aware that funding:
can also be obtained from individuals and corporate groups through the
National Culture Fund (NCF} which is a trust chaired by Minister of Tourism and
Culture and accepts donations towards promotion of arts and preservation of
culture. Asked if the option of obtaining funds through NCF have not been
explored, the Ministry replied;

“Donors have not expressed interest in excavation and exploration works.
Public and Private Sectors including Multinational Companies are
interested in conservation, restoration and development works of world
famous monuments which give them good publicity. Accordingly there ts a
number of ASI assignment funded through NCF”

4.13 Asked if ASI actually is facing a fund crunch and if so, efforts the Ministry
made to strengthen NCF and its activities, the Ministry replied;

“Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) is undertaking conservation works of
monuments and archaeological sites across the country within the
available budget and man-power. To further strengthen the budget
provision, funds are sought from other agencies through NCF to utilize
them for conservation works as well as for providing various amenities for
which incentives in the form of 100% tax exemption for the funds made
available for such works. More posts have been sanctioned for NCF, as
well as within the ASI, new posts have been proposed to exclusively deal
with the NCF Project.” .


25

4.14 On how the Ministry makes an assessment of funds requirement in the
ASI, the Ministry submitted;

"Funds assessment and allocation for ASI follows general budget
provisions and processes. As regards NCF projects is concerned,
assessment of funds is done together by NCF, ASI and the funding
agency.” , a

4.15 On whether such assessment meetings are really effective in terms of

meeting ASI’s demands and on the issue of arbitrary cuts in funding by the

Ministry, the Ministry wrote;

‘The requisite funds for conservation are provided by the Ministry of
Culture to the ASI. The budget allocations are finalized by the Ministry in
consultation with the ASI, Higher allocations are desirable, having
limitations of budget of the Ministry, but there is no acute fund shortage fo
ASI.”

पु

4.16 Asked as to how AS! prioritize its projects requiring funding through NCF

the system of monitoring of these projects, the Ministry submitted;

Vv.

“ASI had provided a list of 100 Projects to NCF seeking funds through
public private partnership. Recently, ASI also provided a list of 25 projects

to NCF for which funds have been sought for conservation and for

providing visitor amenities. However, apart from ASI's indicating priority
for certain monuments for conservation, it is also the prerogative of a
donor agency, its funding capacity, location of a monument, that contribute
to the selection of a monument for its conservation under NCF...The
projects being undertaken through NCF are regularly monitored by the
Project Implementation Committee (PIC), under the chairmanship of DG,
ASI that comprise members from ASI, NCF and funding agency.”

Chapter V: Functional issues

Identification and Protection of Monuments and their documentation

Monuments of National Importance

5.1

According to section 3 of the Ancient Monuments and Archeological Sites

and Remains (AMASR) Act, 1958, all ancient and historical monuments and all


26

archaeological sites and remains, which had been declared by the Ancient and
Historical Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Declaration of
National Importance) Act, 1951 or by Section 126 of the Stafe Re-organizations
Act, 1956 to be of national importance, shall be declared to be of national
importance. The Act stated that profecfed monuments should be the ancient
monuments and archaeological sites and remains which are of historical,
archaeological or artistic interest and which have been in existence for not less
than 100 years. However, the Act did not define the term “national importance” in ”
abjective terms with a defined set of criteria, Even the Ministry so far had not
specified any detailed criteria for declaring any monument to be of national
‘importance. The Ministry agreed that there was urgent need to review and
survey all the ancient monuments and archaeological site declared as of nationat
importance whether they still continue to be of national importance.

5.2 Asked as to why the Ministry did not conduct any comprehensive survey
or review for identifying monuments of national importance, the Ministry replied;

“Identification of any monument of National Importance is an ongoing
process, As per procedure, the proposals of protection of any monument
are received from field offices of AS! after conducting a detailed survey
and are scrutinized by technical and advisory committee at AS! HQ before
declaring it as of National Importance under the provisions of the AMASR
Act 1958, It may be informed that during the years 2011-13 six (6)
numbers of proposals were approved for preliminary notification and two
monuments have been declared of National Importance....A draft
guideline for protection for monuments has been prepared based on the

_ recommendation of the expert committee in which criteria have been
prescribed. Out of 24 monuments 09 have been declared as protected so
far.” ,

5.3 Asked if the Ministry has attempted to define these terms on some
objective criteria, after being pointed out in Audit, the Ministry submitted;

"Sub Section 2(a) of Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and
Remains Act, 1958 defines ‘Ancient Monuments’ and Sub Section 2 (d)
defines ‘Archaeological and Remains’. The Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites should fulfill the criterion as defined under the Act to
declare the same as monuments of national importance. However, a draft
guideline for declaration of any monument to be of national importance
has already been prepared."


27

Protected Monuments

5.4 - ASI did not maintain a reliable database regarding the number of
protected monuments. Further, the information in respect of number of
monuments provided by the ASI HQ was at variance with the information
provided by Circle/Sub-Circle offices. Further discrepancies were observed in
the figures of profected monuments provided by the ASI to the. Ministry of
Finance in 2006 and to the Parliament in June 2012.

5.5 About there being no Centralized database of protected monuments
available at ASI HQ and at the Ministry till now and whether no need was felt for
‘such a database, the Ministry wrote;

“The list of centrally protected monuments/sites is already available on
ASI web site of the HQ. In addition, Circle/State wise list of
monuments/sites are also available on the web site of each Circle. These
lists are updated as and when any new monuments/site is declared as
centrally protected. Further, a committee has also been constituted to
verify the data to avoid any discrepancies."

5.6 Audit had pointed to a variation between the number of protected
- monuments as maintained at AS] Headquarters and by Circle offices. On being

asked as to what action had been taken to ensure no further misinformation recur
in future, the Ministry replied;

“The variation in respect of number of monuments maintained by the ASL
Headquarter and by the Circle/sub-circle offices has been cross checked
and necessary corrections have since been carried out. Necessary
instructions have already been issued to field offices to verify all
monuments periodically. A committee has already been constituted at ASI
HQ to compile the data to avoid any discrepancies in future.”

Notification cases

5.7 No procedures were found laid down for the Circles under the ASI, to send
recommendations for the protection of monuments periodically. Even after the
approval in nine cases, for issue of preliminary notification for declaring the
monuments of national importance, only one monument was found notified.


28

Many proposals submitted by Circles were found not even considered and no
reasons recorded for the same.lt was also noticed by Audit that even after
Circtes submitted proposals for denotification of monuments which did not exist,
no action was taken by the ASI HQ and the Ministry. Even Circles made
considerable delays in submitting the proposals for de- notification. THe Ministry
stated-that the proposals received from the Circles were not taken on record as
these were incomplete and had been sent without completing the formalities.

5.8 Asked as to why no guidelines were made for regular submission and
timely action on notification and de-notification cases, the Ministry replied;

“The notification and de-notification of any monument is taken up only on
the basis of the proposal received from the field officers or the public after
examining the merit of the case. Further instructions have been issued to
all circle SAs asking them to submit the protection proposal every year in
the month of January with complete documents”

5.9 On whether any instructions have been made to the Circles, incorporating
the points to be checked before sending any proposal to Ministry, they submitted

the following reply;

“Archaeological Survey of India has well set procedures for submission of
protection proposals in ‘Form B’ supported with revenue schedule, site
plan, revenue map and photographs. The ‘Form B' designed for this
purpose by the Department is being followed since long. Important
information related to monuments is called for its evaluation. As per the
guidelines the Advisory Committee evaluated: the protected proposals in
the light of criteria laid down under Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sifes and Remains Act, 1958 and other related
information.”

5.10 On why the Ministry was sitting over the de-notification proposals for so

many years, the Ministry replied;

“A committee has already been constituted to frame the guidelines for de-
notification of the monuments which have ceased to be of National
Importance:;"


29

5:11 Asked why there was no system established for conducting regular/
annual survey to know the exact status of the monuments which were required 10
be included or deleted from the list of centrally protected monuments. The
Ministry submitted;

"Protection af any monument as National Importance is an ongoing
process. ‘However, the circles have been asked to submit such proposais
after examining the cases in the month of January every year. The
committee has been constituted to frame guidelines for de-notification is
mainly on the basis of periodical inspection/survey of the monuments by
the field officers. However, instructions for regular inspection of the
monuments have been reiterated....The field Officers were directed to
conduct the Physical Inspection/verification of the monuments. So for
3335 Monuments have been verified. Based on this report and the
guidelines the monuments will be identified for de notification."

5.12 Asked why no updated documentation stating the importance of each
protected monument was being maintained at ASI -HQ, the Ministry submitted;

“Each monument declared as centrally protected monument or monument
of National Importance has its own historical cultural and architectural
importance based on which it has been declared as monument of national
importance under the provisions of the Act. The inventory of monuments
of some of the circles has already been published and the publication of
the monuments of other circles are under process. The National
tmportance of each protected monument is being reviewed in the process
of categorization of monuments”

5.13 On whether a timeline has been fixed for publication of the inventories of
all the monuments, the Ministry wrote;

“The committee under Chairmanship of Additional Director General
(Archaeology) has been constituted to prepare inventory of remaining
protected monuments. No time frame has been given to the committee to
complete the work. Latest details/present states of each monument is to
be complied for preparation of inventory of the protected monument.
Considering the amount of the work with each filled officer, the time period
for completion of the work cannot be given precisely. However, all efforts
will be made by ASI to complete the work as early possible.”


30

lumber of Missing Monuments

5.14 The Ministry communicated to the Parliament and other concerned
authorities that the number of missing/untraceable monuments were 35.
However, a joint physical inspection of 45% of the total monuments revealed that
92 monuments are found missing/untraceable. Though in.most of the cases, the
Circles were aware of the missing/untraceable monuments, the same was not
thoroughly checked by ASI HQ before informing the Parliament.

The Ministry accepted the recommendation and stated that the number of
missing monuments 1.9. 35 reported to Parliament. was based upon a survey
done in 1998-99, however no documentary evidence was shown.

5.15 On why the Ministry did not feel the necessity to conduct a survey since
1998-99, they replied;

“Conducting survey of ancient archaeological remains is a continuous
process and regular surveys of varying nature have been carried out viz.
femple Survey, Village to Village Survey of Antiquarian remains:
Excavation and Exploration Surveys; Conservation Survey etc.”
5.16 Audit commented that the Ministry's reply is incorrect as the question is
regarding comprehensive survey of all monuments already notified as “protected”
monuments of national importance to ascertain their continued importance and
existence. Further, Audit claimed that negligible surveys have been done by
temple survey project. Village to village survey has not been undertaken due to
manpower crunch for past several decades. Thus these activities do not
substitute the need for comprehensive survey of already protected monuments to
ensure their continued national importance and status of preservation, To this,
the Ministry replied;

“The field Officers were directed to conduct the Physical
Inspection/verification of the monuments. So far 3335 Monuments have
been verified”


31

5.17 Asked whether the Parliament/Ministry were informed that the information
is more than a decade old and has not been verified since then, the Ministry

explained as follows;

“There was no intention to provide out of date information. information
provided was based on last verification done by ASI"

5.18 Asked as to when the Ministry intends to conduct a complete survey in a
time bound manner and report the status of each protected monument to
Parliament, they replied;

"As on date, physical verification of 1205 monuments has been
completed. Necessary direction has been issued to field offices to
complete physical verification of the balance monuments by the end of
December 2014."

5.19 After Audit’s vetting comments, the Ministry revised the figure as below;

“as on date 3335 Monuments have been physically verified. Certain
monuments could not be verified as there located in militant infested
areas. No time frame could be fixed.”

Criteria for issue of Notifications

5.20 A monument is declared to be of national importance only after publishing
a notification in the Gazette of Government of India in this regard. However,
Many discrepancies were noticed by Audit in the issue of notifications by the

Ministry/ASI as mentioned below:
4

a) There were no criteria fixed for notifying number of monuments in one
complex either as a single monument or as an independent monument.

b) There were cases where only a part of the monument is protected and the
Test of the part of monument was left as unprotected.

c) Cases were noticed where same monument was notified twice.

d) Cases were noticed where monuments were declared protected though
the final notification was not issued.

e) ASI notified the monuments before clearing the ownership and
encroachment which resulted into the court cases and failure of ASI to
carry out any action for conservation of the monument.


5.21

32

Cases were noticed where rmonument was protected by centre as well as
state. This indicates lapses in the coordination with state Government
agencies.

Cases were noticed where the monument was first notified then de
notified and then again identified for notification.

Cases were noticed where monuments were notified even before their
completing 100 years, which is a prerequisite for declaring any monument
as protected.

Several cases were noticed where items/antiquities were declared as
protected monument though they did not fall under the definition of the
ancient monument. है

Asked why no assessment had been carried out till now to make required

corrections in the notifications issued during British period, the Ministry,replied,

5.22

“There is no prescribed provision for periodic review of notifications issued
in the past. It is the duty of the ASI fo maintain and provide correct
information.”

On whether copies of all notifications are available with DG ASI/ Ministry,

and if so, why these were not provided to CAG during Audit, the Ministry

submitted;

5.23 -

"Most of the notifications are available with ASI HQ and its Circle Offices.
However, certain old notifications are not available and, hence, could not
be provided to C&AG. Efforts are being made fo frace the missing
notifications from State/Nationa! Archives.”

Asked by when ASI can issue a final notification for the monuments, as

listed in Annex 2.2 of the CAG’s Report, which are being taken as protected

without any final notification having been issued so far, they replied;

“There are a few isolated cases in which protection/conservation is taken
up pending 8808 of final notification. These primarily pertain to Excavated
sites and cases of de-facto transfer of monuments from State
Government. Verification of final notification is being carried out alongside
physical verification of monuments is: likely fo be completed by Dec
2014.... A cell has been created in ASI to address all these issues and is
working on CAG observations such as physical verification’ collection of
notification of monuments ‘as centrally protected / double nofifications
reported as missing by CAG etc. The work is likely to be completed in one
year.”


a3

Categorization of Monuments हि

5.24 The ASI HO notified in 2011 that alt the monuments were to be
categorized in eight specified categories. It was noted that the categorization
was followed only in one Circle. No other Circle had carried out this
categorization so far. No detailed guidelines or any timelines were prescribed for
the completion of thts activity. Lack of documentation was also noticed in
categorization af monuments in some categories.

The Ministry stated that fhe categorization of the protected
Monuments/Sites was the responsibility of the NMA and not that of the ASI.

5.25 Asked as fo why guidelines and timelines were not: prescribed for
categorization of the monumenis, the Ministry reptied;

“The categorization of monuments under section 4 of the AMASR Act has
been completed and handed over fo National Monument Authority for its
consideration and making recommendations to the Ministry...

There is a proposal to amend the AMASR Act. Categorization of the
monuments will be part of that process.
Time frame — one year"

5.26 The Committee desired to know as to when the Ministry would be able to

complete the process of categorization of monuments. They submitted:

"The proposal for categorization of monuments under section 4 of the
AMASR Act has been drafted and handed over to National Monument
Authority” *
5.27. When no information is being maintained for footfall in un-ticketed
monument, the Committee desired to know how the Ministry would categorize
“the monuments under category Vi. They replied;

“Listing under Category VI has been done by the SAs in-charge of ASI
Circles based on their assessment of the number of visitors to such
monuments.”


34

5.28 The Committee were apprised that in the absence of any record of footfall
in non-ticketed monuments, SAs can at best provide a subjective assessment.
This may result in grossly incorrect categorization. Further, it is ironical that
though SA's subjéctive assessment would be the basis for categorization, the
actual categorization has been handed over to the NMA for further action. This
indicates a-major flaw in process and accountability for correct categorization.
On the issue the Ministry submitted as follows

“The Categorization of monuments will be carried out by ASI under sec.20

{1} (a)

While the NMA will carry ouf classification of monuments under sec.20-
{a} *

Presently there is no other means of assessing the footfall at un-ticketed
monuments.”

§.29 Whether the Ministry are not the ultimate custodians to the protected
monuments, they stated;

"DG, ASI is the ultimate custodian of all centrally protected monuments in
the country. SA of the Circle is responsible to maintain and preserve the
monuments in the Circle.”

Unauthorised activities at the Monuments

5.30. The ASI intimated that 955 monuments were being used for worship and
prayers, ASI did not have the details of the monuments where prayers/worship
were being held prior to issue of notificafion. As the actual handling of the
monument is in the hands of the frusts/organisations/individuals carrying out the
unauthorised activities, the ASI failed to protect the monument. ASI failed to

have any formal agreement with these trusts/organisations.

5.31 On why no guidelines were issued for the use of living monuments and
why strict and timely action were not faken against the encroachers of the

protected monuments’, the Ministry submitted;


35

“As per the Archaeological Manual, the status of the monument at the time
of protection has to be maintained. If the monument is used under
religious practice the same will be allowed fo continue even after the
protection. As per section 6 of AMASR Act 1958 an agreement is to be
executed between ASI and user. In some cases authorities with whom
such agreements are to be executed are not willing to have an agreement.
All efforts are made to remove the encroachments from protected areas of
the monuments. Timely action is taken by ASI to approach the District
Authority for action/intervention as Law-and Order; issue is vested with
them. But due to lack of timely action/inaction by the District
Administration, encroachments happen in certain cases."

5.32 Audit pointed out in their vetting comments that it was found that in mos
cases, there were no attempts to contact management of trusts or individuals
owning these living monuments to enter into MoUs. Further, in cases 0
encroachment, matter was taken up mostly only upto the level of SAs and was
not raised to DG, ASI/MOC. During the study visit of the Committee to
Bhubaneswar in September 2015, the Committee were informed that for remova ,
of encroachments from monuments, Guwahati circle had taken up matter with
district Administration in all seven states of the North East. Further, a State level
co-ordination Committee under the chairmanship of Secretary (Culture),
Government of Assam had been constituted fo take up issues for removal of

encroachments from monuments. The matter should be taken up at the highest
level of MoC with state governments/private trusfs managing these monuments
to save the national heritage. To this the Ministry replied;

“The Secretary (Culture) has addressed letters fo the Chief Secretaries of
all States on this issue. ह

Further all the State Governments have been requested to form
Committee to look in to the issue of encroachments”

5.33. Asked as to when the Ministry would complete its database of information
regarding monuments being used for worship and prayer; the Ministry stated;

“Such data are available with ASI. Presently there are 955 numbers of
centrally protected monuments under worship


36°

5.34 Audit opined that Ministry’s reply is evasive as it did not provide any time
itame fo collect the information. The numbers mentioned in the reply do not

include further cases pointed out in audit report. To this the Ministry responded

“A cell has been created in ASI address to all these issues and is working
on CAG observations such physical verification/collection of notification of
monuments as centrally protected /double notifications repotted as
missing by CAG etc. the work is likely to be completed in one year.”

6.35 Asked if the Ministry ever took the issue it up with the State police and
district authorities for stopping the unauthorized activities; The Ministry
submitted;

“ASI has listed 249 encroachments within the protected monuments by —
individuals or organizations. There are several cases wherein
constructions were in existence prior to the notification of the monuments
and such cases have not been considered as encroachments. tt is not
correct that sub-circle did not inform the concermed Circle office about the
encroachment in the monuments. The sub-circle in-charges are duty
bound to inform the Circle office about the encroachment. However, all
efforts are made to remove encroachment from protected area by the.
Circle level as well as by the Directorate. There are several instances
where the ASI is not the owner of the land and in such cases it is difficult
for the ASI to process the removal of encroachment. For example, in case
of the encroachment at Sisupalgarh fort, District, Bhubaneswar, Audit itself
mentioned that AS! is owner of only 0.775 acre of Jand out of 562.681 acre
of protected area. In spite of that, AS! has made its best effort to stop
encroachment within the protected area. In respect of other
monuments/sites as pointed out by Audif, necessary information is being
collected from the circles for suitable action. In spite of sincere efforts
made by ASI unauthorized construction have not been removed at many
places, The Audit party has also mentioned its report that "in many cases
despite best efforts of the ASI offices District authority and police were not
cooperating”. DG, ASI has requested alt Chief Secretaries of the States in
this regard. After enactment of Ancient Monument and Archaeological
Sites and Remains (Amendments & Validation) Act, 2010 necessary data
regarding unauthorized constructions in prohibited and regulated areas of
centrally protected monuments have been collected from field offices. It is
further mentioned that based on the information received from Circle
offices, Director: General, issued demolition orders in respect of 1231
cases under rule 38(1) of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological
Sites and Remains Rules, 1959 to the owners of the building and 2004
demolition orders have been issued to respective Deputy Commissioners


37

under the provision of rule 38 (2} of the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains Rules, 1959.

In spite of sincere efforts made by AS! unauthorized constructions have
not been removed at many places. The Audit party has also mentioned its
report that "in many cases despite best efforts of the ASI offices District
authority and police were not cooperating". DG, ASI has requested all
Chief Secretaries of the States in this regard. In addition, for illegal
constructions and encroachments within the jurisdiction of Delhi circle of
ASI, a Committee under the Chairpersonship of Minister of Culture has
been constituted which has representation from all the local authorities,
the State Government, Delhi Police, INTACH, Ministry of Urban
Development etc. with the objective of sensitization of all these agencies
about the illegal constructions and encroachments within the protected,
prohibited and regulated areas of ASI monuments. An inter-ministerial
committee under AS (MoU) also takes periodic review of such Issues.
Moreover, an inter-departmental committee has been constituted for
monitoring the illegal construction and encroachments in and around
monuments in Lucknow.”

Use of Monuments for Other Purpose by the ASI ‘

5.36 Audit pointed out that the ASI themselves are not following their rules and
regulations and was carrying out unauthorized activities in the monuments. Even
parts of the monuments were used as residences of the officials of ASI, a case in
point being Director General's residence inside Red Fort. There were no do’s and
dont's for use of monument by ASI officials for official use also.

6.37 The Ministry had intimated that residence of the ASI officials and
accommodations of the security guards were in the modern barracks and not in
the protected monuments. Audit is of the view that the 851 was incurring the
expenditure for the entire complex as a protected monument.

5.38 Asked as to’ why no guidelines were issued for use of monument for
Official purposes, viz., establishing office etc, the Ministry stated

“Parts of certain monuments are being used for offices of ASI. However,
all care is taken to retain authenticity and integrity of the monument while
using portion/parts of such monument as office accommodation. The

> nN


38

proposed conservation policy states:- “Adaptive reuse of secondary
portions of a monument should be preferred fo incorporate functions such
as providing visitor amenities, ASI field Officers, stores etc. subject to the
condition that the authenticity and integrity of the monument is least
disturbed. But the main portion of the monuments however should not be

- subject to any reuse or fampered for any physical modification. In case of
Red Fart and Fatehpur Sikri, the modern facility has been provided only to
the inspection room and no intervention has been made to the ancient
structure. ॥1 case of the Red Fart,’ Delhi the monument is to be
conserved/maintained as per the recommendation of Comprehensive
Conservation Management Plan prepared under the direction of Hon'ble
Supreme Court of India, CCMP mentions to selectively retain the modern
structures that contribute to understanding the history to the site and are
useful to house visitor amenities and other activities that are proposed for
the site.” :

5.39 Asked if officials were officially allowed to use parts of the monuments for
their residences and as to why the expenditure on maintenance of barracks were
incurred fron the conservation head, the Ministry replied:

“In general officials are not allowed to use the parts of monuments for their
tesidences. However, in exceptional circumstances, officials may
temporarily reside in existing buildings within the protected area.....

Under the Comprehensive Conservation Management Plan of Red Fart,
Delhi some barracks are identified to house the antiquities presently kept
at Purana Quila and to relocate the museums of the Red Fort which are
functioning in the monuments, Since these barracks are more than 100
years old and played an important role in freedom movement of India and
are part of monument, expenditure on the maintenance of these barracks
was incurred from the conservation head."

5.40 Audit noticed instances where permissions were granted to organize
festivals in the protected monuments. While allowing these types of functions,
the guidelines issued in this regard were not followed. Cases of damage to the
monument and carrying out of commercial activities were noticed in the
monuments of national importance against the guidelines of ASI. The Ministry
intimated that the religious functions were allowed as per customary practices.
However... since the rules did not permit for waiver of prescribed fees for
fetigious functions the Ministry were asked as fo why the ASI gave permission to


39

carry out cultural activities in and around the protected monuments without fees.
They replied;

"Prescribed fee is waived only in case of traditionally/customary functions
which are celebrated at a particular monument since long. DG ASI is
authorized to waive off such fee under rules.”
5.41 Audit found the justification given not tenable and in contravention of the
AMASR rules. The Ministry were asked to reply specifically on its failure to
comply with the conditions for organizing the cultural events in the centrally
protected monuments. Further, there is no rule authorizing the DG to waive off
the fee, To this, the Ministry submitted:

“The point is well taken. A draft guideline regarding organizing cultural
event has been prepared and the same was uploaded on the websife
seeking public comments. It is in final stages of being approved.”

5.42 Audit observed that two different agencies of Ministry ie. AS| and [GNCA
were providing different information in respect of location of the monuments.
Instances were also noticed: where the information provided by Circle office was
different from what available in the notifications. The Ministry accepted the
recommendation and intimated that efforts would be made fo eliminate
ambiguities. Asked as to when the data of centrally protected Monuments were
compiled and published for all circles, the Ministry submitted.

“As per Office Order No. 2/1/97-M dated 28.06.1997, a committee was
formed for preparation of “An inventory of Centrally Protected Monuments
under the Archaeological Survey of India. The committee could not be
continued beyond July 2001 owing to transfer/retirement of the Members
and the Chairman. A New Committee has been set up to prepare the
inventory of centrally protected monuments.”

5.43 On whether the Ministry had set out a timeframe for completion of the
task, the Ministry were non-committal citing the magnitude of the task.


40

Maritime Archaeology

5.44 During evidence, the Committee desired to know whether the Ministry of
Culture and the ASI have given adequate importance to Maritime archaeology
with focus on both academic aspects of building knowledge on our past ties and
achievements in the naval field as well as on establishing the strong historical
ties we shared with the Indian ocean rim countries in cultural and economic
fields. Responding on the issue, the representative of the Ministry submitfed as

follow;

“We have launched a project last year in June 2014 in UNESCO which we
have called Project Mausam, which basically addresses the Indian Ocean
Rim and India's historical rings at the whole region. ४४७ have focused both
on academic work and historical work in this ‘region......As regards,
maritime museum, we propose to open a new Maritime Museum in
Mumbai at a dis-used textile mill. A part of that, the local body of Mumbai
has agreed in principle to allot to us. We are in dialogue with them. But we
will have a full-fledged maritime museum in Mumbai which will look at the
history of the entire Indian Ocean world and focus on Project Mausam
also. “ 7

5.45 Replying to queries during an earlier evidence on whether ASI have a
, wing of Marine Archaeology and the steps taken, the Ministry's representative
stated;

“In Goa, we entered into a MoU with the Institute of Oceanography... For
example, the IIT, Gandhinagar are willing to set up a unit for Archaeology
plus they have asked for one person for deputation from ASI just to set up
a Department of Archaeology"

Leveraging IT for preservation and promotian

5.46 During evidence, the Committee were keen to be apprised of the efforts
made to leverage Information Technology in preserving and promoting the
national cultural heritage. Outlining the initiatives taken by the Ministry in the
field, the representative of the Ministry submitted during evidence;

"A proposal for e-ticketing is some of the ASI's protected monuments is
under consideration. Far the purposes of proper collections management
of monuments and museums or project on digitalisation of museums
collections has been undertaken by the Ministry in association with C-DAC
under which a software namely 'JATAN' developed by C~DAC, is being


41

installed in ten museums of the Ministry of Culture and ASI in the first
phase of implementation....Under the Google Art Project, more than 150
masterpieces of the National Museum and NGMA, New Delhi, have
already been digitalised and made available on the website. We have
also entered inta an MoU with Google for ASI monuments. Simitarly the
Salarjung Museum and Indian Museum will also be collaborating with
Google saon....Recently the AS| has also undertaken a project in
collaboration with Google India for 360 degree photography of chosen
historical monuments for making the same available over the internet for
public viewing

5.47 The Committee also expressed grave concerns over the non-availability
with ASI of important national monuments like the original historical document of
26" November, 1949 that is the signed copy of the constitution, Jallianwala Bagh
Statutory Commisston Report, the creation of two dominions Act which is very
important for India etc. in digital formats while the same are accessible from the
ontine library of foreign institutions. Taking note of the concerns of the Committee
and expressing the Ministry’s willingness to work in that direction, the
representative of the Ministry stated

"As regards Archives, we have 60 lakh files with us. Our first priority is
only to digitize first page of the documents. We know the index. Hon.
Members have suggested about some documents to be digitized. Most of
them | understand are property of Parliament itself. We can request
Parliament tibrary for that. If they want any help, we can help them...
Many of these documents are available with British Library and from there
they have got it as per same agreement. We are in the same process.
We have entered info agreement with the British Library also."

Maintenance of Monuments and Baolis

5.48 The Audit Report also highlighted the utter negligence of some important
Monuments. The Committee are apprised of the need for widespread
preservation and conservation, requiring immediate attention. Improper
conservation works leading to dilapidated conditions of walls, plasters, floral and
other designs were pointed out. Improper maintenance of gardens and problems
of water-logging inside monuments were also pointed out by Audit’'s inspection
reports. They also pointed out how the Old Delhi area of Shahjahanabad has
nearly 526 havelis that were constructed in the 19th and 20th century and how
these havelis, having Hindu, Mughal, British and European art influences, are in
a pathetic condition. They observed how this heritage needs to be saved from
unauthorized construction, encroachments and traffic jams, efc. The Committee
also take note of the commendable work done by Heritage India Foundation in
preservation and conservation of these threatened heritage monuments..


42

5.49. The Committee were especially concerned about the poor maintenance
and negligent conservation of Baatis or water wells, Noting that these step wells
nat only represent an era gone by but also highlights the achievements in water
conservation the country had seen


43

PART II

OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

The Committee observe with appreciation that the C&AG have
carried out a much needed performance audit of the
Preservation and Conservation of Monuments and Antiquities
and submitted Report No. 18 of 2013 to Parliament. The
Commiftee would like to reiterate here that the Ministry of
Culture had been in existence as early as 1961 and yet certain
basic procedural and institutional lacunae still remain in its
efforts to preserve and conserve a rich heritage of historical
monuments: and antiquities in the country, which is one of the
largest depositories of such treasures of world civilization.
Beyond their national importance, historical monuments and
antiquities are a shared heritage of the world, of humanity, and
therefore, national governments not only have a_ national
responsibility in proper preservation and conservation of such
valuable souvenirs of the past but also have a universal
obligation to humanity as a whole. The Archaeological Survey of
india (ASI), which today is under the Ministry of Culture, and
continues to be the premier organization for the archaeological
researches and protection of the cultural heritage of the nation,
precedes the emergence of the Indian republic. It predates the
Ministry of Culture by a century, as in 1861 Cunningham was
appointed as the first Archeological Surveyor. From the
antiquity of ASI itself and the fact that the Ministry of Culture


44

had been created as far back as 1961 to protect and conserve
ancient historical monuments and valuable relics of the past, the
amount of public money spent over the years has been huge by

any standard.

The Committee also would like fo place on record the important
role that the Ministry and its subsidiaries, the 251, National
Museum, etc. can play in national integration by establishing
historical linkages of different regions of the country through
geographically inclusive and representative. . works of
conservation, excavations, protection of monuments of regional
significance, etc. and through an inclusive display of antiquities
and artifacts collected from all corners of the country, thereby
building an integrated historical narrative of the country’s past.
With this background, and supplementing the recommendations
contained in the Audit report, the Committee would like fo make

the following important observations and recommendations.

4. National Conservation Policy

The Committee are pleased fo note that the Ministry have taken
steps to remedy the absence of a National Conservation Policy
-and have finalized the National Policy for Conservation of the
ancient monuments, archaeological sites and remains (NPC -
‘AMASR) and notified the same in February 2014. The Committee
are of the opinion. that the absence of a well laid down policy for

_ systematic conservation and restoration of the artifacts had


45

resulted in their deterioration. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Ministry take necessary steps like notifying
the rules under the policy to streamline notification and de-
notification of monuments and its conservation activities under
the new policy within three months from the date of presentation
of this report to Parliament and revert to the Committee on

achievements and progress made thereon.

2. Exploration and Excavation Policy

The Committee, pleased to note the progress made towards
evolving the National Policy on Archeological Excavations and
Explorations post Audit’s observation, desire that the Ministry
should further expedite the final notification and drawing up
action plans under the policy so that public resources
earmarked for excavation and exploration of archeological
remains are henceforth properly streamlined and focused,
resulting in improved outcomes. They feet that exploration and
excavation of the archeological remains in the country and their
study is one of the primary activities of the ASI. However, the
Committee are surprised to note that ASI was spending less
than one percent of its total expenditure on such activities.
They, therefore, recommend that while drawing up action plans
under the policy, the Ministry should ensure adequate allocation
of funds and effective utilization by ASI for exploration and
excavation of archeological remains. Actions taken in this

regard may be intimated to the Committee.


46

3. Acquisition of Antiquities and Art Treasures

The Committee express displeasure over the absence of an
appropriate and effective mechanism for acquisition of
antiquities in the country so far, as also the delay in bringing
about amendments to the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act
1972, leading to the development of an illegal domestic and
export market for such items, some of which are of great
heritage value to the nation. The Committee note with serious
concern that the Ministry is yet to bring amendments to the Act
even after a lapse of nearly two decades, though the process to
amend the Act was initiated in 1997. The Committee, therefore,
desire that the Ministry expedite the finalization of the draft
Antiquities and Art Treasures Amendment Bill. They also
recommend that the Ministry should explore and take necessary
steps to recover or procure antiquities which are of cultural
significance to our country but have been sold to buyers abroad
and also to bring back the artifacts/antiquities and or Cultural
Property of Indian origin that were, taken away outside the
country during Colonial rule hy initiating dialogue at the
diplomatic level as wel! as through appropriate legal
mechanism. Progress made in this regard may be intimated to
the Committee within three months of presentation of this

report.


47

4, Management of Living Monuments

The Committee note that Living Monuments are being managed
and preserved under the joint responsibility of owners and ASI
through Memorandums of Understanding (MOUs), which has
been further strengthened through the National Policy on
Conservation of Ancient Monuments, Archeological Sites and
Remains (NPC-AMASR), 2014. The Committee were also
informed that more effective measures would be taken to
monitor the signing of MOUs with the managing bodies of living
monuments. The Committee were also apprised of fhe
Conservation Manual by Sir John Marshall being used as a
guideline for protection and preservation of Ancient, Mounds.
The Committee desire that the Ministry may apprise the
committee of the progress achieved in signing MOUs with
managements of living monuments and the enhanced efforts to
protect and preserve ancient Mounds. Moreover, conservation
and preservation of Rock edicts is yet another issue of concern
for the Committee when they observe that there is no specific
policy for their conservation. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that ASI should make concerted efforts to ensure
conservation and preservation of Rock edicts as these edicts
have pristine value and depict a definite era in historical

evolution of our Nation’s culture.


48

5. Uniform procedure for Archeological Museums

The Committee observe that no uniform laid down policy is
being followed in Archeological Museums under Ministry of
Culture as they are independent entities working under the
direction of their Board of Trustees/Societies. Moreover, as
Audit have pointed out, the ASI did not have a comprehensive
Policy Guidelines for management of Antiquities owned by it.
There were no standards for acquisition, preservation,
documentation and custody of object possessed by the ASI.
Further, systematic maintenance of the accession register was
largely absent in the Museum. The Committee are of the opinion
that proper maintenance of the accession registers was
essential to correctly account for the museum objects and also
for their safety. It was surprising for the Committee to note that
the Museum did not evolve a rotation policy for displaying
artifacts in galleries, as a result of which more than 95% of
objects were lying in reserve without ever having been put on
display. However, the Committee have also been informed that
Ministry of Culture is considering to standardize and implement
uniform procedures/practices in respect of issues as highlighted
above and have taken various steps in this regard. The
Committee are of the view that artefacts of culture and cultural
excavations are pristine cultural glory of any nation and
therefore, they recommend that the Ministry should expedite the

implementation of uniform procedures for Museum so that such


49

artefacts are preserved and maintained in a proper manner and
issues highlighted above are addressed effectively. National
register may be prepared highlighting the details of each and
every Ancient Monuments, Archeological sites and remains,
both of National and State importance, including the detaits of
artefacts lying in museums, government treasuries and/or in
other government and private possession spread over the
country which relate to Cultural Heritage of India. Action taken
in this regard should be informed to this Committee at the

earliest.

6. Shortage of Manpower and Restructuring

«

The Committee note with grave concern the severe shortage of
manpower in the ASI and take strong exception to some posts
being left vacant for years together without even any ad-hoc
arrangements. They were apprised of an ongoing cadre
restructuring process which has been submitted to the Ministry
of Finance for financial approval. Taking into account the
debilitating handicap faced by ASI in fulfilling its primary
functions due to the acute shortage of manpower, and taking
cognizance of a proper restructuring of the organization being
essential to overcome its deficient functioning in the important
mandate to preserve our cultural heritage, the Committee
recommend that the Ministry of Culture should pursue the
matter with the Ministry of Finance for early clearance of the

restructuring proposal and finalize the same at the earliest to


50

overcome the shortage of manpower at the earliest under
intimation to the Committee and also to ensure adequate
financial allocation for Archaeological Survey of India to help
strengthen future archeological survey, excavations and proper
maintenance ‘of ancient monuments in archaeological sites and

remains.

7. Filling current Vacancies

The Committee have been apprised that while the restructuring
exercise is aimed at strengthening all wings of AS! as far as
encadered posts are concerned, there are existing vacancies in
the organization which need to be filled. The Committee observe
that the Ministry had opted to outsource jobs that are not
directly related to the spheres of archeology, conservation and
excavation, while also entering into MoUs with institutions and
Universities for sharing professionals on deputation and training
basis to meet current shortage in technical manpower. The
Committee however note with great concern that the Ministry
have not been able to fill the vacancies as pointed out by audit
in a report laid in 2013, While deprecating this lackadaisical
attitude on the part of the Ministry, the Committee recommend
that the Ministry should make concerted effort to fill all vacant
posts in ASI and a compliance report be submitted to the
Committee within six months of this report being laid on the

table of the Houses of Parliament.


51

8. National Monuments Authority

The Gommittee note that pursuant to Audit comments on the
delays in establishment of NMA and appointments of members
therein, the Ministry had taken steps to expedite the entire
matter. The Committee feel that it is desirable for authorities to
pursue their tasks earnestly without awaiting Audit’s comments
and desire that the Ministry evolve an internal mechanism to set
targets and monitor timelines for its various agencies and units
in consultafion with units concerned. The Committee urge the
Ministry evolve proper systems to fill vacancies in important

positions in a time bound manner.

9. Security and safequard arrangements

From Audit’s findings, the Committee observe that there are
huge gaps in the management of security and safeguard around
important monuments and museums arising out of lack of
_ proper attention. They note with concern the lack of effective
monitoring in removing of encroachments and absence of any
coordinated effort to check unauthorized constructions within
conservation areas. The Committee however note with
appreciation that the Ministry has formed a Committee to
suggest security measures at monuments to strengthen
protection of monuments from possible damage, loss or
destruction through terror attacks and weak monitoring of

visitors, etc. The Committee recommend that the ASI should


52

constitute a coordination mechanism with representatives of
respective State Governments at each Circle to check the
incidents of encroachments with the cooperation of District and
Police authorities and there should be regular monitoring of
progress on existing encroachments. While they feel that efforts
should be made by the Ministry to strengthen the manpower for
security, the Committee also feel that the ASI lagged behind in
leveraging the advances in IT for enhancing security of the
monuments. They, therefore, recommend that the Ministry
should develop a comprehensive security policy for all
monuments and museums under its control by addressing the
shortage of security personnel and at the same time exploring
the possibility of taking the help of ISRO for aerial survey and
installation of satellite cameras and other agencies like
Electronics and IT department for !T-based security modules.
They also desire that the Ministry should apprise this Committee
of the status of implementation of recommendations of the
Committee on Security. The Committee further recommends that
all monuments, archaeological sites maintained by A.S.|. must
have Clean and Modern toilets, Eateries, Medical Shops and
other urgent conveniences in and around their precincts and
also accessible motorable roads to the benefit of hoth domestic

and foreign tourist.


53

10. Training and implementation of expert group’s report

The Committee are surprised to note with much concern that the
training needs of various technical personnel had been left
unattended by the management until Audit highlighted the
problem. The Committee desire that the ASI implement the New
HRD policy in right earnest to overcome shortage of trained
personnel for its technical tasks of conservation, preservation,
excavation and exploration, and constantly review training
needs through a feedback mechanism encompassing all units.
Further, the Committee while appreciating the Ministry’s
agreements with advanced and popular Museums for training
and their plan to sef up a training institute under ASI in Red Fort
with UNESCO recognition, recommend that these may be
pursued in right earnest and progress achieved be reported to

this Committee.

11. Budgetary allocation

The Committee note the Ministry’s claim that issue of
inadequate fund allocation and reductions made on the
projections of requirements are related to availability of
resources within the Ministry subsequent to cuts imposed by
the Ministry of Finance. However, since government works on
the basis of projections of requirements and not on allocation of
available resources, the Committee feel that inadequate
assessment of requirements of AS! highlighted by Audit is a
responsibility of the Ministry and ASI. They, therefore, strongly


54

recommend that demands must be raised for adequate funding
of needs for growth and efficiency and not for mere survival of
ASI for which both ASI and those responsible in the Ministry
must join hands to infuse a sense of direction and progress
through pre-budget planning exercises keeping in view that the
archaeological Survey of India is performing enormous and
onerous duty in maintaining thousands of ancient monuments,
archeologicat sites and remains of National importance for more
than a century with a very limited fund allocated. form time to

time.

12, Revenue generation eneration

The Committee are dismayed to note that there is no structured
system of determining whether protected Monuments are to be
placed under ticketed Monuments category or not. They also
note that the Ministry is dithering on the issue of increasing the
rates for film shooting, which has not been revised since 1991.
During deliberations, the Committee also dwelt on other
possible avenues of Revenue generation including renting out
premises of well-known monuments like Red Fort, Taj Mahal,
Victoria Memorial Hall for premium social and family events.
The Committee recommend that a structured system for
categorization of Monuments as ticketed or non-ticketed must
be developed and a comprehensive review carried out to bring
more monuments in the ticketed category. Further, the rates of
entry tickets should be reviewed and suitably revised upwards

at par with the rates at Monuments in other countries. The


ss

Committee also recommend that rates for film and documentary
shoots in premises of monuments must also be appropriately
revised upwards and promotional short films can be produced
by ASI separately in coordination with the Tourism Ministry. The
Committee also recommend that the Ministry/ASI should
seriously explore enhancing revenue generation through
premium renting of well-known sites for social and family events
with proper guidelines.

13. Non-budgetary funding

The Committee note that funding apart from Budget allocations
_are accessible fo ASI for Conservation and visitor amenities
through the National Culture Fund and that currently funding
through PPP mode is sought from NCF for 100 projects and 25
identified projects of ASI for conservation and visitor amenities.
‘The Committee recommend that the coordination between ASI
and NCF should be strengthened to rope in more Corporate
groups and high net-worth individuals into funding conservation
and visitor amenities at monument sites.

t

14. Identification criteria and survey

The Committee note that a comprehensive survey to identify
monuments of national importance for placing such monuments
in the centrally protected category is overdue. They also note
that a proper guideline for determining whether a monument is


56

considered to be of national importance is still in the process.
The Committee recommend that the guidelines for determination
of national importance of monuments be finalized at the earliest
and not later than six months from the presentation of this
report and thereafter, a comprehensive survey with target
timeline should be conducted to identify the exact number of
monuments of national importance that can be protected.

15. Notification issues

The Committee note with concern that despite theit claim of the
existence of well laid down procedures regarding proposals for
notification of monuments as protected monuments, the pace of
notification is found to be very slow. They also note with much
reproof.that after so many years, no de-notification guidelines
have been put in place. The Committee recommend that the
Ministry cause AS] to issue detailed instructions and if
necessary conduct workshops for circle office personnel for
effective preparation of proposals for notification. They further
recommend that the finalization of de-notification guidelines
may be expedited and the list of centrally protected monuments
updated at regular intervals, The Committee found it elusive that
the Ministry should claim inability to fix a time frame for
preparation of inventories of all monuments notified fo be of
national importance and recommend that definite time frames
may be given to circles concerned to complete the task. The

Committee also desire that punitive action may he initiated


5?

against the circles and officers found to be defaulting in

accomplishing the fask.

16. Missing Monuments

The Committee are apprised of the discrepancy in the number of
missing monuments which, besides raising issues of
safeguarding monuments, also reflects a complacence in
maintaining data on such monuments. The Committee are
perturbed to note that ASI did not have a reliable database of the
exact number protected monuments under its jurisdiction, Théy
feet that in the absence of this primary information, it is difficult
to judge if the ASI is able to fulfill its basic mandate effectively.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the ASI
expedite the verification of the physical condition and existence
of the notified protected monuments and furnish details to this

committee at the earliest.

17. Process of notification

The Committee note that notifications issued in British India
also remain without review and there are no provisions for
periodic review of notifications issued in the past. They also
note with dismay that certain old notifications are even
untraceable. The Committee were also apprised of certain cases
where protection/conservation tasks were taken up before issue
of final notification as protected monuments. While . the

Committee appreciate the circumstances requiring pre-


58

notification work of conservation in specific cases refating to
Excavated sites and cases of de-facto transfer of monuments
form State Governments, they are appalled to note cases of old
notifications missing from records and the absence of any
provisions for periodic review of old notifications. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the ASi/Ministry of
Culture put in place a system of periodic review of old
notifications to verify the physical existence and continuing
- importance of notified monuments. They also desire that the
ASI/Ministry may take up as a priority retrieving copies of old
notifications that were found missing. The Committee also
desire that the ASI/Ministry may consider issuing guidelines
whereby Ancient monuments (predating say 1700 AD) and
contemporary Monuments that are 100 years old and are of
national importance stand automatically protected, requiring
special notification for monuments of importance but are less

than 100 years only.

18. Categorization of Monuments

The Committee were apprised that, the proposal for
categorization of Monuments had been made in the absence of
any record of footfall in non-ticketed monuments and merely on
the basis of the assessments of Superintending Archeologists
(SAs), of the number of visitors to such monuments. The
Committee also take strong exception to the Ministry’s

submission that the categorization of Monuments will form a


59

part of the amendment of the AMASR Act as the legislative
process of amendment of an Act is entirely independent of the
administrative task of categorizing Monuments into various
categories such as ticketed, non-ticketed, etc. The Committee
desires that the Ministry may expedite the process of
amendment of the AMASR Act to address existing lacunae,
They recommend that ASI should put in place a system of
recording footfalls in non-ticketed monuments, and that
proposals for clarification may be reviewed once the record of

footfalls are obtained.

19, Encroachments and unauthorized activities

The Committee note that in certain living monuments, religious
worship and prayers are being held and feel that considering the
need for protection and conservation of such monuments,
certain guidelines on their use that ensure safeguarding and
preservation of the monuments would certainly be useful with
‘regard fo the issue of encroachments. The Committee, while
taking note of the ongoing efforts of the Ministry/ASI to have the
encroachments removed, desire a more proactive and
coordinated effort with closer monitoring. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the ASI/Ministry should consider
evolving clear guidelines on the use of protected monuments
and to ensure that proper MOUs are signed with
users/occupants based on the said guidelines for retaining
integrity of the monuments. Moreover, the Committee are of the
opinion that ASI should have a laid down policy for notification


60

of sites with contested ownership or encroachments. These
sites can be placed in the tentative list for nomination till all
disputes are resolved. The Committee feel that such notification

wilt not only provide a legal status for protected monuments but

also define the area of the site. The Committee therefore,

recommend that ASI should maintain the records and the
notifications related to such sites which should also be readily
available with the ASI HQ. They also recommend that AS!
should constitute a coordination body with representatives of
respective State Governments at each circle to check incidents
of encroachments with the co-operation of District and Police
authorities and also to initiate timely action for removal of all
encroachments and to protect the ancient ‘monuments,
archeological sites and remains form vandalism, theft, spoliation
and disfigurement, etc in accordnance with law. They further
recommend that proper guidelines should be evolved to put in
place a transparent and time bound system of issuing no

objection certificates to projects requiring ASI clearance.

20. Use of Monuments for other purposes:

The Committee were apprised that some structure and some
parts of Monuments were being used as accommodation/offices
by ASI. They also note with disbelief that the Director General is
provided a residence inside the Red Fort. While they appreciate
the fact that in using some parts of certain Monuments, the ASI

ensures the authenticity and integrity of structures, they felt


61

such practice may not always be helpful in conserving
Monumental buildings. The Committee also note that ASI are
yet to put in place a set of guidelines on allowing cultural events -
to be organized in the centrally protected Monuments. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that use of parts of
Monuments for residence should be done away with and usage
as offices by ASI or any agency should be discouraged, kept to
the barest essential minimum and stricter guidelines developed
to ensure that the authenticity and integrity of such structures
are not damaged. They further recommend that the Ministry may
expedite the finalization and notification of the guideline
regarding organizing cultural events in the vicinity of Centrally

Protected Monuments.
21. Inventory of Gentrally Protected Monuments.

The Committee are deeply concerned to note that no reliable
inventory of Centrally Protect Monuments have been maintained
by ASI. They take strong exception to the AS!/Ministry’s
unwillingness to spell out a time frame within which the
Committee constituted to prepare an inventory of centrally
protected Monuments must complete their task, citing the
volume of work. The Committee strongly disapprove of such an
attitude on the part of ASI. They, therefore, recommend that the
Committee for preparation of the said inventory must be given a
timeframe of not more than two years and must be given
necessary resources to accomplish the task within the specified

time frame. Further, the Committee desire that such an inventory


62

of all monuments of importance should be compiled in such a
way and made accessible through a portal where visitors of the
portal should be able to get ready-made information on various
categories of Monuments like monuments of
_ national/regional/state importance, Circle and state of location
and distance from nearest major city or town, historical and
cultural significance of the monument, number of missing
monuments, number of encroached monuments with details,
etc. The Committee further desired that such an inventory

should be updated every 5 years.

22. Maritime Archaeology

The Committee are pleased to note that some efforts have been
made in the direction of exploring and preserving maritime
archaeology under project Mausam which is expected to unearth
our ties with our maritime neighbors. The Committee would like
to reiterate the importance of establishing the archaeological
narrative of our strong cultural ties and thriving economic
relations with Indian Ocean rim countries. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that a separate wing of ASI with relevant
expertise should be specially tasked to bolster efforts in this
direction. They also desire that maritime museums displaying
antiquities and monuments of our great maritime past as has
been setup at Cuttack by the State Government of Odisha, which
is one of ifs kind be taken as a cue and also be established at


53

other appropriate locations with adequate financial support for

their upkeep.

; 23. Leveraging IT for preservation and promotion

The Committee express grave concern over the limited way in
which the advances in IT have so far been leveraged in the
preservation and promotion of the Nationa! cultural heritage.
While appreciating the initial steps taken by the Ministry and ASI
in this direction, they recommend that enhanced efforts must be
made to fully leverage the advantages of using information
technology in preserving perishable monuments and antiquities
for prosperity and to promote them across the globe through the
internet. The Committee desire that‘ASI should enhance the use
of modern scientific technology, build capacity of its officials
and establish an upgraded dating laboratory of its own. The
Committee desire that the Ministry/ASI should evolve a roadmap
for preserving historical and cultural monuments using
electronic data and images, and to promote our rich cultural and
historical heritage into more prominence. They also desire that
AS! should have funds earmarked specifically for awareness,

interpretation and related activities. ‘

The Committee were deeply concerned about the lagging efforts
of the ASI in the maintenance and conservation of some very
important monuments leading to dilapidation of invaluable

symbols of the nation’s heritage and culture including Baolis.


64

Pictures of depleting plasters, damaged floral designs, neglected
gardens, dilapidated walls contained in the C&AG report presents a
damning narrative of the state of conservation. The Committee at the
same time note that:some efforts are being initiated by ASI as well as
private foundations like Heritage Foundation of India to remedy the
situafion. The Committee strongly recommend the ASI to strengthen
its efforts to restore the monuments fo their pristine glory by proper
and diligent conservation efforts. They also desire that the AS] work
in collaboration with some of the pioneering private organizations
active in conservation and preservation of the nation’s heritage
particularly Baolis in old Delhi areas, either through MoUs or through -
grants and support funding. Action taken in this regard may be
intimated to this Committee.

«

26. Restoration of damaged Monuments

The Committee observe with concern that in the process of
restoring damaged Monuments, certain damaged parts of the ancient
monuments are often removed and replaced with new material to
maintain the structural Integrity and to prevent further damage. The
Committee feet that such restoration works should be limited only to
monuments that require unavoidable restoration. Further they
recommend that the damaged parts so removed may also be
preserved and displayed near the sitefor at Museums with
explanatory notice providing information about where they .are

removed from and when they were replaced.

NEW DELHI; PROF. K.V. THOMAS
_ April, 2016 Chairperson,

Vaisakha, 1938 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee