 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY SECOND  REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
NEW DELHInew LY  
 
 
 
 
8_ 
  
  
 
  
 
 
KENDRIYA VIDYALAYA SANGATHAN          
AND GUJARAT VIDYAPITH 
122 

2 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-SECOND REPORT 
     
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
         
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
  
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on: 18.12.2018 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 18.12.2018 
 
 
L O K    S A B H A    S E C R E T A R I A T 
N E W  D E L H I  
 
December, 2018/       Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka) 
 
 
KENDRIYA VIDYALAYA SANGATHAN AND 
GUJARAT VIDYAPITH 
PAC NO. 2161           

3 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  PAGE 
NO. 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2018-19)       
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2017-18)       
INTRODUCTION  
 PART - I  
 Introduction  
I Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan - Irregular expenditure on 
Project KendriyaVidyalayas 
 
II Irregular payment of Service Tax  
III Gujarat Vidyapith  
 A. Non follow up of norms of reservation.   
 B.  Irregularities in Appointments and Drawl of pay scales 
for various posts 
 
 PART - II  
 Observations/Recommendations of the Committee  
 APPENDICES  
I. Minutes of the Eighth sitting of the Public Accounts Committee 
(2017-18) held on 23 August, 2017 
 
II. Minutes of the Tenth sitting of the Public Accounts Committee 
(2017-18) held on 27 September, 2017 
 
III. Minutes of the  Twentieth sitting of the Public Accounts 
Committee (2018-19) held on 5 December, 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2018-19) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge   - Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria  
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra 
5.     Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar   
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
7. Smt. Riti Pathak 
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank” 
9. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
10. Shri Abhishek Singh 
11. Shri Gopal Shetty 
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya  
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
15. Dr. Ponnusamy  Venugopal 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
16. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda 
17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
18. Shri Shwait Malik 
19. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
21. Shri C.M.Ramesh 
22. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A.K. Singh          - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri T. JayaKumar    - Director 
3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja     -        Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Malvika Mehta   -           Committee Officer 
  

5 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
 (2017-18) 
                                                           
1 Shri Neiphiu Rioh Ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon acceptance of his r esignation from Lok Sabha w.e.f . 22 February, 
2018.  
2 Shri Naresh Agrawal ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 2 April, 2018 
3 Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 2 April, 2018 
4 Elected w.e.f. 29 December, 2017 in lieu of vacancy caused due to retirement of Shri Shantaram Naik.  
5 ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 18 August, 2017 and re -elected w.e.f. 29 
December, 2017. 
6 Shri Ajay Sancheti ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 2 April, 2018 
7 Shri Bhupender Yadav ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 3 April, 2018 
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge   - Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
  
3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra 
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey 
6. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar   
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
8. Smt. Riti Pathak 
9. Vacant1 
10. Shri Abhishek Singh 
11. Prof. Ram Shanker 
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya 
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi 
15. Dr. P. Venugopal 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Vacant2 
17. Vacant3 
18. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
19. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan4 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy5 
21. Vacant6 
22. Vacant7 

6 
 
  
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2018 -19), having been authorised by 
the Committee, do present this One Hundred and Twenty-second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) 
on 'Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan and Gujarat Vidyapith'  based on Para Nos. 13.3, 13.7 & 
13.11 of C&AG Report No. 12 of 2017 relating to the Ministry of Human Resource Development.   
 
2. The C&AG Report No. 12 of 2017 was laid on the Table of the House on 21 July, 2017.  
 
3. The Public Accounts Committee (PAC) selected Paras 13.3, 13.7 & 13.11 of C&AG 
Report No. 12 of 2017 for examination in 2017 -18 and was further selected and examined by 
PAC in 2018-19.  
 
4. The Public Accounts Committee (2017 -18) took oral evidence of the representatives of 
Ministry of Human Resource Development on aforementioned paras on 23 August, 2017 and 27 
September, 2017. 
 
5. The Public Accounts Committee (2018 -19) considered and adopted the One Hundred 
and Twenty-second Report on the afore-mentioned paras from C&AG Report at their sitting held 
on 5 December, 2018.  The Minutes of the sittings are appended to the Report.  
 
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part II of the Report. 
 
7. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the Ministry 
of Human Resource Development for tendering evidence before them and furnishing the 
requisite information to the Committee in connection with the examination of the subject. 
  
8. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to 
them in the matter by the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                 Mallikarjun Kharge 
13 December, 2018                                                                            Chairperson                                                                                
22 Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)                                           Public Accounts Committee 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

7 
 
 
Part-I 
Report 
Introduction 
1. The Public Accounts Committee decided to take up for detailed examination and 
report, Paras  13.3,13.7 and 13.11 of Audit Report no. 12 of 2017 (Compliance Audit 
Observations Union Government (Civil) on ‘Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan (KVS)’, 
‘Irregular payment of Service Tax’ and ‘Gujarat Vidyapith (GVP)’ respectively pertaining 
to the Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD).  
 
I  Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan - Irregular expenditure on Project 
KendriyaVidyalayas 
2. According to Audit, Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan , an autonomous body under 
Ministry of Human Resource Development establishes and manages Kendriya 
Vidyalayas (KV). The scheme of KV had also been extended to the children of the 
employees of Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs)/Institute of Higher Learning o wned by 
Government of India (GoI), at their request on the condition that all recurring and non -
recurring expenditure on running these Vidyalayas would be provided by the sponsoring 
agencies. The annual requirements of school are required to be met by the sponsoring 
agency by release of budgeted funds , both recurring and non -recurring to the 
concerned KVs in bank account as advance in two installments i.e. in April and October 
of the current financial year under intimation to the Regional office and KVS, 
Headquarters.  
 
3. In this regard, the Ministry submitted the following in their background note with 
regard to the objectives of the Kendriya Vidyalayas:- 
 
“The main objectives of Kendriya Vidyalayas are as under: 
 To cater to the educational needs of the child ren of transferable Central 
Government employees including Defence and Para -Military Personnel by 
providing a common programme of education. 
 To  provide, establish, endow, maintain, control and manage schools, 
hereinafter called ‘the Kendriya Vidyalayas’   for the children of transferable 
employees of the Government of India, floating population and others 
including those living in remote and undeveloped locations of the country and 
to do all acts and things necessary for or conducive to the promotion of suc h 
schools. 
 To pursue excellence and set pace in the field of school education; 

8 
 
 To initiate and promote experimentation and innovativeness in education in 
collaboration with other bodies like the CBSE, NCERT etc., and 
 To develop the spirit of national integ ration and create a sense 
of  ‘Indianness’ among children.” 
4. With regard to opening of Project KVs, the Ministry submitted the following:- 
 
“Kendriya Vidyalayas can be opened either in the Civil / Defence Sector or 
under the Project / IHL Sector. Proposals for opening of new KV is 
considered only if sponsored by one of the following:- 
            (a) Ministries or Departments of the Government of India 
            (b) State Governments 
            c) Union Territories Administrations. 
  
Opening of Kendriya Vidyalayas under Project/ IHL Sector 
Apart from Civil/ Defence Sector, the Central Public Sector 
Undertakings/Institutes of Higher Learning (IHL)can also sponsor the 
Kendriya Vidyalayas subject to the following: 
 
a) The Public Sector undertaking/Institutions of Higher Learning shall bear 
all the recurring and non -recurring expenditure on the proposed Kendriya 
Vidyalaya. The administrative overhead charges from the sponsoring 
project/ IHL authorities will be charged @ 15% of the actual expenditure of 
the Project/ IHL Sector Vidyalaya. The administrative overhead charges 
shall be charged @15% of the actual expenditure of the project Vidyalaya. 
 
b) When there is concentration of at least 1000 employees of the Govt. of 
India undertaking, and when there are at least 200 children (500 children 
in the case of big cities) willing to be enrolled in different classes of the 
proposed Kendriya Vidyalayas to begin with. 
 
c) The Sponsoring Authority shall provide free of cost, suitable land and 
building for housing and future development of the Vidyalaya. 
 
d) The Sponsoring Authority shall provide suitable residential 
accommodation to the teaching and non -teaching staff of KVS on the 
same basis and at the same rates as prescribed by it for its own 
employees. 
 
e) The children of the Sponsoring Authority will get first priority in matters 
of admission. However, the children belonging to the eligible categories 
will be  considered against seats available after accommodating the 
children of the employees of the Sponsoring Authority. 
 
Proposals received from the Public Sector undertakings for opening of 
new Kendriya Vidyalayas in their campuses are considered on fulfillment 
of certain terms and conditions devised by KVS in the form of an 
MOU.  The recurring and non -recurring expenditure including 
proportionate overhead charges and future development expenditure are 
met by the PSUs/ Institutes of Higher Learning be sides providing of 

9 
 
suitable and sufficient land, building, furniture, equipment and residential 
accommodation for the staff of the proposed K.V.   
 
The essential difference between a KV opened under the Civil / Defence 
sector and that under Project / IHL s ector is that the former is established 
with the approval of the Government where as in the latter case, the 
school is established through a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) 
entered into between the Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan on the one part 
and the Public sector Undertaking / IHL on the other part. 
 
Some of the projects have become sick and the project authorities are 
increasingly finding it difficult to discharge their liabilities in respect of the 
KV under their sponsorships. Keeping in view such cons traints faced by 
the project authorities, the KVS has authorized project authorities to 
prescribe / charge a differential fee structure vis -à-vis other civil sector 
KVs which will enable them to generate additional resources for meeting 
their liabilities t owards KVS. In the eventuality of their failure to generate 
funds by these means, for whatsoever reasons, the sponsoring agencies 
would be liable to pay their dues to KVS from their own resources.” 
  
5. With regard to funding of the Project KVs, the Ministry submitted as under:- 
“Funding of Project Kendriya Vidyalayas 
Project Schools are opened after the sponsoring authorities make available land 
and building for the running of school and sufficient number of residential 
quarters etc. for the staff posted ther e.  The annual requirements of the school 
are required to be met by the sponsoring agency by release of budgeted funds to 
the KVS/Regional Office in two advance installments in the month of April and 
October. 
The entire recurring and non -recurring expenditure in respect of Project school 
which is payable by the concerned authority to the Sangathan is inclusive of 
proportionate Administrative Overhead Charges relating to the Hqrs. and 
Regional Offices.” 
6. In CAG’s earlier Audit Report No. 4 of 2004, Audit had highlighted non -payment 
of dues by the sponsoring Authorities as an amount of ` 12.73 crore and ` 11.84 crore 
was outstanding as at March 2003 from existing/functioning Project Vidyalayas and 
closed Project Vi dyalayas respectively. Subsequently, PAC, in its Forty Sixth Report of 
2006-07 advised that the matter be resolved early by MHRD in co -ordination with other 
Departments of GoI with a view to recover the amount due to KVS. The Committee 
further recommended that KVS should be cautious in future and also reconsider their 
policy of opening and running such project schools involving PSUs so as to avoid 
recurrence of such instances. 
 
7. Audit examination in July 2015 and July 2016 disclosed that as of March 2016 
there were 161 Project Vidyalayas of which dues of ` 59.67 crore were recoverable 

10 
 
from 34 closed and 47 operating Vidyalayas. Audit observed that in cases where the 
Sponsoring Authority defaulted in making the required payments, KVS diverted the 
Government grants to meet the expenditure towards pay & allowance of the staff and 
other recurring and non-recurring expenditure. 
8. The outstanding amount of Closed Project Vidyalayas were between `14.61 
crore to ` 15.10 crore during 2011-12 to 2015-16 and have increased from `11.22 crore 
in 2011 -12 to `44.56 crore in 2015 -16 in respect of existing Vidyalayas. The regular 
practice of diversion of Government grants is not only financially imprudent but also 
against the canons of Budgetary Management and Expenditure Control. This would also 
adversely impact the core objective for which such budget was allotted.  Even though 
the matter was brought to the notice of Management/Ministry in CAG Report No.  4 of 
2004 and specific recommendations of 46 th PAC Report of 2006 -07 that th e matter be 
resolved early by MHRD in co -ordination with other Departments of GoI with a view to 
recovering the amount due to KVS, KVS has not streamlined its recovery process since 
the recovery from closed projects increased from ` 11.84 crore to ` 15.10 crore and for 
existing Vidyalayas increased from ` 12.73 crore to ` 44.56 crore from March ending 
2003 to March ending 2016 respectively. 
 
9. KVS, in its reply stated in July 2016 and August 2016 that it was regularly 
monitoring the issue and this was being t aken up at the level of Commissioner, and 
Hon’ble HRM -cum-Chairman, KVS and Hon’ble Ministers incharge of other ministries 
under whom the project schools are functioning. It was further added that efforts of 
Administrative Ministry resulted in recovery of an amount of ` 1.83 crore. 
 
10. The Ministry stated the following with regard to difficulties being faced by KVs:- 
“Difficulties faced by KVS 
●          Since the employees posted in Kendriya Vidyalayas  are permanent 
employees of KVS and their pay and allowances have to be paid in time, KVS 
has been releasing funds to such few defaulting KVs as an advance out of 
Government Grants to ensure release of salaries to KVS employees. 
 
●          Although, the s aid amount is given as an advance to the Project 
Authorities, the same has attracted serious audit objection by CAG, Govt. of 
India.  If such schools continue to function the outstanding dues will increase 
year after year. 
 
●          After some years of e xistence of Kendriya Vidyalaya under Project/IHL 
Sector, the sponsoring authorities of these KVs started defaulting from funding of 
the KV on one or the other ground and the KVS dues starts accumulating.  They 
request KVS either to convert the Vidyalaya in to Civil Sector or to close it. The 
extant guidelines, however, do not have any such provision for conversion of a 
Project sector KV into a Civil Sector KV. 

11 
 
 
●          The grounds which are normally adduced by the sponsoring authorities 
are non -availability of funds due to loss in the business of the company, the 
wards of the employees of said project getting reduced, closing of project in 
phased manner, intention of the project authorities of establishing another 
organization school with a view to reduce the expenditure etc. 
 
●          Since the KVS assignment is to cater to the educational needs of 
children, the abrupt decision of closure of the KV cannot be taken in the interest 
of the education of the children, who are studying in the said KV.   In case, such 
decision is taken by KVS, as KVS do not receive any grant from Govt. of India for 
running such KVs, parents/ public representatives approach KVS authorities to 
continue the Vidyalaya.   This results in accumulation of outstanding dues in the 
name of project/IHL authorities.” 
11. In the context of the efforts put in to recover the outstanding dues, the following 
was submitted by the Ministry:- 
“A)       The Secretary, School Education and Literacy  (SE&L),MHRD conducted 
a meeting on 05.04.2017   with the representatives of various Ministries whose 
PSUs have sponsored Kendriya Vidyalayas and Officers of KVS to expedite the 
recovery of outstanding dues from the Sponsored Projects.   After review of 
cases, the Secretary (S E&L) directed the Commissioner, KVS to reconcile and 
recover the outstanding dues from the Sponsored Projects of KVs as well as to 
discuss the other issue raised vice -versa with the representatives of the 
concerned sponsoring authorities in KVS (Hqrs), New Delhi. 
 
i)        In accordance with the above decision, meeting was conducted   on four 
different dates namely 18.05.2017, 19.05.2017, 22.05.2017 & 24.05.2017 under 
the Chairmanship of Additional Commissioner (Admn.) in Kendriya Vidyalaya 
Sangathan (HQ)   with the Officers of different Project Authorities to sort out the 
issues and recovery of outstanding dues from the Sponsored Projects. 
 
ii)      The issue was further discussed in the Deputy Commissioners’ Conference 
recently held in the First week of July, 2017 and decisions arrived at are as under 
:- 
 
a)   All Regional Offices should communicate the outstanding balance 
recoverable as on 31.03.2017 to the concerned Project Authority for its 
confirmation ; 
 
b)  In case of any differences poi nted out by the Project Authority, the 
Finance Officer/Assistant Commissioner working in the Region concerned should 
be deputed to the concerned Project Authority for its reconciliation; 
 
c)   All Deputy Commissioners are directed to personally interact wi th the 
concerned Project Authority for the immediate recovery of overdue amount. 
 
B)        As per the decision taken in the Deputy Commissioner’s Conference, a 
letter has also been issued to all Regional Offices on 03.08.2017 enclosing a 

12 
 
statement of outs tanding dues as on 31.03.2017 for confirming the outstanding 
dues in consultation with Project Authorities. To monitor the recovery effectively 
from project authority, all Regional Offices have been directed vide this office 
letter dated 27.07.2017 to forward the monthly Report to KVS(HQ). 
  
 C) In 4 Project Kendriya Vidyalayas namely KV, BHEL Haridwar, BHEL 
Jagdishpur, FRI Dehradun  and Central University of Hyderabad    fresh 
admissions in Class 1 and XI have been stopped for the year 2017 -18 on the 
request of sponsoring authorities as they have expressed their inability in funding 
the Kendriya Vidyalayas w.e.f. 01.04.2017 and also r equested to convert into 
Civil Sector. However,  keeping the interest of students and parents admissions 
have been restored, with the approval of Hon’ble   Human Resource Minister 
(HRM).” 
  
12. Regarding recoveries, MHRD further added the following:- 
“..while in  some cases, the Sponsoring Authorities have made part payments 
towards dues during the intervening years, in other cases (especially in closed 
KVs) there is no payment at all during the last 10 years.” 
 
13. On being asked if the MOU between KVS and the Sponso ring Authority provided 
for measures to be taken when any sponsoring authority backs off from a project, 
MHRD replied the following:- 
“That in case, Clause 12 & 14 of the Memorandum of Understanding has 
sufficient provisions both for sponsor and KVS.  Clause 12 provides as under:- 
"That in case, the party of the other part fails to comply with all or any of the 
commitments given hereinabove, the Sangathan is free to take such decision as 
may suit its convenience and such decision shall be final, binding upo n the party 
of other part.  However, it is provided that KV shall not be allowed to be closed 
for the breach committed by the party of the other part and in case such a 
situation arises, it shall be the duty on the part of the other part to pay damages 
and keep the Sangathan indemnified."  In the MoU, KVS is the party of one part 
and the Sponsoring Project Authority is the party of the other part. 
Also clause 14 of the MoU provides as under:- 
"It is also provided that in case of any dispute arising out of t his MoU, the same 
shall be referred to a sole arbitrator for his/her decision as per the law in force 
and the appointment of the sole arbitrator shall be carried out by the 
Commissioner KVS whose decision in this regard will be final and binding 
between the parties." 
It may be added that most of the defaulting Sponsoring Authorities are in respect 
of Kendriya Vidyalayas opened before 2007 when the system of MoU was not in 
practice.” 
 
14. In this context, when asked that paying for increasing expenses without any 
matching earnings from that project would become uninteresting for any sponsoring 
authority, MHRD submitted the following:- 
 “Yes…However, as per clause 12 of the MoU  a Project Sector KV is not to be 
closed for the breach committed by the Sponsoring Project.  In such a situation it 

13 
 
shall be the duty of the Sponsoring Project to pay damages & keep KVS 
indemnified.  In view of above provision in the MoU and also in the i nterest of 
studies of students of such KVs, KVS pays for the salary and allowances of its 
staff as a loan to the Kendriya Vidyalaya.  Simultaneously, KVS keeps pressing 
the defaulting Sponsoring Project Authorities to clear its dues.” 
 
15. On being queried whe ther existing students were allowed to complete their 
schooling till 12th in case of closure of KVs, MHRD responded as under:- 
“KVS, as far as possible, tries to close down Kendriya Viyalayas in a phased 
manner on the request of Sponsoring Project Authorities.  However, in a situation 
where the sponsoring authority concerned backs out from their commitment 
abruptly and KVS has no option but to close the KV, the existing students 
pursuing their studies are adjusted in nearby Kendriya Vidyalayas or any KV as 
per their choice.” 
 
16. When asked that in case  a particular sponsoring authority has been defaulting 
whether the Ministry tried to persuade some other PSU etc. to run the KV in larger 
public interest and if the Ministry thought other Corporate entities in the  area could be 
made to contribute towards such schools under the Corporate Social Responsibility 
initiative, the Ministry replied:- 
“The Project Sector Kendriya Vidyalayas are opened on the request of the 
Sponsoring Project Authorities in their campuses on  certain terms and conditions 
as per the MoU since 2007.  Before 2007, Project Sector KVs were opened on 
mutually agreed terms and conditions without any MoU.  Their wards are given 
first priority in admissions. 
KVS will explore the possibility of other PS Us/corporate entities offering to take 
the responsibility of funding of such Kendriya Vidalayas under Corporate Social 
Responsibility initiative.  Further, no other PSU/Corporate entities ever made 
such an offer to KVS. 
Incidentally, the Ministry had, in t he case of a KV run under the sponsorship of 
University of Hyderabad, advised that, in the event the University finds 
supporting the KV financially burdensome, they may ascertain the feasibility of 
other organisations like Tata Institute of Fundamental Res earch (TIFR), National 
Institute of Animal Biotechnology ( NIAB), National institute of Design  (NID), 
Indian Immunologicals Limited (IIL) etc. to contribute their share of operating and 
maintenance cost on certain formula to be developed by them.  Ministry 
welcomes such possibilities being explored by other similarly placed project 
authorities also.” 
 
17. In th e context of MoUs  with Project authorities , the Ministry also stated the 
following:- 
“Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan placed the matter of default by some Project 
Sponsoring Authorities in payment of KVS dues before the Board of Governors, 
KVS in its 77th meeting held on 20.0 6.2007.  BOG, KVS decided signing of 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the Sponsoring Project Authorities 

14 
 
for Kendriya Vidyalayas under Project Sector.  This MoU is being signed 
between the sponsoring authority and KVS in respect of all new Project Se ctor  
KVs opened after 2007.  Further, BoG, KVS in its 79th meeting held on 
26.06.2008, approved the inclusion of a clause "The concerned Ministry, through 
its Secretary shall also convey their concurrence to the Memorandum of 
Understanding through a separ ate letter" in the MoU format.  KVS is taking the 
concurrence as above in all cases before opening of new Project Sector KVs 
since then.” 
 
18. On the issues of opening of escrow account by Project Authority, making the 
administrative ministry as a financial gu arantor and amendments in the Mo U and 
norms for opening of new Project KVs, the Ministry submitted the following in their 
action taken reply to Audit :- 
“It has also been indicated by the KVS that it has emphasized on the issue of 
opening of Escrow Account  by the Project Authorities those who have opened 
the Project KVs after the decision of BOG, KVS dated 20.6.2007.  The Deputy 
Commissioners, KVS, Regional Offices have been directed to look into the issue 
of opening of Escrow Account to ensure compliance immediately. 
While entering into MoU for opening up of KV, the MoU shall be tripartite 
involving the concerned administrative Ministry also which should also stand as a 
guarantor to make payment of dues to KVS in the event of default by the Project 
Authorities. 
KVS has committed before the Public Accounts Committee that Kendriya 
Vidyalaya Sangathan would propose to its Board of Governors the additional 
remedial measures in respect of opening of new Kendriya Vidyalayas under 
Project/IHL Sector to avoid the default by any sponsoring Project/IHL Authorities.  
In compliance, KVS has drawn certain amendments/parameters in the existing 
norms prescribed for opening of new Kendriya Vidyalayas under Project/IHL 
Sector.  Draft agenda has also been prepared for its subm ission before the 
competent body i.e. Board of Governors, KVS.” 
19. In regard to differential fee structure in Project KVs, MHRD stated the following:- 
“There is a provision that Sponsoring Authorities of Project Kendriya Vidyalayas 
can frame a different fee s tructure than that of Civil Sector Kendriya 
Vidyalayas.  However, Sponsoring Authorities of Project Kendriya Vidyalayas 
adopt the fee structure fixed by Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan for Civil/Defence 
Kendriya Vidyalayas. 
Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan is als o contemplating revision of fee 
structure.  This will augment funds of project sector KVs also, as and when 
implemented.” 
II Irregular payment of Service Tax  
20. According to Audit, Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue, Government of 
India exempted cert ain services provided to or by educational institutions from service 

15 
 
tax with effect from 1 July 2012 (Notification No. 25/2012 -Service Tax dated 
20 June 2012). The notification clarified that exempted services inter alia includes any 
services which educational institutions ordinarily carry out themselves but may obtain as 
outsourced services from any other person. Ministry of Finance further clarified that by 
virtue of the entry in the negative list, it was clear that all services relating to education 
are exempt from service tax (circular no.172/7/2013 -ST dated 19 September  2013). 
These services also include hostels, construction, housekeeping, security services, 
canteen etc. 
21. Audit observed that in five institutes, services provided by the contractors 
towards rendering of services such as security, construction, housekeeping and 
catering, etc. were exempted from payment of service tax, but paid ` 12.42 crore as 
service tax.  
22. IIT Roorkee replied (April 2016) that services rendered by Bedi  & Bedi 
Associates and Sybex Computer Systems (P) Ltd. are not exempt under aforesaid 
notification. The payment of service tax to Peregrine Guarding Pvt. Ltd. has been 
discontinued from August 2015. BBAU replied (May 2016) that service tax payment was 
being made to Sri SaiNath Associates as the firm was providing manpower services and 
had discontinued payment of service tax on the bills of service providers pertaining to 
Sanitation & Security. 
23. IIM Ranchi replied (June/August 2016) that payment of service tax was 
discontinued from January 2016 and also stated that they have put up claim for refund 
of service tax already paid.IIT Patna stated (August 2016) thatHon’ble High Court (in 
CWJC No 16965 D ated 03 March 2016) has upheld the audit observation and directed 
Commissioner of Service Tax for refund of Service Tax to the concerned tax payers. 
Accordingly, the IIT Patna has asked to the service providers for refund of Service Tax.  
24. ISI Kolkata repli ed (October 2016/January 2017) that they had stopped the 
payment of service tax from February 2015 and have lodged (January 2016) a refund 
claim with the Service Tax Department. MSPI endorsed (November 2016) the views of 
ISI, Kolkata. 
 
25. In this regard, the Ministry in their background note submitted the following:- 
 
“BBAU has informed that it was not aware about the provision of service tax 
applicable. 
IIM Ranchi has informed that the payment was made due to inadequate 
awareness about relevant notification. 
 
26. The Ministry in their background note stated the following with regard to 
interpretation of the rules regarding exemption from service tax in their background 
note:- 

16 
 
“The MHRD is of the view that there are two different interpretations of the rules 
regarding exemption of the educational institutions from paying service tax by the 
CAG and the service tax authorities. And this has resulted into the dispute  
between the service tax authorities and the concerned educational institutions.” 
  
27. When asked as to  what action was taken by the Ministry, when according to the 
MHRD, there were two different interpretations of the rules regarding exemption of the 
educational institution from paying service tax by the CAG and service tax authorities  
and, the Ministry replied the following:- 
 
“The instructions in this regard are clear and need to be followed by all 
autonomous bodies. All Bureau Heads in the Department of Higher Education 
have been asked to obtain a Compliance Report, from the Autonomo us Bodies 
under their control, as per the format.” 
 
 
III Gujarat Vidyapith 
28. Gujarat Vidyapith (GVP) was founded by Mahatma Gandhi on 18 October, 1920 
and received the status of a deemed university under the UGC Act on 16  July, 1963. 
GVP is a public trust registered under the Bombay Public Trust Act, 1950. The Vice -
Chancellor and the Registrar are responsible for the day -to-day administration of the 
Vidyapith. 
 
29. In this regard, MHRD in their background note submitted the following:- 
“Gujarat Vidyapith is fully funded by the Government through UGC, however, it is 
privately managed. Since, it is fully funded by the Government, it is audited by 
CAG and Government’s rules apply in respect of promotion, reservation, etc.” 
 
30. Audit of GVP was conducted for the  period April 2009 to March 2016 during 
January-February 2015 and June 2016 to ascertain the extent of adherence to rules 
and regulations relating to appointment, promotion, pay fixation of Teaching and Non -
Teaching Staff working in GVP.  
A. Non follow up of norms of reservation.  
31. As per Audit, Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT ) issued (July 1997) 
instructions for implementation of Post Based Reservation (PBR) roster. Further, UGC 
from time to time had issued instructions to GVP to the follow reservation policy of GoI 
for the teaching and non -teaching posts and also to fill up t he backlog vacancies for 
SC/ST/OBC/Physically Handicapped (PH) to fulfill the statutory requirement of 

17 
 
GoI.Audit noticed that despite instructions of GoI  and UGC, GVP had not prepared and 
filled up posts as per PBR roster during 2009 -2016 for teaching and non -teaching staff 
resulting in less  representation of SC, ST and OBC in teaching staff. During 2009 -16, 
representation of SC and ST category in teaching  post of Professor was NIL and in the 
post of Associate Professor, the representation of ST category was NIL. GVP did not fill 
up the vacant teaching posts earmarked for the reserved category. 
32. In this regard, the Ministry in their background note submitted the following:- 
“Gujarat Vidyapith in their Action Taken Report dated 16 th September, 2017 has 
intimated that the Rosters for teaching and most of the non -teaching posts have 
been prepared as per the rules now.” 
33. In the Action Taken Report and compliance update on the C&AG report no. 12 of 
2017, the Vice-Chancellor, GVP submitted the following to the UGC:- 
“Please note that GV has already prepared Post Based Reservation Roster 
register and has given advertisements accordingly.” 
B.  Irregularities in Appointments and Drawl of pay scales for various posts 
34. Based on the information and records furnished to Audit and on test check of 
records it was observed that certain appointments made for various posts and pay 
scales given were not as per the UGC Regulations and GoI norms. 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Post 
Audit findings Management Reply 
1. Library 
Assistants 
GVP had made four appointments (February 
2011-June 2012) of Library Assistants through 
Direct Recruitment and on the date of 
appointment, the age of these appointed officials 
was beyond the maximum prescribed age as per 
Recruitment Rules. 
The GVP replied (April 2016) 
that the proposal for condoning 
the age limit for such 
employees is being sent to 
UGC. 
2. Reader 
(Bio Gas 
Research)  
Dr.Pradeep Acharya was appointed as  Reader 
in Bio Gas Research w.e.f 1 November 1993 but 
he did not possess Ph.D as required under the 
UGC Regulations. He had completed his Ph.D in 
26 May 2005. Thus, the appointment of 
Dr.Acharya as Reader w.e.f 
1 November 1993 was irregular. 
The GVP accept ed 
(September 2015) the 
observation and intimated 
(June 2016) tentative 
differential 8 amount of `  30.61 
lakh for the period up to March 
2016.  
The final action/recovery was 
yet to be taken by GVP. 
                                                           
8 Based on the due and drawn statement furnished by GVP on the basis of audit observations. 

18 
 
3. Reader 
(Archival 
Science) 
The One Man Commission 9 appointed to inquire 
into the irregularities in the administration of 
GVP had observed (March 2006) that 
Ms.Binduvasini Joshi was not qualified to even 
be a Lecturer but was appointed as Reader (AS) 
without having the requisite educational 
qualification a nd teaching experience. Hence, it 
adversely commented on her selection for the 
post of Reader (Archival Science). GVP had not 
sought relaxation from the UGC to appoint the 
candidate as Reader. 
The GVP replied (April 2016) 
that the case of Ms.Binduvasini 
Joshi has again been referred 
to UGC for grant of ex -post 
facto approval. 
The final action/recovery was 
yet to be taken by GVP. 
4. Assistant 
Librarian 
Smt. Raxaben Patel was appointed as Library 
Assistant w.e.f27 March 1983 and further 
promoted to the post of Assistant Librarian 
w.e.f1 August 1988 with the condition that the 
candidate shall have to pass the Masters of 
Library Science within two years which was the 
requisite qualification for appointment as 
Assistant Librarian. She cleared Master of 
Library i n 1990. Hence promotion as Assistant 
Librarian w.e.f 1 August 1988 was irregular as 
she did not possess required qualification at the 
time of promotion. 
Based on the advertisement, Smt. Raxaben  
Patel was recruited again as Assistant 
Librarian/Lecturer (teaching post) on 24 October 
1996. The appointment details were forwarded 
(November 1999) to UGC and the Commission 
stated (January 2002) its inability to accept the 
proposal on the ground that sh e did notpossess 
NET/SLET. 
On non -acceptance of the proposal by UGC, 
Smt. Raxaben Patel was reverted to previous 
held post of Assistant Librarian on which she 
was appointed on 1 August 1988 vide orders 
dated 13 June 2007 considering as lien. The 
appointment of Smt. Raxaben Patel as Assistant 
Librarian/Lecturer in October 1996 when she did 
not possess the required qualification was 
irregular. 
The GVP accepted 
(September 2015) the 
observation and intimated 
(June 2016) tentative 
differential amount of `  59.61 
lakh for the period up to March 
2016. 
The final action/recovery was 
yet to be taken by GVP. 
5. Head Clerk Shri. Prahlad G Parmar was appointed as a 
Junior Clerk cum typist on 3 January 1990 in the 
scale of `  950-1500. Subsequently based on the 
The GVP accepted 
(September 2015) the 
observation and intimated 
                                                           
9 UGC had appointed One Man Commission to look into the Financial and Administrative irregularities of the Gujarat 
Vidyapith. 

19 
 
Selection Committee decision, he was appointed 
as Statistical Assistant on 1 December 1997 in 
the scale of `  5,000-8,000 as against the 
prescribed scale of `  4,500-7,000. Thus, 
ShriP.G.Parmar was irregularly given higher 
scale in the post of Statistical Assistant.  
Further, GVP appointed (24 September 2004) 
him as Head Clerk from 3 January 1990 i.e. from 
the date of appointment as Junior Clerk with 
retrospective effect. The appointment to the post 
of Head Clerk with retrospective effect and 
consequential benefits of p romotions and 
MACPs given to ShriPrahlad G Parmar were 
irregular.  
(June 2016) tentative 
differential amount of `  13.25 
lakh for the period up to March 
2016. 
The final action/recovery was 
yet to be taken by GVP. 
6. Cashier  ShriJayeshChauhan, Cashier was drawing 
higher pay scale than the pay scales as 
prescribed by various pay commissions during 
the period 1 June 2000 and 31 December 2010. 
The irregular higher pay scale drawn by 
ShriJayeshChauhan was considered at par with 
the post of Head Clerk and hence was promoted 
to the post of Section Officer (1 January 2011) 
which was also irregular .  
The GVP accepted 
(September 2015) the 
observation and intimated 
(June 2016) tentative 
differential amou nt of `  11.56 
lakh for the period up to March 
2016. 
The final action/recovery was 
yet to be taken by GVP. 
7. Internal 
Auditor 
As per UGC instruction (May 1989)pay scale of 
non-teaching staff of the GVP were at par with 
the Central Pay Pattern with effect from 1 April, 
1989. ShriDineshbhai C. Rana, was appointed 
as Internal Auditor w.e.f 1July 1997on a higher 
pay scale than the pr escribed pay scale. The 
higher pay scale drawn for the period from 1 July 
1997 to 13 March 2003 while holding the post of 
Internal Auditor was irregular. 
The GVP accepted 
(September 2015) the 
observation and intimated 
(June 2016) tentative 
differential amo unt of `  18.92 
lakh for the period up to March 
2016. 
The final action/recovery was 
yet to be taken by GVP. 
8. Secretarial 
Services 
Ministry of Education & Social Welfare, 
(Department of Education), GoI prescribed 
(January 1978) pay scale of Stenographer i n 
GVP as `  380-700. Further as per UGC 
instruction (May 1989) non -teaching staff of the 
GVP are to be brought at par with the Central 
Pay Pattern with effect from 1 April, 1989: 
ShriSevantibhaiPanchal, Private Secretary, 
ShriShaileshTrivedi and Ms.Preeti S hah 
Stenographers were drawing higher pay scale 
other than the prescribed pay scale from the 
date of appointment till the date of audit. This 
further resulted in incorrect drawl of ACP/MACP  
The GVP accepted 
(September 2015) the 
observation and intimated 
(June 2016) tentative 
differential amount of `  15.72 
lakh, `  16.94 lakh and ` 11.74 
lakh respectively in respect of 
these three officials for the 
period up to March 2016. 
The final action/recovery was 
yet to be taken by GVP. 

20 
 
9. Lecturer Smt. Shashibala  Punjabi was appointed as 
lecturer in the PB - 3 ` 15,600-` 39,100 GP 6000 
in GVP on 26 September 2006. She had 
tendered her resignation (September 2006) as 
Assistant Professor (Selection Grade) in 
previous organisation to join the new post at 
GVP. 
GVP gave both pay scale and pay protection by 
fixing the pay in the Pay Band PB 4 `  34,700-
` 57,000 GP 9,000 w.e.f 26 September 2006 
which she was drawing in her previous 
organisation instead of fixing the pay in the scale 
of Lecturer of PB - 3 of `  15,600-` 39,100 with 
GP 6000 the scale of her appointment. Since her 
application for appointment as Lecturer in GVP 
was not routed through proper channel she was 
not eligible for protection of pay in terms of MoF 
OM No. 3379 -E.III(B)/65 dated 17June, 1965 
read with provisions of FR 22 -B. Hence she was 
not eligible for protection of pay and should have 
been placed in the scale which she was 
appointed i.e. as Lecturer PB -3 of `  15,600-
` 39,100 with GP 6,000.  
GVP accepted (September 
2015) the observation and 
intimated (June 2016) tentative 
differential amount of `  50.25 
lakh for the period up to March 
2016. 
The final action/recovery was 
yet to be taken by GVP. 
 
35. With regard to the performance of GVP, the Vice -Chancellor in his oral 
submission before the Committee stated the following :- 
 
“Meanwhile, I would like to inform all the hon. Members of the Committee that 
Gujarat Vidyapith has undergone the accreditation process. We have got ‘A’ 
Grade by the National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC). Then, 
there was a five year review committee by UGC. There we have also got very 
positive report as well as recommendations and suggestions pertaining to 2020 
when Gujarat Vidyapith is completing 100 years of its establishment.” 
 
36. MHRD was asked to intimate the action taken for recovery in respect of 
appointments made to the post of Asst. Librarian, Head Clerk, Cashier, Internal Auditor, 
Secretarial Services staff and Lecturer. The Ministry submitted the following:-  
“The Gujarat Vidyapith  has intimated that the matter of adjustment/recovery of 
the excess amount and taking administrative actions shall be done after approval 
of the Finance Committee followed by Board of Management, to be held during 
this month. Gujarat Vidyapith has been directed vide our letter No.5-5/2016 dated 
31.10.2017 to effect recovery in each case and report compliance to UGC by 
30.11.2017. In addition, UGC will also reduce grants to the extent of recoverable 
amount form the next grants.” 

21 
 
 
37. When asked about the finding s of the high level review committee formed to 
review all the cases from the angle of legal, administrative and other points, the Ministry 
submitted the following in their written replies:- 
 
“The Gujarat Vidyapith proposes to terminate the services of the employee who 
were not eligible as per the recruitment rules with the approval of their Board, the 
meeting for which is scheduled this month. 
Gujarat Vidyapith constituted a Review Committee (RC) to look into the cases 
objected by the Audit and to recommend  the action for rectifying them. The 
Review Committee’s Report was subsequently discussed in the Executive 
Committee Meeting of Gujarat Vidyapith. The concerned employees were issued 
show cause notices. Subsequently, after receiving and reviewing the repli es 
given by the incumbents, the Chairperson of the Review Committee was again 
asked to verify the details of the concerned employees separately in August 
2016. The Appellate Authority (Vice Chancellor) had a discussion with the 
Chairperson of the Review Co mmittee, later on, to discuss the issues raised by 
the concerned employees. 
For adhering to the Principle of Natural Justice, a High Level Committee (HLC) 
was formed on 29/04/2016, which included, Senior Advocate, High Court of 
Gujarat, Former Senior AO of  Office of the AG, Ahmedabad and Former Deputy 
Director, Gandhi Heritage Site Mission, Ministry of Culture, Government of India, 
New Delhi, with the intention to confirm the line of action to be taken in these 
cases. All the three members have given indepe ndent Report in individual cases. 
In the meanwhile, the Vice Chancellor and Registrar were called for discussions 
for the PAC Meeting, for oral examination on 27th September, 2017. There was a 
pre and post PAC Meeting Discussion with the Officials of the U GC/MHRD, at 
Delhi, during which all the cases were further discussed. Finally, Appellate 
Authority heard the incumbents in person on 5th October, 2017.” 
 
38. On being asked if the internal audit of GVP ever pointed out the irregularities in 
the appointments, the Ministry stated the following in their written replies:- 
“The Gujarat Vidyapith has stated that as per the Internal Control Systems in 
vogue, Gujarat Vidyapith has appointed a firm of Chartered Accountants for 
carrying out the Audit of all the Financia l Transactions / payments; and, whereas 
the Internal Audit Section has been entrusted with only pre -audit of the payment 
vouchers. However, this work is internally looked after in hierarchy from Clerks to 
Deputy Registrar -Administration, before approvals b y Competent Authorities. 
Gujarat Vidyapith is seriously contemplating to get the Administrative Audit of 
previous appointments/payments to the employees at a stretch and also conduct 
Administrative Audit subsequently, every year, in future. 
As per the Rule  236 (2) of General Financial Rules,2017,  the accounts of the 
Grantee Institution or Organization shall be audited by the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India under Section 14 of the Comptroller and Auditor General 

22 
 
of India (Duties, Powers and Conditi ons of Service) Act, 1971, if the Grants or 
loans to the institution in a financial year are not less than Rupees twenty five 
lakh and also not less than seventy -five percent of the total expenditure of the 
Institution. The accounts may also be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India if the Grants or loans in a financial year are not less than 
Rupees one crore. Where the accounts are so audited by the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India in a financial year, he shall continue to audit th e 
accounts for a further period of two years notwithstanding that the conditions 
outlined above are not fulfilled. In terms of provisions contained in General 
Financial Rules, Gujarat Vidyapith will request C&AG of India to conduct audit of 
Vidyapith on regular periodicity.” 
 
39. In this context, when asked What action had been taken against those 
responsible for making such appointments, MHRD replied the following:- 
“The Gujarat Vidyapith has stated that as the decision of appointment was made 
by the Members of the duly constituted Selection Committee, it is felt that no 
individual was responsible for the appointments. This is not acceptable. Gujarat 
Vidyapith has been directed to identify  officials responsible for making such 
irregular recommendations/selection and take appropriate administrative action 
against them. UGC will give the compliance report in this regard.” 
 
40. When asked what action had been contemplated against those responsible  for 
making such appointments, whether the Gujarat Vidyapith authorities were aware of the 
rules/regulations and prescribed qualifications for a post and what action the UGC/ 
Ministry of HRD had taken against the authorities/VC for violation of law/ favori tism, 
MHRD submitted the following:- 
“On the directions of M/HRD, UGC constituted a Committee to look into these 
affairs. Based on their report, Gujarat Vidyapith has been directed vide our letter 
No.5-5/2016 dated 31.10.2017 to take immediate corrective a ction including 
administrative action against the erring officials.  
Apart from that, the Ministry has asked the UGC to direct the Institute to 
terminate all illegal appointments. UGC will also recover the money spent on 
payment of salary to these illegal appointments by reducing future grants to 
Gujarat Vidyapith from next year.” 
 
 
 
  

23 
 
Part-II 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
 
1. The C&AG of India in their Report no. 12 of 2017 Compliance Audit Union 
Government (Civil)  brought out certain observations related to the Ministry of 
Human Resource Development. The Committee examined three Audit Paras viz. 
13.3, 13.7 and 13.11 of the said report pertaining to “Irregular Expenditure on 
Project Kendriya Vidyalayas”, “Irregular payment of Service Tax” and “Gujarat 
Vidyapith”.  According to Audit, in para 13.3, KVS incurred expenditure on the 
Project ‘Kendriya Vidyalayas’ (KVs) in violation of prescribed conditions  and as 
on 31 March 2016, `59.67 crore were due from 81 Project KVs of which 34 had 
been closed, rendering the possibility of recovery as remote. As per para 13.7, 
Four institutes under the Ministry of Human Resource Development (Indian 
Institute of Technology, Roorkee; Babasaheb Bh imrao Ambedkar University, 
Lucknow, Indian Institute of Management, Ranchi and  Indian Institute of 
Technology, Patna) and one institute under the Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation (Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata) made payment of 
service tax amounting to `12.42 crore on the outsourced services, although these 
services were exempted from payment of such tax.  According to Para 13.11, Post 
Based Rosters as per GoI  norms were not being maintained for the teaching and 
the non -teaching staff  and appointments in teaching and non -teaching posts 
were made in contravention of UGC/GoI instructions which resulted in 
overpayment of   `2.29 crore. The observations/ recommendat ions of the 
Committee on important issues are contained in the succeeding paragraphs. 
KVS-Recovery of dues 
2. The Committee note that Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan  (KVS), an autonomous 
body under Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD) establishes and 
manages Kendriya  Vidyalayas (KV)  and that this  scheme of KV had also been 
extended to the children of the employees of Public Sector Undertakings 
(PSUs)/Institute of Higher Learning (IHL) owned by Government of India (GoI), at 
their request  (i.e. PSU and IHL) , on the condition that all recurring and non -
recurring expenditure on running these Vidyalayas would be provided by the 

24 
 
sponsoring agencies.  The sponsoring authorities of some existing/ functioning 
and closed Project Vidyalayas defaulted in payment of dues resulting in 
recoverable amount of `24.57 crore in the year 2003. The Committee further note 
that where the sponsoring authority defaulted in mak ing the required payments, 
KVS diverted the Government grants to meet the expenditure towards pay & 
allowance of the staff and other recurring and non -recurring expenditure.  The 
Committee are disappointed to note that Despite C&AG’s Audit Report No. 4 of 
2004 and subsequently the Committee’s 46 th Report in 2006 -07 recommending 
that the matter may be resolved early by MHRD in coordination with other 
Departments of GOI with a view to recover the amount due to KVS, the 
recoverable amount increased to `58.60 crore as on 30.09.2018 . The Committee 
are of the opinion that along with the key concern of recovery of dues  which have 
been long pending , the matter needs to be looked at in the larger perspective of 
the importance of  Project Kendriya Vidyalayas in providing education to children 
of PSU employees apart from transferable employees of the Government of India 
as well as floating population and others including those living in remote and 
undeveloped locations of the country.  The Committee feel that  there are certain 
inter-linked issues such as amending the provisions of MoU entered into by KVS 
with the Project Authorities, running of KVs in the event of request for 
closure/closure by Project Authorities etc. which also need to be addressed to 
prevent further instances of default by project authorities. 
Accordingly, while acknowledging the various steps taken by MHRD to recover 
the amount due such as meeting the representatives of various ministries whose 
PSUs sponsored KVs, discussion with the Regional  Offices, interaction at 
personal level by officials of KVS with the concerned Project Authority etc. , the 
Committee recommend that for those Project KVs , functioning and closed , with 
whom KVS does/did not have an Memorandum of Understanding ( MOU), the 
Administrative Ministry of the Project Authority may be asked by the MHRD to 
either pay the amount due to KVS  or the sponsoring authority may be asked to 
transfer the infrastructural asset s where the KV is /was running i.e. the land, the 
building and all th e property contained therein to allow KVS to run the school in 
the larger interest so that KVS does not have to spend large amount of money on 
the same.  Further, those sponsoring authorities that the KVS has an MOU with, 
while the KVS/MHRD may in the first instance pursue the steps outlined above, if 

25 
 
the same do not yield any result, Clause 14 of the MOU which provides for 
referring the matter to an arbitrator may be resorted to.  
 
MoU Provisions 
3. The Committee note that KVS placed the matter of default by some project 
sponsoring authorities in payment of KVS dues before the Board of Governors  
(BOG), KVS in its 77 th meeting held on 20.06.2007. BOG, KVS decided signing of 
MOU with the Sponsoring project Authorities for Kendriya Vidyalayas under 
project sector and the same is being signed in respect  of all new project sector 
KVs opened after 2007.  The Committee also note that the BOG, KVS in its 79 th 
meeting on 26.06.2008 , approved the inclusion of a clause “The concerned 
Ministry, through its Sec retary shall also convey their concurrence to the MOU 
through a separate letter” and that KVS is taking the concurrence  in all cases 
before opening of new Project Sector KVs since then.  The Committee are of the 
view that it is imperative to amend/add provisions in MoUs of KVS with Project 
Authorities to strengthen KVS  in case of default by the latter . The Committee 
recommend that the MHRD/KVS may consider adding a clause in the MOU to 
provide for transfer of infrastructural assets to the KVS in case of repeated non-
payment of dues to KVS or closure of KV by Project Authority.  Further, while 
noting that KVS has drawn certain amendments/parameters in the existing norms 
prescribed for opening of new Project KVS such as a tripartite MOU involving the 
concerned Administrative Ministry which would stand as a financial guarantor to 
make payment of dues to KVS in the event of default by the Project Authorities 
for approval by the BOG, the Committee desire that the same may be done at the 
earliest and would like to be apprised of the status in this regard.   
The Committee note that KVS has emphasized on the issue of opening of escrow 
account by the Project Authorities who have opened Project KVs after the 
decision of BOG, KVS dated 20.06.2007  and that the Regional Offices have been 
directed to look into the issue of opening of the same  to ensure compliance 
immediately. The Committee are surprised that the compliance of the said 
provision was not monitored by KVS earlier and enjoin upon the KVS to ensure 
opening of the escrow accounts  by all Project KVs and also apprise the 

26 
 
Committee of the status thereof. The Committee further urge the MHRD/KVS to 
direct the existing Project KVs to also open the said accounts.  
Project Kendriya Vidyalayas in the event of closure 
4.  The Committee note that as on 30.09.2018, the amount recoverable from 34 
closed KVs stood at ` 15.03 crore and that in certain cases there has been no 
payment during the last 10 years. The Committee note that on closure of any 
Project KV, assets are retained by Project Authorities . The Committee also 
observe that the sponsoring authorities of 4 Project Sector Kendriya Vidyalayas 
have expressed their inability to operate the KVs .  Since there has been almost 
zero progress in recovery of amount due from the closed KVs, the Committee 
desire that as recommended earlier, the MHRD/KVS may ask the sponsoring 
authority to transfer the infrastructural assets to KVS  to run the school after 
assessing the demand in the area . The Committee further desire that State 
Governments and/or other Corporate entities in the area may be requested to 
contribute towards running of such schools under the ir Corporate Social 
Responsibility initiative. The wards of the new sponsoring authorities may be 
given priority in  admissions along with the resident children in the area. The 
Committee also desire that in the event that it becomes absolutely unviable to run 
these project schools, the MHRD /KVS may first consider taking over such 
schools urgently.  
Differential Fee structure in Project KVs 
5. The Committee note that the KVS has authorized project authorities to 
prescribe/charge a differential fee structure vis -à-vis civil sector KVs to enable 
them to gener ate additional resources for meeting their liabilities towards KVS. 
The Committee are of the opinion that this goes against the principle of parity and 
would not be fair for children of local inhabitants studying in the school who 
would be paying higher fees solely for the purpose of meeting the liability 
towards KVS by the Project Authority and recommend that whil e KVS as a whole 
may revise its fee structure, differential fees may be permitted only after adequate 
justification.  
Status of vacancies in KVs 

27 
 
6. The Committee note that the number of vacant posts in KVS stood at 11585 as 
on 01.08.2017. The Committee while observing that the direct recruitment process 
for 6205 posts has been completed and recruitment for another 6000 vacancies 
through Limited Departmental Examination has been assigned to CBSE by KVS, 
recommend that the sanctioned posts in all the schools under the KVS may be 
filled at the earliest. The Committee desire to be apprised of the status thereof. 
Irregular payment of Service Tax 
7. The Committee note that Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
Government of India exempted certain services p rovided to or by educational 
institutions from service tax w.e.f. 1 July 2012 vide notification which clarified 
that exempted services inter-alia include any service which educational 
institutions ordinarily carry out themselves but may obtain as outsource d 
services from any other person. It was further clarified that by virtue of the entry 
in the negative list, it was clear that all services relating to education are exempt 
from service tax including hostels, construction, housekeeping, security 
services, canteen etc. The Committee observe that four institutes under the 
Ministry of Human Resource Development viz. Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), 
Roorkee, Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University (BBAU), Lucknow, Indian 
Institute of Management  (IIM), Ranch i, and IIT, Patna irregularly paid almost ` 11. 
85  crore as service tax for services provided by contractors towards rendering of 
services of security, construction, housekeeping and catering etc. The Committee 
are dismayed to note that most of the institutes have pleaded lack of awareness 
of the provisio n of service tax applicable as the reason for payment of the same. 
The Committee are alarmed at the con fusing responses from the MHRD who have 
stated at one point that there are two different interpretations of the rules 
regarding exemption of educational institutes from paying service tax and at 
another that the instructions are clear and need to be followed by autonomous 
bodies. I t is essential for  the nodal ministry  to be  clear on  the prescribed  rules 
and regulations  in order to disseminate correct infor mation to the organizations 
under them. The Committee recommend that a cell may be setup in the Ministry 
which may coordinate with the Ministry of Finance and organizations under the 
Ministry for seeking such tax related clarifications. The Committee also 
recommend that the MHRD issue necessary instructions to all the organizations 

28 
 
under them to appoint a nodal officer, who may interact on behalf of the 
organization and seek clarifications from the above -mentioned cell on tax related 
issues. 
 
Gujarat Vidyapith (GVP) - Non-follow up of norms of reservation 
8. The Committee observe that despite instructions of Department of Personnel 
and Training (DoPT) , Government of India ( GoI) and University Grants 
Commission (UGC), Audit found that GVP had not prepared and filled up posts as 
per Post Based Reservation (PBR) roster during 2009-2016 for teaching and non -
teaching staff resulting in less than prescribed representation of SC, ST and OBC 
in teaching staff. The Committee note that after being pointed by Audit, GVP has 
since prepared PBR roster and has given advertisements for filling up the posts.  
The Committee would like to be apprised of the status thereof in all cadres in 
GVP. The Committee desire that the PBR should be regularly prepared and the 
recruitment process may be initiated well in advance to ensure that the vacancies 
are filled up at the earliest. 
Monitoring by Ministry and UGC 
9. The Committee note that in respect of both the issues of non- preparation and 
filling up of posts as per P ost Based Reservation (PBR) roster and irregularities 
in appointments and pay scales  given for various posts, o n the directions of 
MHRD, UGC constituted a Committee to look into these affairs. Based on its 
report, Gujarat Vidyapith was directed to take immediate corrective action 
including administrative action against the erring officials . The Committee 
observe that the Ministry has asked the UGC to direct the Institute to terminate all 
illegal appointments. The Committee observe that UGC will recover the money 
spent on payment of salary to these illegal appointments by reducing future 
grants to Gujarat Vidyapith  from next year. In this regard, the Committee are of 
the opinion that if a strong system of internal audit had been in place, 
irregularities of such kind would not have taken place. While acknowledging the 
steps taken by MHRD/GVP to strengthen the internal audit system, the Committee 
still feel that the MHRD need s to develop a mechanism to monitor all institutes 

29 
 
under its aegis on a regular basis so that such instances do not recur. 
10. The Committee note that test check of records by Audit revealed that certain 
appointments made for various posts viz. Library Assistants, Reader (Bio Gas 
Research), Reader (Archival Science), Library Assistant, Head Clerk, Cashier, 
Internal Auditor, Secretarial Services, Lecturer etc. and pay scales given were not 
as per the UGC Regulations and GoI norms. The Committee are shocked to find 
that in the appointments of teaching and non -teaching staff, deviations from the 
requirement of prescribed qualifications, age criteria etc. under the UGC 
guidelines and GoI norms were made  and that there was retrospective selection 
in the higher post, grant of higher pay scales and fixation of higher pay in 
contravention of UGC guidelines/regulations.  The Committee note that the 
Gujarat Vidyapith constituted a Review Committee (RC) to look into the cases 
objected by the Audit and to recommend corrective action. The Committee 
observe that GVP issued orders for discontinuation of services of certain posts 
and recoveries in respect  of those given higher scales. While recoveries in some 
cases has been started, in some, the employees concerned have filed special civil 
applications in the High Court of Gujarat and in one case, final directions from 
UGC are pending.  The Committee recommend that GVP may take the necessary 
steps to ensure timely recoveries in all the cases. The Committee also 
recommend that applications ma y be filed in the Court for speedy hearing  of 
cases that are subjudice so that the matters are not prolonged unendingly and 
reach their logical conclusion at the earliest. 
Grading and Review 
11. The Committee are shocked to note that the GVP was awarded ‘A’ Grade by 
the National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC)  and that a five year 
review committee  also gave a positive report to the Institute  despite the 
occurrence of s everal irregularities in the internal affairs of the Institute . This 
casts a shadow on the accreditation process of NAAC and UGC. The Committee 
find it pertinent to mention here that any accreditation which is authorized by the 
MHRD holds immense value for all the students and  their parents while looking 
for admission in Institutes/ universities , and it is imperative that such an 
accreditation may be done after stringent assessment of the performance of any 

30 
 
institute. The Committee recommend that a review of all the organizatio ns 
accredited by NAAC/UGC  may be carried out to verify that there functioning, 
appointments and all other aspe cts are in order. The Committee further 
recommend that the accreditation should only be valid for a prescribed period 
and renewal of the same may also be done after thorough review  of the 
functioning to ensure conformity with all the extant rules and regulations. 
Report of Committee of External Experts 
12. The Committee note GVP’s submission that all the cases are very old and 
require in -depth study of all the papers/records related to the appointments to 
identify the officials, if any, responsible for the irregularities made in these cases.  
GVP has appointed a Committee of External Experts to look into these aspects, to 
fix the responsibility.  The Committee has been asked to submit report in  respect 
of each appointment, by 30 th November, 2018.  The Committee desire to be 
apprised of the findings of the committee and the action taken thereon.  The 
Committee further desire that in case collusion and malafide action is 
established, penal action may be taken against the officials involved in the 
matter. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                         Mallikarjun Kharge 
13 December, 2018                                                                                 Chairperson                                                                                
22 Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)                                             Public Accounts Committee 
 
 