49

[auc ro asi LINK TO KASHMIR

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations!
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fourth Report
[167 Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(RAILWAY BOARD)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2015-16)

‘FORTY-NINTH REPORT

- SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

‘ . पु
हर . aw

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI



PAC NO. 2081 -

FORTY-NINTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2015-16)

"(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

[Action Taken by the Government on the Chservations/ Recommendations‘
of the Committee contained in their Fourth Report {16" Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(RAILWAY BOARD) —

Presented fo Lok Sabha on: QS OF Aolb

- Laid in Rajya Sabha on: ...a8..24. 2016

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
- .- April.2016/, Vaisakha 1938 (Saka) - ae


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS

INTRODUGTION

CHAPTER | REPO veces हनन ....................:......-

CHAPTER II*. | Observations/Recommendations which have been

accepted by the Government .....

CHAPTER IIl*  Observations/Recommendations which , the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
replies received from the Government........ ्ल्ज

CHAPTER IV* Observations/Recommepdations in’ respect of”

which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration नम जज

CHAPTER ४४ Observations/Recommendations — in respect of

which the Government have furnished interim
18198 ........। ७ "चलता ला eteerenerereecsaeaaeees

APPENDICES
Minutes of the Twénty“seventh Sitting of the Public
Accounts Committee (2015-16) held on 26" Aprit
2016 os ।

॥- Analysis of the Action Taken by the 00५शधाशाई on

Accounts Committee contained. in their Fourth
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

_ the Observations/Recommendations of the Public .

-uPAGE _
(ili)

iw)

*Not appended to the Nol appended fo the oyslosiyled copy ofthe Report SS of the Report


eS COMPOSITION OF THE PUpLt hi THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

16.
17.
18,
48.
20.

22.

s
“Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay, _

(2015-16)

Prof. KV. Thomas न Chairperson
MEMBERS |. .
, , LOK SABHA

hri S.S. Ahluwalia

fri Ranjit Singh’ Brahmpura 77 a
Shri Nishikant Dubey
Shri Gajanan Kirtikar

00.

"Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank*

” Shri Neiphiu Rio

Shri Dushyant Singh
Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
Dr. Kirit Somaiya

" Shri Anurag Singh Thakur ,
SI

ri Shivkumar Udasi
Dr. P, Venugopal
RAJYA SABHA
Shri Naresh Agrawat
Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
Shii Anil Madhav Dave
Shri Vijay Goel. -
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Shri Shantaram Naik .
Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy -
a "SECRETARIAT |,
Shri AK. Singh ~ Additional Secretary °
Shri T. Jayakumar - Director

Ms. Malvika Mehta - ~ Committee Officer



_ प्रा आर contained {ntheir-Fourth Report (Sixteenth |

INTROBUCTION

1, the Chaicman, Public Accounts Committee (2015-16), having been authorised |
by the Committee, do present this Forty-ninth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha} on ‘Action
. Taken by the Government oh the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
k Sabha).o1 :

ail-Link to Kastimir.

2. The! Fourth Report was presented fo Lok Sabha on 25" November, 2014, and
laid 0 Rajya Sabha on 25" November, 2014. Replies ‘of the Government to the
Observations/ Recommendations contained ‘in the Report were received on
12" October, 2016. The Public Accounts Committee considered and adopted the Forty-
ninth Report at their sifting held on 26" April, 2016. Minutes of the sifting are given at
Appendix-. , _

3. For| facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the

Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

5, An analysis of the action taken by the Governntent on the’ Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given at

Appendix-tt.

|

| .
NEW DELHi;. PROF. K. V. THOMAS,
26 April, 2016 . . Chairperson, -

6 Vaisakha, 1938 (Saka) हि हि ‘ Public Accounts Committee

ty



ee © GHAPTER-I a

REPORT
This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with action taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in

their Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha} on "Rail Link to Kashmir" based on C&AG
Report ‘No.19 of 2012-13 Union Government - Railways relating io the Ministry of

Railways (Railway Board).

2, The Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha and laid
in Rajya Sabha on 25.11.2014, It contained twelve observations/recommendations.
Acton Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Railways in respect of alf

the Observations/Recommendations and are broadly categorised as follows:,

(i) Observation/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
* Government

Recommendation Para Nos, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 11 and 12
Total: 10

Chapter It

(ii) Observation/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to”
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government

Recommendation Para Nos.Nit |
हि Total : Nil

Chapter II!

- (ii) ~~ Observation‘Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration

i - Recommendation Para Nos, 6 and 10
है _ Total:02

Chapter ४

(iv) Observation/Recommendations in respect of which the Government have
furnished interim replies—-!- "कन्‍न- ~~ fee ee

* Recommendation Para Nos, Nif . पु
हि हु Total : Nil
Chapter V

3. The detailed examination of the subject by the, Committee had revealed that for the
292 Kms fine Udharmpur-Srinagar-Baramulla Rail Link (USBRL) project, the most’

chatlenging project for the Indian Railways yet, in terms of constructing a new fine

7 -


a

a.

4 « oe ho. i

"altogether in-a rugged and hostile tetrain, tough weather conditions, sensitive security

‘situation and deficient logistics support, funds were provided from the:Consolidated-F und

“of India rather than from.the operating surplus of the Indian Railways. The-current outlay -

expected ‘for the project was © 20,000 crore (approx) as against the initial estimate of

“हैं. 1500-crore.- The-project was-being implemented by-three principal-agenciés—namely,

Northern ‘Railway Consttuction Organization (4200), Konkan. Railway Corporation Ltd.
{KRCL) and [rcon International Ltd. (IRCON). The 119 kms section from Qazigund to
Baramulla was completed and operationalised in three phases, the last phase being in
October 2009. The critica 168 Kris sections i.e. Udhampur-Katra which was scheduled

‘ to'be completed by 2003 was operationalised in July 2014. However, Katra-Qazigund

section was yet to be completed. The revised target date far completion of this section is
2017 as against the initial target of 2007. The Committee based on the Audit findings,
had analysed the toot causes for the time and cast overrun ‘of the projects and had given

their considered opinion.

4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board)
on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fourth
Report (Sixteenth, Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this
Report in the succeeding paragraphs, the Committee will now deal with the Action
Taken by the Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations made in

the original Report which either need reiteration or merit comments

. Recommendation Para No. 2,3 and 4

5. The. Committee in their, recommendation nos, 2, 3 and 4 had noted that the
Ministry of Railways initially approved alignments passing through Eastern Corridor with
steep gradient of 1:40 in March 1994 only to reverse the same in June 1995, in favour of
alignment in Western Corridor with a gradient of 1:100 based on the opinion given by
the consultant appointed by the Northern Railway who studied the Eastern Corridor

““alignment-and opined that the gradient of 1:40 is unsafe and technically not feasible.
- The Ministry had contended that in view of the difficult geology, inaccessibility of sites,

law and order problems and decision of the Government to start the work at the

“earliest, “ codal” provisions were “followed” fo. the “exten possible in the* “giver,

circumstances ‘as detailed geological investigations were’ not possible due’ to
inaccessibility of sites. Justifying the decision for an alignment through the Wéstem
carridor, the Ministry had further contended that factors like uninhibited, inaccessible

i


i हे नई RG - 4

ateas without approach roads, presence of active thrusts and faults, steeper hills and

a valleys-were ‘unavoidable even for the-alignment-through-Eastern-Gorridor also and

“hence it did not make any difference in the decision making process. The’ Committee
were of the considered opinion that réquisite fleld investigations and technicat feasibility

---an 7 studies: should have -beén-carried-out-before taking the critical decision on-selection of

the alignment, more so ‘considering the difficult and unexplored terrain of the région

The Committee had desired that the. Ministry should draw suitable lessons from the

factors that impeded the smoother implementation of the project of ‘National
_ Importance! and exercise due diligence in similar projects in future.
The Committee had noted that affer the project was declared as one of ‘National
’ [naportance' fo be funded by Government of India (2002), the Railways in December 2002
ie. even before the Final Location Survey which was. a pre-requisite for commencement
of. work, entrusted the execution of ‘Katra-Qazigund section (barring 5 km beyond Katra
assigned to Northen Railway) to two PSUs ie. IRCON and KRCL under the overall
control of NRCO. The Ministry had contended that conducting survey/investigation would
have entailed 2-3 years of delay and hence the works were to be commenced along with
- surveys and investigations by the contracted agencies. The Committee were concerned
fo note that the Ministry adopted this high risk strategy without an overall assurance of the
technical feasibility of. the alignment and had sought reasons for the same. The
Cammittee had desired that while continuing the present work, fresh and quick evaluation
of the new technical studies/consultations be carried out. ; |
The Committee were of the firm opinion that the problems that arose during the course of
the project could not be foreseen because of lack of initial'surveys, studies and planning,
” despite the Ministry's justifications to the contrary. The Committee had,! therefore,
exhorted the Ministry to exercise due .prudence and diligence for smoother

implementation of the remaining parts ‘of the project besides plugging the foopholes-

before undertaking similar challenging but important projects in future. The Committee
—had~further “desired: that alongwith -selection~of-proper—gradient,~ other ~factors—like

curvature, level of traffic, speed envisaged, stability, constructability, safety. and _

“maintenance of structure be accorded due weightage and consideration,



4

3 हर तु पे 4

The Ministry of Railways in the Action Taken Notes have submitted as under:

“For cecommertdation_ no. 2- The Physical separation between the two
proposed alignment along Eastern and Western Corridor was less than 100 Kms

'” Therefore, sudden abrupt variation in geology on a large scale is not expected
. ie. Eastern Corridor would be free of all faults and fisher and Western Corridor .
= will-be dotted-with-al-such-complexities=-Various- Geological features such. fault--———---

* railway line in this area.

and thrust are not localized and span the entire Himalayan range.. The features
of the regions, viz. the main frontal thrust (MFT), the main boundary thrust (MBT)

and Eastern alignment to more or less large extent, which is evident from various

‘and the main central thrust. (MCT) would have been intercepted by both Western -

reports ahd records of GSI. Therefore, both eastern and western cortidors were °-
. considered identical. from geological and technical consideration for laying a

Necessity of requisite field investigations and technical feasibility studies
before taking the critical decision on selection of the alignment of a new line to be
taken Up in an unmapped area devoid of approach roads is unquestionable and

undisputed. But the issue of extent to which various investigations can 087

carried out beforehand will always crop up whenever construction) of any New
Line in similar terrain -is planned and taken up as detailed; Geological,
Geophysical, Geotechnical, Hydrological studies require proper approach road
for transportation of equipment and technical manpower to different locations,
Further, there is 9 Serious limitation to the extent detail investigation can be
carried out in advance because of increase in horizontal and vertical distance: of
place of investigation from any accessible location along the alignment.
However, the suggestion of the Committee that requisite field investigations and
technical féasibility studies should be carried out before taking the critical
decision on ‘selection of the alignment, more so considering the difficult and
unexplored: terrain of the region has been noted. Accordingly, It has been
decided: that in case of all future New Lines projects in similar, inaccessible
terrain, Final Location Survey will be carried out before project is sanctioned
Detailed geological and geo-technical studies will be part of FLS and completed

. to the extent possible well in advance at the time of preparing the DPR and

-before commencement of construction. The assistance of, experienced
: consultants/foreign Consultants and Institutions if required will be: taken at that

stage : हि '

For recommendation no. 3- There is no.denying the fact that completion ‘of all

investigations before sfart of execution was not possible because of virtual
inaccessibility of majority of the stretches and above all there was a serious

‘limitation of-the éxtent of Geological;Geotechnical investigations which could-be-

carried 00-10 advance due to topography besides that if was very time
consuming: due to difficult hilly terrain, surrounded by steep hills, infested with

“ wild animals and extraordinary difficult !aw & order situation, inaccessibility,
_fransporting men _and machinery in‘these locations. But the prevailing potitical

necessitated early commencement of the work as: soon as investigations. of a
stretch were completed., The observation of the Committee that Ministry adopted
this high risk strategy without an overall assessment of the technical feasibility of
the alignment has been noted. However, it is pointed out that in case of the

“situation coupled with security issues and expectation of thé’ public of J&K ~ a


4 . 5 5 % x
project in such terrain complete investigation of all kind to have zero risk strategy
is difficult to be achieved., The question, as, to. what-extent it is possible to be. ,
‘done in .advahce will vary from project to project. Under all circumstances, in
similar project some ‘decision will have to be necessarily taken as. the work
progresses. Notwithstanding the limitation, in future it will be the endeavour to
adopt a near zero risk strategy. है .

new technical studies/consultations while continuing the present work has been
noted. Necessary action’in this regard has already been teen. Local minor
realigaments have been carried out at cértain stretches on the alignment on
Katra-Banihal section, after the acceptance of Expert committee report of 2009
and on the basis of M/s. Amberg report on alignment in March 2010. The
alignment has been refined to cross the thrusts and faults at more or less

perpendicular to its axis.

The’ work of geotechnical investigations between Km. 61 to 91 being
executed by M/s. IRCON has been ‘targeted for completion by June 2015.
Detailed planning has been done based’ on geo-physical and geotechnical
investigation to complete the project in 2017-18. international Consultants, Mis.
(TASCA alongwith IIT Delhi & IISc Bangalore have been engaged. to authenticat
the slope stability of the location of Anji Bridge. KRCL has engaged reputed
International Consultants (M/s TASCA) to carry out analysis of stability of slopes
of Chenab Bridge and during the course of stability analysis, lIT, Delhi & IISC
Bangalore who will be closely associated to provide necessary assistance to
ensure that all aspects related to stability of slopes are covered during analysis.

For Recommendation- 4- The reason for nor carrying out detail
Geological/Geophysical, Geotechnical specification before commencement of
. work has been explained in reply to observation No. 3. However, the suggesting
of the Commitieé to exercise due prudence and diligence for smoother
implementation of remaining part of the project has been noted. In this regard
action has already been taken. International and national consultants for DDC
(detailed design consultancy), slope stability analysis, design of bridges and
proof checking engaged by PSUs are f° follow: ' oo हि
{a) DDC consultants are Mis. Lombardi, M/s. Amberg, M/s. Geodata, M/s.
“Bernard, M/s. Geo Consult ete. . :

(b) Design of bridges by RITES, WsP (Fintand), LAP (Germany) ete.
(c) Proof checking of Bridges by IIT Roorkee, URS (UK), Flint and Neill (UK)
awe oe BIOL मु a+ s evvntan + ~ wee 2 जन

(9). 9078 Stability Analysis by IIT Delhi, isc Bangalore, TSCA, USA.

As regards, .all future New Lines projects in similar inaccessible location,

vee the alignment will be decided.based on selection.of proper gradient, other factors
‘like curvature, level of traffic, speed envisaged, stability, constructability, safety

and: maintenance of structure. And along the alignmeént decided detail Final:

Location Survey will be carried out before. project is sanctioned, Detailed

geological and geo-technical studies will part of FLS and completed well in

advance fo maximum possible extent at the time of preparing the DPR and

Suggestion of the committee to carryout fresh and quick ‘evaluation of the



‘ . 6 हि हि
i 4 a 2 8

before “commencement of construction. The assistance of experienced
consultants/foreign Consultants and Institutions, if required, will be taken at that

stage.

he_Committee..note, that the Ministry have admitted that necessity of
|

requisite fietd investigations and technical feasibility studies before taking the
critical decision on selection of the alignment of a new line fo be taken up in an
_ unmapped area devoid of approach roads is unquestionable and undisputed. The
Ministry have further staied that it has been decided that in case of all future New
Lines projects in similar inaccessible terrain, Final Location Survey will be carried
out before project is sanctioned. . Detailed geological and geo-technical studies
. will be part of FLS and completed to {he extent possible well in advance at the
time of preparing the DPR and before commencement of construction, The
assistance of experienced consultants/foreign Consultants and Institutions if
required. will be taken at that stage. The Committee find it shocking on the part of
the Ministry to have commenced work on the project without carrying out detailed
groundwork only because of political reasons and expectations of the people.
‘The Committee are also not convinced with the arguments of the Ministry that

‘completion of all investigations before start of execution was not possibie
i

nos i है
because of virtual inaccessibility of majority of the stretches and serious

limitation of the extent of Geological, Geotechnical investigations which could be

_tartied out in advance. While understanding the difficulties being faced by the

Ministry in terms of terrair and prevailing conditions, the Committee feel that

since the Ministry have decided henceforth, to carry out the final location survey

and detailed investigations and appoint international consultants the same could
|

have been done earlier also. before embarking upon such an important project of

huge magnitude. The Gommittee desire a detailed explanation from the then and


=f
aS

4 4 7 en * ne

present officials resporisible for commenceémentfexecution of work without

proper studies and surveys resulting in avoidahle and inordinate delays in the

project. The Committee hope that the Ministry would adhere to their decision of:

oon -~Garrying out complete and detailed investigations -before start of future projects

Recommendation Para No: 5

i

8.

The Ministry had contended that the progress of the work could not be termed as

poor performance as the target set was far from realistic and 10 commensurate with °
ground realities. The Committee did not accept the contention of the Ministry stating that

the responsibility of fixing targets and gauge the ground realities in a difficult and hostile
terrain lied with the Ministry and the Ministry's statement that they were going to engage
renowned consultants for the purpose implied that they did not do so earlier. The ingress

of water and collapse of tunnels, the changes in the design of bridles non finalization of

drawings, ete. which also delayed fhe completion of the project depicted deficient

planning and lack of expert consultations. The Committee were of the firm view that had
the project Authorities and implementing agencies resorted to prudent planning including:
consultations with renowned experts at the very beginning itself, it would have been
possible fo minimize uncertainty an account of constructability thereby paving the way for

smoother implementation of the project. The Committee had impressed upon the Ministry

fo draw suitable lessons from the shortcomings/impediments/lacunae that surfaced in the

course of the execution of the project and take requisite remedial measures to complete
the ‘unfinished stretches as per the revised target date -besides resorting to adequate

precautionary measures to minimize delay in future projects. Sy

The Ministry of Railways in the Action Taken Notes have submitted as under:

There's no denying the fact that completion of all investigations before

__start of execution was not possible because of virtual inaccessibility of majority of
“the stretches and above all there was a serious limitation of the extent of

Gedlogical, Geotechnical investigations which could be carried out in advance
due to topography besides that it was very time consuming due to difficult hilly
terrain,. surrounded by steep hills, infested with wild animals and extraordinary.

- - difficult law & order situation, inaccessibility, transporting men and machinery in

these locations. But thé prevailing political situation coupled with security igsues
and expectation of'the public of J&K necessitated early commencement of the
work as soon as investigations of a stretch were completed. The observation of
ihe Committee that Ministry adopted this high risk strategy without an overall
assessment of the technical feasibility of the alignment thas been noted.


4 8 é &

However, it is potnted out that in case of the project in such terrain complete
_ . Investigation of all kind to have zero risk strategy is. difficult to be achieved. The
question as to what extent it is possible:ta be done in advance will vary from
project to’project. Under all circumstances, in similar project some decision wit!
have fo be necessarily taken as the work progresses. Notwithstanding the
limitation, in future it will be endeavour to adopt a.near zero risk strategy.

| Suggestion of the committee to carryout fresh and quick evaluation: of the
new technical studies/consultations while ‘continuing the present work has been
10180 Necessary action-in this regard’ has already been taken. Local minor
realignments have been cariied out’af certain stretches. on the alognment on
Katra-Banihal section, after the acceptance of Expert committee report of 2009
and on the basis of M/s. Amberg report on alignment in. March 2010. . The
alignment has been refined fo cross the thrusts and faults at more or less
perpendicular fo its axis

The work of geotechnical investigations between Km.61 to 91 being
executed by M/s. IRCON has been targeted for completion by June 2015.
Detailed planning has been done based on geo-physical and geotechnical
inyestigatian to complete the project in 2017-18. International Consultants, M/s
ITASCA alongwith IIT Delhi & tISc Banglore have been engaged to authenticate ©
the slope stability of the Jocation of Anji Bridge. KRCL has engaged reputed
Intemational Consultants (M/s. [TASCA) to carry out analysis of stability of  *
slopes of Chenab Bridge and during the course of stability analysis, IIT, Delhi &
॥56 Bangalore who will be closely associated to provide necessary assistance to
ensure that all aspects related to stability of slopes are covered during analysis.

The reason for not carying out detail Geological/Geophysical,
Geotechnical specification before commencement of work has been explain to
reply to observation No. 3 However, the suggestion of the Committee to exercise
due prudence and diligence for smoother implementation of remaining part of the
project has been noted. in this regard action has already been taken
international and national consultants for DDC (detailed design consultancy)
slope stability analysis, design of bridges and proof checking engaged by PSUs
are as follows.

| {a) _ DDC consultants are M/s Lombardum Ms. Amberg, M/s. Geodata,
' M/s. Bernard, M/s Geo Consult etc. ,

(b) Design of bridges by RITES, WSP (Finland), LAP . (Germany) etc

. (c) Prof checking of Bridges by IIT.Roorkee, URS (Uk), Flint and Neill
ene (UR ete, : --- a -- जलनओ जिन -

(d) Slope Stability Analysis by JIT Delhi, 186 Bangalore, ITASCA, USA.

As regards, all future New Lines projects in similar inaccessible location, -
- the alignment will be decided. based on selection of proper.gradient, other factors
; like curvature, level of traffic, speed envisaged, stability, constructability, safety
fo and maintenance of structure. And along the alignment decided detail Final
Lecation Survey will be carried out before project is sanctioned. Detailed ५
geological and geo-technical studies will be part of 11.8. and completed will in
advance fo maximum possible extent at the time of prepasing the ,DPR.and


boo. ५ : poo 8 4g e

“before commencement of construction. The assistance of. expetienced

consultants/oreign Consultants and Institutions, if required, will be taken_at that _.

stage

40. The Committee had observed that Leg Il of USBRL project i.e. Katra-

Konkan Railway Corporation Ltd, (KRGL) and Ircon International Limited (IRCON) .

in 2002 with scheduled date of completion in 2007, since revised to December,
2017. The Committee in their recommendation had, therefore, itnpressed upon the
Ministry to draw suitable lessons from the shortcomings that surfaced in the
course. of the execution of the project and take remedial measures to complete

the unfinished stretches as pet the revised target date, besides resorting to

‘ .
adequate precautionary measures to minimize delays in’ future projects. The

डे

Cominittee nate from the reply that the Ministry has already taken necessary
action and detailed planning has been done based on geophysical and
geotechnical ‘investigation by M/s IRCON, authenticated by international

’ consultants Mis [TASEA alongwith IIT Delhi and IISC Bangalore to complete the
project by 2017-18. The Committee express their satisfaction that Ministry has
agreed that in all future hew lines projects, detailed geological and geotechnical
studies will be completed well in advance at the DPR stage with assistance of
experienced consultants/ foreign consultants and institutions, if required well

- before the commencement of construction. The Committee hope and expect that

the. project would now be completed within the revised timeline of 2017-18 and

would like to be apprised of the status of work. The Committee desire that in

order to ensure the completion of the project as per schedule, the Ministry should

poy
designated officer at Railway Board level and apprise the Committee accordingly.

monitor the progress ‘of this particular leg of fhe project on monthly basis by a

_ --. Qazigund_was. awarded. fo, Northern Railway Construction Organisation (NRCO),___


» 10,

Recommendation Para No. 6 है
41. The Committee had noted ‘that the USBRL project was fo be completed by August . ~~
2007 and to ensure timely completion it was divided into three legs. Though Leg I and
Leg Ill were completed and operationaliséd, Leg H 1.8. Katra-Qazigund was awarded to
me» NRCO,.KRCL..and_IRGON..in-November/December. 2002_with. the. scheduled date of ____
completion in August, 2007 and the project was yet to be completed. The Ministry had
attributed several reasons for the slow progress of different stretches which infer-alia °
included inclement weather; unprecedented rain, snowfall and floods; frequent disruptions
in transportation of construction material; non-availability of local skilled manpower
disruption of work by the locals on minor issues; kidnapping and killing of an Engineer
affecting the morale of the workers; delay in land acquisition and forest clearance etc. As
such, the target date for the completion of the Katra-Qazigund section has been revised
to December 2017.. The Committee had stated that the plea of delay in getting land
acquisition and forest clearance was not tenable for the project had remained unfinished.
The Committee had, therefore, impressed upon the Ministry to take up the matter with the
State Government and also at other appropriate levels to timely obtain’ the land
acquisition and forest clearance so that the progress of the project was'not impeded. The
Committee had also desired that the Railways should resort fo a confidence building
Tapport with the local people so that the construction work is not disrupted on trivial
issues , |
42. The Ministry of Railways in the Action’ Taken Notes have submitted as under |
- "Periodical meetings are’ being held at various levels with State

Government to resolve issues pertaining fo land acquisition, forest clearance
earth/mud dumping, construction of approach soads ete.

As far as the question of building rapport with the local people-to ensure
uninterrupted construction work is concerned, the suggestion of the Committee
has been noted. .PSUs have been requested through MOU to involve ‘local
‘contractors, focal population etc. in carrying out construction work and CSR
activities on the projec

ह 13. + The Committee in their recommendation had desired ‘effective interactions
with State Government to expedite land acquisition and forest clearance’ so that
progress of work of the project was not impeded: The Committee had also.

+ desired fhe Ministry to initiate confidence ‘building measures with local people to

ensure uninterrupted construction. The ‘Comniittee a’e- unhappy. to note that the


AL.

i 4 to. पु 4

Ministry have not-given any specific reply on the status of the land acquisition

, and forest clearance 88 a result of the efforts made by thent. The Ministry have

also not replied on the outcome of the méasures being undertaken to involve

| . पु
—_ ~-fosal-poputation so’as to ensure unimpeded construction work on-the-project.--

The Committee would like to: be ‘apprised of the status of fand acquisition, forest

and other clearances and the CSR activities within two month of the presentation

of this report.

Recommendation Para No.9

14.

The|Committee had noted that the initial cost of the. project was estimated at

= 1500 rare in the year 1994-95 which was revised to T 3077.23 crore in 1999 and
further revised to हैं 9341.44 crore in 2010. As of September 2013, the estimate had

touched & 20, 000 crore (approx) based on the rates of 2010 and the Ministry were stilt

uncertain about the final cost which was likely to escalate by few more thousand crores of

rupees by the time-the-entire project is completed. The Ministry had reasoned that in a

project of this magnitude and in such complex topographicat and geological formations, it

was not possible to ascertain all the project features as underground construction is
always full of uncertainties/surprises. As the inadequacy of the project had heavily
conttibuted to time and cost over-runs, the Committee had exhorted the Ministry to guard:

‘ against complacency and take requisite measures fo prepare the estimates in sucha way (५
as to provide a reliable basis for cast control and project monitoring. so that the final cost:
. |
of the project is ascertained and not allowed to inflate imprudently . The Committee had

also desired that effective advance measures be taken in cost estimation of similar

' challenging projects in future.

415.

The Ministry of Railways in their action taken.reply stated as under:

" The detailed estimate of Katra-Banibal section is being framed by the PSUs
{(IRCON & KRCL). incorporating all components. As! regard suggestion of the __
committee fo take effective advance measures fo be faken in cost estimation of
similar challenging projects in future has been noted.”


. : ; है न न 12 पु - Lo. पु
16. The Commitiee note that USBRL project is the most challenging project
"taken up by indian Railways since independence. The strategic importance of the _ S
project to-J&K and to the nation as a whole cannot be over stated and rightly so it
—.was-decfared-as-a-projeat-of national-importance: However,-the-project suffered ~
from, inefficient planning resulting in inordinate delays in Implementation with
, time and exorbitant cost escalation. The. section from Udhampur to Katra was
‘compieted in July 14, more than 11 years behind schedule, the section from Katra
to Banihal.scheduled to be completed by August 2007 is yet to be completed.
The initial cost of the project estimated at Rs. 1500 crore in 1994-95 has now
- touched Rs. 20,000 crores as of September 2013 i.e. an increase -of more than
300% based on the rates of 2010. The Committee further note that the Ministry.is
still uncertain about the éinal cost of the project. The Committee had in their
recommendation exhorted the MInistry to prepare the estimates on realistic basis
and for cost control and project monitoring so that the final cost.of the project is

not atlowed to inflate imprudentiy. The Commitiee are unhappy to note the casual

reply of the Ministry that the detaifed estimate of Katra Bahihal section is being
framed by the PSUs (IRCON & KRCL) incorporating all components and that the
suggestion of the Committee has been noted. The Committee also express
displeasure that Ministry is not serious. about containing cost escalation and has

not spelt out the measures in this regard. The Committee are disappointed that

the cost of the project which is approximately 13 times the original cost and no

steps have been taken by the Ministry in ensuring that cost estimation in other

similar projects is accurate and monitoring is adequate and strict. The Committee

desire the Ministry to set up a robust monitoring mechanism: to ensure no further

. cost escalation in the project and that itis completed on time f.6.2017-18.


“13

Recommendation ParaNa.10 °° ...”- , --

'17. The Committee were unhappy to ‘hote that the general planning faiture on the
part-of Railways had contributed to a 1088 of T 3258.92 crore as of 2010 on account of

Contractor's claims (& 1514.40 crore); foreclosure of contracts and award of the balance

work at higher rates (© 1122.63 crore); loss on account of already executed assets ©

281,42 crore); expenditure on rectification of defective warks 194.37 crore}; delayed

approval/midway revision of drawings/design (र 62.34 crore); loss on account of idle

manpower/machinery ( 57.24 crore); and overpaymentfnon recovery of Railway dues
(९ 26.52 crore). Expressing their sérious displeasure over the above factors that

resulted in avoidable losses/claims in the course of execution of the’ projéct, the

- Committee had impressed. upon the Ministry to fix responsibility and put in place a

robust mechanism for éffective planning and project monitoring so as to ensure that

such losses/claims da not recur.

18. The Ministry of Railways in their action taken reply stated as under.”

“As far as the fixing of responsibility is concerned, it is submitted that various
decisions were taken over a period of time collectively at various levels in
Railways, Railway Board and PSUs. These decisions were taken based on the
state of knowledge available and advice of consultants keeping in view the
adverse conditions|and best available options in the -time frame available and
keeping the best’ interest: of the project delivery within. targets set and

organizational capabilities and resources

19. The Committee had expressed their. serious ‘displeasure over avoidable

losses/claims to the tune of हैं 3258.92 crore in the course of exeeution of the

project and had desired the Ministry to fix responsibility and put in place a

mechanism to avert such losses/claims. The Committee are aghast [9 note the ‘

callous reply of the Ministry that decisions were taken collectively over a period

of time at various levels in the Railways, ‘Railway Board and PSUs. Further, the ~

eer oe

Ministry has. ignored the other observation of the Committee to set up a

monitoring -mechanism. “The Commitiee -deprecate imprudent planning and हु

deficient project monitoring which resulted in huge losses/delays and feel that .

Ministry has learnt no lessons from these lapses.

The Committee, therefore,


3 a4 4 . -
7 x i ४ 4

desire that collective responsibility should be fixed against.all those responsibie

for taking such decisions and action taken against the concerned officials.

wee a eee 2 pe

i
3

” PROF. K. ५, THOMAS,

NEW DELHI; , |
26" April, 2016 Chairperson,
. 7 Public Accounts Committee
Loe ।

- 06 Vaisakha, 1938 {Saka}


+

APPENDIX-T.

MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SEVENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC PUBLIC:
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2015-16) HELD ON 26” APRIL, 2016.

The.Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1615 hrs. on 26" April, 2016 in Room No.

51", Parliament House, New Delhi. ~~

PRESENT

“Prof. KV: Thomas PTE os Chairperson 7 एप पाण ne
MEMBERS = रा
LOK SABHA

. Shri Nishikant Dubey
Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank"
Shri Neiphiu Rio :
Shri Dushyant Singh
Shri Janardan Singh Sigrival

9. Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi

10. Dr. Kirit Somaiya

44. Shri Anurag Thakur

42. Dr. P. Venugopal

en थे था के YN

RAJYA SABHA
43: Shri Naresh Agrawal
14, Shri BhubaneswarKalita’*,
15. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

4. ShriA.K. Singh - Additional Secretary
2, Shri 1. Jayakumar - Director

3... Shri Paoliental Haokip - Deputy Secretary.
4. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary

Soo |S


; 2 _ क्र .
REPRESENTATIVES PROM THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND o
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA

4. Dr. P. Mukherjee . दर Deputy C8&AG (Commercial)

2, Ms.K.Ganga ५... ५. ‘DapulyCRAG

3, Ms, Mala Sinha - Director General of Audit

4. + Shii KufiarT Vithayathil~--~=-~Director General गा Audit (Commercial)...

5. Shri Manish Kumar - Principal Director of Audit (PAC)

2. At the outset, the Chairperson, PAC welcomed the Members to the Sitting of
the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft Reports for
consideration: है ‘

{i) ३2000. ३2000. #8७४ XAXX

(i) XK 2000. 600 XXXX

(ii) Draft Report था the Action Taken by. the Goverfment णा
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 4" Report (i6" Lok Sabha) on

“Rall Link to Kashmir
(श 2000. UKE XXX XXXX

(v) ३05. 20606. 2000. 2000

3. The Chairperson invited suggestions of the Members on the above mentioned
draft Reports. After discussing the contents of these draft Reports, the Committee
adopted the draft Reports at Sl. No (i) with minor changes/modifications. The
Committee then adopted the’ draft Reports at Sl. No. (ii), Gi), (४) & (0) without any |

changes/modifications . |

4. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalise these Reports in the light
of verbal discussion and consequential changes arising out. of factual verification by

the Audit and preserit the same to Parliament.

The Committee then adjourned, adjourned.


APPENDIX-It
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction}

. ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
" CONTAINED IN THEIR FOURTH REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

=== ——-Totaltnumber of Observations/Recommendations ~~ 12° © te eee
* (ii) Observattons/Recommendations ofthe Committee ‘Total : 10
which have been accepted by the Government: Percentage: 83.33%

Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 11 and 12

(iii) -Observations/Recommendations which the है Total : Nif
Comniittee do not desire to pursue in view of =~ Percentage: 0%
- the reply of the Government: ‘ ह
- Para No. को...
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of Toial : 02
which replies of the Government have not been Percentage: 16.66%

accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration: Para Nos. 6 and 10 -

(v)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of Total: Nit

which the Government have furnished interim replies: Percentage: 0 %

Para No. Nit
i


42

A

[Action Taken by the. Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fourth. Report
(160 Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(RAILWAY BOARD)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2015-16)

FORTY-NINTH REPORT
en

"SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI