96
MANAGEMENT OF NARCOTICS
SUBSTANCES

MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2017-18)

NINETY-SIXTH REPORT
LL

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

सत्यमेद aad

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 213(

NINETY-SIXTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2017-18)

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

MANAGEMENT OF NARCOTICS

SUBSTANCES

MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

March, 2018/ Chaitra, 1940 (Saka)


ULUNIENIS

PAGE
NO.

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2017-18

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 2016-17

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2015-16

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2014-15

COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE Ill OF PAC (2017-18

COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE Ill OF PAC (2016-17

INTRODUCTION
[PART -l
CHAPTER -1
INTRODUCTION
| [introduction 5&<ककआ$ऑ ा ं$े$े$टेटे0 |

Sanctioned Strength and Persons-in-position

Performance of the Narcotic Substances Management in India

IV Ambiguity in the Opium policy

Vv. Excess ineligible licenses issued to cultivator due to violation
of License Polic

vi Continuous downfall in number of Cultivators, harvested area,
harvested villages and commensurate Non Tax Revenue and
Non-achievement of required opium production

Vil Anomalies in the Opium policy

Vill Loss of Opium crop due to exorbitant ploughing back |_|

[x | Payment made to persons other than cultivators

x Long pendency of Court cases

Xl Preventive activities, Illicit Poppy cultivation

Xll Internal control audit and Monitoring

i ART
Observations/recommendations of the Committee

APPENDICES

Minutes of the sixth sitting of the Sub-Committee III of Public
Accounts Committee (2016-17) held on 9 November, 2016.

Minutes of the ninth sitting of the Sub-Committee Ill of Public
Accounts Committee (2017-18) held on 9 November, 2017.

Minutes of the twelfth sitting of the Sub-Committee Ill of Public
Accounts Committee (2017-18) held on 4 December, 2017.

IV. | Minutes of the sixteenth sitting of the Sub-Committee Ill of
Public Accounts Committee (2017-18) held on 22 March, 2018.
V. | Minutes of the twenty-second sitting of the Public Accounts

Committee (2017-18) held on 23 March, 2018.



COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2017-18)
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

2 Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay

3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey

6 Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
7 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

8. Smt. Riti Pathak

9. Shri Neiphiu Rio”

10. Shri Abhishek Singh

11. . Prof. Ram Shanker

12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya

13... Shri Anurag Singh Thakur

14... Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi

15. Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Naresh Agrawal

17. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi

18. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
19. Shri Mohd. Ali Khant

20.. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy*
21. Shri Ajay Sancheti

22. Shri Bhupender Yadav

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh - Additional Secretary
2. Shri T.Jayakumar = - Director

3. Smt.Bharti 5. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary

* Ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon acceptance of his resignation from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 22
February, 2018.
1 Elected w.e.f. 29 December, 2017 in lieu of vacancy caused due to retirement of Shri Shantaram Naik.

ई ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 18 August, 2017 and
re-elected w.e.f. 29 December, 2017.


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

Prof. K.V. Thomas - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
Shri Nishikant Dubey
Prof. Richard Hay
Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Smt. Riti Pathak
Shri Neiphiu Rio
' Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
Shri Abhishek Singh
Dr. Kirit Somaiya
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi
Dr. P. Venugopal

0 9० ND ए Fw DN

Bee ee
की की YNrS

RAJYA SABHA
16. Shri Naresh Agrawal
17. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
18. * Shri Bhupender Yadav
19. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
20. Shri Shantaram Naik
21. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
22. Shri Ajay Sancheti

§ Elected w.e.f. 09.08.2016 vice Shri Vijay Goel, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f. 05.07.2016.


cP IND A # ४ dD

moe
SEs

13.

16.
17.
18,
19.
20.
21.
22.

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS LUMPOSTTION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
SE ME 7 BLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2015-16)
Prof. K.V. Thomas - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura
Shri Nishikant Dubey
Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank"
Shri Neiphiu Rio
Shri Dushyant Singh
Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
Dr. Kirit Somaiya
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
Shri Shivkumar Udasi
Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA
Shri Naresh Agrawal
Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
Shri Anil Madhav Dave
Shri Vijay Goel
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Shri Shantaram Naik
Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2014-15)
Prof. K.V. Thomas - Chairperson

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri S.S. Ahluwalia

Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura
Shri Nishikant Dubey

Shri Gajanan Kirtikar

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank"
Shri Neiphiu Rio

Shri Dushyant Singh

11. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
12"t, Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi

13. Dr. Kirit Somaiya

14. Shri Anurag Thakur

15", Dr. P. Venugopal

po NA w RW DN

RAJYA SABHA
16. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
17. Shri Vijay Goel
18. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya
19. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
20. Shri Shantaram Naik
21. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
22. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh

“" Elected w.e.f. 3% December, 2014 vice Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy who has been appointed as Minister w.e.f. 9" November, 2014,
tt Elected w.e.f. 3% December, 2014 vice Shri Jayant Sinha who has been appointed as Minister w.e.f. 9" November, 2014.

# Blected w.e.f. 3 December, 2014 vice Dr. M. Thambidurai who has been chosen as Hon'ble Deputy Speaker, Lok Sabha and
has since resigned from the membership of the Committee.


COMPOSITION OF THE SUB COMMITTEE Ill OF THE
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2017-18)

Convenor 1. Shri Nishikant Dubey
Alternate Convenor: 2. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
Members 3. Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi

4. Shri Bhupender Yadav

5. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar २०४

6. Shri Ajay Sancheti

*ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 18 August,
2017 and re-elected w.e.f. 29 December, 2017.


COMPOSITION OF THE SUB COMMITTEE SE THON OF THE SUB COMMITTEE - ॥ OF THE PAC
(2016-17)

Sub-Committee — III (Direct and Indirect Taxes)

Convenor :

Alternate

Convenor :

Members

=

aw

Shri Nishikant Dubey
Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi

Shri Shivkumar 0. Udasi
Prof. Richard Hay

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar
Roy ;
Shri Ajay Sancheti


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2017-18), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Ninety-sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha) on 'Management of Narcotics Substances’ based on Chapter VI of C&8AG
Report No. 12 of 2014 relating to the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue).

2. The Report No. 12 of 2014 of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India was
laid on the Table of the House on 1 August, 2014.

3. Chapter VI of C&8AG Report No. 12 of 2014 on Management of Narcotics
Substances was selected by the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) for examination in
2014-15 and continued to be examined during 2015-16. The subject was discussed by
the PAC during study visit at Goa during 2015-16. Subsequently, on allocation of the
subject to Sub-Committee III (Direct & Indirect Taxes) of PAC, the subject was
examined during 2016-17 and 2017-18.

4. The Sub-Committee Ill of Public Accounts Committee took oral evidences of the
representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs on 9 November, 2016, Ministry of
Commerce & Industry (Department of Commerce) and Narcotics Control Bureau (NCB)
on 9 November, 2017 and Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) & Central
Bureau of Narcotics (CBN) on 4 December, 2017. The Sub-Committee Ill of PAC
(2017-18) considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 22 March, 2018.
The Public Accounts Committee (2017-18) considered and adopted this Report at their
sitting held on 23 March, 2018. The Minutes of the sittings are appended to the
Report. है

5. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part Il of the
Report.

6. The Committee thank the predecessor Committees for obtaining information on
the subject.

7. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of
Commerce & Industry (Department of Commerce), NCB and CBN for tendering
evidence before them and furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in
connection with the examination of the subject.

8. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance
rendered to them in the matter by the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of
India.

NEW DELHI; Shri Mallikarjun Kharge,
_23 March, 2018 Chairperson,

2 Chaitra 1940 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.


MANAGEMENT OF NARCOTICS SUBSTANCES
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)

Part-I

1. Introduction

The use of opium in the country could be traced back as far as 1000 AD where it
finds mention in ancient texts such as Dhanvantari Nighantu as a remedy for variety of
ailments. Prior to 1950, the administration of the Narcotics Laws, namely, the Opium Act
of 1857 & 1878 and the Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930 vested with the Provincial
Government. The amalgamation of these Agencies laid the foundation of the Opium
Department in November, 1950 which is presently known as Central Bureau of
Narcotics (CBN). The CBN Headquarters was shifted from Shimla to Gwalior in 1960.
In India, opium poppy cultivation is prohibited, under Section 8 of the Narcotics Drugs
and Psychotropic Substances (NDPS) Act, 1985, except under a license issued by the
Central Bureau of Narcotics. At present, the licit opium cultivation is permitted by the
Government of India in selected tracts in three traditionally opium growing States
namely Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan. As a signatory to the United
Nations Single Convention on Narcotics Drugs, 1961 and as a licit producer of opium,
India is required to adhere to the regulations under the said convention. The NDPS Act
1985 was amended twice in 1989 and 2001. The NDPS (Amendment) Act 2011,
passed on 21 February 2014, aimed at ensuring availability of essential opioid
medicines for medical use and private sector involvement.

2. The Chapter VI of the Report Number 12 of 2014 of the C&AG scrutinized
records of cultivation, production, possession, storage, sale, consumption, import and
export of opium and its derivatives of Narcotics Commissioner, Central Bureau of
Narcotics, Gwalior and its field formations along with its linkages with Government
Opium and Alkaloid Works (GAOW) and Narcotic Control Division (NCD) for the period
from 2010-11 to 2012-13.

3. Narcotics Commissioner, CBN reports to the Additional Secretary (Revenue),
Narcotic Control Division (NCD), Department of Revenue (DoR) for all operational
matters.For administrative, personnel and vigilance issues it is under the Central Board
of Excise and Customs. The opium collected from the farmers by the CBN is sent to
Government Opium and Alkaloid Works (GOAW) Neemuch and Ghazipur which are
under the control of the Chief Controller of Factories (CCF) under the NCD (DoR).


4. Being signatory to the three UN Conventions on drugs held in the year 1961,
1971 and 1988, India has made enabling provisions in the NDPS Act, 1985 for control
over narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances and precursor chemicals. The CBN is
performing the function of the Competent National Authority for control over
international trade of NDPS as provided for in the NDPS Act 1985. These provisions
prohibit import and export of these drugs unless an Import Certificate or Export
Authorization has been issued by the Narcotics Commissioner. The CBN issues
certificates for Export/ Import of Narcotic Drugs & Psychotropic Substances and issue
‘No Objection Certificate’ for import/export of precursor chemicals dealing with narcotic
drugs, psychotropic substances and chemicals/substances used for manufacture of
these drugs.

5. The manufacture of Narcotic drugs is governed by estimate system. While
allowing the manufacturing license, it is ensured that the total quantity of drug allowed to
be manufactured during any year does not exceed the annual estimated requirements
of India as furnished and subsequently published by the International Narcotics Control
Board (INCB), Vienna, Austria.

6. Any narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances can be imported into/exported out
of the country subject to Rule 53 and Rule 53-A of the NDPS Rules, 1985. The exports
of Precursor Chemicals are governed by System of Pre-Export Notification (PEN).CBN
uses a system of PEN to verify the genuineness of the transaction and to notify the
Competent Authority of the importing and transhipping country of the impending export.
Import of opium seeds is allowed subject to the following conditions:

i. Import is permitted only from Australia, Austria, France, China, Hungary, the
Netherlands, Poland, Slovenia, Spain, Turkey and Czech Republic;

ii. The importer shall produce an appropriate certificate from the competent authority of
the exporting country that the Opium Poppy have been grown licitly/legally in that
country as per requirement of International Narcotics Control Bureau; and

iii. All import contracts shall be compulsorily registered with the Narcotics
Commissioner, Gwalior prior to import.

The CBN has started the work of quota allocation of narcotic drug to the consuming
companies from the year 2010.

7. Turkey, India, Australia, France, Spain and Hungary are the major legal
cultivators of opium poppy in the world. Neemuch and Ghazipur GOAW produce around

2 .


250 kg Morphine. Demand of the same is estimated to surge to 30000-40000 kg a year.
Similarly around 15 Tonnes of Codeine Phosphate is produced whereas the
tequirement is 60 Tonnes of Codiene per annum. Last demand survey was conducted
by the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment thirteen years back in 2001. All
India customs data (ICES 1.5) for 2012-13 revealed that imports were made of poppy
seeds valued at = 283.40 crore, opium valued at हैं 134.57 (single import for testing
purpose) and codeine phosphate valued at = 0.55 lakh. During 2012-13 exports were
made of codeine phosphate valued at = 24.05 crore, opium valued at % 130.71 crore
and poppy seeds valued at हैं 3.72 crore.

8. The scope of this audit was scrutiny of the records for the period from 2010-11 to
2012-13. It involves scrutiny of records of Narcotics Commissioner, Central Bureau of
Narcotics, Gwalior and its field formations along with its linkages with Government
Opium and Alkaloid Works (GOAW) and Narcotic Control Division (DoR) for cultivation,
production, possession, storage, sale, consumption, import and export of opium and its
derivatives.

9. The audit scrutiny revealed that there are twenty six functions outlined for CBN.
CCF (GOAW), NCD (DoR) and CBEC have a critical linkage to the CBN for
performance of the functions and delivering agreed results as per its RFD. There is no
mention of any relationship with Narcotics Control Bureau (NCB) an organization under
the administrative control of the Ministry of Home Affairs, established in 1986 under the
same NDPS Act, for drug law enforcement and NCB also acts as a nodal agency to
coordinate between related agencies. Almost all the roles of NCB overlap with that of
CBN and the involvement of multiple agencies has led to overlapping of function
between NCB and CBN and coordination related issues. Further, cases of illicit
production of opium poppy, dwindling licit production of opium in India and no clear
policy framework for management of Narcotic Substances have been noted by the
Audit.

10. In the process ‘of examination of the subject, the Sub-Committee obtained
Background Notes and detailed written replies from the Ministry of Home Affairs,
Department of Revenue and Central Bureau of Narcotics. They also took oral evidence
of the representatives of the Department. Based on written and oral depositions by the
Department/Ministry the Committee examined the subject in detail and reached certain
conclusions as enumerated in the succeeding paragraphs.

॥. Sanctioned Strength and Persons-in-position

11. Audit observed that the sanctioned strength and persons-in-position of office of
the Central Bureau of Narcotics, Gwalior and Chief Controller of Factories (common


cadre) ranged from 63% to 14% in CBN whereas for CCF it was 64% to 30%. The
vacancies stood at 56.83% in CBN and 60.85% in CCF.

12. Explaining about the huge gap between the sanctioned strength and persons-in-
position in CBN and CCF, Special Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs submitted during
evidence held on 9.11.2016 that there were some administrative difficulties which they
had to resolve by consulting DoPT.

13. On being asked to furnish the status of vacancies in CBN and CCF, the
Department of Revenue in its written note submitted:-

“The status of vacancies in the CBN as on 01.12.2017, is as under:

51. Name of the Sanction Working Vacancy
No. post Strength Strength
1. Group ‘A’ 14 | _ 8 | 565३ |
2. Group ‘B’ 279 160 110
3. Group ‘C’ 912 243 [ 6569 |
_ Total 1205 420 785(65%

The maximum numbers of vacancies are in the cadre of Hawaldars, therefore,
tight from June 2016, matter was taken up by Narcotics Commissioner with Staff
Selection Commission and Central Board of Excise and Customs for launching
special drive for filling up vacant post of Halwaldars. Ministry of Finance also had
taken up the matter with DoPT reiterating the same request. As a result of this,
Chairman, Staff Selection Commission organized a meeting on 18.08.2017,
where, the Narcotics Commissioner also participated. During the course of
meeting, Staff Selection Commission informed that, their calendar is full and they
are not in a position to organize the special examination for recruitment of
Hawaldars in CBN, CBEC and NCB, before May, 2018.

Further looking at the acute shortage of direct recruit Sub-Inspectors in CBN, a
request was made to Staff Selection Commission in May 2016, followed by
request to DoPT in August 2016, to devise a system of maintaining wait list in the
selection list, as it has been experienced that candidates were either short
sponsored for Sub-Inspector post in CBN or sponsored for Sub-Inspector post in
CBN or sponsored candidates do not join Sub-Inspector’s post in CBN, being
not a preferred choice of majority of candidates.

Status of vacancies in CCF as on 30.11.2017



51. Name of Sanctioned Working Vacancy
No. the post Strength Strength
L 1. Group ‘A’ 43 20 23
2. Group 8' 118 42 76
3. Group ‘C’ 1234 580 753(54%

From the above table it is quite clear that a large number of posts are vacant in
CCF organization. These posts belong to different cadres like CBN cadre, CRCL
Cadre, Factory Cadre as well as CBEC Cadre. Posts could not be filled in CCF
organization on the ground that similar ratio of vacancy is existing in the said
cadres also.”

14. During evidence held on 9.11.2017, Director-General, NCB further added that
they were making continuous effort to fill this gap. According to their Recruitment Rules,
some posts which are to be filled through UPSC which takes time as it involves long
procedure.

15. | When asked to furnish the status of vacancies in Narcotics Control Bureau the
apex coordinating agency under Ministry of Home Affairs for matters related to
enforcement under NDPS Act, the NCB in their written note replied as under:

5.1 | Name of the Post Vacancy Vacancy
No. 9.11.2016 9.11.2017
1. | Deputy Director General a I |
2. _| Assistant Director 15 11
3. __| Superintendent ~ {12 12
4. | Computer Programmer 01 [oi sis
5. __| Intelligence Officer 111 07
[6. [| Assistant 07 07
7.__| Steno Grade - Il 02 01
[8. | Steno Grade - Ill 04 [oo Cid
[9. | Survellience Assistant 01 01
10. | Upper Division Clerk 04 01
11. | Lower Division Clerk ॥१-िकिो।ए।॥
12. | Halavdar/Sepo 12 05
13. | MTS 04 05
का. Performance of the Narcotic Substances Management in India:

16. The audit revealed that the commensurate financial, human resources and
litigation management information system could not’ be correlated with success



indicators of the objectives of NCD (DoR).Though CBN has a results framework
document (RFD) as a responsibility center, NCD (DoR) or CCF (GOAW) did not have
any RFD stating their objectives and measuring their success indicators thereon. There
are twenty six functions outlined for CBN. CCF (GOAW), NCD (DoR) and CBEC have a
critical linkage to the CBN for performance of the functions and delivering agreed results
as per its RFD. There is no mention of any relationship with Narcotics Control Bureau
(NCB) an organization under the administrative control of the Ministry of Home Affairs,
established in 1986 under the same NDPS Act, for drug law enforcement and NCB also
acts as a nodal agency to coordinate between related agencies.Almost all the roles of
NCB overlap with that of CBN.

17. On being asked about the status of the Cabinet Note for transfer of NCD, CBN
and CCF from DoR to MHA, Finance Secretary during the evidence held on 04.12.2017
stated as under:

॥ do not think we have got any official Cabinet note so far. Maybe, they are in the
process of preparing some Cabinet note about it but we have not examined it
from that angle. Whenever the Cabinet note comes, we will give our views. It is
for the Government and the Cabinet to decide about the transfer.”

18. ‘It was further observed during the audit that 7276.89 hectares of land was
involved in illicit cultivation of poppy which indicated the potential of additional opium
cultivation in India. Better management of ‘production of opium through ancing process
and policy framework to incentivize cultivators and manufacturers could have helped
save precious foreign exchange to the tune of = 283.40 crore in buying poppy seeds.
Audit maintained that concerted measures to increase production of poppy seeds could
be taken in the NDPS Policy management which could be appropriately taken up with
the UN authorities, if necessary.

19. On being asked about the above issue, the NCB, MHA submitted in its written

note:

“The licit cultivation of opium is carried in the States of Madhya Pradesh, Uttar
Pradesh and Rajasthan, the States where 49% of shortfall of opium crop has

6


been reported, whereas the States where NCB has destroyed illicit cultivation of
poppy lies in the remote areas of West Bengal, Bihar, Jharkhand, Manipur,
Arunachal Pradesh and Uttrakhand and is unauthorized and illicit & its produce
would have gone for illicit trafficking and drug abuse. Therefore there seems to
be no relation between the two with regard to control of the Government and
generation of revenue.”

IV. Ambiguity in the Opium policy

20. Audit, revealed that Opium poppy is cultivated strictly in accordance with the
General conditions finalized by the Government of India, considering the total
requirement of opium as well as keeping in view the imperative need to control diversion
of opium produce into illicit channels. Accordingly, these General conditions also include
a condition providing for a certain Minimum Qualifying Yield (MQY) of opium produce
per hectare, which is required to be tendered by the licensed cultivators, to be eligible
for licence during the following crop year. At the time of finalizing the MQY, per hectare
average yield of opium achieved in that area is also taken into consideration. Audit
examination revealed that the State of Uttar Pradesh was not achieving the average
Minimum Qualifying Yield (MQY).

21. Though 23591 hectares area was licensed there was a shortfall of 49 percent in
utilization. Thus, on the one hand Government is experiencing 49 percent shortfall in
licensed area poppy cultivation and there is no Government policy to promote popular
poppy seed cultivation, the farmers are utilizing a loophole in the opium cultivation
policy through which the farmers cultivate opium without fulfilling the intended purpose
of providing opium for medical purposes.

22. In this regard, the Department of Revenue replied in its written submission:

“Poppy cultivation in India is being undertaken for extraction of opium to meet the
domestic needs of Indian Pharmaceutical Industries and for export purposes.
The area brought under cultivation is to fulfill the requirement of gum opium in
domestic market and export purposes as communicated by the Chief Controller,
GOAF, New Delhi, after considering the requirement of opium for buffer stocks.
The licensing conditions for issue of licence also clearly provide that license is
being issued to the cultivators for production of opium. In order to check the
cultivators who are habitually applying for uprooting, a provision has been made
in the general conditions that cultivators who uprooted their crop continuous for
two years will be delicensed in the next crop year.


The provision was further amended in 2015-16 crop year vide which a provision
has been made in the general conditions that cultivators who uprooted their crop
continuous for three years will be delicensed- in the next crop year. The
provisions for plough back before lancing exist primarily to safeguard the
cultivator from damage caused to the opium crop prior to lancing due to reasons
such as rain, hailstorm, etc. when the cultivator is unlikely to fulfill the MQY and
stands the chance of getting delicensed in the next crop year .License is given
only for the production of opium for medicinal use only as per the licensing policy
notified by the Government of india every year. Poppy seed is a by-product
obtained from the cultivation of opium poppy, which the cultivators can retain for
sale in the open market as their own will or he may retain it for stock in future.
There is no government control on sale of poppy seed by the cultivators in open
market as it is a non-narcotic item.”

Vv Excess ineligible licenses issued to cultivator due to violation of License
Policy

23. In Madhya Pradesh state, the audit noticed that contrary to the provision of
above notifications, the department had issued licenses to cultivators whose average
yield was less than the prescribed limit for getting license of 50 ares in 2010-11, 2011-
12 and 15 ares in 2012-13. 1909, 1820 and 1343 licenses were issued in excess
against eligible cultivators during the year 2010-11, 2011-12 and 2012-13 respectively.

24. On being pointed out by Audit, DOR replied as under

" The information has been taken from Annual Narcotics Conference (ANC) Data,
which is provisional. The licenses are issued on the basis of final analysis report
received from.Government Opium and Alkaloid Works (GOAW),.Neemuch and
not on the basis of ANC Data. Hence, no incorrect license was issued."

25. As per Audit, the Department’s reply is to be viewed in the context that the
GOAW had issued only cultivator wise analysis report for quality and consistency of
opium. The yield of cultivators had been calculated on the basis of consistency report
teceived from GOAW by the concerned Divisional Opium Officer. Hence, such data
could not be treated as provisional. हैं

Vi. Continuous downfall in. number of Cultivators, harvested area, harvested
villages and. commensurate Non Tax Revenue and Non-achievement of required
opium production

26. The audit revealed that:—

i. The harvested area was less by 36.29-per cent, 50.86 per cent and 3.40 per cent
during the year 2010-11, 2011-12 and 2012-13 respectively in Madhya Pradesh and the
harvested area was less by 27.74 per cent, 45.74 per cent and 4.24 per cent during the

8


year 2010-11, 2011-12 and 2012-13 respectively in Rajasthan State with respect to the
area licensed for cultivation of opium poppy.

ii. No. of cultivators licensed also reduced each year which resulted in downfall in Non-
Tax Revenue, which was reduced by 9.15 per cent in three years in Madhya Pradesh
State and was reduced by 15.72 per cent in three years in Rajasthan State.

iii. Number of villages reduced by 65 villages in Madhya Pradesh state and 193 villages
in Rajasthan state in three years i.e. 2010-11 to 2012-13, where cultivators cultivate

opium poppy.

iv. There is no provision for inclusion of new tracts and new cultivators in the NDPS Act
and Opium Policy.

v. The amount of license fee had been fixed at ¥ 25 per license, applicable with effect
from 5 November 1994, which was neither reviewed nor upgraded.

In Rajasthan state, the above matter was brought to the notice of the Dy. Narcotics
Commissioner, Kota (February 2014).The Department stated that it is a policy related
matter and is decided by the Ministry.

27. As per Audit, the persistent decrease in license fee was attributed to the following
reasons:

| There is no provision for inclusion of new tracts and new cultivators in the NDPS act
and Opium Policy.

॥ The amount of license fee has neither been reviewed nor upgraded since 1994.

28. The Department also admitted the fact that the license fee had neither been
reviewed nor upgraded since 1994. DoR stated (March 2014) that the procurement
price of opium is fixed by the DoR, based on the estimated cultivation cost and the need
to incentivize the cultivators.

29. In Madhya Pradesh state, the audit noticed that the available stock of opium as well
as the expected/estimated requirement (buffer stock of one year) of opium for domestic
use and for export for the years 2010-11 to 2012-13 had shortfall in production of opium
i.e. 100 MTs, 600 MTs and 169 MTs in respect of requirement of opium for the year
2010-11, 2011-12 and 2012-13 respectively clearly shows the failure of department to
achieve the estimated requirement/production of opium. The Department replied
(January 2014) that shortfall in production of opium was due to less harvesting of crop
due to damage in crop (plant disease/natural calamity) in year 2010-11, large
uprooting/plough back of opium due to heavy damage in year 2011-12 and licenses are
given to cultivators for 10 ares and 15 ares in place of 35 ares and 50 ares resulting in

9


less harvested area in year 2012-13. As per Audit, the licensing policy is prepared after
considering various aspects like domestic use of opium, commitment for export,
minimum qualifying yield, number of cultivators, number of villages and trend of last
year etc. and even after considering all these aspects there was a huge shortfall of
43.04 per cent and 31.29 per cent in production of opium during the year 2011-12 and
2012-13 respectively. है

30.

Explaining about why are they not able to have a policy of narcotics by which the

farmers of India are able to cultivate more of opium, Finance Secretary stated during
evidence held on 04.12.2017:

Vil.
31.

“There are two main reasons for this. One is that the current policy of producing
poppy and the crop which we are growing in which there is a bulb which is
lynched and then from that, gum is taken out and that gum is converted into
opium. Now, this is the crop technology which we are using is outdated world
over and many countries are shifting towards the new technology. The main
treason for this is that the old technology is prone to misuse and if it is misused,
there is a chance of leakage of opium going into the market and thereby can
create the danger to our youth and that is why, we need to the new technology.

The second reason is that this particular production is only done in Government
factories which are right now with us in Government of India. There are two
factories, one is in Neemuch and another is in Ghazipur. The Ghazipur factory is
as old as 1850. It has been running since 1850, and, of course, the Neemuch
factory has been running since 1976. Now both these factories are also very old
and they are also based on the old technology. The production is based on the
old pattern of crop. Now we can modernize them. We can have more production
in the factory but the question is, if we expand the factory based on old
technology, it is going to be of no use to us. So, we have to actually move in for a
new variety of crop, which is called, Concentrate of Poppy Straw (CPS)
technology, for which we have already gone ahead. We have invited the bids,
and some two parties have been pre-qualified.”

Anomalies in the Opium policy
Audit examination revealed the following deficiencies:

In Uttar Pradesh, the Central Government notifies 49 tracts in 10 Districts every
year where opium cultivation is allowed whereas actual cultivation is found in
only 13 tracts of Barabanki District.

The ‘Minimum Qualifying Yield (MQY)’ of opium for the next crop year in the
State of Uttar Pradesh is proposed on the basis of demand in international
market, and not on the basis of soil testing.

10


e No provision has ever been made for inclusion of new cultivators or
updation/upgradation of new tracts in the NDPS Act and opium policy. No soil
testing was carried out before issue of licenses to cultivators.

The District Opium Officer accepted the audit observation that no soil testing was
carried out before issue of licenses to cultivators. According to the Audit, though
MQY is a diversion prevention measure, the extent of diversion it prevented in the
last 10 years is not clearly measured.

32. When asked about the fixing of the MQY, notification of new tracts and absence
of soil testing, the Department of Revenue in its written submission stated:

“1, Area under Tract Notification has been revised now and the new Tract
Notification includes only those areas where cultivation is taking place.

2. Audit observed that regarding issuance of license on the basis of Soil
Testing etc are neither supported by the provisions of NDPS Rules issued under
NDPS Act, nor by NDPS Policy and nor even by the Guidelines issued by the
Govt. for issuance of license.

However, CBN issues licences for development, soil research etc to five
Research Institutes namely (i) Narendra Dev University of Agriculture &
Technology, Faizabad (UP), (ii) Rajasthan College of Agriculture,
MPUAT, Udaipur (Rajasthan) (iii) National Botanical Research Institute, Lucknow
(UP) (iv) Central Institute of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants, Lucknow (UP) and
(v)KNK college of Horticulture, Mandsaur (MP). The said research Institutes
submit their research report every year. Their research projects are long term
projects. Every year during Licensing Operation Agriculture Scientists are invited
to give information/guidance to the poppy cultivators regarding varieties of high
yielding opium, seeds, use of fertilizers and pesticides. Hand bills/pamphlets are
prepared based on recommendation of Agriculture Scientists and distributed
amongst the poppy cultivators and Lambardars of the village.

The National Policy on Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances issued in
2012, elucidates the reason behind fixing of MQY. It states that in order to ensure
that there is no diversion of licitly grown opium, the Government of India, inter-
alia, continuously reviews and increases the minimum qualifying yield (MQY)
which the farmers have to tender in order to be eligible for a license to cultivate
opium poppy next year.

In the Crop Year 1999-2000, as per Para 4 of the Licensing Policy the
applications for new licenses were considered from the residents of opium
cultivating villages falling in the notified tracts. The villages were selected in
descending order from high yielding villages. New licenses were distributed
equally amongst all the divisions. For determination of average yield of a village,
the average of the opium yield per hectare tendered by the villages in the last five

11


years shall be taken into account. For a village, which has more than one
lambardar or is divided into more than one part for administrative convenience,
the yield of the entire village will be taken into account for

computing the average yield.”

Vill. Loss of Opium crop due to exorbitant ploughing back

33. The audit observed that in Uttar Pradesh State the percentage of area uprooted
vis-a-vis measured area showed an upward trend and was carried out in disregard of
the provisions of Part - Il, Para - 131 of Opium Manual. In Barabanki district, the
uprooted area increased from 59.57 per cent in 2011 to 75.32 per cent in 2013, and no
reasons like natural calamities such as rains, plant diseases etc. were available on
record. An illustrative case relating to uprooting in contravention of the aforesaid.
provisions is stated below: In Bareilly district, a cultivator had’ an excess cultivation
beyond the 5% ‘Condonable Limit’ during the crop year 2011-12 and the appellate
authority vide appeal order No.9/2012 dated 29 March 2012 had ordered the ploughing
back of excess portion of crop only.DOO, however, ploughed back the entire crop of the
cultivator in disregard of the aforesaid provisions and the order of the appellate
authority. Besides, this fact was wilfully not mentioned by the District Opium Officer in
his annual report of 2012.

34. — In this regard, the Department of Revenue replied in its written submission:

“The ploughing back /uprooting of un-lanced opium crop is done under the
Departmental supervision on the basis of application received from the cultivators
stating reason of damage caused to the opium poppy crop due to natural
calamity e.g. heavy rains, strong winds, hailstorm etc. or disease. Uprooting is
done in case of un-lanced opium poppy crop only. It is not correct to say that
there is deficient internal control and no proper documentation regarding details
of uprooting of crops is made by the unit offices. Plough back/uprooting is
conducted by a team of officers headed by an officer not below the rank of
Superintendent under proper Panchnama. Proper monitoring is done at DOO,
DNC and Headquarters Level. There is no loss of good opium crop due to
ploughing back/uprooting.

As regards reminiscent of the poppy plant, there are two by-products in opium
crop one poppy seeds and the other poppy husk. The cultivator can sell poppy
seeds in open market without any. restriction whereas poppy straw is purchased
by the State Excise through contractors. In pursuant to the Order No. 2 dated
7.3.2012 as amended by order No. 3 dated 19 February, 2012 issued by the
Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance, Government of India, under section
74 A of NDPS Act, 1985 no poppy straw would be allowed to be used for de-
addiction purpose and should only be ploughed back in the field after 31.3.2016
i.e. after which poppy straw sale would be prohibited.”

12


IX. Payment made to persons other than cultivators (208.39 lakh)

35. The audit examination revealed that in Madhya Pradesh state, during the test
check of Opium Payment Register for the year 2010-11 to 2012-13 of three District
Opium Officers (Jaora-Il, Mandsour-Ill and Neemuch-l), contrary to the provision given
in NDPS Rule,1985 the department had paid = 151.94 lakh being 90 percent price of
opium and its balance amount to the persons other than cultivators like son, brother,
daughter and Mukhiya etc which was against the provisions of NDPS Rules, 1985.

36. The Department of Revenue replied in this regard in its written submission:

“It is mentioned that before crop year 2012-13, there was provision to make cash
payment to the cultivator at Weighment/Settlement Centre. During weighment
many female and old age cultivators after tendering their opium left the
Weighment Centre and could not wait for payment till late evening. Generally,
their near relatives nominated by the cultivator concerned collect cash payment.
Keeping in view of practical difficulties faced by such cultivators, provisions are
there in the opium Manual

to make payment to the Lambardar or substitute appointed by the cultivator
himself on the responsibility of the Lambardar and the name of the payee being
recorded in the weighment register. The same practice prevailed until the crop
year 2012-13. Department has not faced any difficulty either from cultivator side
or from any public representative in general in this matter. Now, from the crop
year 2012-13 onwards, the system of cash payment is completely withdrawn and
payment to cultivator is now being made direct to their individual savings Bank
Account through e-payment.”

37. | As per Audit, the fact remains that an amount of = 151.94 lakh was paid to
persons other than cultivators without obtaining any appointment letter from the
cultivators. हि

XxX. Long pendency of Court cases

38. As per provisions of Results Framework Document (RFD) of CBN, the
Department is mandated to book cases against the offenders of NDPS Act, 1985; to file
complaint in the designated court and to watch their disposal. During the scrutiny of
Quarterly Information/Report in respect of Pending Cases in District/Subordinate courts
for the quarter ending on December 2013 sent by U.P. Unit of CBN to their
Headquarters, audit observed that out of 104 cases pending as on date, about 37 cases
involved seizures prior to the year 2000; but neither the respective date(s) of filing these
104 cases had been mentioned, nor the Department was aware of the disposal/present
status of any of these cases.

39. The matter has been brought to the notice of the DoR which submitted:

13


“It is not correct to say that 104 no. of cases are pending. The officers of CBN
have filed complaint in the designated courts within the stipulated time period
under the NDPS Act. Once a complaint is filed the Investigating Officer or the.
department have no powers to expedite the disposal of such cases in the court.
The judiciary being independent has laid down procedure and it acts according to
its own procedures.or as laid down by the higher courts for trial of the cases filed
before it. However, the department regularly directs the SPP concerned to
request the courts for early disposal of the cases. It is pertinent to mention here
that as in Uttar Pradesh there are no Special Courts for trial of NDPS cases
unlike M.P. and Rajasthan. Therefore, this is one of the reasons of long
pendency of NDPS cases in U.P.”

XI: Preventive activities, Illicit Poppy cultivation

40. As a preventive and enforcement function, CBN while conducting the survey to
verify satellite maps for presence of illicit poppy cultivation, destroyed 2785.148
hectares of illicit opium poppy crop during the period 2009-10 to 2011-12. Another.
organization, Narcotics Control Bureau (NCB) under the Ministry of Home Affairs was
established in 1986 under the NDPS Act for drug law enforcement and it also acts as a
nodal agency to coordinate between related agencies. Almost all the roles of NCB
overlap with that of CBN. However, the NCB under Ministry of Home Affairs separately
teported identification and destruction of opium poppy spread over 3098.55 acres
(1291.06 hectares) in 2012 compared to 14366 acres (5985.83 hectares) in 2011.

41. On being asked about the effectiveness of the satellite used for monitoring during
the evidence held on 09.11.2016,Director General, NCB replied that the mapping of
many areas had not been done and they were making efforts for the ground survey but
the satellite provided images had many deficiencies and needed improvement.

42. DoR submitted in this regard:

“As regards opinion of the audit in this para that enforcement, management and
coordination of NDPS Act, 1985 should be with one agency to avoid duplicity,
dissonance and waste of precious resources, it.is submitted that the NCB and
CBN have their own set of mandates assigned by the Central Government. It is
also mentioned that a number of Central and State level agencies have been
empowered under various provisions of the NDPS Act. At the Central level, these
agencies are CBN, NCB, Customs and Central Excise, DRI and certain
paramilitary forces. At the State level, these are the Police, Excise, Drug Control
etc. Each of these agencies also has a primary function. Thus, while NCB is the
apex coordinating agency under Ministry of Home Affairs for matters related to
enforcement under NDPS Act. NCB collect and analyse data related to seizures
of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substance, study trends, modus operandi,

14


collect and disseminate intelligence and work in close cooperation with the
Customs, State Police and other law enforcement agencies. The primary function
of CBN besides enforcement work relates to supervision over licit cultivation of
opium poppy In India spread across the States of Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan
and Uttar Pradesh, issue of licenses for manufacture of synthetic narcotic drugs,
Issuance of Export Authorisations/ Import Certificate for export/ import of Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances, Issuance of No Objection Certificate (NOC)
for import/ export of a select number of Precursor Chemicals. Therefore, it cannot
be said that all the roles of NCB overlap with that of CBN.

The ADRIN satellite images & topographic co-ordinates are being received by
CBN through CEIB since 2015. In 2015 CBN received satellite images & co-
ordinate for the states of West Bengal, J & K, Himachal Pradesh, Bihar &
Jharkhand which were sent to the Chief Secretary, the DGP and the Secretary,
State Excise for further necessary action.

In 2016, Revenue Secretary, Department of Revenue has written to the Chief
_ Secretaries of various States where ADRIN has provided satellite data/imagery
relating to illicit cultivation, for giving necessary direction to concerned authorities
in the State to immediately verify each and every locations given by ADRIN and
take steps to destroy the illicit poppy crop. Secretary Revenue also wrote to
Heads/DGs of various Central Paramilitary Forces and Chairman, Central Board
of Excise & Customs (CBEC) to assist and coordinate with the NCB and State
law enforcement authorities in the operations to destroy the illicit poppy crops.”

XII. Internal control audit and Monitoring

43. As per Audit, the Department claimed to conduct 100 per cent internal audit of
cultivation of opium records after the completion of settlement operation each year.
However, it is believed that 100 per cent internal audit was instructed only in 2009-10
under special __—_ circumstances. As per internal audit report no
discrepancies/irregularities/ambiguity was found during period from 2010-11 to 2012-13.
However, this audit has pointed out, inter-alia, non-adherence to the provisions of
licensing policy, smart card identification, satellite based cultivation management and
lack of serious efforts for recovery of outstanding dues from the cultivators indicating
lack of internal control in the Department."

44. Further, Audit observed that it was not clear as to how the RFD of CBN is being
monitored by DoR and the critical performance, requirements from other organizations
(including NCB) are managed for achievement of DoR’s objectives since; DoR did not
have a RFD in line with its business rules. Similarly, there was no reconciliation done
with the State Excise Departments to control the sale/diversion of the by-product of the

15


poppy (poppy straw, poppy husk and poppy seeds). The action taken by CBN to comply
with ISO 9001 requirements was also awaited from the Department.

45. During evidence held on 09.11.2017, DG, NCB replied with regard to Centralised
Monitoring System that the approval for Centralised Monitoring System has been given
by Cabinet Committee on Security and it is under active consideration.

46. When asked about the internal control and audit of the activities of ABN, the DoR
replied in its written note:

“The department conducted 100 percent internal audit of cultivation of opium
records after the completion of settlement operation (Licensing) during crop year
2010-11, 2011 -12 and 2012-13. There is regular system of monthly reporting on
all aspects of their functioning, which is regularly scrutinized and monitored at the
level of Headquaters. Besides, reports of. all seizures and those on other
developments are sent as and when they occur. The CBN office does not have
an ISO certificate. However, a number of steps have been taken for automation
of its functional activities including interaction with public by introductory web-
application and sharing of information. These initiatives are at beginning stage
and it would take some time to achieve the level to go for ISO certification.”

16


PART- II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS

Chapter VI of C&AG Report No. 12 of 2014 pertains to shortcomings in the
management of narcotic substances like illicit cultivation of opium poppy, no
clear policy framework for the management of opium production and sales and
overlapping of roles of Narcotics Control Bureau and Central Bureau of Narcotics
(CBN). The Committee, based on the analysis of the audit chapter, oral evidences
of the representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs, Department of Commerce,
Narcotics Control Bureau (NCB), Department of Revenue and Central Bureau of
Narcotics and post-evidence replies furnished by Ministry of Home Affairs,
Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance have found various shortcomings
and have placed their observations and recommendations in succeeding
paragraphs.

1. Huge vacancies in Major Controlling Agencies:

The Committee observe an acute shortage of staff in Group ‘A’ and Group ‘D’
cadres in CBN and CCF telling upon the quality of inspections and
implementation of work. The vacancies stood at 56.83% in CBN and 60.85% in
CCF . The difference between the sanctioned and actual strength for different
cadres ranged from 14% to 63% in CBN whereas for Chief Controller of Factories
(CCF) it was 30% to 60% in 2013-14. The Committee further note that even after
being pointed out by the Audit in the Report and the Committee during evidence,
the vacancies are still at 54% and 65% in CCF and CBN. Also, a large number of
vacancies are yet to be filled in NCB. The Committee note from the reply of the
Ministry that the vacancies are being filled and meetings with Staff Selection
Commission and Central Board of Excise and Customs have been organized and
that Staff Selection Commission informed that, their calendar was full and they
would not be in position to organize the special examination for recruitment of
Hawaldars in CBN, CBEC and NCB, before May, 2018. Further, the Committee
note from the reply of the Ministry that a request was made to Staff Selection
Commission in May 2016, followed by request to DOPT in August 2016, to devise

17


a system of maintaining wait list in the selection list. The Committee desire that
the Ministry may follow up with the SSC and DoPT on the request for maintaining
a wait list and apprise the Committee of the action taken by SSC and DoPT
thereon. The Committee are of the view that in the instant case, for NDPS Act to
be properly implemented, it is necessary to fill these key positions urgently. The
Committee observe that such large scale vacancies in all of the major agencies
involved in controlling and management of narcotic substances has seriously
hampered the functioning of these Agencies which is clearly visible from the
findings of the Audit Report and exhort the Ministry to take up the matter urgently
with the recruitment agencies so that the vacancies are filled up at the earliest.

The Committee are of the view that delay in filling up vacancies across all
the Ministries/Departments is taking its toll on the output of these organizations.
The working of oganizations mandated to enforce laws, rules regulations etc is
severely affected by shortage of manpower. The Committee opine that the
Ministry may allow organizations with large number of vacancies to absorb
deputationists who served that organization satisfactorily for a specified number
of years. The Committee desire that Ministries/Departments should have a well
laid down rotational transfer policy to be implemented in letter and spirit to
discourage vested arid personal interests hampering judicious decisions. The
Committee also recommend that the recruitment procedure be comprehensively
reviewed by the Government to ensure that vacancies are filled up at the earliest.

i. Robust Policy Framework

2. The Committee note that opium poppy is cultivated strictly in accordance
with the general conditions finalized by the Government of India and one of the
condition stipulates for a certain Minimum Qualifying Yield (MQY) of opium
produce per hectare, which is required to be tendered by the licensed cultivators,
to be eligible for license during the following crop year. Audit revealed that the
State of Uttar Pradesh was not achieving the average MQY and is producing less
opium ranging from 6.67% to 31.38% of average MQY during the period of 2008-09
to 2012-13. The Committee further note that a huge number of cultivators in Uttar

18


Pradesh fully/partially uprooted the crop during the years 2008-09 to 2012-13 and
though 23591 hectares area was licensed there was a shortfall of 49 percent in
utilization. The Ministry replied that to reduce cases of uprooting, a provision has
been made in the general conditions that cultivators who have uprooted their
crops for three years continuously will be delicensed in the next crop year. The
Committee desire that the details regarding delicensing of the number of farmers
who have been delicensed for uprooting their crops be furnished to the
Committee and an inquiry be made into issuing of licenses to the farmers who
could not achieve MQY repeatedly and stern action taken against those found
abetting illegal trade so as to curb the menace of drug-trafficking. The Committee
further desire that clear guidelines for destruction of uprooted crops be issued
and enforced strictly as these uprooted crops can be used for extracting narcotic
substances and the issue of large number of such cases be investigated.

3. Audit examination revealed that no soil testing was carried out before issue
of licenses to cultivators and the District Opium Officer of Barabanki, Uttar
Pradesh accepted the audit observation. The Committee are shocked to note from
the reply of the Ministry that observations made by the audit regarding issuance
of license on the basis of soil testing etc are neither supported by the provisions
of the NDPS rules issued under NDPS Act, nor by NDPS Policy and nor even by
the Guidelines issued by the Govt. for issuance of license. However, CBN issues
licenses for soil research and development to five Research Institutes. The
Committee desire that expenditure incurred on soil research.and development in
last 5 years and the innovations/ decisions etc. made on the basis of above
research be furnished to the Committee. The Committee are of the considered
opinion that logically, soil testing must be a pre-requisite before issuing licenses
and desire that an explicit provision in this regard be added to the Rules so that
the licenses are issued on scientific basis. The Committee also desire that soil
testing in new areas should. also be done for determining the production
capability of the country. The figures so derived be intimated to the Department
of Commerce for inclusion in EXIM policy for the narcotics substances and the

19


International Narcotics Control Bureau (INCB) for being considered while fixing of
country quotas by them.

ut Need for well requlated and controlled narcotic control framework:

4. The Committee observe that manufacture, sale and export of the narcotic
alkaloid extracts higher up in the value chain have the potential to provide
exponentially higher economic returns to the poppy plantation and save foreign
exchange in procuring poppy seeds from the traditional hinter lands. However,
Audit pointed out that there seemed to be no clear policy framework aiming at the
twin objectives of revenue generation through sale of finished opium based pain
relief chemicals and foreign exchange savings by indigenous production of
opium seeds. The Committee note that the CBN which is under the DoR is
responsible for the supervision of opium cultivation and is regulatory authority
for licensing import and export of the alkaloids and licit opium etc. Narcotics
Control Bureau(NCB) which is under the Ministry of Home Affairs, is an apex
enforcement agency for the narcotics drugs and destruction of illicit cultivation of
opium. The DRI, the Customs, the State police, are other agencies which are
involved in management of narcotics substances. The Committee observe that
the system in place to monitor and control production of opium poppy is deficient
as is evident from illegal crop production, rampant uprooting of crops, not
achieving even the Minimum Quality Yield (MQY), absence of soil testing, limiting
the production to only three States etc. The Committee find that involvement of
CBN, NCB and State authorities has only added to the confusion,
mismanagement, overlapping of monitoring and control, not taking action by one
organisation as they think that the other organisation might take action due to
lack of coordination and absence of clearly defined responsibilities in inter-
related areas. The Committee would, therefore, like to refer to the Principle of
Management i.e. ‘Unity of Direction’ which states that activities aimed at the same
objective should be so organized that there is one plan and one head responsible
for accomplishment of the same. The Committee are of the view that there
should be an integrated plan for management of narcotics substances under

20


the supervision of Narcotics Control Division (NCD), DoR to ensure unity of
action and coordination. Accordingly, the Committee desire that all functions
related to management of narcotics substances be transferred to the NCD to
ensure efficient handling of related aspects.

5. Further, there seems to be no apparent rationale for allowing cultivation of
poppy seeds in only three States when the demand for the same is much higher
than its production which is consequently met through imports. The Committee
note that last demand survey was conducted by the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment seventeen years back in 2001. The Committee desire that a
comprehensive demand survey be done urgently by the NCD and thereafter every
five years to assess the actual demand of opium poppy in India. However,the
Committee observe that the demand for opium have already been much higher
than its cultivation and will increase manifold in next 5-10 years after National
Health Policy is enforced. The Committee exhort the Ministry to conduct soil
testing in more States ‘to ascertain its quality for poppy cultivation to cope up
with the ever increasing demand of opium. The Committee desire that the results
of soil testing of new and existing areas and drug demand survey be considered
by NCD for adding new areas of cultivation to meet the domestic demand.

IV Need for Augmenting Opium Production and technological advancement:

6. Audit revealed a shortfall in production of opium 100 MTs, 600 MTs and 169
MTs in respect of requirement of opium for the year 2010-11, 2011-12 and 2012-13
clearly indicating the failure of Department to achieve the estimated
requirement/production of opium. The Committee note from the reply of the
Department. that shortfall in production of opium was due to less harvesting of
crop due to damage in crop (plant disease/natural calamity) in year 2010-11, large
uprooting/plough back of opium in year 2011-12 and licenses given to cultivators
for 10 ares and 15 ares in place of 35 ares and 50 ares resulting in less harvested
area in year 2012-13.The Committee are shocked to note that Annual Narcotics
Conference (ANC) on poppy cultivation was held every year to discuss various
aspects before finalizing the policy for next crop year cultivation. Even after

21


factoring the stated reasons every year during Annual Conference there was a
shortfall in achievement of required opium production year after year. The
Committee desire that a Sub-Group may be constituted to review poppy
Cultivation in India and suggest measures to increase cultivation, production,
technology upgradation and changes in licensing policy and fee and
amendments to NDPS Act to arrest continuous decline in production.

7. The Committee observe that India is one of the few producers of opium in
the world, yet opium seeds have to be imported. As per the Department of
Commerce, the imports of poppy seeds during 2016-17 was USD 44.07 million as
against exports to the tune of USD 0.73 million. The Committee further observe
that West Bengal, Bihar, Jharkhand, Manipur, Arunachal Pradesh and Uttrakhand
are the areas where illicit crop has been cultivated and destroyed. The Committee
are of the view that in order to increase production within the country such areas
of land can be brought under licit cultivation and new cultivators included
through advertisement and by involving village panchayat offices. The Committee
note that two factories, one in Neemuch and another in Ghazipur are employing
methods based on old and outdated technology leading to delay as well as
shortage in production in addition to its misuse. The Committee while noting the
submission of the Secretary that technological upgradation is needed to make
production in the country viable, desire that the abovesaid Sub-Group may also
suggest the road map for introducing new technology to increase production ina
time-bound manner.

Vv Monitoring and Control

8. The Committee observe that in Uttar Pradesh, area uprooted vis-a-vis
measured area showed an upward trend and was carried out in disregard of the
provisions laid down in opium manual issued by the Department. In Barabanki
district, the uprooted area increased from 59.57 per cent in 2011 to 75.32 per cent
in 2013, and no reasons like natural calamities such as rains, plant diseases etc.
were available on record. Further, In Bareilly district, a cultivator had an excess
cultivation beyond the 5% ‘Condonable Limit’ during the crop year 2011-12 and

22


the appellate authority vide appeal order No.9/2012 dated 29 March 2012 had
ordered the ploughing back of excess portion of crop only. District Opium Officer
(DOO), however, ploughed back the entire crop of the cultivator in disregard of
the aforesaid provisions and the order of the appellate authority. Besides, this
fact was wilfully not mentioned by the District Opium Officer in his annual report
of 2012. On being pointed out by the Audit, the Ministry replied that entire crop of
said cultivator had dried up by the time of passing of Appeal Order and
ploughing-back was on application of the farmer. The Committee are of the view
that the reply is not acceptable as no such record was available in the State of
Uttar Pradesh and that such cases point to the callous attitude of the higher
authorities and complicity of the officials at field level . The Committee desire that
strict action be taken against the erring DOO and delinquent officials and the
Department may also look into other such cases to ensure that uprooting has
only been allowed in genuine cases.

9. The Committee observe that a new mode of drug trafficking is happening
through darknet using crypto currency. The Committee are distressed to note
that growing e-commerce in the country is facilitating significant increase in
online pharmacies that are being used for trafficking drugs with the help of shady .
courier services under the veil of darknet. The Committee feel that as India is also
facing challenges associated with narcoterrorism, illegal cultivation of opium
poppy and rising drug abuse there is a need to improve coordination and
reducing number of agencies, giving impetus to increasing opium production in
India and restricting imports, eliminating illegal internet pharmacies, while
safeguarding trade interests. The Committee desire the need for a dedicated
technical Cyber Wing under NCD, DoR to monitor drug trafficking through virtual
currency and internet pharmacy.

10. The Committee observe that during the scrutiny of quarterly
information/report in respect of pending cases in the District/Subordinate Courts
for the quarter ending on December 2013 sent by U.P Unit of CBN to their
Headquarters, out of 104 cases pending as on date, about 37 cases involve

23


seizures prior to the year 2000; but neither respective date(s) of filing these 104
cases had been mentioned nor the Department was aware of the present status of
any of these cases. Shockingly, the Ministry submitted that it is not correct to say
that 104 no. of cases are pending as the Officers of CBN have filed these cases
and Special Public Prosecutor (SPP) concerned is regularly directed to request
Courts for early disposal of cases. The Committee do not agree with the
contention of the Department as the observation had been concluded from the
records provided by U.P. unit to CBN Headquarters. Though speedy decisions by
Courts is beyond the control of the Department, poor record keeping and lack of
monitoring by the Department is a serious matter. The Committee desire that
strict action be taken against the officials responsible for mismanagement of
records. The Committee are of the opinion that there must be special NDPS
courts in all States where tracts have been notified and desire that Ministry to
vigorously pursue disposal of NDPS cases besides regular monitoring of all the
Court cases which should be preferably made online and easily accessible to
higher authorities.

11. The Committee note that contrary to the provisions, the Department had
paid more than % 2 crore being 90 percent price of opium and its balance amount
to the persons other than cultivators like son, brother, daughter and Mukhiya etc.
On being asked about the matter, it was replied that as per Opium Manual
Volume-ll “If any cultivator is absent, payment for him may be made to the
Lambardar or substitute appointed by the cultivator himself on the responsibility
of the Lambardar”, and that no complaint had been received from ‘cultivators
regarding non receiving of cost of opium and since 2012-13 opium cost had been
paid to the cultivators individual bank account through e-Payment. The
Committee are dismayed to note that though e-payment has been introduced,
large amount such as हैं 1.51 crore and हैं 0.56 crore (approx.) in respective States
was paid to persons other than cultivators without obtaining any authority letter
from the cultivators and the original cultivator had not given authority to whom
the payment was to be made; hence, the payment was irregular. The Committee

24


desire that the responsibility of the officials for making irregular payments be
fixed and action taken against them and the Committee be apprised thereof.

12. The Committee note that the Department claims to conduct 100 per cent
internal audit of cultivation of opium records after the completion of settlement
Operation each year and as per the internal audit report, no
discrepancies/irregularities/ambiguity was found during the period 2010-11 to
2012-13. However, C&AG audit found, inter-alia, non-adherence to the provisions
of licensing policy, smart card identification, satellite based cultivation
management and lack of serious efforts for recovery of outstanding dues from
the cultivators indicating lack of internal controls in the Department. The
Committee further note that there was no reconciliation done with the State
Excise Departments to control the sale/diversion of the by-products of the poppy
(poppy straw, poppy husk and poppy seeds). The Department replied that there is
a system of monthly reporting on all aspects of the functioning of State units of
CBN and CCF, which is regularly scrutinized and monitored at the level of
Headquarters. Besides, reports of all seizures.and those on other developments
are sent as and when they occur and a number of steps have been taken for
automation of its functional activities including interaction with public by
introducing web-application and sharing of information. The Committee are
shocked to note that instead of taking measures to rectify the flaws pointed out
by the Audit, the Ministry is reiterating the prevailing mechanism .The Committee
are of the view that since cases of non-adherence to the provisions of Licensing
Policy, non-maintenance of records at District Opium Office i.e. Preliminary
Weighment Register, Payment Weighment Register etc. have been pointed out by
the Audit the reporting, recording and monitoring system be strengthened and a
time frame be prescribed for CBN to get an ISO certification. The Committee are
of the view that non-adherence to the provisions of licensing policy, non-
maintenance of records and non-reconciliation with the State Excise Department
to control diversion are serious issues which should be enquired into and action
taken against those found responsible. The Committee exhort the Ministry to
take urgent steps to improve the system and apprise the Committee accordingly.

25


13. The Committee are distressed to note that audit has pointed out serious
problems like licenses issued to ineligible farmers, exorbitant ploughing back of
Opium, no mechanism to verify opium testing report, irregularities in Preliminary
Weighment Register etc indicating deficiencies and irregularities in the internal
control mechanism. The above cases highlight the lackadaisical attitude of the
District Opium Officers (DOO), Lambardar in recording and maintaining the
records at regional level. Hence, the Committee exhort the Ministry to develop a
robust monitoring mechanism to ensure that rules, regulations and procedures
are followed by all levels in the hierarchy. The Committee desire the Ministry to
Prescribe yearly schedule of regular inspections of Regional Offices by the senior
Officers of the Department and all inspection reports be made available online to
ensure transparency and easy access by the higher authorities. The DOO should
also be made accountable by prescribing submission of fortnightly reports
online. ,

14. The Committee further note that the satellite based monitoring of illicit
cultivation of opium is not enough as cases of illegal cultivation not detected by
the satellite have been noticed. Also, the areas reflected in satellite data is at
times short captured than actual area found and destroyed by agencies. Such
inefficiency defeats the very purpose of the systems of identification of illegal
opium cultivation and monitoring. The Committee are of the view that mapping of
areas be done in a manner where satellite based monitoring functions as an
adjunct to the ground level survey to give effective results. The Committee opine
that Centralised Monitoring System will work better with the Departments and
Ministries concerned coming together, coordinating and working effectively for
the cause. The Committee desire that in order to reduce illicit cultivation a facility
be developed whereas an image of the illegally cultivated area can be uploaded
on the website by anyone as is being done by the DDA.

NEW DELHI; Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
23 March, 2018 Chairperson
2 Chaitra, 1940 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

26


CONFIDENTIAL

MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF SUB-COMMITTEE ॥ (DIRECT AND
INDIRECT TAXES) OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2016-17) HELD ON
9 NOVEMBER, 2016 .

The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 9th November, 2016 from 1430 hrs. to 1545
hrs. in Committee Room '0' , Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT

Shri Nishikant Dubey - Convenor

LOK SABHA

Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi
RAJYA SABHA

Shri Ajay Sancheti

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. K. Singh - Additional Secretary
2. 511 T. Jaya Kumar - Director

REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS

1. Shri M.K.Singla - Special Secretary,
Ministry of Home Affairs
(MHA)

2. Rahiv Rai Bhatnagar - DG, Narcotics Control
हैं . Bureau (NCB)

REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA :

1. Ms. K. Ganga - Dy. CAG (CRA)
2. Ms. Shefali S. Andaleeb - PD (Customs)
2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the Members of the Sub-Committee and the

representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs to the sixth sitting of Sub-Committee III of
PAC (2016-17). The Convenor, then, apprised them that the meeting was convened to
—_ 27 _~


-2-

discuss ‘Management of Narcotic Substances’ based on C&AG Report No. 12 of 2014. He
drew the attention of the witnesses to the confidentiality of the Sub-Committee-ill of the
Public Accounts Committee (2016-17). The Sub-Committee took serious note of the
absence of Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs in the meeting. The Convenor pointed out
that Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs sought exemption on grounds of illness only after
being telephoned by the Secretariat that too on the day of the meeting whereas the names
of his subordinates were forwarded to the Secretariat the day before.

3. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs after introducing
themselves briefed the Committee on the issues raised in the report of the C&AG. The
Convenor and Members then raised various queries on the above above-mentioned

subject including :
i) Rationale for allowing cultivation of popy crop in only three States.
ii) Destruction of illicit opium crops.
iii) -Advertisements for inviting requests for licenses to ensure transparency.
iv) Need for bringing licensing and monitoring under one agency.

v) Legal cultivation dealt with by the Department of Revenue (DOR) and illicit
cultivation dealt with by the Ministry of Home Affairs.

vi) Problems in coordination amongst various agencies.
vii) Details of issues taken up with Ministry of Home Affairs.
vii) | Whether NCB working successfully with regard to its mandate.

ix) Complaints tegarding enforcement, feedback from the fields and lack of
coordination amongst forces guarding borders, State police forces,
Department of Revenue and Central Bureau of Narcotics (CBN).

x) Using satellite imaging for detecting illicit cultivation.

xi) Conferences in States where satellite images show illicit cultivation to take up
the matter with Principal Secretary and District Magistrate regarding plan of
action for destruction of illicit crops.

28


xii)

xiii)

xiv)

xv)

xvi)

xvii)

xviii)

xix)

xx)

xxi)

xxii)

xxiii)

xxiv).

-3-

Opium cultivation by immigrants and lackadaisical action by the NCB and
State Governments.

Efficacy of satellite mapping, ground surveys and coordination with State
Governments.

Frequency of meetings of NCB with Chief Secretaries of the States.

Effectiveness of intelligence wing of NCB and coordination with intelligence
wings of Central/State Governments.

Involvement of NCB officers in corrupt practices and action taken against
them. |

Collection of statistics from various agencies for transmission to the
International Narcotics Control Bureau.

Computerisation of the data of NCB, Central Monitoring System and
vacancies in NCB.

Report on challenges and issues before NCB.

Ineffectiveness of NCB/Ministry of Home Affairs in preventing disturbing
situations in various States due to opium cultivation.

Excess cultivation beyond the condonable limit, difference between
preliminary check of quality and weighment of opium and final checks.

Involvement of multiple agencies in enforcement and the resultant confusion.

Role of NCB as coordinator and investigator in intelligence operations and

prosecution.

Sanctioned strength and vacant posts in NCB, cadre review and change in
recruitment rules.

System of coordination developed by NCB after 2003, whether any scientific
system developed for coordination with the agencies viz. DOR, MOC,
Intelligence Bureau, State Police at National, State and Zonal levels and the

29


4.

schedule of meetings and whether the targets were met in last 3 years.
xxvi) Internal monitoring of opium cultivation.

xxvii) Impact of dividing the work between DOR and Ministry of Home Affairs and

level of coordination achieved.
xxviii) Whether CBN and NCB should be under one Ministry.
xxix) Reasons for importing opium.
xxx) No visits by NCB in sample survey location provided by ADRIN.

4. The Convenor observed that the internal mechanism to detect illicit cultivation of
opium in India should be strengthened by the NCB. The Convenor also directed that a
report on the issues, challenges and the benefits derived from dividing the responsibilities
between CBN/DOR and NCB/MHA may be submitted to the Sub-Committee within 10
days.

5. The Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs and other officials, replied to the queries
raised by ‘the members on various issues of the subject. As some queries required
detailed information and clarifications, the Convenor asked the representatives of the
Ministry to furnish written replies thereon to the Secretariat within 10 days. The officials
assured the Sub-Committee to do the same.

6. The Convener then thanked the representative of Ministry of Home Affairs and
officers of NCB for appearing before the Sub-Committee for tendering evidence and for
giving free and frank replies to the queries of the members.

7. The Convener then thanked the representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs for

giving their views in a candid manner.

The witnesses then withdrew.

A copy of the verbatim proceedings has been kept on record.

The Committee, then, adjourned.
es


CONFIDENTIAL

MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF SUB-COMMITTEE II] (DIRECT AND
INDIRECT TAXES) OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2017-18) HELD ON
09 NOVEMBER, 2017

from

The ninth sitting of Sub-Committee was held on Thursday, the 9"" November, 2017
1530 hrs to 1645 hrs in Committee Room '3',Block A, New Extension Building,

Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

1.
2.
3.

Shri Nishikant Dubey - Convenor

PRESENT

Members
LOK SABHA
Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT ;

Shri A.K Singh - Additional Secretary
Shri Jayakumar T. - Director

Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary

REPRESENTATIVES 07 “MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY

(DEPARTMENTOF COMMERCE)

Ms. Rita Teaotia - Commerce Secretary
Shri Alok Chaturvedi - Director Gerieral of Foreign Trade

REPRESENTATIVES OF NARCOTICS CONTROL BUREAU

Ms. Rina Mitra - Director General
Shri Rajendra Pal Singh - Deputy Director General (Operations)
Shri Taj Hassan - Deputy Director General (Headquarters)

3)


-2-

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE C&AG OF INDIA

1. Ms. K. Ganga - Dy. CAG
2. Ms. Shefali S. Andaleeb -  Pr.Director (Customs)
2. At the outset, Hon'ble Convenor welcomed the Members of the Sub-Committee and

the representatives of C&AG to the sitting of Sub-Committee III of PAC (2017-18). Hon'ble
Convenor, then, apprised them that the meeting was convened to take evidence of
representatives of Ministry of Commerce & Industry (Department of Commerce) and
representatives of Narcotics Control Bureau (NCB) on issues related to "Management of
Narcotics Substances" based on Chapter VI of C&AG Report No. 12 of 2014. After
briefing by the officials of C&AG, the witnesses were called in.. Hon'ble Convenor while
drawing attention of the witnesses to the confidentiality of the evidence tendered before
the Committee, in his introductory remarks, made the following observations:-

(i) Role of various Ministries/agencies in Management of Narcotic Substances.
(ii) "No apparent rationale-for allowing cultivation of poppy seeds in only three States. हि
(iii) High demand for poppy seeds in India and the difference between demand and
production being met through imports.
(iv) Coordination related issues due to involvement of multiple agencies.
(v) ७४७९ of online pharmacies for drug trafficking.
(vi) Dwindling production of opium.
(vii) Overlapping roles of Narcotics Control Bureau (NCB) and Central Bureau of
Narcotics (CBN). |
(vill) No policy framework for the twin objectives of revenue generation and foreign
exchange savings.

3. Thereafter, the representatives of Department of Commerce (DoC) & NCB
introduced themselves. Secretary, Department of Commerce in her opening remarks
briefed the Sub-Committee about the mechanism and structure of formulation of trade
policy in the Ministry and specific role in Management of Narcotic Substances. Thereafter,
Director General (DG), NCB explained that NCB is the nodal agency for all coordination

B2



-3-
measures taken by various agencies and _ that it monitors drugs disposal and seizures

etc. The Members of the Sub-Committee sought clarifications on various issues including :

(i) Drug trafficking through Darknet & Bitcoins.
(ii) Trade deficit in poppy seeds and steps taken to address the issue.
(iii) Unified mechanism to look into licit and illicit opium production.
(iv) ४४७७ addition to opium for using it for medicinal purpose.
(v) Need fora role of DoC in advising Department of Revenue (DOR) about balancing
imports & exports.
(vi) Report of the DoC regarding the opium policy which it has shared with line
Ministries.
(vii) Status of Coordination Cell referred to by the then DG, NCB during evidence held
on 09.11.2016
(viii) Action taken against corrupt officials of NCB in last one year.
(ix) Meetings held with International Narcotics Bureau & CBN to address issues relating
to increase in drug trafficking in last one year.
00. Status of online computerised system being developed for collecting data regarding
illicit trade.
(xi) Vacancies filled up in last one year in NCB.
(xii) Lack of satellite mapping and coordination issues with State Government leading to
increase in illicit cultivation.

3. Secretary explained that DoC regularly makes an assessment of major imports and
exports and sends it to the line Ministries to devise a strategy in order to address why
there is too much of imports in certain categories. Thereafter DG, NCB while responding
fo the queries of the Members stated that the recruitment process takes time as it needs to
be taken up by the UGC which has an elaborate procedure for the same. As regards the
Centralised Monitoring System.(CMS), the representation of the NCB stated that it would
become operational by March, 2018.

4. Hon'ble Convenor in his closing remarks stated that a meeting between all the
Ministries and agencies under the Charimanship of Cabinet Secretary be held to address
the issues relating to trade deficit, getting estimate for the pharmaceutical companies,
setting yield on scientific basis, inclusion of new cultivations/tracts, considering licensing in
other States as per demand and proper monitoring by having a unified agency. Hon'ble

33


- -4-
Convenor directed the representatives of the Ministry to submit the replies to the
queries raised by the Members within 15 days.

The witnesses then withdrew.

A copy of the verbatim proceedings has been kept on record.

The Committee, then, adjourned.

BY


YN Wh A

MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF SUB-COMMITTEE Ill (DIRECT AND
INDIRECT TAXES) OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2017-18) HELD ON
04 DECEMBER, 2017.

The sitting of Sub-Committee was held on Monday, the 4 December, 2017 from

1500 hrs to 1615 hrs in Committee Room '3',Block A, New Extension Building, Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.

Bons

Shri Nishikant Dubey - Convenor

PRESENT

Members
LOK SABHA

Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

Shri A.K Singh - Additional Secretary
Shri Jayakumar T. , - Director

Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary

REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY 07 FINANCE (DEPARTMENT 07

REVENUE), CHIEF CONTROLLER OF FACTORIES AND CENTRAL BUREAU OF
NARCOTICS (CBN) .

Shri Hasmukh Adhia - Secretary

Shri Udai Singh Kumawat - JS

Shri C.P. Goyal - Chief Controller of Factories
Shri Rajesh Puri - ‘Narcotics Commissioner

SS



-2-

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE C&AG REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE C&AG OF INDIA

Smt. Anita Patnaik - Dy. CAG
2. Shri Sanjay Kumar - PD (Customs)
2. At the outset, Hon'ble Convenor welcomed the Members of the Sub-Committee and

the representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)and Central Bureau
of Narcotics (CBN) to the twelfth sitting of Sub-Committee III of PAC (2017-18). Hon'ble
Convenor, then, apprised them that the meeting was convened to discuss further the
subject ‘Management of Narcotic Substances’ based on C&AG Report No. 12 of 2014. He
drew the attention of the witnesses to the confidentiality of the Sub-Committee-IIl of the
Public Accounts Committee (2017-18). It was further apprised that the PAC (2015-16) had
held informal discussion on the subject at Goa during the study visit of the Committee.
Further, on allocation of the subject to the Sub-Committee-Ill, the subject was further
discussed with Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) and Narcotics Control Bureau (NCB) on
09.11.2016 followed by another evidence of NCB and Department of Commerce (DoC) on
09.11.2017. Hon'ble Convenor, further made following observations in his introductory

remarks:-

(6). Potential of narcotic alkaloid extracts to provide higher economic returns to poppy
plantation and save foreign exchange.
(ii) Lack of clear policy framework aiming at the twin objectives of revenue generation
and foreign exchange savings.
(iii) Involvement of multiple agencies leading to overlapping and coordination related
problems with regard to management of Narcotic Substances.
(iv) ० apparent rationale for allowing cultivation of poppy seeds in only three States.
(v) High demand of poppy seeds consequently met through imports.
(vi) Rise of illicit production of opium poppy.
(vil) Remedial action taken by the Ministry on Audit's observations.
(vill) Steps taken by the Ministry to address issues of overlapping of roles, illicit
productions of opium poppy, dwindling licit production of opium in-India and policy
framework for better management of Narcotic Substances.

SG



-3-
3. Thereafter, the representatives of Department of Revenue(DoR), Chief

Controller of Factory (CCF) & Central Bureau of Narcotics (CBN) introduced themselves.
Secretary, Department of Revenue in his opening remarks briefed the Sub-Committee
about the responsibility of the Department for NDPS Act, 1985 and responsibility of two
agencies CBN and CCF. Secretary, DoR, on overlapping functions between CBN and
NCB, pointed out that CBN is the main regulatory authority for licensing, import & export of
opium alkaloid whereas NCB is an apex enforcement agency for narcotic drugs. He
further briefed that the crop technology used in India to convert the gum into opium is
outdated world over and there is need for shifting towards new technology to prevent
misuse and leakage of opium into the market. The two factories at Gazipur (since 1850)
and Neemuch (since 1976) running on old technologies, needs to be modernised. On
lines of new technology of Concentrate of Poppy Straw (CPS) experimental fields have
been given to two parties for growing CPS. The Sub-Committee sought clarifications on
various issues including:

(i) Pilot project under CPS.
(ii) Views of Department of Revenue on Cabinet Note mooted by MHA on transfer of
NCB, CBN and CCF from DoR to MHA. :

(ii) | Demand analysis for untapped potential of opium and its derivatives.

(iv) Guidelines formulated subsequent to the judgement of the Allahabad High Court for
import of poppy seeds.

(v) Efforts made by the Government to increase production of poppy seeds in line with
_ the National Policy on Narcotic Drugs. है

(vi) Total no. of NOCs issued for import and export of precursor chemicals under the
PEN (Pre-Export Notification).

(vil) Issue of smuggling of opium from non-signatory to signatory countries and chances
of it getting into India via countries signatories to International Narcotics Control
Bureau (INCB).

(viii) | Determination of quota for each country under INCB, Vienna.

(ix) Seeking information from INCB on opium produced, consumed and exported by
other signatory countries.

(x) _ Rationale for cultivating poppy only in three States.

(xi) Reasons for import of opium from particular countries only.

(xii) Details of drug-demand survey done by the Department in view of increasing drug
requirements in the country particularly in the health sector.

37


(xiii)
(xiv)

(xv)
(xvi)
(xvii)

(xviii)

(xix)

(xx)

(xxi)

(xxii)
(xxiii)

(xxiv)

(xxv)

(xxvi)
(xxvii)
(xxviii)
(xxix)
(xxx)
(xxxi)

4.

Reasons for rise in trade deficit of narcotic substances.

४ Steps taken to control illicit production of poppy in other States of the country.

Policy framework to address issues of coordination with MHA & State agencies on
illicit poppy production.

Issue of huge vacancies in CBN.

Using of shrub area along Ganga river for cultivation of poppy.

Misuse of border areas along the country for illegal smuggling of opium/narcotic
drugs due to weak law.

Need for strengthening of law to cultivate poppy sufficient. to meet domestic
requirements for drugs and other issues and thereby reducing dependency and
bridge the export-import gap.

Universal implementation of National Health Policy and increasing requirement of
drugs in that case.

For carrying out drug survey need for coordination amongst DoR, MHA, Ministry of
Social Justice and Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilisers.

Anamolies in Opium policy and steps taken to address them.

Reasons for variations in data of three poppy growing States and reasons for non-
achieving of opium production targets.

Action taken in last 5 years against the responsible officers for. illicit poppy
cultivation

Neéed for constitution of Coordination Committee at Secretary level to address Inter-
Ministerial issues.

Minutes of last four quarterly meetings taken by NCB and as attended by CBN.
Long pendency of court cases and their quarterly information report.

Issue relating to non-testing of soil before issuance of license to cultivators.

Reports from four Institutes on scientific study of opium crops.

Non-disposal of seized opium and other psychotropic drugs fit for disposal.

Issue of irregularities in Preliminary Weighment Register (PWR) and details of list of
237 cases scrutinised by Audit.

Secretary explained that the Department of Revenue would give their opinion on

Cabinet Note initiated by MHA as and when it comes to Department and expressed his

opinion that it would be better that the regulatory & enforcement issues on Narcotic
Substances be dealt separately by CBN & NCB respectively. Thereafter, Narcotics
Commissioner, CBN while responding to the queries of the Members stated that CBN

38


-5-
attend quarterly meetings of NCB as and when issues related to CBN is on the

agenda and also enlightened the Sub-Committee about the February, 2016 judgement of
Supreme Court in 'Mohan Lal’ case.

4. The Secretary, Department of Revenue and other officials replied to the queries
raised by the Members on various issues related to the subject. As some queries required
detailed information and clarifications, the Convenor asked the representatives of the
Ministry to furnish written replies thereon to the Secretariat within 10 days. The officials
assured the Sub-Committee to do the same.

i

5. The Convenor then thanked the representative of DoR, CCF & CBN for appearing
before the Sub-Committee for tendering evidence and for giving free and frank replies to
the queries of the Members.

6. The Convenor then thanked the representatives of Ministry of Finance (DoR), CCF
& CBN for giving their views in a candid manner.

The witnesses then withdrew.

A copy of the verbatim proceedings has been kept on record.

The Committee, then, adjourned.

39


MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-III

(DIRECT & INDIRECT TAXES) OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2017-18) HELD ON 22 MARCH, 2018.

The Committee sat from 1000 hrs. to 1045 hrs. on 22 March, 2018 in
Committee Room No. “3", Block A, Extension Building, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.

PRESENT

Shri Nishikant Dubey - Hon'ble Convenor

MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Shiv Kumar C. Udasi
RAJYA SABHA
3. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

1. Shri A. K. Singh
Shri T. Jayakumar
Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja

- Additional Secretary
- Director
- Deputy Secretary

REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA

41. Shri. Sanjay Kumar - PD (DT)

2. At the outset, the Hon'ble Convenor welcomed the Members and the
representatives of the Office of the C&AG of India to the sitting of the Sub-Committee.
The Hon'ble Convenor then apprised the Members that the meeting has been
convened to consider and adopt two Draft Reports; one Original and one Action Taken
Report, already circulated to Members. Thereafter, the Sub-Committee took up the
following draft reports one by one for consideration:

(i) Draft Report on "Management of Narcotic Substances" based on Chapter VI of
the C&AG's Report No. 12 of 2014; and

(ii) Draft Report on Action’ Taken by Government on __ the
Observations/Recommendations. contained in 75" Report (16"" Lok Sabha) on
“Performance of Import and Export Trade Facilitation through Customs Ports”.

Yo


3. The Hon'ble Convenor invited suggestions of the Members on the above
mentioned draft.Reports. After discussing the contents of the draft reports, the Sub-
Committee adopted the same with minor changes/modifications.

4. The Sub-Committee authorized the Hon'ble Convenor to finalize the Reports in
the light of consequential changes arising out of the factual verifications by the Audit
and present the same before the Main Committee for consideration and adoption.

The Sub-Committee then adjourned.

_u) -