48

AVOIDABLE EXPENDITURE ON

“SERVICE TAX BY INSURANCE ~

REGULATORY AND DEVELOPMENT
AUTHORITY (IRDA)

MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(Department of Financial Services)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE |
(2015-16)

FORTY-EIGHTH REPORT

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA '

FRETS

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT.
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2080

FORTY-EIGHTH REPORT

- PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ~~
(2015-16)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

AVOIDABLE EXPENDITURE ON SERVICE
TAX BY INSURANCE REGULATORY AND
DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY (IRDA) ,

MINISTRY OF FINANCE

(Department of Financial Services)

wane फ़पते

Presented to Lok Sabha on: 2:04 2016

Laid in RajyaSabhaon: 28°" OY 2ole

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

April, 2016 / Vaisakha 1938 (Saka)

aa


1

CONTENTS

4
Composition of the Public Accounts Committee (2015-16)
Composition of Sub-Committee-It (Direct and Indirect Taxes) of the Public Accounts
Committee (2015-16)

Introduction - ~
~~ REPORT
PART- |
Introduction
* The Issue
Observations of Audit

IRDA's contention
Ministry's reply

Refund of Service Tax collected from the subscribers of Varishtha Pension Bima Yojana
(VPBY)
PART - fi

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
:
APPENDICES

Minutes of the ‘st Sitting of Sub-Committee-IIl (Direct and Indirect Taxes) held on 11th
January, 2016, .
Minutes of the 3rd Sitting of Sitting of Sub-Committee-IIl (Direct and Indirect Taxes) held
on 25th April, 2016.

Minutes of the 27th Sitting of PAC (2015-16) held on 26th April, 2016.

iii)

PAGES
(गे

dit)



11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

16.
iA
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEES °

@

ONO wWN

» (2015-16)

Prof. K.V. Thomas

MEMBERS

hri 5.5. Ahluwalia
hri Sudip Bandyopadhyay

hri Nishikant Dubey
fhri Gajanan Kirtikar
hit Bhartruhari Mahtab

hri Neiphiu Rio
hri Dushyant Singh

7. Kirit Somaiya
hri Anurag Singh Thakur
hri Shivkumar Udasi

हज ५० ५०ए 0५? ५ ८००५ ५० (7 ५०2 ०7 ० ०?

ir, 7, Venugopal

Shri Naresh Agrawal

Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
Shri Anit Madhav Dave
Shri Vijay Goel

Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Shri Shantaram Naik

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy

€

Shri AK. Singh

, Shri T. Jayakumar

Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja

- Ms. Malvika Mehta

hri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura हि

ri Janardan Singh Sigriwal

-. Chairperson

LOK SABHA

hii Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank"

RAJYA SABHA

SECRETARIAT

(iy.

Additional Secretary
Director

Deputy Secretary
Committee Officer


ory 4
a

+ COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE (DIRECT AND INDIRECT
TAXES) OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2015-16) -

Shri Nishikant Dubey - Convenor
Dr. Kirit Somaiya - Alternate Convenor

MEMBERS —
LOK SABHA
3. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank"

RAJYA SABHA

4. Shri Shantaram Naik
5. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy -


INTRODUCTION

¥

|, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2015-16), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Forty-eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha) on ‘Avoidable Expenditure on Service Tax by Insurance Regulatory
and Development Authority (IRDA)’ based on Para No. 6.1 of C&AG Report No.
18 of 2015, Union Government (Civil) (Compliance Audit Observations) relating to

Ministry of Finance. - coe _

2. The Report of the Cornptroller and Auditor General of India was laid on the
Table of the House on 24" July, 2016. ;

3. The Public Accounts Committee (2015-16) selected the subject for detailed
examination and report. A Sub-Committee under the convenorship of Shri
Nishikant Dubey, MP and a Member of PAC was constituted for the purpose. The
Sub-Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Financial Services) on the subject at their sitting held on aw
January, 2016 The Sub-Committee-IIl considered and adopted the Report at their
sitting held on 25th April, 2016 and thereafter, the Public Accounts Committee
(2015-16) considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 26th April,
2016. Minutes of the Sittings form Appendices to the Report.

4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold and form
Part I] of the Report.

5. The Committee thank the Sub-Committee for taking oral evidence and
obtaining information on the subject as well as finalizing and placing the Draft
Report before the main Committee.

6. The Committee would-like to express their thanks to the representatives of
the Ministry of Finance for tendering evidence before them and furnishing the
requisite information to the Committee in connection with the examination of the
subject.

7. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance
rendered to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India.

रु

NEW DELHI; PROF. K.V.THOMAS
26" April, 2016 : Chairperson,

6 Vaisakha 1938 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

Git)


I Introduction

1. Report no. 18 of 2015 of the C&AG of India contains significant results of the

_ compliance audit of financial transactions of _the Ministries/ Departments of the Union

Government and their autonomous bodies under the economic/ general and social
services. Para 6.1 of ‘this report relates to the failure of Insurance Regulatory and
Development Authority of India to recover service tax from its clients and subsequent
payment thereof from own funds fesulting in avoidable expenditure of हैं. 22.58 crore.
The Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA) was set up as an
autonomous body under the IRDA Act, 1999 with the main objective to protect the
interests of policy holders, to regulate, promote and ensure orderly growth of the
insurance industry. and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. The IRDA
is under the administrative control of the Department of Financial Services, Ministry of

Finance.

2. The main activities of IRDA include framing regulations for insurance industry in
terms of Section 114A of the Insurance Act 1938, from the year 2000, registering new
insurance companies in accordance with regulations and monitoring insurance sector
activities for healthy development of the industry and protection of policyholders’

interests.

॥ The Issue

3. Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA), Hyderabad has been
- rendering services to the Public/ Private Insurance companies, agents, brokers etc. by

collecting charges/ fees. As per the provisions of the Finance Bill 2012, service tax is to

be levied on all services except those specified under Section 66D (Negative List aind
——----—- exempted services). ‘The: services provided-by-IRDA-were not included ‘in the negative ~~ ~
list. Hence, IRDA was required, with effect from 1 July 2012, to collect service tax on the.

charges/ fees collected for the services provided by it.


(April 2012) the Ministry to get the
ist. IRDA did not, however, collect the

services rendered by it included in the Negative
service tax as per the provisions of the Act pending ‘decision from the Ministry.

5. Ministry stated (July 2043) that it was a conscious decision of Government to
keep exemptions at the minimum and as such the services of IRDA are liable to service ,
tax.

6. Subsequently, IRDA sought opinion from a tax consultant, who confirmed
(December 2013) the service tax liability and assessed the same for the period from 1
July 2012 to 2 December 2013 at हैं 17.09 crore.

7. IRDA decided (December 2013) to collect service fax payable from 1 January
2014 from service receivers. It however, paid the service tax of हैं. 22.58 crore for the

period 01.07.2012 to 31.12.2013.

lil” Observations of Audit

8. Audit observed (February 2074) that

+ IRDA did not consider it prudent fo recover service tax from its service

receivers pending Ministry's reply which was received ‘after 15 months.

+ Even after receipt of Ministry's reply in July 2013, IRDA did not initiate action to

recover service tax from its clients and instead it decided to pay the tax from its .

own funds. : wee

IV IRDA’s contention

x

9. IRDA stated (September 2014) that

s there was. no clarity on the subject, it sought the opinion of Ministry and the

clarification was received in July 2013.

_ * Opinion sought from tax consultant was for calculation of service tax and not

regarding its applicability.


+ It felt that it was cumbersome to collect the service tax from agents (20 lakh)

brokers (300), etc. and hence a conscious decision was taken to bear the servige

tax liability
Vv Ministry’s reply |
10. In this regard, to the question of the Committee on the enormous delay of 15

months on the part of Department of Financial Services in responding to IRDA on a

matter of urgent importance with potential serious financial implications, the Secretary,

Department of Financial Services during oral evidence replied that on consu tation’ with
the Department of Revenue and on receiving a clarification from them, the decision was

conveyed to IRDA.

11... In the context of the main reason attributed to the delay in recovery of Service
Tax by Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of india (IRDAI), the Ministry
submitted the following:-

“IRDAI was of the view that the services of the authority are not subjected to
the provisions of the service tax, as the function performed by the IRDAI.
under IRDA Act 1999 are in the nature of statutory obligations which are
fulfilled in accordance with the law.

After getting the clarifications from Department of Revenue, intimated by
DFS on 30" July, 2013 that the service provided by the authority are liable to
service tax, the matter was referred to the Chartered Accountant firm for
opinion on the method of working i.e. method of calculation, retrospective or
prospective etc. The opinion of the Chartered Accountant firm placed before
the authority in its 817 meeting held on 31.12.2013. Since IRDAI had not
collected service tax from the service receivers, it was felt difficult'to recover
the service tax for the earlier period i.e. from 01.07.2012 to 31.12.2013. It
was proposed to collect the service tax from 17 January, 2014 prospectively
it was also decided that the service tax payable from 1% July, 2012 to 317
December, 2013 would be borne by IRDAI. There appears to have been a
misunderstanding in IRDAI on the applicability of service tax

t

After C&AG’s audit observation on non recovery of service tax, the matter
was placed before the 87" meeting of the Board held on 27" March, 2015
and it was decided to recover the entire service tax-due and’ authorise
Chairman, IRDA! to constitute a three member. conimittee for recovery of
service tax. The three member committee recommended to recover the
service tax from all concerned-and the authority.-has recovered 96% of the

+


4 4 4

+ 4 4

as against the total of € 22.58 crore as on date.

total dues ie. ¥ 21.60

12. According to Audit, the reply of the Ministry needs to be viewed in light of the

following

+ Services provided by IRDA were covered neither in the negative list nor by any

specific exemption notification and were therefore liable to service tax.

+ Tax consultant in his opinion also confirmed that services provided by IRDA -
were neither covered under negative list nor Mega Exemption List, therefore

attracted service tax. ©

«IRDA could have attempted to collected service tax from its service recipients at
the time of renewal of licenses as the services provided by |RDA were clearly
taxable and its decision to bear the burden without initiating steps to recover the

same was flawed.

43. Therefore IRDA’s decision initially to not collect service tax and subsequently to
bear the tax liability resulted in an avoidable expenditure of € 22.58 crore. The matter

was reported to Ministry (October 2014), their reply was awaited.

44, : In this regard, the Ministry in their background note submitted the following:-"

“IRDA submitted a revised ATN indicating the status of recovery vide their letter
dated 06/10/2015, in which it was mentioned that the authority has recovered an
amount of .% 16.80.crore against the.total of. .% 22.58 crore. Accordingly,.a.— ..
revised ATN was submitted to C&AG by this Department on 26th October, 2015.
The C&AG vetted the ATN vide their letter dated 5" January, 2016 with the
conclusion that % 16.80 crore has been recovered against the total payment of
Service Tax amounting to % 22.58 crore. Further progress of the remaining
recovery may please be intimated to Monitoring Cell, Ministry of Finance/PAC

“Tindér intimation to Audit ————T ve ee

As per the latest information provided by IRDA, the authority has so far
recovered an‘amount of % 21.60 crore as against the total of हैं 22.58 crore and
only a balance of 4% i.e. & 98 lakh is pending for recovery now. The authority
has further informed that they are vigorously pursuing the recovery of the
remaining amount of Service Tax.


ot

16. ~ In this regard, the representatives of IRDA stated the following:-

“Initially the Board decided not to collect it. But as soon as the C&AG raised

the objection, immediately we started the coll

lection process. We have already

collected 96 per cent of the amount. Only four per cent is pending and we
assure you that we would be able-to collect the money by the: end: of this
month.”

16.

The Committee asked if electronic system was

being followed in the Ministry for

addressing of queries or for the purpose of obtaining information and such issues could

be sorted in 10-15 days if electronic approach is

Department of Financial Services replied that at presen

17.

fees are charged along with the quantum by IRDA

gave the fol

On being asked about the details of fees and en

lowing information:-

they were not following it.

taken. To this the Secretary,

ities (intermediaries) from whom

_ and its regulations, the Ministry

Fa Regulated | Fees Structure Regulation Details | Remarks
No | Entit है
1 insurers Application -Rs 50,000/- | Registration of
per class of business Indian Insurance
Renewal -1% of one- Companies 2000
twentieth of Gross and Fifth
Written Premium subject | Amendment-2013
to a maximum of Rs 5 है
वि Crore.
2 |TPAs Rs 15,000/- Third Party
. Administrators-
Health Services
. _}(Second 2 =
Amendment)
Regulations, 2013
3. | Agents Rs 125/- (Licensing of | After
Insurance Agents) ( | Insurance
Amendment) Law
Regulations, 2013 Amendm
the
function
of
licensing
of Agents

BAT 2015, [77

by“ IRDAI


x

4

Sr | Regulate

“| No | Entity” |

Fees Structure

Regulation Details

Remarks

has been
withdraw
ne

Brokers __

_| Application Fees

,000
z

Direct broker: हें
Reinsurance broker:
25,000 Composite *
broker: % 40,000
Annual licence fees:
Direct Broker

0.50% of rémuneration
earned in the preceding
financial year subject to
minimum of हैं 25,000
and maximum of हैं
4,00,000.

Reinsurance broker
0.50% of remuneration
earned in the preceding
financial year subject to
minimum of % 75,000
and maximum of हैं
3,00,000.

Composite broker
0.50% of remuneration
earned in the preceding
financial year subject to
minimum of & 1,265,000
and maximum of हैं
500,000.

Renewal fee: र 1000

Insurance Brokers
Regulations, 2013

Surveyors

Application Fee
Rs1,000/-
Renewal Fee Rs 100/-

Insurance

Surveyors and Loss
Assessors
Regulations, 2015

Insurance
Repositori
ES.

Renewal Fees --Rs.

Application Fees -
Rs10,000/-

20,000/-

Guidelines
Insurance

on

repositories and |..........

electronic issuance
of insurance policies

Web
| Aggregator
हि

Application& Renewal
Fees Rs10,000/-

Web Aggregators
Regulations 2013.

Referral

Application & Renewal

Sharing of

for

Entities

Fees Rs10,000/-

Databases


Sr | Regulated | Fees Structure Regulation Details | Remarks
~~ No" Entit a शलििओ a

Distribution of

nsurance Products
F Regulations 2010

| | Corporate. | Application Fee _ Registration of

Agents Rs10,000/- Corporate Agenis
Registration Fee Regulations, 2015
: Rs25,000/-
10 | CSI Application Fee Rs nsurance Services
5000/- न by Common Service

Renewal Fee Rs 1,000/- | Centres
है ~_| Regulations, 2015

41 | Insurance | Application Fee Rs Registration of

Marketing | 5000/- nsurance Marketing

-Firm Renewal Fee Rs 2,000/- | Firm Regulations
2015

418. In the context of services being rehdered by regulators such as IRDA, the
Committee queried that due to the dual role being performed by regulators as service
providers or market developers, what were the provisions of auditing the income
generated by this second role as service providers. The Secretary, Department of

Financial Services, Ministry of Finance in this regard replied that these were thought

-provoking points and that they would get the issue of auditing of regulators as service
providers checked in case of all other regulators under them.

vi Refund. of Service Tax collected from the subscribers of Varishtha Pension
Bima Yojana (VPBY)

19. In a related context, during the oral evidence of the representatives of the
Department of Financial Services, Ministry of Finance, the Committee asked about the
status of refund of service tax collected from the subscribers of Varishtha Pension Bima

Yojana and how much money had so far been refunded and what steps were taken by

IRDA to ensure refund. The Ministry in their reply stated the Toliowing:-

“In the Union Budget, 2015, Life Insurance service provided by way of
Varishtha Pension Bima Yojana (VPBY) scheme has been exempted froth
service tax.w.e.f. 017 April, 2015. However, for the period from 14 August,
2014 (date of launching) to 31° March, 2015, LIC had collected service tax on
policy subscriber contribution under the scheme and it was decided that ~


5 ड़

amount of service tax collected under VPBY for above. period will be

reimbursed to’ LIC. as and when’ LIC would lodge’ the’ clairfis “alongwith a ~~"

cettificate from the Chartered Accountant firmn/auditors indicating that the
amount have been reimbursed to the subscribers of the scheme. LIC has
informed that as the payment process is not yet completed by the- LIC’s
offices, the desired certificate from the Chartered Accountant could not be
obtained. As per LIC the refundable service tax under VPBY scheme is
Rs.109.40 crore. As on date LIC has refunded Rs.108 crore to the
subscribers and an amount of Rs.1.40 crore is to be’refunded for which they

are taking all efforts.”



9

ह ‘Part-ll

Observations/ recommendations of the Committee

Para 6.1 in report no. 18 of 2015 of the C&AG of India pertains to the failure
of Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India (IRDA) to recover
service tax from clients and subsequent payment thereof from own funds
resulting in avoidable expenditure of RS. 22.58 crore. The Committee, based on
the analysis of the audit para, oral evidence of the representatives of Department
of Financial Services (DFS), Ministry of Finance and replies furnished by the DFS
have found certain shortcomings on its part and IRDA and place their

observations and recommendations on the matter in the succeeding paragraphs.

1. Delay on the part of DFS in replying to IRDA ह

The Committee note that IRDA which has been rendering services to the
Public/ Private Insurance companies, agents, brokers etc. by collecting charges/
fees was required, with effect from 1 July 2012, to collect service tax on the
charges/ fees collected for the services provided by it, as per the provisions of
the Finance Bill 2012. The Committee note that IRDA, instead of collecting the tax,
requested the Ministry in April 2012 to get the services rendered by it included in
the Negative List (List of those who are not to pay service tax) and also did not
collect the service tax as per the provisions of the Act pending decision from the
Ministry.. The Committee observe that the Ministry intimated IRDA on 30" July,
2013 that the services provided by the Authority are liable to service tax.

The Committee are distressed to note that in this modern era of fast paced
developments, it took the Ministry fifteen long months to give clarification on a
single query raised by the IRDA resulting in non-collection of service tax during
the period. The Committee observe that the Ministry which imposes penalties for

“delays oii other parties is oblivious oF iis own laxity. The Committee are of the”

view that a time frame may be prescribed for the Ministry to clear-all the queries
referred to it so that such lapses are not repeated in future.. The Committee also

desire that responsibility for this delay be fixed and stringent action taken against:


10

5 4 4

those found guilty and the Committee be apprised ‘thereof within three months of

presentation of this report.

2. Computerisation of query addressing system system
The Committee_note that the Ministry.does not follow electronic approach for

receiving/ addressing/ processing the queries received for clarification. The
Committee fee! that queries such as liability to service tax is a routine matter for
the Ministry and can be handled by prescribing a procedure which can be
-implemented electronically. The Committee, therefore, desire that Ministry may
adopt and:apply electronic systems/approach to all its processes to streamline
such seeking of clarifications and obtaining information to avoid instances of
unconscionable delay. The Committee also feel that such electronic system
should also provide for reporting the time of receiving the queries and the time

taken to address them for enabling effective monitoring.

3. Collection of Service Tax
The Committee note that despite receiving the clarification from the

Ministry in July, 2013 that IRDA was liable to pay service tax, the Authority

sought an opinion from a tax consultant, who confirmed in December 2013, the
service tax liability and assessed the same for the period from 1 July 2012 to 2
December 2013 at Z 17.09 crore. The Committee further observe that IRDA
decided then to collect service tax payable w.e.f. 1 January 2014 from service
receivers. It however, paid the service tax of % 22.58 crore for the period
01.07.2012 to 31.12.2013 from itsown funds as it was felt difficult to recover the ©
service tax for the earlier period. It was only after Audit’s observation on hon-
recovery of service tax, the matter was placed before the 87" meeting of the

Board held on 27" March, 2015 and it was decided to recover the entire service

--tax due. The Committee-note-that IRDA has-recovered-96%-of the-total-dues (०, --~ -

21.60 crore as against the-total of हैं 22.58 crore as on date.

The Committee’ observe with concern that there was an avoidable and
inordinate-delay on the part of IRDA by seeking the ‘opinion. from the tax
consultant when the Ministry had already directed them to pay service tax. The


it

process took five months for calculating the service tax liability. The Committee

desire that accountability maybe fixed on the officials concerned, so that such
matiers of financial significance are not neglected or repeated in future by the

Authority. The concerned officials in the Ministry of Finance should have

prevailed upon the IRDA in fimely following the provisions of the Finance Bill,
2012. The Committee view seriously about the failure of the Ministry in this
regard. The Committee while cautioning the Authority on being careful in the
future in financial matters, would further like to be apprised of the status of
recovery of the balance amount of 4% Le. 98 lakhs from the service receivers.
The Committee further recommend that IRDA should computerise and strengthen

its tax collection systems to facilitate service tax collection.

4, Audit of income and expenditure income and expenditure दि हि
The Committee note that at first, the IRDA decided not to collect service tax
pending decision of the Ministry and then after the Ministry had given its decision

to collect the service tax, IRDA found it cumbersome to collect the dues of
service tax from the receivers and paid it from its own funds. The Committee
observe that the IRDA should not have used its own funds to pay up the liabilities
of the service providers. The Committee further’ observe that the IRDA
apparently, did not exercise financial discipline and feel that internal audit of the

working of the regulator may be done regularly to ensure reasonableness,

while noting that C&AG only audits the administrative expenditures of the

regulators and the orders that are passed in its quasi-judicial capacity are not

be auditable, the incomes, wherever and however, generated, must fall within the

scope. of Audit.

appropriateness and accuracy of the inflow/outflow of funds. The Committee’ -

-: subject to Audit are, however, of the strong opinion that though orders may not -

5. Regulators as service providers

The Committee note that in view of the surge in number of services and

~ service providers, the number of regulatory authorities have also increased which

are mandated. with dual roles i.e. both regulation and development of the


intimation to the Committee.

12

respective sectors and for achieving these aims, they provide certain services for

which charges/fees are taken. The Committee also note the reply of the Ministry
while deciding on the issue of exemption to IRDA that "it was a conscious
decision of the Government to keep the exemptions at the minimum and hence
the services rendered by IRDA are liable to service tax”. The Committee are of the
view that instead of taking decisions to only align with the strategy to keep the
exemptions to the minimum, the Ministry should analyse whether’ services
rendered by these regulators should be liable under service tax and whether all
the regulators are paying service tax for services rendered by them and bring out

a policy decision on the same under intimation to the Committee.

6. Reimbursement to the subscribers of the VPBY

The Committee note that in the Union Budget 2015, life insurance service
provided by way of Varishtha Pension Bima Yojana (VPBY) scheme was
exempted from service tax w.e.f. 1.4.2015. However, as LIC had collected service
tax on policy subscriber contribution from 14.8.2014 to 31.3.2015, it was decided
that LIC would be reimbursed on production of certificate from the Chartered
Accountants indicating that the amounts have been reimbursed to the
Subscribers. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that LIC has
refunded %108 crore to the subscribers and %1.40 crore is yet to be refunded. The
Committee observe that the IRDA should monitor such cases earnestly to ensure
that the-moneys due to subscribers are paid back expeditiously. The Committee
are of the view that IRDA should work in tandem with the insurance companies in
such cases and display all such information on its website in bold to safeguard
the interests of the subscribers. The Committee desire that the remaining service

tax collected from the subscribers of VPBY be refunded at the earliest under

‘NEW DELHI; ~ जे PROF. K.V.THOMAS

260 April, 2016 ' Chairperson,

6 Vaisakha 1938 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


CONEIDENHAL,
APPENDIX. - |

MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF SUB-COMMITTEE (DIREGTINDIRECT
TAXES) PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2015-18) HELD ON 417 JANUARY,

2016.

The Committee sat on Monday, the 14 January, 2016 from 1130 hrs to 1210 hrs in

Room 'E', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT

Shri Nishikant Dubey ; - Convenor
Members

LOK SABHA

Dr. Kirit Somaiya
RAJYA SABHA

Shri Shantaram Naik

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Shri Tirthankar Das हि >>... Additional Director

” Shri A.K. Yadav - Deputy Secretary

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMFi her OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR
GENERAL OF INDIA vo

SEVERAL ee

Deputy C&AG (C)

4. Shri P.Mukherjee -
2 . 2
2. Ms. Mala Sinha - Director-General (ESM)
3. Ms. G.Sudharmini - > Principal Director
4, Shri Manish Kumar - Principal Director (PAC )
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF FINANUE MINISTRY OF FINANCE
4. Ms:Anjuly Chib Duggal - " "Secretary
/ Shri Alok Tandon - Special Secretary (DFS)

———— आए sit MS. Jayakumar - CAO, IRDA - Dor. et

कट


-2-
2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the Members and the representatives of the
Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services to the first sitting of the Sub-
Committee Il. The Convenor, then, apprised the. Members that the meeting was convened
to discuss Para 10. 6.1 on ‘avoidable Expenditure on Service Tax by Insurance Regulatory
‘and Development Authority’ in C&AG Report No.18 of 2015. He drew the attention of the

witnesses fo the confidentiality of the matter till a report on the same was presented to the

House.
3. The Convenor and members then raised various queries on the above-mentioned
subject including the reasons for the enormous delay on the part of the Department of
Financial Services in replying to IRDA’s query of including services rendered by them in
the Negative List under section 68D; rationality in charging fees on services being provided
by IRDA; the dual rote of regulatory authorities such 88 IRDA of being regulators and that
of marketing/ developing of business and the provisions in place for auditing accounts of
such organisations related to the income generated on, account of fees collected for

services provided by IRDA to agents, brokers, insurance companies etc.

4. The Secretary, Department of Financial Services replied to the queries raised by the
members on related aspects of the subject. As some queries required detailed information
and clarifications to be sought from other departments, the Chairperson asked the
Secretary fo furnish written replies to the Secretariat at the earliest. The Secretary assured

to do the same.

5. The Chairperson thanked the representatives of the Ministry for appearing before
the Committee and the representatives of the office of the C&AG of India for providing

assistance to the Committee in the examination of the subject.

The witnesses then withdrew.

A copy of the verbatim proceedings has been kept on record.

The Committee, then, adjourned. adjourned.



APPENDS ix: t
REUEN DDS

DRAET MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF SUB-COMMITTEE-K
(DIRECTIINDIRECT TAXES) OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2015-

16) HELD ON 25" APRIL, 2016

The Sub- Committee sat from 1630 hrs. to 4640 hrs. on 25!" April, 2016 in

Committee Room "A", Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

Shri Nishikant Dubey

MEMBERS
‘LOK SABHA

2. Dr. Kirit Somaiya

RAJYA SABHA
3. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy

_ PRESENT. ie

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

Shri A. K. Singh
2. Shri 1. Jayakumar
Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja

Convenor

- Additional Secretary
- Director
- Deputy Secretary

REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND

AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA

4. Dr. P. Mukherjee a

Deputy C&AG

2. At the outset, the Convenor, Sub-Committee Ill of PAG (2015-16) welcomed the
Members to the Sitting of the Sub-Committee Then, the Sub-Committee took up the

draft Report on the subject “Avoidable Expenditure on Service Tax by Insurance

Regulatory and Development Authority”

2015 for consideration.

based on Para 6.1 of the C&AG Report No. 18 of

3... The Convenor invited suggestions of, the Members on the above mentioned
draft report. After discussing the contents of the. draft report, the Commitee adopted

the same without any changes/modifications

पट :


2

4. The Sub-Committee authorized the Convenor to finalise the Report in the light

of consequential changes arising out of factual verification by the Audit and place the

same before the Main Committee for consideration and adoption.

The Committee then adjourned. adjourned.



APP Es biy th

MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SEVENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC

ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2015-16) HELD ON 26 APRIL, 2076. 26" APRIL, 2016.

The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. fo 1615.hrs. on 26" April, 2016 in Room No.

“51”, Parliament House, New Delhi. ~

ak ON

© @ ND

Pren
Bas

13.
44,
45.

BRON >

' PRESENT

PPO KV Thomas. © Chairperson

‘MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri Nishikant Dubey

Shri Gajanan Kirtikar

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab™
Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal “"Nishank”
Shri Neiphiu Rio

Shri Dushyant Singh

Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi—
Dr. Kirit Somaiya

Shri Anurag Thakur

Dr. P. Venugopal’

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Naresh Agrawal

Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita ;
Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Shri A. (९, Singh

Shri 1. Jayakumar

Shri Paolienlal Haokip

Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja

‘

Additional Secretary

Director
" Deputy Secretary
Deputy Secretary


2 A
REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA

4. Dr. P. Mukherjee - Deputy C&AG (Commercial) |

2. Ms. K. Ganga - Deputy C&AG

3. Ms. Mala Sinha - Director General of Audit

4. Shri Kurlan Vithayathil -- Director General of Audit (Commercial)
5. Shri Manish Kumar - » Principal Director of Audit (PAC)

2. At the outset, the Chairperson, PAC welcomed the Members to the Sitting of
the Committée. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft Reports for _
consideration:

(i) 20000. 30030. 20000. XXKX

(ii) Draft Report on “avoidable Expenditure on Service Tax by Insurance Regulatory

and Development Authority” based on Para 6.1 of the C&AG Report No. 18 of 2015
+

की). 2000. 2000. १00. १00७

(9. 2000. 2000. 2000. 200७
(v) XXXX  XXXK XXXX—_ XXXK

3. The Chairperson invited suggestions of the Members on the above mentioned
draft Reports. After discussing the contents of these draft Reports, the Committee
adopted the draft Reports at SI.-No (i) with minor changes/modifications. The
Committee then adopted the draft Reports at SI. No. (ii), (il), (iv) & (४) without any

changes/modifications.

4. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalise these Reports in the light
of verbal discussion and consequential changes arising out of factual verification by

the Audit and present the same to Parliament.

The Committee then adjourned. adjourned.