24

AUGMENTATION OF PROVISION TO OBJECT HEADS.
GRANTS-IN-AID AND SUBSIDY

{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their 837 Report (15 Lok Sabhay}

MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF
ECONOMIC AFFAIRS)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2015-16)

TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT

SIXTEETNH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI



PAC NO. 2055

TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT

PUBLIC. ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2015-16)

{SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

AUGMENTATION OF PROVISION TO OBJECT
HEADS-GRANTS-IN-AID AND SUBSIDY

[Action Taken by the Government on lhe Observations/Recammendations of
the Committee contained in their Fighty-third Report (15" Lok. Sabha)} .

MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF
ECONOMIC AFFAIRS)

_ कु?

w
td ies et ty
Laid in Rajya Sabha on: iy

Presented to Lok Sabha on:

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

August, 2015 /Shravana, 1937 (Saka)



CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2015-16)

INTRODUCTION

CHAPTER 1
CHAPTER IF

CHAPTER IiI*

CHAPTER IV*

CHAPTER V*

Repart ...

Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the 50एशाशाश॥ ............... ... ...... ..

Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue fn view of the
replies received from the Government ........ ...... ..
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
" which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Commitlee and which require
reiteralion ..... - ‘

Observations/Recommendations in respect * of
which the Government have furnished interim
FOPMOS ..................... ७५०० नल जन जब" >> ००५

APPENDICES

‘Minufes of the 50 sitting of the Public Accounts
Commitlee (2015-16) held © on
117 August, 2015

Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Commitlee contained in their Eighly-third
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)

PAGE
(iti)

(५)

‘Not appended fo the cyclostyled copy of the Report

city



PnNanRwN

11.
12.
43.
14.
15.

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
at.
22,

SeNS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2645-18)
Prof, Thomas - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

"Shri 8.5. Abluwalta

Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
Shri Ranjit Singh Brabmpura
Shri Nishikant Dubey

Shri Gajanan Kirtikar

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

_ Shri Ramesh Pokhviyal “Nishank"

Shi Neiphiu Rio

Shri Dushyant Singh

Shit Janardan Singh Sigtiwal
Dr. Kirit Somaiya -

Shi Anurag Singh Thakur
Shri Shivkumar Udasi

Dr. P. Venugopal

. RAJYA SABHA

Shri Naresh Agrawai

Shi Satyavrat Chaturvedi
Shri Anit Madhav Dave

Shri Vijay Goet

Shi Bhubaneswar Kalita . #
Shri Shantaram Naik

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy

“SECRETARIAT *

Shr ASC. Singh - Additional Secretary
Sint. Anita R. Panda - Director हे
Shri Tuayakumar - Additionat Director -
Sat. Any Kukreja, = Under Secrefary _

(४)



- INFRODUCTION

i, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2015-16), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Twenty-fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok -
Sabha} on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recormmendations of
the Committee contained in their Eight-Third Report (Fifleenth [ok Sabha} on
‘Augmentalion of Provision to Object Heads Grants-in-Aid and Subsidy" relating to

Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs).

2, The Efghty-third Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on
30" April, 2013. Replies of the Government to all the Observations/Recommendations
coniained in the Report were received. The Public Accounts Committee considered
and adopted fhe Twenty-fourth Report at their sitting held ०1
117 August, 2015. Minutes of the sitling are given at Appendix |.

3. For facility. of reference and convenience, the Observations and.
Recommendations of the Commiltee have been printed in thick type-in the body of the

Repart.

4. The Commitice piace on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptrofler and Auditor General of India.

5. Aa analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Eighty-third-Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given at’

Appendix-it.

NEW DELHI ; - PROF. K.V. THOMAS

t2 August, 2015 है Chairperson,
2p Shravana,; {937 (Saka) . Public Accounts Committee

tv.)



"REPORT
हि PART —!

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their Eighty-third Report (15° Lok Sabha) on “Augmentation of Provision to object
Heads — Grants-in-Aid and Subsidy" based on Para Nos. 4.2.1 and 4.2.2 of the C&AG's
Report No. 1 for the year 2011-12, Union Government - Accounts of the Union
Government.

2, The Fighty-third Repart (15" Lok Sabha) which was presented to Lok Sabha/laid
in Rajya Sabha on 300 April, 2013, contained 11 Observations and Recommendations.
Action Yaken Notes in respect of all the Observations and Recommendations have
been received from the Ministries/Depariments concerned and are broadly categorized
as under:
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accopted by the
Government: ,

Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 & 11

"Tota 14
Chapter - !
(il) Observations/Recommendations which the Commiltee do net desite fo

pursuc in view of the replies received from the Government:

Para Nos. NIL

Total: NIL
Chapter - Ili
(ii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the

Government have not becn accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Para Nas. NIL

Total: NIL
Chapter - IV



(५. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have

furnished interim replies:

Para Nos, NIL

Total: NIL
Chapter -V

(a) Audit Observation

3. Audit scrutiny of the subject revealed that in 25 cases, across 14 Grants, funds
aggregating 10 € 698.82 crore were provided through Re — appropriation by various
Ministries/Departments during the financial year 2010-11 for augmenting provisions
under the object head “Grants-in-aid", without obtaining prior approval of Parliament.
Further, in four cases, across four Grants, funds aggregating to ₹ 935.52 crore were
provided through Re — appropriation by various Ministries/Departments during the
financial year 2010-11 fer augmenting the provision under the object head ‘Subsidy’

without obtaining prior approval of Parliament.

(b) Further observation of Audit

4. ‘the Office of Comptroller and Auditor General of India, vide their D.O. letter
dated 14 June, 2012 on the subject had stated (hat the aforesaid cases of augmentation
of provision to object head 'Grantin-aid' and ‘Subsidy’ relate lo Re-appropriation being
effected by Ministries/Departmants where they were required fo seek prior approval of
Parliament. 1189 had, therefore, requested the Public Accounts Committee to review
the matter and take a decision as to whether the amount re-appropriated in these cases
may be regulated in terms of Article 115(1)(b) of the Constitution.

{c) Comments of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)

5. in this regard, comments of Ministry of Finance (Deparlment of Economic Affairs)
were sought in the first instance. The Ministry examined the ४508 and made the

following comments:—



"Article 115(1)(b) stipulates. that "The President shall, if any money has been
spent on any service during a financial year in excess of the amount granted for
that service and for that year, cause 10 be laid before both the Houses of
Parliament another statement showing the estimated amount of that expenditure
"or cause 10 be presented to the House of the People a demand for such excess,
as fhe case may be,

Soon after the Lok Sabha passes the Demands for Grants, Supplementary
Demands for Grants or Demands for Excess Grants, the Government introduces
an Appropriation Bill to provide for Appropriations out of the Consolidated Fund
of India, Each Appropriation Bilt becomes Appropriation Act after the Parliament
passes the Bill and President assents. Appropriation Act authorizes the
Government to withdraw certain sum (in respect.of Main Demands for Grants),
certain further sums (in respect of Supplementary Demands for Grants for the
services of the financial year} and in respect of Demands for Excess Grants, the
connected Appropriation Acl seeks to provide for the authorization of
Appropriation of moneys out of the Gonsolidated Fund of India 10 meet the
amounts spent on cerlain services during the financial year ended on the 31st
day of March, iti excess of the amounts granted for those services and for (hat
year. The word ‘Services’ here denotes the Name of the Demand.

Excess Grants happens when in any ono of the four sections, viz. Revenue
Voted, Capital-Voted, Revenue-charged or Capital-Charged, the expenditure for
the year exceeds the sum of Original pius Supplementary Grants/ Appropriations.
While Originat Appropriation Act and Supplomentary Appropriation Acts are
obtained in thousands of rupees, Appropriation for Excess Grants are always
obtained in unit of rupees. . : हि

‘The Re-appropriation orders issued by the Mintstries/Depariments in respect of
Granis-in-aid and Subsidy without tho approval of Parliament tantamount to
defective Re-appropriation order, and, therefore, it has to be deall in the manner
as an instance in which the expenditure is Incurred without proper budgefary
sanction. :

Regularisation of such type of expenditure under Article 115(1)(b) is not aut
appropriate mechanism for obtaining Parliament's approval. As explained above .
Article 115(4} (b) is only invoked to get the excoss expenditure regularized in any
of fhe four sections of the Grants (Services). Regulating the inappropriate Re-
appropriations through the route of Article 115(1) (9) of the Conslilution will result
in bloating of Appropriation and will be mis-leading

in view of the above, it is observed that in the instant case, the Re-appropriation
done without the approval of Parliament may be treated as defective Re-
appropriation and the Ministries/Departments may be directed to frame the ATN,
which could be examined by the PAC for further necessary action.”



(d) Comments of the Ministry of Law and Justice

6. Subsequently, the Commitice sought the views of Ministry of law and Justice on
the subject, as lo whether the amount re-appropriated in these cases may be regulated
in terms of Article 115(1)(b} ef ihe Constitution. The Ministry referred the matter lo
Learned Atlorncy General for India for his considered opinion. Learned Attorney
General dwelling on the Article 115 (1){a) and Aiticle 115(1}(b) of the Constitution
opined thati—

"One has to analyze Article 115 of the Constitution of India. ॥ is in two parts, Article
115(1}{a) deais with cases where the amount authorized is found insufficient for
fhe purpose or where a need has arisen during the current financial year for
Supplementary or additional expenditure. This would cover cases where the
authorization is sought before the amount is spent. Article 115(1)(b) deals with
cases where money has been spent on any service during a financial year in
excess of the amount granted for (hal service and for that year.

In both cases, the President shall cause to be laid before both fhe Houses of
Parliament, another statement showing the estimated amount of that expenditure
of cause to be presented to the | louse of the People a demand for such excess, as
the case may be. हु

As tightly pointed out by Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, the passing of an excess Grant is
nothing but an Indemnity act which is consistent with the principle that ultimately it
is Parliament alone which can sanction and. authorize. payments in the
Consolidated Fund of India, As Dr. Ambedkar said: ~~~

in the case of excess grant, the excess expenditure has already been incurred and
the executive comes before Parliament for sanclioning what has already been
spent.

un

fn the premises, my answer to the Query raised is in the ‘affirrnative’.

7. Therefore, taking into consideration the Constitutional provisions, Ue relevant
Rules, the reasons attributed by the Ministries/Departments concerned in their
explanatory notes, comments of the Ministry of Finance (Depariment of Economic
Affairs) and the considered opinion of the Learned Attorney General for tndia oa the
subject, the Committee had given their Observations/Recommendations in their Fighty-
third Report (15" Lok Sabha). The gist of important observatiuns/recommendations as

contained in the Report are given as under:



@ The Ministry of Finance should devise an effective mechanism so as (0 avoid
recurrence of such serious lapses and to reinforce financial discipline.

(i) The Ministty of Finance should keep strict vigit over the (rend of expenditure
and take fimely corrective action to obtain additional funds with the prior
approval of Parliament.

{ii} 116 Ministry of Finance should seriously look info the matter and deal sternly
with cases of aberrations noticed so as to ensure strict adherence to and
strict application of the prescribed Financial Rules by the Departmental Heads
and FAs.

(9५). Need for establishing a robust and foo! proof mechanism for ensuring strict |
compliance of Constitutional and Financial provisions emphasized.

{v) 118 confravention of the Constitutional and Financial provisions in all the
cascs of wrongful Re — appropriations be regularized as per the Constitution
as also advised by the 1 4, Atlorney General.

8. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministries/Departments concerned on
the Observations/Recommendations contained in 83 Report (1501 06 Sabha) have
been reproduced in the relevant chapters of this Report. The Commiltee will now deal
wilh action taken by the Government on their Observations/Recommendations which
cither need reileration or merit comments.

1. Jo_devise_an_ offective mechanism शि' 17019 financiaf_ discipline
(Recommendation Para No. 2)

9. The Committee had expressed thoir serious concer over the augmentation of
funds to the tune of T 698.82 crore under the head 'Grants-in-aid’ and रे 935.52 crore
under tho head 'Subsidy' during the year 2010-14 without obtaining the mandatory prior ~
approval of Parliament. The violation of Constitutional and Financial provisions
occurred despite the fact that the adequacy of funds is discussed during mid-review
while drawitiy up Revised Estimates. Upon noticing that the Ministry of Finance had no
tobust mechanism for timely detection of such contraventions of Constitutional and

Financial provisions, the Committee recommended (hat the Ministry of Finance shoutd



devise an effective mechanism so as to avoid recurrence of such serious lapses and fo

reinforce financial discipline,

10. ‘The Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) in their Action Taken

Notes have responded as under:

“Ministry of Finance (Budget Division) has been re-iterating all necessary
instructions on the subject every year as a part of Budgot circular. Further this
Ministry is contemplating to cause further awareness among all the Ministriesf
Departments on fhe seriousness of overshooting the appropriation approved by
the Parliament.

2. A meeting of the Financial Advisors of various Ministries/ Departments on
the subject of ‘excess expenditure’ was also held under the chaitmanship of
Finance Secretary on 18" April, 2013. The thrust of the meeting was fo ascertain
ihe reasons for excess expenditure, besides laying special emphasis fo avoid its
recurrence and bring more accuracy in estimation of Budget.

3. The above points will also 90 discussed in the expenditure review mecting
chaired by Hon’bic Finance Minister.

4. Each Ministries/Departments are controlled by the respective Secretary of
that unit and all expenditure are incurred with the concurrence of respective
Financial Adviser. Minisuy of Vinance does nof come into picture when the
expenditure is incurred by them. However, lhe above steps taken by Ministry of
Finance will ensure that the Incidence of such unauthorised expenditure does nol
recur again and financial discipline is enforced."

11. During the course of vetting of the above said Action Taken Noto, the Audit made

the folowing observations:

"Ministry of Finanec, being the nodal authority is responsible for cnsuring
financial propricty and discipline from all the Ministries/Dopartments. Ministry is
silent on the issues to devise an appropriate and offective re-appropriation
mechanism for timely detection of such contraventions of Constitulisnal and
financial provisions for imposing financial discipline on alt the
Ministries/Departments. This aspect may please be incorporated in the reply for
proper appreciation of the PAC."

42. While submitting their comments in response 10 the above-said audit
observation, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) have stated as

follows:



“Ministry of Finance (Budget Diviston) vide letter No.F.7(7}-B(SDW2013 dated
7.1.2014 has once again reitorated that it is incumbent upon the Secretaries of
Ministry/Department as Chief Accounting Authority of their respective
Ministry/Department, to ensure that Constitutional and financial provision are
strictly observed. Further thoy have been directed that these rules are rigidly
followed.

A new initiative has boen taken up by this Department which envisages
development of software fo process Re-appropriation proposals, for approval of
- Compoteni Authority. Necessary checks wilh respect lo rules are being built in
the proposed software, so that re-appropriation is correctly done, The necessary
Software ts in the conceptual stage and shall be implemented in due course.

In view of ‘the above it is once again assured that Ministry of Finance shall

continue to carry out ifs review al apex level fo ensure that such cases of in-

appropriate re-appropriation orders are eliminated,”
13. The Committee note that in pursuance of their recommendation, the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs} have once again tried to
impress upon the Sccretaries of the Ministries/Departments to observe the
Constitutional and financial provisions strictly instead of devising a suitable
mechanism for tightening the exchequer contro! as recommended by the
Committee. The Committee have also been given to understand that the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) has taken up a new inifiative to
develop a software for processing Re-appropriation proposals, for approval of
Competent Authority. Necessary check with respect to rules are being built in the
proposed software, so that re-appropriation is correctly done. According to the
Ministry of Finance the necessary software is in the canceptual stage and shal!
be implemented in due course. The Commillee regret to observe that the Action
Taken Note is silent about the date of initiation of this softwaro andthe time
frame by which it would be completed and the tangible outcome thereof. The
Committee also regret to note that despite the lapse of three years since the
laying of CRAG Report containing the subject on the Table of the Hause and after
lapse of two years since the presentation of 83 Report qd 5" Lok Sabha) of Public
Accounts Commitlee to the Parliament, the said software has not yet been
developed. While deptoring lack of urgency on the part of the Ministry of Finance

to such a critical area of financial control, the Committee emphasize the need to



take measures for expediting setting up of such ‘software with a vicw fo
effectively monitoring the re-appropriation of funds by ali the
Ministries/Departments., The Committee would also like to 90 apprised about the
tangible difference in the system by eliminating the inappropriate re-
appropriation in the wake of introduction of this software.

IL Unauthorized expenditure under Grant No. 32_~ Department of Economic
Affairs
(Recommendation Para No. 8)

14. In yet another case, the Committee found that Grant No, 32 -- Department of
£conomic Affairs under head of Account "3075.60.101.02 — Reimbursement of losses of
Railways” on operating strategic Railway lines an additional expenditure of हैं 34.38
crore was mel by Re-apprapriation. According to the Ministry of Finance augmentation
of = 10 crore was alone agreed against the budget provision of & 600 crore in the
absence of prior approval of Parliament through Supplementary Demands for Grants
and sanction for release of ¥ 610 crore was accordingly issued by them. The
Committee observed that augmentation of & 10 crore through Re-appropriation of funds
is admissible under the primary unit of appropriation ‘Subsidy’ in terms of Ministry of
Finance's instructions dated 25.05.2006. Strangely, the Ministry of ‘Railways while
putting through the transaction on proforma basis adjusted ¥ 634.38 crore in accounts
for the year 2010-11 for re-imbursement of losses to Railways, resulting in unauthorized
expenditure of t 24.38 crore. Taking a serious view of the perfunctory manner in which
the vilal accounts were maintained by the Railways, the Committee sought an
explanation from the Ministry as to how such error escaped notice and could nol be
rectitied in time. They had also desired the Ministry to go inlo the causes, fix
fesponsibility for the lapse and lake corrective measures so that such aberrations do not

fecur.

15. in their Action ‘Takers Note on the above-said recommendation, the Ministry of
Railways stated as follows:

"No error has occurred as far as Railway Accounts are concemed. The
"Reimbursement of Losses on operation of Strategic Lines" has been accounted



for at £610 crore only in railway accounts as per sanction given by the Ministry of
Finance. tfowever, in accounts of Department of Economic Affairs, the same
has been shown as ¢ 634.38 crore. This might be due to the fact that both the
‘Subsidy to Railways towards dividend relief and the ‘Reimbursement of Losses
~ to Railways on operation of Strategic lines' are shown under the MH-8675. The
amount of © 24.38 crore, which actually should have been a part of the first item
appears to have been erroneously accounted for in the second item by Ministry
of Finance. The matter has already been explained to Ministry of Finance vide
this Office's letter No, 2012/AC-/3/6 dated 16.10.2012 in reference to their Jelter
No. CCAMFIn/DEA/PrAQIPro, Acct/2012-13/1192 dated 19.09.2012 that the
adjustments made are strictly as per rules and within the allotted amounts."

16. The Vetied comments of Audit on the above: said Action Taken Notes are as
under:

"Railway Audit vide their U.O. 14 - RA-II/2-2/43 dated 23.08.2013 have vetted
fhe ATN with the remarks Scen. Thanks.’ Ministry of Railways receives
subsidies from Ministry of Finance on two occasions subsidy to Railways from
General revenues towards dividend relief, other concossions and subsidy fo
dividend relief is fo be accounted for by the Department of Economic Affairs
under Sub Head-O01 Payment to Railways (Object Head 01.00.33) and Re-
imbursement of losses to Railways on operating strategic railway tine under Sub
|lead-02 (Object I lead 02.00.33)

During the year 2010-11, the Ministry of Railways has oblained ¢ 610
crore as subsidy fo Railways towards re-imbursement of losses on operating
strategic railway line and % 2,037.64 crore as Subsidy to Railways fiom Gerieral
Revenues towards dividend relief and other concessions both for Commercial
line (९ 2,073.26) and stratogic lines (€ 24.38 crore)

Thus, subsidy towards losses fo Railways on operating of strategic [ines
was only हैं 610 crore during the year 2010-11 and not ¥ 634.38 crore. The
remarks given by the Ministry of Railways in its Action Taken are correct,"

17. While observing that wrong adjustment of २ 634.38 crore instead of ₹ 610
crore in the accounts for the year 2010-41 by the Ministry of Railways resulted in
unauthorized expenditure of ₹ 24.38 crore, the Committee had desired the
Ministry fo go into the causes, fix responsibility for the lapse and take corrective
measures so that such aberrations do not recur, The Ministry of Railways while
denying the said wrong adjustments in their accounts have now slated that the
amount of हैं 24.38 crore had been erroneously accounted for by the Ministry of
Finance and the matter had alreacy been explained ‘to the Ministry of Finance by



10

the Ministry of Railways vide their letter dated 16" October, 2012. The Raliway
Audit while vetting the Action Taken Notes of the Ministry of Railways had also
supported the views of the Ministry and found these correct. On account of the
casual approach of the Ministry of Finance in presenting the facts and figures
without proper analysis of the case the Committee were misled and accordingly
constrained to seek explanation from the Ministry of Railways for unauthorized
expenditure of ₹ 24.38 crore, The Committee consider it a sad reflection on the
adequacy of accounting system and also a failure on the part of the Budget
Controlling Authorities of the Ministry of Finance. The Committee are inclined to
conclude that this is a clear case of laxity in the financial control cxercised at the
supervisory level in the Ministry of Finance for which responsibility should be

fixed and action taken against those responsible for the mistake.

I. Infringement of the basic Constitutional and Financial Provisions
{Recommendation Para No, 9 and 10)

48. Expressing their serious displeasure over the ever increasing tendency on the
part of various Ministries/Departments to blatantly indulye in violation of the provisions
of General Financiat Rules, the Committee had emphasized that if is imperative on the
part of the Ministry of Finance, being the nodal Ministry for overall general financial
management, fo pul in place a robust and fool-proof mechanism for ensuring strict
compliance and observance of the Constitutional and Financial provisions by all the
Ministries/Departments. As the Ministries/Nepartments were required fo obtain
approval of Parliament in all the cases of wrongful Re-appropriations, the Committee
had recornmended that contravention of the Constitutional and Financial provisions be
regularized as per the Constitution and urged ihe Ministry of Finance to reguiarize the
Irreqular excess (e-appropriations as also advised by the Ld. Attorney General,

49. The Minisiry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs - Budget Division} in
their Action Taken Noles have stated as under:

"The recommendations/observations of the Committee made in the above two
paragraphs of 837 Report (2012-2013) (15" Lok Sabha} on ‘Augmentation of
Provision to Object Heads—-Grants-in-Aid and Subsidy’ have been noted. The



(i)

it

following is the submission of this Minis{ry on the recommendations/observations
of ihe Committee:

2. Rules 59 and 60 of General Financial Rules (GFRs) stipulate thal -

Subject to the provisions of Rule 10 of the Delegation of {inancial Powers Rules,
1978, and also subject to such other general or specific restrictions as may be
imposed by the Finance Ministry in this behalf, re-appropriation of funds from one
primary unit of appropilation to another such unit within a grant or appropriation,
may be sanctioned by a competent authority at any time before the close of the
financial year 10 which such grant or appropriation relates.

(ii) Re-appropriation of funds shall be made only when it is known or anticipated that

the appropriation for the unit from which funds are to be Lransferred will not be
utilized in full or that savings can be effected in the appropriation for the said unit.

(ii) Funds shall not bo re-appropriated from a unit wilh the intention of restoring the

diverted appropriation fo that unit when savings become available under other
units later in the year.

{iv}An application for re-appropriation of funds should ordinarily be supported by a

statement in Form GFR 4 or any other special form aulhorized by departmental
regulations showing how the excess is proposed 10 bo met. In all orders,
sanctianing re-appropriation, the reasons for saving and excess of Z 1 jakh or
over and the primary units (secondary units, wherever necegsary), affected
should be invariably stated. ‘The authority sanctioning the re-appropriation should
endorse a copy of the ordor to the Accounts Officer.

(५) Supplementary Grants: If savings are nol available within the Granl to: which the

payment is required to be debited, or if the expenditure is on 'New Service’ or
‘New Instrument of Service’ not provided in the budget, necessary
Supplementary Grant or Appropriation in accordanec wilh Article 115 (1) of the
Constitution should be obtained before payment is authorized while processing
the cases relating to re-appropriation of funds available within the same section
of the Grant and for oblaining the approval of Parliament through Supplementary
Demands for Grants when savings are not available in the Grant for meeting
additional requirement of funds or if the expenditure on 'New ServicefNew
fastrument of Service’ is not provided in the budget.

Ail the Ministries/Departments are required to follow these provisions while
processing the cases relating {o re-appropriation of funds available within the
same Section of the Grant and for obtatning the approval of Parliament through
Supplementary Demands for Granis.



12

3. Ministry of Finance has been impressing upon all Ministries/Departments,
while calling for the Supplementary proposals, the need to obtain the approval of
the Parliament whenever the financial limits to New Service/New Instrument of
Service are attracted. The position is brought to the notice of all Financial
Advisors of tine Ministries/Departments at the time of calling for the
Supplementary proposals. As is evident from the table below, the
Ministries/Departments are complying with the stipulations made in GFRs and in
this Ministry's O.M. No. F.4 (23)-B (AC¥2005 dated 25.05.2006,

7 showing number of cases referred (० Parliament
_ through token supplementaries in Supplementary Demands for
Granls seeking approval of Parliament for incurring expenditure
_on ‘New Service/New Instrument of Service’.

[ Supplementary Demands for Grants _
Year First] Second] __ Third
2010- है
2014 58 60 ft 98 ?
2011-
2042 80 30 107 non
2012.
sos | हा न रा बिका
2013- न
aoa |S aes aia
ird batch in the year 2042-2013.

A. This Ministry has been taking all precautions.in ensuring compliance of
financial rules/provisions relating lo augmentation of funds under various object
heads including ‘Grants-in-Aid?’ and ‘Subsidy’.

5. The Report cites only 25 cases across 14 Grants/Appropriations for the
year 2010-2011, where excess expenditure has been observed by audit under
these specific objecl heads such as ‘Grants-in-aid’ and ‘Subsidy’, whereas 216
cases, in all, were referred to Parliament through Supplementary Demands for
Grants by including token supplementaries. ‘fhis is evident fram the table given
above. This proves that this Ministry has been monitoring the cases which
require {he approval of Parliament in cases relating to New Service/New
Instrument of Service and ensuring that these are included in the Supplementary
Demands for Grants and approval of the Parliament thercon obtained. The cases
where the cerlain Ministries/Departments faited to obtain the prior approval of the
Partiament through Supplementary Demands for Grants for augmentation under
Grants-in-aid/Subsidy are viewed by this Ministry to obviate the posstbility of
recurrence of such deviations/lapses and efforts arc continuing io educate the



20.

13

Ministries/Departments. This Minisiry has been inviting the attention of the
Secretaries of Ministries/Departments to the provision stipulated in this Ministry's
O.M.No.1(23)-B(AC/2005 dated 25.5.2006 relating to financial limits applicable
to 'New Service‘New Instrument of Service’. Latest instruction issued vide fetter
No, 7(7)-B (SDV2013 dated 7.1.2014 from this Ministry refers in this regard.

6. The observations and recommendations made by the Committee for
regulatizing lhe excess expendiliire under specific primary units of appropriation
viz. ‘Subsidies’ and ‘Grants-in-aid’ under article 115(1)(b) of the Constitution are
based on the considered views rendered by Ld. Attorney General. ft may be
secn that the views rendered by Ld, Attorney General are largely towards
interpretation of the Constitutional provisions relating to Supplementary/Excess
grant and the opinion does not throw new inlerpretation fo the extant procedure
being followed with reference to Supplementary/ Excess grant. Application of the
Constitutional provision on financial management at micro level may not be
appropriale. Regularization of excess expenditure under the object heads .
‘Subsidies’ and ‘Grants-in-aid’ in terms of articla 115 of the Constitution of India
are selective and this may resull in seeking the approval of Parliament on the
excess expenditure even when, under specific circumstances, ‘grant as a whole’
is not exceeded. In case, the excess expenditure under the object heads
‘Subsidies’ and 'Grants-in-aid’ is regularised in forms of article 115 of the
Constitution of India, similar treatment may need to be given (0 all other object
heads (like ‘Major Works’, ‘Machinery & Equipment’, ‘investmenis’ and ‘Loans
and Advances’, etc.) where the expendilure incurred in excess of the financial
limits applicable to New Service/New Instrument of Service and without the
explicit approval of the Parliament. Wilh the recommendation made by the
Committee, the excess expenditure occurred under ‘Subsidies’ and ‘Grants-in-
aid’ would require to be regularized even if there is no excess expenditure in any
of four sections of the grant (Revonue-Voted, Revenue-Charged, Capital-Voled
and Capital-Charged}."

Vetted comments of Audit on the aforesaid Action Taken Notes are as under:
“@ (0 Action Taken Note's Paras 4 and 5:

The Public Accounts Comeniltee in their 237 Report (14" Lok Sabha:
2005-2006), while agreeing to the revision of norms for re-appropriation of funds,
which was circulated vide Ministry of Finance OM No. F.1 (23}-B (AC}2005
dated 25.05.2006, had observed that:

“the Committee would like to impress upon the Minisiry of Finance
(Department of Expenditure} (0 devise an effective mechanisin for proper and
continuous monitoring of the revised nornis in order fo ensure strict adherence to



at.

14

the same by each and every Ministry/Department. The Committee also expects
the Financial Advisors of the Ministries/Departments to ensure that there is no
violation in implementation of the said revised norms for ie-appropriation of funds
and any slackness in complying with the said norms fs strictly deait with”.

Being the nodal Ministry for ensuring overall financial discipline in the
Government, Ministry of Hinance is responsible to ensure thai there is no
violation of OM No. F.1 (23)-B(AC2005 dated 25.05.2006 by any
Ministry/Depariment as desired ibid by the Committee. 25 cases of violation
across 14, grants/appropriations in the financtal year 2010-2011 reflects that
Commitiee's directives have not been taken seriously by the Ministry of Finance’
and the line Ministries.

(1). On Action Taken Note’s para 6:

In para 4.2.1. and 4.2.2 of Comptroller & Auditor General of India's Audit
Report No. 1 of 2011-12 for the financial year 2010-11, cases of financial breach
attracting limilations of New Service/New Instrument of Service have been
pointed out in respect of only lwo object heads viz. subsidies/grants-in-aid.

In sttbsequent |‘inanctal Audit Reparts of Comptroller & Auditor Generat of
India on the Accounts of the Union Governmeni, instances relating to financial
breach attracting New Service/New Instrument of Service in respect of a number
of object heads in addition fo subsidies/grants-in-aid, viz. Major Works,
Machinery & Equipment, Loans & Advances, efe. have been painted out.

In the tight of the recommendations of the PAC, the Ministry of Finance
woukl therefore necd to strengthen the mechanisms to ensure that a single
aberration of the conditions stipulated in OM No. 7/1.(23)-8 (AC/2005 dated 25"
May, 2006 do not occur in any of the grantfappropriation. It may also be
mentioned that the Ministry of Finance, has further clarified and claborated the
OM dated 257 May, 2006, in their subsequent OM No. F.1 (5)-B (ACV2011 dated
21 May, 2012. Any slackness in implementation’ compliance of the said revised
norms for re-appropriation of funds ts striclly dealt with,.as desired by the PAC,
since such instances tantamount to assuming the financial powers of Parliament
by the executives."

Further reply of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs --

Budget Division) on the aforesaid Audit comments is given as under:

“Ministry of Finance has been taking all precautions in ensuring compliance of
financial rules/provisions retating to augmentation of funcs under various object
heads including ‘Grants-in-Aid’ and ‘Subsidy’.

In view of the above, this Mintsiry humbly appeals to the Public Accounts
Committee to rée-consider their recommendation for regularizing the expenditure



occurred under object heads ‘Subsidies’ and ‘Grants-in-aid', exclusively, in
excess of the appropriation authorized by Parliament and allow this Ministry to
continue the existing practice of sacking approval of Parliament for regularizing
the excess expenditure only if the excass expenditure has occurred in any of the
four sections of the grant."

22. Expressing concern over the irregular provision of funds to the tune of
more than हैं 7600 crore through Re-appropriation by various
Ministrics/Departments during the Financial year 2040-11 without obtaining the
approvat of Parliament, the Committee in their 83" Report (457 Lok Sabha} had
emphasized the Ministry of Finance to put in place a robust and fool-proof
mechanism for ensuring strict compliance and observance of the Constitutional
and Financial provisions by alt the Ministries/Departments. They had also urged
the Ministry of Finance to ensure that in case the expenditure cxcccds
Parliamentary authorization, the excess expenditure is regularized through
Appropriation (Excess) Act. The Ministry of Finance have now informed that the
cases where certain Ministries/Departments failed to obtain the prior approval of
the Parliament through Supplementary Demands for Grants for augmentation
under Grants-in-aid/subsidy have been reviowed to obviate the possibility of
recurrence of such deviations/lapses and efforts are continuing to educate the
Ministries/Departments. Further, the Ministry of Firiance have been inviting the
attention of Secretaries of Ministrics/Departments to the provision stipulated in
their O.M. dated 25.05.2006 relating to financial timits applicable to 'New *
Service/New Instrument of Service’ and lafest instruction in this regard was
issued on 07.01.2014. Keeping in view the instances relating to financial breach
in respect of fhe object heads Grants-in-aid and subsidy in tho subsequent C&AG
Reports, the Commiffee feel that repeated instructions are not being followed
scrupulously by the Ministrics/Departments and therefore, an effective
mechanism should be put in place in the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Economic Affairs-Budget Division} so as {oe ensure that a proper check is
exercised on the flow of expenditure under every Granl/Appropriation of all the
Ministries/Departments. Again, as regards the regularization of oxcess

expenditure under specific primary units of appropriations viz. ‘Subsidies’ and



16

‘Grant-in-aid' under Article 115(1) (b} of the Constitution, the Ministry of Finance
informed that this may result in seeking the approval of Parliament on the excess
expenditure even when, under specific circumstances, ‘grant as a whole’ is not
exceeded, Moreover, similar treatment may need to be given fo all other object
heads viz. ‘Major Works’, Machinery and Equipment’, ‘Investments' and ‘Loans
and Advances’ efc, The Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
have therefore, requested the Public Accounts Committee to re-consider their
recommendation for regularizing the expenciture occurred under abject Heads
‘Grants-in-aid’ and ‘Subsidy’. The Committee have been disappointed to note that
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) have not taken any
concrete steps for implementation of their recommendation. No mention has
been made in the reply regarding meastires taken or proposed 10 be faken to
strengthen the mechanisms to cnsure that there is no violation of O.M. No. F.4
(23)-8 (AC}2005 clated 25.05.2006 by any Ministry/Dcpartment. The fact that
instructions have been issucd fime and again without achicving any conerete
result warrants that some bold and innovative measures are required fo be taken
by the Ministry of Finance to ensure compliance of financial rules/provisions
relating to augmentation of funds under various object heads including 'Grants-
in-Aid' and ‘Subsidy’. Since instances rolafing to financial breach attracting New
Service/New Instrument of service tantamount to assuming the financial powers
of Parliament by the executive, the Committee trust that in the larger interest of
achieving a sound fiscal health in future, the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Economic Affairs} should devise an effective mechanism to timely detect such
cases and ensure that these are included in the Supplementary Demands for

Grants, approval of Parliament thereon obtained and any slackness is strictly

dealt with.
NEW DELHI; PROF. K.V. THOMAS
110 August, 2015 Chairperson,

29 Shravana, 1937 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee



welt

APPENDIX-I
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
CONTAINED IN THEIR EIGHTY -THIRD REPORT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA}

(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations 11
(ii) | Observations/Recommendations of the Committee Total: 11
which have been accepted by the Government: Percentage: 100%

Para Nos. 1 to 14

(iii) Observatians/Recommendations which the Total : 0
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of Percentage: 0
the reply of the Government:

ParaNos.  -Nil

(५).  Observations/Recommendations in respect of Total : 0
which replies of the Government have not been Percentage: 0
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

Para Nos. -Ni}

{v)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of” Total : 0
which the Government have furnished inferim replies; Percentago: 0

ParaNos. -Nii