23 -

_ INDIAN CUSTOMS ELECTRONIC DATA
INTERCHANGE SYSTEM (ICES 1.5)

MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE) :

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2015-16)

TWENTY-THIRD REPORT .

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT -

NEW DELHI!



PAC NO. 2054

TWENTY THIRD REPORT.

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2015-16)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA}

INDIAN CUSTOMS ELECTRONIC

DATA INTERCHANGE SYSTEM
| (ICES 1.5)

MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)

Presented to Lok Sabha on sseseneseeee og

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 4 ay

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
“NEW DELHI
August 2015/ Shravana 1937 (Saka}



GLOSSARY

Harmonized | Commodity . __

ACP _. | Accredited Client Program
ACC. ___| Atr Cargo Complex.
ADD | Anti Dumping Duty _ ne
AEO Authorised Economic Operator —* en “:
150 | Airport Sorting Office | _. : .
ATF | Aviation Turbine Fucl _ a
{AV___| Assessable Value हे
BCD _ _| Basic Customs Duty _
BE Bill of Ente . _
CAB Change Advisory Board
CBDT ~ Central Board of Direct Taxes 7
CBEC Centrat Board of Excise & Customs है
CCEA Cabinet Committee On Economic Affairs
CCR Compulsory Compliance Requirement
CETH CentralExcise TariffHeading _|_|_|___ .
CHA Custom House Agent
CNE Committee on Non-Plan Expenditure.
COO/CORG | Country of Origin
CRA _| Customs Receipt Audit_
CTA Customs Tariff Act
CTH Customs TariffHeading
Cus Customs _
CVD Countervailing Duty
DEPB Duty Entitlement Pass Book Scheme/Scrip
DGCI&S Directorate General of Commercial Intelligence & Statistics _
OGFT Director General of Foreign Trade
DIT Department of Information and Technology
[DoR _| Department of Revenue
[DoS _| Directorate General of Systems & Data Management
DoV Directorate of Valuation ७ ्््््‌ः
DSCcl Data Security Council of India _
DMZ _| Demilitarized Zone _
ECDB Expert Commodity Database
| EDD Extra Duty Deposit
EDI Electronic Data Interchange
EGM Export General Manifest _
EO Export Obligation woe
EODC _ Export Obligation Discharge Certificate _
EPCG Export Promotion Capital Goods
FMS —___| Focus Market Scheme/Scrip _
FRS Focus Product Schemo/Serip.
HPC High Powered Committee _
RS



TEG

Technical Experts Group ४ 7 —|.
TPA Third. Party Auditor - i
TRA Telegraphic Release Advice
UGG Unit Quantity Code _ wi
VPD - {Virtual Private Database =
Warehouse”

७)



CONTENTS .
PAGE
COMPOSLIEION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2015-2016)........ ....... (vii)

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2014-2015)...... {viii)
INTRODUCTION tereessee (IX)

PART -व
BACKGROUND ANALYSIS

1. INTRODUCTORY 18

TL. BUSINESS PROCESSES NOT COVERED UNDER ICES, REQUIRING 8-16
MANUAL ASSESSMENTS

DL FUTURISTIC IS STRATEGIC PLANS AND DRISHTI PROJECT 10-13
7९, PERFORMANCE OF POST CLEARANCE AUDIT (PCA) 14-46
¥. INEFFECTIVE FUNCTIONING OF LOCAL RISK MANAGEMENT 16-20
(LRM)
VI. SECURITY SYSTEM AND VERIFICATION OF ICES APPLICATION 29-25
AND RMS
VL. HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT 25-26
VI, INTERNAL AUDIT SYSTEM FOR ICES 26-27
IX, CRA MODULE APPLICATION 27-28

X. DELAY IN UPDATING OF CUSTOMS EXEMPTION NOTIFICATION 28-30
_AND DUTY RATE DIRECTORIES

XE ANTI-DUMPING DUTY 30-31

XH. ONLINE BUSINESS TRANSACTIONS 32-33
XTU. IMPROPER ALLLOCATION/UTILIZATION OF HARDWARE 33-34
PART-II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 35-46
APPENDICES

I Minutes of the 8" sitting of Public Accounts Commtitiee (2014-15) held on
~  (9,11.2014

गा... Minutes of the 5" sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2015-16) held 6७
11.08.2015

(४)



COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE - *

{2075-16)
Prof. K.V. Thomas -. Chairperson
‘MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

2. Shri S.S. Ahluwatia

3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay

4 Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura
5 Shri Nishikant Dubey

6. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar

7... शा Bhartruhari Mahtab

8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank"
9. Shri Neiphiu Rio

10... Shri Dushyant Singh

11. -Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal,
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya -

13, Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
14. Shri Shivkumar Udasi

15. Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA

- 16.. Shri Naresh Agrawal
17... Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
18. Shri Anil Madhav Dave
19. Shri Vijay Goel
20. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
- 21... Shri Shantaram Naik
22. Shri Sukhtendu Sekhar Roy

SECRETARIAT हि

Shri AK. Singh - ‘Additional Secretary हैं
Smt.Anita 8. Panda - Director है
Shri T.Jayakumar - Additional Director

- Shri Paotiental | {aokip - Deputy Secretary

Pers

N ॥) है

4 “ * 4

a,



4:

ny

COMPOSITION OF ‘THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2014-15)  '
Prot. K.V. ‘Thomas - Chairperson
MEMBERS =
- LOK SABIFA
2. Shri 8.5. Ahhewalia
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
- 4... Shei Ranjit Singh Brahmpura
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey
6. | Shei Gajanan Kirtikar
7 Shri Bhartruhavi Mahtab
8: Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank"
‘9, Shri Neiphiu Rio
10°. Shri Dushyant Singh
11. + Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
“12h Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi
13. Dr. Kirit Somaiya
14, ‘Shri Anurag Thakur
15,

97 7. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA,

16... Shi Satyavcat Chaturvedi
1g, “Shri Vijay Goel

18. . Dr, Satyanarayan Jatiya

19 | Shri Bhubaneswar Kulita

20... Shei Shantaram Naik

सा... Shri Sulkhendu Sekhar Roy
- 22. ‘Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh

” Blested wae, 3" Deseraber, 2014 vice Shei Rajiv bratop Rudy who has been appointed as Minister w.e.f. 9" November, 2614,
1 Blectod-w.c.f. ३४ Decomber, 2014 vice Siri Jayant Sinha who has been appointed as Minister wef. 9% November, 2014,

५. Ravsinoé resigned from the meuhership of the Committee

ह wy vi )

1 Blested ७०.५ 3% December, 2014, 6९ 19 हर; !11970/00ए७ who bas been chosen as Hon'ble Deputy Speaker, Lok Sabha and”.



x

INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee, having been authorised by the :
Committee, do present this Twenty-third Report(Sixteenth Lok Sabha} on " Indian
Customs Electronic Data Interchange System (ICES 1.5)* based on. Audit Report

. No. 11 of 2014 relating fo the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)

122. The Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India forthe year 2012-13 was

laid on the Table of the House on 18 July, 2014

3. The Public Accounts Committee (2014-15) took up the subject for detailed
examination and report. The Committee took oral evidence of the. representatives of the -
Ministry of Finance on 19.11.2014. As the examination could not be corpleted due to
paucity of time,.the PAC 2015-16 retained the subject to continue the examination and
to submit. a Report to Parliament based on evidence faken by the predecessor
Committee. Accordingly, draft Report was prepared and placed before the Committee

. for their consideration. The Cornmittee considered and adopted this draft Report at their
. sitting held on 11" August, 2015. The Minutes of the Sittings are appended to the
. Report. Looe

.4.. For facility of “reference and convenience, the. Observations and-

Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type and form Part: II of

~ the Report.

- हु, The Committée would like to place on record their appreciation to .the

tepresentatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) for tendering
evidence before the Committee and furnishing the requisite information. in connectiori

“with the examination of the subject. The Committee also expresse their gratitude to the
” representatives of Central Board of Excise and-Customs {CBEC) for submission of facts

and for tendering evidence before the Committee in connection with examination of the

“subject.

है 7, “The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to _
* > them in the matter by the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India :

' NEW DELHI; - . ; PROF. K.V.. THOMAS

4x" Auqust,2015 ; Chairjerson, |

2% Shravana, 1937 (Saka) - . - Public Accounts Conkmittee.

UIA )



‘REPORT
PART «|

६ Introductory 7 हि

_ The Central Board of Excise & Customs (56880) runs a number of projects
aimed at harnessing ICT for achieving the objectives of Customs and Central Excise
administration. The Directorate General of Systems & Data Management (DoS) has
been entrusted with the implementation of these projects. There are three major
components of Indian Customs ICT Systems, as under: हि हु

a The Indian Customs Electronic Data Interchange System (ICES) was
developed around 18 years back as the core Information and Communication,
Technology (ICT) system through which import and export documents {Bills of
Entry (855), Shipping Bills (SBs), import General Manifests (IGMs) and Export

- General Manifests (EGMs}} were to be processed, The main objectives of ICES
were to provide a comprehensive, paperless, fully automated customs clearance व
system by ensuring uniformity of assessments and valuations; ensure faster

है processing; reduce transaction cast, interaction of the Trade with Government
agencies, and provide quick and accurate import/export statistics for compilation
by Directorate General of Commercial Intelligence and Statistics (OGCI&S).
ICES Ver 1.0 was initially launched as a: Pitot project at Delhi Custom House ‘in
4995. It was gradually made operational at other custom houses from. 1997.
ICES is running at 123 customs locations at presént and handling nearly 88 per
cent of India's International trade {CES 1.5 is upgraded version of the original
ICES 1.0 version. it rolled out across various custom locations from June, 2009 a

onwards.

b. The Indian Customs ED! Gateway (iCEGATE), is the interface of ICES
with the Trade for customs clearance related messages and with licensing and
regulatory agencies ‘such as Directorate. General of Foreign Trade (DGFT),
Directorate of Commercial Intelligence and Statistics (DGCI&S), Ministry of Steet,
_ Ministry of Railways, Reserve Bank of India (RBI), etc. for sharing of trade _



statistics‘Customs clearance data. The National Import Database (NIDB) and
Export Commodity Database (ECDB) for Directorate of Valuation (DoV) are also
serviced through ICEGATE. It provides ahost of services like e-filing of customs
documents, e-payment of duty, document tracking status, online verification of
licences, importer-exporter code (IEC) status, PAN based Custom House Agent ;
(CHA) data, etc.

0, The Risk Management System (RMS), is a separate application, but
integrated with the ICES, which facilitates minimal or no checks for low risk
import consignments/entities and focuses customs compliance “enforcement
efforts on high risk consignments/ entities. !t was introduced in November, 2005
and a newer version, RMS ver. 3.1, was introduced in June, 2010. It had so far
functioned for imports only, but RMS for exports has been introduced from 15
July, 2013 at two ICES locations on triat basis.

2. Audit had earlier reviewed the Customs ED) System for the first time in the year
2000-01 and reported its findings in CAG's Report No. 10 of 2002 (Customs). The
review focused on procurement and software development.. ICES 1.0 was again
reviewed by the Audit in the year 2008, primarily to verify whether it had mapped the
processes and provisions of the Customs Act and allied rules and regulations
effectively. This review had revealed deficiencies in (i) system design leading to
incomplete capture of data resulting in manual interventions, {ii) incorrect mapping of
business tules, (iii) absence of appropriate input controls, {iv) absence of validation
” between ‘custonis tariff heading’ and the serial number of the notification for ensuring
correct availing of exemption notification, (v) absence of validation of licence and
scheme code, (vi) inadequate change management controls and (vii) wastage of
resources as the data available inthe systern was not utilised and manual process were
restored instead. The Audit had also made certain recommendations to address the
system deficiencies which were included in’ their Report No. PA 24 of 2009-10
(Customs) which were as follows:

|. Review of the business rules mapped in. the systems may be carried out.



3.

3

Any changes buiit info the system may be documented and the conformity of the
changes to the business rules ensured. The changes may be authorised by an
appropriate authority. An audit trail of the changes made fo the system and the
data may be maintained. For centralised applications, a centralised change
management system must be in place. ©

Input controts and validation checks may be reviewed and built into the system,
wherever required. . |

The system may be modified to use the available data fully so that ali business
Processes are done through the system instead of resorting to manual
procedures.

A periodical review of the performance of the system may be put in place to
ensure continued efficiency and effectiveness of the system towards the
” desired/dynamic business objectives.

All the above recommendations were accepted by the Ministry of Finance.

The Customs ICT systems and the ICES application have been modified from

time to time in accordance with the operational requirements of the department and

changes in the Customs Act and allied Acts, Rules and Regulations. Although the core

ICES application has been in use for nearly two decades, with the migration from

decentralised to centralised environment from the year 2009-10, the Audit report states

that there were several changes in underlying !CT- infrastructure, work flow, data

transfer and storage, security, etc.

4.

ICES 1.5, an upgrade of the original 105 1.0 Version was rolled out in a phased

manner across varlous customs locations from June 2009. The main features of the

upgraded version were a‘ migration from Oracle database 8i fo 10g, which runs in an

environment with a centralised application having:

i. Multi-iocationat functionality;

tl. Single database with partitions for users to access data only for their location;



ll. Centralized maintenance and updating of software;
IV. Faster and better communication with external stakeholders, banks, 2-PAO, etc.

V. Integration with iCEGATE in central environment leading to better response time.
(However, having spend % 604 crore in upgrading the application, estimation of
commensurate gains in terms of cost and time savings have not been made.)

The latest Audit of ICES 1.5 was stated to be conducted to gain an assurance
that:

a. The ICT system has adequate contro!s in place to ‘safeguard assets (data,
fechnology, applications, facilities and people), :

b. To maintain data confidentiality, integrity, and

c. To ensure fulfilment of the department's business requirements set down in the
Customs Act and allied rules and regulations by effectively mapping the
processes and provisions of the Customs Act and allied rules and regulations

through the ICES 1.5 application and its inter phases.

5. The Customs Department is today facing challenge from the global online
shopping business giants like Amazon, eBay, etc. There lies great potential in tapping
and generating revenues from the online shopping businesses across the globe. The
Customs Department needs to devise smart strategies to tap this potential domain. -

6. Though qualitative changes have been made in ICES 4.5 as compared to ICES
1.0 the Audit came across certain systemic issues and issues involving inadequate
scoping and functionality of the 1.5 application. The total revenue implication of the _
Audit Report was worked out to be % 847,16 crore. :

7. + Some of the important findings of Audit were as under:
(i) Incorrect calculation of warehousing interest by [CES 1.5 Application

8. An analysis of 1055 data for the period 1 April 2012 to 31 March 2013 revealed
that out of 6,887 Ex-Bond BEs involving clearances from Warehouse (WH) beyond 90°



5

days (considering the WBE_WH_DT field from fhe BE_STATUS Table and the
PAYMENT_DT field from the BE_CASH Table) and where WH interest was levied, in
6;756 BEs WH interest was levied for one day less, resulting in short-levy of WH.”
interest by Rs. 13.28 lakh, In the remaining 131 BEs, WH interest was found to have
been either excess or short-levied for periods varying from 28 days in excess to 6 days
less, for reasons not ascertainable from the available data. This indicatéd an error in
the program for the ‘calculation of WH Interest’ in ICES 1.5 application.

(ii) Absence of RSP {Retail Sale Price) validations to enforce RSP declaration
for imports attracting RSP based assessment

9... The audit analysis revealed that there were no validations in the ICES 1.5
application to ensure that importers of goods falling under any of the Tariff lines
attracting RSP based assessment were required to declare the RSP of the imported

goods.

10. . In 61 per cent of the imports valuing Rs. 44,612.93 crore, Countervailing Duty
(CVD) amounting to Rs. 5,746.40 crore was levied on ad valorem basis. Had these
imports been assessed under RSP, the revenue realisation could have been much
more. The exact short realisation of revenue could not be quantified by Audit as RSP

were not declared in these cases.
(iii) Acceptance of multiple rate of exchange rates by the application

11. According to Section 14 of the Customs Act 1962, valuation of goods for
assessment to duties of customs is to be ascertained with reference to the ‘Tate of
exchange’ of the foreign currency of the invoice, as in force on the date of presentation
of BE and the rate notified by CBEC. The Board, vide NT notifications dated 21 May
2012 and 24 May 2012, had upwardly revised the exchange rates for the Japanese
Yen, the US. Dollar, andthe Hong Kong Dollar, effective from 22 May 2012 and 25
May 2012, respectively.’ However, the audit had observed that the changes were not
updated in the system, resulting in incorrect assessment and consequently short levy of

duty.



(iv) Failure to update the central excise duty rate and notification directories

12. 118 updating of rates of Central Excise duty and the Central Excise notification

7 directories are delegated to the Jawaharlal Nehru -Custom House (JNCH), Nhava
Sheva. Audit observed that these directories were not updated when the Finance Act _
2012-13 was passed and notified vide Gazette of india notification No. 25 dated 28 May
2012, The omission continued for the rest of the FY 2013, as a result of which a.
number of amendments in the Central Excise Tariff Schedule involving changes in duty
rates was not incorporated in the system. This resulted in continued short levy of CVO
on goods like ‘cigarettes (Chapter 24) and ‘railway wagons’, 'parts of locomotives’ ete.
(CETH 8607, 8608 and 8609) throughout the year. The impact of short levy on imports है
under chapter 86 vide 1,696 BEs at all-India level due to application of CVD rate of 6

" per cent instead of the higher applicable rate of 12 per cent from 28 May 2013
amounted to Rs. 97.55 crore, as ascertained from ICES 1.5 data.

(v) Delay in updating of Customs Exemption Notification and Duty rate
Directories -

13. The updating of rates of customs duty and the customs notification directories
are delegated to Chennai Sea Customs. Custom's exemption dated 17 March 2012
was amended by notification dated 23 January 2013 enhancing the Basic Customs Duty
(BCD) rate from ‘niP to 2.5 percent in respect of certain goods involving crude oil
imports. However, audit observed that in 15 instances of imports of ‘crude sunflower oi?
and ‘crude palm kernel oi made on 23 and 24 January 2013 under Chennai Sea
Customs were assessed at ‘nil’ rate of BCD vide exemption notification dated 17 March
2012, resulting in short collection of duty of Rs. 2.29 crore. The reason for the incorrect
exemption was the delay in updating of customs exemption notification.

{vi} Failure to update the SAD Exemption notification

14. It was noticed by Audit that in several instances at. Chennai Sea, Air and |
Tuticorin Commissionerates, incorrect exemption from SAD was allowed under serial
No. 50 of notification.dated 1 March 2006 though the goods are liable to SAD in ferms
of the other notification dated 1 March 2006, This resulted in short levy of duty of Rs.



2.33 crore, out of which recovery of Rs, 0.98 crore had been effected till July 2013
(Audit Paragraph No. 4.3 of Report No.14 of.2013). Similarly, in 49 instances in Kochi
Sea Customs incorrect grant of exemption resulted in short 18५५ of duty of * 0.89 crore
(Audit Paragraph No. 1.75 (4) of Report No.14 of 2013). Similar case was once again
noticed in audit in Kochi in November 2012 which resulted in short levy'of Rs. 0.51 lakh.
Scrutiny of the EDI transaction data from 8 April 2011 to 31 March-2013 pertaining to
Kolkata Port and Airport Commissionerates revealed that-in 1,034 and 9154 cases SAD
was not levied. This resulted in short levy of SAD amounting to 1२७. 46.59 crore and Rs,
29.26 crore in the respective Commissionerates.

(शी) Difference in duty calculated and duty collected

15. The analysis revealed that there were differences in the calculated duty payable
and duty actually paid in the cases of 1,057 and 1,729 BEs for the year 2011-12 and -
2012-13 respectively. The total duty payable in these BEs were Rs. 106.77 crore and हैं
195.73 crore, whereas, only ₹ 20.87 crore and % 59.07 crore were collected on
clearance of imported goods for the year 2011-12 and 2012-13, resulting in short

- collection of = 85.70 ‘crore and हैं 136.86 crore in these BEs for the respective years
2011-12 and°2012-13. Further, out of 1,057 BEs for the year 2011-12 and 1,729 BEs
for the year 2012-13, in 162 and 445 855 calculated duty payable were ¥ 32.29 crore
and हैं 72.68 crore for the respective years 2011-12 and 2012-13, against which no
amount was collected.

{viii} Business processes not covered under 1058, requiring manual
assessments हु

16... liwas observed that an average of 3.64 per cent, 1.87 per cent and 1.39 per cent
BEs were filed manually at 19 EDI ports during the years 2010-11, 2011-12 and 2012-
13. Similarly 4.35 per cent, 2.16 per cont and 2.18 per cent SBs were filed manually at
these 19 EDI ports during the years 2010-11, 2011-12 and 2012-13. However, the.
number of 501 processed cusloms documents has increased over the past three years.
The percentage of manual filing of BEs were higher at Tuticorin, Goa, Nagpur and
Kelkata Port, ranging between 3.53 percent to 6.90 percent, whereas the manual filing



of SBs were higher at Chennai Air, Kochi, Goa, Nagpur and Kolkata Airports, ranging
between 4.77 percent to 23.76 percent, which were in contravention of sections 46 and
50 of the Customs Act and the Board's instructions. It was aiso noticed that 100 per
cent of BEs were assessed manually at West Bengal (Preventive) Commissionerate.
Audit also observed that out of 116 EDI enabled locations, only in 89 locations,
electronic filing of import documents was.done, out of which in 29 locations, less than ,
500 BEs were fited during 2012-13. Similarly export documents were filed in 99
locations; out of this in 20 locations, less than 500 SBs were filed during the same.

period.
{ix} Improper allocation/sutilization of hardware

17. Audit observed that only 250 and 100 numbers of Thin Client terminals have
been installed at Chennai Sea and Chennai Air Commissionerates against 414 and 166
numbers received by them. Further, in case of Chennai Air and ICD Patparganj, it was
observed that out of 100 and 62 numbers of installed terminals, only 80 and 30
terminals were actually in use as on 31 March 2013. This indicates that optimum
utilization of hardware was not being done.

I. Business processes not covered under 1055, requiring manual

assessments

18. According to sections 46 and 50 of the Customs Act 1962, import documents, i.e.
Bills of Entry (BEs) as well as export documents, i.e. Shipping Bills (SBs) are mandatory
to be filed electronically (through Electronic Data interchange or EDI system). In order to
prevent misuse, CBEC issued instructions on 04 May 2011, that manua! processing and
clearance of import/export goods shall be allowed only in exceptional cases and data for
manual documents should be compulsorily entered and transmitted by all locations
within the stipulated time period,

19.. The percentage of manual filing of BEs were higher at Tuticorin, Goa, Nagpur
and Kolkata Port, ranging between 3.53 percent to 6.90 percent, whereas the manual
filing of SBs were higher at Chéennaj Air, Kochi, Goa, Nagpur and Kolkata’ Airport,
ranging between 4.77 percent to 23.76 percent, which were in contravention of section

ow



46 and 50 of the Customs Act and the Board's instructions. It was also noticed that 100

percent of BEs were assessed manually at West Bengal (Preventive) Commissionerate.

20. Audit also obsefved that out of 116 EDI enabled locations, only in 89 locations,
electronic filing of import documents were carried out, out of which in 29 locations, less
than 500 BEs were filed during 2012-13. Similarly export documents were filed in 99
locations; :out of this in 20 locations, less than 600 SBs were filed during the same
period.

21. When asked about the measures taken to ensure compliance with mandatory
filling of BEs and 585 electronically, through ED! system, the Ministry submitted
following reply:

"In order to ensure compliance with mandatorily filing of BEs and SBs
électronicaliy, CBEC vide F.No.401/81/2011-Cus.Ill dated 4th May 2011 has
issved instructions that only in-the rarest of rare and genuine cases manual
processing and clearance will be allowed and further the Authority of permitting
manual documents shail be vested only with the Commissioner of Customs."

22. The Committee were surprised to note that the manual filing of return was still
being allowed. When asked the reasons for the same, the Ministry replied as under:

“The reason why manual filing of return are still being allowed is due to the fact that
‘there are certain customs locations which are not yet under EDI net. While it is the
constant endeavour of CBEC to ensure that ail sites are brought onto EDI at the
earliest, several reasons like very less volume of business, connectivity issues &
remoteness of the locations are hindrances,

Further, there are various processes in Customs of which major processes have
already been automated. Remaining are taken up for automation, based on
prioritization by the Board, which priority is in turn dependent on changing criteria
- including the urgency of the requirement, its impact on revenue collection, mitigation
of fraud possibilities, the -cost involved, addressing concerns of maximurn
stakeholders, etc. In the- meanwhile, manual filing for these processes is
necessitated. 7

Earnest efforts are being taken for automation of all these business processes to
the extent possible, which can .be seen from the significant decrease in the
documents filed manually."

23. On being asked what mechanism the department had to ensure that all manual
entries made at all stations were entered in the system within the prescribed time, the



10

Ministry replied that there was a provision in the ICES for capturing data for manual
documents. CBEC vide instruction F.No.401/81/2011-Cus.IIFdated 04.05.2011 had
prescribed 8 mechanism for Commissionerates to monifor data entry for manual
documents and to ensure that all manual entries made at all stations were compulsorily
entered in the system within the prescribed time. .

24. On being asked whether the Ministry had fixed any timeline for ensuring
maximum compliance with mandatory filing of BEs and SBs electronically, through ED!
system, the Ministry in their written reply submitted as under:

“No time limit is fixed. The Customs Act, 1952 mandates filing of electronic
declarations, both import and export. Manual filing is generally allowed only in

exceptional cases where it is not feasible to file electronic declarations due to .

non availability of EDI or operational issues relating 10 EDI. in such cases
approval of Commissioner of Customs is required.”

Il. Futuristic iS strategic plans and DRISHTI Project

25. To exact maximum benefit from an Information System (IS) requires foresight to
prepare for the changes, and planning to provide an economical and effective solution.
IS planning provides a structured means of addressing the impact of technologies,
including emerging technologies, on. an organization, Through the planning process,
relevant technologies are identified and evaluated in the context of broader business
goals and targets. Based on a comparative assessment of relevant technologies, the
direction for the organization can be established. When the Committee enquired
whether the information system (IS) was up-to-date with emerging technologies and
prepared to meet the challenges in context of business targets in the global economy

and what new initiatives had been taken in the recent past by the department to meet

new challenges, the Ministry replied as under:

“58520 had deployed state-of-the-art information systems to meet the business
requirements of its stakeholders. These include enterprise class servers, storage,
networks, security devices and other systems. CBEC also regularly upgrades its
information systems such as databases, operating systems etc, keeping in
consideration the growing business demands and emerging technologies. Some
of the recent initiatives being undertaken are upgrading the data centre network
from 1G to 10G; up gradation of storage to the latest technology and increasing

ae



26.

11

the computing capacity of its systems In a manner which will utilize. the data
centre space and power utilization in a more economical manner. Furthermore,

. 58६6 has recently submitted a project proposal for augmentation and revamp of

its IT systems to meet new business requirements in the period 2016-17 until
2020-21. This proposal is under consideration by the Ministry- for approval of
funding. ” Ot

DRISHTI is an ambitious and well highlighted project of the Department of

Revenue, A personnel policy for development of internal competencies for management

of CBEC IS Management, development and training of IT personnel are key essentials

for smooth operation of the Department's mission critical IT System. The Committee

desired to know whether any initiative had been taken by the Department to constitute a

Steering Committee for developing IS plan according to its business strategy in

consonance with its future IS needs, The Departinent of Revenue’ have accordingly

submitted the details of the DRISHTI project proposed to be launched for improving the

efficiency and effectiveness of Indirect Tax Administration as follows-

“A High Powered Committee (HPC) by Department of Revenue, Ministry of
Finance, CBEC was constituted to examine the possible improvement in the
existing systems and laying down an appropriate IT roadmap of CBEC named as.

_ Driving Information Systems for Holistic Tax Initiaves (DRISHTI) as weil as for

preparing a vision document with a view to strengthening CBEC initiatives
towards achieving its vision of creating a voluntary compliance and in combating
smuggling, revenue evasion and commercial frauds after taking info account

. Clearly identified activities, milestone and responsibilities and considering the

requirements of external and- internal stakeholders. The said Committee has
already submitted its report to Finance Minister on 21.10.2014. The report after
examining the existing business processes and the existing status of [T systems
in CBEC, has highlighted the area for improvement and has offered certain
recommendations aimed at leveraging IT for improving the quality and extent of

- fax payer services, encouraging voluntary compliance and detecting tax evasion.

The recommendations are under examination by CBEC."

. Audit had made the following comment on above reply of the Ministry:

“The project does not deal with effectiveness on taxation issues. For other tax
administration issues, the report submitted to FM along with the recommendation
made may have to be analysed io opine on its applicability. - The
recommendations of the: HPC do- not indicate linkages between the
issues/activities recommended and measurable results expected, thereon."

oe
we
wet



2

27. The major recommendations of the Report of the High Powered Comrrittee
(170) constituted by Department of Revenue to examine the possible improvement in
the existing systems and laying down an appropriate IT roadmap of CBEC as provided
by Ministry and the recommendations of the DRISHT! Committee are listed below:-

° The Existing Help Desk to be augmented and converted to an integrated National
Help Desk

« Need to adopt a more IT-Centric HR Policy

« Manpower Resource augmentation at Systems Directorate

« Centralised HR Management System

« Administrative and Financial constraints to be suitably addressed
« Need for technology upgrade of ICES application ,

« Review and redesign ACES and introduce invoice level data capture to enable
CENVAT credit reconciliation.

« Conduct a comprehensive review of Business Processes in Customs, Central
. Excise and Service Tax

« Redesign of ICES, ICEGATE and RMS into an Integrated Customs System

« Introduce a well-planned change management initiative at policy level for ”
providing sufficient lead time for technical changes such as during the Budget
and tax notifications

¢ Need to expand the Tax 360 initiative
« Increasing the use of advanced data analytics

* Enhancement of Risk Management System across Customs, Central Excise and
Service Tax

» implementation of mobility solutions

« Sufficient headroom to ensure that resource utilisation does not exceed 60% ona
sustained basis :

* Increase the computing capacity at the DR site to provide full redundancy with
~ zero data loss through synchronous replication and a DR Network Operation
Centre.

* ‘Improve CBEC network resilience and connectivity with better bandwidth
allocation best in class network monitoring tools revamping VPN solutions etc

« Making the IT infrastructure more manageable by reducing the multiplicity of
vendors

* Implement real time replica system for transactional and hybrid reports



43

Reduce disaster Recovery time to move tawards automated fail-over

Strengthen user authentication. process by measures such as two factor
authentication aan

Deploy Document Management System for business documents at local and
central levels for safe archival; even for manual data

Upgrade ICEGATE application technology.to supported versions
Implement modular, scalable server solutions, use of flash etc.

Human resources handling IT operations to be strengthened.

Lateral entry of experts

Capacity building of officers

Creation of a Chief Technology Officer (CTO) function under DG Systems

Implement an internat e-learning system comprising a Learning Management
System and a Knowledge Management System

Introduction of a structured Leadership Development Programme in policy
making, tax strategies, and gfobal tax developments and given wide exposure to
other tax administrations

Consider the various IT Governance Models including SPV Model

Customs Single Window Project interfacing with other Government departments
and regulatory agencies

- Engage with other Customs Administration towards International Data Exchange

CBEC to implement document management system on the lines of the project
implemented in Bangalore

Introduce Advance Passenger Information System

Set up a National Customs Assessment Centre for central processing of
Customs Import & Export declarations.

Create a National Processing Centre for Central Excise & Service Tax.Returns.

Establish a National Targeting Centre dedicated fo collection, processing,
analysis and dissemination of critical data / information across the country-and
abroad for real-time intervention and action .

Setting up a National Centre of Exceltence similar to the Knowledge and
Intelligence unit of HMRC, UK, to act as Research and Knowledge Hub for entire
Indirect Tax Administration

Setting up a Directorate General of International Customs
Strengthening and reorganisation of Functional Units in CBEC



14

lV. Performance of Post Clearance Audit (PCA)

- 28. In order to implement self assessment effectively anc fo ensure its benefits to the
trade, the Board decided that current facilitation level under RMS. should be enhanced
significantly. Accordingly, as per the Board's circular dated 2 September 2011, it was
decided to enhance facilitation level up to 80, 70 and 60 per cent in case of Air Cargo
complexes, ports and 1005 respectively, by rationalizing sisk rules and risk parameters.
According to Board circular dated 13 June 2012, higher facilitation at the same time has
led to the need for more scrutiny of BEs at PCA/PCCV stage. It is, therefore, felt that the
‘percentage of BEs selected for PCA needed to be enhanced by concerned field
formations. Board, therefore, directed that till the time OSPCA was made applicable to
all categories of importers, the percentage of BEs selected for PCA ata Customs house
should be suitably enhanced to safeguard the interest of revenue. Board also desired
that concerned Chief Commissioners of Customs should review the staff position in their
jurisdiction and reallocate more manpower for audit work as increased facilitation in
terms of reduced examination had led to lesser requirement of staff for examination of
goods. it was, therefore, imperative that excess staff should be diverted for activities

_ suchas PCA and SIIB in Customs Houses.

29. The Committee note that the compilation of information on PCA activity received
from field offices revealed that the Board's instructions to reallocate more manpower for
PCA to increase scrutiny of RMS cases has not been followed in any location and
showed increasing trend in pendency of cases in 8 out of the 10 customs locations for
which data has been received

30. On being asked why more manpower has not been allocated fo the field offices’
as desired by the Board, the Ministry submitted their written reply asunder: 7

“The generat reasons for not posting staff for PCA has been that prior to cadre
restructuring there was acute shortage of Appraising Officers and Assistant
Commissioners, For instance, Chief Commissioner of. Customs, Chennai has
reported that due to acute overall shortage of manpower at the grade of
Appraising Officers (40.35%) and Assistant / Deputy Commissioner of Customs
(44.23%), more staff from other.sections could not be diverled fo PCA. The
situation has improved after cadre restructuring and more number of officers are
being posted by field formations.for PCA.”



31.

15

When asked whether any steps had been taken to deploy excess staff for PCA &

._ 918 in Customs Houses after the audit observation, the Department of Revenue

- submitted the details as under:

32.

“Chief Commissioner of Customs, Chennai has informed that after cadre
restructuring 6 Assistant Commissioners have been posted to attend exclusively
to PCA work in Chennai Sea Commissionerate and 5 Assistant Commissioners
have been posted to attend exclusively PCA work in Chennai Air Cargo complex.
Similarly, the strength of Assistant Commissioners has been enhanced from 1 to
2 in SUB.

Chief Commissioner of Customs, Jawaharlal Nehru Custom House, Nhava
Sheva has also reported that with the implementation of cadre restructuring more
officers particularly at the level of Assistant /Deputy Commissioners have now
been deployed. Accordingly. 8 Officers at the level of Assistant /Deputy
Commissioners have been posted in Jawaharlal Nehru Custom House, Nhava
Sheva and there is greater emphasis on PCA. SIiB has also been strengthened
by deployment of 4 Officers at the level of Assistant / Deputy Commissioners.”

The Committee were surprised to note.that no PCA wing has been constituted at

ICD Mandideep and ICD Pithampur leaving no scope for detection of incorrect

assessment by the department at these customs locations. The Ministry, when asked

about the reasons for not-constituting PCA wing as mentioned above, replied:

33,

“A dedicated PCA Wing was not set up due to the low volume of import
However, PCA Wing has since been set up at ICD, Pithampur on 26.11.2014 and
at ICD Mandideep on 11.04.2014.”

The Committee were curious to know how, in absence of PCA, the Department

ensure the correctness of the assessments made at the custom locations. When a

specific query was addressed to the Ministry in this regard, the following reply was

submitted:

34,

“Assessment is done on self-basis by importers and its correctness is confirmed
by performing systems checks and by verification by the Customs officers. PCA
is an additional methodology to confirm the assessment, Thus, the assessment is
being-confirmed even.in the absence of PCA."

_The Ministry also informed in writing that theie were tofal 49 ICDs with RMS

wherein a PCA Wing was required and that such a Wing had been constituted at all
these ICDs. ‘



16

35. CAG Audit on scrutiny of the pending PCA BEs at ACC Chennai and Tuticorin
Commissionerates as on 31 March 2013 revealed that approximately 138 and 2172 bills
of entry respectively, had already become time barred under section 28 of the Customs
Act, 1962, thereby foreclosing the opportunity to raise demand even if incorrect
‘assessments were detected. The Committee enquired whether there .was any
provision in the system to detect such cases timely, the Ministry replied as under: ,
“The list of documents pending for PCA is made available to the audit officers

alongwith the dates. The officer has the option to select any document for PCA
based on the requirement, although no alert as such is generated in the System.”

Vv, Ineffective Functioning of Local Risk Management (LRM}

36. The Risk Management System of ICES 1.5 has two components — National Risk

Management (NRM) and Local Risk Management (LRM). While risk rules and targets at
the National level are inserted and updated by RMD, Mumbai, the LRM Committees at

custom sites are responsible for inserting and monitoring local risk factors through
insertion of local targets. According to CBEC dated 28 June 2007, LRM Committee was
to be constituted at each Custom House/ACC headed by an officer not below the rank
of Commissioner of Customs. The Committee was to meet ence in every month to
‘discuss framing and review performance of RMS and to send periodic reports to RMD,
Mumbai.

37. Audit observed poor functioning of LRM at almost all locations in discharging its
function to monitor the performance of RMS and PCA. No LRM Committee has yet
been constituted in Goa, ICD Patparganj, 100 Mandideep, ICD Pithampur and Kolkata
Airport Commissionerates.

38. The Committee were interested fo know whether any directions/instructions had

been issued to Local Risk Management Committees at different sites for proper and

“timely performance teview of RMS. On being asked the same, the Ministry replied as
under: है ह

“AS per para 5.3(iv) of the Board circular’ no, 23/2007 dated 28.06.2007, the

Local Risk Management Committees have been instructed to review the

performance of the RMS and evaluate the results of the action taken on the basis
of the RMS output."



Vy

39, The GBEC, Department of Revenue also informed in a written reply that have
submitted the details that RMS has been rolled out in 89 EDI locations and as-per

; information’ available: with the RMD, LRMCs ‘have been cofistituted for all these 89
locations (List given below).

Status of RMS in various EDt locations

Sr No| LRM LOCATION ~ S| LRM LOCATION
- No
i ICD Patparganj 26 [100 Sabarmati, Ahmedabad
| 2 [1160 Mulund . 27__| Custom House Kandla
__3 | ACC Sahar * 28 | Custom House Mundra
4 |ACCChennai 29 |ACC Ahmedabad .....___
b: 30_| ICD Dashrath, Vad:

31 [ICD Vapi ...
n | .32 | Dahej Pi
ustom House Tuticorin 33__| Magdala port

9 100 Tuglakabad | 34 | ICD Thar Dry Port, Sanand
| 410 | ICD Hyderabad 35 [100 Waluj Aurangabad
141 | ICD Whitefield, 36 | Pipavav Port
__...| Bangalore ee हि
12 110 Dighi. 37__| ICO Ankaleashwar
13 | ICD Talegaon, Pune 38 | ICD Sachin Surat
14 | ICD Chinchwad, Pune 39 _| ACC Kolkata
15 | ACC Bangalore 40 | Custom House Kolkata
| 16 | ICD Gari Harsaru 41 | Custom House Goa
47__| ICD Rewari- 42__| Custom House Cochin
| 18 [100 Pati 43 1100 Maliwada
49 _| CFS Nashik 44 {ACC Goa
20 | ICD Janori 45 { ACC Trivandrum
21. | ACC Amritsar __ | 46 {ICD Mandideep
22 | ICD Bhusawal i j
23 _ | Paradeep Port 1-1०.
24 | ACC Janori 49- | ICD KOTTAYAM, VILLAGE
_| NATTAKAM 7
_[ ICD Ballabhgarh aa है
| Custom House Chennai ICD Jaipur oe
Ennore.Port 1 72 |CONCORDADRI
ICD irungaltukottai 73_| TRIDENT - DADRI रा
ICD CONCGR है -
54 | Tondiarpet_ - 74_| CFS Albatross ICD.Dadri
55 _| Kattupalli Port 75 | CGM DADRI

56_| Custom House 76_| CFS STARTRACK DADRI

a
.



ag.

Mangatore _ हु ee _ |
57 | Custom House Vizag 77 [100 Concor Kanakpura, Jaipur
58 | CFS(QWPL) Ludhiana 78 | ACC Jaipur
59 | Custom House Kakinada | 79. | ICD Concor Jodhpur.
[ 60 [100 Pithampur 80
61 |iCDBallabgarh | 87
62_|ICDSinganailr | 82
[ICD Irugur | 83 ICD Agra
64 |ACC Coimbatore sss | 84 FICD Kota
65__| Nagapattinam port 85 11012 ICD, PANKI, KANPUR
{ 66 | Gangavaram Port | 86 | ICD Surat
| 6 [100 Pakwara,Moradabad | 87_ | ACC Dethi
{68 _| ICD Loni 88 [HAZIRAPORT
| 69 |KaraikkalPort | 89 | JNCH Nhava Sheva Coe
70, | Krishnapatnam Port a वि है

40. When enquired about the members of the LRM Committee and experts in risk
management in these Committees, the Ministry submitted the following written reply:

“As per para 5.2 of the- Board Circular no. 23/2007 dated 28.06.2007 the LRM
Committee comprises of the Additional/Joint Commissioner in charge of Special
investigation and Intelligence Branch (SIIB), who 18 designated as the Local Risk
Manager, and functions as the Secretary of the Committee. The LRM Committee
includes the Additional / Joint Commissioner in charge of Audit and a nominee,
not below the rank of a Deputy Director from the regional / zonal unit of the DRI,
and a nominee, not below the rank of Deputy Director from the Directorate ‘of
Valuation, if any. The Local Risk Manager handles the Risk Management System
at local level on regular basis and possesses the domain knowledge. Further, he
may consult the Risk Management Division. in case of any difficulty."

41. As regards the functions of NRM, the Ministry have furnished following
information to the Committee:

- "NRM i.e. the Risk Management Division (RMD) is the nodal agency with the
overall responsibility for designing and implementation of Risk Management
‘System using various risk parameters and risk Management tools. RMD suggests
assessment and examination in respect of consignments perceived to be risky and
facilitates the remaining ones. The: RMD aiso reviews the performance of the Rish ©
Management System (RMS) in terms of reviewing the various targets/interventions
inserted by the Local Risk Managers. However, the Board vide Circular
No.23/2007-Cus dated 28.06.2007 has issued “Charter of Functions for the RMD”
and the same are reproduced as under:

” Charter of functions for the RMD.



48

3.1. The RMD will have the overall responsibility for the management of the RMS
which has been designed to address risks facing Customs, i.¢., the potential for
non-compliance with Customs and allied laws and security regulations, including
risks associated with the potential failure to facilitate international trade.

3.2 The RMD will be the nodal agency with the overall responsibility for designing
and inplementation of Risk Management System using various risk parameters
- and risk management tools. RMD will suggest assessment and examination in
respect of consignments perceived to be risky and facilitate the remaining ones.

3.3 The RMD will also be responsible for collecting and collating information and
developing an intelligence database with a view to effectively implement the RMS
and also carry out effective risk assessment, risk evaluation and risk mitigation
techniques. !t-will update and maintain tisk parameters in relation fo the trade,
commodities and all stakeholders associated or involved with the supply chain
lagistics.

3.4 The RMD will be the nodal agency for Accredited Client's Programme (ACP).
it will maintain a fist of accredited clients in the RMS and closely monitor the
compliance standards of these accredited clients.

3.5 The RMD will closely interact with ali Custom Houses, Directorate of
Revenue Intelligence (DRI) and Directorate of Valuation (DOV) to enabie it to
effectively address national risks. The loca! risks will be largely addressed by RMD
in’ co-operation with the Custom Houses where import/export clearances are
actually effected. Further, the RMD will also closely interact with Directorate of
Valuation (DOV) on all matters pertaining fo the Valuation Risk Assessment
Module (VRAM) of RMS. DOV will guide and advise RMD on alt matters pertaining
fo valuation in RMS. DOV will also supply the fist of Most Sensitive Commodities
with value bands, the list of valid valuation alerts and the list of Unusual Quantity
Code (UQC) at agreed intervals.

3.6 The RMD will also review the performance of the RMS in terms of reviewing
the various targets/interventions inserted by the Local Risk Management (LRM)
Committee, make an objective assessment of the effectiveness of such insertions,
and ensure that the performance is consistent with the objective laid down. For this
purpose, the RMD shall provide necessary advice and guidance to Custom
Houses as and when required, which’shall be followed. The RMD will also review
the extent of facilitation being provided to the trade and offer necessary guidance
fo the officers in the Custom Houses with a view to providing appropriate
facilitation and also ensuring compliance.

3.7. The RMD will also coordinate and liaise with other Government Depariments
*(OGDs), in order to deal with risks relating to the compliance requirements under .
allied Acts which the Customs department is required to administer, under the

overall direction of the D.G. (Systems).

3.8 The RMD wilt work in close coordination with NACEN in developing training
manuals and other documentation necessary for the implementation of RMS, In
addition fo this, it will also work out regular training schedules for training of officers

xe



20

responsible for implementing the RMS in major customs locations.

3.9 The RMD shalt work in close coordination with Directorate General of Audit
(DG Audit},. which has the responsibility, for formulating audit policies and
procedures, developing criteria and parameters for selection of cases or
documents for audit.

3.10 DG (Systems) will submit periodic reports on the functioning of the RMS to
the Board.”

VI. Security System and Verification of ICES Application and RMS System and Verification of ICES Application and RMS

42. DoS issues-Single sign-on Identity (SSOID) to local users for accessing the EDi
system on the basis of request received from the appointed nodal officer. After issue of
SSOID, the System ‘Manager/Commissionerate Administrator at the field formation level
assigns roles/privileges required to perform any activity within the application and
monitors SSOIDs activity. Audit observed that the number of SSOIDs issued as on 31
March 2013 was not available with system Manager/Administrator at 10 of the 19 EDI
locations where the Performance Audit was conducted, indicating that SSOIDs activity
was not being monitored at these locations by the local system administrator,

43. On being asked about the steps/measures taken by the Department to monitor
the SSOIDs activity by the users, the Ministry submitted the following written reply to the
Committee:

“The Central Systems Integration (SI} team of CBEC monitors the SSOIDs
issued to users, Every month, the central team proactively disables users retiring
in that month. Furthermore, the Electronic User Access Review and Verification
too! mentioned in the Report has been launched country-wide in September 2014
and is being actively used by the field formations.

44. Explaining further the working of the User Access Management tool the Ministry

of Finance furnished the fallowing reply:

“The Electronic User Access. Review and Verification too! has already been
~ launched Country-wide in September 2014 and is being actively used by the
- System Managers of all field’ formations. The User Access Review and
_ Verification too] (UAV) has been designed to verify and review the application
‘access provisioned to the departmental users. The System manager/Comm

Admin can review and verify the availability and application role access of -



21

departinental users in their respective locations. The System Manager! Comm
Admin has been provided with.the privileges to review and.update the tool, if any
change is required in user's access. The System Manager / Comm Adminis
Tequited to carry out this ‘review on a monthly basis. Using this User.Access
Review and Verification application, the System ManagerfComm Admin can
perform the foliowing functionalities

. Check location wise list of users

. Review User's details and application access

. Update the tool in case of any variation in user details and application
access

. .Generate ihe Review Status Report upto 6 months.

Using this tool the Project Monitoring unit as well as the concerned officials of the
Directorate of Systems can track the changes made by the Systems Managers
and help in resolution of issues. This User.Access Review and Verification tool
displays.to all System managers the list of all SSOIDs active and mapped to their
locations along with their 10185, System manager is thus able to verify all users
for their locations. The 1001 has been deployed and is in use."

45. According to the Ministry, a Central SI team monitors the SSOIDs issued to
users, but the performance audit indicated that the activity was not monitored at 10 of
the 19 EDI locations. On being asked about the reasons for such a lapse, the Ministry
replied as under:

“The Central SI team is responsible for user creation and mapping only. It
deactivates proactively all users retiring in the month. In ICES application the
grant of access inside the system, role allocation etc. is driven by local System
Managers. Since the introduction of the User Access Review and Verification too!
in September 2014, the locations are using the same for review and reporting.”

46. Passwords are given to the officers to access the data filed by the users in their
area. The Committee desired to know the procedure for passing over the password in
case of transfer of the officers. When asked about the same, the Ministry replied as
under:

“Every officer is allotted a unique Single Sign On user ID (SSOID) and password.
The SSOID remains the same for the complete service tenure of the officer. The
password expires after_30 days and has to be regularly changed by the officer.
Every officer is required to access the system using his unique SSOID and
password only. Use of another officer's ID or password is not permitted as per
CBEC's Information Securify policy. CBEC’s applications follow Role Based



22

“Access Control. Accordingly, once an officer is transferred or his role is changed,
his access in the system is disabled by the concerned System Manager and the

- SSOID is de-mapped from the location in case of transfer to another focation.
-The SSO-ID of the relieving officer is mapped to the desired role by the System
Manager at the location for access into the system. Thus there is no question of
transferring any ID or password. “

47, Audit had observed that some features of operational password policy fike
password composition requirements, account lockout from unsuccessful login attempts,
etc. were different fram the documented password policy (paragraph 9.2.3 — User
Password Management) of the Information Security Procedures V1.7. The operational
password policy has different security features for ordinary users (business) and
privileged users (administrators etc.), whereas the documented password policy does
not provide for separate policies for different categories of users. Neither does it provide
for relaxation of number of failed login attempts for ordinary users, as found to have
been allowed in the operational policy. ;

48. The changes in the operational features of jogical security elements like
password policy may invariably be implemented only after due authorisation and
documentation of the changes. In this regard, when asked whether any password policy
has been framed by the department for different categories of users, the Ministry replied
as under: :

"CBEC has instituted an ISO 27001 compliant information Security Policy and
Procedure document, and password policy is an integral. part of these. The
Security Procedure document 2.0 contains the password policy (para 9.2.3) for
different categories of users such as System Administrators who typically have
the most stringent password controls, internal CBEC users, other stake holders
such as Banks etc. Any change in password policy or procedure is implemented
only after taking written approval of competent authority. Such changes are

necessarily documented as per intemal approval process. Further, security _

documents are reviewed and updated-on an annual basis."

49. In reply to the query about the measures/initiatives taken to ensure full proof data ~

security of the ICES system, the Ministry fumished the written information to the
Committee as under:- . ;

“CBEC recognizes data as its most critical asset and has.accordingly put in place
measures to ensure zero loss of its critical data. The production environment is

a2
a



23

conwpletely separated from development and testing environments. Application
support personnel do not have access to production systems. Infrastructure
suppor team is completely separate and does not have any access either to
development / testing environment or to application source code. MIS Reports
are: built into applications and are menu-based, retrievable only by authorized
CBEC users. Remote access from offices where WAN connectivity is not present
is permitted only through VPN, USB ports are disabled by default and permitted
only by exception. User Access is through diskless thin clients. CBEC uses
standard products for its applications which have several inherent’ features
rélating to data integrity, consistency, access logs and audit trails ete. In addition,
CBEC has implemented Virtual Private Database (VPD) which allows even an

authorized user fo view only the data pertaining fo his/her location. Applications .

have Role Based Access Control and day to day user access is controiled: by
CBEC officers themselves at the national and locat levels for all its applications.
Even privileged users:such as DBAs can work only after they have been granted
the required privilege by the Administrator, who in turn seeks CBEC approval for
any major database activity. In 2013-14, CBEC has implemented a Real time
Database Activity Monitoring solution to prevent misuse of DBA privileges and
protect its business data

CBEC has adopted the stringent [SO 27001 standard for Information Security for
its data centre implementation and was certified for compliance to this standard
in July 2011 by the Standards Testing Quality and Certifications (STQC) ~ a body
under the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology. Action has
been initiated to achieve re-certification as’ per the revised standard (ISO
27001:2013)

All infrastructure hosting business data and business logic is in the militarized
zone (MZ), in a separate network segment from the Dernilitarized Zone (DMZ)
and public zone. In addition, consoles for managing network are also in a
separate network segment from the data LAN. CBEC internal users access the
data centre using diskless thin clients without local storage, through the Citrix
presentation layer that allows only mouse clicks and keyboard strokes to traverse
the network, while also providing bandwidth optimization from an availability
perspective. Perimeter security is in place with firewalls etc. and a 24x7
monitoring team works in shifts. CBEC has its own email domain which is also
used by CBEC’s service providers for official .communication. The computing
infrastructure is owned by CBEC and deployed in caged areas in BS 7799-
certified, tier-3 data centres, with primary and DR sites in different seismic zones.
Alf IT operations are conducted from a dedicated Network Operating Centre
(NOC) which is separated from other ckent environments and is: ISO’ 27001
certified. Application service providers are distinct from the infrastructure team
and have no access to production data’ The infrastructure feam, in turr, has no
access to applications and manages databases only in the capacity of DBA. All
changes deployed in production are first tested on the development environment,
then tested by users on the pre-production environment, which is again
completely separate from the production environment. Production data is backed



50.

24

up on a daily, weekly and monthly basis on disk and tape libraries, with tapes
being stored in an off-site location in fire-proof storage. The Data Security
Council of India (DSCI) awarded CBEC as the winner of their “Security in e-
Governance” award.on 11th December 2012." है

On being asked how the department validate, the 1055 application and RMS to

detect related cases in view of the large volume of goods cleared at RSP declared

below import cost, the Ministry. submitted the written replies as under:

51.

"There are no legal provisions empowering the Customs authorities to
mandatorily disallow lower RSP based assessment vis-a-vis transaction value
based assessment. Selling goods at’a price lower than the cost may be a purely
commercial decision. Further, against all the CTH where RSP based CVD is
applicable, Compulsory Compliance Requirements (CCRs) to that effect are
already in place which instruct the ‘Out Of Charge Officers’ to ensure compliance
of declaration of RSP and correctness of CVD levied/collected before
consignment is allowed Out of Customs. As of now, 1455 CTHs have been
identified for RSP based assessment.”

in response, the Audit made following comment:

“Reply is not acceptable. Non-interception of the undervalued goods imported at
the self assessment regime will not only lead to loss of revenue but also impact
the domestic industry. Therefore, it is important to know if the Ministry is
considering amendment of-Valuation rules in case of RSP mis-declared (cases
where RSP is lower than the import cost)? If any instructions were issued to
refer those cases to investigative agencies? Whether the importers making
regular imports at undervalued RSP were marked/flagged for PCA/OSPCA?”

The Ministry has submitted that in addition to the SI (System Integration) team

which generates daily, weekly and monthly system reports for CBEC for monitoring the

system performance, user response time, e-filing and e-payment etc., there is a Change

Advisory Board (CAB) comprising exclusively of CBEC officers that meets every week

to approve major and significant changes to the system. All the.changes to the system

are entered into Service Manager Tools and audited by third party auditors* bi-annually.

52.

Substantial delay had been reported in implementation of RMS Export module,

The constraints in the timely implementation of RMS Export module as specified by

Ministry are as follows:



“The delay in implementation of RMS Export module was due- to various
operational constraints, as explained earlier, as prior fo consolidation, the
department had to upgrade and modify both ICES and RMS applications fo make
them work in a centralized environment. It was indeed a challenge to make ail
the three Customs Applications namely ICES, ICEGATE and RMS compatible
with each other as changes in one necessitates: changes/modifications in the
other application. Further, the infrastructure needed augmentation in order to
handie a large number of export documentations. Exporters’ convenience and
ease of doing business was paramount to the department and it was, therefore,
decided to implement Exports RMS affer sorting out ail the issues. The
infrastructure was finally augmented during August, 2012 and Export RMS was
finally implemented on 15th July, 2013."

Vil.. Human Resources Development

53. As per C&AG observation, presently, nearly 98 percent of customs transactions
are being processed through ICES and the department is entirely dependent on its
Systems for assessment and collection of customs revenue. Therefore, by not having a
personnel policy for recruitment of technically qualified officers to manage the Systenis,
the department is failing to build internal competencies and limiting its options for better
management and monitoring the IS Systems to the third party vendors/service providers
who manage the IS systems,

54. In this regard, when Committee enquired about specific policy or long term plan
for inducting specialized selection and recruitment of staff for |CT System, the Ministry
replied that there was no such policy at present.

58, Human Resource Development and Training is an integral part of , any
organization for keeping its staff equipped with latest technological or administrative or
managerial developments. The Ministry has provided the details of the Training and skill
development policy of the Department for its staff and officers as follows:

“NACEN; Faridabad with 9 RTIs are engaged in imparting professional training to
Group ‘A' officers at the induction stage in service as weil as in in-service training
and by conducting Phase Ii}, [V & V mid-career training. The human resources of
the department are provided critical and vital inputs on the crucial areas of ICT
skills and latest technological, administrative and managerial development
through various course modules. Group ‘B’ & ‘C’ officers are given induction
training and in-service training at the RTIs. Induction training is also imparted to

officers promoted from Group ‘B’ to Group ‘A’ on leadership and to develop their-

ro



26

skills to run the independent establishment in Customs Central Excise & Service
Tax."

56. According to paragraph 6.2.2 of IT Security Procedures Ver.1.7, ICES users shall

be imparted training on Information Security on a periodic basis and refresher courses’

will be conducted to re-train the already trained employees on new threats and
countermeasures. On being asked whether any periodic training had been conducted
for 2850 users during last-5 years, the Ministry submitied the following details:

"CBEG conducts training for all ICES users. New IRS probationers are trained on
the system in every batch by NACEN. Regional Training Institutes also conduct
trainings for Group B officers. Need -based courses are scheduled both by
NACEN and regional Institutes. In addition to the above, security awareness
trainings have been held at various locations. More than 20,000 users at more
than 90 locations have been trained till date by represeritatives of DG Systems.

The details of training in 2044-15 are as given below.

== = of users
हे trained
100 TKD 76
NCH, Dethi है 63
Kolkata (CE 11, ४ 82
and ST} ह न
ACC Sahar 99 -
Vishakhapatnam |, II ह 78
and Custom ली ही
Total . 398

VIE. Internal Audit System for ICES

57.  Audit-observed that the Internal Audit and Corrective Action-Preventive Action
Procedure Ver. 1.2 does not. have any provision for auditfreview of any of the
applications of the {T System, either by departmental officers or by TPAs. In an IS
‘organization a critical application like ICES with massive revenue implication requires a

tegular audit of the database, OS, infrastructure, application hardware for IT security

audit, Malware analysis; Source code review, Application configuration review, ICT



27

infrastructure configuration review, Application-OS-hardware-network performance

reviews, Vulnerabilities Assessment and Penetration Testing (VAPT) etc.

58. ~ When asked to give details of internal audit system of the Department for ICES
and how in absence of any provision for audit/review of the application of the IT System,
the Department ensure that a critical application like ICES was functioning properly, the
Ministry submitted as under: ,

“The Central Board of Excise and Customs acknowledges the requirement of an
Internal. Audit and. Contro!. The Board is actively considering devising a
mechanism for the same where the requisite domain knowledge, skill sets: of
audit and understanding of the Information Technology are fused together to
enable an early implementation of the same.”

IX. CRA Module Application

59. After the implementation of ICES 1.5, SSOIDs were issued to CRA officers to
access {CES 1.5 from specified focations for auditing BEs and SBs. However, the Audit
observed that while making a selection for SBs, only cancelled and purged SBs were
getting selected for audit. This was brought to the notice of the department in May 2012
and February 2013, apart from eleven other inherent drawbacks of CRA module
through this report but has not been rectified.

60. Section 28 of the Customs Act 1962 was amended with effect from 8 April 2014
by Section 42 of Finance Act 2011, increasing the period for raising a demand in
respect of imports from six months to one year from the date of clearance of goods.
However, the corresponding changes have not been incorporated in CRA module
available in the ICES system where it is possible to make a selection of auditable
documents only for upto six months from the current date. Similarly, in the CRA module
there is no system to go to and view any particular item in a BE containing more than
one.item except by viewing the details of each item in sequential order.

61. On being asked whether department -has issued any guidelines for removing
deficiencies of CRA module, the Ministry replied as under:

“Regarding the issue of only cancelled and purged shipping bills getting selected
in the Audit, the issue has already been rectified on 11.01.2014. On the issue of



28

various suggestions to incorporate changes for audit of BE in CRA modute, it can
be seen that the requirement of Audit is dynamic in nature. Currently discussions
are already on fo provide customs transaction data on a regular basis through
secure file transfer. Acquisition of this data will provide complete flexibility to
Audit to carry out any such deeper analysis. No changes would therefore be
required in the CRA Module."

62. _ When asked whether the department had taken any steps to introduce cheeks in
ICES to detect cases. where RSP declared was less than the assessable value, the
Ministry repliéd that there was no legal provision empowering Customs authorities to
disatiow RSP lower than the transaction value. The assessment on the basis of
transaction value was in accordance with India’s commitment under the WTO
Agreement on Customs Valuation as well as its obligation to adhere to the principle of
“national treatment”.

xX. Delay in updating of Customs Exemption Notification and Duty rate
Directories ~ .

63. The updating of rates of customs duty and the customs notification directories
are delegated to Chennai Sea Customs. As per C&AG observation, Custom's
exemption dated 17 March 2012 was amended by notification dated 23 January 2013
enhancing the BCD rate from ‘il to 2.5 percent in respect of certain goods involving
crude oil imports. However, audit observed that in 15 instances of imports of ‘crude
sunflower ०1 and ‘crude palm kernel oil’ made on 23 and 24 January 2013 under
Chennai Sea Customs were assessed at ‘nil’ rate of BCD vide exemption notification
dated 17 March 2012, resulting in short collection of duty of Rs.2.29 crore. The reason
for incorrect exemption was the delay in updating of customs exemption notification.

64. In this regard, when asked whether recovery has been made for the shortfall, the
- Ministry submitted that Chief Commissioner of Customs, Chennai has informed that the
entire amount of short levy of Rs.2.29 crore has been recovered.

65. The Committee desired to know whether any explanation had been called or any
action initiated against stafffofficers responsibie for this lapse/delay in updating of
exemption notification resulting in substantial loss tothe exchequér. On the issue, the
Ministry submitted:



66,

29

“Chief Commissioner of Customs, Chennai has reported that the said Notification
No.2/2013-Customs, dated 23.01.2013 which enhanced the BCD rate from nil to
2.5 % in respect of certain goods involving crude oil imports was updated on the
day of its issue itself ie., 23.01.2013. However, under ICES version .1,0 the
updated Notification directory moved to the ICES server only during the ‘End Of
The Day’ operations. As such, the updation made in the directories became
available in the ICES only from 00:00 on 24.04.2013.

The matter has been remedied w.e.f. February, 2013 onwards with the
introduction of the new version ICES 1.5. Now, once the directories of Customs
duties and notifications are updated, the same becomes instantly available.
Hence the issue would not arise again.”

In response, the Audit made the comment on Ministry's reply as under:

“Reply is not acceptable. Out of 15 cases reported at Chennai Sea
Commissionerate, 6 cases relates to imports dated 24.01.2013, thus the
contention of the Ministry that notification updation made on 23.01.2013 become
available in the system from 00:00 on 24.01.2013 is incorrect. Further Ministry's
claim that the issue of delayed updation under ICES 1.0 was remedied in ICES
1.5, which was implemented in 2011 was also not correct as the cases cited by
audit pertains to the period January 2013. in response to the remedy claimed by
department audit can comment after verification of the relevant data made
available to audit.”

The Ministry, when asked about the mechanism to ensure that the notification is

immediately updated, submitted details as under:

87.

“Presently Jawaharlal Nehru Custom House (JNCH), Nhava Sheva, Raigad,
Maharashtra fs the nodal site for updation of BCD and CVD directories white
Chennai Customs is the nodal site for updation of notifications. ICD Patparganj,
New Delhi updates exchange rates and drawback notifications. :

Procedure for ensuring timely updating of notifications in the EDi system is under
active consideration. As a first step, Nodal officers have been appointed in TRU
who coordinate with the Directory updating sites fo ensure timely updation. If a
time lag occurs due to any unavoidable circumstances, an advisory is issued fo
all sites to recall the earlier BEs and collect differential duty, if any.”

According to Section 14 of the Customs Act 1962, valuation of goods for

“assessment to duties of customs is to be asceftained with reference fo the ‘rate of

exchange’ of the foreign currency of the invoice, as in force on the date of presentation
of BE and the rate notified by CREC. The Board, vide NT notifications dated 21 May
2012 and 24 May 2012, had upwardly revised the exchange rates for the Japanese
Yen, the U.S. Dollar and the Hong. Kong Dollar effective from 22 May 2012 and 25 May



30

2012, respectively. However, audit observed that the changes were not updated in the

system, resulting in incorrect assessment and consequently short levy of duty.

68. When asked fo give explanation for non-updating of exchange rates as
mentioned above, and whether any responsibility had been fixed upon the concerned
officers for such serious lapses having substantial financial implications, the Ministry
gave a written submission ‘as under: ,

"The non updation of exchange rate occurred due to the fact that earlier the
exchange rate notification was issued once in a month. This practice was
changed suddenly without notice as the Ministry was forced to issue revised
’ exchange rate in the middle of the month due to the excessive fluctuation in the
US Dollar. It also necessitated System changes to remove an existing validation
in the system which hitherto ensured that exchange rate notifications could be
made effective in ICES only from a future date. In addition, a facility was
immediately provided to System Managers of all locations to change the effective
exchange rate for the Bills of Entry which were assessed at the earlier rates. An
advisory was also issued immediately. There is no lapse on the part of officers.”

69. When asked about monitoring the cases of short levy in ICES and details of the
Process of recovery in such cases, the Ministry in their post evidence reply stated that
monitoring of short levy was a post clearance process involving demand, adjudication,
recovery, etc. which was not automated, The process of recovery of cases involving
short levy was dealt in accordance with Section 28 of the Customs Act, 1962. ;

XE = Anti-dumping Duty

70, Anti dumping Duty (ADD) is leviable on certain imported goods based on factors
such as customs classification, description of goods, country of origin, country of export,
name of the producer and name of exporter. The amount to be levied depends on one
or more of the above factors. It is observed that in the BE display screens in the ICES
application, such as Master, invoice, GATT declarations, etc. there is-no field showing पु
name of producer, In the absence of such vital information, it cannot be assured in Audit

that correct ADD has been levied.

71. “The Ministry in their reply stated that the ED! BE format is compliant to the
prescribed format for electronic filing of import documents. The format had evolved”
over the iast few decades as per requirements, It was not possible to capture each and



31

every details of the importer/supplier/manufacturer by introducing separate fields in the
BE format. Levy of ADD is dependent on the serial no. of the anti-dumping notification
declared by the importer. Anti dumping notifications might prescribe any.kind of
conditions such as description of goods, country of exports, name of the producer, ह
name of the exporter efc., none of which were structured fields. Hence, automation of
such fields for automatic decision-making was not possible. The risk management
system populates CCR in the BE based on the CTHs where anti-dumping duty had
been levied. Such BEs were routed through shed examination where the necessary

checks were carried out manually by the customs officers.

72, On being asked about the mechanism available in the ICES to ascertain levy of
ADD at correct rates without the field of ‘name of producer’, the Ministry replied as
under:
"A separate field is provided for recording any ‘additional information’ including
name of producer. The importer may also add it as a part of description, as itis in
his interest.to declare the name to avoid the higher generic rate applied to ‘any’
other producers. The information is, therefore, available on the System to the
assessing officer for taking necessary action.“
73. When asked to provide details of technological solutions in place in other
countries like USA, UK and China in matters of Anti Dumping Outy, if any, and if we
could replicate. the technical solutions as prevalent in these countries, the Ministry in
their post evidence replies stated that so far no studies of technological solutions used
in other countries have been carried out. ;

74, The Ministry iit their post evidence reply also furnished the details of monitoring
mechanism in the Department of Revenue under ICES 1.5 architecture for goods
released on trans-shipmert, as follows:

"The trans-shipper executes a running bond and Bank Guarantee with the
gateway site. After approval of transhipment, the System debits the bond and
allows transhipment. On receipt of goods at destination site, a fanding certificate
is provided by the custom officer and is submitted to the gateway site for re-credit
of bond on the System. Facility has been provided on the Systeth to monitor
pending bonds."



32

Xfl. Online Business Transactions

78. Today, on-line shopping companies like Amazon, eBay, Flipkart etc. which have
international presence in several countries, are witnessing a quantum jump in their
business in India they have their own business modeél.. It is really a challenge for all the
tax authorities not only in India but all over the world to capture the revenues which they
are generating. tn fact, the fatest-trend in that business is that they are entering into
non-transparent tax agreements with certain Countries. Considering their large
transactions charging them is a new development and of course, a big challenge.

76. The Committee were keen to know how the Department of Revenue looked at
this new import-export aspect of online shopping transactions. When a query was

, raised in this regard, the representatives of the Ministry deposed before the Committee
on 19" November, 2014 as under:

"In fact, the latest trend in that business is that they are entering into not so
transparent tax agreements with certain jurisdictions like Luxemburg and other
places where the tax rates are very low which means that world over they will not
pay any tax. This is a matter of concern and very rightly this issue has been
discussed in the G-20 meetings in the earlier part of this week when the hon.
Prime Minister participated in the G-20 meeting. This kind of issues came up for
discussion as a part of the BEPS, Base Erosion and Profit Shifting, project which
the G-20 has taken up. The tax base of each country is getting shrunk. The
profits are being shifted to other countries or fo jurisdictions like Luxemburg
where no tax or very low tax is paid. Therefore, internationally the G-20
countries have agreed and under the aegis of the OECD this BEPS project is
being undertaken under which digital economy, that is the e-commerce models
are being studied. Our Revenue Department from India is actively taking part in
this Working Group which has been constituted by the G-20 countries under the
aegis of the 0६50, One tnajor achievement from India’s point of view which we
have been able to get, in fact it forms part of the communiqué issued at the end
of the jatest G-20 Summit which the Hon'ble Prime Minister attended.
Internationally now every country has agreed that they will givé due weightage to
the place where the economic activity or where the business is generated.
Companies like Amazon may be in USA or Luxemburg but if bulk of its business
is generated in countries like India or China we should get our due share of tax,
due share of Its profit should be taxed fn countries like India. In principle this has
been accepted. : - : :

So far as the e-commerce companies functioning entirely outside India, | wish to
report to the Committee that since they are companies based in India their



33

income will be taxed in india’ as per the Income Tax Act. With regard to the
leViability of service tax, our service tax jurisdictions in Mumbai are currently
studying the business models of their entire operations. .We will see whether the
existing laws are sufficient.to ensure that they can be taxed or if it requires, it will
be too premature for me to make an observation, any change in law the
Government will consider that." -

77. 118 Ministry also submitted their post evidence reply in this connection which is
as under ’

"Online shopping transaction or e-Commeice is basically a mode of payment with
the goods being generally imported either through. courier or posts mode. There
are jaid down procedures under the Customs Act, 1962 for handling the import
and export of goods through courier / post. A challenge is expected in the area of
valuation but the Department is equipped to handle it.”

Xlll. Improper Allocation/Utilization of Hardware Allocation/Utilization of Hardware

78. As per the C&AG observation, only 250 and 100 numbers of Thin Client
terminals were installed at Chennai Sea and Chennai Air Commissionerates against
414 and 166 numbers received by them. Further, in case.of Chennai Air and ICD
Patparganj, it was observed that out of 100 and 62 nurnbers of installed terminals, only
80 and 30 terminals were actually in use as on 31 ‘March 2013. This indicates that
optimum utilization of hardware was not being done.

79. When the: Committee enquired whether the system installed for electronic filing
was user friendly and had any review been made of the system, the Ministry in writing
replied that the system was user friendly and there had been no negative feedback from
the users and that review of system was an ongoing and continuous process.

80. When further asked whether Department of Revenue has made fresh
assessment of the requirements of the Thin Client Nodes in view of the-online filing of
BEs and 583, the Ministry replied:- *

“The requirement of Thin Client / Nodes had been assessed based on the roles
allocated to the officers at a particular field formation. Ontine filing of BEs for
assessment is not relevant for determining the requirement of Thin Clientf Nodes,
Since BEs and SBs are processed by the officers using Thin Clients, hence
number of such user officers is relevant for determining the requirement of Thin
Clients/Nodes.”



34

. 81. The Committee noted that some Thin Client Terminals have been lying utilized at
some locations. On being asked how they propose to. use the infrastructure rendered
redundant and the staff employed there, the Ministry replied as under:

“It is mentioned that online fiting of returns is done by the Assessees,
which are then processed by the departmental officers using Thin Clients.
Therefore, utilization of Thin Clients is not dependent on the number of
documents fited online. At certain focations infrastructure may be
temporarily surplus due to shortage of staff posted. It is proposed to utilize
such spare infrastructure at other field formations in the course’ of
testructuring exercise.”

In response Audit made comment on the Ministry's above reply as under:

“The reply is not acceptable because hardware is supposed to be
planned, procured and allocated based on actual. or projected
requirement; but the department failed to justify in these lines.”



35.

PART — fl
Observations/Recommendations

4. The Committee note that although the ICES application has beén operating
for the last 18 years, the CBEC could not overcame its weaknesses in areas of {T
strategic planning, personnel management and training and policy for internal
assessment and audit of core applications, as highlighted in the C&AG’s scrutiny
as well as in the Committee’s examination of ICES 1.5. At the application level,
date validations in several critical areas such as customs and.excise exemption
notifications, country of origin based exemptions, Retail Sale Price {RSP} based
assessments, efc., which are essential for ensuring correct exemptions have been
found to be lacking thereby aliowing incorrect exemptions by the application,
leaving scope for mis-declarations and incorrect assessments and resultant
leakage of revenue. The Committee observe with serious concern that even after
incurring ै 604 crore in upgrading the version form ICES 1.0 to ICES 1.5, the
Department did not assess their cost and time saving, if any, due to the enhanced
competence of ICES1.5. The Committee have now been informed that processes
followed by their Director General of System and Data Management (DoS) are
aligned with globally recognized standards/best practices particularly those
embodied in the IT infrastructure library framework evolved by the Unitec
Kingdom’s office of Government Commerce. CBEC has also started monitoring
compliance regularly through an ‘Information Security Committee’. Additionally,
the report of a High Powered Committee to deliberate upon Driving Information
Systems for Holistic Tax [nitiatives (DRISHTE) has since been submitted to the
Minister concerned. In the light of these developments, the Committee hope that
the CBEC has finally developed a roadmap for future
modifications/alterationsfenhancements in their automated business processes |
relating to customs, as well as review of the effectiveness brought about by their
core applications under-ICES 1.5 version. .They would like fo be furnished’ with a _
detailed note on the same, aiso indicating the progress on various modules, which

were under finalisation for inclusion in the ICES 1.5 application, as well as, the

“A



36

action taken on the various systematic issues that emerged subsequent to the
audit as well as PAC’s examination of the subject, which are given in the ensuing

paras.

- Filing through EDI

2. , The Committee observe that Sections 46 and 50 of the Customs Act, 1962
stipulate that. import/export documents are mandatorily required to be filed
electronically through Electronic Date Exchange (६01) system. In order to
prevent misuse, GBEC issued instructions in May, 2071 that manual processing '
and clearance of importfexport goods shall be allowed only in the rarest of rare
and genuine cases. Audit has pointed out that out of 116 EDI enabled locations,
only in 89 locations, electronic filing of import documents was carried out, out of
which, in 29 locations, less than 509 Bills of Entries (Bes} were filed during 2012-
413. Similarly, export documents were filed in 99 locations, out of this in 20
locations, less than 500 585 were filed during the same period. The Committee
note that manual filing of SBs were higher at Commissionerates in Chennai Air,
Kochi, Goa, Nagpur and Kolkata Airport, ranging between 4.77% to 23.76%. The
Committee fail to understand as to how the CBEC allowed such rampant non-
adherence to its instructions, both in terms of number of locations adopting
electronic filing and high percentages of manual filing at major locations. They
therefore, recommend that stringent action be initiated against responsible
authorities in ‘the identified commissionerates for such indifference to its
directions. The CBEC have now informed the Committee that the percentage of
manually assessed documents has been reducing over the years and presently it
is less than one percent of import-documents and less than 2.5 percent of export
documents. The Commitfee desire that the Ministry should furnish a -
Commissionerate-wise Statement fo them providing details of those covered
under their EDI net till date and the percentage of manual filing of documents by
those, if any. The Committee recommend that CBEC should take appropriate

measures and remove the constraints, if any, in ensuring 100% electronic filing, ©



37

as it will bring better accountability, efficiency and transparency in the Customs

Department.

DRISHTI Project

3. Driving Information Systems for Holistic Tax Initiatives (DRISHT}) is the IT
Vision of the CBEC for improving the efficiency and effectiveness of Indirect Tax
Administration. The Committes note that a High Powered Committee (HPC) had
been set up to examines issues to evolve appropriate roadmap for actualization of
DRISHTI and recommending appropriate IT architecture to support business
services. DRISHTI aiso envisages studying issues which require immediate
attention and decide the priority for implementation in view of current resource
constraints in system. The said HPC has reportedly submitted their
recommendations on DRISHTE in October, 2014 to the Minister concerned.
However, according to audit, effectiveness on taxation issues and linkage
between action and targets are certain areas where the project needs to delve
upon. The Committee are of the opinion that as DRISHTI is an ambitious project
of Department of Revenue which can bring long lasting changes and reforms in
Customs Department in terms of bringing better efficiency, transparency,
accountability and service delivery, it must be ensured to identify and prioritise
all issues requisite linkages within as well as outside the Department in their
future IT plans. The Committee, therefore, would like to be apprised of the action
taken on DRISHTI HPC's recommendations and desire that the Department of
Revenue should expedite the.actualization of the project on priority.

Security Features in Information system (IS)

4 A Single Sign-on Identity (8507) is issued to the local user by the DoS
for accessing EDI system. In the backdrop of the audit finding that in 10 out of
19 EDI locations, the total no. of such IDs were not available, the Committee note -
that the Department has already launched a review and verification tocol in
September 2014 to enabie the system Manager see, check, review and monitor

all users. Such a vital tool shoufd have been made available right from the



38

beginning. Further, the Committee take note of the Audit observation that some
_features of operational. password policy fike password composition
requirements, account lockout from unsuccessful fogin attempts, etc. were
different from the documented password policy. The operational password
policy has different security features for ordinary users {business} and
privileged users (administrators etc), whereas the documented password policy -
does not provide for separate policies for different categories of users. Neither
does it provide for relaxation of number of failed login attempts for ordinary
users as found fo have been allowed in the operational policy. The Committee
feel that changes in the operational features of fogical security elements like
password policy should invariably be implemented only after due authorisation
and documentation of the changes. The Committee have been given details of
the security related aspects of ICES by the Department. They also stated to
have applied for recertification as [SO-27001:2013 by the Standardisation
Testing and Quality Certification (STQC) also. The Committee desire 10 know its
status. They are of the considered opinion that security feature in Information
System of ICES is of critical importance, Any breach or leakage into the
security architecture of [ICES -may result in manipulation in
data/ crashing of the whole IS system which may impact the revenue collection
too. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Department should
take all necessary measures to ensure a fool proof security system and all
changes in the same must be implemented after due authorisation from the
Change Advisory Board of CBEC, which is the body mandated for the same.

Timely updation of central excise duties, exemption notifications and exchange

lates .

5. The Committee take note of Custom’s exemption dated 17 March 2012.
which was amended hy notification dated 23 January 2073 enhaneing the BCD
tate from ‘nil’ to 2.5 percent in respect of certain goods involving crude oil
imports. However, audit observed that 15. instances of imports of ‘crude
sunflower oil’ and ‘crude palm kernel oil’ made on 23 and 24 January 2013 under
Chennai Sea Customs were assessed at ‘nil’ rate of BCD vide exemption



39

notification dated 17 March 2012 instead of the revised version dated 23 January,
2013, resulting in short collection of duty of %2.29 crore. Similarly, according to

‘Section 14 of the Customs Act 1962, valuation of goods for assessment of duties:

of customs is to be ascertained with reference to the ‘rate of exchange’ of the
-foreign currency of the invoice as in force on. the date of presentation of BE and
the rate notified by CBEC. The Board, vide NT notifications dated 21 May 2012
and 24 May 2012, had upwardly revised the exchange rates for the Japanese Yen,
the U.S. Dollar-and the Hong Kong Dollar, effective from 22 May 2012 and 25 May
2012, respectively. However, the changes were not updated in the system,
resulting in incorrect assessment and consequently short levy of duty. The
response of the Ministry w.r.t. these cases in Chennai customs based on the
reply of Chief Commissioner Customs, were not accepted by Audit as those were
incorrect. The Committee desire that the Ministry may probe the matter and take
suitable action against the erring officers for furnishing incorrect information.
The Committee also feel that failure in updation of central excise duties,
exemption notices and exchange rates is a serious lapse and a matter of
dereliction of duty on the part of concerned officers/staff particularly since the
Chennai Customs, where audit noticed the irregularity, itself has been the nodal
site for updation of notifications. The Committee recommend that all such
instances should be enquired to fix the accountability of officers by the
Department. The Department of Revenue and 0850 should take necessary steps
in this regard. Further, the Committee are also of the view that as far as

exchange rates updation is concerned, a module may be developed in the ICES .

for daity updation of exchange rates with RBI. This would enable the exchange
rate to be applicable from midnight and the issue would get resolved

automatically, The Committee recommend that the Department should put in .

place a system for either centralized monitoring or cross-verification of the
directory/otifications updating delegated to various Custom field formations,



AG

Incorrect calculation of warehousing interest

6. The Committee take note of the analysis of ICES data by the audit for the :
period from 1 April 2042 to 34 March 2013 which revealed that out of 6,887 Ex-
Bond BEs involving clearances from Warehouse beyond 90 days and where Ware ,
House (WH) interest was levied, in 6,756 BEs WH interest was levied for.one day

’ Jess, resulting in short-levy of WH interest by Rs. 13.28 lakh. In the remaining 131
-BEs, WH interest was found to have been either in excess or short-leviéd for -
periods varying from 28 days in excess to 6 days less, for reasons not
ascertainable from the available data. ‘The Committee, therefore have a reason to
believe that there may be an error in the ‘program for the calculation of WH
Interest’ in ICES 1,5 application, which, if not rectified, might lead to continued
short levies of WH interest thus resulting in loss to the Government exchequer.
The Committee are astonished fo observe that such technical faultfsoftware error
kept on persisting and the supervisory officers failed to notice the same. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the root problem causing the incorrect
calculation of warehousing interest by ICES application should be sorted out on
urgent basis. [t is the responsibility of technical team of ICES application to
ensure accuracy and correctness in calculation of warehousing interest. The
Committee, also desire that in such cases of short levying of interest
responsibility needs to be fixed upon the concerned officers/staff for under-

recovery.

Responsibility to be fixed and Recovery be made for short levy

7. The Committee observed various Audit paras of CAG and found that there
had been numerous cases of short levy due to casual and negligent aftitude of
the concerned officers and staff resuiting in huge revenue [655 to the
Government .oxchequer. As per the Performance Audit report only, the total
revenue implication was calculated as ₹ 847.16 crore. The Committee are
surprised that even after numcrous such incidents of short levy no responsibility
has been fixed upon the concerned stafffofficers of the Department. Though

recovery has been made in a few cases and system related issues are bein:



41

addressed by developing relevant modules for {CES 1.5 application by the
Department, the Committee, strongly recommend that the Department should fix
responsibility for serious lapses of shortfall of revenue due to non-updation of
duty rates, exchange rates or exemption notices and ‘take appropriate action
against the officer/staff responsible for it. The Committee, also impress upon the
Department of Revenue to take rigorous action for recovery of all the shortfall
revenues in a time bound and effective manner. in this regard the Committee
desire to be furnished with the details of action taken, if any, against the
responsible staff and officers and progress made in the direction of recovery of
the shortfall of revenue. हु

Jneffective functioning of LRM

8. The Risk Management System (RMS) is a separate application integrated
with ICES which facilitates faster clearance with minimal or no checks for fow risk
import. consignmenis/entities and focusses customs compliance enforcement
efforts on high risk consignmentsfentities. RMS has two components, National
Risk Management {NRM) and Local Risk Management (LRM). The Committee
observe that LRM Committees of custom sites are responsible for inserting and
monitoring local risk factors through insertion of local targets. CBEC’s circular
dated 28 June, 2007 had stipulated that a LRM Committee was to be constituted
at each Custom House/ACC headed by an officer not below the rank of
Commissioner. The Committee take a criticat note of the Audit observation about
poor functioning of LRM at almost alt locations in discharging its function for
monitoring. the performance of RMS and PCA. The Committee are anguished to
see that despite an 8 year old’ stipulation, no LRM Committee had been
constituted in Goa, 100 Patparganj; Icb Mandideep, ICD Pithampur and Kolkata
Airport Commissionerates. Surprisingly, the Commissionerates of Kolkata Port .
and Pune had no information regarding the LRM Committee Meetings, The
Committee, therefore, are not satisfied with the functioning of LRM at many of the
Custom sites. The Committee also note that non-constituting of LRM Committees
in many custom locations is a serious lapse on the part of Customs Department

ae
“



42

and wonder as to whether insertion of local targets was being under taken at all
in these locations. The Committee condemn the lethargic attitude of CBEC
towards ensuring proper and timely compliance of its own circular of June, 2007
with regard fo constituting LRM Committee at each Custom House. The
Committee recommend that. LRM Committees should be constituted at all
Customs Houses without any further delay. The Committee would also like to
have the sfatus report about constitution of LRM Committees by CBEC.

Staff Recruitment

9. The Committee observe that shortage of staff is severely affecting the
performance of the Customs Department. They note that CBEC had directed that
till the time On-site Post Clearance Audit (PCA) was made applicable to all
categories of importers, the percentage of BEs selected for PCA at a Customs
House should be suitably enhanced to safeguard the interest of revenue, The
Committee understand that the concerned Chief Commissioners of Customs
were supposed to review the staff position in their jurisdiction and reallocate
more manpower for audit work as increased facilitation in terms of reduced
examination had [ed to lesser requirement of staff for examination of goods. It
was, therefore, imperative that excess staff should have been diverted for
activities such as PCA and Special Investigation and Intelligence Branch (BSIIB}
in Customs Houses. However, the compilation of information on PCA activity
received from field offices revealed that the Board’s instructions to reallocate
more manpower for PCA to increase scrutiny of RMS cases have not been
followed in any location and showed increasing frend in pendency of cases in 8
out of the 10 Custom locations for which data has been received. The Committee,

therefore recommend that moro manpower be aflocated to the field offices for
strengthening PCA and SIIB in Customs Houses.

Training and Skill development of StafffOfficors

10. The Committee are of the considered opinion that Human Resource -

Development and Training is an integral part of any organization for keeping its



43

staff equipped with latest technological or administrative or managerial
developments. Paragraph 6.2,2 of IT Security Procedures Ver.1.7 reportedly
states that ICES users shall be imparted training on Information Security on a
periodic basis and refresher courses would be conducted to re-train the already
trained employees on new threats and counter-measures. The Committee
observe that day to day user management for role allocation and revocation is
also handled by CBEC officers themselves as part of the application. Since the
cusfoms cargo clearing process is an online process, the inability of Customs
Officers to work on ICES could impact the clearance of cargo. . Though the
representative of the Ministry informed the Committee during evidence that till
date around 20,000 users have been trained in 90 locations, the figures furnished
for 2074-15 showed only 398 users trained during the year in 5 locations. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that regular training of staff and
officers at various levels be made an integral feature of [T Management system of
CBEC, Department of Revenue. Also the Department may examine the possibility
of evolving a personne! policy for development of in-house technical expertise for
CBEC's IS management through recruitment and training of IT personnel. The
Department may furnish details of Training programmes conducted, if any for
improvising skills of staff and officers at various levels during the fast 5 years to

the Committee.

Anti-Dumping Duty assessment feature of ICES 415 Ver. and System

enhancement .

11. The Committee observe that dumping of goods from outside into the
Country can severely affect the national economy, which is the reason behind the
enactment of Anti-Dumping laws and operation of anti-dumping-duty regime in
-the Country. Based on Audit’s observations, the Committee note that there are
concerns over the effectiveness and capacity of the ICES software for-accurate
determination of Anti-Dumping Duty to import shipments. The Committee also
nofg the Ministry’s claim that adequate features forthe same are included in the
system. However, the Committee desire that the Ministry needs to conduct a
comparative study of technological solutions in place in select developed



aq

countries so that the features in the ICES 7.5 Version may be further enhanced,
not only in the correct assessment of Anti-Dumping Duty, but also in the overall

efficiency and effectiveness of the system.

Generating revenues from Online Shopping Business Giants

12,. -The Committee nofe that the Department, although aware of the challenge
faced by them due to a surge in the online shopping transactions across borders
is yet to fully grasp the custom implications of the online shopping businesses,
both national and international. It is evident from the reply given to the Committee
which merely informed that such transactions, being either through courier or
posts mode, are dealt with under the relevant procedures of the Customs Act,
1962. However, the Committee also note that efforts are ongoing, both at the
national level and International level, to assess, understand and tackle the
possible tax base erosion and profit shifting brought about by this mode of online
transactions and that the officials of the Department are part of the G-20
Workshop Group working on the project. The Committee desire that the CBEC
apprise the Committee of the progress made in tapping revenue from online
shopping businesses, national and international, and report on whether the
existing: legistations, institutional structures are adequate to deal with the new

form of importfexport of goods.

Lack of Internal Audit System of ICES 1.5

13. The Committee observe that internal audit system of the Customs
Department did not have any provision for auditireview of any of the applications
of the IT system either by departmental offices or by Third Party Auditors (TPAs}.
‘Neither Standardization Testing and Quality Certifications (STQC) nor oracle
reviewed the adequacy of business processes covered and the correctness of

business rules mapping which have been found to be deficient in ICES 45 हि

application. The Committee are of the opinion that in an is organization a critical
application like ICES with massive fevenue implication requires a regular audit of

the database, OS, infrastructure and application hardware for IT Security audit,



a

Malware analysis, source code review, application configuration review, [CT
infrastructure configuration review, vulnerability assessment and National Cyber
Security policy compliance, etc. The Committee are of the view that the
Department of Revenue should take necessary action to audit and examine its
core ICES 1.5 application for detecting deficiencies and suggesting
‘improvements in the application. As the Department is stated to be actively
considering the matter, the-Committee would like them to submit a status report
on action taken with regard to introducing a sufficient and capable internal audit
system for ICES 1.5 application. A blueprint or framework of the internal audit
system as envisaged by the Department covering different areas or domains may
be furnished to the Committee.

Impropertunder-utilisation of hardware

14. The Committee observe that optimum utilization of hardware was not being
done and the procurement and distribution of the same lacked proper planning,
The Committee take critical note of the Audit observation that only 250 and 100
Thin Ctient terminals have been installed at Chennai Sea and Chennai Air
Commissionerates against 414 and 166 received by them. Again, in case of
Chennai Air and [CD Patparganj, it was observed that out of 100 and 62 numbers
of installed terminals, only 80 and 30 terminafs were actually in use as on 3tst
March 2013, The Committee further note that the audit were informed by the
Department at that time that all the their clients would be put to use in Chennai
after implementation of Cadre Restructuring. However, the shortage of Officers
was only one reason for the underutilization. . Another reason cited was non-
availability of modules pertaining to the processing of BEs fited in Courier and
APSO. The Committee feet that such technical upgradation should be undertaken’
in-ICES 1.5 version fast so as to rule out any underutilization resulting from
Operational issues. While the Committee woutd desire to know the present status
of thin client terminals in Chennai sea and Air Commissionerates, they feel that
the optimum utilization of the already procured hardware would have enhanced

the working and efficiency of the [CES system. The Committee also feel that



46

under-ufilisation of hardware which was already procured, points towards an
unrealistic procurement planning leading to wastage, The Committee, therefore,
fecommend that CBEC should henceforth ensure development of a proper
system of procurement planning for all its units based on actual requirement and
manpower availability,

Absence of linkage of ‘Sezonline’ Portal f linkage of ‘Sezonline’ Portal

15. The Committee express their Concern that ICES 1.5 has not been linked
with Sezonline' portal (Spécial Economic Zone’s ontine portal) of the Ministry of
Commerce which facilitates online clearance of both imports and exports by the
Development Commissioners of SEZs to monitor the closure of IGMs filed at the
Customs ports for the goods imported which are intended for use in SEZs. The
Committee feel that the said linking, once achieved, could be of immense help to
the Customs Department in better, efficient and faster Management of imported-
exported goods, thereby earning more revenue for the Country. The Committee,
therefore, desire that the Ministry should expedite the requisite modalities. of '
linking the ICES 1.8 with 'Sezoline' portal of Ministry of Commerce and submit a
status report in this regard within six months of the presentation of this report.

NEW DELH: : PROF. K.V, THOMAS
12 August,2015 Chairperson,

“21 Shravana, 1937 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee,



coe Mee

Confidential

The.Commiltée sat on Wednesday the'19 November, 2014 froni 1430 his. to :
‘ $546 hrs. in Committee Room 'C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi

PRESENT
“Prof. K.V. Thomas - .. aa Chairperson ~~
> EMBERS’ :

LOK SABHA.
.. Shti §.S. Ahluwalia ;
Shri Ranjil Singh Brahmpura
Shii Nishikant Dubey
Shr Bhartruhari Mahtab
Shi Ramesh: Pokhriyal "Nishank’ :
.- Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwat

SN Pw BR wp

‘Shri Anurag Thakur
RAJYA SABHA
9, © Shii Satyaveat Chaturvedi
10. Shri Vijay Goel
14, Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya
12. Shri Shantaram Naik ;
243. , Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy ©

EOK SABHA SECRETARIAT. | "व
झआ0, 6 Singh. 2°, + Joint Secretary.

हर ae Smt. Anita.B- Panda’ ar => Director :
3,° Shri Jayakumar-T. 27h." Additional Director

“4. Sti: Goswami ~:~ Principal Direofor of Audil (Gustonis) . |,
| है “Shei B.P. Yadav "= Principal Ditecior: of Audit ७88...

sw



- १६

- REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE

1, . Shri Shakti Kanta’Oas : ५ ” Secretary” :

2.7 ‘Shei Kaushal Srivastava © Special Secretary & Chairman

3... Shri Shashi Bhushan Singh = Special Secretary & Meniber (CX&ST)
4. Ms. Mala Srivastava oS . Member (Customs & 160) ~

4. ‘Ms. Ananya Ray : DG (System) wo

6... Shri Sandeep M. Bhainagar Js (Custom)

7. _ ShiiVivek Chaturvedi a “Commissioner (EDW)

2, At the oulset, the CHairperson, PAC welcomed the Officers of the C&AG of
- India and the representatives of the Ministry of Finance to the sitting of the Committee.
The Chairperson apprised that the meeting has been convened to have oral evidence
on the subject ‘Indian’ Customs electronic Data Interchange System (ICES 1.5)' based
- on C&AG Report No. 11 of 2014. The Chairperson sought the views of the Secretary
on the issues relating to the differences in-calculated duty payable and duly actually
1 paid; manual ’processing of import and export documents and incorrect exemption
from Special Additional Duty. The Chairperson further pointed out the ineffective
functioning of Local Risk Management system &-gross failuré in updation of the central *
excise duty rates and notification directory and desired. the Directorate General of
Systems & Data Management fo pay special attention for centralized monitoring of

-* directory updating.

“3.- The’ representative of the Ministry then-gave’a briefing on the subject, the
Audit findings’ anc respanse of-the. Ministry thereon.’ Thereafler, Secretary of the.
s of the-miembers on the ineffective functioning of the

' Ministry-allended to the'que
Risk Management System .of ICES 1:5, delay in updation of Customs Exemption

mun compliance of fitiag of tetarh through -

ifedsures taken by CBEC to ensure niaxi
-sysiem, ‘password policy of Oepartinent and steps taken’ by Departmont of? | |

’ Revénue to ensure full proof data secysity of the ICES system:

Notification. & «Duty “rate Direciories,..cecoveries’ made: for shorftall of revenues. | SS

& - Fas Gontttiliée took a-critical- note of the Department for lack. of any specific *

personnef policy for recruitmerit of technically qualificd officers and sfaff lo manage the
5५ 48 system. as the department was. entirely dependent'cn its Is sysiem for assessment



-~4q-

.& coliection of customs revenue. As some queries required detailed ‘and ‘statistical
information, the Chairperson asked the Fepresentatives of fhe Ministry. to furnish
written repliés to the PAC Secretariat ad early as possible.

5 The Chairperson, then thankéd the’ representalives ofthe Ministry fof appearing -

before the Committee’ and furnishing the updated information on the subject

A copy. of the verbatim proceedings was képt oft record,

“The Commiftes then adjourned. Committed then adjourned. -



Sh
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2015-16) HELD ON 11" AUGUST, 2015. ‘

The Comitnittee sat from 1000 hrs. to 1045 hrs. on 11" August, 2016 in Room
No. "817 (Chairperson's Chamber), Parliament House, New Dethi. हु

"PRESENT

-Prof. K. ५, Thomas - ., Chairperson
MEMBERS. :

- LOK SABHA.
Shri Nishikant Dubey
Shri Ramesh Pokhriyat “Nishank"
Shri Neiphiu Rio

छ (७

Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
- Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi

Dr. Kirit Somaiya

RAJYA SABHA

8, Shri Ani’Madhav Dave
“9. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
“40. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy

“NO a #;

.LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT.

1. ShriA.K. Singh - Joint Secretary
2... smt. Anita 3. Panda : - Director

3... Shri 1. Jayakuniar a - Additional Director
4.

Shri P. Haokip : - Deputy Secretary

“REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND
_ AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA

i,

कण की ow

1-1 है । 0 41॥ ६ Singh - Dy. C&AG (RC&IB)
Shri Prasenjit Mukherjee , - By. C&AG (Commercial) - ~
Shri A.M. Bajaj हे ; ~ Director General (ESM
Ms. Shubha Kumar - . Director General {Report Central)
“Shri Manish Kumat —. s°—-Principal’Director (PAC)

at _ an y



ने

2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcome the Members and the representatives
of the Office of the C&AG of India to the sitting of the Committee. - The. Chairperson
then apprised that the meeting had been convened to consider and ‘adopt four Draft ह
Reports of the Committee and for selection of additional. subjects for detailed
examination by the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft
Reports one by one for consideration:

i. Draft Report on "Role and Functioning of Indian Coast Guard” based on

C&AG Report No.? of 2011-12 है

ii. Draft Report on “Procurement of Allopathic drugs in CGHS" based on Para.
6.3 of C&AG Report No.19 of 2013; ;

ii. Draft Report on "Indian Customs Electronic Data Interchange System
(ICES1.5)" based on C&AG Report No. 11 of 2014; and

iv. Draft -Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
observations/recommendations of the Committee contained in their Eighty-third .
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha): on "Augmentation of provision to object
heads - Grants-in-aid and Subsidy”.

3. While considering the draft Reports, the Committee decided to observe and
make suitable recommendations on. the issues relating to land acquisition and ship
building, repair and refit capacity development, as far as the report at Serial No. () is-
concerned. With regard to report’ at Serial No. (ii) the Committee desired that
recommendations may be made for the Ministry to give due importance and stress on
‘making quality drugs available, and to devise systems avoid stock piling of drugs that
have: expired. The modification and amendments are shown in Annexure | and Il

respectively.

4. They adopted the other two reports ‘without any modification. “The Committee
alse authorised the Chairperssn to finalise the four Reports adopted by them, in light
of their suggestions and factual verifications received from the Audit and present the -

same (o the House on a.date convenient te him.

5. Thereafter, the Chairperson placed the following two subjects for consideration

; ofthe Committee for selection and detailed examination during.2015-16:

"xix!" Commonwealth Games 2010" based on 0855 Réport No. 6 of
_ 2011-12; and sy : . A:



~54-

i, "Bad debts/uncollectible accounts burden willful default by borrowers on
public institutions"

6. After some discussion on the above-mentioned two subjects the Committee’ -
agreed to the proposal of the Chairperson on the first subject and to modify the second
subject as "Bad debts/uncollectible accounts and willful defauiters; burden on public
financial institutions" .

7. The Chairperson also apprised the .Cammittee about. the forthcoming
Conference of Chairpersons of PACs of Parliament and State Legislatures/UTs from 8
‘fo 9 September, 2015, proposed siltings of the Comniittee on 19 & 26 August.and 7"
September, 2015 and the proposed Study Visit: of the Committee to Bhubaneswar,
Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Chennai from 15-19 September, 2045.

The Committee then adjourned.

ae
we
5
ae