73

AVOIDABLE EXPENDITURE ON SERVICE TAX BY
INSURANCE REGULATORY AND DEVELOPMENT
AUTHORITY (IRDA) |

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Forty-Eighth Report (167 Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF FINANCE

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

SEVENTY-THIRD REPORT

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

'सत्यमैद जयते

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAG NO. 2106

SEVENTY-THIRD REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

AVOIDABLE EXPENDITURE ON SERVICE TAX BY

INSURANCE REGULATORY AND DEVELOPMENT

AUTHORITY (IRDA)

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Forty-Eighth Report (16"" Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF FINANCE

सत्यमैव जयते
a ee
Presented to Lok Sabha on: O hte é

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: ee अआ,

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

April, 2017/ = Chaitra, 1939 (Saka)


CONTENTS

PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (iii)
COMMITTEE (2016-17)
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE lil OF (v)
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2016-17)
INTRODUCTION (vii)
CHAPTER I Report 1

CHAPTER Il Observations/Recommendations which have
been accepted by Government

CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of -
the replies received from Government

CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require

reiteration

CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which Government have furnished interim
replies

APPENDICES

i Minutes of the Ninth sitting of Sub-Committee-lIl of
Public Accounts Committee (2016-17) held on
05.04.2017.

I Minutes of the Twenty-Ninth sitting of Sub-
Committee-ill of Public Accounts Committee (2016-
17) held on 06.04.2017.

i Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their Forty-eighth
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)


16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

BON >

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

Prof. K.V. Thomas - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

hri Sudip Bandyopadhyay

hri Prem Singh Chandumajra
Shri Nishikant Dubey

Prof. Richard Hay

Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
5

s

S
s

hri Bhartruhari Mahtab

mt. Riti Pathak

Shri Neiphiu Rio

Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
Shri Abhishek Singh

Dr. Kirit Somaiya

Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi

Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Naresh Agrawal

Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi

” Shri Bhupender Yadav
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
Shri Shantaram Naik

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
Shri Ajay Sancheti

SECRETARIAT

Shri A.K. Singh - Additional Secretary
Shri Sukhi Chand - Joint Secretary
Shri T. Jayakumar - Director

Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja - Deputy Secretary

* Elected w.e.f. 09.08.2016 vice Shri Vijay Goel, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f. 05.07.2016.


Composition of Sub-Committee - Ill (Direct and Indirect Taxes) of the Public
Accounts Committee (2016-17)

Convenor : Shri Nishikant Dubey
Alternate Convenor : Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
Members : Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi

Prof. Richard Hay
Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
Shri Ajay Sancheti

Qahon>


INTRODUCTION

{, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2016-17), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Seventy-Third: Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Forty-Eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Avoidable Expenditure on Service Tax by Insurance Regulatory and
Development Authority (IRDA)' relating to the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Financial Services and Department of Revenue).

2. The Forty-Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on
28 April, 2016. Replies of the Government to the Observations/ Recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 27 February, 2017 and final replies were
received on 24 March, 2017. The Sub-Committee-IIl under the convenorship of Shri
Nishikant Dubey, MP considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 5th
April, 2017 while the Main Committee adopted the Report at the sitting held on 6th
April, 2017. Minutes of the Sitting of the Sub-Committee and the Main Committee are
given at Appendix-I and II respectively.

3 For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

5. The Committee thank the Sub-Committee for finalizing and placing the draft
Report before the Main Committee.

6. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty-eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha) is given at Appendix-lll.

NEW DELHI; PROF. K.V. THOMAS
_ April, 2017 Chairperson

Chaitra, 1939 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


CHAPTER - |

REPORT

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with Action Taken by the

Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their
Forty-eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on “Avoidable Expenditure on Service Tax by
IRDA” based on the C&AG Report No. 18 of 2015 relating to the Department of Financial
Services and Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance.
2. The Forty-eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in
Rajya Sabha on 28.04.2016. It contained six Observations/Recommendations. Action
Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations have been received from
the Ministry of Finance and categorized as under:

(i) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee which have been accepted

by the Government:
Para No.4,6
Total: 02
Chapter- Il

(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the replies received from the Government:

Total: NIL

Chapter- III

(ii) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which requires reiteration:
Para Nos. 1, 2
Total: 02
Chapter- 1५

(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:
Para No. 3,5
Total: 02
Chapter- V


2

3. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed certain
shortcomings/deficiencies on the part of the Ministry of Finance which inter-alia included
inordinate delay in replying to Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA)'s
query on collection of service tax, lack of a proper mechanism for addressing issues/queries
presented to it, obsolete systems and inability to adapt to latest tools and technologies and
gross laxity in adhering to financial discipline. The Committee had accordingly given their
observations/recommendations in their Forty-eighth Report.

4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Finance on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Forty-eighth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. In the
succeeding paragraphs, the Committee have dealt with action taken by the Government on
some of their Observations/Recommendations made in the original Report which either

need comment or reiteration.

5. The Committee desire that Action Taken Note in respect of
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter | and fina! action taken replies in
respect of the Recommendations contained in Chapter V for which interim replies have been
given by the Government may be furnished to them within six months of the Presentation of

the Report to the House.

1. DELAY ON THE PART OF DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES (DFS) IN
REPLYING TO IRDA
Recommendations (Para No. 1)

6. The Committee noted that IRDA, instead of collecting the tax, requested the Ministry
of Finance in April, 2012 to get the services rendered by it included in the Negative List and
also did not collect the service tax as per the provisions of the Act pending decision from the
Ministry. The Committee observed that the Ministry intimated IRDA on 30" July, 2013 that
the services provided by the Authority are liable to service tax.

The Committee noted that even in this modern era of fast paced developments, it
took the Ministry fifteen long months to give clarification on a single query raised by the
IRDA resulting in non-coillection of service tax during the period. The Committee observed


3

that the Ministry which imposes penalties for delays on other parties was oblivious of its own
laxity.

The Committee were of the view that a time frame may be prescribed for the Ministry
to clear all the queries referred to it so that such lapses were not repeated in future. The
Committee also desired that responsibility for this delay be fixed and stringent action taken
against those found guilty and the Committee be apprised of the same within three months
of presentation of this report.

7. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:-

"It is submitted that IRDA’s request regarding inclusion of services provided by the
Authority in negative list of service tax was received in the Department on
26.04.2012. The subject matter invoived a policy decision, this Department referred
IRDA’s request to Central Board of Excise & Customs, Department of Revenue,
Ministry of Finance on 23.05.2012 and followed up vide reminder dated 20.09.2012.
The Department expected a decision on applicability of service tax of the services
rendered by IRDA in the Budget statement of 2013-14. As there was no mention of
this matter in the Budget statement of 2013-14, this Department again reminded
Department of Revenue vide OM dated 16.05.2013 and 27.05.2013.

Vide OM dated 26.06.2013, Department of Revenue informed that the services
provided by IRDA are neither covered in the negative list nor by any exemption
notification and is therefore liable for service tax. This was communicated to IRDA
by this Department vide letter dated 26.07.2013. In response, vide their letter dated
13.03.2014, IRDA informed that they have remitted service tax from 1% July, 2012 to
31°! December, 2012 under Voluntary Compliance Encouragement Scheme (VCES)
and for the remaining period the payment would be finalised. IRDA also sought
clarifications on the term “Government Authority” as defined in the notification
no.25/2012-service tax, issued by the Ministry of Finance and requested to inform
whether IRDA can be treated as Government Authority and be exempted in payment
of service tax. This was again referred to Department of Revenue vide OM dated
29.04.2014 and reminders dated 14.10.2014, 03.11.2014 and 19:12.2014.
Department of Revenue vide their OM dated 31.12.2014 informed that the term
“government authority’ as defined in notification no.25/2012-ST (as amended)
covers only such authority or a board/body that carries out any function entrusted to


4

a municipality under article 243W of the Constitution. IRDA does not carry out any
function entrusted to a municipality and hence IRDA is not covered under the
definition of “government authority” as defined in the said notification. Therefore,
IRDA is liable to pay service tax on any taxable services provided by it.

Accordingly this Department informed IRDA vide letter dated 14.01.2015 that
the exemption provided to the “government authority’ as defined in the notification
no.25/2012/ST (as amended) is not applicable to IRDA and IRDA is liable to service
tax. It may be observed from the above that there was no substantial delay on the
part of this Department in taking up the matter with the Department of Revenue and
communicating the decision to the IRDA. It is submitted that this Department
referred IRDA’s request to Department of Revenue, which is the appropriate
authority to issue the clarification. The subject matter under consideration involved
policy decisions and it took some time before a final view could be conveyed to
IRDA."

8. The Committee had noted about the inordinate delay on the part of the Ministry
in replying to a single query raised by the IRDA, which resulted in non-collection of
service tax during the given period and, eventually, its recoveries are still pending.
Though the Ministry, in their reply, have stressed on the need to obtain clarifications
from the concerned department which took some time as it involved policy decisions,
the Committee are of the opinion that unless expressly exempted the organizations/
authorities should continue to collect taxes even if any clarifications are sought in
this regard, which is also clear from the reply of Department of Revenue that " ...all
services are liable to service tax, unless they are in the Negative List or are
exempted". The Committee took serious note of the fact that it took long fifteen
months, which is referred as sometime, by the Ministry of Finance due to its own
lackadaisical attitude to decide a query of the IRDA on collection of tax. The
Committee are of the strong view that effective coordination between various
departments, particularly, of the same Ministry is essential to ensure that collection
of taxes is not hampered due to procedural delays to give a clarification on paying of
tax. The Committee while opining that timeliness instill a sense of urgency in dealing
with issues in hand and also enable prioritization, emphasize on the need to fix a time
frame to address al] such queries and adhere to the same in future.


Hi. COMPUTERISATION OF QUERY ADDRESSING SYSTEM

Recommendations (Para No. 2)

9. The Committee noted that the Ministry does not follow electronic approach for
receiving/ addressing/ processing the queries received for clarification. The Committee felt
that queries such as liability to service tax were a routine matter for the Ministry and could
be handled by prescribing a procedure, which can be implemented electronically. The
Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should adopt and apply electronic
system/approach to all its processes to streamline such seeking of clarifications and
obtaining information to avoid instances of unconscionable delay. The Committee also felt
that such electronic systems should also provide for reporting the time of receiving the
queries and the time taken to address them for enabling effective monitoring.

10... Inits reply, the Department of Financial Services have stated that:-

"The subject matter of services of Authority, whether to be taxed or not, is a policy
matter under Department of Revenue and this is reflected through Budget statement
in the form of exemption/negative list. Hence it may not be treated as a routine
matter and therefore, it may practically not be feasible to adopt and apply query
based electronic monitoring system to provide the clarifications. However, a copy of
the Report has been sent to Department of Revenue for taking necessary action and
inform the Committee accordingly."

The Department of Revenue, in its reply, further stated as under:-

"The CBEC also addresses citizen grievances through the CPGRAMS. Grievances
are received, addressed and solved in the given time frame electronically. At the
Zonal level 24 hours e-help lines are operational. Further, at Commissionerate level
mechanisms viable for the local conditions have been set in place for effective
grievance redressal, GST is scheduled to be operational from 01.7.2017. While the
methodology of issuing clarification about taxability in GST is yet to be worked ‘out, it
is possible that Ministry may not be able to issue clarifications by its own and


6

proposed clarifications may have to be discussed by the GST council. The
observation of the committee will be kept in mind while evolving the procedure."

41. The Committee had recommended that the Ministry should adopt and apply
electronic systems/approach to all its processes to streamline the methodology of
clarifications and obtaining information to avoid instances of unconscionable delay.
The Committee note from the reply of the Department of Financial Services that
policy matters are under Department of Revenue which are reflected through Budget
statement in the form of exemption/negative list and hence it may practically not be
feasible to adopt and apply query based electronic monitoring system to provide the
clarifications. The Committee are dismayed to note that even in the age of digital
revolution, the Department of Financial Services is shying away from establishing
such an advanced system for addressing/ processing the queries received by it.
Instead of switching to e-governance, the Department of Financial Services, in its
reply, has expressed its inability to adopt and apply electronic monitoring systems to
deal with such issues. The Committee note that Department of Revenue in it its reply
has, however, stated that citizen grievances are addressed electronically and that the
methodology for issuing clarifications about taxability in GST is yet to be worked out.
The Committee while noting the reply of the Department of Revenue that the
observation of the Committee would be kept in mind while evolving the procedure in
the GST regime, reiterate that timely settlement of issues presented before all the
Departments of the Ministry is necessary to enhance public trust in Governmental
institutions and as e-governance is the only way ahead, all Departments ought to
adopt the latest tools/ electronic systems at their disposal to ensure that such

inordinate delays are averted in future.

fll. | COLLECTION OF SERVICE TAX

Recommendations (Para No. 3)
12. The Committee noted that despite receiving the clarification from the Ministry in July,
2013 that IRDA was liable to pay service tax, the Authority sought an opinion from a tax
consultant, who confirmed in December, 2013, the service tax liability and assessed the ©
same for the period from 1% July, 2012 to 2" December, 2013 at Rs.17.09 crore. The
Committee further observed that IRDA then decided to collect service tax payable w.e.f. 1%


7

January, 2014 from service receivers. It however, paid the service tax of Rs.22.58 crore for
the period 01.07.2012 to 34.12.2013 from its own funds as it was felt difficult to recover the
service tax for the earlier period. It was only after Audit’s observation on non-recovery of
service tax that the matter was placed before the 877 meeting of the Board held on a7
March, 2015 and it was decided to recover the entire service tax due. The Committee
noted that IRDA had recovered 96% of the total dues i.e. Rs.21.60 crore as against the total
of Rs.22.58 crore as on date.

The Committee was concerned about the avoidable and inordinate delay on the part of
IRDA by seeking the opinion from the tax consultant when the Ministry had already directed
them to pay service tax. The Committee desired that accountability be fixed on the officials
concerned, so that such maiters of financial significance were not neglected in future by the
Authority. The concerned officials in the Ministry of Finance should have prevailed upon the
IRDA in timely following the provisions of the Finance Bill, 2012. The Committee viewed
seriously the failure of the Ministry in this regard. The Committee while cautioning the
Authority on being careful in future in financial matters, desired to be apprised of the status
of recovery of the balance amount of 4% i.e. Rs.98 lakhs from the service receivers. The
Committee further recommended that IRDA should computerise and strengthen its tax
collection systems to facilitate service tax collection.

13. The Ministry in its Action Taken Note has stated as under:-

"IRDAI has informed that after receiving Ministry’s decision on payment of service
tax, the office took up the process of calculation of service tax with the help of a
Chartered Accountant firm, in order to determine the correct methodology of
calculation of tax i.e. whether ‘inclusive’ method or ‘exclusive’ method is to be
followed, since IRDAI was new to service tax payment. The processing has taken
some time and the authority assured that financial significance will not be neglected
and the Authority also assured that it will not be repeated in the future. IRDAI has
also requested for a lenient view to be taken in the matter. IRDAI has further
informed that as far as recovery of service tax is concerned, the authority has
recovered Rs.22.35 crore as against Rs.22.58 crore and they are pursuing vigorously
for recovery of balance amount of Rs.23 lakhs. IRDAI has also informed that
services provided by IRDAI are exempted from service tax w.e.f. 01.04.2016 vide Tax
Research Unit's 0.0. No.F.No.334/8/2016_TRU dated 29.02.2016,"


8

14. .The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that IRDAI had since
recovered Rs. 22.35 crore as against Rs. 22.58 crore and they were pursuing for
recovery of balance amount of Rs. 23 lakhs. The Committee desire to he apprised of
the final status pertaining to the recovery of the balance at the earliest. The
Committee noted with concern the avoidable and inordinate delay on the part of IRDA
by seeking the opinion from the tax consultant when the Ministry had already
directed them to pay service tax. The Committee had desired that accountability be
fixed on officials responsible for the avoidable delay in collection of service tax. The
Committee while noting that IRDAI has assured that financial significance would not
be neglected and repeated in future and also requested for a lenient view in the
matter, desire that the officials concerned in the Ministry as well as IRDA may be
appropriately warned to be more careful in future and instructions may be issued to
all such Authorities/ Regulators and officials of the Ministry emphasizing the
significance of financial matters, need for strict financial discipline and avoidance of

inordinate delays in matters relating to public moneys.


9
CHAPTER II

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT

Observation / Recommendations

Audit of income and expenditure

4. The Committee note that at first, the IRDA decided not to collect service tax pending
decision of the Ministry and then after the Ministry had given its decision to collect the
service tax, IRDA found it cumbersome to collect the dues of service tax from the receivers
and paid it from its own funds. The Committee observe that the IRDA should not have used
its own funds to pay up the liabilities of the service providers. The Committee further
observe that the RDA, apparently, did not exercise financial discipline and feel that internal
audit of the working of the regulator may be done regularly to ensure reasonableness,
appropriateness and accuracy of the inflow/outflow of funds. The Committee while noting
that C&AG only audits the administrative expenditures of the regulators and the orders that
are passed in its quasi-judicial capacity are not subject to Audit are, however, of the strong
opinion that though orders may not be auditable, the incomes, wherever and however,
generated must fall within the scope of audit.

[Observation / Recommendations No. 4 of 48" Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (16th Lok Sabha)]

Action Taken:
Audit of income and expenditure

IRDAI has informed that the authority has also put in place Internal/Concurrent Audit
wing which regularly does the internal audit of IRDAI flow of funds to ensure
reasonableness, appropriateness and accuracy. IRDAI has further informed that the
authority has implemented SAP system for its accounting purpose and tax collections are
done through the SAP system.


10

Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN

The SAP system implemented by IRDA! provides for accounting of Service Tax
levied on the fees received. It is to be pointed out that from 01.04.2016, the services
provided by IRDAI are exempted from Service Tax.

Hence, ATN is accepted.

[Ministry of Finance OM No. R-16013/01/2016-Ins.1
dated 27 February 2017]

Observation / Recommendations
6. Reimbursement to the subscribers of the VPBY

The Committee note that in the Union Budget 2015, Life Insurance service provided
by way of Varishtha Pension Bima Yojana (VPBY) scheme was exempted from service tax
w.e.f. 01.04.2015. However, as LIC had collected service tax on policy subscriber
contribution from 14.08.2014 to 31.03.2015, it was decided that LIC would be reimbursed on
production of certificate from the Chartered Accountants indicating that the amounts have
been reimbursed to the subscribers. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that
LIC has refunded Rs.108 crore to the subscribers and Rs.1.40 crore is yet to be refunded.
The Committee observe that the IRDA should monitor such cases earnestly to ensure that
the moneys due to subscribers are paid back expeditiously. The Committee are of the view
that IRDA should work in tandem with the insurance companies in such cases and display
all such information on its website in bold to safeguard the interests of the subscribers. The
Committee desire that the remaining service tax collected from the subscribers of VPBY be
refunded at the earliest under intimation to the Committee.

[Observation / Recommendations No. 6 of 48th Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (16th Lok Sabha)]

Action Taken

Reimbursement to the Subscribers of the Varishta Pension Bima Yojana (VPBY)

This is regarding refund of service tax paid by the subscribers under VPBY scheme
upto 317 March, 2015. LIC of India had collected service tax on policy subscription amount
under the scheme for the period from 14.08.2014 (date of launching of scheme) to
31.03.2015. However, subsequently the premium paid towards VPBY was exempted from
service tax w.ef. 1% April, 2015 by the Department of Revenue. However, the said


11

exemption was not applicable to those who joined the scheme from 14.08.2014 to
31.03.2015.

In order to bring parity among the policyholders contributing under VPBY under
different point of time ie. before and after 43 April, 2015, the matter was referred to
Department of Revenue (DoR). DoR informed that there is no provision for exemption of
service tax from retrospective date. However, DoR has suggested that an amount equal to
service tax collected under VPBY from 14.08.2014 to 31.03.2015 would be reimbursed to
LIC on submission of CA/Auditors Certificate by LIC. Accordingly, this Department advised
LIC to refund the service tax amount collected from the policyholders and produce
certificate from CA/Auditors to the effect that amount have been reimbursed to the

policyholders for claiming reimbursement by LIC.

LIC has confirmed that the entire service tax on premium amounting to
Rs.109,32,26,720 collected from the subscribers of Varishtha Pension Bima Yojana (VPBY)
scheme has been refunded and LIC has also produced the certificate from the Chartered
Accountants indicating that the amounts have been reimbursed to the subscribers.
Accordingly, Department of Financial Services has requested Budget Division, Department
of Economic Affairs to make budgetary provision under Revised Estimates (RE) 2016-17 for

reimbursement of above said amount to LIC.

Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN

The observations are not related to the functioning of IRDAI. Hence, no remarks to
offer.

[Ministry of Finance OM No. R-16013/01/2016-Ins.1
dated 27 February 2017]


12
CHAPTER Ill
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT

DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE
GOVERNMENT

-NIL-


13
CHAPTER IV

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRES REITERATION

Observation / Recommendations
Audit of income and expenditure
1. Delay on the part of DFS in replying to IRDA

The committee note that IRDA, instead of collecting the tax, requested the Ministry in
April, 2012 to get the services rendered by it included in the Negative List and also did not
collect the service tax as per the provisions of the Act pending decision from the Ministry.
The Committee observe that the Ministry intimated IRDA on 30" July, 2013 that the services
provided by the Authority are liable to service tax.

The Committee are distressed to note that in this modem era of fast paced
developments, it took the Ministry fifteen long months to give clarification on a single query
raised by the IRDA resulting in non-collection of service tax during the period. The
Committee observe that the Ministry which imposes penalties for delays on other parties is
oblivious of its own laxity.

The Committee are of the view that a time frame may be prescribed for the Ministry to
clear all the queries referred to it so that such lapses are not repeated in future. The
Committee also desire that responsibility for this delay be fixed and stringent action taken
against those found guilty and the Committee be apprised thereof within three months of
presentation of this report.

[Observation / Recommendations No. 1 of 487 Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (16th Lok Sabha)]

Action Taken:
Delay on the part of Department of Financial services in replying to IRDAI

It is submitted that IRDA’s request regarding inclusion of services provided by the
Authority in negative list of service tax was received in the Department on 26.04.2012. The
subject matter involved a policy decision, this Department referred IRDA’s request to
Central Board of Excise & Customs, Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance on


14
23.05.2012 and followed up vide reminder dated 20.09.2012. The Department expected a
decision on applicability of service tax of the services rendered by IRDA in the Budget
statement of 2013-14. As there was no mention of this matter in the Budget statement of
2013-14, this Department again reminded Department of Revenue vide OM dated
16.05.2013 and 27.05.2013.

Vide OM dated 26.06.2013, Department of Revenue informed that the services
provided by IRDA are neither covered in the negative list nor by any exemption notification
and is therefore liable for service tax. This was communicated to IRDA by this Department
vide letter dated 26.07.2013. In response, vide their letter dated 13.03.2014, IRDA
informed that they have remitted service tax from 4* July, 2012 to 31% December, 2012
under Voluntary Compliance Encouragement Scheme (VCES) and for the remaining period

the payment would be finalised.

IRDA also sought clarifications on the term “Government Authority” as defined in the
notification no.25/2012-service tax, issued by the Ministry of Finance and requested to
inform whether [RDA can be treated as Government Authority and be exempted in payment
of service tax. This was again referred to Department of Revenue vide OM dated
29.04.2014 and reminders dated 14.10.2014, 03.11.2014 and 19.12.2014.

Department of Revenue vide their OM dated 31.12.2014 informed that the term
“government authority” as defined in notification no.25/2012-ST (as amended) covers only
such authority or a board/body that carries out any function entrusted to a municipality
under article 243W of the Constitution. IRDA does not carry out any function entrusted to a
municipality and hence IRDA is not covered under the definition of “government authority”
as defined in the said notification. Therefore, IRDA is liable to pay service tax on any
taxable services provided by it. Accordingly this Department informed IRDA vide letter
dated 14.01.2015 that the exemption provided to the “government authority” as defined in
the notification no.25/2012/ST (as amended) is not applicable to IRDA and IRDA is liable to

service tax.

It may be observed from the above that there was no substantial delay on the part of
this Department in taking up the matter with the Department of Revenue and communicating
the decision to the IRDA. {t is submitted that this Department referred IRDA’s request to
Department of Revenue, which is the appropriate authority to issue the clarification. The


15

subject matter under consideration involved policy decisions and it took some time before a
final view could be conveyed to IRDA.

Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN

The subject matter involving policy consideration was taken by Department of
Revenue. As the issue is not related to IRDAI, no remarks to offer.

[Ministry of Finance OM No. R-16013/01/2016-Ins.1
dated 27 February 2017]

Observation / Recommendations
2. Computerisation of query addressing system

The Committee note that the Ministry does not follow electronic approach for
receiving/ addressing/ processing the queries received for clarification. The Committee feel
that quaries such as liability to service tax is a routine matter for the Ministry and can be
handled by prescribing a procedure which can be implemented electronically. The
Committee, therefore, desire that Ministry may adopt and apply electronic systems/approach
to all its processes to streamline such seeking of clarifications and obtaining information to
avoid instances of unconscionable delay. The Committee also feel that such electronic
system should also provide for reporting the time of receiving the queries and the time taken
to address them for enabling effective monitoring.

[Observation / Recommendations No. 2 of 487 Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (16th Lok Sabha)]

Action Taken:

Computerisation of query addressing system

The subject matter of services of Authority, whether to be taxed or not, is a policy
matter under Department of Revenue and this is reflected through Budget statement in the
form of exemption/negative list. Hence it may not be treated as a routine matter and
therefore, it may practically not be feasible to adopt and apply query based electronic
monitoring system to provide the clarifications. However, a copy of the Report has been
seni to Department of Revenue for taking necessary action and inform the Committee

accordingly.


16

The CBEC also addresses citizen grievances through the CPGRAMS. Grievances are
received, addressed and solved in the given time frame electronically. At the Zonal level 24
hours e-help lines are operational. Further, at Commissionerate level mechanisms viable for
the local conditions have been set in place for effective grievance redressal.GST is
scheduled to be operational from 01.07.2017.While the methodology of issuing clarification
about taxability in GST is yet to be worked out, it is possible that Ministry may not be able to
issue clarifications by its own and proposed clarifications may have to be discussed by the
GST council. The observation of the committee will be kept in mind while evolving the
procedure.

[Ministry of Finance OM No. R-16013/01/2016-Ins.1
dated 27 February 2017]

Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN

The observations are not related to the functioning of IRDAI. Hence, no remarks to offer.

[Ministry of Finance OM No. 137/70/2016-Service Tax
dated 24 March 2017]


17
CHAPTER V

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT HAVE
FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES

Observation / Recommendations
3. Collection of Service Tax

The Committee note that despite receiving the clarification from the Ministry in July,
2013 that IRDA was liable to pay service tax, the Authority sought an opinion from a tax
consultant, who confirmed in December, 2013, the service tax liability and assessed the
same for the period from 4* July, 2012 to 277 December, 2013 at Rs:17.09 crore. The
Committee further observe that IRDA decided then to collect service tax payable w.e.f. 1%
_ January, 2014 from service receivers. It however, paid the service tax of Rs.22.58 crore for
the period 01.07.2012 to 31.12.2013 from its own funds as it was felt difficult to recover the
service tax for the earlier period. It was only after Audit’s observation on non-recovery of
service tax, the matter was placed before the 877 meeting of the Board held on 27" March,
2015 and it was decided to recover the entire service tax due. The Committee note that
IRDA has recovered 96% of the total dues ie. Rs.21.60 crore as against the total of
Rs.22.58 crore as on date.

The Committee observe with concern that there was an avoidable and inordinate
delay on the part of IRDA by seeking the opinion from the tax consultant when the Ministry
had already directed them to pay service tax. The process took five months for calculating
the service tax liability. The Committee desire that accountability may be fixed on the
officials concerned, so that such matter of financial significance are not neglected or
repeated in future by the Authority. The concerned officials in the Ministry of Finance
should have prevailed upon the IRDA in timely following the provisions of the Finance Bill,
2012. The Committee view seriously about the failure of the Ministry in this regard. The
Committee while cautioning the Authority on being careful in future in financial matters,
would further like to be apprised of the status of recovery of the balance amount of 4% i.e.
Rs.98 lakhs from the service receivers. The Committee further recommended that IRDA
should computerise and strengthen its tax collection systems to facilitate service tax

collection.

[Observation / Recommendations No.3 of 48th Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (16th Lok Sabha)}


18
Action Taken
Collection of Service Tax

IRDAI has informed that after receiving Ministry's decision on payment of service tax,
the office took up the process of calculation of service tax with the help of a Chartered
Accountant firm, in order to determine the correct methodology of calculation of tax i.e.
whether ‘inclusive’ method or ‘exciusive’ method is to be followed, since IRDA! was new to
service tax payment. The processing has taken some time and the authority assured that
financial significance will not be neglected and the authority also assured that it will not be
repeated in the future. IRDAI has also requested for a lenient view to be taken in the
matter. IRDAI has further informed that as far as recovery of service tax is concerned, the
authority has recovered Rs.22.35 crore as against Rs.22.58 crore and they are pursuing
vigorously for recovery of balance amount of Rs.23 lakhs. IRDAI has also informed that
services provided by IRDAI are exempted from service tax w.e.f. 01.04.2016 vide Tax
Research Unit’s D.O. No.F.No.334/8/2016_TRU dated 29.02.2016.

With effect from 01.07.2012 the tax base has been broadened and all services are
liable to service tax, unless they are in the Negative List or are exempted. Thus the liability
of a service provider is seen vis-a- vis the legal definition of “service” and not by the nature
of the body (i.e a regulator). As mentioned earlier, in order to ensure that the tax base is
wide, exemptions are kept at minimum. GST is scheduled to be operational from
01.07.2017 and in the GST regime, policy decisions will be taken by the GST council.

Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN

Out of Rs.22.58 crore, IRDAI has recovered Rs.22.35 crore as on date. Rs.23 lakh is
pending recovery.

As 99 per cent of service tax has since been recovered, the ATN is acceptable..

[Ministry of Finance OM No. R-16013/01/2016-Ins.1
dated 27 February 2017]


19
Observation / Recommendations

5. Regulators as service providers

The Committee note that in view of the surge in number of services and service
providers, the number of regulatory authorities have also increased which are mandated
with dual roles, i.e. both regulation and development of the respective sectors and for
achieving these aims, they provide certain services for which charges/fees are taken. The
Committee also note the reply of the Ministry while deciding on the issue of exemption to
IRDA that “it was a conscious decision of the Government to keep the exemptions at the
minimum and hence the services rendered by IRDA are liable to service tax’. The
Committee are of the view that instead of taking decisions to only align with the strategy to
keep the exemptions to the minimum, the Ministry should analyse whether services
rendered by these regulators should be liable under service tax and whether ail the
regulators are paying service tax for services rendered by them and bring out a policy
decision on the same under intimation to the Committee.

[Observation / Recommendations No. 5 of 48th Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (16th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken

Regulators as service providers

The subject is a policy under the domain of the Department of Revenue, Ministry of
Finance and they are the exclusive authority in the matter of service tax. As such the policy
decision as desired by the Committee needs to be taken by Department of Revenue,
Ministry of Finance. Accordingly, Department of Revenue has been requested to take
appropriate action in the matter and inform the Committee accordingly.

Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN

The observations are not related to the functioning of IRDAI. Hence, no remarks to
offer.

[Ministry of Finance OM No. 137/70/2016-Service Tax
dated 24 March 2017]

NEW DELHI; PROF. K.V. THOMAS
6 April, 2017 Chairperson

16 Chaitra, 1939 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


20
APPENDIX-+4
CONFIDENTIAL

MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF SUB-COMMITTEE-III (DIRECT AND INDIRECT
TAXES) OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2016-17) HELD ON 057 APRIL, 2017.

The Sub- Committee sat from 1030 hrs. to 1045 hrs. on 057 April, 2017 in Commitiee
Room “E”, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT

Shri Nishikant Dubey - Convenor
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Prof. Richard Hay
RAJYA SABHA

3. Shri Ajay Sancheti

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

41. Shri S.C. Chaudhary - Joint Secretary
2. Shri T. Jayakumar - Director
3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary

2. At the outset, the Convenor, Sub-Committee Ill of PAC (2016-17) welcomed the
Members to the Sitting of the Sub-Committee. Then, the Sub-Committee took up the draft
Report on the subject “Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the 487 Report of PAC (16 Lok Sabha)
on Avoidable Expenditure on Service Tax by Insurance Regulatory and Development
Authority (IRDA)” based on 487 Report of PAC (46th Lok Sabha) for consideration.

3. The Convenor invited suggestions of the Members on the above-mentioned draft
report. After discussing the contents of the draft report, the Sub-Committee - adopted the
same.

4, The Sub-Committee authorized the Convenor to place the same before the Main

Committee for consideration and adoption.


21

APPENDIX II

MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-NINTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2016-17) HELD ON: 6 APRIL, 2017.

The Committee sat from 1030 hrs. to 1100 hrs. on 6 April, 2017 in Room No. "51",

Parliament House, New Delhi.

10.

11.

12.

PRESENT

Prof. K. V. Thomas
MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
Shri Nishikant Dubey

Prof. Richard Hay

Smt. Riti Pathak

Shri Neiphiu Rio

Shri Abhishek Singh

Dr. Kirit Somaiya

Shri Anurag Singh Thakur

Shri Shiv Kumar C. Udasi
RAJYA SABHA

Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita

Shri Ajay Sancheti

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Shri A. K. Singh

Shri S. C. Chaudhary

~ Chairperson

- Additional Secretary

- Joint Secretary


22

3. Shri T. Jayakumar - Director

4. Shri Paolienlal Haokip - Deputy Secretary
5. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary
6... ShriA. K. Yadav हि - Deputy Secretary

REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR
GENERAL OF INDIA

41. Shri. Nand Kishore - Dy.CAG (DCR)
2. Shri Mukesh P. Singh - D.G (ACE)
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the representatives of the

Office of the C&AG of India to the sitting of the Committee. The Chairperson then apprised
the Members that the meeting has been convened to consider and adopt six Draft Reports
as already circulated to Members. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft

reports one by one for consideration:

(iy चल+ pera Peet) peered
(i) हक* freed cored pererd
(iil) हू ferred wane pees
iy) me ieee cored free
(iv)

(v) Draft Report on Action taken by Government on observations/ recommendations
contained in 48" Report (167 Lok Sabha) on “Avoidable Expenditure on Service Tax by
Insurance Regulatory Development Authority (IRDA)”;

(vi) * soe अमकरूके seek

3. After deliberations, the Draft Reports were adopted unanimously by the Committee
except Draft Report at Serial No. (iii) above wherein minor changes/modifications were

suggested by a Member.

4, Hon'ble Chairperson, thereafter, also informed the Members that a group photograph
of Members of PAC with Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha has been organised on 7 April, 2017


23

at 1000 hrs at the courtyard behind P.N.O, near Gate No. 1, Parliament House. He
requested all the Members to be present on the occasion.

5. The Chairperson thanked the Members for their participation in the consideration and
adoption of the Draft Reports and the representatives of the C&AG of India for assisting the

Committee in the examination of the subjects.

The Committee then adjourned.


24

APPENDIX-III
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
CONTAINED IN THEIR FORTY-EIGHTH REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

Total number of Observations/Recommendations

Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
which have been accepted by the Government:

Para Nos. 4 and 6

Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
reply of

the Government:
-Nil-

Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

1and 2
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which the Government have furnished interim
replies:

Para Nos. 3 and 5

6

Total : 2
Percentage:
33.33%

Total : 0
Percentage: 0%

Total : 2
Percentage:
33.33%

Total : 2
Percentage:
33.34%