111 
 
NUTRIENT BASED SUBSIDY POLICY FOR 
DECONTROLLED PHOSPHATIC & POTASSIC 
FERTILIZERS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Sixty Fifth Report (16th Lok Sabha)] 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND ELEVENTH 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 

 
PAC NO.2145 
 
O N E  H U N D R E D  A N D  E L E V E N T H  
R E P O R T 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
( SI XTEENTH LO K S ABH A)  
 
 
 
 
     [Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Sixty Fifth Report (16th Lok Sabha)] 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on: 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
August, 2018 /Shravana, 1940 (Saka) 
 
NUTRIENT BASED SUBSIDY POLICY FOR 
DECONTROLLED PHOSPHATIC & 
POTASSIC FERTILIZERS 
 

CONTENTS 
 
  PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2018-19)  (iii) 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………... ……………………..   (iv) 
CHAPTER I             
  
 
  Report ………………………………………. 
 
1-13 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government …………………….. 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
replies received from the Government 
…………………………….. 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration ………………………………………… 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which the Government have furnished interim 
replies ………………………………………………… 
 
APPENDICES 
I * 
 
Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts 
Committee (2018-19) held on   
07.08.2018 
 
             II Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public 
Accounts Committee contained in their Sixty Fifth 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
 
 
*  Not appended in the Report 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shri Mallikarjun Kharge   - Chairperson 
 
 M E M B E R S  
 
L O K  S A B H A  
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra 
5.    Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar   
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
7. Smt. Riti Pathak 
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank” 
9. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
10. Shri Abhishek Singh 
11. Shri Gopal Shetty 
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya  
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
15. Dr. Ponnusamy Venugopal 
 R A J Y A  S A B H A  
16. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda 
17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
18. Shri Shwait Malik 
19. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
21. Vacant 
 
22. Vacant 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Sanjeev Sharma             - Additional Director 
3. Shri Ashikho  Alemo  - Sr. Committee Assistant  

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2018-19), having been authori sed 
by the Committee, do present this One Hundred and Eleventh Report (Sixteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the Observation/ Recommen dations 
contained in the 65 th Report (16 th Lok Sabha) on “Nutrient Based Subsidy Policy For 
Decontrolled Phosphatic & Potassic Fertilizers ” relating to the Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers.  
 
2.  The 65th was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 17.03.2017 . Replies 
of the Government to all the observations/ Recommendations contained in th e Report 
were received. The Public Accounts Committee considered and adopted the One Hundred 
and Eleventh Report at their sitting held on 7 August, 2018. Minutes of the sitting are given 
at Appendix-I   
3.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Recommendation s of the 
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
4.  The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to them in 
the matter by the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.  
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixty Fifth Report (16 th Lok Sabha) is 
given at Appendix-II 
 
NEW DELHI;        MALLIKARJUN KHARGE  
7   August, 2018                          Chairperson,  
 16  Shravana, 1940 (Saka)           Public Accounts Committee 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
R E P O R T  

PART – I 
INTRODUCTORY 
This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Ta ken by the 
Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee conta ined in 
their Sixty Fifth Report (16 th Lok Sabha) on the subject “Nutrient Based Subsidy Policy 
For Decontrolled Phosphatic & Potassic Fertilizers" based on the C&AG Report No. 16 
of 2015 relating to the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
2. The Sixty Fifth Report (16 th Lok Sabha), which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid 
in Rajya Sabha on 17 th March, 2017 contained 11 Observations and Recommendations.  
Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations and Recommendations hav e been 
received from the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers and are broadly categorized as under:   
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
 
Para Nos. 1-3, 5-11                Total: 10 
Chapter - II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies received from the Government: 
  
Para Nos.  Nil                 Total: Nil 
Chapter - III 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government hav e not 
been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
 
Para Nos. Nil                 Total: Nil 
Chapter - IV 
 (iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have furnishe d 
interim replies: 
 
Para Nos. 4           Total: 01 
Chapter – V 
 
 
 
3. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee revealed the steep rise in 
the use of Urea, which has Nitrogen (N) as its primary nutrient, leading to imb alance use of 

nutrients, decline in the production of indigenous fertilizers and deterioratio n of soil health. 
The Committee also found irregularities like avoidable payment of subsidy, excess payment 
on lump sum freight subsidy for Single Super Phosphate (SSP), non recovery of gains from 
Phosphate & Potassium (P&K) manufacturing companies for using cheape r domestic/APM 
gases, Sales of SSP without assessing requirement, unreasonable loading of cost 
component on MRP, unjustified fixation of MRP etc. The Committee had acco rdingly given 
the observations/recommendations in their Sixty Fifth Report. 
4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers in 
respect of all Observations and Recommendations of the Committee have been 
reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. The Committee will now deal w ith the 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations and Recommendations made in the 
Original Report which either need reiteration or merit comments. 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 1) 
 
TARGET ORIENTED APPROACH 
 
5. The Committee did note that ‘Nutrient Based Subsidy ’ (NBS) Policy was 
introduced in April, 2010, with the objectives to improve agriculture productivity, ensure 
balanced use of fertilizers, promote growth of indigenous fertilizers industry and  to 
reduce the burden of subsidy. The Committee observed that the Policy had not made 
any significant progress towards achieving these objectives. The Committee viewed that 
for the successful implementation of any scheme or Policy of the Government which will 
have far reaching consequences on the welfare of the people, particularly, farm er and 
peasant community, there should be well-defined road-map for achieving  the stated 
objectives of the policy which may, inter-alia, indicate quantifiable deriva ble and specific 
timeline for achieving the objectives. To their utter surprise, the committee found  that 
neither was there any clear road map nor any timeline indicated towards implementation 
of the said scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommended that the Department need 
to adopt a target oriented approach without any further delay and  set specific timelines 
with a strong and in-build monitoring mechanism for achievement of  each of the 
objectives and ensure overall success of the policy. The Committee desired to be 
apprised of the steps taken in this regard be intimated them. 
 
6. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as under: 
 
“In order to ensure food security in the country by increasing productivity, 
Urea and P&K fertilizers are provided to farmers at subsidized rates under 
different subsidy schemes at different periods.  The Concession Scheme on 
decontrolled Phosphatic and Potassic (P&K) fertilizers was under implementation 

w.e.f 1 st April 2008.  Under Concession Scheme, the prices of P&K fertilizers 
were fixed by Govt. and the difference between the normated deli vered 
price(different cost factors are based on certain norms and not based on actual  
expenses reported by companies) of fertilizers and the statutory MRP was b eing 
paid as concession to the fertilizer companies. During implementation of the 
Concession Scheme, certain drawbacks such as high subsidy implication; 
marginal response of agricultural productivity to additional fertilizer usage, near 
stagnation of indigenous industry etc., were observed. 
 
In order to overcome the shortcomings of concession scheme and with the 
main objectives of reducing subsidy burden, to improve agriculture productivity, 
to ensure balanced use of fertilizers and promote growth of indigenous fertilizers 
industry, the subsidy scheme for P&K fertilizers has been modified w.e.f. 
1.4.2010 from a controlled regime to market driven scheme allowing the market 
forces to determine the MRP of P&K fertilizers, while maintaining subsidy rates 
unchanged for one year. The revised scheme was named NBS Scheme as  the 
subsidy was provided on each grade of P&K fertilizers based on their nutrien t 
content. 
 
The freedom allowed to fertilizer companies in the NBS Scheme to fix 
MRP of P&K fertilizers based on market dynamics was expected to promote 
competition leading to efficiencies in production and import. In the long run, the 
policy is expected to stabilise demand and supply situation and also contain the 
subsidy outgo, besides promoting balanced fertilization of soil. 
 
However, the success of NBS Scheme is not independent in itself as it is 
dependent on international prices of fertilizer raw materials/intermediaries/ 
finished fertilizers. Our country has no known source of potash and is depe ndent 
on imports for 90% requirement of Phosphate. Even the P&K fertilize r industry is 
dependent more than 90% on imports for its nitrogen requirement. Thus, the 
indigenous P&K fertilizer industry is almost dependent on imported raw 
materials/intermediaries for its survival and growth. At the time of introduc tion of 
NBS Scheme, availability of domestic gas was not an issue as the KG D6 gas 
was expected to be available for fertilizer industry. Even the three indigeno us 
P&K fertilizer industries, MFL, FACT & GNFC were asked to convert their 
Naphtha based feedstock plant to gas based feedstock plant. However, domestic 
gas production in the country came down and the supply of gas to fertil izer 
industry reduced post NBS Policy. Domestic gas provided to three P&K fertilizer 
companies, RCF, GSFC & DFPCL, was either diverted for urea production or 

discontinued. This has affected the existing production of P&K fertilizers in th e 
country.  
 
Post NBS Policy, the Government could not facilitate acquiring of fertilizer 
raw material abroad due to unfavourable terms & conditions, commercia l 
decision of fertilizer companies and internal policies of the resource rich countries 
to promote their own industry instead of selling raw materials abroad and keeping 
the prices of finished products lower than that of raw materials. This also affected 
the growth of indigenous industry. 
 
The other factors, which affected growth of indigenous industry are de lay 
in payment of subsidy to fertilizer companies and various controls at diffe rent 
levels. The funds allocated under different heads of account for paym ent of 
subsidy were never adequate resulting in delay in payment of subsidy a nd extra 
financial cost to fertilizer companies. 
 
In view of the foregoing, the NBS policy in itself cannot ensure growth of 
indigenous fertilizer industry. However, number of indigenous SSP industries a nd 
production of SSP have registered an increase after NBS Scheme. 
 
After introduction of NBS Policy, the subsidy burden has come down 
considerably achieving one of the objectives of the Scheme. The actual su bsidy 
disbursed during last ten years as given below confirms this: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In respect of balanced use of fertilizers as one of the objectives of NBS 
Policy it is stated that balanced use of fertilizers refers to use of proper  
combination of various nutrients, N, P, K and S besides other micro-nutrients . 
Balanced use of fertilizers is a wider issue involving other factors such as price of 
urea, farmers’ active participation and level of awareness about balanced use of 
fertilizers, active involvement of State Governments in implementation by way  of 
effective agro-extension services, soil condition and its health, awareness 
amongst farmers etc.  While controlling of urea prices is within the administrative  
ambit of the Department of fertilizers, Department of Agriculture, Cooperation 
Year  Subsidy on P&K 
Ferts. 
(Rs. In crore) 
Year  Subsidy on P&K Ferts. 
(Rs. In crore) 
2005-06 6596.19 2011-12 36107.94 
2006-07 10298.12 2012-13 30576.10 
2007-08 16933.80 2013-14 29426.86 
2008-09 65554.79 2014-15 20667.30 
2009-10 39452.06 2015-16 21937.56 
2010-11 41500.00 2016-17 18985.01 + 15 (City Compost) 

and Farmers Welfare is concern ed with promotion of balanced use of fertilizers 
through various awareness programmes and schemes, involving the state 
agriculture departments etc. In this regard, the DAC&FW has launched the Soil  
Health Card Scheme in February 2015. Under the scheme, about 14 crore 
farmers will be issued soil cards, which will carry crop-wise recommendations of 
nutrients and fertilisers required for the individual farms to help them to im prove 
productivity through judicious use of inputs. 
One of the reasons for imbalanced use of nutrients is the comparatively 
lower price of Urea. While the Urea price is fixed statutorily by Govt., t he MRPs 
of P&K fertilizers are determined by market forces. Any change in the 
international prices of P&K fertilizers and distortion in the exchange rate ha s a 
bearing on the domestic prices of P&K fertilizers. Due to devaluation of  Indian 
rupee against USD after NBS Scheme (Rs.46/USD in 2010 to Rs.68.565/USD in 
2016-17) and increase in the international prices of P&K fertilizers during  the 
initial years of NBS Policy, there was an increase in the domestic prices of P&K 
fertilizers. Delay in payment of subsidy also had a bearing on the prices as 
finance cost due to delayed subsidy payments gets added up to the MRP. During 
introduction of NBS Scheme, the idea was to bring Urea also into the NBS 
Scheme in the 2 nd phase. However, non-implementation of NBS Scheme in urea 
due to various reasons resulted in the widening of the prices of P&K fertilizers 
and Urea and ultimately affecting the preference of farmers for Urea. Howe ver, 
since last one year, the international prices of P&K fertilizers have come d own 
and the Government instead of reducing subsidy in line with falling internationa l 
prices, kept the subsidy rates same, resulting in fall in domestic prices of P&K 
fertilizers. It is expected that the reduced prices of P&K fertilizers and th e 
awareness programmes initiated by DAC&FW will encourage farmers for 
balanced use of fertilizers.” 
7. Audit in their vetting comments stated as under:- 
 
“IMG constituted in Nov 2008 recommended implementing NBS regime 
where in farm gate prices are decontrolled and subsidy fixed for ea ch fertilizer 
based on nutrient content. Accordingly, NBS regime has been extended to P& K 
fertilizer in April 2010. The Urea was required to taken be in the NBS in 2 nd 
Phase within three years from April 2010. However, the urea was not extended to 
the NBS regime despite lapse of seven years. Steps taken to bring the urea in 
NBS regime may be appraised to PAC.” 
 
 
 

8. The Ministry in their updated Action Taken Notes have stated as under: 
“The GOM in 2011 decided to constitute an Inter-Ministerial Committee 
under the Chairmanship of Shri Saumitra Chaudhuri, Member Planning 
Commission to examine the proposal for introduction of Nutrient Based Subsidy  
in urea sector.The said Committee evaluated various alternatives on nutrient 
based subsidy regime in urea sector and gave recommendations based on 
which Department of Fertilizers (DoF) made a proposal to be placed before 
GOM. The draft Agenda Note including Committee Report was perused by the 
then Minister of Chemicals & Fertilizers (MCF). The then Minister of Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (MCF) made certain observations on the Committee report, which 
were forwarded to Chairman of the Committee.
 
The Agenda note for GOM was circulated to various Departments for their  
views, if any. While recognizing certain gains proposed in the report of 
Committee, DOE expressed their concerns on certain areas of the report. The 
key concerns included (i) Chances of runaway price increase in the domestic 
market;  (ii) gauging the ‘reasonableness’ of price increase, without resorting to 
cost estimations, and therefore, reverting to old cost plus mechanism;  (iii) with 
gas prices already ruling considerably above the base price taken into account, if 
the increase in MRP for the year is limited to 10% as per the proposal, the 
burden on GOI shall be significantly more than what has been envisaged in the 
report; and (iv) without drastic improvement in the availability of urea at farm gate 
level, removing the restrictions on fortified urea completely may not be 
appropriate and cost of such add-ons could push up retail prices by another.
 
The note dated 13 th July, 2011 containing the proposal on NBS for urea 
as recommended by the Committee along with proposals as suggested by DoF 
and the observations of the then MCF, were placed before the GoM.  GoM , 
however, decided that the proposal on Nutrient based Subsidy (NBS) for urea  be 
placed before the CCEA for consideration; and while placing the above propo sal 
before CCEA, the observations of Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers be clearly 
spelt out and direction of the CCEA sought.
 
The matter was placed before CCEA twice and CCEA directed that the 
proposal be reformulated and be placed before the GoM constituted to review 
the fertilizers policy and re-circulate the note for inter-ministerial 
consultation. Since the GoM referred in the decision of the CCEA was 
subsequently not re-constituted, therefore, Department of Fertilizers submitted a 
new proposal for consideration of CCEA on 23rd November 2012. 
 

Meanwhile, with the approval of Prime Minister, a new GoM was 
constituted to look into all aspects relating to formulation of policy for the ex isting 
urea units beyond Stage-III of NPS in January, 2013. Based on the 
recommendations of GOM, a CCEA Note was submitted for seeking the 
approval on the proposal regarding Modified NPS-III for existing urea units. After 
the approval of the CCEA, Modified NPS-III for the existing urea units was issued 
by the Department on 2nd April, 2014. 
In the meantime,
 NBS was introduced in P&K Fertilizers wherein the 
Nutrient based subsidy is fixed and paid on each nutrient including Nitroge n and 
MRP is decided by the Fertilizers Companies themselves based on demand 
supply dynamics. Though the availability of fertilizers improved and the su bsidy 
burden reduced with the implementation of NBS in P&K Fertilizers, howeve r, the 
demand of P&K fertilizers vis-a-vis urea decreased due to increase in price s of 
P&K fertilizers. This has resulted in skewed NPK ratio and caused imbalance 
use of fertilization 
Subsequently, the urea policy was revisited afresh in 2015 and after du e 
consultation, a proposal to formulate New Urea Policy was approved by CCEA. 
Alongwith, a proposal of gas pooling policy was also approved by CCEA. As per 
the decision of CCEA, Department of Fertilizers notified New Urea Policy- 2015 
on 25th May 2015 for existing 25 gas based urea units with the objectives of 
maximizing indigenous urea production; promoting energy efficiency in urea 
production; and rationalizing subsidy burden on the Government. 
Department of Fertilizers is following various strategies/mechanisms to 
promote balanced use of Fertilizers in association with DAC&FW. 
 
With the objective of encouraging balanced use of fertilizers, Department 
of Fertilizers has made it mandatory for all the domestic producers of ur ea to 
produce 100% as Neem Coated Urea. Entire quantity of indigenously p roduced 
urea and imported urea is being neem coated w.e.f 1 st September, 2015 and 
w.e.f 1st December, 2015 respectively. 
 
Vide notification dated 4 th September, 2017, Government of India has 
decided to introduce 45 kg bag of urea in place of existing 50 kg bag  and a 
period of six months have been given to urea units as lead time to  ensure 
smooth implementation of the policy. However, MRP of such bag will be n otified 
by Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare. 
9. The Committee desired to know the latest position in regard to rationalising the 
size of urea bag and whether the MRP of such bag had been notif ied by the Ministry of 

Agriculture and Farmers Welfare or not.  The Department of Fertilizers accordingly 
intimated that the approval of the Government to introduce 45 kg bag  replacing the 
existing 50 kg bag had been conveyed and also the MRP of 45kg bag had been notified 
on 1st March, 2018. 
10. The Committee are happy to note that the Department of Fertilizers had 
notified a New Urea Policy, 2015 for the existing 25 gas based urea units with the 
objectives of maximizing indigenous urea production, promoting energy 
efficiency in urea production and rationalizing subsidy burden on the 
Government. To encourage balanced use of fertilizers, the Department had also 
made it mandatory for all domestic producers of urea to produce 100% Neem 
Coated Urea and consequently the entire quantity of indigenously produced urea 
and imported urea was neem coated w.e.f 1st September, 2015 and w.e.f 1st 
December, 2015 respectively.  The Committee see this development as a way 
forward in effecting the new urea policy.  Nevertheless, the Committee desire to 
be apprised of the impact of the new urea policy on indigenous urea production 
and the subsidy burden of the Government.  The Committee are also happy to 
note that the MRP for the 45 kg bag has since been fixed which will eventually 
benefit the farmers.  However, a close scrutiny of the updated information 
supplied by the Committee does not categorise the reasons for truncating the 
size of urea bag from 50 kg to 45 kg.  The Committee in this regard desire that 
they be apprised of such a change.   
(Recommendation Para No.3) 
 
PROMOTION OF INDIGENOUS FERTILIZERS INDUSTRY 
 
11. The committee noted that despite the stated objective of NBS Polic y to improve 
growth of indigenous fertilizers industry, production of P&K Fertilizers by the indige nous 
fertilizers industry declined. Since 2003-04, the number of indigenous plants a nd their 
capacities remained static. Though the number of plants remained the same even  in 
2013-14, installed capacity increased marginally. The Committee were distressed to find 
that in a span of ten years, no significant achievement had been made in the growth of 
distressing fertilizers plants and their production level. This was even more distressing 
to note that although NBS policy was announced in 2010, the result had been very 
pathetic as production of P&K fertilizers by the indigenous fertilizers industry d eclined 
i.e. a phenomenon which is just opposite to one of the objective of NBS Po licy. The 
Committee also noted that in order to ensure long term availability of raw 
material/intermediaries, Indian companies are encouraged to enter long-term o ff-take 
contracts at concessional rates, Joint Ventures to acquire mines in resource rich 
countries. The Committee also took note of the fact that under the NBS Policy  number 

of Single Super Phosphate (SSP) units had increased from 73 in 2008-0 9 to 100 in 
2014-15 and the production of SSP had also increased. While appreciating the efforts of 
the Department to promote indigenous production of fertilizer, the Committee fou nd it 
inadequate. The Committee, therefore, recommend ed that the Department take pro-
active measure to encourage/enhance investment in the fertilizers sector in close  co-
ordination with MoF and introduce target oriented implementation of NBS Poli cy in an 
effort to increase the domestic production of fertilizers and SSP units.      
 
12. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as under: 
 
“Growth of indigenous industry depends on availability of raw material in 
the country and in case of non-availability or less availability in the coun try, easy 
availability of raw materials in the international market. Import/tariff policy also 
contribute to the growth of indigenous industry. In case of India, we have neither 
gas to produce Ammonia nor Potash mines to source ‘K’ required for P&K 
fertilizers. Similarly, more than 90% of phosphate requirement is also imported  in 
the form of either raw material/intermediaries or finished products. 
 
Post NBS Scheme, the Government could not facilitate acquiring of 
fertilizer raw material from  abroad due to unfavourable terms & conditions, 
commercial decision of fertilizer companies and internal policies of the resource  
rich countries to promote their own industry instead of selling raw materials 
abroad and keeping the prices of finished products lower than that of raw 
materials. The recent fall in prices of Potash in the international market has led to 
wait and watch decisions by the fertilizer companies to enter into any ag reement 
with foreign suppliers for long term purchase agreements. A ll these factors 
affected the growth of indigenous industry.  
 
Another factor, which affected growth of indigenous industry is the present 
import tariff rates on various raw materials and finished fertilizers.  At present,  
raw material and finished fertilizers produced with the said raw material attract 
same customs duty. For encouraging fertilizer companies to import raw materials 
and increase production, the Department has been requesting the Ministry of 
Finance to reduce customs duty on raw materials and intermediaries for the las t 
3-4 years. But, the proposal has not yet been approved. This is enc ouraging 
fertilizer companies to depend on import of finished fertilizers rather than 
importing raw materials to produce indigenously. 
 
 
 

However, the recent fall in gas prices in the international market has led to 
increase in import of RLNG. It is expected that easy availability of RLNG to 
fertilizer plants will encourage establishment of new fertilizer units.” 
 
13. The Committee took note of the fact through the submission of the 
Department that growth of indigenous fertilizer industry depends on availability of 
raw material in the country and in case of non-availability or less availability, on easy 
availability of raw materials in the international market. The Committee also learnt 
through the reply that import/tariff policy also contribute to the growth of indigenous 
industry. Due to limited resources and raw material in the country, the fertilizer 
industry is heavily dependent on imports of raw materials and intermediaries. The 
Committee appreciate the fact that the Department of Fertilizers has been requesting 
the Ministry of Finance to reduce customs duty on raw materials and intermediaries 
for the last 3-4 years to encourage fertilizer companies to import raw materials and 
increase production. Noting that the proposal for reduction of customs duty has not 
been approved so far, the Committee wish to be apprised of the reasons given by the 
Department of Finance for not approving the proposal of the Department of 
Fertilizers. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department may also seek 
the advice of the Department of Finance in exploring other options like granting 
certain incentives to attract investors/companies to import raw materials for 
indigenous production. 
 
(Recommendation Para No.4) 
 
 
TIME BOUND CLEARANCE OF PENDING PROFORMA-B 
 
14. The Committee in their original Report did note that the outstanding am ount of 
Rs.50,587 crore of Performa-B for the period 2007-08 to 2009-10 has  been brought 
down to Rs.427.85 crores as on 05.01.2016. Further, the amount of outst anding 
Performa-B for the period from 2007-08 to 2015-16 is Rs.23,570.8 0 crore as compared 
to outstanding Proforma-B of Rs. 50,587 crore for the period from 200 7-08 to 2009-10. 
The Committee however, find that there is no specific mechanism is place to  ensure 
that States furnish Performa-B certificates in time. The Department of Fertilizers ha d 
stated that the responsibility to issue the Quantity certificate lied with the s tate 
Governments. Department of fertilizers had no other option but to pursue  the matter 
with state Governments regularly and make efforts to clear the pendency of Performa-B. 
Though the DoF had claimed to have taken a number of measures tow ards reducing 
the pendency of Performa- B, the Committee Feel that the progress made was not 
satisfactory especially in view of advances in IT which in this case appear to  have not 

been leveraged. The Committee therefore, recommend ed that a time-bound action plan 
may be put in place to clear pendency of proforma-B. The Committee sug gested that 
the monitoring mechanism of pendency of Proforma-B need to be strengthened and 
penalty be imposed on states, in the form of reduced subsidy grant, fo r any delay in the 
submission of quantity certificates. 
      
15. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:  
“The Department of Fertilizer has already issued a notification regarding 
the procedure for release of subsidy vide No.D(FA)/CCEAl2011 dated 
25.10.2012 and according to this notification, the State Governments are 
required to send Proforma B 1 (for quantity) and Proforma B2 (for quality) for all 
the Companies. Proforma B 1 (Quantity) is to be certified online on Fertiliz er 
Monitoring System (FMS) (Now iFMS) within 30 days. If the same is no t received 
within 30 days from the State Government, it shall be deemed to h ave been 
received. Further, Proforma B2, certifying the quality, is required to be sent within 
six months and is mandatory for settlement of balance subsidy claim/bills o f the 
fertilizer Companies. Now as per O.M. No.23011/20/2014-MPR dated 25 thJune, 
2015, the Proforma B-2 is deemed to have been received if not receive d within 
180 days from the date of receipt of the fertilizers in the district for which th e 
subsidy claims pertain. Thus the subsidy claims in respect of P & K Fertilizers 
and Urea would be processed without quality certificates from the State  
Governments. But, as and when the State Government intimates the sub-
standard quantity or short receipt, the subsidy amount along with penal interest is 
being recovered accordingly. The status of State-wise pendency of proforma B1 
up to the year 2015-16 is Rs. 12745.64 Crore whereas B2 pendency u p to the 
year 2016 is Rs. 22670.89 Crore.  
The submission of Proforma B1 & B2 is being monitored through the We b 
based fertilizer monitoring system (FMS) now iFMS by the Department of 
Fertilizers regularly. However, the responsibility to issue the quantity/quality 
certificate lies with the State Government. Department of Fertilizers is regularly 
pursuing the matter with the Agriculture departments of the respective Stat e 
Governments and making efforts to clear the pendency of Proforma B 1  & B2 
and on the basis of reports generated through FMS now (iFMS).  
The department of Fertilizers is making all efforts to reduce the pendency  
of proforma B1 and B2 by taking up the matter with state Governments at all 
levels.” 
16. The Committee note that the Department of Fertilizers monitors the 
submission of Proforma ‘B’ by the States through a web based fertilizer 

monitoring system (iFMS) for quantity (B1) and quality (B2) checks. Proforma B is 
the basic reconciliation tool for cross verification of information pertaining to 
quantity and quality of fertilizers supplied by fertilizer companies with information 
provided in the mobile Fertilizer Monitoring System (FMS) by the State 
Government. The Committee also note the Department had issued notification to 
all State Governments for submission of Proforma B1 & B2 within 30 and 180 
days respectively and Proforma B1 & B2 would be deemed to have been received 
if the same were not submitted by the State Governments within the stipulated 
period and subsidy claims in respect of P&K fertilizers and Urea would be 
processed without quality certificates from the State Governments. However, 
notwithstanding the fact that in spite of all procedures/arrangements in place, the 
processing of subsidy claims without obtaining actual quality certificate from the 
States is unreasonable and illogical. Taking serious note of the huge pendency of 
Proforma B, the Committee recommend that the Department take necessary and  
stringent  measures to ensure submission of Proforma B by all concerned States 
within a timeframe for settlement or recovery of subsidy from the fertilizer 
companies for distribution of sub-standard quality or short quantity of fertilizer s 
as the case may be.   This would not only help the Ministry in achieving its policy 
objectives deftly but would also do the due justification to the farming 
community, per se.  
(Recommendation Para No.6) 
 
STATUS OF RECOVERY OF UNDUE BENEFIT DUE TO USE OF CHEAPER 
DOMESTIC GAS 
 
17. The Committee noted that the Empowered Group of Ministry (EGoM) had 
directed (February 2012) the Department of Fertilizers to finalize guidelines for effecting 
recovery of undue benefits that had accrued to P&K manufacturing fertilizers companies 
which used cheaper domestic gas. Further, pending finalization of guidelines, Minist er 
of State for Chemicals & Fertilizers had also directed (November 2013) the De partment 
to initiate ‘adhoc’ recovery. The Committee were dismayed that the Department of 
Fertilizers had neither finalized the guidelines to effect recovery nor made  ‘adhoc’ 
recoveries from fertilizer companies for use of cheaper domestic gas till date. The 
Committee noted that the Department had been withholding subsidies in the case  of 
RCF from each monthly subsidy bill, stopped subsidy payment since 10.10.201 4 in 
respect of DFPCL. In respect of GSFC no recoveries were made due to court order 
restraining the Department not to take any coercive action due to the ad-h oc recovery 
order. The committee found that the measures taken by the Department so far for 
recovery of undue benefits were highly unsatisfactory. The Committee, the refore, 
recommended that guidelines for recovery of undue benefits accrued due to  use of 

cheaper domestic gas may be formulated without any further delay. Moreove r, the 
Committee viewed that recoveries should be effected from the date of implementation of 
NBS Policy i.e 1 April 2010. The Committee also desired to be apprised of the action 
taken in this regards 
 
18. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under: 
 
“The IMC, constituted for the above purpose, gave its recommendations after the 
deliberation of the matter in its 8 th meeting. The recommendations of the IMC 
were sent to the Competent Authority for approval. However, the Competent 
Authority has raised some observations on the recommendations of the IMC a nd 
directed the IMC for further deliberation on the matter. As per the observatio ns of 
the Competent Authority, 9th meeting of the IMC has been convened.”   
 
19. Audit in their vetting comments stated as under:- 
 
“In the 7th IMC meeting held on 24 April 2016, it has been decided that for 
recovery of undue benefits to the companies based on the normativ e cost of 
imported ammonia (monthly weighted average cost of ammonia import ed by all 
P&K fertilizers submitted of DoF). The recovery would be the difference between 
the cost of total quantity of ammonia/Nitrogen used in the production o f the P&K 
fertilizers by using the APM gas and the above normated cost of the q uantity of 
ammonia/nitrogen on monthly basis w.e.f. 01.04.2010. The total recovery w ould 
be subject to adjustment of benefits passed on by the companies in the form of 
lower MRPs to the farmers and taxes/dividends paid to governments. 
 
In the 8 th IMC meeting held on 1 August 2016, decided that since the 
MOP&NG has already issued orders revising gas price to non-urea producing 
manufacturers from 01.04.2010 onwards and also made a reference to this in the 
Supreme court, the Ministry of P&NG may initiate recovery proceeding as per the 
letter dated 16.12.2015 except that MoP&NG should charge market price instead 
of higher rate of RLNG used for production of urea during the concerned p eriod 
for the quantity of APM gas used by fertilizer units for manufacturing of  products 
other than urea after notification of new domestic gas pricing guideli nes i.e. 
01.11.2014 onwards. 
 
In the 9th IMC meeting held in 14 July 2017, it has been advised that CMD 
RCF to calculate the recovery amount based on various scenario viz AP M vs 
highest of RLNG, APM vs market determined price, APM vs Market price and  

APM vs PMT after taking consideration tax/dividend paid and gains passed o n to 
farmers in term of lower MRP. 
Once the decision regarding recovery of undue benefit due to use of 
cheaper domestic gas from the companies has been taken in the IMC held o n 24 
April 2016, the reasons for bringing the matter again and again to IMC and 
changing the decision may be intimated to PAC. It is noteworthy that DoF has 
made the recovery from IFFCO on account of undue gain due to use of  cheaper 
Ammonia at the rate of difference between cost of imported Ammon ia used by 
other Companies and Cost of Cheaper Ammonia used by IFFCO.” 
 
20. The Ministry in their updated Action Taken Notes have stated as under: 
 
“The 8th IMC was held as MoP&NG has conveyed the Department that the 
views of MoP&NG was not brought out clearly in the minutes of the 7 th IMC 
meeting whereas the 9th IMC was convened on observation raised by the Hon’ble 
Minister (C&F) on the proposal. 
 
As far as the recovery of IFFCO is concerned, the formula of difference 
between cost of Ammonia imported by IFFCO and Cost of Ammonia imported b y 
IFFCO under AOTA with OMIFCO during a month has been adopted as IFFCO 
had used imported ammonia as feedstock for the production of P&K fertilizers. 
But in the instant matter, all the three companies used Domestic gas for 
production of Ammonia and finally P&K fertilizers. Therefore, both the  cases are 
different and shouldn’t be compared.” 
 
21. The Committee note that despite the decision taken during the 7 th meeting 
of the Inter Ministerial Committee (IMC) on 24 th April, 2016 for recovery of undue 
benefits to the companies based on the normative cost of imported ammonia 
(monthly weighted average cost of ammonia imported by all P&K fertilizers), the 
Department of Fertilizers have not done any recovery or ‘adhoc’ recovery of 
undue benefit for t he use of cheaper domestic gas by the companies. The 
Committee also note that during the 8 th meeting held on 1 August 2016, it was 
decided that since the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas had already issued 
orders revising gas price to non-urea producing manufacturers from 01.04.2010 
onwards and made a reference to the same in the Supreme Court, the Ministry of 
P&NG may initiate recovery proceeding as per the letter dated 16.12.2015 except 
that MoP&NG should charge market price instead of higher rate of RLNG used for 
production of urea during the concerned period for the quantity of Administered 
Pricing Mechanism (APM) gas used by fertilizer units for manufacturing of 
products other than urea after notification of new domestic gas pricing guidelines 

i.e. 01.11.2014 onwards. The Committee also observe that during the 9 th meeting 
of IMC held on 14 July, 2017, the CMD, Rashtriya Chemicals & Fertilizers (RCF) 
was advised to calculate the recovery amount based on various scenario viz APM 
vs highest of RLNG, APM vs market determined price, APM vs Market price and 
APM vs PMT after taking consideration tax/dividend paid and gains passed on to 
farmers in term of lower MRP. The Committee are, however, dismayed to note that 
even after the lapse of 12 months no recovery or ‘ad hoc’ recovery proceedings 
have been initiated. The Committee desire to be apprised of the reason behind 
the prolonged delay in determining the recoverable amount and categorically 
recommend that immediate action be taken to determine the recoverable amount 
and set a deadline for complete recovery.   The Committee would like to be 
apprised once the issue reaches finality. 
(Recommendation Para No.9) 
 
NEED FOR MORE FQCLs AND LABs 
 
22. The Committee noted that there were 78 FQCLs and 4 laboratories across the 
country. The Committee viewed that the current number of labs is insufficien t to provide 
proper/adequate fertilizers quality monitoring and cater to the demand s of an agrarian 
country like India. The Committee also found that information regarding measures taken 
to improve fertilizer and formulation of proposals for revamping the mechan ism to 
enforce quality of fertilizer was awaited from the Department of agricu lture, Cooperation 
and family Welfare (DAC&FW).  The Committee, therefore, recommended that th e 
Department of Fertilizers assume a more proactive role and pursue DAC&FW to fin alize 
the proposals for the revamping the mechanism for fertilizer quality control without much 
delay.  The Committee also desired that the Department of Fertilizers undertake  a 
survey and research on the requirement of FQCLs based on which additional FQCLs  
may be established wherever necessary to facilitate adequate fertilizer qu ality control 
and monitoring. 
 
23. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as under: 
 
“Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee have been noted an d the 
State Governments have been advised to submit details regarding available 
infrastructure, targets/analytical capacity of FQCLs, future requirement etc.  to 
this Department for further necessary action.  The Central Government will 
continue to persuade States with inadequate facilities to set up new 
laboratories/strengthen existing laboratories.” 
 

24. Having gleaned through the Action Taken Notes of the Ministry, the 
Committee espouse the urgent need for adequate and up-to-date Fertilizer Quality 
Control Laboratories (FQCLs) and laboratories in the country. The Committee 
note that the Department of Fertilizers have advised the State Governments to 
submit details on available infrastructures, targets/analytical capacity of FQCLs, 
their future requirements etc. to the Department for further necessary action. The 
Committee are of the view that rather than merely advising the States to furnish 
details of FQCLs, its capacity and future requirement, it would be prudent for the 
Department to take a more proactive role in obtaining the required details from 
the States. The Committee recommend and expect the Ministry to set a timeframe 
for the States to furnish the details and based on the details, to mull necessary 
measures to ensure setting up of FQCLs and laboratories wherever required. The 
Committee also reiterate their earlier recommendation on undertaking a survey 
and research to gauge the requirement of FQCLs across the country. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;        MALLIKARJUN KHARGE  
7   August, 2018                          Chairperson,  
 16  Shravana, 1940 (Saka)           Public Accounts Committee 
 
 
 
 