51

ROLE AND FUNCTIONING OF INDIAN COAST
GUARD
{Action Taken by the Government.on the Observations/Recommendations of

the Committee contained in their Twenty-first Report (16™ Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF DEFENCE

- PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

FIFTY - FIRST REPORT

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

सत्यमेव जयते

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO, 2084

FIFTY-FIRST REPORT

“PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE.
(2016-17)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

ROLE AND FUNCTIONING
OF INDIAN COAST GUARD

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Twenty-first’ Report (167 Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF DEFENCE

Presented to Lok’Sabha on;

Laid in Rajya Sabha on:

LOK.SABHA SECRETARIAT
हि NEW DELHI है

November, 2016/Kartika, 1938 (Saka)


CONTENTS

PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS ; . (iii)
COMMITTEE (2016-17)
INTRODUCTION: ................... ola cececectes sotttttestcdieeteneeteess (iv)

CHAPTER | REPO ............... eee cette जल लत तिल हल

CHAPTER II* Observations/Recommendations which have been |
accepted by the Government ...... तह

CHAPTER III* Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
replies received from the Government .............

CHAPTER ४१५. Observations/Recommendations in ‘ respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted ‘by the Committee and which require
reiteration

CHAPTER V* Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which the Government have furnished interim
TEPHES ........... "ली eee ee nce हल न

APPENDICES*

Minutes of the Ninth Sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2016-17) held on 287 July, 2016

॥ Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their Twenty-first
Report (Sixteenth Lok 58019)

*Not appended to the cyclostyled copy of the Report |

[thy


COMPOSITION OF ‘THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTE

(2016-17) है है
Prof. K.V. Thomas - ° Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay

Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra

Shri Nishikant Dubey ;
Prof. Richard Hay Le
Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Smt. Riti Pathak

9. Shri Neiphiu Rio

40. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal

41... Shri Abhishek Singh

12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya

43,- Shri Anurag Singh Thakur

44. Shri Shivkumar Udasi

415. Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA -

16. Shri Naresh Agrawal

17... Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
18.” Shri Bhupender Yadav
19. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
20. Shri Shantaram Naik

21. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
22, Shri Ajay Sancheti

OQNOarond

SECRETARIAT हि
4. Shri A.K. Singh - Additional Secretary
2. Shri S.C Chaudhary - Joint Secretary
3. Shri Tirthankar Das - Additional Director
4, Shri Deepankar Kamble - Executive Officer

* Elected w.e.f, 09.08.2016 vice Shri Vijay Goel, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f. 05.07.2016.


INTRODUCTION

॥ the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2016-17), having been authorised
by the Committee, do present this Fifty-first Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Twenty-first Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Role and Functioning of
Indian Coast Guard' based on the C&AG Report No, 7 of 2011-12 relating to Ministry of

Defence.

2. The Twenty-first Report was presented to Lok Sabha/ldid in Rajya Sabha on 13
August, 2015. Replies of the Government to the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 25 April, 2016. The Public Accounts
Committee considered and adopted the Twenty-first Report at their sitting held on
4" August, 2016. Mirtutes of the sitting are’given at Appendix-l.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations : and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the

Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to

them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor Genesal of India.

5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-first Repo-t (Sixteenth. Lok Sabha) is given

at Appendix-fl.

feng DELHI; PROF. K. V. THOMAS,
| November, 2016 Chairperson,
aS Kartika, 1938 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

LV)


CHAPTER ~ |
REPORT
This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their Twenty-first Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on “Role and Functioning of Indian
Coast Guard” based on the C&AG's Report No. 7 of 2011-12 relating to the Ministry

of Defence. |

2. The Twenty-first Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha), which was presented to Lok
Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 13" August,. 2015, contained 27
Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the
Observalions/Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Defence

and these have been categorized as under: |
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the
Government:

Paragraph Nos. 1, 2, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19,
22, 23, 24, 25 and 27

Total: 19
Chapter- Il

(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:

Paragraph Nos. 3, 7, 21 and 26

Total: 04
Chapter- III

(ii) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration:

Paragraph Nos. 4, 11, 12, and 20
Total: 04
Chapter- lV

(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government
have furnished interim replies:

-NIL-

Total: 00
Chapter- V


2
3. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Defence on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Twenty-First
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this
Report. In the succeeding paragraphs, the Committee have dealt with the Action -
Taken by the Government on some: of their Observations/Recommendations which

either need reiteration or merit comments

I. Inability to achieve targeted acquisitions
(Recommendation Para No. 4)

4. The Committee in their earlier Report had recommended that in spite of the
Ministry curtailing the projected requirement, the actual Capital expenditure as a
percentage of capital outlay ranged between 82 percent in the 9" Plan and 53
percent in the 10" Plan. This resulted in the non-achievement as well as shifting of
Plans in terms of the physical acquisitions of ships and aircrafts. For instance, in the
10" Plan, acquisition of 2 Advance Light Helicopters and 4 Chetak helicopters was
carried forward from the 9" Plan. Besides, against procurement process to be
finalized for 61 ships and 1 aircraft, there was not even a single delivery made in the
Five Year Plan period. In the 11" Plan, only 2 ships and 1 aircraft were actually
delivered against procurement process to be finalised for 175 ships and 52 aircrafts.
The reasons cited for these failures were procedural delays in finalization of
procurement process at all levels 1.8. Coast Guard Headquarters (CGHQ), Ministry of
Defence and Ministry of Finance, delayed signing of contracts, abnormally slow
progress on the part of shipyards to construct the ships, neutralization of requirement
of spares through revenue budget, cancellation of projects, non-sanction of new
schemes by the Ministry of Defence, expiry of validity of approvals of the
procurement process, delayed supply of spares and inconclusive trials etc. which are
typical of this country's defence acquisitions under the ‘Defence Procurement
Policies. The Ministry of Defence claimed that despite stringent timelines and regular
project monitoring, slippages occurred due to the complex nature of the projects
which was spread to 4-7 years from initiation especially for ship and aircraft
acquisitions. When asked, the Ministry did not identify any official for delays and
lapses. The Committee were utterly disappointed at such cumbersome Defence
Procurement Procedure, which will eventually lead to failure of any defence plan

thereby compromising the Country's defence preparedness to tackle the very


3

sensitive security issues. During evidence the Defence Secretary admitted that the
present strength of 105 ships and 64 aircraft in ICG may not be adequate for infallible
security. Still the Committee felt that under the current ‘scenario, the ICG’s plan of
having a fleet of 150 ships and 100 aircrafts by the year 2018 seemed to be a distant
dream. The Committee, therefore, recommended the Ministry of Defence to analyse
threadbare the hindrances affecting defence procurements, put in place quicker
teplacement in case a company fails to deliver order well in time, infuse novel ideas
in the system and overhaul the country's Defence Procurement Procedure further so
that all the targeted acquisition are timely achieved and the Country's defence
preparedness is maintained at its peak level. The Committee had also desired
detailed note from the Ministry on the status of all acquisitions for ICG during the

current Five Year Plan, which at the time of oral evidence, were under the process.

5. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:

"AS on 31 October, 2015, ICG has a force level of 118 ships and 62 aircraift.
XIl Plan caters for acquisition of 57 Surface Platforms and 36 aircraft.
Amongst these, contract for acquisition of 26 Surface Platforms have been
Signed. Cases for acquisition of 24 Surface Platforms are at various stages of

acquisition. The case for acquisition of balance 07 Surface Platforms is being
initiated. With 72 ships/boats under construction at various shipyards and
acquisition process of 36 aircraft at advanced Stage, the fleet. strength of ICG
is certain to exceed 150 ships and 100 aircraft by year 2018 and 2020
respectively" हे
6. The Committee note that although the XI! Plan provided for acquisition of
57 Surface Platforms and 36 Aircraft, contracts- for acquisition of only 26
Surface Platforms have been signed and out of the’ rest, 24 Platforms are at
various stages of acquisition and the remaining 07 Platforms are being
initiated. They have been apprised that the acquisition of 36 ‘Aircraft as
envisaged by the XII Plan period is at advanced stages. The Committee fee/
that the process of defence acquisition is taking so much of time. They fail to
understand that even though the Xil Plan commenced in the year 2012, much of
the defence acquisitions during the plan period have not yet been achieved
although more than four years of the Plan period has elapsed. The Committee
express their displeasure for the delays in the matter and desire that officials
responsible for such delays may be brought to book. The Committee,

therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Defence should make all out efforts


4
to see that the defence procurements which are at various stages of

acquisition are fast-tracked particularly in the context of the new Defence
acquisition procedure being put in place, so that all the targeted acquisitions
are achieved at the earliest and the Country's defence preparedness is

maintained at the required level.

Il. Lapses in Refits

(Recommendation Para No, 9)

7. The Committee. in their earlier Report had expressed their unhappiness to
learn that the ICG which did not have its own repair yard like the Navy, had not been
able to ensure adherence to its prescribed norms for carrying out different types of
refits of Coast Guard ships by 18 public sector and private sector shipyards where
the refits were carried out. Consequently, refits to be undertaken periodically were
not undertaken duly on time and the time taken for completing the refits was much
longer than the prescribed time. During 2003 to 2010, out of 257 refits due for
AOPVs/OPVs and FPVIIPV, only 107 could be undertaken indicating a shortfall of 58
percent and the time taken for various refits was 86 percent to 127 percent more than
the benchmarked timelines. Since, a vessel which was not refitted when due,
couldn't be said to be fully role worthy and when vessels spend more time
undergoing refit, they were not available for operations, ICG operated its vessels with
sub-optimal state of preparedness. This definitely jeopardized effective operations of
the Coast Guard. The Committee had been informed that various efforts had been
made to reduce delays in refits and ensure timely completion of refits such as
positioning of the Indian Coast Guard overseeing teams for monitoring refits,
enhancement of liquidated damages from 5 percent'to 10 percent, timely supply of
spares besidés acquisition/creation of in-house repair infrastructure including dry
docks, slipways and arrangements with additional shipyards. While these initiatives
were efforts in the right direction, the Committee found that most of the DPSUs were
grossly underutilized. Besides, the Committee had been informed during their Study -
Visit to Kochi that the Cochin Shipyard, which operates under the Ministry of
Shipping, routinely gets orders from abroad for ship building, repair and refits. It was,
therefore, questionable as to why a Government PSU, which had the capability to
cater to foreign clients, should not be utilized for delivering orders from the ICG. In

this scenario, the Committee couldn't accept the pronounced lapses in repairing/refits



5

of ICG ships, which could have been avoided had the full capacity of the concerned

DPSUs utilized optimally with more orders for repairing/refits from the ICG. The

Committee, therefore, recommended, the Ministry to assess and verify the existing

Capacity of the DPSUs as well as the 15 fegistered Refitting Yards and galvanize

their arrangements with them for ensuring timely repair/refits of ICG ships for more

effective deployment of vessels for operational duties. The Committee would like to

be apprised of the-precise action taken in this regard.

8. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:

“(a)_ The Public Accounts Committee has acknowledged that the efforts of
ICG in reducing delays in commencement of refits and timely completion of
refits with measures introduced by the ICG such as regular sensitizing of
Coast Guard Overseeing Teams, timely procurement of critical and long lead
Spares, action on defaulting refitting yards. by enhancement of LD and
continued efforts in identifying competent repair agencies for refits of ICG
ships. Now 18 Private Firms have been registered for undertaking various

7 types of refits of ICG ships. The. efforts to register more capable and
Competent firms are a continuing process with impetus on firms having
captive infrastructure. In addition, own dry dock and repair facility and
associated infrastructure at Ratnagiri, Beypore and Port Blair is also being
pursued vigorously, However, the response of DPSUs/PSUs in undertaking
tefits of ICG ships has continued to remain unsatisfactory. MDL, Mumbai has
regretted in participation of tenders citing preoccupation in ship building
projects of Indian Navy. GRSE, Kolkata and GSL, Goa have been selective in
bidding process but mostly regret or do not participate. CSL, Kochi has also
limited participation in the refit bidding activity. HSL, Vizag is the only DPSU
who has been participating in refi enquiries in the recent past. The last refi
undertaken by various DPSUs/PSUs is as mentioned below:

Last Refit Undertaken

Name of the
Yard

MDL,

Time since last refit

MR of ICGS Vigraha in year 2004~- 10 Years

Mumbai 05

GRSE, Special Refit of ICGS Varaha from 04 Years and
Kolkata 17 August 2009 to 24 March 2011 08 Months
HSL; Vizag Special Refit of ICGS Vajra in ‘ नर
progress from 08 June 2015 .
GSL, Goa Short Refit of ICGS Vishwast from 02 Years and
05 December 2012 to 02 April 08 Months
2013
CSL, Kochi | Medium Refit of ICGS Samar from 01 Years and

15 April 2013 to 05 June 2014 06 Months

(b) All DPSU/PSU shipyards (including CSL, Kochi) are being issued with
letter inviting Expression of Interest (Eol) for undertaking refits of ICG ships,
without fail. However, in most cases these shipyards either regret view pre-
occupation or do not respond to the Eol. or RFP. In rare cases when they



6

forward bids, they generally do not emerge as L-1 yard. In case of Eol/RFP

issued by CGHQ/MoD, no DPSU/PSU shipyard (except HSL, Vizag) has

forwarded bid in last one year.

(c) Despite poor response from most of the DPSUs/PSUs, the refitting of

ICG ships is being undertaken with no delay or least delays in

commencement and completion of refits with impetus on proper upkeep &

health monitoring of ships and their equipment at-all times.
9, The Committee are concerned to note that the Ministry, in their reply,
have not reported on the issue of developing a dedicated repair yard for the
ICG. In spite of the difficulties faced by the ICG for getting refits done by
DPSU/PSU shipyards on their ships, the Committee. find that the Ministry
remains non-committal to this vital issue. What is even more disturbing to note
is the unsatisfactory response of the DPSUs for undertaking refits of ICG ships.
Most of these shipyards either do not participate citing pre-occupation or do’
not respond to the Expression of Interest (Eol). The Committee find it
surprising that since the Ministry of Defence is the controlling authority of the
DPSU shipyards, no suitable action has been taken or instructions given by the
Ministry in this regard. The Committee, therefore, recommend that efforts shall
be made to strengthen the DPSU shipyards so that the shipyards can take up
the task of providing the refit jobs for Defence ships in an effective manner.
Meanwhile, the Committee, also desire the Ministry to take up the matter with
the DPSU/PSU shipyards for adjusting and accommodating the ICG's work
orders in their job profile till DPSU shipyards are strengthened. Since, the ICG's
primary work is to strengthen coastal security for ensuring the defence
preparedness, the refit jobs for its ships should be given utmost importance by
the DPSUs and the Ministry of Defence should try to explore possibilities to
find out ways and means to make it mandatory on the part of DPSUs to accept
the refit job of ICG ships on priority so that the defence preparedness of the
Country is not compromised at any cost. The Committee also desire that a
dedicated repair yard for ICG ships, like the Navy, should be developed to get
the refit jobs on ICG ships and expect an early action on the part of the Ministry
in this direction. The Committee would also like to be apprised about the steps

taken by them in this regard.



॥॥, Shortage of Manpower

{Recommendation Para No. 10)

10. The Committee in their.earlier Report had noted that despite efforts made by
the Indian Coast Guard there was still a shortage of.46 percent and 42 percent
respectively of Officers and Enrolled Personnel as of December, 2010 vis-a-vis the
force levels of 1,925 Officers and’ 10,959 Enrolled Personnel envisaged for the
perspective plan 1985-2000. The Committee had been informed that various
measures had been taken to fill up the vacancies viz. increase in intake of Officers
and Enrolled Personnel since 2009, Special Recruitment Drives for reserved category
vacancies, media publicity to altract more youth, increasing the number of recruitment
centres, introduction of Short Service Schemes, increased promotional avenues,
online recruitment procedure etc. Even then, as on 97 March, 2015, there was a total
shortage of 3,068 Officers and Enrolled Personnel in the ICG. The Ministry,
reportedly planned to fill up the existing shortage of Officers by 2020 and that of
Enrolled Personnel by 2017. The Committee viewed this as too long a period. The
Committee felt that shortage of manpower in the iCG was a serious lapse which
would ultimately cripple the Country's marine security amidst mounting seaborne
security threats, smuggling and piracy They felt that staffing needs to keep pace
with the acquisition plans of ICG. Besides, the Committee were unable to see any
reason for shortage of manpower when there were lakhs of qualified and unemployed
youth available in the Country. From the submission of the Ministry, they noted that
5238 posts were sanctioned for ICG between 2007-2014 and desired to know exactly
how many personnel had been actually inducted in ICG as on date. The Committee,
also urged the Ministry to continue taking concerted efforts and innovative methods to

fill up the vacancies in the 105 without further loss of time.

11. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have submitted as under:

(a) The details of Govt sanction vis-a-vis borne strength and shortage of
Manpower as on 23 February, 2016 are as follows:-

SI.No | Category Govt Sanction | Borne Shortage
(i) Officers 2096 © 1563 533 (25.43%)
ii) EPs 10738 9038 1700 (15.83%)
(iii) Civilian 1760 1251 509 (28.92%)

Total 14594 11852 2742 (18.79%)



8

(b) The requirements of Officers and EPs have increased correspondingly.
Post 26/11, 752 Officers and 4732 Enrolled Personnel have been recruited.
The average intake has been 130 officers and 720 Enrolled Personnel per
year which is almost 100% increase as compared to the period pre-2009.
Further, induction of Officers and EPs in service is subject to availability of
vacancies in Indian Navy (IN) training establishments. In addition, following
measures have also been institutionalized to mitigate the shortages:-

(i) Re-employment of IN SSC Officers in the rank of Comdt(JG) and
below;
(ii) Re-employment of Law officers from Army/Navy/Air Force;

(ii) — Short term deputation of IN officers against vacant billets, in case of
Officers; and

(iv) - Induction of Commercial Pilot License (CPL) holders as pilots under
scheme of Short Service Appointee (SSA)".

12. The Committee are surprised to note that despite the efforts made by the
ICG for filling up the vacant posts, there is still shortage of manpower in each
category of employees as compared to the sanctioned strength. Against the
total sanctioned manpower strength of 14,594, the present strength of work
force is only 11,852. They have been informed that several measures such as (i)
re-employment of IN SSC Officer in the rank of Comdt(JG) and below; (ii) re-
employment of Law officer from Army/Navy/Air Force; (fii) short term
deputation of IN officers against vacant billets, in case of Officers and (iv)
induction of Commercial Pilot License (CPL) holders as pilots under scheme of
Short Service Appointee (SSA) have been taken to counter the shortage of staff
strength. Appreciating the efforts made by the Ministry to implement such
innovative methods to fill up the vacancies in ICG in response to their
recommendation, the Committee would like to know the precise number of
vacancies filled in ICG through these measures.

IV. Inadequate Training Infrastructure
{Recommendation Para No. 11)

13. The Committee in their earlier Report had observed that the ICG did not have
its own training infrastructure and all basic trainings for its Officers and Enrolled
Personnel was provided by the Indian Navy in a makeshift training centre at Kochi.
Such an arrangement of training was bound to compromise the standard and quality
of training provided to the Indian Coast Guard personnel. The Committee were

a



9 .
informed that ICG Academy at Azhikkal, Kerala, which was approved in February,
2011 was in the process of being established. Capable of training 650 men at any
given time, this academy would primarily look after the specialized training
requirements of the iCG. The Committee felt that this should have been
conceptualized at the time of establishing the ICG itself, Considering the importance
of providing cutting edge training to a force responsible for securing the country’s
maritime interest and security, the Committee had observed that the Ministry of
Defence to provide training to the Indian Coast Guard personnel at the regular
training centres of the Indian Navy and also emulate the training regime of the Coast
Guard of the major maritime nations of the world, They had also desired to be
apprised of the progress made in the establishment of the ICG Academy in the last 4

years, as also commissioning of the Academy in the scheduled year 1.6. 2016.

14... The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have submitted as under:

_“(a) The Approval-in-Principle was accorded for establishing of ICG
Academy at Azhikkal by Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) on 03%
October, 2012. A 'Go-Ahead sanction’ amounting to Rs.30.50 crore was
accorded by Ministry of Defence on 16" October, 2012. M/s MEACON Ltd. a
PSU under Ministry of Steel has been engaged as Consultant for the project
from Concept to Commissioning. On 12" December, 2013, Ministry of Defence
had accorded approval for an amount of Rs. 53.22 crore for the execution of

. deposit works by Kerala State Electricity Board (KSEB), Kerala’ Water
Authority (KWA) and Irrigation department, which are in progress.

(b) Zonal Layout Plan and Master Plan of ICG Academy have been
finalized and the Concept Drawings (CDs) of all buildings has been
completed. Preliminary Drawings and Detailed Project Report (DPR) are under
preparation and the Survey and Soil Investigation of the Site is also in
progress. Recommendations for CRZ clearance of 164.22 acre land at
Azhikkal, Kannur has been forwarded by KCZMA (Kerala Coastal Zone
Management Authority) to MoEF for consideration.

(०) Meanwhile, the cost of the project for establishing ICG Academy has
been revised from Rs.629.85 crore to Rs.990.19 crore due to revision of land
cost, infrastructure development and also adopting the green building norms
etc. The escalation also includes market variation for the plinth area rates
applied for RIC and AEs. According to MES authorities the project will take
364 weeks (07 years) for completion after commencement of construction.

(9) Administrative approval to the revised estimated cost of Rs.990.19
crore for infrastructure development of the ICG Academy has been accorded
by the Hon'ble Raksha Mantri with a direction to seek the approval of CCS for
the increased cost of the proposal, as the original approval has been-granted
by CCS. Accordingly, the draft CCS note was sent to Ministry of Finance


10
(DoE) for concurrence. However, Ministry of Finance has made certain
observations which are being replied".
15. The Committee are dismayed to note that although the ‘in-principle'
approval was accorded for establishing ICG Academy at Azikkal, Kerala by the
Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) in 2012 and Ministry of Defence had
accorded approval for an initial amount of % 53.22.crore in 2013 for execution of
developmental works which were already in progress, yet the Academy which
was to be commissioned in 2016 has seen minimal progress. They also note
that the cost of the project has been revised from % 629.85 crore to ₹ 990.19
crore due to revision of land cost, infrastructure development and also है
adopting the green building norms etc. The Committee are of the opinion that
these are the issues which are normally addressed by an organization while
commissioning such a project. They wonder how the Ministry of Defence and
the ICG could arrive at the commissioning date without taking into account
these essential factors. They, therefore, caution the Ministry/ICG to be more
careful in future while executing such projects.. The Committee also express
their unhappiness that due to inept handling by the then officers of the
Ministry, not only the cost of the project has escalated by more than 50% but
completion of the project will be further delayed by 7 years from the date of
commencement of the project. They, therefore, desire that the responsibilities
in this regard may be fixed and actions may be taken against the erring
officials. The Committee have been given to understand that approval for the
. fevised cost has been accorded by the Raksha Mantri (RM) and the Cabinet
Committee on Security (CCS), and the Ministry of Finance (MoF) has made
certain observations which are being replied by the MoD, Moreover, according
‘to Military Engineer Services (MES) authorities, the project will take 07 years
_ from the date of commencement. Considering the urgent need of an Academy
for training of the ICG personnel, the Committee urge upon the MoD/ICG to fast-
track the execution of the project by taking up the matter with the MoF for
obtaining their concurrence and also with other executing agencies to see that
the project is completed before its revised time. They also desire that post-CCS
approval, be strictly monitored and a senior functionary of MoD be designated

for the purpose, who would be responsible for corrective intervention as



11]
required. The action taken in this regard may be intimated to the Committee at

the earliest.

५. Failure of Operation Swan
(Recommendation Para No. 12)

16. The Committee noted that following the March, 1993 serial blasts in Mumbai,
the Government launched in April, 1993 Operation Swan, a joint operation of the
Indian Navy and the ICG aimed to prevent smuggling of arms/ammunition and other
contraband and carry out intensive surveillance on high seas, maintain surveillance in
the territorial waters and patrol! the shallow waters near the shore along the
Maharashtra and Gujarat Coast. Unfortunately, this operation was not conducted in
right earnest as the Coast Guard had not been involved in the inner layer operations
in Maharashtra till December, 2010 due to manpower and resource constraints. Joint
Coastal Patrolling undertaken by the Indian Navy in Maharashtra, was discontinued
by September, 2005 based on the decision of the Ministry of Home Affairs to
establish coastal police stations to provide the coas al security and check smuggling
of arms and ammunition. The coastal patrolling was thereafter left to the State

Marine Police and Customs, which had meagre operational assets to handle the

operation. Further, all naval detachments were replaced by 3 quick reaction teams,
which were kept stand by in case of any contingency. This created a void in
undertaking close coastal patrolling. Further, by March, 2008, only 47 out of 73
coastal police stations had been set up by the Ministry of Home Affairs in nine coastal
States and four Union Territories. Even the type of trainings for Marine Police
personnel and boats.provided to the State Marine Police by the Ministry of Home
Affairs were found to be substandard. Besides, though the proposal for establishing
additional three Coast Guard Stations was approved in January, 2005 to take over
the extra responsibilities of Operation Swan, none of these stations could be
activated prior to 26/11. In all, the attitude and approach of those at the helm of
affairs for securing the Country's, maritime interest and security especially in the
Ministry of Home Affairs were lackadaisical and irresponsible resulting in the overall
failure of Operation Swan. The Audit Report revealed that these limitations in Gujarat
were also highlighted by HQ, Coast Guard (W) in as early as March, 2008 to ICG
(HQ). The Committee were shocked at the apathy of ICG (HQ) on this matter and

had desired that the matter should be probed to fix responsibility on the Officers, who


12
were manning ICGHQ at that point of time. They felt that had Operation Swan been
conducted successfully and intense coastal patrolling sustained, an incident like
- 26/11 terror attack on Mumbai could have been avoided. Ironically, even after this
colossal marine security failure the attitude and approach of the Ministry of Defence
remained unchanged when: they claimed that "Joint coastal patrolling was not
discontinued at any point of time”. This was erroneous since the decision of the
ndian Navy to discontinue: the Joint Coastal Patro ing was based on the decision of
he Ministry of Home Affairs in the year 2005 itself to establish coastal police stations
and these police stations came into existence much later, thereby negating the
Ministry's claim. The Committee, therefore, felt that the Ministry of Home Affairs and
the ICG owe an explanation-to the Committee for 28/11. The Committee had
observed whether the enquiry undertaken post 26/11 fixed accountability for the

grave lapses on the officials of the Ministry of Home Affairs and the ICG. They were

of the firm opinion that, the Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of Home Affairs need

to work together in close coordination to face terror threats via sea/air/land routes.

The Committee also desired that duties and responsibilities of all the Ministries/
Departments and forces concerned with the Country's coastal security must be
clearly demarcated so as to ensure effective coordination amongst them. They had
desired to know as to how many Coastal Police Stations have been actually
established under the Coastal Security Scheme, Phase-2, out of the envisaged 131

such stations, since April, 2011, till date.
17. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have submitted as under:

“(a) The onus of responsibility of the 26/11 incident cannot be attributed to
any organisation or service as no credible actionable intelligence was
available, on which an operation could be launched. Further, there was
no past precedence leading to terror activities using the maritime
routes. The meagre resource which was available with the ICG in terms
of ships, aircraft and manpower were grossly inadequate to patrol/
undertake surveillance of our vast EEZ. The problem was compounded
due to the presence of 1.8 lakhs (approx) fishing boats operating in an
unregulated manner. Provision to identify ships, boats and other crafts
were non-existent. However, post 26/11, great impetus was given to
maritime surveillance and coastal security in particular with a slew of
initiatives by Govt. The Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) in its
meeting on 16 February 2009, approved setting up of a robust coastal
security mechanism along the entire Indian coastline.


13

(b) Presently, there exists close coordination between the ICG and MHA
with regard to Coastal Security. Further, the coastal security is
monitored and supervised by the National Committee on Strengthening
Maritime and Coastal Security (NCSMCS) at the level of Cabinet
Secretary. Meetings held by Department of Border Management
(DoBM)/MHA, are attended by representatives from the ICG. Further,
the ICG actively participates in various projects of the DoBM wiz. Setting
up of Marine Police Training institute, Technical Advisor in procurement
of boats for the Marine Police and Recruitment of manpower etc.
Further, the responsibility of various departments/ministries has been
clearly brought out in the Coastal Security mechanism. A tiered system
is followed with demarcated areas of responsibility. The Indian Navy
(IN), ICG and State Marine Police units and other agencies viz.
Customs, CISF, DRI, Ports, Mercantile Marine Department (MMD),
Immigration, Fisheries Department, etc are involved in. the security of
Maritime Zones of India, Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for all
Coastal States have been promulgated which clearly brings out the role
and responsibility of various stakeholders. The IN is responsible for
overall Maritime Security and ICG is to coordinate Coastal Security in
territorial waters with the Coastal Marine Police.

(c) As per records held with CGHQ and confirmed by MHA, 104 Coastal
Police Stations are operational under Coastal Security Scheme Phase
Il, out of the envisaged 131 such stations, since April 2011, till February,
2016".

18, The Committee note that although great impetus has been given to
maritime surveillance and coastal security post 26/11 and there exists close
coordination between ICG and MHA with regard to coastal security, yet the
Ministry stated that the onus of responsibility for 26/11 could not be fixed on
any organization as no credible actionable intelligence was available and there
was no past precedence leading to terror attack using the maritime routes. This
analogy of past precedent is not atceptable to the Committee as they are of the
opinion that defence preparedness of a Country is made not only on the basis
of past precedent of attack; but also against any unforeseen situations as was
evident during Mumbai terror attack using the maritime route. The Committee,
therefore, deprecate this attitude on the part of the Ministry with regard to
defence preparedness and urge upon the Ministry to change this perception so
that the defence preparedness can be strengthened to nullify any unforeseen
and sudden terror attack through maritime route. The Committee reiterate their
earlier recommendation that an enquiry undertaken post 26/11 to fix
accountability for the grave lapses on the part of the officials of the Ministry of

Home Affairs and the ICG and duties and responsibilities of all the Ministries/


14
Departments and forces concerned with the Country’s coastal security be
clearly demarcated so as to ensure effective coordination amongst them and
possibilities of system failures be reduced to the minimum.

Vi. Legal Constraints and lack of empowerment of the Indian Coast Guard Constraints and lack of empowerment of the Indian Coast Guard
- (Recommendation Para No. 19)

19. The Committee, in their earlier Report expressed its concern that while the
Maritime Zones of India Act, 1981 empowered the ICG to enforce its provisions
against vessels found engaged in unauthorised survey, data collection etc.,
prosecution of offenders could be launched ‘only after obtaining the approval of the
Ministry of External Affairs, which reportedly was the nodal Ministry for the Umbrella
Act i.e. the Maritime Zones of India (M21) Act, 1976. This was rather a cumbersome
process and detrimental to national security. The Committee also found it strange
that the provisions with respect to initiating action for any violation committed by
Indian registered fishing vessels were enforced by the State Fisheries Department
officials and not by the ICG which enforced Central Government Legislations. This
compromised the purport of having the ICG as a force for securing coastal security.
The Committee had been informed that proposals had been made to amend the MZI
Act, 1976 and the matter had been referred by the Ministry of External Affairs to the
National Security Council Secretariat in August, 2014 for setting up of an Inter-
Ministerial Group to work on amending Indian legislations to address the same.
Further, the Committee found that there were no laws for regulating Indian deep sea
fishing vessels in the Indian Exclusive Economic Zone beyond territorial waters and
hence the ICG was nol in a position to monitor the activities of deep sea fishing
vessels which came under the purview of the Ministry of Agriculture. The Committee
had also been informed that a draft bill regulating fishing by all vessels under
Maritime Fisheries (Regulation and Management) Act had been proposed by the ICG
in 2009 but it remained at draft stage. As per the Audit Report certain issues were
pending with the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries, Ministry
of Agriculture (MoA) too. They were quite shocked to learn that the deep sea fishing
vessels registered in India and having “Letter of Permission 2004" from 1४08 operated
under no legislation but MoA’s administrative guidelines solely, which did not
Prescribe any punitive action in case of violations committed by them against the ;

sonditions prescribed in the Letter of Permission. The Committee felt that ambiguity


in laws could be one o
As the ICG

other related maritime activi

organizations.
i
and Manuals needed to b
competent enough to carry o

bringing in all classes of sh

15
the most frustrating aspects in the functioning of

was earmarked’ specifically for coastal security and all

88, relevant amendments to the Acts, Rules, Regulation
e effected early to make the ICG empowered and
ut its duties more effectively. This would be possible by

ips/vessels under the ICG's purview. The Committee

desired that amendments required by the ICG must be carefully drafted and proposed

again to MEA so that these ०
matters to be taken up at t
away with and the ICG was
- the MZ! Act, 1976 on its own

.

‘ould be found acceptable. Further, they would like these

he highest level so that the extant procedure was. done

empowered to take strict action against the offenders of

They, therefore, desired that the Ministry may take up

the matter with MEA as wel

matter at the action taken sta
20.

“(a)
Act, 1976 to empowel
search and seize ve:
prosecution and forwa

Ministry of Defence

as MoA again and report the hitherto progress on the

ge

The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have submitted as under:

ad approved the proposal for amendment of MZI
an Coast Guard and Indian Navy to stop, board,
and. bring them before a competent court for
he same to Ministry of External Affairs (Legal and

r indi
ssels
1060

Treaties Division) in July, 2011, for introduction of the proposed amendment in

the Act, 1976, as MEA being the nodal Minist
to the proposed amendment.

(b)
National Committee
(NCSMCS) during wi
proposed amendmen
the 12" NCSMCS he
Chairmanship of Ad
December 2015 with
grant of legal powers

The above issue wa

ty. However, MEA did not concur

s also raised by MoD during the meetings of the
Strengthening Maritine and Coastal Security
Cabinet Secretary directed MEA to consider
he ५2] Act, 1976. Consequent to the decision of
6" October 2015, a meeting was held under the

for

hich t
stot
id on

ditional Secretary (R), Ministry of Defence on 17" 7

he concerned officers from MEA, ICG and IN to discuss
fo Indian Navy and Indian Coast Guard under MZI Act,

1976. After detailed discussions, it was decided that:

seek legal opinion of the Attorney General as to
an act prejudicial to good order or security committed by

a foreign vessel in Territorial Waters of India may be construed
as contravention of Section 4()) of MZI Act,1976:

(i) MEA wil
whether
(ii) MEA wil

initiate necessary action for grant of powers to the Navy

and the Coast Guard for visit, board, search and seizure of

vessels |

in the EEZ for contravention of MZI Act, 1976".


16
21. The Committee, in their previous recommendation expressed their

concern regarding the apparent ambiguities in Maritime Zones of India (020
Act which hindered the effective discharge of duties by the ICG and therefore,
desired the Ministry of Defence to take up the matter with Ministry of External
Affairs (MEA) for its concurrence with respect to proposed amendment to the
MZ! Act. The Ministry in their reply to the Committee have stated that the MEA
proposes to seek legal opinion of the Attorney General of India with respect to
grant of powers to the Navy and the Coast Guard for visit, board, search and
seizure of vessels in the FEZ for contravention of MZI Act, 1976. The Committee
desire to be apprised of the latest status of the aforesaid Act which will
empower the ICG as well as the Indian Navy for search and seizure of boats
and vesseis.

Vii. Identification of Ships
(Recommendation Para No. 20)

22. The Committee in their earlier Report had noted that that the International Ship
and Port Security (ISPS) Code came into force internationally with effect from 18 July,
2004 and the control and compliance measures of ISPS in various countries were
under their Coast Guards since they were most suited to deal with the issue.
However, in India, the Ministry of Shipping nominated the Director General, Shipping
to implement the new requirements as provided in the ISPS code. Surprisingly, the
Director General, Shipping kept the Indian Coast Guard out of the ambit of ISPS
compliance till February, 2009 and it was only after 26/11 incident that ships arriving
in Indian waters were required to submit ‘Pre-Arrival Nolification of Security(PANS) to
the Indian Coast Guard. Even then, all ships entering Indian Ports were not providing
reports to the Indian Coast Guard and there was no penal provision for non-
compliance by ships. This was a serious breach of coastal security which needs to
be plugged at the earliest. The Committee questioned the wisdom of the Ministry of
Shipping and their then Director General, Shipping in sidelining the ICG from the
ambit of ISPS compliance and the delay in notifying the penal provision and
demanded a thorough explanation from the concerned DG(S) and the Ministry of
Shipping in these matters. The Committee further desired that the Ministry of

Defence take up these issues at the highest level and get expedited notification of the


17
penal provisions for non-submission of PANS by ships to the Indian Coast Guard,

which was in the process reportedly since March, 2010.
23. 16 Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have submitted as under:

"Director General (Shipping) being the Maritime Safety Administrator (MSA) is
required to initiate necessary action to issue appropriate instructions/orders
regarding penal provisions for non-submission of PANS. However, in
general, most of the ports discourage entry of vessels who have not
submitted PANS as per the stipulated guidelines. The ICG has been
regularly taking up the issue at the Maritime States Development Council
(MSDC) meetings being steered by the MoS. The last MSDC meeting was
held at Goa on 24 August 2015, chaired by Hon'ble Minster of Shipping. The
issue is under review in Ministry of Shipping".
24. The Committee find that the Director -General (Shipping) is also the
Maritime ‘Safety Administrator (MSA) and is required to initiate necessary
action to issue appropriate instructions regarding penal provisions for non-
submission of Pre-Arrival Notification of Security (PANS). The Committee fail to
understand the rationale behind entrusting the responsibility of maritime safety
with the DG (Shipping) designating him as MSA when in many countries, the
International Ship and Port Facility Security (ISPS) security issues lie broadly
with the Coast Guards or the Navy. They are of the opinion that the incumbent
for the post of MSA shall be a person of caliber who besides dealing with
civilian ships can also sense the threat perception from security angle in the
right earnest and take preventive measures to guard against any surreptitious
moves by ships of enemy countries. They are also of the view that this will help
in reducing the inter-services bureaucratic conflicts which often cause
considerable delay and reduce operational efficiency in times of crises. The
Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to reconsider their decision and press
for their point to nominate a suitable professional, in consultation with DG
(Shipping) and the ICG to the post of MSA, thereby ensuring a more secure
maritime environment. Moreover, the Committee are of the view that with this
arrangement, it would be more easier for identifying ships and penalizing ships
for non-submission of PANS thereby making the ICG more empowered for this

onerous task,


18.

Vii. Poor Management Information System Management Information System
(Recommendation Para No. 24)

25. The Committee in their earlier Report had expressed their concern that the
ICG did not maintain a complete and comprehensive database of its.search and
rescue, pollution control, anti-poaching operations. It could not furnish information
about the number of cases where the missions were not successful or could not be
carried out due to inadequacy of resources or other constrains, In many cases, the
figures submitted by the Regional Headquarters and the ICG Headquarters did not
tally. It was also found that Letter of Permissions submitted by the ships were not
complete and there was no communication from the Regional Headquarters/ICG :
Headquarters to the ships about this deficiency. Regarding Search and Rescue
Operalions, the ICG Headquarters had furnished inflated figures and claim that
figures given by them may be taken as correct without furnishing the reasons for
discrepancy in the data. This could not be accepted since the Headquarters figures
should be based on the data given by the Regional Headquarters. The Committee
had been informed that the comprehensive search and rescue data bank was being
maintained at Coast Guard Headquarters by the National Maritime Search and
Rescue (NMSAR) Secretariat and the ICG had instituted software for recording all
operational data to obviate the mismatch of figures. Had this been the case, the
Committee wondered as to why variations appeared in the data maintained at
different levels. The Committee desired that the ICG should pay attention to this

discrepancy and maintain a more reliable database so that it can review and plan its

Operations. according to the success/| ailure rate. The Committee, therefore,
recommended that the ICG should put in place a reliable Management Information
System comprising a full database of its Operations including Search and Rescue
operations, unsuccessful operations, abandoned operations, _ Further, the stand
taken by the Ministry that 1006 was an armed force and was not a profit seeking
service hence no targets were fixed for its charter of duties was not appreciated by
the Committee. They were of the view that-in order to bring the ICG into the league
of the foremost competent and professional forces, comparable with Coast Guards of
other major Maritime Nations, benchmarks, parameters/targets needed to be fixed for

assessing its performance in respect of its charter of duties.


19

26. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have submitted as under:

“(a) Accase for developing a proper Information Management System is
being processed at CGHQ. Presently, the process of digitally capturing
all data related to various important operations is under progress and
the same is being stored in the data bank established at CGHQ.
Further, updating the statistical data of all kinds of operations is in
progress. Correlating, correcting and updating of data with the Regional
Headquarters are also in progress. On completion, an internal audit of
data will also be carried out.

(b) SAR and anti-poaching are incident-based operations and hence a
benchmark or a target cannot be fixed. Further, in missions where no
rescue is undertaken in SAR or no apprehension done in Anti-
Poaching, cannot be termed as a failed mission as the initial हि
ntelligence input/rescue request may be false. The ICG is maintaining
a record of every SAR incident as required by the International
Conventions. The procedure for documentation of SAR case is
elaborated in the National Search and Rescue Manual promulgated by
ndian Coast Guard and the same is being followed by all stake-
holders. In addition, to have a proper management system related to
SAR cases, a proposal for creation of SAR software is in progress.

The guidelines for patrolling in maritime and coastal zones are laid
down in the Confidential Coast Guard Order (CCGO) 01/1991 and
Coast Guard Order (CGO) 05/1993. Further, the Annual Flying Tasks
for various aviation units are promulgated by the Coast Guard
Headquarters separately. These guidelines lay down the stipulated
number of days at sea for each class of ship and number of flying hours
for a squadron/flight, factoring the aspects of maintenance, Operational

Turnaround and refits.

However, occasionally unforeseen defects,

weather and sea parameters exceed the operational parameters,

thereby restricting the

deployment of assets, both surface and air. Many

a times, the Regional

eadquarters are required to plan

operations/deploy assets at short notice, owing to emerging threat
perception, geographical area.in question and availability of assets.
Since such situations/occurrences are dynamic in nature and cannot be
predicted, quantification of tasks by Jaying down norms would restrict
the role played by the Service

27.

in place a reliable Management Information System in ICG, effort has been

The Committee find that in response to their recommendation for putting

made to develop the same in the Coast Guard Headquarter (CGHQ). But they
also find that the process of digitally capturing all data related to various
important operations is still under progress, The Committee. desire that
correlating, correcting and updating of data with the Regional Hqrs. which are

under progress, should be accomplished within a given time-frame so that an


20
internal audit of data be carried out soon. They also desire that the Search and

Rescue (SAR) software, which is under progress, shall be developed quickly
and put in place so that the stake-holder can follow it without any hindrance.
The Committee would like to be informed of the latest position in the
development of a proper Information Management System in
ICGICGHQ/Regional Headquarter (RHQ). है

NEW DELHI; PROF. K.V. THOMAS
November, 2016 Chairperson,

Kartika 1937 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

ऑफ अ ऋफ के inne


y

APPENDIX II
(Vide Para. 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
CONTAINED IN THEIR TWENTY-FIRST REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

0)
(i)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

Total number of Observations/Recommendations -

Observations/Recommendations of the Committee = -
which have been accepted by the Government

Para Nos. 1-2,5-6,8-10,13-19,22-25 and 27

Observations/Recommendations which the Committee -
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received
from the Government.

Para Nos. 3,7,21 and 26

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which -
replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee and which require reiteration.

Para Nos. 4,11-12 and 20

_Observations/Recommendations in respect of which -

Government have furnished interim replies

-NIL-

2 -
— 3!

27

Total: 19
Percentage: 66.67 %

Total: 04
Percentage:14.81%

Total: 04
Percentage:14.81%

Total: NIL
Percentage: 0%