9
EXCESSES OVER VOTED GRANTS AND
CHARGED APPROPRIATIONS (2010-11)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their
Sixty-fourth Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2014-2015
NINTH REPORT
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

NINTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2014-15)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
EXCESSES OVER VOTED GRANTS AND
CHARGED APPROPRIATIONS (2010-11)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
of the Committee contained in their Sixty-fourth Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11 December, 2014
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 11 December , 2014
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2014/Agrahayana, 1936 ( Saka)

PAC No. 2040
Price: `  170.00
©2015 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2014-15)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (iii)
INTRODUCTION  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (v)
CHAPTER I Report  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations      which      have     been
accepted by the Government  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from
Government  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations    in    respect   of   which
replies  of  Government  have  not  been  accepted  by  the
Committee and which require reiteration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations    in    respect   of   which
Government have furnished interim replies.  . . . . . . . . . . . 152
APPENDICES
I. Minutes  of  the  Tenth  sitting   of   the   Public   Accounts
Committee (2014-15) held on 2nd December, 2014  . . . . . 153
II. Statement of Observations/Recommendations  . . . . . . . . . . 155
III. Analysis of the Action  Taken  by  the  Government on the
Observations/Recommendations  of  the   Public  Accounts
Committee contained in their  Sixty-fourth Report (Fifteenth
Lok Sabha)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 163

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2014-15)
Prof. K.V . Thomas — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
4. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey
6. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank"
9. Shri Neiphiu Rio
*10. Shri Dushyant Singh
11. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
†12. Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi
13. Dr. Kirit Somaiya
 14. Shri Anurag Thakur
‡15. Dr. P . V enugopal
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
17. Shri Vijay Goel
18. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya
19. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
20. Shri Shantaram Naik
21. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
22. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Jayakumar T. — Additional Director
3. Shri S.L. Singh — Under Secretary
*Elected w.e.f. 3rd December, 2014 vice Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy who has been appointed as Minister
w.e.f. 9th November, 2014.
†Elected w.e.f. 3rd December, 2014 vice Shri Jayant Sinha who has been appointed as Minister w.e.f.
9th November, 2014.
‡Elected w.e.f. 3rd December, 2014 vice Dr. M. Thambidurai who has been chosen as Hon’ble Deputy
Speaker, Lok Sabha and has since resigned from the membership of the Committee.
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2014-15), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Ninth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Sixty-fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Excesses
Over Voted Grants and Charged Appropriations (2010-11)'.
2. The Sixty-fourth Report was presented to Hon'ble Speaker on
16th January, 2013 and Lok Sabha on 26th February, 2013 and laid in Rajya Sabha
on 27th February, 2013. Replies of the Government to the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report were received from the Ministries of
Finance, Commerce & Industry (Department of Commerce), External Affairs,
Petroleum and Natural Gas, Road Transport and Highways, Urban Development,
Defence, Communications and Information Technology (Department of Posts) and
Railways on 15th January 2014, 13th September 2013, 22nd July 2013, 20th December
2013, 28th November 2013, 15th July 2013, 20th June 2013 and 27th June 2013
respectively. The Public Accounts Committee considered and adopted the Ninth
Report at their sitting held on 2nd December, 2014. Minutes of the sitting are given
at Appendix I.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of
the Report and have also been reproduced in a consolidated form in Appendix II to
the Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Sixty-fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given
at Appendix III.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. K.V . THOMAS
08 December, 2014 Chairperson,
17 Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government
on the Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained
in their Sixty-fourth Report (15th Lok Sabha) on "Excesses over V oted Grants and
Charged Appropriations (2010-11)".
2.  The Sixty-fourth Report (15th Lok Sabha), which was presented to
Hon'ble Speaker on 16th January, 2013 and Lok Sabha on 26th February, 2013 and laid
in Rajya Sabha on 27th February, 2013 contained 13 Observations/Recommendations.
The Action Taken Notes on all the Observations/Recommendations have been received
from the Ministries/Departments concerned and are categorised as under:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by
Government:
Paragraph Nos. 1—4, 8-10, 12 and 13
Total: 9
Chapter: II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from Government:
-Nil-
Total: Nil
Chapter: III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Paragraph Nos. 5—7 and 11
Total: 4
Chapter: IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:
-NIL-
Total: Nil
Chapter: V
I.  Delay in submission of Action Taken Notes
3. In accordance with the time line prescribed by the Committee, Notes indicating
the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained
in their Reports were required to be furnished by the Ministries/Departments concerned
within six months of the presentation of the Reports. But an analysis of the submission
of the Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministries/Departments concerned in the

2
instant case has revealed that there have been delays ranging between 7 days to
6 months beyond the stipulated period of six months. The Ministry/Department-wise
position of delay has been tabulated as under:—
Sl. Ministry/Department Due date of Date when Delay
No. furnishing complete A TNs
ATNs were furnished
1. Finance 15.07.2013 15.01.2014 6 months
2. Commerce -do- 13.09.2013 1 Month 29 days
3. External Affairs -do- 22.07.2013 7 days
4. Petroleum and Natural Gas -do- 31.10.2013 3 Months 16 days
5. Road Transport and Highways -do- 20.12.2013 5 Months 5 days
6. Urban Development -do- 28.11.2013 4 Months 13 days
7. Defence -do- 15.07.2013 -
8. Posts -do- 20.06.2013 -
9. Railways -do- 27.06.2013 -
4.  The Committee are perturbed that despite repeated assurances given by
the Ministries/Departments especially by the Ministry of Finance that necessary
remedial measures have been taken to ensure timely submission of Action Taken
Notes, none of the defaulting Ministries/Departments barring the Ministry of
Defence, Department of Posts and the Ministry of Railways could furnish the
requisite Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained
in their Sixty-fourth Report (15th Lok Sabha) within the prescribed time of six
months from the date of presentation of the Report. The Ministry of Finance, the
nodal Ministry expected to act as a role model in such matters, performed miserably
and submitted their Action Taken Notes after a maximum delay of six months.
Evidently, this shows gross negligence and undermining of the principles of the
fiscal discipline and financial propriety by the Ministries/Departments concerned
especially the Ministry of Finance. The Committee express their strong displeasure
over such inordinate delay in furnishing the requisite Action Taken Notes resulting
in avoidable delays in preparation and presentation of the relevant Action Taken
Reports by the Committee. While deploring the callous and indifferent approach
of the defaulting Ministries/Departments, the Committee impress upon the
authorities concerned in these Ministries/Departments to urgently initiate requisite
remedial and corrective measures including fixation of responsibility for lapses/
negligence and overhauling of their extent mechanism so as to ensure that the
Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee are
finalized and furnished invariably within the stipulated deadline of six months.
5. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministries/Departments concerned
have been reproduced in the relevant chapters of this Report. The Committee will
now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some of their Observations/

3
Recommendations made in their Sixty-fourth Report (15th Lok Sabha) which either
need reiteration or merit comments.
II. Measures for containing Excess Expenditure
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
6. Taking note of the huge variations in the quantum of excess expenditure
incurred under twenty-nine Grants/Appropriations during the financial year
2010-11, the Committee in their Sixty-fourth Report had cautioned that expenditure
over and above the budgetary provisions sanctioned by Parliament at different stages
of the budget did not augur well for fiscal prudence and fiscal consolidation besides
undermining the Parliamentary financial control. The Committee had observed that
the unabated large excess expenditure by these defaulting Ministries/Departments
was not only axiomatic of the fact that they had miserably failed to track the pace of
expenditure vis-a-vis the grants approved by Parliament but also indicated that the
defaulting Ministries/Departments had not accorded due importance to the guiding
principles of budgeting and abdicated their responsibilities. The Committee had urged
upon the defaulting Ministries/Departments to learn from the experience of the
Ministries/Departments which did not incur excess expenditure. In view of the
persisting trend of excess expenditure and considering the fact that the problem was
not intractable with effective application of IT and e-governance, the Committee had
recommended that the Ministry of Finance make it incumbent upon the Financial
Advisers and the Budget Controlling Authorities by issuing suitable and periodic
instructions to ensure that no excess expenditure takes place in future.
7. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Finance have stated as under:—
"The Ministry of Finance circulates among the Ministries/Departments, various
Government instructions to be undertaken to formulate Budget, ensure smooth
pace of expenditure throughout the year, avoid exceeding the budgetary limit
etc., in one place. While seeking proposals for Supplementary Demands for
Grants also, instructions are issued to make realistic projections, so that neither
there is an occasion for huge surrender of budget provisions nor there are huge
excesses. Compliance to these instructions is closely monitored.
Discussions are held with the Financial Advisers of various Ministries/
Departments so that a micro review is undertaken at the apex level of Ministry
of Finance for estimating a realistic budget requirement by the Ministries/
Departments. During the discussions, review of expenditure is done scheme-
wise in respect of Ministries/Departments so that realistic budget is framed and
approved by the Parliament. Ministry of Finance also takes an opportunity to
assess realistic requirement of funds for the year during the three batches of
Supplementary Demands for Grants.
Ministry of Finance has taken steps for precisely estimating the expenditure
and budget accordingly so that the instances of excess are avoided. Finance
Secretary had convened a meeting of Financial Advisers of Ministries/
Departments where excess had taken place in the past to ascertain the reasons

4
for excess expenditure over Voted Grants and Charged Appropriations.Measures
to be taken up to avoid its recurrence in future were also discussed. Finance
Secretary directed that excess expenditure on account of inaccurate estimates
needs to be avoided. Measures such as tighter payment control by disbursing
officers, and speedy reconciliation of accounts with field units were emphasised.
Instructions have been issued from time to time and periodic discussions are
held with the Financial Advisers and Budget Controlling Authorities to ensure
that no excess expenditure takes place in future.”
8. The Department of Commerce in their Action Taken Note have stated as
under:—
"So far as Department of Commerce is concerned, the excess Expenditure is
Rs. 6,56,75,990 against the Total Grant of Rs. 682,99,00,000. The excess
Expenditure was incurred due to (a) booking of expenditure (i) on projects/
schemes for the benefit of North Eastern Region and Sikkim;  (ii) by the Ministry
of Urban Development under the ongoing schemes; and (b) excessive
expenditure incurred by some Cheque Drawing and Disbursing Officers. On
the advice of Ministry of Finance Department of Economic Affairs vide their
D.O. No. 7 (2)-B(SD) 2012, dated 5th February, 2013, the excess Grants of
Rs. 6,56,75,990 has been regularised by Parliament and assented to by the
President of India on 22nd March, 2013 enclosed. The same has been intimated
to Lok Sabha Secretariat, Parliament House on 14 June, 2013 vide this
Department O.M. No. G . 20008/10/2011-B&A.
It may be mentioned that Expenditure against the Budget is being monitored
on a monthly basis with senior officers.”
9. The Ministry of External Affairs in their Action Taken Note have stated as
under:—
“The Ministry had taken all necessary steps to try and avoid excess expenditure.
However, due to reasons already explained in the Excess Note 2010-11, it was
not possible to avoid excess expenditure. Clear instructions are issued to all the
spending units of Ministry at RE stage each year to surrender any identifiable
excess funds forthwith. Instructions are issued to spend the funds retained in
full and to avoid incurring excess expenditure. The instruction of the
Hon’ble Committee will be circulated to further sensitize these units to strictly
adhere to the budgetary limits on spending. Close monitoring of expenditure
on daily basis is being done in the last quarter of the financial year to ensure
that expenditure remains with the budgetary limits.Tools of IT and e-governance
are also being used in accounting and monitoring the pace of expenditure.
Expenditure of the 180 Missions/Posts in particular is constantly monitored
through implementation of Integrated Mission Accounting Software (I-MAS),
accounts of which are rendered monthly by these Missions/Posts.”
10. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
have merely stated that the Recommendation of the Committee had been noted.

5
11. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways in their Action Taken Note
have stated as under:—
“The Excess expenditure of 15,000 was erroneously booked by BRDB under
Revenue Charged due to urgency in implementing court order against Court
Case No. WP(C) 787 of 2010 filed by Ravinder Vs UOI & others. Suitable
instructions have been issued to all concerned to ensure no excess expenditure
take place in future.”
12. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Urban Development have stated
as under:—
“Observation of Hon’ble PAC is accepted. Concerted efforts to avoid the chances
of excess expenditure over voted grants and appropriation are being  made by
issue of Instructions to all concerned to strengthen the monitoring of expenditure
to keep the expenditure within the budgeted allocation and no excess expenditure
may occur.”
13. In respect of Grant No. 21 — Defence Pensions, the Ministry of Defence
have inter-alia stated as under:—
“As a measure of control, the Ministry of Defence have been advising the budget
estimating authorities of Defence Pensions to prepare their budget with utmost
caution and accuracy while estimating requirement of funds and budgetary
projections be made after  an accurate and realistic assessment of the
requirements and visualization of actual/anticipated expenditure. In this regard,
instructions were issued vide MoD(Fin.) ID No. 2(6)/MO/2010-11/911
dt. 11/7/2011, MoD(Fin.) ID No. 2(6)/MO/2010/1617 dt. 9th Dec. 2011.
Subsequently, instructions were also issued to PCDA(P) Allahabad and O/o
the CGDA, New Delhi vide ID No. 2(6)/MO/2011 dt. 12/7/2012 wherein it
was advised to adopt e-governance model to utilize the information technology/
tools so as to establish a centralized data base of Pensioners and networking of
all the banks so as to arrive at a correct estimation of Pension liability and
expenditure in a particular year. Necessary monitoring and follow up action in
this regard would be ensured. O/o the CGDA vide their letter No. A/B/I/ 0107/
AA-DP/10-11 dt. 6/6/2012 informed about various measures initiated to promote
e-governance model and use of IT.
Also, as per the directions of Ministry of Finance, to Review of the existing
arrangement of Reporting and Accounting of Defence Pensions, an Internal
Audit was conducted by O/o the CGDA, and a brief report was furnished vide
their letter No. A/B/I/9130-Study Report/2012 dt. 11/5/2012 wherein various
measures to improve the system have been suggested by O/o the CGDA. The
report was forwarded to Min. of Finance vide this Office ID No. 2(8)REBE/
MO/2009/187 dt. 19/6/2012. In accordance with the recommendations contained
in the report, following measures/actions have been taken:—
* The issue of incorrect or invalid PPO Nos. missing details in the scrolls
have been taken up with banks specifically with SBI, the largest PDA.

6
* PCDA(P) Allahabad has been asked to take into account pending scrolls
of the previous years while estimating budget for the next years.
* An exercise named ‘Project Sangam’ has been undertaken in order to
create an up-to-date Pensions database in collaboration with PCDA(P),
Allahabad and various pension are disbursing agencies.
* PCDA(P) has taken up with Banks to provide Pension Payment scrolls
on electronic format.
* As per the latest development made under Project Sangam, it is mentioned
that there are about 23 lakh Pensioners enrolled under Defence Pensions
and out of these details of about 15 lakhs pensioners have been computerized
and the remaining 8 lakhs pensioners are in the process of computerization.
* Apart from “Project Sangam”, a new web based application for “Pension
Accounting System” has also been developed, which is under trial running
process. The project once implemented will give a more accurate database
for monitoring the pace of expenditure and will be very useful while
predicting the future requirement of funds.
Any instructions issued by Ministry of Finance in this regard would certainly
be followed by this Ministry.”
14. With regard to Grant No. 22 — Defence Services — Army, Grant
No. 23 — Defence Services — Navy, Grant No. 25 — Defence Ordnance Factories
and Grant No. 27 — Capital Outlay on Defence Services, the Ministry of Defence in
their Action Taken Note have stated as under:—
“In light of the recommendations of the Committee, three Committees are being
constituted in the Ministry of Defence to make an in-depth examination of the
issues and identify weaknesses in the budgetary control systems that allow repeated
instances of excess expenditure and formulate solutions to the same. These
Committees will comprise representatives from Defence Finance Division, Budget
Holders/Financial Planning Directorates of the Services and other agencies under
the Ministry of Defence and Controller General of Defence Accounts. Further,
any instructions issued by Ministry of Finance to curb excess expenditure in
future would be complied with by this Ministry in letter and spirit.”
15. In their Action Taken Note, the Department of Posts have stated as under:—
“Subordinate units of the Department of Posts are instructed regularly to project
realistic demands for funds. Department place request for funds which is mainly
based on assessment and projections made by its subordinate units. Ministry of
Finance during pre-budget discussions; re-assess the demands for funds and based
on this, the fund allocation has reduced, which also is a reason for excess
expenditure.
Instructions on austerity measures received from Ministry of Finance are also
being circulated to all field formations and their expenditures are reviewed by
the Secretary (Posts) on monthly basis through video conferencing. All heads

7
of circles are also advised from time to time to limit their expenditure within
the budgetary allocations.”
16. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Note have stated as
under:—
“Of the total excess of Rs. 3,052.79 cr. incurred during 2010-11, 93.73% of the
excess has occurred under five grants, viz., 6, 8, 10, 12 & 13. Excess under
grant No. 13 alone is 46% of the total excess incurred by Ministry of  Railways.
The excess under this Grant has been due to the difficulty in assessing the
impact of implementation of recommendations of the 6th CPC on pension
payments which continued in 2010-11 also. Under Grant No. 12, the excess
was 21.5% mainly under the head ‘Suspense’ mainly due to clearance of heavy
outstanding liabilities and more materialisation of claims than anticipated. Under
Grant No. 10, the excess was 13% mainly due to increase in average rate of
HSD oil & electricity, higher activity of locos and higher taxes/duties than
anticipated. The share of excess under Grant no. 6 & 8 is relatively minor at
7.2% & 6.2%.”
17.  The Committee are appalled to note that except for the Ministry of
Finance issuing circulars, holding discussions and convening meetings and the
Ministry of Defence undertaking ‘Project Sangam’ and ‘Pension Accounting
System’ to streamline and computerize Defence Pension Accounting System, none
of the Ministries/Departments concerned have taken any concrete steps to ensure
application of IT and e-governance in their budgeting so as to avoid excess
expenditure. Disappointingly, instead of admitting their lapses and striving to
learn from the experience of the Ministries/Departments which did not incur
excess expenditure as recommended by the Committee, almost all  these
Ministries/Departments have sought to justify the excess expenditure incurred
by them. The Committee vehemently criticize such tendancy of the Ministries/
Departments concerned to unsuccessfully justify their excess expenditure and
violation of Financial Rules instead of revamping their existing mechanism with
a view to achieving concrete improvement in their budget estimation exercise.
The Committee find that the Ministries/Departments which scrupulously adhere
to the General Financial Rules and have unwavering commitment to financial
discipline and propriety contain their expenditure within the budget allocated
and approved by Parliament. Moreover, in an age of e-governance made feasible
by computerization and instant connectivity between  filed formations,
Subordinate Offices and Head Quarters, there is no valid justification for
irregularities like unauthorized excess expenditure. The Committee, therefore,
urge upon the defaulting Ministries/Departments to learn from the experience
of the Ministries/Departments which did not incur excess expenditure and also
ensure effective application of IT and e-governance in their budgeting to avoid
excess expenditure. Furthermore, since the instructions issued for containing
excess expenditure have failed to produce tangible result year after year, the
Committee desire that the Ministry of Finance should now take more stringent
and innovative measures and make it incumbent upon the Financial Advisers

8
and the budget controlling authorities to ensure that no excess expenditure is
incurred in future.
III.  Excess Expenditure Despite obtaining Supplementary Grants/Appropriations
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
18. In their Original Report, the Committee had noted with profound concern
that out of the total twenty-nine cases of excess registering Grants/Appropriations,
an excess expenditure of Rs. 10,966.95 crore was incurred in as many as twenty-
three cases even after obtaining Supplementary Grants/Appropriations to the tune of
Rs. 19,065.46 crore. The percentage of excess expenditure over the Supplementary
Grants/Appropriations in respect of these twenty-three Grants/Appropriations ranged
from 0.001 per cent [Grant No. 72 (Capital V oted) — Ministry of Petroleum and
Natural Gas] to 2,108 per cent [Grant No. 101 (Revenue V oted) — Public Works]
and in thirteen cases, this percentage was more than 50 per cent. In respect of seven
Grants/Appropriations, the quantum of excess expenditure incurred was even higher
than the Supplementary Grants/Appropriations sought. The Committee had deplored
the tendency of the defaulting Ministries/Departments in resorting to excess
expenditure in a routine manner despite obtaining huge sums of Supplementary Grants/
Appropriations in three stages, the latest being February — March 2011  i.e. the fag
end of the financial year. The Committee had observed that this was a clear indication
of not only bad budgeting but also deeply pervading malaise in the extent budgeting
method/mechanism, which had failed to ensure proper assessment and accurate
projection of fund requirement despite ample opportunities for seeking parliamentary
approval besides exposing the hollow claim of the Ministries/Departments that they
monitored the flow of excess expenditure. The Committee had recommended that the
Ministries/Departments concerned should probe into the causes of this chronic malaise
and find effective ways and means to make the mechanism of estimating Supplementary
Grants more realistic and the budget controlling officers responsible so that no excess
expenditure was incurred and strict fiscal discipline was maintained.
19. The Ministry of External Affairs in their Action Taken Note have stated as
under:—
“It is submitted that many of the Ministry’s developmental projects are
implemented in the foreign countries which depend on the local conditions
prevailing in those countries. V ery often, implementation of these projects is
affected by the political climate in the host country. Ministry, however, will
continue to endeavour to project more realistic budget demands taking into
consideration all aspects of projects under consideration and implementation.
With the implementation of the Integrated Mission Accounts Software (I-MAS)
in all the Missions/Posts in a phased manner, control of expenditure has
improved. Clear instructions are given to all the spending units at RE stage to
stick to the RE ceiling indicated and also to surrender any savings which are
foreseen. The instructions of Ministry of Finance regarding curtailment of
expenditure and expenditure ceiling are also given wide circulation among the
spending units.”

9
20. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
have stated as under:—
“This Ministry had requested for the entire sum of Rs. 101,53,14,000, but in
the budget document only Rs. 101.53 crore was shown due to rounding off
leaving Rs. 14,000 unadjusted.
The amount of Rs. 101.53 crore (leaving Rs. 14,000/- unadjusted) was provided
to us in 3rd Supplementaries and the approval was conveyed on 18.03.2011.
During the next financial year i.e. 2011-12, this Ministry had vide letter dated
7.12.2011 requested Ministry of Finance to forward the Explanatory Note to
Public Accounts Committee for regularization of excess expenditure of
Rs. 14,000/-.”
21. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways in their Action Taken Note
have stated as under:—
“No supplementary grant was taken by the Ministry for this purpose. The Excess
expenditure of Rs. 15,000 was erroneously booked due to urgency in
implementing court order against Court Case No. WP(C) 787 of 2010 filed by
Ravinder Vs UOI & others.”
22. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Urban Development have stated
as under:—
“Instructions have already been issued to all concerned to strengthen monitoring
of expenditure and to keep the expenditure well within the budgeted allocation
and no excess expenditure over the grant/appropriation is allowed to occur
vide OM No.G-23012/6/2011-Bt.(UD) dated 12.08.2011. Further, One Day
Workshop on Awareness Building on re-appropriation and projection of
Supplementary Demands for Grants was also conducted on 13.09.2011.”
23. In respect of Grant No. 21 — Defence Pensions, the Ministry of Defence in
their Action Taken Note have inter-alia stated as under:—
“The approved BE 2010-11 was Rs. 25000 crore and at RE 2010-11 stage, an
amount of Rs. 37647 crore was projected under Grant No.21—Defence
Pensions, however, due to financial constraint, MoF approved only Rs. 34000
crore, that is, Supplementary Grant to the tune of Rs. 12647 crore was requested
at RE stage of 2010-11, but due to financial constraint only Rs. 9000 crore was
approved by MoF, which means less Supplementary Grant was approved than
projected, which resulted into excess expenditure of Rs. 3,336.41 crore. The
actual expenditure of Rs. 37,336 crore incurred under the Grant, was in line
with the RE projection of Rs. 37,647 crore submitted by the Ministry to MoF.
Also, the payment of pension to the Defence Pensioners is a committed
expenditure and cannot be stopped for the want of Budget.”
24. Regarding corrective measures taken, in respect of Grant No. 21 — Defence
Pensions, the Ministry of Defence in their Action Taken Note have stated that they
had issued, from time to time, instructions to exercise strict control on progress of

10
Expenditure in order to avoid any large-scale savings or excess under any grant relating
to Civil Estimates. The Ministry also submitted the same reply given by them in the
case of Committee’s Recommendation No. 2 which is reproduced in para 13 of this
Report.
25. With regard to Grant No. 22 — Defence Services — Army, Grant
No. 23 — Defence Services — Navy, Grant No. 25 — Defence Ordnance Factories
and Grant No. 27 — Capital Outlay on Defence Services, the Ministry of Defence in
their Action Taken Note have stated as under:—
“In view of the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of
Defence is constituting three Committees comprising representatives from
Defence Finance Division, Budget Holders/Financial Planning Directorates
of the Services and other agencies under the Ministry of Defence and
Controller General of Defence Accounts. These Committees would make an
in-depth examination of the issues to identify weaknesses in the budgetary
control systems that allow repeated instances of excess expenditure and
formulate solutions to the same. Detailed instructions have been issued to all
concerned vide MoD (Fin.) ID No. 7(5)/Bud.-I/2011 dated 29/11/2011, 10(01)/
Bud.-I/2012(PC) dated 11/12/2012, 10(01)/Bud.-I/2012 dated 06/02/2013,
10(01)/ Bud.-I/2013 (PC) dated 07/03/2013, 14/03/2013, 20/03/2013,
26/03/2013 for strict monitoring of utilization of the budget to avoid excess
expenditure over allocation.”
26.  In their Action Taken Note, the Department of Posts have stated as under:—
“It is a fact that there has been excess expenditure for Rs. 366.63 crores during
the year 2010-11. Austerity measures received from Ministry of Finance are
also being circulated to all field formations and their expenditures are reviewed
by the Secretary (Posts) on monthly basis through video conferencing. All heads
of circles are also advised from time to time to limit their expenditure within
the budgetary allocations.
Department is implementing IT project through which business processes of
each action of the Department is going to be computerised which will enable to
make more accurate projection of demands for funds.”
27. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:—
“In March, 2011, Ministry of Railways obtained supplementary under 13 Grants
and 9 Appropriations. Of this, excess has occurred under 9 Grants, viz., 3, 4, 6,
7, 8, 10, 11, 12 & 13 and under 4 Appropriations, viz., 3, 6, 8 & 12.
Excess under charged appropriations could not be avoided despite taking
supplementary because more decretal payments materialised in March, 2011
whereas the supplementary was finalised at the end of February, 2011 itself. As
regards excess under voted grants, the reasons have been given in the A TNs to
the preceding observations.

11
However, noting the c oncern of the Committee, the Railways have been
addressed on the issue vide the letter (No. 2013-B-342 dated 09-04-2013) and
also in the General Managers’ conference held in April, 2013.”
28. The Committee are dismayed to observe that only the Ministry of
Petroleum and Natural Gas and the Ministry of Defence (in respect of Grant
No. 21—Pensions) could give satisfactory reply for incurring excess expenditure
despite obtaining Supplementary Grants/Appropriations. The reply given by the
remaining defaulting Ministries/Departments i.e. the Ministry of External Affairs,
the Ministry of Urban Development, the Ministry of Defence (in respect of Grants
No. 22 Defence Services—Army, Grant No. 23—Defence Services—Navy, Grant
No. 25—Defence Ordnance Factories and Grant No. 27—Capital Outlay on
Defence Services), the Department of Posts and the Ministry of Railways is far
from convincing and as such, they should have initiated probe into the causes of
excess expenditure despite obtaining Supplementary Grants/Appropriations under
the Grants/Appropriations operated by them as recommended by the Committee.
It signifies that no specific and concrete measures have been put in place as yet by
them to streamline their budgetary process and overhaul the procedures adopted
for revised estimation of budget at the Supplementary Grants/Appropriations
stage with view to avoid unjustified excess expenditure. As there are no cogent
reasons for the inevitability of excess expenditure when the Ministries/Departments
get opportunities to present and obtain Supplementary Grants/Appropriations
during the three sessions of Parliament in a year, the Committee deprecate the
defaulting Ministries/Departments and would once again like to remind them about
the sanctity of General Financial Rules which stipulate that no expenditure should
be incurred which might have the effect of exceeding the total Grant or
Appropriation authorized by Parliament by law for a financial year except by
way of obtaining Supplementary Grants/Appropriations or an advance from the
Contingency Fund. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the Ministries/
Departments concerned probe into the causes of this chronic malaise and find
effective ways and means to make the mechanism of estimating Supplementary
Grants/Appropriations more realistic and the Financial Advisers and the budget
controlling officers responsible so that strict fiscal discipline is maintained and no
excess expenditure is incurred after obtaining Supplementary Grants/
Appropriations.
IV . Recurring Excess Expenditure by the Ministries of Railways and Defence
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
29.  In their Sixty-fourth Report, the Committee had observed that the Ministry
of Railways had been persistently incurring huge excess expenditure during the
financial years 2001-02 to 2010-11 while the Ministry of Defence had been spending
much above the authorized expenditure during each of the financial years 2003-04 to
2010-11. To elucidate, the Ministry of Railways incurred excess expenditure of
Rs. 210.71 crore in eight Grants/Appropriations in 2001-02, Rs. 323.65 crore in
eleven Grants/Appropriations in 2002-03, Rs. 1136.92 crore in nine Grants/
Appropriations in 2003-04; Rs.2,151.99 crore in ten Grants/Appropriations in

12
2004-05, Rs. 2,322.46 crore in eleven Grants/Appropriations in 2005-06,
Rs. 365.16 crore in eight Grants/Appropriations in 2006-07, Rs. 51.22 crore in eight
Grants/Appropriations in 2007-08, Rs. 532.12 crore in eight Grants/Appropriations
in 2008-09, Rs. 1,922.84 crore in nine Grants/Appropriations in 2009-10 and
Rs. 3,056.86 crore in ten Grants/Appropriations in 2010-11. The Committee had
found that under Defence Services sector, the Ministry of Defence incurred an excess
expenditure of Rs. 37.50 crore in a single Grant in 2003-04, Rs. 41.99 crore in two
Grants in 2004-05, Rs. 44.84 crore in two Grants in 2005-06, Rs. 667.17 crore in a
single Grant in 2006-07, Rs. 71.19 crore in a single Grant in 2007-08, Rs. 742.61
crore in two Grants in 2008-09,  Rs. 2,615.23 in two Grants in 2009-10 and
Rs. 4,239.34 crore in four Grants/Appropriations in 2010-11. This recurring
phenomenon of wide variations between the budgetary provisions and the actual
expenditure by these important Ministries over such long periods had led the
Committee to arrive at the conclusion that the estimation of requirement of funds was
still done in a haphazardly manner devoid of sound budgetary presumptions. Needless
to say the existing budgeting mechanism in these Ministries still suffered from various
loopholes and lacunae which were nullifying the attempts of the Government to
enhance accuracy level of their budgetary projections to achieve the desired
improvements. Observing that the persistence of such a pernicious trend was bound
to further deteriorate the fiscal discipline leading to financial ad-hocism, and
maladministration, the Committe had impressed upon the Ministries of Railways and
Defence to overhaul their budgetary mechanism drastically, introduce and implement
IT and e-governance in their financial administration and fix responsibility against
the budget controlling authorities in case their estimation go awry leading to excess
expenditure.
30. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:—
“The excess expenditure on Railways has increased from Rs. 210.71 crore in
2001-02 to Rs. 2322.46 crore in 2005-06. However, it declined to Rs. 365.16
crore in 2006-07 and further to Rs. 51.22 crore in 2007-08. But, it increased to
Rs. 532.12 crore in 2008-09, to Rs. 1,922.84 crore in 2009-10 and to
Rs. 3056.86 crore in 2010-11. The increase in 2008-09 and 2009-10 had been
mainly due to the difficulty in assessing the impact of implementation of the
recommendations of the 6th CPC as has already been submitted to in ATNs to
Reports of PAC on Excess over V oted Grants and Charged Appropriations
relating to those years. As regards the increase in 2010-11, the reasons have
been given in the other A TNs to the present Report of PAC.
Notwithstanding the same, the recommendation of the Committee has been
noted for compliance. The Committee may appreciate the fact that the excess
in 2011-12 has drastically reduced to around Rs. 1050 crore.’’
31. The Ministry of Defence in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:—
“In light of the recommendations of the Committee, three Committees are being
constituted comprising authorities in Defence Finance Division, Budget Holders/
Financial Planning Directorates of the Services and other agencies under the
Ministry of Defence and Controller General of Defence Accounts. These

13
Committee would make an in-depth examination of the issues to identify the
weaknesses in the budgetary control systems that allow repeated instances of
excess expenditure and formulate solutions to the same. One of these Committees
will be examining the extant IT system used for compilation of defence
expenditure for further refinements and will also study the feasibility of
conveying budget allotments by means of an IT solution. The Navy has
implemented an FIS system which will also be examined for possible replication
by other services.
Detailed instructions have been issued to all concerned vide MoD (Fin) ID No.
7(5)/Bud-I/2011 dated 29/11/2011, 10(01)/Bud-I/2012(PC) dated 11/12/2012,
10(01)/Bud-I/2012 dated 06/02/2013, 10(01)/Bud-I/2013 (PC) dated 07/03/
2013, 14/03/2013, 20/03/2013, 26/03/2013 for strict monitoring of utilization
of the budget to avoid excess expenditure over allocation.’’
32. The Committee are pleased to note that pursuant to their
Recommendation, the Ministry of Defence have initiated certain measures by way
of constituting three Committees towards overhauling their budgetary mechanism
and introducing IT and e-governance in the system. The Committee would like
the Ministry of Defence to take further concerted efforts in this direction to achieve
successful overhauling of their budgeting mechanism wherein IT and e-governance
are fully integrated and fixation of responsibility against the erring budget
controlling authorities is ensured. The Committee are, however, concerned to note
that the Ministry of Railways have merely noted the Recommendation of the
Committee and sought to justify their recurring excess expenditure on one pretext
or the other. It is apparent that the Ministry of Railways, instead of sincerely
introspecting and finding solutions to their ever recurring unjustified excess
expenditure, have chosen to remain incorrigible even to the extent of grossly
undermining the Parliamentary financial control. Strongly criticizing such a
cavalier attitude, the Committee reiterate their Recommendation impressing upon
the Ministry of Railways to overhaul their budgetary mechanism drastically,
introduce and implement IT and e-governance in their financial administration
and fix responsibility against the budget controlling authorities in case their
estimation go awry leading to excess expenditure.
V .  Delay in submission of Explanatory Notes
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
33. In their Original Report, the Committee had observed that the Explanatory
Notes pertaining to the excess registering Grants/Appropriations as highlighted in
the Union Government Appropriation Accounts (Civil) for the financial year
2010-11 were due for submission to the Committee on or before 24th April, 2012.
However, the Ministries of External Affairs, Commerce and Industry (Department of
Commerce), Petroleum and Natural Gas and Defence furnished their Explanatory
Notes pertaining to the financial year 2010-11 after a delay of 7 months 18 days;
7 months 5 days; 3 months 27 days; and 13 days respectively. The Committee did not
find any valid justification for inordinate delay in submission of the Explanatory

14
Notes by these defaulting Ministries/Departments as they had ample time to prepare
and furnish the same to the Committee well before the stipulated time as has been
done by other Ministries/Departments. Deploring the abysmal failure on the part of
the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways to furnish Explanatory Notes to the
Committee (as on 28.12.2012) even after repeated written and oral reminders, the
Committee, being unable to endorse regularization of the excess expenditure, had
recommended that responsibility be fixed by the Ministry of Finance in consultation
with the Ministry of Law & Justice for violation of constitutional provision and they
be apprised accordingly.
34. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Finance have stated as under:—
“Accordingly, letters dated 15th May, 2013, 14th June, 2013 and 8th October,
2013 were sent to Ministry of Road Transport and Highways requesting them
to initiate and intimate the action taken for the lapse. Ministry of Road Transport
and Highways will ensure that the lapse does not recur in future and suitable
action is taken against those responsible.’’
35. The Department of Commerce in their Action Taken Note have stated as
under:—
“So far as Department of Commerce is concerned regarding Delay of 7 months 5
days, the reason for delay is due to non receipt of Vetting Note from the Audit.”
36. To this, Audit in their vetting comments have stated as under:—
“Initially when the explanatory Note was sent in September 2011, the same
was vetted and returned to Ministry on 23.11.2011 without offering any comment
in Capital section of the grant, since this was shown as saving of Rs. 6.57 crore
i.e. less than Rs. 100 crore. Subsequently, Ministry of Commerce and Industry
submitted the A TN on excess to Audit for vetting on 27th November, 2012.
The vetting comments of Audit were forwarded to the Ministry on 7th December,
2012.’’
37. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of External Affairs have stated as
under:—
“The delay in submission of explanatory notes on excess expenditure in FY
2010-11 is regretted. However, it may be mentioned that some queries were
raised in the Excess Note sent to Audit for vetting, and gathering information
on these queries and their acceptance by the Audit led to delay. After clearance
from Audit, the explanatory note was submitted to PAC. The delay could have
been avoided. Ministry will make all efforts to avoid such delay in future.’’
38. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in their Action Taken Note
have stated as under:—
“Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas had forwarded the ‘Explanatory note
for Excess’ for the excess expenditure to Monitoring Cell, Department of
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance on 7th December 2011. Hence there was no
delay at the level of Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas.’’

15
39. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
have stated as under:—
“The excess expenditure of Rs. 15,000 was incurred under the head
3451.00.090.11 (Revenue Section Secretariat Economic Services). The Charged
Expenditure amount to Rs. 15,000 was booked by AO, GREF  agency of Border
Road Development Board — against a writ petition (Civil) No. 787 of 2010
against Union of India V/s Ravinder, in which the judge awarded an amount of
Rs. 15,000 as a court decree. The expenditure was incurred by an agency of
BRDP which is not under the direct payment control of the Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways. However, the provisional expenditure is made in the
DDG of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways.
The above excess expenditure was brought to the knowledge of Pr. Accounts
Office of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways by the BRDB after the
close of financial year, which was later on incorporated in the Appropriation
Accounts.
On receiving the information regarding the excees expenditure immediately
the Pr. Accounts Office prepared the Excess Note as per the prescribed guidelines
and submitted to the O/o CGA after duly approved by AS&FA along with the
remedial action taken. The same was also submitted to O/o Director General of
Audit, Economic & Service Ministries vide U.O. No. Pr. AO/RTH/ATN/Gr.
No 80/2010-11/12, dated 20.11.2011 for vetting. The C&AG office confirms
the receipt of the excess expenditure note for the Ministry of Road Transport
and Highways.
The duly vetted audit comments were received by this office on 22.12.2011 in
which the Audit had directed to submit explanatory note to the Monitoring
Cell, Deptt. of Expenditure, M/o Finance for onward transmission to the PAC
Branch, Lok Sabha Secretariat for regularization of the excess expenditure.
As per the direction of Audit 40 sets of English and 30 sets of Hindi versions of
Explanatory Note in respect of Gr. No. 80 for the year 2010-11 was submitted
to the Under Secretary , Monitoring Cell, vide letter no. PAO/RTH/Saving Note/
2011-12/118 dated 31.01.2012.
Further it was also confirmed by the Monitoring Cell that the duly vetted excess
expenditure note was duly forwarded by the Monitoring Cell to the Lok Sabha
Secretariat for consideration of the Committee vide letter dated 02.02.2012.
All the required documents along with the Explanatory Notes on Excess
expenditure of Rs. 15,000 for regularization by the PAC were submitted by this
office well in time. Further, this office has not received any written and oral
reminder for non-submission of explanatory notes from Monitoring Cell or
PAC. From the above mentioned facts it may be appreciated that there was no
delay in submission of explanatory notes for the excess expenditure. Hence the
action to fix responsibility is not warranted. However suitable actions are being
taken by the BRDB to ensure that such lapse of excess expenditure over grants
does not happen in future.’’

16
40. The Ministry of Defence in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:—
“The Appropriation Acconts (Defence Services) for 2010-11 was laid before
the Parliament on 24th April, 2012 and the connected Explanatory Notes for
excess expenditure was submitted to the PAC Branch and the Monitoring Cell
of Ministry of Finance on 2nd May, 2012. The nominal delay has been noted
for future avoidance. The Explanatory Notes for the year 2011-12 have already
been vetted by the Audit and ready for submission to the PAC along with the
Appropriation Accounts (Defence Services) for 2011-12 as and when the date
for laying the same is intimated by the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs/Ministry
of Finance.’’
41. The Committee are shocked to find that the Ministry of Petroleum and
Natural Gas had forwarded their Excess Explanatory Note to the Monitoring
Cell, Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance on 7th December, 2011
but the same was furnished to the Committee by the Monitoring Cell only on
21st August, 2012 after a delay of 8 months and 15 days. Further, on checking
the records in PAC Secretariat pursuant to the reply of the Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways that their Excess Explanatory Note was furnished to
the Committee on 2nd February, 2012, it was found that this Excess Explanatory
Note was surreptitiously attached by the Monitoring Cell to the Saving Note of
the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways furnished by them with a
forwarding O.M. which mentioned about the Saving Note only. Deplorably, when
the PAC Secretariat forwarded repeated oral and written reminders to both the
Monitoring Cell and the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, none of
them cared to inform the Committee that this Excess Explanatory Note had
already been furnished. In fact, upon receiving the reminders, the Monitoring
Cell themselves wrote to the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways to
expedite furnishing of this Excess Explanatory Note. Such acts of extreme
carelessness and utter disregard of the Committee are unpardonable and the
Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry of Finance to institute a high
level enquiry into the matter, fix responsibility for the lapse and take stringent
punitive action against those found responsible. While criticizing other defaulting
Ministries/Departments also for delay in furnishing their Explanatory Notes,
the Committee would like them to learn suitable lessons from this episode and
ensure timely submission of their Explanatory Notes in future.
VI. Lackadaisical Attitude of the Ministry of Railways Towards Controlling
Excess Expenditure
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
42. In their 64th Report, the Committee had noted that during the financial year
2010-11, the Ministry of Railways incurred a total excess expenditure of Rs. 3,056.86
crore (after misclassification) in fifteen cases of ten excess registering Grants/
Appropriations which was 158.98 per cent of the preceding financial year’s total of
Rs. 1,922.84 crore incurred in ten cases of nine excess registering Grants/
Appropriations. According to the Ministry, the reasons for excess expenditure were
incurrence of more expenditure on staff cost due to implementation of the 6th Pay
Commission Recommendations, materialization of   more contractual payment than

17
anticipated, more direct purchase due to increase in special repairs, more drawal of
stores from stock, more adjustments of wages and material on POH, increase in POH
activitiy, more expenditure towards consumption of HSD oil for more activity  of
diesel locos, increase in average rate of HSD oil,  adjustment of more details, more
expenditure towards sales tax/excise duty and V AT than anticipated, incurrence of
more expenditure cost of electricity used for traction services, clearance of heavy
outstanding liabilities and more materialization of claims and  adjustment of details
than anticipated, receipt of more  details from various pension  disbursing authorities
on account of implementation of the 6th Pay Commission Report. The Committee's
examination had revealed that the Grant No. 6 (Revenue Voted)—Working Expenses—
Repairs and Maintenance of Carriages and Wagons had registered  excess expenditure
of  
`157.25 crore, `161.20 crore and `221.26 crore during the financial year
2008-09, 2009-10 and 2010-11 respectively while the Grant No. 8 (Revenue V oted)—
Working Expenses—Operating Expenses—Rolloing Stock and Equipment had
registered and excess expenditure of 
`128.30 crore during the financial year 2008-09,
similarly, the Grant No. 12 (Revenue Voted)-Miscellaneous Working Expenses
registered excess expenditure to the tune of `39.87 crore and `22.33 crore during the
financial years 2009-10 and 2007-08 respectively. The Committee had also found
that the Grant No. 13 (Revenue V oted)—Working Expenses—Provided Fund, Pension
and other Retirement Benefits had registered excess expenditure of 
`1,512.27 crore
during the financial year 2009-10. In these cases too, the Ministry had furnished
similar contributory reasons. Finding that incurring of excess expenditure under the
Grants/Appropriations operated by the Ministry of Railways was a recurring
phenomenon indicating serious flaws in their budgetary excercise, the Committee
were  not enthused by the Ministry’s stock reply that every care had been taken to
assess the expenditure under various Grants/Appropriations as precisely as possible
and to obtain supplementary allotments where necessary so that excess is avoided to
the maximum extent possible. The Committee had observed that while anticipating
the requirement of  funds by the Railways, estimations for various Sub-Heads could
have been projected more realistically by analysing properly the total monetary effect
of salary hike,  prevailing expenditure trail, upcoming demands/requirements, rising
cost, etc. which was  possible by putting in a little more effort. Concluding that the
indolent Ministry of Railways had not taken any timely corrective measures to improve
their budgeting mechanism with a view to avoiding such a huge unauthorized
expenditure, the Committee had observed that the Ministry had paid scant respect to
enforcing fiscal discipline while incurring want only excess expenditure, which was
regrettable. Taking serious note of lack of concern and sustained efforts on the part of
the Ministry in observing fiscal discipline, the Committee had recommended that the
Ministry of Railways strive earnestly for ensuring realistic estimation of their budgetary
requirements under various sub-heads of the Grants/Appropriations operated by them
so that the existing lapses/loopholes are identified and concrete remedial measures
taken to obviate excess expenditure.
43. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:—
“The excess expenditure in 2008-09 and 2009-10 had been mainly due to the
difficulty in assessing the impact of implementation of the recommendations

18
of the 6th CPC as has already been submitted to in ATNs to Reports of PAC on
Excess over V oted Grants and Charged Appropriations relating to those years.
As regards the excess in 2010-11, the reasons have been given in the other
A TNs to the present Report of PAC.
Notwithstanding the same, the recommendation of the Committee has been
noted for compliance. The Committee may appreciate the fact that the excess
in 2011-12 has drastically reduced to around 
`1,050 crore”.
44. The Committee feel that it’s untenable on the part of the Ministry of
Railways to exonerate themselves form incurring excess expenditure by
furnishing year after year the similar contributory reasons such as the
implementation of the 6th Pay Commission Recommendations, more operational
cost than anticipated, more expenditure on purchases than anticipated, more
maintenance and repair costs, etc. These reasons/factors are not that
unforeseeable and estimations for various Sub-Heads could have been projected
more realistically by analysing properly the total monetary effect of salary hike,
prevailing expenditure trail, upcoming demands/requirements, rising costier,
etc. which was possbile by putting in a little more effort. The Committee find
much to  their consternation that the Ministry of Railways have once again
merely noted the Recommendation of the Committee and sought to justify their
perpetual incurring of unauthorized excess expenditure without giving proper
regard to  their Recommendation. As such, no action has been taken to review
and overhaul their existing mechanism for estimation of budgetary requirements
which has proved to be a failure year after year. This is symptomatic of the
Ministry's penchant for disrespecting fiscal discipline, incurring want only excess
expenditure and undermining Parliamentary financial control and hence
unacceptable to the Committee. Deploring such an apathetic, boisterous and
irredeemable attitude of the Ministry, the Committee reiterate their
Recommendation asking the Ministry of Railways to strive earnestly for ensuring
realistic estimation of their budgetary requirements under various sub-heads of
the Grants/Appropriations operated  by them so that the existing lapses/loopholes
are identified and concrete remedial measures taken to abviate excess
expenditure.
45. In sum, the Committee express their strong displeasure over incurring
consistently uncontrolled unauthorized excess expenditure  by the defaulting
Ministries/Departments and would like the nodal Ministry i.e the Ministry of
Finance to bring this feeling of the Committee to the notice of the appointing
authority of the respective Chief Accounting Authority as well as Financial
Advisers of the  Ministries/Departments concerned with a view to facilitating
remedial measures which inter-alia should include fixation of responsibility so
as to avoid excess expenditure in future.

CHAPTER II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee's examination of the appropriation Accounts of the Union
Government relating to the Civil, Defence Services, Postal Services and Railways
for the financial year 2010-11 has revealed that a total excess expenditure of
`11,042.87 crore was incurred in twenty-nine cases under twenty-two Grants/
Appropriations. The Ministries/Departments which have incurred excess expenditure
during the 2010-11 fiscal are the Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Grant No.
11—Department of Commerce); the Ministry of Communications and Information
Technology (Grant No. 13—Postal Services); the Ministry of Defence (six cases
under five Grants/Appropriations i.e. Grant Nos. 21, 22, 23, 27 and Appropriation
No. 25); the Ministry of External Affairs (two cases under Grant No. 31); the Ministry
of Petroleum and Natural Gas (Grant No. 72); the Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways (Grant No. 80); the Ministry of Urban Development (two Grants i.e. Grant
Nos. 101 and 102); and the Ministry of Railways (fifteen cases under ten Grants/
Appropriations i.e. Grant Nos. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12 and 13 and Appropriation
Nos. 3, 6, 7, 8 and 12). The Committee observe an improved performance of the
Government in containing the quantum of excess expenditure during the financial
year under review as compared to that of the last fiscal  wherein a total excess
expenditure of  
`14,581.86 crore (before misclassification) was incurred in twenty
cases under eighteen Grants/Appropriations. They, however, express their concern
over the increase in the number of excess registering Ministries/Departments. The
incidence of excess expenditure of such a huge magnitude is far from justifiable
given the provision for obtaining Supplementary Demands for Grants in the course
of a financial year. The Committee desire that such an endemic failure arising out of
want of essential alacrity in the budgetary estimations, sheer dereliction of duty on
the part of budget controlling authorities to monitor the pace of expenditure and to
invoke the provision of supplementary demands and failure on their part to ensure
observance of strict fiscal discipline should be prudently addressed in the coming
years.
[Sl. No. 1, Appendix II, Para No. 1 of  64th Report of the Public Accounts
Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Department of Commerce
The Para 1 relates to various Ministries like Commerce and Industry/Defence/
External Affairs/Petroleum and Natural Gas, etc. So far as Department  of Commerce
is concerned, the excess Expenditure of 
` 6,56,75,990 against the Total Grant of
` 682,99,00,000. The excess Expenditure was incurred due to (a) booking of
expenditure (i) on projects/schemes for the benefit of North Eastern Region and
Sikkim, (ii) by the Ministry of Urban Development under the ongoing schemes; and
19

20
(b) excessive expenditure incurred by some Cheque Drawing and Disbursing Officers.
On the advice of Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs vide their
D.O.No. 7 (2)-B(SD) 2012, dated 5th February, 2013, the excess Grants of
`6,56,75,990 has been regularised by Parliament and assented to by the President of
India on 22nd March, 2013. The same has been intimated to Lok Sabha Secretariat,
Parliament House on 14th June, 2013 vide this Department O.M.No. G . 20008/10/
2011-B&A copy enclosed.
It may be mentioned that now Expenditure against the Budget is being monitored
on a monthly basis with senior officers.
Audit Comments
Excess expenditure of Rs. 6,56,75,990 (Capital V oted) has been regularised by
the Parliament and assented to by the President of India on 22nd March, 2013 as
prescribed in Article 115 (1) (b) of the Constitution of India has been obtained. Hence,
no further comments.
Sd/-
AS&FA
The above A TN has been vetted by the Office of the Principal Director of
Audit, Economic & Service Ministries, New Delhi vide their U.O.No. AMG-V/VV/
A TN/2011-12/177-179, dated 29th August, 2013.
[Department of Commerce, O.M. No. G. 20008/10/2011-B&A
(pt.), dated 13.09.2013]
Action Taken by the Ministry of External Affairs
The expenditure incurred by 180 Missions and Posts abroad and their accountal
posed unique challenge to the Ministry. However, with the implementation of the
Integrated Mission Accounts Software (I-MAS) in all the 180 Missions/Posts in a
phased manner, monitoring of expenditure has improved. As regards monitoring of
pace of expenditure, the periodicity prescribed by the Ministry of Finance for
compilation of accounts of a Ministry is monthly. The Ministry of External Affairs
fully adhere to the timelines prescribed by the Ministry of Finance in this regard. The
Missions/Posts abroad are required to send their monthly cash accounts to the Principal
Chief Controller of Accounts by the 5th day of succeeding month. The Principal
Chief Controller of Accounts consolidates the accounts of the Ministry and furnished
the same to the Controller General of Accounts (CGA) by the 10th of the succeeding
month. The Monthly accounts of the Ministry are also uploaded on the web-based
portal of CGA "e-lekha". The Accounting for the month of March involves closure
of all transactions arising during the financial year. The timelines prescribed by
Ministry of Finance for compilation of March preliminary and supplementary accounts
are also fully adhered to. The reduction of time lag in reporting of financial transactions
with the application of information technology is an on-going process involving
directions of the Ministry of Finance. Further, the Ministry always endeavours to
scrupulously follow all the instructions of Ministry of Finance issued from time to

21
time such as 33% expenditure ceiling in the last quarter, 15% expenditure ceiling in
the month of March etc. are also circulated to all concerned to be scrupulously
followed.
Sd/-
(Kusumjit Siddhu)
No. Q/Bud./125/02/2012 Additional Secretary (Financial Advisor)
Ministry of External Affairs
Action Taken by the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
During the year 2010-11, the Ministry had sought a technical supplementary of
Rs. 101,53,14,000.00 on account of additional equity investment in Engineers India
Limited (EIL). This additional equity investment was necessitated on account of receipt
of bonus shares from EIL. The President of  India was having 90.401% equity in EIL
as on 31.3.2010 and number of shares held by the President of India as on 31.3.2010
(face value of Rs. 10 each) were 507,65,700. Subsequently, it was decided to split
one equity share of face value of Rs. 10/- into two equity shares of face value of
Rs. 5/- each and to issue bonus share in the ratio of 2:1. As such for every one share
two shares were issued. Accordingly, 20,30,62,800 bonus shares (Face value of
Rs. 5/- each) worth Rs. 101,53,14,000/- were issued in the name of President of India
during 2010-11. Accordingly, during third Supplementary Demands for Grants for
the year 2010-11, we had requested Ministry of Finance to provide us technical
supplementary to the tune of Rs. 101,53,14,000 under Major Head 4802 (Capital
Section). However, on account of rounding off the amount in lakh, Ministry of Finance
could provide us only Rs. 101.53 crore and the balance amount was left out.
From the above, it could be seen that there was no excess expenditure from
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas side as this Ministry had raised the demand for
the entire sum but Ministry of Finance could provide us Rs. 1010.53 crore leaving
Rs. 14,000 crore unadjusted.
Keeping in view the fact that there was no lapse on the part of this Ministry as
far as excess expenditure under the Grant was concerned, the Public Accounts
Committee was requested to regularize the excess expenditure vide this office
O.M. of even No. dated 7.12.2011 (copy enclosed).
(The above mentioned A TN has been examined and vetted by the office of the
Principal Director of Audit, Economic and Service Ministries, vide their U.O. letter
No. AMG-VI/App.A/C/A TN/2013-14/11-13 dated 30.04.2013).
Sd/-
Additional Secretary and
Financial Advisor
[Ministry of P&NG , O.M. No. G-24011/1/2012 Fin. 1, dated 31.10.2013]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways

22
An excess amount of Rs. 15,000/- was incurred by B.R.D.B. under the head
3451.00.090.11 Revenue charged—Sectt. Economic Service.
1. The Excess Expenditure erroneously booked under Revenue Charged
due to urgency in implementing court order against Court Case No. WP(C)
787 of 2010 filed by Ravinder Vs UoI & others.
2. The petitioner Shri Ravinder S/o Shri Jai Lal VPO Chandwas,
Distt. Bhiwani was provisionally selected for the post of Driver MY (OG)
under UR category against Advertisement No. 2/2008.
3. On checking of the Driving Licence of the candidate at the time of
introduction, it was observed that on the first page of driving licence
No. 1616/E1E the date of issue was mentioned as 28th July, 2006,
however, on the next page the date of issue was mentioned as 16th July,
2008. Therefore, the prima-facie  evidence raised the doubt of the
genuineness of the Driving Licence. Hence, the candidature of
Shri Ravinder was cancelled by the Competent Authority at that point of
time.
4. The genuineness of the Driving Licence was later verified from the issuing
authority and was found correct as intimated by the District Transport
Officer, Imphal (East) vide their letter no. 2/10/DL/DTO/(IE), dated
2nd December, 2010.
5. Hon'ble High Court of Delhi vide order dated 9th December, 2010 directed
to pay a sum of Rs. 15000/- to the petitioner as cost of litigation within
eight weeks from the date of order.
6. To comply with the court order and to avoid Contempt of Court Order,
GREF Centre was directed to implement the court order vide Dte. GBR
Fax message dated 4th January, 2011. Accordingly GREF Centre, Pune
has made the payment on 5th February, 2011 to the petitioner through
SBI, Pune, DD bearing No. 173367 dated 14th January, 2011. The
expenditure was booked under MH 3451.00.090.11 and Charge Head
099/066/21, which requires to be regularized under charged expenditure.
The compelling reason for making this expenditure, erroneously under
MH 3451.00.090.11, was to avoid contempt of court and to comply court
direction/order.
7. It may be appreciated that excess expenditure of Rs. 15,000 was incurred
to avoid contempt of court and to comply court direction/order.
8. Remedial Measures
(i) DGBR has been asked to be careful while compiling expenditure in
proper Code Heads.
(ii) PCDA (BR) has also been asked to issue instructions to all AOs to
ensure that such cases do not recur in future.
Sd/-
Addl. Secretary and Financial Advisor
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways

23
Action Taken by the Ministry of Urban Development
The excess expenditure attributed to payment of enhanced Salary and Dearness
Allowance, on implementation of MACP Scheme as well as clearance of payment of
local bodies towards electricity, property tax, etc. However, kind observation and
recommendation of Hon'ble PAC is taken care of. Instructions have also been issued
to all concerned to strengthen the monitoring of expenditure to keep the expenditure
within the budgeted allocation and no excess expenditure over the grant or
appropriation is allowed to occur.
The explanatory note containing the reasons for excess was sent to the Principal
Directorate of Audit, Economic & Service Ministries vide letter No. G-23012/4/2011-
Bt.(UD) dated 5.10.2011 which has been duly vetted by the Audit vide their UO No.
AMG-1/VV/ATN/2011-12/544-546 dated 19.12.2011.
The excess demand statement has been sent to the Ministry of Finance for
regularisation of the excess expenditure during the Budget Session vide this Ministry's
letter No. G-23012/1/2012-Bt.(UD) dated 11.02.2013.
The contents of the Action Taken Note on the Recommendations of PAC were
sent to the Principal Director of Audit, Economic & Service Ministries vide letter
No. G-23012/4/2011-Bt.(UD) dated 11th April, 2013 for vetting. The Principal
Director, Audit vide their U.O. No. AMG-V/VV/A TN/2013-14/114-116 dated
26th June, 2013 has stated that the Action Taken Note has been examined in Audit
and the Audit has no comments to offer thereon.
Sd/-
(Naresh Salecha)
Joint Secretary and Financial Adviser
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
(Grant No. 21)
In this Paragraph, the Committee have observed that the Appropriation Accounts
of the Union Government relating to the Defence Pensions, Defence Services, Postal
Services and Railways for the financial year 2010-11 has revealed that a total excess
expenditure of Rs. 11042.87 crore was incurred in 29 cases under 22 Grants/
Appropriations. The Committee have expressed their concern over the increase in
the number of excess registering Ministries/Departments and have observed that the
incidence of excess expenditure of such a huge magnitude is far from justifiable
given the provision for obtaining Supplementary Demands for Grants in the course
of a financial year. The Committee have desired that such an endemic failure arising
out of want of essential alacrity in the budgetary estimations, sheer dereliction of
duty on the part of budget controlling authorities to monitor the pace of expenditure
and to invoke the provision of Supplementary demands and failure on their part to
ensure observance of strict fiscal discipline should be prudently addressed in the
coming years.
2. In this regard, it is submitted that out of total excess expenditure of
Rs. 11042.87 crore incurred in 29 cases under 22 Grants/Appropriations, an excess

24
expenditure of Rs. 3,336.41 crores only was incurred during the year 2010-11 under
Grant No. 21-Defence Pensions, which is 9.81% of the total grants. It is further
mentioned that the approved BE in 2010-11 was Rs. 25000 crores and at RE 2010-11
stage, an amount of Rs. 37647 crores was requested under Grant No. 21-Defence
Pensions, however, due to financial constraints, MoF approved only Rs. 34000 crores,
that is, less Supplementary was provided than the amount projected in RE 2010-11.
Also, the actual expenditure of Rs. 37,336 crores incurred under the Grant, was in
line with the RE projection of Rs. 37,647 crores, submitted by the Ministry to MoF.
Moreover, the payment of pension to the Defence Pensioners is a committed
expenditure and cannot be stopped for the want of funds, which resulted into excess
expenditure.
3. It is further submitted that the excess expenditure of Rs. 3336.31 crores under
the voted portion of Revenue Section under Gr. No. 21-Defence Pensions, occurred
mainly due to substantial improvement in pension in respect of Personnel Below Officer
Rank (PBOR) discharged prior to 01.01.2006; booking of pending Pension scrolls
received from banks to clear amount under suspense and more balances of Earned
Leave (EL) at the credit of retirees and encashment of Earned Leave (EL) and also
payment of 10 days EL provided during Leave Travel Concession (LTC). Also, in view
of the fact that the expenditure, for which cash flow had already taken place in the
books of RBI, was required to be brought to account, the pending pension scrolls had
to be booked under the Defence Pensions Head to clear the amount laying under RBI
Suspense to reflect the true picture of cash flow from the Government account.
4. Under the charge portion of Revenue Section, the excess expenditure of
Rs. 10.75 lakh under Gr. No. 21-Defence Pensions occurred mainly due to
implementation of Court Decrees which is an obligatory expenditure and cannot be
predicted in advance and cannot be stopped for want of funds.
5. As a measure of control, the Ministry of Defence has been advising the
budget estimating authorities of Defence Pensions to prepare their budget with utmost
caution and accuracy while estimating requirement of funds and the budgetary
projections be made after an accurate and realistic assessment of the requirements
and visulization of the actual/anticipated expenditure. In this regard, instructions were
issued vide MoD(Fin.) ID No. 2(6)/MO/2010-11/911 dt. 11/7/2011, MoD(Fin.) ID
No. 2(6)/MO/2010/1617 dt. 9th Dec., 2011.
6. Subsequently, instructions were also issued to PCDA(P), Allahabad and
O/o the CGDA, New Delhi vide ID No. 2(6)/MO/2011 dt. 12/7/2012 wherein it was
advised to adopt e-governance model to utilize the information technology/tools so
as to establish a centralized data base of Pensioners and networking of all the banks
so as to arrive at a correct estimation of pension liability and expenditure in a particular
year. Necessary monitoring and follow up action in this regard would be ensured.
O/o the CGDA vide their letter No. A/B/I/0107/AA-DP/10-11, dt. 6/6/2012 informed
about various measures initiated to promote e-governance model and use of IT.
7. Also, as per the directions of Ministry of Finance, to Review the existing
arrangement of Reporting and Accounting of Defence Pension, an Internal Audit was
conducted by O/o the CGDA, and a brief report was furnished vide their letter

25
No. A/B/I/9130-Study Report/2012, dated 11/5/2012 wherein various measures to
improve the system have been suggested by O/o the CGDA. The report was forwarded
to Min. of Finance vide this Office ID No. 2(8)/REBE/MO/2009/187 dt. 19/6/2012.
In accordance with the recommendations contained in the report, following measures/
actions have been taken:—
The issue of incorrect or invalid PPO Nos. missing details in the scrolls have
been taken up with banks specifically with SBI, the largest PDA.
• PCDA(P), Allahabad has been asked to take into account pending scrolls
of the previous years while estimating budget for the next years.
• An exercise named 'Project Sangam' has been undertaken in order to
create an up-to-date Pensions database in collaboration with PCDA(P),
Allahabad and various pension disbursing agencies.
• PCDA(P) has taken up with  Banks to provide Pension Payment scrolls
on electronic format.
• As per the latest development made under Project Sangam, it is mentioned
that there are about 23 lakh Pensioners enrolled under Defence Pensions
and out of these details of about 15 lakh pensioners have been
computerized and the remaining 8 lakh pensioners is the process of
computerization.
• Apart from "Project Sangam", a new web based application for "Pension
Accounting System" has also been developed, which is under trial running
process. The project once implemented will give a more accurate database
for monitoring the pace of expenditure and will be very useful while
predicting the future  requirement of funds.
Sd/-
(Rajnish Kumar)
JS&Addl. FA(RK)

MOST IMPORTANT
BUDGETARY MATTER
Ministry of Defence (Finance)
Main Office
Subject : Instructions/Cautions for preparation of Revised/Budget estimates on
realistic basis to avoid savings or excess w.r.t. total allocations/grant under
each sub/detailed head.
It has been noticed by this Division that Excess expenditure of Rs. 10.75 lakhs
occurred under charged portion of revenue section under Demand No. 21—Defence
Pensions, against the sanctioned provision during the financial year 2010-11.
It is, therefore, stressed that utmost caution and accuracy be adopted while
estimating requirement of funds for RE 2011-12, BE 2012-13 after taking into account
all the instructions issued by Ministry of Finance from time to time and adhere to the
expenditure control during the current/ensuing financial year as well. In order to
ensure that the budgetary projections are made after an accurate and realistic
assessment of the requirements and visualization of the actual/anticipated expenditure,
detailed reasons by giving the numercial impact in respect of each components of the
respective detailed/sub-head should invariably be recorded where the estimations
are increased or decreased by 10% or more w.r.t. the actual expenditure during the
last financial year (i.e. 2010-11), etc.
These instructions may please by circulated to all concerned for avoiding savings
or excess over the approved grant. Remedial measures/corrective action taken in this
regard may kindly be intimated to this Division for apprising the positions to DGA,
DS.
Sd/-
(T. Henry Franklin)
Dy. Financial Adviser (MO)
Tel: 23014890/2404
1. Jt. CGDA(A/Cs & Budget)
2. Pr. CDA (P), Allahabad.
[MoD (Fin.) ID No. 2(6)/MO/2010-11/911, dated 11/07/2011]
26

No. 2(6)/MO/2010/1617
Government of India
Ministry of Defence (Finance)
Main Office
New Delhi, dated 9th December, 2011
The undersigned is directed to refer to this Division ID No. 2(6)/MO/2010-11/
911 dated 11/07/2011 where in it has been requested for utmost caution and accuracy
to be adopted while assessing Budget Estimates.
2. In the revised draft Head wise Appropriation Account (Stage-III) in r/o Gr.
No.- 21, Defence Pensions, for 2010-11 it has been observed that there is an excess
of Rs. 333630.73 lakhs in the voted portion of Revenue Section of the grant against
the sanctioned provision. Hence, it is requested to strictly adhere to the instructions
issued in the above mentioned ID dated 11/7/2011 so that the Savings/Excess under
the grant may be avoided in future.
3. Further, it is also requested to give comprehensive and specific reasons along
with supporting documents for excess expenditure incurred under sub-heads mentioned
below in r/o the Gr. No.-21, Defence Pensions for the year 2010-11 as observed in
the revised draft Head wise Appropriation Accounts (Stage-III) so that the same may
be incorporated in the Explanatory Note which has to be submitted to the Monitoring
Cell of Ministry of Finance for onward transmission to PAC. The excess incurred
under Sub Heads are as follows:
(Rs. in thousands)
Sub-Head Provisions Actual Expenditure Excess
2071.02.101.01 29848,06,15 33037,57,61 3189,51,46
2071.02.102.01 933,42,29 980,29,87 46,87,58
2071.02.102.03 106,87,63 124,98,83 18,11,20
2071.02.103.01 1947,07,81 2038,35,68 91,27,87
2071.02.103.03 240,88,55 252,30,41 11,41,86
4. It is requested to furnish the reasons for excess expenditure immediately/by
return fax for incorporation of the same in the Explanatory Note.
5. This issues with the approval of JS & Addl. FA(R).
Sd/-
(T.H. Franklin)
Dy. Financial Adviser (E/MO)
Tel: 011-23012180/23012404
Shri Shharat Sharma, IDAS
Jt. CGDA/ (A/Cs & Budget)
Office of the CGDA,
Ulaanbataar Road,
Delhi Cantt.
Copy to:
Pr. C.D.A.(P)
Allahabad.
27

Ministry of Defence (Finance)
Main Office
Subject: Instructions/Caution for preparation of Revised/Budget estimates on
realistic basis to avoid savings or excess w.r.t. total allocations/grant under
each sub/detailed head.
While going through the March Final Account (15/2012)/expenditure Statement
in r/o Defence Pensions, it has been observed that during the Financial Year 2011-12
an excess expenditure of Rs. 3569.39 crores under Revenue Portion of the Grant has
been incurred, against the sanctioned provision of Rs. 34,000 crores.
2. It is, therefore, stressed that utmost caution and accuracy be adopted while
estimating requirement of funds for RE 2012-13 and BE 2013-14 after taking into
account the instructions issued by Ministry of Finance from time to time and adhere
to the expenditure control during the current/ensuing financial year as well. In order
to ensure that the budgetary projections are made after an accurate and realistic
assessment of the requirements and visualization of the actual/anticipated expenditure,
detailed reasons by giving the numerical impact in respect of each components of the
respective detailed/sub-head should invariably be recorded where the estimations
are increased or decreased by 10% or more w.r.t. the actual expenditure during the
last financial year (i.e. 2011-12) etc.
3. It is also observed that, from the Financial year 2008-09 onwards there is a
persistent excess expenditure being booked under the Pension Heads which clearly
indicate systemic weakness in budgetary Control. It is also observed that there has
been wide gap between the Budget Estimate figures and the actual RBI Cash flow on
account of Pension expenditure during the last few years which leads to accumulation
of amount under Suspense Head. Due to this reason, a huge excess expenditure of
Rs. 8999.54 crores has been incurred in the FY 2009-10 to clear pending Pension
V ouchers/scrolls lying under Suspense head. This has been adversely commented by
the PAC in its 40th Report. The Public Accounts Committee in it's report pointed out
that concrete measures need to be taken to revamp the system so that the pension
liability can be correctly forecast and factored into the budgetary estimations. The
committee also stressed for the corrective action plan so that existing deficiencies
and shortcomings in the pension payment system are rectified. It is also suggested to
adopt e-governance model to utilize the information technology services/tools so as
to establish a centralized data base of pensioners and networking of all the banks so
as to arrive at a correct estimation of pension liability and expenditure in a particular
year.
4. In this regard, kind attention is drawn towards various measures initiated by
the O/o CGDA in consultation with various pension sanctioning authorities to promote
e-governance model and use of IT as intimated by the O/o the CGDA vide their UO
letter No.A/B/I/0107/AA-DP/10-11 dt. 06.06.2012 (copy enclosed). It is requested
to implement these measures as soon a possible so that PCDA(P) Allahabad can do
28

29
correct and timely booking of pension expenditure by automating classification and
accounting system.
5. These instructions may please be circulated to all concerned for avoiding
savings or excess over the approved grant. Remedial measures/corrective action taken
in this regard may kindly be intimated to this Division for apprising the positions to
DGA, DS.
6. This issues with the approval of JS & Addl. FA(RK).
Sd/-
(S.K. Jassal)
Asstt. Financial Adviser (MO)
Tel: 23014890/2404
1. Jt. CGDA(A/Cs & Budget)
Palam, Delhi Cantt.
2. Pr. CDA (P) Allahabad.
[MoD(Fin.) ID No. 2(6)/MO/2011/51/ fg-) dt. 12/07/2012]

Office of the Controller General of Defence Accounts
(Accounts & Budget Division)
Ulaanbataar Road, Palam, Delhi Cantt.
Subject: Action Taken on the observations/recommendations contained in the
40th Report of the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) (15th Lok Sabha)
on Excess over V oted Grants and Appropriation (2009-10)-Defence
Pensions.
Ministry of Defence (Fin./MO) may kindly refer to their DO letter No. 26(7)/
MO/2011/195 dated 23rd May, 2012 on the above subject.
The observations/recommendations contained in paras 1,2,3,4,5,6,10 & 14 relate
to Appropriation Accounts of the Union Government including Civil Ministries,
Defence Services, Postal Services and Railways for the year 2009-10.
Para 9 of the PAC report was specific to the Defence Pensions (Grant No. 21),
therefore, 'Action Taken Note' was sent to Ministry of Defence (Fin./MO) vide this
office UO of even number dated 15.05.2012. Comments on other paras of the PAC
report are as under:
Paras 1 & 3
In these paras, Public Accounts Committee has highlighted the total excess
expenditure of Rs. 14581.86 crore in 20 cases pertaining to 18 Grants in the
Appropriation Accounts of the Union Government for the financial year 2009-10,
which includes excess booking of Rs. 8999.54 crore in respect of Grant No. 21 Defence
Pensions. In this regard it is mentioned that since budget was not available for booking
of pending pension scrolls, the amount was booked to suspense head by PCDA(P),
Allahabad. The booking to Pension heads was however done at the closing of accounts
for the year, at the instance of Ministry of Defence (Fin./MO) in order to clear the
amount lying under suspense. The same as appropriately explained in the
Appropriation Accounts in respect of Defence Pensions for the year 2009-10.
In this regard, PCDA(P), Allahabad has been instructed to streamline budget
estimation process vide this office letter dated 10.05.2012 (copy enclosed) so as to
avoid recurrence of excess expenditure in future because of incorrect estimation of
budget.
Further, in accordance with the observations of PAC, Pension disbursement
agencies viz. banks have been approached for transmission of pension payment data
electronically so as to enable PCDA(P),  Allahabad to ensure correct and timely
booking of pension expenditure by automating classification & accounting system
through computerized system.
Para 2
Para deals mainly with misclassification of expenditure in Grants/Appropriations
in respect of Ministry of Railways, hence no comments.
Para 4
No comments. Ministry may reply.
30

31
Paras 5, 6 & 9
In order to ensure realistic estimation of budget for pension expenditure,
necessary instructions have been issued to PCDA(P), Allahabad to streamline budget
forecasting process and take into account previous year's liabilities while projecting
expenditure for next year.
Further, to promote e-governance model and use of Information Technology,
following measures have been initiated by this office in consultation with various
Pension sanctioning authorities:
/circle6New computer application for pension sanction is being developed to create
pension data base at the time of issue of PPOs.
/circle6In order to automate disbursement and accounting of pension payments
made by departmental PDA i.e. DPDO, a web based online application
has been implemented in all 61 DPDOs.
/circle6Pension disbursement agencies viz. Banks have been approached for
transmission of pension payment data electronically so as to enable
PCDA(P) Allahabad to ensure correct and timely booking of pension
expenditure by automating classification & accounting system.
Para 10
Monthly analysis of booking is carried out to find out variation between the
expenditure booked to Defence pension heads and the cash flow as per  RBI books.
Matter is pursued with PCDA(P) Allahabad and other pension disbursing offices to
take necessary steps to bring down the gap between RBI cash flow and booking made
by them to pension heads. Further, PCDA(P) Allahabad has been requested to liaise
with the Public Sector Banks concerned to get the pension scrolls expedited.
Para 14
No comments.
This issues with the approval of CGDA.
Sd/-
Jt. CGDA(A/Cs & Budget)
DFA(E/MO)
Ministry of Defence (Fin./MO)
South Block, New Delhi
UO No.A/B/I/0107/AA-DP/10-11
Dated 06.06.2012

Office of the Controller General of Defence Accounts
(Accounts & Budget Division)
Ulaanbaatar Road, Palam, Delhi Cantonment-110010
Subject: Review of existing arrangements of reporting and accounting of Defence
Pensions.
Ministry of Defence (Fin./MO) may kindly refer to their ID No. 2(8)REBE/
2009/1938 dated 16.03.2012 on the above subject.
2. The Report submitted vide this office UO Note of even No. dated 09.02.2012
has been reviewed in light of observations contained in your ID under reference and
subsequent discussions with FA(DS) on the above subject. A revised Internal Audit
Report is enclosed for your further necessary action.
3. Further, following action to implement various recommendations/suggestions
contained in the Report has been initiated:
/circle6The issue of incorrect or invalid PPO Nos., missing details in the scrolls
has been taken up with banks specifically with SBI, the largest PDA.
/circle6PCDA(P), Allahabad has been asked to take into account pending scrolls
of the previous years while estimating budget for the next year.
/circle6The office has undertaken an exercise, named 'Project Sangam', in order
to create an up-to-date Pensions database in collaboration with PCDA(P),
Allahabad and various pension disbursing agencies.
/circle6PCDA(P) has taken up with Banks to provide Pension payment scrolls
on electronic format.
/circle6Further, Department of Banking, Ministry of Finance, GOI has proposed
to form a committee for working out uniform format for transfer of pension
payment data by the banks on electronic format and manner of data
exchange.
4. The above measures are expected to improve budgeting and accounting of
pension expenditure.
This issues with the approval of CGDA.
Sd/-
Jt. CGDA (Accounts & Budget)
JS & Addl. FA(R)
Ministry of Defence (Finance/Main Office)
South Block, New Delhi - 110 011
[UO No.A/B/I/9130-Study Report/2012 dated 11/05/2012]
32

Ministry of Defence (Finance)
Main Office
Subject: Expenditure Statements for the month of Oct. 2011 to Dec. 2011 and Review
of existing arrangements of reporting and accounting of Defence Pensions.
Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs (Budget Division) may
kindly refer to their DO letter No. 2(24)-B(AC)/2010 dt. 8.9.2011 and
OM No. F.2(28)-B(AC)/2011 dated 08.02.2012 requesting thereby to have an internal
audit conducted on the expenditure of Defence Pension with specific emphasis on arriving
at the reasons for substantial increase in expenditure on Pension in the FY-2011-12.
2. Accordingly, O/o the CGDA was requested to review the existing arrangement
of reporting and accounting of Defence Pensions and to have internal audit conducted
on the expenditure of Defence Pensions in accordance with the advice of MoF. It was
also requested to focus on all the other aspects such as increase in retirements/impact
of DA increase/impact of implementing improvement in pensions of PBOR pensioners
etc. and also the matter relating to accumulations under 'Suspense Head', timely
accounting of Pension Payment, Speeding up the reporting mechanism and
reconciliation of payments etc. may also be taken as a part of the study report.
3. O/o of the CGDA have now submitted its report vide UO No.A/B/I/9130-
Study Report/2012 dt. 11.05.2012, same is forwarded herewith for further necessary
action.
4. In the report, vide para 2.8 it has been clarified that the progressive expenditure
booked till July, 2011 was higher than that of the progressive amount till July 2010,
due to booking of previous year's pension payment scrolls/paid vouchers amounting
to Rs. 3338.94 crore (not booked till March 2011). Later, these bookings were
withdrawn from the booking of FY 2011-12 and booked in the last year's account
(i.e. in the FY 2010-11) through manual correction in November, 2011. The other
aspects mentioned in the DO letter dt. 8.9.2011 such as increase in retirements/impact
of DA increase/impact of implementing improvement in pensions of PBOR pensioners
etc. are also focused in the report. Moreover, action plans have been initiated by
O/o the CGDA for automating classification and accounting of Pension expenditure
to improve budgeting and accounting of pension expenditure.
5. This issues with the approval of Financial Advisor (Defence Services).
Sd/-
(V eena Prasad)
JS & Addl. FA(VP)
Tele: 23012204
Shri N.M. Jha,
Director Budget
Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
(Budget Division)
North Block, New Delhi.
[MoD(Fin.)ID No. 2(8)/REBE/MO/2009/187, dated 19/06/2012.]
33

34
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
In view of the recurrence of incidences of excess expenditure and the
observations/recommendations of the Committee on the subject, the Ministry has
been issuing instructions to all concerned for ensuring proper control of Defence
expenditure and stressing the need to avoid any excess over and above the grant
approved by the Parliament. Detailed instructions have been issued to all concerned
vide MoD(Fin.) ID No. 7(5)/Bud-I/2011 dated 29/11/2011, 10(01)/Bud-I/2012(PC)
dated 11/12/20-12, 10(01)/Bud-I/2012 dated 06/02/2013, 10(01)/Bud-I/2013 (PC)
dated 07/03/2013, 14/03/2013, 20/03/2013, 26/03/2013 (Copies enclosed) for strict
monitoring of expenditure. The Ministry is also monitoring the Defence expenditure
on monthly basis to ensure that funds allocated are fully utilized to achieve the planned
objective and avoid excess expenditure.
Further, in view of the specific observations of the Committee to observe strict
financial discipline, three Committees are being constituted comprising representatives
from Defence Finance Division, Budget Holders/Financial Planning Directorates of
the Services and other agencies under the Ministry of Defence and Controller General
of Defence Accounts. These Committees would make an in-depth examination of the
issues to identify weaknesses in the budgetary control systems that allow repeated
instances of excess expenditure and formulate solutions to the same.
Sd/-
(V eena Prasad)
Joint Secretary & Addl. FA(VP)
[MoD (Fin.) ID No. 7(2)/Bud-I/2013, dated 12-07-2013.]

Ministry of Defence (Finance)
Budget-I
Subject: Monitoring and Control of Defence Expenditure.
Attention is invited to this Division’s ID No. 5(3)/Bud.-I/2011 dated 31st May,
2011 on  the above cited subject vide which instructions were issued that steps may
be taken by the FP Directorates, CGDA and at the level of the Ministry of Defence,
Departmental Groups headed by FA(Acq.) in respect of Acquisition heads and Addl.
FAs in respect of other heads in order  to prevent excesses/savings under various
heads.
2. The Public Accounts Committee, in Para 12 of its 36th Report on action
taken by the Government on their observations/recommendations contained in the
7th Report (15th Lok Sabha) on “Excesses over V oted Grants and Charged
Appropriations(2007-08)” has observed that “no firm  measures have been put in
place as yet by the Ministries/Departments concerned to avoid  excess expenditure
by the defaulter Ministries. The Committee's scrutiny reveals that the Ministries which
scrupulously adhere to the General Financial Rules and have unwavering commitment
to financial discipline and prosperity do succeed in avoiding excess expenditure. The
Committee find no cogent reasons for the inevitability of excess expenditure when
Government get opportunities to present the Supplementary Demands for Grants
during the three sessions of Parliament in a year. In an age of e-governance made
feasible by computerization and instant connectivity between field formations,
Subordinate Offices and Head Quarters irregularities like excess expenditure should
not recur. The Committee express their displeasure over the tepid approach of the
defaulter Ministries/Departments particularly for bad planning, lack of foresight and
ineffective monitoring on the part of budget controlling authorities while preparing
both budget estimates as well as Supplementary Demands for Grants. The Committee,
therefore, reiterate the need for scrupulous scrutiny of the budget proposal both at
the time of  preparation of Demands for Grants, rigorous monitoring of the pace of
expenditure and strict compliance of General Financial Rules to eliminate the
possibility of excess expenditure, under spending wrongful appropriation etc."
3. In the light of the observations of the PAC, all concerned authorities are
once again requested to take all necessary measures, including use of electronic
systems, to ensure proper planning and monitoring of expenditure vis-a-vis voted
grants so that excess expenditure is avoided. Further,  scrupulous scrutiny of the
budget proposal, both at the time of preparation of Demands for Grants and
Supplementary Demands for Grants, and compliance to provisions of the General
Financial Rules may also be ensured to eliminate the possibility of excess expenditure,
under-spending, wrongful appropriations etc.
4. It is, therefore, again reiterated that in order to ensure even flow of expenditure
and to avoid any excess expenditure/savings in any Grant, the instructions issued on
‘Monitoring and Control of Defence Expenditure' should be followed strictly and
meetings of the Monitoring Groups should be held regularly. The proceedings of
such meetings should invariably be endorsed to the Secretary (Defence Finance).
35

36
5. While complying with the above instructions, the instructions issued earlier
by this Division on Monitoring and Control of Defence expenditure may also be
adhered to.
Sd/-
(V eena Prasad)
JS & Addl. FA (VP)
FA (Acq.) & AS
All Joint Secretaries/Addl. FAs & JS/FMs
DGFP, ACNS(P&P), ACAS(Fin. P),DGOF
CCR&D (R&M), DGQA, DGNCC, DGMF, DGAQA, Dte. of Standardisation
[MoD (Fin.) ID No. 7(5)/Bud.-I/2011, dated 29 November, 2011.]
Copy for information to:
VCOAS, VCNS, VCAS, Chairman OFB, SA to RM, CISC & CGDA, DG (Acq.).

Ministry of Defence (Finance)
(Budget-I Section)
Subject: Cash Management System in Central Government—modified exchequer
control based expenditure management and restrictions on expenditure
management and restrictions on expenditure during the last quarter of the
financial year—reg.
Reference: Ministry of Finance (i) DO letter No. F.2(31)-B(AC)/2012 dated
4th December, 2012 and (ii) OM no.21(1)/-PD/2005 dated
5th December, 2012.
Copies of above mentioned references received from Ministry of  Finance on
the subject cited above are enclosed herewith for information and strict compliance.
Sd/-
(Kanwaldeep Singh)
Director (Fin./Bud.)
Tel. 2301 2554
DGFP; ACNS(P&P); ACAS(Fin. P); ACIDS(FP), HQIDS;
CCR&D(R&M); DGQA; DGNCC; DGOF
[MoD(Fin.) ID No.10 (01)/Bud.-I/2012 (PC), dated 11th December, 2012.]
Copy to:
AFA (MO)—for similar action in respect of MoD (Civil) Budget.
37

R.S.GUJRAL GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
Finance Secretary MINISTRY OF FINANCE
DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE
NORTH BLOCK, NEW DELHI-110 001
Tel.: 011-23092929, 23092663
Fax : 011-23092546
E.mail : secyexp@nic.in
Web. http://finmin.nic.in
D.O. No. F.2(31)—B (AC)/2012
Dear Shashi Kant, 4th December, 2012
Attention is invited to Raksha Mantri's D.O. letter No. 10(01)/Bud./2010(PC)/
5671-F/RM/2012 dated 24.11.2012 addressed to Finance Minister regarding
identifying possible savings under Capital Grant of Defence Services in the current
year.
2. It is noted that the expenditure of the Defence Ministry in the last 4 months
of the financial years has been abnormally high, in this regard, I may bring to your
kind attention that there are stipulations on expenditure restriction in the last quarter
of the financial year, and also in the month of March. The expenditure in the last
quarter and in the month of March is required to be contained within 33% and 15%
of the BE, respectively, while in the  earlier years, some relaxations have been made
in  this regard; however, in the current financial year, due to the challenging fiscal
situation, no relaxation would be made. This may kindly be kept in view.
With kind regards,
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(R.S. Gujral)
Shri Shashi Kant Sharma,
Defence Secretary,
M/o Defence,
South Block,
New Delhi.
38

MOST URGENT
F. No. 21(1)/-PD/2005
Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
Budget Division
(Cash Management Cell)
North Block, New Delhi
dated December 5, 2012
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject: Cash Management System in Central Government—modified exchequer
control based expenditure management and restrictions on expenditure
during the last quarter of the financial year—reg.
The undersigned is directed to refer to the recently concluded pre-budget/RE
meeting wherein Finance Secretary has emphasized on the need for prudent financial
management/expenditure rationalization due to the tight resource position in the current
financial year. The necessity to curb rush of expenditure in the last quarter of the year
particularly in the month of March and restricting the expenditure in the last quarter
of the current financial year to 33% and during the month of March, 2013 to 15% of
the Budget Estimates, was reiterated.
2. It is, therefore, requested that the 33% and 15% expenditure ceilings in respect
of each scheme, in the last quarter of the current financial year and during the month
of March, 2013 respectively, should be strictly adhered to. Where the Revised
Estimates for 2012-13 are lower than Budget Estimates, actual expenditure may be
kept within RE ceilings. Compliance of the  above instructions is being monitored at
the highest level  in the Ministry of Finance. All FAs are therefore requested to enforce
compliance on the above instructions without any deviation.
3. This issues with the approval of Finance Secretary.
Sd/-
(Dr. Rajat Bhargava)
Joint Secretary (Budget)
To
All Financial Advisors
39

IMPORTANT
Ministry of Defence (Finance)
Budget-I Section
Subject: Cash Management System in Central Government—modified exchequer
control based expenditure management and restrictions on expenditure
management and restrictions on expenditure during the last quarter of the
financial year—regarding.
Reference:—MoD (Fin.) ID No. 10(01)/Bud.-I/2012 dated 11th December, 2012.
In continuation of this Division's ID under reference, it is stated that Ministry
of Finance, Deptt. of Expenditure vide their O.M. No. 23 (9) E. Coord./2012 dated
28th January, 2013 has further clarified that expenditure in the last quarter of the
current Financial year may be restricted to 33% and during the month of March,
2013 to 15% of the Budget Estimates in respect of each scheme. Further, it may be
ensured that the total actual expenditure is kept within the communicated RE ceilings.
2. All concerned are requested that the above instructions be strictly complied
with.
Sd/-
(Kanwaldeep Singh)
Director (Fin./Budget)
Tel. 23012554
DG FP; ACNS (P&P); ACAS (Fin P); ACIDS (FP), HQ IDS;
CCR&D (R&M); DGQA; DGNCC; DGOF; CGDA.
[MoD (Fin.) ID No. 10(01)/Bud.-I/2012, dated 06th February, 2013.]
Copy to:-
AFA (MO)—For similar action in respect of MoD (Civil) Budget.
40

Ministry of Defence (Finance)
Budget-I Section
Subject: Cash Management System in Central Government—modified exchequer
control based expenditure management and restrictions on expenditure
management and restrictions on expenditure during the last quarter of the
financial year—regarding.
Reference: MoD(Fin.) ID No.10(01)/Bud.-I/2012 dated 06th February, 2012.
This is in continuation to this Division's ID cited above vide which it was
intimated that Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Expenditure have emphasized that
expenditure in the last quarter of the current financial year may be restricted to 33%
and 15% during the month of March, 2013 in respect of each scheme and total actual
expenditure is to be kept within the communicated RE ceilings. In  case the Revised
Estimates for 2012-13 are lower than Budget Estimates actual expenditure may be
kept with RE ceilings.
2. It is once again reiterated that instructions may please be issued to all the
budget holders under your jurisdiction for strictly follow the instructions issued
by Finance Ministry and to ensure that no excess expenditure over and above
RE 2012-13 ceilings occurs.
Sd/-
(Kanwaldeep Singh)
Director (Fin./Budget)
Tel. 23012554
DG FP; ACNS (P&P); ACAS (Fin P); ACIDS (FP), HQ IDS;
CCR&D (R&M); DGQA; DGNCC; DGOF.
[MoD (Fin.) ID No. 10(01)/Bud.-I/2013, dated 07th March, 2013.]
41

Ministry of Defence (Finance)
(Budget-I)
Subject: Control over Defence Expenditure: RE 2012-13.
Reference: In continuation of this  Division's ID No. 10 (01)/Bud. I/2012 (PC)
dt. 07th March, 2013.
A copy of D.O. letter No. 21(1)-PD/2005 V ol. II dt. 8th March, 2013 from
Finance Secretary to FA (DS) is forwarded for your information and strict compliance.
Sd/-
(Kanwaldeep Singh)
Director (Fin./Budget)
Tel. 23012554
CGDA,
DG FP; ACNS (P&P); ACAS (Fin P); ACIDS (FP); CCR&D (R&M); DGOF; DGQA;
DGNCC,  DGAQA, DGATVP , Director (Standardisation), MoD (Fin./MO).
[MoD (Fin.) ID No. 10(01)/Bud.-I/2012 (PC), dated 14/03/2013.]
42

IMMEDIATE/TOP PRIORITY
R.S.GUJRAL GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
Finance Secretary MINISTRY OF FINANCE
DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE
NORTH BLOCK, NEW DELHI-110 001
Tel.: 011-23092929, 23092663
Fax : 011-23092546
E.mail : secyexp@nic.in
Web. http://finmin.nic.in
File No.21(1)-PD/2005 V ol-II
8th March, 2013
Dear Smt. Priti,
You may kindly refer to instructions issued by Budget Division on December 5,
2012. It was requested that expenditure ceilings of 33% in the last quarter and 15%
of BE in the last month should be strictly adhered to. It was further requested that
Actual expenditure must be kept within the RE ceiling conveyed by Ministry of
Finance.
2. As we draw to the closure of FY 2012-13, it is once again reiterated that RE
ceiling should not be breached under any circumstance. Y ou may kindly instruct all
the officials including those in the Finance and Accounts Wings of your Department
to strictly abide by the Revised Estimates of Expenditure. Adherence to expenditure
ceiling is being monitored at the highest level and any deviation will be viewed very
seriously.
With kind regards,
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(R.S. GUJRAL)
Smt. Priti Mohanti,
Financial Adviser (Defence Services),
M/o Defence,
Room No 140,
South Block,
New Delhi 110 001
43

MOST IMMEDIATE
Ministry of  Defence (Finance)
(Budget-I)
Subject: Restricting Defence Expenditure within RE 2012-13.
Reference is invited to this office ID Note of even No. dated 6.2.2013, 7.3.2013
and 14.03.2013 emphasising that total expenditure is to be kept within the RE 2012-
13 communicated by this Division.
2. It is reiterated that the expenditure under both Revenue (Except salary) and
Capital must be kept within RE taking into account the re-appropriations made within
the RE under different Minor Heads of Revenue budget and between the Services
under Capital Budget. The position may be monitored on daily basis and instructions
as required be issued to concerned PCsDA/CsDA.
3. MA is under approval and will be conveyed shortly.
Sd/-
(Kanwaldeep Singh)
Dir. (Fin./Bud.)
Tel 011-23012554
Jt. CGDA (Accounts & Budget), O/o the CGDA
[MoD ID No. 10(01)/Bud I/2012 (PC), dated 20/03/2013.]
44

MOST URGENT
BUDGET MATTER
Ministry of Defence (Finance)
Budget-I
Subject: Estimates of Expenditure in respect of RE 2012-13.
Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs (Budget Division) vide
their F.No. 2(70)-B (CDN)/2012 dated 25th March, 2013 have again reiterated that
all steps should be undertaken to ensure that the expenditure in 2012-13 should not
exceed the Revised Estimates and while incurring such expenditure within the RE
limits, the instructions regarding 33% and 15% ceilings for last quarter and last month
respectively are also scrupulously followed.
2. It is requested to ensure that the above instructions are strictly complied
with.
Sd/-
(Kanwaldeep Singh)
Dir (Fin./Bud.)
Tel. 011-23012554
Jt. CGDA (Accounts & Budget),
DG FP, ACNS (P&P), ACAS (Fin. P), ACIDS (FP), CCR&D (R&N), DGOF,
DGQA, DG NCC, DG AQA, DG A TVP, Director (Standardisation), Mod (Fin/Mo)
[MoD (Fin.) ID No. 10 (01)/ Bud.-I/2012 (PC), dated 26.03.2013.]
45

46
Action Taken by the Department of Posts
The original Grant of  Rs. 11328.68 crore under Revenue Section was augmented
to Rs. 13426.63 crore by obtaining supplementary Grant of Rs. 2097.95 crore. Against
this, Final Grant of Rs. 14326.63 crore, the actual expenditure of the Department was
Rs. 13793.26 crore which resulted in excess expenditure by Rs. 366.63 crore. Out of
excess expenditure of Rs. 366.63 crore, Rs. 346 crore (94.4%) pertains to Salary and
pension expenses which are mandatory in nature. Due to additional expenditure
incurred on implementation of MGNREGA, payments made on account of MACP
scheme. 60% arrear of TRCA payable to GDS on implementation of GDS committee
report, assessment of demand was not fully accurate etc.
Instructions on Austerity measures received from Ministry of Finance are also
being circulated to all field formations and their expenditures are reviewed by the
Secretary (Posts) on monthly basis through video conferencing. All heads of circles are
also advised from time to time to limit their expenditure within the budgetary allocations.
Sd/-
(Joint Secretary)
[Ministry of Communications & IT (Department of Posts) OM No. 20-5/11-
BGT (PA) Dt. 15.4.2013]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Railways
The above recommendation takes into account the excess expenditure incurred
by various Central Ministries as a whole including Railways. The observation of the
Committee is noted.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 25 RA-III/2-1/2012 dated 29.05.2013 have vetted
the A TN with the remarks "Seen Thanks".
Sd/-
(V . V aidehi)
Exe. Director Finance (BC)
[Ministry of Railways’ case No. 2013-BC-PAC-XV/64, dated 27.06.2013]
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee find that out of the total excess expenditure of Rs. 11,042.87
crore (before misclassification) incurred during the 2010-11 fiscal, the Civil Sector,
Defence Services, Postal Services and Railways accounted for 30.65 per cent
(Rs. 3,384.10 crore in nine cases under seven Grants/Appropriation), 38.39 per cent
(Rs. 4,239.34 crore in four cases under four Grants/Appropriations), 3.32 per cent
(Rs. 366.63 crore under a single Grant) and 27.64 per  cent (Rs. 3,052.79 crore in
fifteen cases under ten (Grants/Appropriations) respectively, Scrutiny of the cases of
excess registering Grants/Appropriations for the financial year 2010-11 indicates
huge variations in the quantum of excess expenditure incurred under twenty-two
Grants/Appropriations. In the Civil Sector, as much as 98.59 per cent (Rs. 3,336.31
crore) of the total excess expenditure was incurred under Grant No. 21

47
(Revenue V oted)-Defence Pensions alone while Grant No. 72 (Capital V oted)-Ministry
of Petroleum and Natural Gas registered 0.00004 percent (Rs. 14,000). Seven other
Grants/Appropriation (i) Grant No.31 (Revenue V oted)-Ministry of External Affairs;
(ii) Grant No. 101 (Revenue Voted)-Public Works; (iii) Appropriation No. 21 (Revenue
Charged)- Defence Pensions; (iv) Appropriation No. 80 (Revenue Charged)-Ministry
of Road Transport and Highways; (v) Grant No. 11 (Capital V oted)-Department of
Commerce; (vi) Grant No. 31 (Capital V oted)- Ministry of External Affairs, and
(vii) Grant No. 102 (Capital V oted)- Stationery and Printing accounted for 0.19 percent,
0.23  percent, 0.003 percent, 0.00004 percent, 0.19 percent, 0.80 percent and 0.0005
percent respectively. In the Defence Sector, Grant No. 22 (Revenue V oted)-Defence
Services-Army Accounted for 67.56 per cent of the total excess expenditure of
Rs. 4,239.34 crore incurred in this Sector during the fiscal year under examination.
Grant No. 23 (Revenue V oted)-Defence Services-Navy accounted for 3.28 percent
while Appropriation No. 25 (Revenue Charged)-Defence Ordnance Factories and
Grant No. 27 (Capital V oted)-Capital Outlay on Defence Services recorded
0.03 percent and 29.14 percent respectively. As regards excess expenditure incurred
under Grants/Appropriations operated by the Railways out of the total excess
expenditure of Rs. 3,052.79 crore (before misclassification), about 93.73 percent i.e.
Rs. 2,861.48 crore was incurred under five Grants only i.e. (i) Grant No. 6 (Revenue
V oted)- Working Expenses-Repairs and Maintenance of Carriages and Wagons;
(ii) Grant No. 8 (Revenue V oted)-Working Expenses Operating Expenses-Rolling
Stock and Equipment; (ii) Grant No. 10-Working Expenses-operation Expenses-Fuel;
(iv) Grant No. 12 Miscellaneous Working Expenses; and (v) Grant No. 13 Working
Expenses-Provident fund, Pension and Other Retirement Benefits. The Committee
wish to caution that expenditure over and above the budgetary provisions sanctioned
by the Parliament at different stages of the budget does not augur well for fiscal
prudence and fiscal consolidation besides undermining the Parliamentary financial
control. The unabated large excess expenditure by these defaulting Ministries/
Departments is axiomatic of the fact that they miserably failed to track the pace of
expenditure vis-à-vis the grants approved by Parliament. Deplorably, such a trend
also indicates that the defaulting Ministries/Departments have not accorded due
importance to the guiding principles of budgeting and abdicated their responsibilities.
The Committee urge upon the defaulting Ministries/Departments to learn from the
experience of the Ministries/Departments which did not incur excess expenditure.
Taking note of the persisting trend of excess expenditure and considering the fact
that the problem is not intractable with effective application of IT and e-governance,
the Committee recommend that the Ministry of Finance make it incumbent upon the
Financial Advisers and the Budget Controlling authorities by issuing suitable and
periodic instructions to ensure that no excess expenditure takes place in future.
[Sl. No 2; Appendix-II, Para No.2 of 64th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance
The Public Accounts Committee (PAC) recommended that Ministry of Finance
make it incumbent upon the Financial Advisers and the Budget Controlling
Authorities by issuing suitable and periodic instructions to ensure that no excess
expenditure takes place in future.

48
2. The Ministry of Finance circulates among the Ministries/Departments, various
Government instructions (copies enclosed) to be undertaken to formulate Budget,
ensure smooth pace of expenditure throughout the year, avoid exceeding the budgetary
limit, etc. in one place. While seeking proposals for Supplementary Demands for
Grants also, instructions are issued to make realistic projections so that neither there
is an occasion for huge surrender of budget provisions nor there are huge excesses.
Compliance to these instructions is closely monitored.
3. Discussions are held with the Financial Advisers of various Ministries/
Departments so that a micro review is undertaken at the apex level of Ministry of
Finance for estimating a realistic budget requirement by the Ministries/Departments.
During the discussions, review of expenditure is done scheme-wise in respect of
Ministries/Departments so that realistic  budget is framed and approved by the
Parliament. Ministry of Finance also takes an opportunity to assess realistic
requirement of funds for the year during the three batches of Supplementary Demands
for Grants.
4. Ministry of Finance has taken steps for precisely estimating the expenditure
and budget accordingly so that the instance of excess are avoided. Finance Secretary
had convened a meeting of Financial Advisers of Ministries/Departments where excess
had taken place in the past to ascertain the reasons for excess expenditure over V oted
Grants and Charged Appropriations. Measures to be taken up to avoid its recurrence
in future were also discussed. Finance Secretary directed that excess expenditure on
account of inaccurate estimates needs to be avoided. Measures such as tighter payment
control by disbursing officers, and speedy reconciliation of accounts with field units
were emphasized.
5. Instructions have been issued from time to time and periodic discussions are
held with the Financial Advisers and Budget Controlling Authorities to ensure that
no excess expenditure takes place in future.
6. The Office of the Principal Director of Audit, Economic & Service Ministries
has intimated that they have further no comments to offer.
7. This Note has been vetted by Audit vide their I.D. No. A.M.G .-V/VV/A TN/
2013-14/136-138 dated 10th July, 2013
Sd/-
(Rajat Bhargava)
Joint Secretary (Budget)
Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs (Budget Division),
New Delhi - 110001
[O.M. No. F.7(2)-B(SD)/2012, dated the August, 2013.]

  ANNEXURE A
F.No. 7(5)/E-Coord/2004
Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
New Delhi, the 24th September, 2004
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject: Guidelines on expenditure management — Fiscal Prudence and
Austerity.
In supersession of this Department’s O.Ms, dated 17/6/1996, 20/8/1998,
5/8/1999, 24/9/2000 and 10/10/2001 on the subject cited above, the following austerity
measures shall take effect from October 1, 2004:
(i) All on-going programmes and schemes, both Plan and Non-Plan, should
be carefully reviewed, scrutinized and evaluated to determine their
continued relevance. This exercise should be taken up immediately and
completed before the end of this calendar year.
(ii) Deviations of expenditure from the prescribed budgetary ceilings should
not be allowed. FAs should personally ensure that unauthorized
expenditure above the appropriations is not incurred in any circumstances.
(iii) It should be ensured that all profit-making PSEs declare a minimum
dividend on equity of 20% or a minimum dividend pay out of 20% of
post-tax profits, whichever is higher. The minimum dividend pay out in
respect of Oil, Petroleum, Chemical and other infrastructure sectors should
be 30% of post-tax profits.
(iv) All profit making companies must also consider issuing bonus shares to
the Government.
(v) All profit making joint venture companies should be asked to make
concerted efforts to give a dividend of 20% on Government equity holding.
(vi) Other non-tax receipts should be revised so that atleast the cost of the
services is recovered.
(vii) Budget formulation should lay greater emphasis on explicit recognition
of the revenue constraints and a realistic projection of the budgetary
allocations required for various projects/schemes and there must be rigid
adherence to budgetary ceilings. All procedures laid down for incurring
both Plan and Non-Plan expenditure on schemes should be followed
scrupulously. In view of the severe constraints on resources, additional
funds to any Ministry or Department shall not be provided at the revised
estimate stage, except in rare and exceptional circumstances.
(viii) No fresh financial commitments should be made on items which are not
provided for in the budget approved by Parliament.
49

50
(ix) There have been cases of Ministries, releasing funds to autonomous bodies
year after year, despite the fact that there are substantial balances with
them remaining unutilised and kept in deposit with the banks. The
Ministries should complete a detailed review of all such cases by
31.10.2004 and, pending such a review, the Ministries are advised not to
release funds in such cases. The responsibility for regulating release of
funds in these cases will rest with the Financial Advisers (FAs).
(x) Most autonomous bodies are given 100% deficit grants. These shall be
reduced in a graded manner by 5% in successive years i.e. to 95% in the
first year, 90% in the second year and so on, in respect of such bodies
which have the potential of raising resources.
(xi) Timely repayment of loans provided by the Government to the PSUs and
payment of fees/charges on Government Guarantees should also be
monitored by the FAs.
(xii) There shall be a mandatory 10% cut in the budgetary allocation—for
non-plan, non-salary expenditure, including OTA/honorarium. No
re-appropriation of funds to augment these heads of expenditure would
be allowed. Austerity must be reflected in furnishing of office/offices at
residences. The expenditure limit prescribed for these purposes shall be
strictly enforced.
(xiii) Utmost economy should be exercised in use of staff cars and other official
vehicles. In accordance with the ceiling prescribed at Sl. No. (xii), there
shall be a 10% cut in the consumption and allocation of funds for
expenditure on POL and travel.
(xiv) Foreign travel should be restricted to unavoidable official engagements.
There shall be a ban on foreign travel for Study Tours, Seminars,
Workshops, etc. funded by the Govt. of India except for annual and other
formal meetings of bilateral/multilateral bodies viz. IMF, World Bank,
WHO, ILO, Joint Commissions, etc. Size of official delegations, where
foreign travel is unavoidable, shall be restricted to the bare minimum.
(xv) The rate of per diem allowance for travel abroad to all countries and for
all categories, officials/ non-officials belonging to Government,
autonomous institutions and PSUs shall continue to be depressed by 25%
as at present.
(xvi) Utmost austerity will be observed in organizing conferences/seminars/
workshops. All grants being given for such purposes would be reviewed
by Department of Expenditure.
(xvii) Ban on creation of Plan and Non-Plan posts will continue. Any
unavoidable proposals for the creation of plan posts including Groups
'B', 'C' and 'D' posts—shall continue to be referred to the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Expenditure) for approval.

51
(xviii) Every Ministry/Department shall undertake a review of all the posts
which are lying vacant in the Ministry/Department and in the Attached
and Subordinate Offices, in consultation with the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Expenditure). FAs will ensure that the review is
completed in a time bound manner (and, in any event, not later than
31.10.2004) and full details of vacant posts in their respective Ministries
etc., are available. Till the review is completed, no vacant posts shall be
filled up except with the approval of the Ministry of Finance (Department
of Expenditure).
(xix) Implementation of existing instructions concerning abolition of posts
should be ensured.
(xx) Purchase of new vehicles is banned until further orders, Exceptions
will be allowed only for meeting the operational requirements of
Defence, Central Para-Military Forces, etc. New vehicles shall not be
purchased even in replacement of condemned vehicles. Hiring of private
vehicles from outside shall be limited to the number of vehicles
condemned.
2. Secretaries to the Government of India and Financial Advisers are requested
to ensure strict compliance of the above instructions.
Sd/-
Secretary to the Government of India
To
1. All Secretaries to the Government of India (By Name)
2. All FAs (By Name)
3. All Heads of Public Sector Enterprises

ANNEXURE G
No. F. 7(6)-B(R)/2001
Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
(Budget Division)
Dated 20th July, 2001
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject: Sixteenth Report of the Public Accounts Committee (13th Lok Sabha) Union
Government Appropriation Accounts (Civil) — 1996-97 — Measures for
minimising  “unspent balances”.
The undersigned is directed to invite a reference to the observations and
recommendations made by the Public Accounts Committee in para 13.1 of their above
mentioned Report and to say that the Public Accounts Committee while taking adverse
note of the whopping saving of Rs. 44231.22 crore in the grants pertaining to civil
Ministries/Departments for the year 1996-97 has noted that out of the above savings,
Rs. 29466.03 crore was on account of less drawal of 31 days Treasury Bills. Excluding
these Treasury Bills savings, the effective saving of Rs. 34765.33 crore constituted
more than two times the supplementary grants of Rs. 7326.86 crore and 3.5 per cent
of the total provision of Rs. 420902.71 crore. The Committee has further observed
that there was aggregate saving under both Revenue and Capital Sections amounting
to Rs. 11266.16 crore in the V oted portion and Rs. 32965.06 crore in the Charged
portion.
2. Taking serious view of this state of affairs, the Public Accounts Committee
has observed that this indicates the lack of earnestness on the part of Ministries/
Departments concerned reflecting on the injudicious formation of budget estimates/
utilisation of funds, where such savings could have been significantly reduced, if not
avoided altogether, by making realistic budgetary projections by the concerned
Ministries/Departments.
3. In order, therefore, to avoid this recurring malady, all Ministries/Departments
are advised that existing mechanism of review, monitoring and control should be so
geared as to make a more careful formulation of plan/schemes having regard to ground
realities and achievable targets and also to make realistic assessment of funds. The
monitoring mechanism to oversee flow of expenditure under various schemes should
also be lightened in such a way as to keep a monthly watch over flow of expenditure.
In case there is likelihood of any savings, corrective action should be taken immediately
in surrender the saving well in advance as required under Rule 69 of General Financial
Rules.
Sd/-
(D. Swarup)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India
To,
1. All Ministries/Departments as per standard mailing list.
2. All Secretaries to the Government of India.
3. All Financial Advisers of Ministries/Departments.
52

ANNEXURE H
F.No. 7(I)/B(D)/2006
Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
(Budget Division)
New Delhi, 31st July, 2006
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject: Public Accounts Committee (14th Lok Sabha) — Recommendation in
Para No. 14 contained in Report No. 17 — Large-scale Unspent
provisions—regarding.
The undersigned is directed to refer to this Department's OM No. 7(6)-B(R)/
2001 dated 20th July, 2001 issued in the context of the Public Accounts Committee
(13th Lok Sabha) in para 13.1 in their 16th Report, taking adverse note of the large
scale unspent provisions of Rs. 44,231.22 crore in the Grants/Appropriations operated
by the Civil Ministries/Departments during the year 1996-97 and recommendation
thereon (copy enclosed). Further to that Report the PAC of 14th Lok Sabha has
inter alia recommended in para 14 of 17th Report that the Ministry of Finance, being
the nodal Ministry should impress upon all the Ministries/Departments to make a
thorough study of the cases where large scale (Rs. 100 crore or more) unspent
provisions have occurred and lay down appropriate guidelines for being followed by
them in this regard.
2. In this context, attention is invited to Department of Expenditure's OM No.
F.No. 5(6)/L&C/2006 dated 1st June 2006 regarding updated Scheme of ‘Integrated
Financial Adviser'. Para 9(i) of the above mentioned OM enjoins upon Financial
Advisors with the assistance of CCAs/CAs the responsibility of bringing in more
analytical inputs into the budget formulation process to ensure better  inter se
programme/prioritization and allocation within budget ceilings based on expenditure
profiles of each programme, assessment of outcomes and current status of projects.
Such analysis is envisaged to ensure a more realistic and efficient deployment of
resources, reduce the reliance on supplementaries and help significantly control
injudicious formulation of budget estimates/utilization of funds where ‘large savings'/
unspent provisions can be reduced if not altogether avoided. Further in order to
efficiently re-deploy the savings anticipated to occur in the financial year, the Financial
Advisers are required to comply with the provisions in Rule 56 of the General Financial
Rules 2005 for surrendering the savings to Government in time as per the dates
prescribed by the Ministry of Finance.
3. It is expected that earlier instructions of this Ministry on the need for the
individual Departments to put in place effective mechanism for realistically assessing
“their requirement of funds in a way that would ward off the occurrence of unwarranted
surrender of savings at a later date, may have been implemented by Departments/
Ministries concerned. The Public Accounts Committee" (PAC) in Para 14 of the
17th Report relating to Union Government Appropriation Accounts (Civil) 1996-97
53

54
has observed that  “large scale unspent provisions under Grants/Appropriations by
the Civil Ministries/Departments have become an almost recurring feature and the
position is still to improve. The Committee are inclined to conclude that the concerned
Ministries/Departments have not made any serious attempts to apply effective
corrective measures in accordance with the Committee's recommendations".
Therefore, in compliance with the recommendation made by the PAC in this regard,
the Financial Advisers are requested to carry out a thorough study of the cases/schemes
where large-scale unspent provisions have occurred and take the following appropriate
action so as to avoid recurrence of large-scale unspent provisions in their respective
Demands for Grants:
(i) Budget Estimates and Revised Estimates shall be prepared with reference
to the measurable/monitorable commitments made in the Outcome Budget
and fiscal discipline enforced in implementation of programmes/projects
to ensure ‘value for money’;
(ii) Ministries/Departments may review the expenditure profile of each major
schemes/programmes at regular intervals and apply the result of such
analysis at the time of initial budget formulation so that a more realistic
estimation of expenditure is made;
(iii) Ministries/Departments may, after carrying out such review, intimate this
Ministry at the time of finalization of Revised Estimates of the current
year the possible savings in their Grant for re-deployment of resources to
other priority sectors;
(iv) In case any savings are identified even after finalization of Revised
Estimates of the year, surrender of such savings may be intimated to this
Ministry immediately;
4.  All Ministries/Departments are requested to note the above instructions for
strict compliance.
Sd/-
(L.M. V as)
Joint Secretary (Budget)
To
1. All the Ministries/Departments (as per the standard list).
2. All Secretaries to the Government of India.
3. Financial Advisers of the all Ministries/Departments.
Copy also to:
(i) All Under Secretaries/Deputy Directors in the Budget Division.
(ii) All Section Officers in Budget Division.

ANNEXURE J(I)
F.No. 21(1)/-PD/2005
Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
(Budget Division)
Room No. 168A, North Block,
New Delhi, dated December 27, 2006
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject: Cash management system in Central Government — modified exchequer
control based expenditure management and restrictions on expenditure
during the last quarter of the financial year.
The undersigned is directed to refer to Office Memorandum of even number
dated January 10, 2006 regarding introduction of exchequer control based expenditure
with effect from April 1, 2006.
2. Based on the working of the scheme, it has been decided to expand and
modify the Scheme as detailed below.
3. The Modified Cash Management System seeks to achieve, inter alia, the
following objectives—
(i) Obtain greater evenness in the budgeted expenditure within the financial
year, especially in respect of items entailing large sums of advance releases
and transfers to corpus funds.
(ii) Reduce rush of expenditure during the last quarter, especially the last
month of the financial year.
(iii) Reduce tendency of parking of funds.
(iv) Effectively monitor the expenditure pattern.
(v) Better planning of Indicative Market Borrowing Calendar of the Central
Government.
4. The Scheme shall apply in respect of 23 Demand for Grants listed in Annex. I,
including 9 to which the Scheme is being extended with effect from financial
year 2007-08.
5. Financial Advisor would be responsible for the implementation of the
modified expenditure management system. He/she may nominate a nodal officer for
the purpose.
6. In respect of each Demand for Grant, Monthly Expenditure Plan (separately
for Plan and Non-Plan Expenditure) [MEP] would be worked out and included as an
annex. to the Detailed Demand for Grant in respect of the said Demand for Grant.
Suggested format is at Annexure II.
55

56
7. MEP would form the basis of Quarterly Expenditure Allocations (QEA).
The Department/Ministries concerned may not issue cheques beyond the Quarterly
Expenditure Allocation (which would be equal to the sum of provisions under Monthly
Expenditure Plan), without prior consent of Ministry of Finance (Cash Management
Cell, Budget Division).
8. The MEP may be finalized taking into account the following—
(a) MEP for the month of March may not exceed 15 per cent of the budgeted
provision (Budget Estimate);
(b) MEP for the months of January-March may be so fixed that the QEA for
the last quarter may not exceed 33 per cent of the budgeted provision; and
(c) The extant guidelines of Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure,
including D.O. No. 7(3)/2006/E. Coord., dated December 21, 2006.
9. The exchequer control would apply cumulatively at the Demand for Grants
level only, i.e. inter se variations between months within a quarter, between plan and
non-plan and between schemes would be permissible, subject to statutory restrictions
and extant guidelines.
10. Savings, if any, incurred under the Quarterly Expenditure Allocations would
not be available for automatic carry forward to the next quarter. The Department/
Ministry may, however, approach Ministry of Finance for revalidation of such savings
through modification in the Monthly Expenditure Plan and thereby Quarterly
Expenditure Allocation. Spill over in respect of Monthly Expenditure Plan, not
inconsistent with Quarterly Expenditure Allocation would not require prior revalidation
from Ministry of Finance but may be included in the quarterly modification.
11. Ministry of Finance would consider such requests for revalidation within a
period of 15 days of receipt of such request, failing which the request for revalidation
would be deemed to have been granted.
12. The Monthly Expenditure Plan and Quarterly Expenditure Allocations
pertaining to the 4th quarter of the financial year would be subsumed in the finalization
of Revised Estimate for the financial year.
13. The Monthly Expenditure Plan and Quarterly Expenditure Allocations may
be made in gross terms.
14. In addition to the above, it is advised that even in respect of Demand for
Grants not covered by the modified exchequer management system, the expenditure
in the last quarter of the financial year may not exceed 33 per cent of the Budget
allocation for the Demand for Grants. However, in the event of Revised Estimates
being fixed lower than the Budget Estimate, actual expenditure may be kept within
the Revised Estimate.
It is clarified that the above provision shall apply in the current financial year
as well.

57
15. This Office Memorandum supersedes the Office Memorandum of even
number dated January 10, 2006.
16. Receipt of this Office Memorandum may kindly be acknowledged.
Sd/-
(V .S. Chauhan)
OSD (Budget)
E mail: phauhan@nic.in
To
1. All Financial Advisors.
2. Principal Director, O/o Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
3. Joint Controller General of Accounts.
4. All Directors/OSD/ABO/US/DD/Section Officers in Budget Division.
5. NIC, Ministry of Finance.

ANNEXURE I
Sl.No. Demand No. Name of the Ministry/Department
1. 1 Department of Agriculture and Cooperation
2. 2 Department of Agricultural Research and Education
3. 8 Department of Fertilizers
4. 11 Department of Commerce
5. 14 Department of Telecommunications
6. 18 Department of Food and Public Distribution
7. 31 Ministry of External Affairs
8. 32 Department of Economic Affairs
9. 41 Indian Audit and Accounts Department
10. 42 Department of Revenue
11. 43 Direct Taxes
12. 44 Indirect Taxes
13. 47 Department of Health & Family Welfare
14. 57 Department of School Education and Literacy
15. 58 Department of Higher Education
16. 68 Ministry of Panchayati Raj
17. 71 Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
18. 73 Ministry of Power
19. 79 Department of Rural Development
20. 86 Department of Road Transport and Highways
21. 92 Ministry of Textiles
22. 100 Department of Urban Development
23. 104 Ministry of Women & Child Development
58

ANNEXURE II
Financial Y ear
Month Plan Non-Plan T otal Cumulative - Total
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
January
February
March
Total
59

ANNEXURE K
F. No. 7(3)/E. Coord./2006
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
Policy and Coordination Wing
New Delhi, the 8th August, 2006.
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject: Expenditure Management—ensuring even flow of expenditure and
observance of conditions for release of funds.
Attention is invited to paragraphs 14-16 of this Department's OM No. F. No.
7(2)/E. Coord./2005 dated November 23, 2005 and Paragraph 4 of the OM No. 7(3)/
E. Coord./2006 dated July 22, 2006 regarding observance of discipline in release of
funds.
After a review of pace of expenditure, it has been decided to implement the
above as follows:—
(a) As already prescribed, no further releases be made until all the utilization
certificates, which have fallen due to the concerned Ministry/Department,
have been received.
(b) The existing guidelines providing for releases of funds to States under
certain schemes in two instalments may be reviewed immediately. The
second instalment amount could be further sub-divided according to the
seasonally of the programme, and, of course, subject to the furnishing of
utilization certification.
(c) The unspect balances available with the States and implementing agencies
must be taken into account before further releases are made.
(d) No further transfers be made to a Reserve Fund until unspent balances in
the fund have been utilized.
(e) The  sanction for payment must clearly specify either that the payee has
no utilization certificates as due for rendition under the Rules under any
scheme of the Ministry/Department, or that the payment has been
authorized by D/o Expenditure.
(f) For any deviation from the above, the case should be referred to the D/o
Expenditure.
(g) The Chief Controller of Accounts must ensure compliance to the above
as part of pre-payment scrutiny.
60

61
(h) A report on cases of deviations may be included in the quarterly report to
be sent by the Financial Advisers, as contemplated in paragraph 6 of the
OM No. 7(3)/E. Coord./2006 dated July 22, 2006.
Sd/-
(Dr. S.C. Pandey)
Officer on Special Duty
(Policy and Co-ordination)
23093457
To,
All Financial Advisers
All Chief Controllers of Accounts/Controllers of Accounts
Copy for information to:—
PS to Finance Minister/Finance Secretary/Controller General of Accounts
61

ANNEXURE Q
F. No. 7(1)/E. Coord./2012
Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
New Delhi, the 31st May, 2012
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject: Expenditure Management—Economy Measures and Rationalization of
Expenditure.
Background
With a view to containing non-developmental expenditure and thereby releasing
additional resource for meeting the objectives of the priority schemes, Ministry of
Finance has been issuing guidelines on austerity measures in the Government from
time to time.
2. Economy Measures
In the context of the current fiscal situation where there is a tremendous pressure
on Government's resources, there is an urgent need for rationalization of expenditure
and optimization of available resources with a view to improve the macro-economic
environment. With this objective, the following measures for fiscal prudence and
economy will come into force with immediate effect:—
2.1 Cut in Non-Plan expenditure
For the year 2012-2013, every Ministry/Department shall effect a mandatory
10% cut in non-Plan expenditure excluding interest payment, repayment of debt,
Defence capital, salaries, pension and the Finance Commission grants to the States.
No re-appropriation of funds to augment the non-Plan heads of expenditure on which
cuts have been imposed, shall be allowed during the current fiscal year.
2.2 Seminars and Conferences
(i) Utmost economy shall be observed in organizing conferences/seminars/
workshops. Only such conferences, workshops, seminars, etc. which are
absolutely essential, should be held and even there a 10% cut on budgetary
allocations for seminars/conferences shall be effected.
(ii) Holding of exhibitions/seminars/conferences abroad is strongly
discouraged except in the case of exhibitions for trade promotion.
(iii) There will be a ban on holding of meetings and conferences at five star
hotels.
2.3 Purchase of vehicles
Purchase of vehicles is banned until further orders, including against condemned
vehicles.
62

63
2.4 Foreign Travel
(i) It would be the responsibility of the Secretary of each Ministry/Department
to ensure that foreign travel is restricted to most necessary and unavoidable
official engagements based on functional necessity and extant instructions,
including on the number of visits, are strictly followed.
(ii) Where travel is unavoidable, it will be ensured that officers of the
appropriate level dealing with the subject are sponsored instead of those
at higher levels. The size of the delegation and the duration of visit will
be kept to the absolute minimum.
(iii) Proposals for participation in study tours, workshops/conferences/
seminars/presentation of papers abroad at Government cost will not be
entertained except those that are fully funded by sponsoring agencies.
(iv) Foreign visits should be so regulated as to ensure that each Ministry
remains within the allocated budget (after 10% cut) for the same. Re-
appropriation proposals on this account would not be approved.
2.5 Creation of Posts
There will be a total ban on creation of Plan and Non-Plan posts.
3. Observance of discipline in fiscal transfers to States, Public Sector
Undertakings and Autonomous Bodies at Central/State/Local level.
3.1 No amount shall be released to any entity (including State Government),
which has defaulted in furnishing Utilisation Certificates for grants-in-aid released
by the Central Government without prior approval of the Ministry of Finance.
3.2 Ministries/Departments shall not transfer funds under any Plan schemes in
relaxation of conditionalities attached to such transfers (such as matching funding).
3.3 The State Governments are required to furnish monthly returns of Plan
expenditure—Central, Centrally Sponsored or State Plan—to respective Ministries/
Departments along with a report on amounts outstanding in their Public Account in
respect of Central and Centrally Sponsored Schemes. This requirement may be
scrupulously enforced.
3.4 The following specific steps may be adopted:—
(a) The unspent balances available with the States and implementation
agencies must be taken into account before further releases are made.
(b) The sanction for payment must clearly specify either that the payee has
no utilization certifications as 'due for rendition' under the Rules under
the scheme in question or that the payment has been authorized by
Department of Expenditure.
(c) For any deviation from the above, the case should be referred to the
Department of Expenditure.
(d) The Chief Controller of Accounts must ensure compliance with the above
as part of pre-payment scrutiny.

64
4. Balanced Pace of Expenditure
4.1 Rush of expenditure towards the end of the financial year continues to be
an area of concern. As per extant instructions, not more than one-third (33%) of the
Budget Estimates may be spent in the last quarter of the financial year. Besides, the
stipulation that during the month of March the expenditure should be limited to 15%
of the Budget Estimates, is reiterated, Ministries/Departments which are covered by
the Monthly Expenditure Plan (MEP) may ensure that the MEP is followed strictly.
4.2 It is also considered desirable that in the last month of the year payments
may be made only for the goods and services actually procured and for reimbursement
of expenditure already incurred. Hence, no amount should be released in advance (in
the last month) with the exception of the following:—
(i) Advance payments to contractors under terms of duly executed contracts
so that Government would not renege on its legal or contractual
obligations.
(ii) Any loans or advances to Government servants etc. or private individuals
as a measure of relief and rehabilitation as per service conditions or on
compassionate grounds.
(iii) Any other exceptional case with the approval of the Financial Advisor.
However, a list of such cases may be sent by the FA to the Department of
Expenditure by 30th April of the following year for Information.
4.3 Rush of expenditure on procurement should be avoided during the last
quarter of the fiscal year and, in particular, the last month of the year so as to ensure
that all procedures are complied with and there is no infructuous or wasteful
expenditure. FA's are advised to specially monitor this aspect during their reviews.
5. No fresh financial commitments should be made on items which are not provided
for in the budget approved by Parliament.
6. Compliance
Secretaries of the Ministries/Departments being the Chief Accounting
Authorities as per Rule 64 of GFR shall be fully charged with the responsibility of
ensuring compliance of the measures outlined above. Financial Advisors shall assist
the respective Departments in securing compliance with these measures and also
submit an overall report to the Minister-in-Charge and to the Ministry of Finance on
a quarterly basis regarding various actions taken on these measures/guidelines.
Sd/-
(Sumit Bose)
Secretary (Expenditure)
All Secretaries to the Government of India
Copy to:—
1. Cabinet Secretary
2. Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister
3. Secretary, Planning Commission
4. All the Financial Advisors

jru ihñ okry Secretary
Ratan P. Watal Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
D.O. No. F.4.2(40)-B(CDN)/2013
13th December, 2013
Dear Shri Srinivasan,
The Pre-Budget meetings were held between October to December, 2013 to
decide the RE 2013-14 (Plan and Non-Plan) and BE 2013-14 (Non-Plan). While the
same shall be conveyed to you shortly, you are fully aware of the tentative figures
approved as ceilings.
2. I am writing this letter to you with the request to strictly adhere to the RE
ceilings for the current year in respect of all the Demands under your charge. Under
no circumstances should the ceiling be breached. It needs to be ensured that the
expenditure is contained within  the RE level.
3. You may recall the meeting chaired by FM on 17th September, 2013. It was
emphasized that Financial Advisers would need to guard against any excessive
expenditure in the 3rd and 4th quarters of the financial year. It is, therefore, requested
that you may closely monitor the expenditure towards the end of December, 2013
and March, 2013, and there should not be any rush of expenditure. The Department
of Economic Affairs have also issued instructions vide O.M. No. F. 21(1)-PD/2005
dated 5th December, 2012 relating to 33% and 15% expenditure ceilings in the last
quarter and last month respectively of the financial year. These instructions may also
be adhered to strictly.
4. In case any further clarification is required, you may instruct your officials
to contract Budget Division, DEA.
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(Ratan P. Watal)
To,
All USs/DDs/SOs in Budget Division, DEA.
lfpo
Hkkjr ljdkj
foÙk ea=ky;
O;; foHkkx
65

66
Action Taken by the Department of Commerce
Para No. 2 relates to various Ministry like Commerce and Industry/Defence/
External Affairs/Petroleum and Natural Gas etc. So far as Department of Commerce
is concerned, the excess Expenditure of Rs. 6,56,75,990 against the Total Grant of
Rs. 682,99,00,000. The excess Expenditure was incurred due to (a) booking of
expenditure (i) on projects/schemes for the benefit of North-Eastern Region and
Sikkim, (ii) by the Ministry of Urban Development under the ongoing schemes; and
(b) excessive expenditure incurred by some Cheque Drawing and Disbursing Officers.
On the advice of Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs vide their
D.O. No. 7(2)-B (SD)/2012, dated 5th February, 2013, the excess Grants of
Rs. 6,56,75,990 has been regularised by Parliament and assented to by the President
of India on 22nd March, 2013 (Annexure I) enclosed. The same has been intimated
to Lok Sabha Secretariat, Parliament House on 14 June, 2013 vide this Department
O.M. No. G . 20008/10/2011-B&A copy enclosed (Annexure II).
It may be mentioned that Expenditure against the Budget is being monitored
on a monthly basis with senior officers.
Audit Comments
No comments.
Sd/-
 AS&FA
The above A TN has been vetted by the Office of the Principal Director of
Audit, Economic and Service Ministries, New Delhi vide their U.O. No. AMG-V/
VV/ATN/2011-12/177-179, dated 29 August, 2013.
[Department of Commerce OM No. G. 20008/10/2011-B&A (pt.),
dated 13.09.2013]
Action Taken by the Ministry of External Affairs
The Ministry had taken all necessary steps to try and avoid excess expenditure.
However, due to reasons already explained in the Excess Note 2010-11, it was not
possible to avoid excess expenditure. Clear Instructions are issued to all the spending
units of Ministry at RE stage each year to surrender any identifiable excess funds
forthwith. Instructions are issued to spend the funds retained in full and to avoid
incurring excess expenditure. The instruction of the Hon'ble Committee will be
circulated to further sensitize these units to strictly adhere to the budgetary limits on
spending. Close monitoring of expenditure on daily basis is being done in the last
quarter of the financial year to ensure that expenditure remains within the budgetary
limits. Tools of IT and e-governance are also being used in accounting and monitoring
the pace of expenditure. Expenditure of the 180 Missions/Posts in particular is
constantly monitored through implementation of Integrated Mission Accounting
Software (I-MAS), accounts of which are rendered monthly by these Missions/Posts.
Sd/-
(Kusumjit Sidhu)
No. Q/Bud./125/02/2012 Additional Secretary (Financial Advisor)
Ministry of External Affairs

67
Action Taken by the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
Noted.
(The above mentioned A TN has been examined and vetted by the office of the
Principal Director of Audit, Economic and Service Ministries vide their U.O. letter
No. AMG-VI/App. A/C/A TN/2013-14/11-13 dated 30.04.2013).
Sd/-
Additional Secretary and Financial Advisor
[Ministry of P&NG OM No. G-24011/1/2010 Fin. I dated 31.10.2013]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
The Excess expenditure of Rs. 15,000 was erroneously booked by BRDB
under Revenue Charged due to urgency in implementing court order against Court
Case No. WP(C) 787 of 2010 filed by Ravinder  Vs. UoI and others. Suitable
instructions have been issued to all concerned to ensure no excess expenditure take
place in future.
Sd/-
Addl. Secretary and Financial Advisor
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Ministry of Urban Development
Observation of Hon'ble PAC is accepted. Concerted efforts to avoid the chances
of excess expenditure over voted grants and appropriation are being made by issue
of Instructions to all concerned to strengthen the monitoring of expenditure to
keep the expenditure within the budgeted allocation and no excess expenditure may
occur.
The explanatory note with detailed reasons and measures to contain the
expenditure within the budgeted grants was sent to the Principal Directorate of Audit,
Economic and Service Ministries vide Letter No. G-23012/4/2011-Bt. (UD) dated
05.10.2011 which has been duly vetted by the Audit vide their UO No. AMG- 1/VV/
A TN/2011-12/544-546 dated 19.12.2011.
The contents of the Action Taken Note on the recommendations of PAC were
sent to the Principal Director of Audit, Economic and Service Ministries vide letter
No. G-23012/04/2011-Bt. (UD) dated 11th April, 2013 for vetting. The Principal
Director Audit vide their UO No. AMG/V/VV/ATN/2013-14/114-116 dated
26th June, 2013 has stated that the Action Taken Note has been examined in Audit
and the Audit has no comments to offer thereon.
Sd/-
(Naresh Salecha)
Joint Secretary and Financial Adviser

68
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
(Grant No. 21)
In this paragraph, the Committee have observed that out of the total excess
expenditure of Rs.11,042.87 crore (before misclassification) incurred during the
2010-11 fiscal, the Civil Sector, Defence Services, Postal Services and Railways
accounted for 30.65 per cent, 39.39 per cent, 3.32 per cent and 27.64 per cent
respectively. In the Civil Sector, as much as 98.59 per cent ( 3,336.31 crore) of the
total excess expenditure was incurred under Grant No. 21 (Revenue V oted)— Defence
Pensions alone. The Committee have cautioned that expenditure over and above the
budgetary provisions sanctioned by the Parliament at different stages of the budget
does not augur well for fiscal prudence and fiscal consolidation besides undermining
the Parliamentary financial control. The committee have urged upon the defaulting
Ministries/Departments to learn from the experience of the Ministries/Departments
which did not incur excess expenditure. Taking note of the persisting trend of excess
expenditure and considering the fact that the problem is not intractable with effective
application of IT and e-governance, the Committee have recommended that the
Ministry of Finance make it incumbent upon the Financial Advisers and the Budget
Controlling authorities by issuing suitable and periodic instructions to ensure that no
excess expenditure takes place in future.
2. In this regard, it is submitted that under the voted portion of Revenue Section
under Gr.No.-21—Defence Pensions for the Financial Year 2010-11, an amount of
Rs. 37,646.75 crs. was projected to Ministry of Finance, however, due to financial
constraint an amount of Rs. 33,999.75 crs. only was approved by Ministry of Finance,
i.e., the amount approved by Ministry of Finance was less than amount projected by
this Ministry which resulted into excess expenditure as shown in the following table:—
(Rupees in crore)
Revenue Amount Final Grant Actual Excess % age
Section Projected (Approved) Expenditure
2010-11
V oted 37646.745 33,999.7500 37,336.0573 + 3,336.3073 9.81%
3. As may be seen in the above table, the actual expenditure of Rs. 37,336.0573
crs. incurred under the voted portion of the Grant, was in line with the RE projection
of Rs. 37,646.7450 crs. submitted by this Ministry to Ministry of Finance. Further,
the payment of pension to the Defence Pensioners is a committed expenditure and
cannot be stopped for the want of Budget, which has resulted into excess expenditure.
4. The excess expenditure of Rs. 3336.31 crs. under voted portion in r/o Grant
No.-21—Defence Pensions has occurred mainly due to substantial improvement in
pension in respect of Personnel Below Officer Rank (PBOR) discharged prior to
01.01.2006; booking of pending Pension scrolls received from banks to clear amount
under suspense and more balances of Earned Leave (EL) at the credit of retirees and
encashment of Earned Leave (EL) and also payment of 10 days EL provided during
Leave Travel Concession (LTC). Moreover, the expenditure for which cash flow had
already taken place in the books of RBI, was required to be brought to account, the

69
pending pension scrolls had to be booked under the Defence Pensions Head to clear
the amount laying under RBI suspense to reflect the true picture of cash flow from
the Govt. account.
5. As a measure of control, the Ministry of Defence have been advising the
budget estimating authorities of  Defence Pensions to prepare their budget with utmost
caution and accuracy while estimating requirement of funds and the budgetary
projections be made after an accurate and realistic assessment of the requirements
and visualization of the actual/anticipated expenditure. In this regard, instructions
were issued vide MoD(Fin.) ID No. 2(6)/MO/2010-11/911 dt. 11/7/2011, MoD(Fin.)
ID No. 2(6)/MO/2010/ 1617 dt. 9th Dec. 2011.
6. Subsequently, instructions were also issued to PCDA(P) Allahabad and
O/o the CGDA, New Delhi vide ID No. 2(6)/MO/2011 dt. 12/7/2012 wherein it was
advised to adopt e-governance model to utilize the information technology/tools so
as to establish a centralized database of  pensioners and networking of all the banks
so as to arrive at a correct estimation of pension liability and expenditure in a particular
year. Necessary monitoring and follow up action in this regard would be ensured.
O/o the CGDA vide their letter No. A/B/I/ 0107/AA-DP/10-11 dt. 6/6/2012 informed
about various measures initiated to promote e-governance model and use of IT.
7. Also, as per the directions of Ministry of Finance, to Review of the existing
arrangement of Reporting and Accounting of Defence Pensions, an Internal Audit
was conducted by O/o the CGDA, and a brief report was furnished vide their letter
No. A/B/I/9130-Study Report/2012 dt. 11/5/2012 wherein various measures
to improve the system have been suggested by O/o the CGDA. The report was
forwarded to Ministry of Finance vide this Office ID No.2(8)/REBE/MO/2009/187
dt. 19/6/2012. In accordance with the recommendations contained in the report,
following measures/actions have been taken:—
• The issue of incorrect or invalid PPO Nos. missing details in the scrolls
have been taken up with banks specifically with SBI, the largest PDA.
• PCDA(P), Allahabad has been asked to take into account pending scrolls
of the previous years while estimating budget for the next years.
• An exercise named ‘Project Sangam’ has been undertaken in order to
create an up-to-date Pensions database in collaboration with PCDA(P),
Allahabad and various pension disbursing agencies.
• PCDA(P) has taken up with banks to provide pension payment scrolls on
electronic format.
• As per the latest development made under Project Sangam, it is mentioned
that there are about 23 lakh pensioners enrolled under Defence Pensions
and out of these details of about 15 lakhs pensioners have been
computerized and the remaining 8 lakhs pensioners is in the process of
computerization.
• Apart from “Project Sangam”, a new web based application for “Pension
Accounting System” has also been developed, which is under trial running

70
process. The project once implemented will give a more accurate database
for monitoring the pace of expenditure and will be very useful while
predicting the future requirement of funds.
8.  Any instructions issued by Ministry of Finance in this regard would certainly
be followed by this Ministry.
Sd/-
(Rajnish Kumar)
JS & Addl. FA (RK)
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
In light of the recommendations of the Committee, three Committees are being
constituted in the Ministry of Defence to make an in-depth examination of the issues
and identify weaknesses in the budgetary control systems that allow repeated instances
of excess expenditure and formulate solutions to the same. These Committees will
comprise representatives from Defence Finance Division, Budget Holders/ Financial
Planning Directorates of the services and other agencies under the Ministry of Defence
and Controller General of Defence Accounts. Further, any instructions issued by
Ministry of Finance to curb excess expenditure in future would be complied with by
this Ministry in letter and spirit.
Sd/-
(V eena Prasad)
Joint Secretary & Addl. FA (VP)
[MoD (Fin.) ID No. 7(2)/Bud.-I/2013 dated 12-07-2013]
Action Taken by the Department of Posts
Subordinate units of the Department of Posts are instructed regularly to
project realistic demands for funds. Department place request for funds which
is mainly based on assessment and projections made by its subordinate units. Ministry
of Finance during pre-budget discussions; re-assess the demands for funds and
based on this, the fund allocation has reduced, which also is a reason for excess
expenditure.
Instructions on austerity measures received from Ministry of Finance are also
being circulated to all field formations and their expenditures are reviewed by the
Secretary (Posts) on monthly basis through video conferencing. All heads of circles
are also advised from time to time to limit their expenditure within the budgetary
allocations.
Sd/-
 Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Communications & IT ( Department of Posts) OM No.20-5/11-
BGT(PA) dt. 15.4.2013]

71
Action Taken by the Ministry of Railways
Of the total excess of Rs. 3,052.79 cr. incurred during 2010-11, 93.73% of the
excess has occurred under five grants, viz. 6, 8, 10, 12 and 13. Excess under Grant
No. 13 alone is 46% of the total excess incurred by Ministry of Railways. The excess
under this Grant has been due to the difficulty in assessing the impact of implementation
of recommendations of the 6th CPC on pension payments which continued in
2010-11 also. Under Grant No. 12, the excess was 21.5% mainly under the head
'Suspense' mainly due to clearance of heavy outstanding liabilities and more
materialization of claims than anticipated. Under Grant No. 10, the excess was 13%
mainly due to increase in average rate of HSD oil & electricity, higher activity of
locos and higher taxes/duties than anticipated. The share of excess under Grant No. 6
& 8 relatively minor at 7.2% & 6.2%.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 25 RA-III/2-1/2012 dated 29.05.2013 have vetted
the A TN with the remarks "Seen Thanks".
Sd/-
(V . V aidehi)
Exe. Director Finance (BC)
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2013-BC-PAC-XV/64 dated: 27.06.2013]
Observation/Recommendation
A comparative scrutiny of the Appropriation Accounts (Railways) 2010-11 and
the Explanatory Notes furnished by the Ministry of Railways indicating the detailed
reasons for excess expenditure incurred by them over V oted Grants/Charged
Appropriations during 2010-11 revealed that there were nine cases of misclassification
of expenditure i.e. (i) Rs. (-) 7,76119 under Grant No. 3 (Revenue V oted) - Working
Expenses - General Superintendence and Services; (ii) Rs. (-) 2,08,05,012 under
Grant No. 4 (Revenue V oted) - Working Expenses - Repairs and Maintenance of
Permanent Way and Works; (iii) Rs. (-) 1,78,32,198 under Grant No. 5 (Revenue
V oted) Working Expenses - Repairs and Maintenance of Motive Powers;
 (iv) Rs. (+) 17,30,273 under Grant No. 6 (Revenue V oted) - Working Expenses-
Repairs and Maintenance of Carriages and Wagons; (v) Rs. (-) 7,40,043 under Grant
No. 7 (Revenue V oted) Working Expenses - Repairs and Maintenance of Plant and
Equipment; (vi) Rs. (-) 5,53,97,530 under Grant No. 8 (Revenue V oted) Working
Expenses - Operating Expenses-Rolling Stock and Equipment;
(vii) Rs. (+) 16,71,49,932 under Grant No. 10 (Revenue V oted) working Expenses-
Operating Expenses-Fuel; (viii) Rs. (-) 55,63,698 under Grant No. 11 (Revenue V oted)
Working Expenses-Staff Welfare and Amenities; and (ix) Rs. (-) 290,55,043 under
Grant No. 12 (Revenue V oted) Miscellaneous Working Expenses. Taking into account
the effect of these nine cases of misclassification, the actual excess expenditure by
the Ministry of Railways during the 2010-11 fiscal works out to Rs. 3056,85,87,626
instead of Rs. 3052,78,77,064 as indicated in the Indian Railways Appropriation
Accounts (2010-11). Accordingly, the total amount of actual excess expenditure
incurred during the financial year 2010-11 which has to be regularized by Parliament
under Article 115 (1) (b) of the Constitution is of the order of Rs. 11,046.94 crore.
[Sl. No. 3; Appendix-II, Para No. 3 of 64th Report of Public Accounts
Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]

72
Action Taken by the Ministry of Railways
The excess expenditure of Rs. 3056.86 cr. incurred by Ministry of Railways
during 2010-11 has been regularized by Parliament in its budget session, 2013.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 25 RA-III/2-1/2012 dated 29.05.2013 have vetted
the ATN with the remarks “Seen Thanks”.
Sd/-
(V . V aidehi)
Exe. Director Finance (BC)
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2013-BC-PAC-XV/64 dated: 27.06.2013]
Observation/Recommendation
An analysis of the four Appropriation Accounts and the Explanatory Notes
furnished by the defaulting Ministries/Departments shows that in seven cases the
percentage of excess expenditure over the Total Grant was exceedingly high. These
are 43.00 per cent in respect of Appropriation No. 21 (Revenue Charged) - Defence
Pensions; 14.30 per cent in respect of Grant No. 102 (Capital V oted) - Stationary and
Printing; 31.88 per cent in respect of Appropriation No. 25 (Revenue Charged) -
Defence Ordnance Factories; 19.33 per cent in respect of Grant No. 12 (revenue
V oted) - Miscellaneous Working Expenses; 135.17 per cent in respect or appropriation
No. 3 (Revenue Charged) - Working Expenses - General Superintendence and Services;
47.07 per cent in respect of Appropriation No. 6 (Revenue Charged) - Working
Expenses—Repairs and Maintenance of Carriages and Wagons; and 47.07 per cent
in respect of Appropriation No. 6 (Revenue Charged) - Working Expenses—Repairs
and Maintenance of Plant and Equipment. Obviously, such a huge percentage of
excess expenditure shows beyond any manner of doubt that the entire budgetary
process has gone awry in these defaulting Ministries/Departments and there has been
abysmal failure on the part of the budget controlling authorities and Financial Advisers
in budget formulation, monitoring and in submission of revised estimates in time.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of finance take a serious
note of it and seek the explanation of the defaulting Ministries/Departments for the
incidence of excess expenditure and report back to the Committee in due course.
[Sl. No. 4; Appendix-II, Para No. 4 of  64th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance
The Public Accounts Committee's (PACs) recommendations on excess
expenditure, relate to 3 Grants (Other than Ministry of Railways) as under:
(Amount in Rs.)
Name of Grant Total Grant Actual Excess Percentage or
Expenditure Expenditure excess over
Total Grant
1 2 3 4 567
21. Defence Pensions Revenue- 25,00,000 35,74,960 10,74,960 43.00
Charged

73
25. Defence-Ordnance Revenue- 3,65,00,000 4,81,34,961 1,16,34,961 31.88
Factories Charged
102. Stationery and Capital- 13,00, 000 14,85,941 1,85,941 14.30
Printing V oted
Total 4,03,00,000 5,31,95,862 1,28,95,862, 32.00
2. The Committee recommended that the Ministry of Finance seek the
explanation of the defaulting Ministries/Departments for the incidence of excess
expenditure and report back to the Committee in due course. Accordingly,
Joint Secretary (Budget), Department of Economic Affairs had sought explanation,
vide his D.O. letter dated 09.02.2013 (copy enclosed), for the incidence of excess
expenditure by the Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of Urban Development.
They were directed to undertake review of the excess expenditure and submit reasons
for the same besides indicating the corrective action taken by them to avoid its
recurrence. They were also suggested to put in place institutional mechanism to ensure
that there is no occasion for excess expenditure in future.
3. The replies furnished by the Ministry of Defence (Finance), Main Office
dated 22.03.2013 and Ministry of Defence (Finance Division) dated 10.04.2013, and
Ministry of Urban Development dated 07.05.2013 are enclosed.
4. The Office of the Principal Director of Audit, Economic & Service Ministries
has desired that a copy of Ministry of Defence (Finance) main office letter
 dated 22.03.2013 may also be appended with the A TN for proper appreciation by
the PAC.
5. This Note has been vetted by Audit vide their I.D. No. A.M.G. V/VV/ATN/
2013-14/136-138 dated 10th July, 2013.
Sd/-
(Rajat Bhargava)
Joint Secretary (Budget)
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs (Budget Division),
New Delhi - 110 001. O.M. No. F 7(2)-B (SD)/2012 dated the August, 2013]
1 2 3 4 567

MkWñ jtr HkkxZo] vkbZ,,l Hkkjr ljdkj
la’;qDr lfpo foÙk ea=ky;
vkfFkZd dk;Z foHkkx
ukWFkZ CykWd] ubZ fnYyh&110 001
DR. RAJAT BHARGAV A, IAS
Joint Secretary Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
North Block, New Delhi - 110 001
Tel.: 23093183, Fax: 23093133
E-mail: rajat.bhargava@nic.in
February 09, 2013
D.O. F. No. 7(2)-B(SD)2012
Dear Madam,
Please refer to Sixty-fourth Report (15th Lok Sabha) on “Excess over V oted
Grants and Charged Appropriations (2010-11)”. Excess expenditure has occurred in
Demand Nos. 21-Defence Pensions & 25 Defence Ordnance Factories for the year
2010-11.
2. The Public Accounts Committee (PAC) in Paragraph - 4 of the above Report
have commented upon that “percentage of Excess expenditure over the Total Grant
was exceedingly high. These were 43.00 per cent in respect of Appropriation No. 21
(Revenue Charged)—Defence Pensions; and 31.88 per cent in respect of Appropriation
No. 25 (Revenue Charged)—Defence Ordnance Factories. Obviously, such a huge
percentage of excess expenditure shows beyond any manner of doubt that the entire
budgetary process has gone awry in the defaulting Ministry and there has been abysmal
failure on the part of the budget controlling authorities and Financial Advisers in
budget formulation, monitoring and in submission of revised estimates in time”.
3. Ministry of Finance issues Budget Circular every year bringing out various
Government instructions and also steps to be undertaken to formulate the Budget.
While seeking proposals for Supplementary Demands for Grants also, instructions
are issued to make realistic projections, so that neither there is an occasion for huge
surrender of Budget provisions nor there are huge excesses. The Budget circular is
followed up by meetings with the Financial Advisers of various Ministries/
Departments, so that a micro review is undertaken at the apex level of Ministry of
Finance for realistic Budget requirement. However, the above position indicates that
there is still some room for better projection of budget estimates. The contributory
reasons for excess expenditure corroborate this fact.
4. Ministry of Defence may undertake a review of the above excess and submit
the reason for excess and also indicate the corrective action taken to avoid recurrence.
74

It is suggested that institutional mechanism may be put in place so that there is no
occasion of excess expenditure in future. I would request you to kindly give this
matter your immediate and personal attention and intimate this Ministry of the outcome
to enable finalization of the A TN on the PAC's paragraph by this Ministry.
warm regards,
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(Rajat Bhargava)
Encl.: As above.
Smt. Priti Mohanti
Financial Advisor (Defence Services),
Ministry of Defence (Finance Division),
Room No. 140, South Block, New Delhi - 110 011.
[Telefax. 2301 6629, Mobile 9999897467, Telefax. 2301 6654]
75

MkWñ jtr HkkxZo] vkbZ,,l Hkkjr ljdkj
la’;qDr lfpo foÙk ea=ky;
vkfFkZd dk;Z foHkkx
ukWFkZ Cykd] ubZ fnYyh&110001
Dr. Rajat Bhargava, IAS
Joint Secretary
Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
North Block, New Delhi - 110 001
Tel.: 23093183, Fax: 23093133
E-mail: rajat.bhargava@nic.in
 New Delhi, Dated: February 09, 2013
D.O. No. 7(2)-B(SD)2012
Dear Nareshji,
Please refer to Sixty-fourth Report (15th Lok Sabha) on "Excesses over V oted
Grants and Charged Appropriation (2010-2011)". Excess expenditure has occurred
in Demand No. 102-Stationery and Printing for the year 2010-11.
2. The Public Accounts Committee (PAC) in Paragraph  4 of the above Report
have commented upon that "percentage of excess expenditure over the Total Grant
was exceedingly high. This was 14.30 per cent in respect of Grant No. 102 (Capital
V oted)—Stationery and Printing. Obviously, such a huge percentage of excess
expenditure shows beyond any manner of doubt that the entire budgetary process has
gone awry in the defaulting Ministry and there has been abysmal failure on the part of
the budget controlling authorities and Financial Adviser in budget formulation,
monitoring and in submission of revised estimates in time".
3. Ministry of Finance issues Budget Circular every year bringing out various
Government instructions and also steps to be undertaken to formulate the Budget.
While seeking proposals for Supplementary Demands for Grants also, instructions
are issued to make realistic projections, so that neither there is an occasion for huge
surrender of Budget provisions nor there are huge excesses. The Budget circular is
followed up by meetings with the Financial Advisers of various Ministries/
Departments, so that a micro review is undertaken at the apex level of Ministry of
Finance for realistic Budget requirement. However, the above position indicates that
there is still some room for better projection of budget estimates. The contributory
reasons for excess expenditure corroborate this fact.
4. Ministry of Urban Development may undertake a review of the above excess
and submit the reason for excess and also indicate the corrective action taken to
avoid recurrence. It is suggested that institutional mechanism may be put in place so
that there is no occasion of excess expenditure in future. I would request you to
76

kindly give this matter your immediate and personal attention and intimate this Ministry
of the outcome to enable finalization of the A TN on the PAC's paragraph by this
Ministry.
Regards,
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(Dr. Rajat Bhargava)
Sh. Naresh Salecha,
Joint Secretary & Financial Adviser,
Ministry of Urban Development,
Room No. 141-C, Nirman Bhawan,
Dr. Maulana Azad Road,
New Delhi - 110 011.
[Tel No. 23062792, Telefax. 23062899]
77

Rajnish Kumar lañ No. 7(2)/Bud.I/2013
JS & Addl. FA (RK) Hkkjr ljdkj
j{kk ea=ky; ¼foÙk izHkkx½
 ubZ fnYyh&110 011
Government of India
Ministry of Defence (Finance Divn.)
New Delhi - 110 011
 fnukad@Dated 10.04.2013
Dear Shri Rajat,
This is with reference to your D.O. No. 7(2)-B(SD) 2012 dated February
09, 2013 regarding Paragraph 4 of the Sixty-fourth Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)
wherein it has been inter alia brought out that an excess expenditure to the tune of
31.88% over and above the allocation (Charged) approved by Parliament during
2010-11 in respect of Grant No. 25 - Defence Ordnance Factories.
2. In this connection, I would state that during 2011 the charged allocation for
Ordnance Factories under Grant No. 25 was Rs. 1.50 Cr. in BE and subsequently
supplementary allocations were made to the tune of Rs. 1.15 Cr. in August, 2010 and
Rs. 1.00 Cr. in March, 2011. Against the total charged allocation of Rs. 3.65 Cr., the
expenditure incurred was Rs. 4.81 Cr. resulting in excess of Rs. 1.16 Cr. The excess
expenditure was incurred due to settlement of more court cases than anticipated. The
excess expenditure has since been regularized vide Appropriation Bill (No. 2) 2013
passed by Parliament and assented to by President on March 22, 2013 published in
Gazette of India on March 23, 2013 as Act No. 1 of 2013.
3. I would also bring out here that budgetary projections for Charged expenditure
are made on the basis of anticipation of court cases to be settled in a particular financial
year and thus over projection or under projection has some times remained the fact.
It may also be appreciated that in case Court Orders are received towards the end of
Financial Y ear involving payment and beyond supplementary, payment has to be
released to avoid contempt of Court.
4. However, instructions already exist to formulate the Budget estimates on
most realistic basis and the necessity to keep the expenditure under constant review
by monitoring it regularly in an effective manner in order to conform to the allocations
made and to ensure that there is neither any excess nor large scale savings over the
sanctioned budgetary provisions.
5. In order to avoid recurrence of any excess, instructions have been issued by
this Ministry from time to time to all concerned emphasizing the need to follow the
instructions issued on the subject more scrupulously and to monitor the progress of
expenditure in vigilant/stricter manner apart from projecting the demands on factual
78

79
basis and to the barest minimum depending on the actual requirements/obligations.
To achieve this objective, Service HQrs/Departments have also been requested to
issue necessary instructions to all budget controlling authorities under their lower
formations to follow the instructions issued on the subject meticulously so as to avoid
any saving/excess. I would like to enclose copies of such instructions issued since
2010.
6. You would appreciate that in view of observations of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)
in their 22nd Report and in Para 12 of their 36th Report in the context of excess
expenditure over the voted grants and charged appropriations, detailed instructions
were further issued to all concerned vide MoD (Fin.) ID No. 5(3)/Bud.-I/2011
dated 31st May, 2011 and ID No. 7 (5)/Bud.-I/2011 dated 29th November, 2011 to
ensure even flow of expenditure and to avoid any excess expenditure/savings in any
Grant.
With warm regards.
Y ours Sincerely,
Sd/-
(Rajnish Kumar)
Encl.: As above.
Dr. Rajat Bhargava, IAS
Joint Secretary,
Deptt. of Economic Affairs,
North Block, New Delhi.
79

Most Immediate
PAC Matter
Ministry of Defence (Finance)
Main Office
Subject: Public Accounts Committee in Paragraph 4 of Sixty-Fourth Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on “Excesses over voted Grants and Charged
Appropriations (2010-11)”.
The undersigned is directed to refer Ministry of Finance, Department of
Economic Affairs UO No. 7(2)-B(SD) 2012 dt. 13th March, 2013 on the above subject.
In this regard, it is mentioned that the Actual Position under the Charged Portion
of Revenue Section under Grant No. 21—Defence Pensions in the Financial Year
2010-11 is as under:
Demand No.  21—Defence Pensions for the year 2010-11
(Rupees in thousand)
Revenue Section Final Grant Actual Expenditure Excess %age
Charged 25,00 35,75 +10,75 43%
The reasons for excess expenditure under the Charge Section of the Grant have
already been furnished in the Explanatory Note and forwarded to Monitoring Cell,
Ministry of Finance vide MoD (Fin.) 2(6)/MO/2010/1424 dt. 31/10/2011 after the
same was vetted by DGA DS. The reasons mentioned in the Explanatory Note is
“The excess amount of Rs. 10,75 thousand has been incurred, mainly due to
implementation of Court decree which is an obligatory expenditure and cannot be
predicted in advance”.
Moreover, as per the advice of Ministry of Finance, instructions have been issued by
Ministry of Defence (Fin.) from time to time, that utmost caution and accuracy be
adopted while estimating requirement of funds and the budgetary projections be made
after an accurate and realistic assessment of the requirements and visualization of the
actual/anticipated expenditure. In this regard, instructions were issued vide MoD(Fin.)
ID No. 2(6)/MO/2010-11/911 dt. 11/7/2011, MoD(Fin.) ID No. 2(6)/MO/2010/1617
dt. 9th Dec. 2011 (copies enclosed). Subsequently, instructions were also issued to
PCDA(P) Allahabad and O/o the CGDA, New Delhi vide ID No. 2(6)/MO/2011 dt.
12/7/2012 (copy enclosed) wherein it was advised to adopt e-governance model to
utilize the information technology/tools so as to establish a centralized data base of
Pensioners and networking of all the banks so as to arrive at a correct estimation of
pension liability and expenditure in a particular year.
O/o the CGDA vide their letter No. A/B/I/0107/AA-DP/10-1 1 dt. 6/6/2012
(copy enclosed) informed about measures initiated to promote e-governance model
and use of IT.
80

81
Further, as per the direction of Ministry of Finance, to Review of the existing
arrangement of Reporting and Accounting of Defence Pensions, an Internal Audit
was conducted by O/o the CGDA, and a brief report was furnished  vide their letter
No. A/B/I/9130-Study Report/2012 dt. 11/5/2012 on Review of the existing
arrangement of Reporting and Accounting of Defence Pensions and various measures
to improve the system has been suggested by O/o the CGDA. The report was forwarded
to Ministry of Finance vide this Office ID No. 28(8)/REBE/MO/2009/187 dt. 19/6/
2012. However, a copy of the same is again forwarded herewith for reference.
This issues with the approval of J.S. & Addl. FA(RK).
Sd/-
(T. Henry Franklin)
Dy. Financial Adviser (E/MO)
Encl. As above Tel: 23015539/2404
Shri V . Prakash,
Deputy Director (Budget)
Ministry of Finance,
Department of Economic Affairs
North Block, New Delhi-110001
[MoD (Fin) ID No. 2(6)/MO/2010/1651 dated: 22/03/2013].

ujs'k lkyspk Hkkjr ljdkj
la;qDr lfpo ,oe foÙkh; lykgdkj 'kgjh fodkl ea=ky;
Naresh Salecha fuekZ.k Hkou] ubZ fnYyh&110 011
Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
Tel: (011) 23062792 MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
Fax: (011) 23062899 NIRMAN BHAV AN, NEW DELHI-110 011
E-mail: jsfa_ud@nic.in
D.O. No.G-23012/4/2011-Bt.(UD)
Dated the 7th May, 2013
Dear Rajat Ji,
Kindly refer to your D.O. No. 7(2)-B-(SD)2012 dated 9th February 2013
regarding Excesses over Voted Grants and Charged Appropriations 2010-11 as
contained in Sixty fourth Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the PAC.
2. It is a fact that 14.30% of excess expenditure over the voted grant has taken
place under Capital Section of Demand No. 102—Stationery and Printing during the
year 2010-11. However, it is submitted that under the grant B.E. Provision of
Rs. 13.00 Lakh was meant for Motor V ehicles (Rs. 3.00 Lakh) and for Machinery &
Equipment (Rs. 10.00 Lakh). A sum of Rs. 8.05 Lakh only was incurred for
procurement of machines and equipment for the Government of India presses during
the year 2010-11. Incidentally, the Directorate of Printing had placed supply order of
Rs. 6.81 lakh for different items for use in Government of India Presses on DGS&D
rate contract during 2009-10. The CCA, Department of Supply raised the said debit
of Rs. 6.81 lakh in the year 2010-11. Thus, the total expenditure during the year
2010-11 has resulted to Rs. 14.86 lakh (An excess of Rs. 1.86 Lakh over BE of
Rs. 13.00 lakh). It may thus be seen that the excess expenditure has occurred due to
delayed raise of debit by CCA, Supply. Had the CCA (Supply) raised the debit in the
year 2009-10 for the supply order of 2009-10 there would not have been any excess
in the grant. The Ministry has also initiated the remedial action by issue of instructions
to all concerned to strengthen the monitoring of expenditure to keep the expenditure
within the budgeted allcoation and no excess expenditure over the grant or
appropriation is allowed to occur. (Copy Enclosed) As regards preparation of Budget
Estimates/Supplementary Demands on realistic basic one day work workship each
on two occasions was organized to sensitize the programme divisions for improved
performance in projections of the estimates.
3. Further, to strengthen the institutional mechanism accounting organization
of the Ministry as well as the implementing divisions has been issued instructions to
strengthen the Monitoring of Expenditure to keep the expenditure well within the
82

83
budgeted allocations and no excess over the grant/appropriation may be allowed to
occur. Secretary (UD) is taking review meetings every month on the progress of
expenditure.
4. It may further be stated that note on excesses with detailed reasons therein
duly vetted by Audit has already been sent to PAC Branch, Ministry of Finance.
Further, the Parliament has granted Excess Grant  and the Presidential assent thereto
has also been accorded on 22nd March, 2013.
With regards.
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(Naresh Salecha)
Dr. Rajat Bhargava,
Joint Secretary,
Ministry of Finance,
Department of Economic Affairs,
North Block, New Delhi.

84
Action Taken by the Ministry of Urban Development
The excess expenditure over the budgeted grant occurred due to clearing
outstanding claims of the previous year. The explanatory note containing the reasons
for excess was sent to the Principal Directorate of Audit, Economic & Service
Ministries vide letter No. G-23012/1/2011-Bt.(UD) dated 02.09.2011 which has been
duly vetted by the Audit vide their UO No. AMG-1/VV/A TN/2011-12/480-482 dated
16.11.2011.
The excess demand statement has been sent to the Ministry of Finance for
regularisation of the excess expenditure during the Budget Session vide this Ministry's
letter No. G-23012/1/2012-Bt.(UD) dated 11.02.2013.
The contents of the Action Taken Note on the Recommendations of PAC were
sent to the Principal Director of Audit, Economic & Service Ministries vide letter
No. G-23012/04/2011-Bt. (UD) dated 11th April, 2013 for vetting. The Principal
Director Audit vide their U.O. No. AMG-V/VV/ATN/2013-14/114-1 16 dated
26th June, 2013 has stated that the Action Taken Note has been examined in Audit
and the Audit has no comments to offer thereon.
Sd/-
(Naresh Salecha)
Joint Secretary and Financial Adviser
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence (Grant No. 21)
In this paragraph, the Committee have observed that analysis of the four
Appropriation Accounts and Explanatory Notes furnished by the defaulting Ministries/
Departments shows that in 7 cases the percentage of excess expenditure over the
Total Grant was exceedingly high. This is 43% in respect of Appropriation No. 21
(Revenue Charged) — Defence Pension. The Committee have observed that such a
huge percentage of excess expenditure shows that the entire budgetary process has
gone away and have therefore recommend that the Ministry of Finance take a serious
note of it and seek the explanation from the defaulting Ministries/Departments for
the incidence of excess expenditure and report back to the Committee in due course.
2. In this regard, the actual position under the Revenue Section—Charge Portion
under Grant No.—21-Defence Pensions for the Financial Year 2010-11 is as under:
(Rupees in crore)
Revenue Section Final Grant Actual Expenditure Excess %age
Charged 0.25 0.3575 +0.10,75 43%
3. Under the charge portion of Revenue Section, the excess expenditure of
Rs. 10.75 lakh under Grant No.—21-Defence Pensions occurred mainly due to
implementation of Court Decrees which is an obligatory expenditure and cannot be
predicted in advance and cannot be stopped for want of funds.
4. However, as a measure of control, the Ministry of Defence have been advising
the budget estimating authorities of Defence Pensions to prepare their budget with

85
utmost caution and accuracy while estimating requirement of funds and the budgetary
projections be made after an accurate and realistic assessment of the requirements
and visualization of the actual/anticipated expenditure. In this regard, instructions
were issued vide MoD (Fin.) ID No. 2(6)MO/2010-11/911 dt. 11/7/2011, MoD(Fin.)
ID No. 2(6)/MO/2010/1617 dt. 9th December, 2011.
5. Subsequently, instructions were also issued to PCDA(P) Allahabad and O/o
the CGDA, New Delhi vide ID No. 2(6)/MO/2011 dt. 12/7/2012 wherein it was advised
to adopt e-governance model to utilize the information technology/tools so as to
establish a centralized data base of Pensioners and networking of all the banks so as
to arrive at a correct estimation of pension liability and expenditure in a particular
year. Necessary monitoring and follow up action in this regard would be ensured.
O/o the CGDA vide their letter No. A/B/I/0107/DD-DP/10-11 dt. 6/6/2012 informed
about various measures initiated to promote e-governance model and use of IT.
 A detailed explanation in this regard has already been furnished to Ministry  of Finance
vide Ministry of Defence ID No. 2(6)/MO/2010/1651 dt. 22.03.2013
Sd/-
(Rajnish Kumar)
JS & Addl. FA (RK)

MOST IMMEDIATE
PAC MATTER
Ministry of Defence (Financial)
Main Office
Subject: Public Accounts Committee in Paragraph 4 of Sixty-Fourth Report (15th
Lok Sabha) on ''Excesses over V oted Grants and Charged Appropriations
(2010-2011)''.
The undersigned is directed to refer Ministry of Finance, Department of
Economic Affairs UO No. 7(2)-B(SD) 2012 dt. 13th March, 2013 on the above subject.
In this regard, it is mentioned that the Actual Position under the Charged
Portion of Revenue Section under Grant No. 21—Defence Pensions in the Financial
Year 2010-11 is as under:
Demand No. 21—Defence Pensions for the year 2010-11
(Rupees in thousand)
Revenue Section Final Grant Actual Expenditure Excess %age
Charged 25.00 35.75 +10.75 43%
The reasons for excess expenditure under the Charge Section of the Grant have
already been furnished in the Explanatory Note and forwarded to Monitoring Cell,
Ministry of Finance vide MoD(Fin) 2(6)/MO/2010/1424 dt. 31/10/2011 after the
same was vetted by DGA DS. The reasons mentioned in the Explanatory Note is
''The excess amount of Rs. 10.75 thousand has been incurred, mainly due to
implementation of Court decree which is an obligatory expenditure and cannot be
predicted in advance.''
Moreover, as per the advice of Ministry of Finance, instructions have been
issued by Ministry  of Defence (Fin.) from time to time, that utmost caution and
accuracy be adopted while estimating requirement of funds and the budgetary
projections be made after an accurate and realistic assessment of the requirements
and visualization of the actual/anticipated expenditure. In this regard, instructions
were issued vide MoD(Fin.)  ID No. 2(6)/MO/2010-11/911 dt. 11/7/2011, MoD(Fin)
ID No. No. 2(6)/MO/2010/1617 dt. 9th Dec 2011 (copies enclosed). Subsequently,
instructions were also issued to PCDA(P) Allahabad and O/o the CGDA, New Delhi
vice ID No.  2(6)/MO/2011 dt. 12/7/2012 (copy enclosed) wherein it was advised to
adopt e-governance model to utilize the information technology/tools so as to establish
a centralized date base of Pensioners and networking of all the banks so as to arrive
at a correct estimation of pension liability and expenditure in a particular year.
86

87
O/o the CGDA vide their letter No. A/B/I/0107/AA-DP/10-11 dt. 6/6/2012
(copy enclosed) informed about various measures initiated to promote e-governance
model and use of IT.
Further, as per the direction of Ministry of Finance, to Review of the existing
arrangement of Reporting and Accounting of Defence Pensions, an Internal Audit
was conducted by O/o the CGDA, and a brief report was furnished vide their letter
No. A/B/I/9130-Study Report/2012 dt. 11/5/2012 on Review of the existing
arrangement of Reporting and Accounting of Defence Pensions and various measures
to improve the system has been suggested by O/o the CGDA. The report was forwarded
to Ministry of Finance  vide this Office ID No. 2(8)/REBE/MO/2009/187 dt. 19/6/
2012. However, a copy of the same is again forwarded herewith for reference.
This issues with the approval of J.S. & Addl. FA(RK).
Sd/-
(T. Henry Franklin)
Dy. Financial Adviser (E/MO)
Tel: 2301-5539/2404
Encl. As above
Shri V . Prakash,
Deputy Director (Budget)
Ministry of Finance,
Department of Economic Affairs
North Block, New Delhi-01
         [MoD (Fin.) ID No. 2(6)/MO/2010/1651
dated: 22.03.2013]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
The Committee has desired that Ministry of Finance reports back to the
Committee along with the explanation of the defaulting Ministries for the incidence
of excess expenditure. The detailed explanations with regard to the excess expenditure
under Appropriation No. 25 mentioned in above paragraph have already been furnished
to the Ministry of Finance  vide U.O. No. 7(2)/Bud-I/2013 dated 10.04.2013 (Copy
enclosed).
Sd/-
(V eena Prasad)
Joint Secretary & Addl. FA (VP)
[MoD (Fin.) ID No. 7(2)/Bud-I/2013 dated: 12.07.2013]

Rajnish Kumar lañ@No. 7(2)/Bud-I/2013
JS & Addl. F.A. (R.K.)  Hkkjr ljdkj
j{kk ea=ky; ¼foÙk izHkkx½
ubZ fnYyh&110001
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE (FINANCE DIVN.)
NEW DELHI-110001
fnukad@Dated 10.04.2013
Dear Shri Rajat,
This is with reference to your D.O. No. 7(2)-B(SD)2012 dated February 09,
2013 regarding Paragraph 4 of the Sixty-fourth Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)
wherein it has been  inter alia brought out that an excess expenditure to the tune of
31.88% over and above the allocation (Charged) approved by Parliament during
2010-11 in respect of Grant No 25—Defence Ordnance Factories.
2. In this connection, I would state that during 2011 the charged allocation for
Ordnance Factories under Grant No 25 was Rs 1.50 cr. in BE and subsequently
supplementary allocations were made to the tune of Rs. 1.15 cr. in August, 2010 and
Rs. 1.00 cr. in March, 2011. Against the total charged allocation of Rs. 3.65 cr., the
expenditure incurred was Rs. 4.81 cr. resulting in excess of  Rs. 1.16 cr. The excess
expenditure was incurred due to settlement of more court cases than anticipated. The
excess expenditure has since been regularised vide Appropriation Bill (No. 2), 2013
passed by Parliament and assented to by President on March 22, 2013 published in
the Gazette of India on March 23, 2013 as Act No. 1 of 2013.
3. I would also bring out here that budgetary projections for Charged Expenditure
are made on the basis of anticipation of court cases to be settled in a particular financial
year and thus over projection or under projection has some times remained the fact.
It may also be appreciated that in case Court Orders are received towards the end of
Financial Y ear involving payment and beyond supplementary, payment has to be
released to avoid contempt of Court.
4. However, instructions already exist to formulate the Budget estimates on
most realistic basis and the necessity to keep the expenditure under constant review
by monitoring it regularly in an effective manner in order to conform to the allocations
made and to ensure that there is neither any excess nor large scale savings over the
sanctioned budgetary provisions.
5. In order to avoid recurrence of any excess, instructions have been issued by
this Ministry from time to time to all concerned emphasizing the need to follow the
instructions issued on the subject more scrupulously and to monitor the progress of
expenditure in vigilant/stricter manner apart from projecting the demands on factual
88

89
basis and to the barest minimum depending on the actual requirements/obligations.
To achieve this objective, Service HQrs./Departments have also been requested to
issue necessary instructions to all budget controlling authorities under their lower
formations to follow the instructions issued on the subject meticulously so as to avoid
any saving/excess. I would like to enclose copies of such instructions issued since
2010.
6. You would appreciate that in view of observations of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)
in their 22nd Report and in para 12 of their 36th Report in the context of excess
expenditure over the voted grants and charged appropriations, detailed instructions
were further issued to all concerned vide MoD (Fin) ID No. 5(3)/Bud-I/2011 dated
31st May, 2011 and ID No. 7(5)/Bud-I/2011 dated 29th November, 2011 to ensure
even flow of expenditure and to avoid any excess expenditure/savings in any Grant.
With warm regards.
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(Rajnish Kumar)
Encl: As above.
Dr. Rajat Bhargava, IAS
Joint Secretary,
Deptt. of Economic Affairs
North Block, New Delhi.

90
Action Taken by the Ministry of Railways
Under Grant No. 12, there was an excess of Rs, 648.44 cr. which is 19.33% of
the total sanctioned grant. This excess mainly under the head 'Suspense' was incurred
mainly due to clearance of heavy outstanding liabilities and more materialisation of
claims than anticipated . As regards excess expenditure under Appropriation No.3, 6
& 7, the same was due to materialization of more decretal payments in March, 2011
than anticipated at the time of finalization of supplementary requirement at the end of
February 2011. The amount involved, however, is only Rs. 0.21 cr., Rs. 0.05 and
Rs. 0.01 cr. respectively. The 'Excess' has been regularized by Parliament in the Budget
Session, 2013.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 25 RA-III/2-1/2012 dated 29.05.2013 have vetted
the ATN with the remarks ''Seen Thanks''.
Sd/-
(V . V aidehi)
Exe. Director Finance (BC)
[Ministry of Railways, case No. 2013-BC-PAC-XV/64 dated: 27.06.2013]
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee find that the Ministry of Defence incurred an excess expenditure
of Rs. 3,336.31 crore under Revenue Section (V oted ) of Grant No. 21—Defence
Pensions which alone accounted for 98.59 per cent of the total excess expenditure
incurred in the Civil Sector. The Explanatory Note furnished by the Ministry of Defence
inter alia states that the excess was mainly due to implementation of one rank one
pension scheme, substantial improvement in pension in respect of Personnel Below
Officer rank discharged prior to 01.01.2006, more number of retirees than expected,
booking of pending pension scrolls received from banks to clear amount under
suspense and encashment of Earned Leave at the credit of the retirees. The Committee's
examination has revealed that this Grant had also registered an excess expenditure of
Rs.13.33 lakh and Rs. 8999.54 crore during the previous financial year 2008-09 and
2009-10 respectively. Such repeated incurring of huge sums of excess expenditure
during the last three financial years indicates lack of reliable data and comprehensive
net working and coordination amongst pension account related offices across the
country. This also suggests the prevailing pension data management and accounting
information systems are not in order. Surprisingly, however, as Remedial Action taken
in this regard, the Ministry of Defence stated in their Explanatory Note that necessary
instructions have been issued to all concerned to prepare their Budgetary; proposal
on realistic basis. The Committee find that the Ministry of Defence have been giving
the same stock reply over the last three financial years without any positive outcome.
this clearly shows that the  Ministry of Defence have not taken any concrete measures
to revamp the system for correctly forecasting and factoring the pension liability into
the budgetary estimations. Consequently, when the recommendations, the 6th Central
Pay Commission were implemented, the flow of funds was thrown out of gear resulting
in huge excess expenditure. The Committee desire that the Ministry of Defence should
look into all aspects for taking necessary corrective action so that the existing
deficiencies and shortcomings in the pension payment are certified and recurrence of

91
excess expenditure is either avoided or greatly minimized on this count. The Ministry
should also adopt e-governance model and utilize the information technology services/
tools to establish a centralized data base of pensioners and networking of all the
banks so that the estimation of pension liability and expenditure in a particular year is
correctly arrived at.
[Sl. No. 8,  Appendix II, Para No. 8 of 64th Report of  the Public Accounts
Committee 2012-13 (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
(Grant No. 21)
In this paragraph, the Committee have observed that Ministry of Defence
incurred an excess expenditure of Rs. 3,336.31 crore under Revenue Section (V oted)
of Grant No. 21—Defence Pensions which alone accounted for 98.59 per cent of the
total excess expenditure incurred in the Civil Sector. The Committee's examination
has revealed that this Grant had also registered an excess expenditure of Rs. 13.33
lakh and Rs. 8999.54 crore during the previous financial year 2008-09 and 2009-10
respectively. Such repeated incurring of huge sums of excess expenditure during the
last  three financial years indicates lack of reliable data and comprehensive networking
and coordination amongst pension account related offices across the country. The
committee have recommended that Ministry should also adopt e-governance model
and utilize the information technology services/tools so that the estimation of pension
liability and expenditure in a particular year is correctly arrived at.
2. In this regard, it is submitted that under the voted portion of the Revenue
Section in the financial year 2010-11, an amount of Rs. 37646.75 crs. was projected
by this Ministry to Ministry of Finance, but due to financial constraint an amount of
Rs. 33999.75 cr. was approved by Ministry of Finance. Hence, less funds to the tune
of Rs. 3647 Cr. were approved by Ministry of Finance than projections submitted by
this Ministry. The actual position under the Revenue Section—V oted Portions under
Grant No. 21— Defence Pensions for the Financial Year 2010-11 is as under:
(Rs. in crore)
Revenue Amount Fin al Grant Actual Excess % age
Section Projected (Approved) Expendiutre
2010-11
V oted 37,646.7450 33,999.7500 37,336.0573 +3,336.3073 9.81%
3. It may be seen from the above table that the actual expenditure of
Rs. 37,336.0573 Cr. incurred under the V oted  Portion of the Grant, was in line with
the RE projection of Rs. 37646.7450 cr. submitted by this Ministry to Ministry of
Finance. As may be seen in the above table, an excess expenditure of Rs. 3,336.31 cr.
was incurred over and above the approved Budget of Rs. 33,999.75 crs. during the
financial year 2010-11, which is 9.81%. However, the payment of pension to the
Defence Pensioners is a committed expenditure  and cannot be stopped for the want
of Budget, which resulted into excess  expenditure.

92
4. Under the V oted Portion of Revenue Section, the excess expenditure of
Rs. 3336.31 cr. under Grant No.—21 Defence Pensions occurred mainly due to
substantial improvement in pension in respect of Personnel Below Officer Rank
(PBOR) discharged prior to 01.01.2006; booking of pending Pension scrolls received
from banks to clear amount under suspense and more balances of Earned Leave (EL)
at the credit of retirees and encashment of Earned Leave (EL) and also payment of 10
days EL provided during Leave Travel Concession (LTC). Moreover in view of the
fact that the Expenditure, for which cash flow had already taken place in the books of
RBI, was required to be brought to account, the pending pension scrolls had to be
booked under the Defence  Pensions Head to clear the amount laying under RBI
Suspense to reflect the true picture of cash flow from the Govt. account.
5. As already explained above, the actual expenditure under Grant No. 21—
Defence Pensions for the financial year 2010-11 was in line with the projections
submitted by this Ministry to MoF at RE state. However, the excess occurred due to
lack of availability of sufficient funds for payment of Defence Pension which is a
committed liability and payment of which cannot be stopped from want of funds. The
under mentioned table shows the amount projected by PC DA(P) Allahabad and the
amount approved by Ministry of  Finance over the last few years:—
(Rs. in crores)
Year wise Amount Amount Less Actual RBI
Allocations Projected Approved Amount Exp. Cash
Received
2008-09 21758 20233.20 1524.80 20233 22947
2009-10 27841 26000 1841.00 34999 35820
2010-11 37647 34000 3647.00 37336 36976
2011-12 37547 34000 3547.00 37569.39 38003
2012-13 41785 39500 2285.00 39328.15 —
(upto 3/2013)
2013-14 45304+2300* 44500 3104.00 — —
BE =47604
6. As a measure of control, the Ministry of Defence have been advising the
budget estimating authorities of Defence Pensions to prepare their budget with utmost
caution and accuracy while estimating requirement of funds and the budgetary
projections be made after an accurate and realistic assessment of the requirements
and visualization of the actual/anticipated expenditure. In this regard, instructions
were issued vide MoD(Fin.)ID No. 2(6)/MO/2010-11/911 dt. 11/7/2011, MoD(Fin.)
ID No. 2(6)/MO/2010/1617 dt. 9th Dec. 2011.

93
7. Subsequently, instructions were also issued to PCDA(P) Allahabad and O/o
the CGDA, New Delhi vide ID No. 2(6)/MO/2011 dt. 12/7/2012 wherein it was advised
to  adopt e-governance model to utilize the information technology/tools so as to
establish a centralized date base of Pensioners and networking of all the banks so as
to arrive at a correct estimation of pension liability and expenditure in a particular
year. Necessary monitoring and follow up action in this regard would be ensured.
O/o the CGDA vide their letter No. A/B/I/0107/AA-DP/10-11 dt. 6/6/2012 informed
about various measures initiated to promote e-governance model and use of IT.
8. Also, as per the directions of Min. of Finance, to Review of the existing
arrangement of Reporting and Accounting of Defence Pensions, an Internal audit
was conducted by O/o the CGDA, and a brief report was furnished vide their letter
No. A/B/I/9130-Study Report/2012 dt. 11/5/2012 wherein various measures to
improve the system have been suggested by O/o the CGDA. The report was forwarded
to Ministry of Finance vide this Office ID No. 2(8)/REBE/MO/2009/187 dt. 19/6/
2012. In accordance with the recommendations contained in the report, following
measures/ actions have been taken:—
/UIrecordThe issue of incorrect or invalid PPO Nos. missing details in the scrolls
have been taken up with bank specifically with SBI, the larget PDA.
/UIrecordPCDA(P), Allahabad has been asked to take into account pending scrolls
of the previous years while estimating budget for the next years.
/UIrecordAn exercise named 'Project Sangam' has been undertaken in order to
create an up-to-date Pensions database in collaboration with PCDA(P),
Allahabad and various pension disbursing agencies.
/UIrecordPCDA(P) has taken up with Banks to provide Pension Payment scrolls
on electronic format.
/UIrecordAs per the latest development made under Project Sangam, it is mentioned
that there are about 23 lakh Pensioners enrolled under Defence Pensions
and out of these details of about 15 lakhs pensioners have been
computerized and the remaining 8 lakhs pensioners is in the process of
computerization.
/UIrecordApart from "Project Sangam", a new web based application for "Pension
Accounting System" has also been developed, which is under trial running
process. The project once implemented  will give a more accurate database
for monitoring the pace of expenditure and will be very useful while
predicting the future requirement of funds.
The above measures are expected to improve budgeting and accounting of
pension expenditure.
9. Also, the Grant No. 21—Defence Pensions has now been covered under
Cash Management System from FY 2013-14 vide OM no. F. 21(1)/PD/2005-V ol-II
dated 30.07.2012 issued from Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs,
Budget Division (Cash Management Cell). As per the aforesaid OM, this Ministry
has to prepare and send Monthly Expenditure Plan (MEP) and Quarterly Expenditure

94
Allocations (QEA) to the cash Management cell for better monitoring and compliance
of the guidelines of the Ministry of Finance regarding the expenditure management.
The same instructions have been issued vide this division ID No. 2(6)/MO/2012-13/
702 dt. 12.09.2012 to the user department of Grant no. 21 for strict compliance and
necessary action. The Monthly expenditure plan and Quarterly Expenditure allocations
of Grant no. 21 in prescribed format has been incorporated in Detailed Demands for
Grants for FY 2013-14.
Sd/
(Rajnish Kumar)
JS & Addl. FA (RK)

Ministry of Defence (Finance)
Main Office
Subject: Cash Management system in Central Government—Modified exchequer
control based expenditure management and restrictions on expenditure
during the last quarter of the financial year—regarding.
A Copy of the Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure's OM No. 21(1)/
pd/2005-V ol. II dated 30.07.2012 on the above subject is enclosed herewith for
information and strict compliance. Also the requisite information may please be
furnished to this Division by 7th of every month for onward transmission to Ministry
of Finance within the stipulated time.
Encl. As above
Sd/-
(S.K. Jassal)
Asstt. Financial Adviser (MO)
Tel. Ph. No. 23014890
1. Jt CGDA (Accounts & Budget) -in r/o Defence Pensions
2. PCDA (P) Allahabad
________________________________________________________________________________
[MOD (Fin.) ID No. 2(6)/MO/2012-13/702 dt:12.09.2012]
95

F.No. 21(1)/PD/2005-V ol. II
Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
Budget Division
(Cash Management Cell)
Room No. 263-B, North Block,
New Delhi, dated July 30, 2012
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject: Cash Management System in Central Government—Modified exchequer
control based expenditure management and restrictions on expenditure
during the last quarter of the financial year—reg.
The undersigned is directed to refer to Office Memorandum of even number
dated January 10, 2006 regarding introduction of exchequer control based expenditure
with effect from April 1, 2006 and November 2, 2011 further extending it to 46
Demands for Grants.
2. Based on the recommendation of 51st Report of the Standing Committee of
Finance on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry of Finance, it has been decided
that henceforth, all the Demands for Grants irrespective of whether they are covered
under the Cash Management System or not, are required to prepare and send their
Monthly Expenditure Plan (MEP) and Quarterly Expenditure Allocations (QEA) to
the Cash Management Cell for better monitoring and compliance of the guidelines of
the Ministry of Finance regarding the expenditure management.
3. The Financial Advisor would be responsible for furnishing the requisite
information to the Cash Management Cell. A nodal officer may be nominated for the
purpose as all the Demands for Grants are likely to be covered under the Cash
Management System with in due course.
4. In respect of each Demands for Grants, Monthly Expenditure Plan (separately
for Plan and Non-Plan Expenditure) (MEP) would be worked out and included as an
annex to Detailed Demands for Grants in respect of the said Demands for Grants.
Suggested format is at Annexure-I.
5. The required information relating to actual may kindly be e-mailed at
cashmgtsystem-dea@nic.in every month. It may also be ensured that this information
is sent to this Ministry in the enclosed proforma by 15th of every month.
96

97
6. The guidelines mentioned in the OM of even No. dated December 27, 2006
would remain unchanged and may be followed in preparation of the MEP & QEA
(Annexure-II).
Sd/-
(Pankaj Sharma)
Deputy Secretary to the Government of India
To,
1. All Financial Advisors.
2. Principal Director, O/o Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
3. Joint Controller General of Accounts.
4. All Directors/OSD/ABO/US/DD/Section Officers in Budget Division.
5. NIC, Ministry of Finance.

ANNEXURE II
F.No. 21(1)-PD/2005
Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
(Budget Division)
Room No. 168A, North Block,
New Delhi dated December 27, 2006
Subject: Cash Management System in Central Government — Modified exchequer
control based expenditure management and restrictions on expenditure
during the last quarter of the financial year.
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
The undersigned is directed to refer to Office Memorandum of even number
dated January 10, 2006 regarding introduction of exchequer control based expenditure
with effect from April 1, 2006.
2. Based on the working of the scheme, it has been decided to expand and
modify the Scheme as detailed below.
3. The Modified Cash Management System seeks to achieve, inter alia, the
following objectives—
(i) Obtain greater evenness in the budgeted expenditure within the financial
year, especially in respect of items entailing large sums of advance releases
and transfers to corpus funds.
(ii) Reduce rush of expenditure during the last quarter, especially the last
month of the financial year.
(iii) Reduce tendency of parking of funds.
(iv) Effectively monitor the expenditure pattern.
(v) Better planning of Indicative Market Borrowing Calendar of the Central
Government.
4. The Scheme shall apply in respect of 23 Demands for Grants listed in
Annexure-I, including 9 to which the Scheme is being extended with effect from
financial year 2007-08.
5. Financial Advisor would be responsible for the implementation of the
modified expenditure management system. He/she may nominate a nodal officer for
the purpose.
6. In respect of each Demand for Grant, Monthly Expenditure Plan (separately
for Plan and Non-Plan Expenditure) [MEP] would be worked out and included as an
annex to the Detailed Demand for Grant in respect of the said Demand for Grant.
Suggested format is at Annexure-II.
98

99
7. MEP would form the basis of Quarterly Expenditure Allocations [QEA].
The Department/Ministries concerned may not issue cheques beyond the Quarterly
Expenditure Allocation [which would be equal to the sum of provisions under Monthly
Expenditure Plan], without prior consent of Ministry of Finance [Cash Management
Cell, Budget Division].
8. The MEP may be finalized taking into account the following—
(a) MEP for the month of March may not exceed 15 per cent of the budgeted
provision [Budget Estimate];
(b) MEP for the months of January-March may be so fixed that the QEA for
the last quarter may not exceed 33 per cent of the budgeted provision;
and
(c) The extant guidelines for Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure,
including D.O. No. 7(3)/2006/E.Coord, dated December 21, 2006.
9.The exchequer control would apply cumulatively at the Demand for Grants
level only, i.e. inter se variations between months within a quarter, between plan and
non-plan and between schemes would be permissible, subject to statutory restrictions
and extant guidelines.
10. Savings, if any, incurred under the Quarterly Expenditure Allocations would
not be available for automatic carry forward to the next quarter. The Department/
Ministry may, however, approach Ministry of Finance for revalidation of such savings
through modification in the Monthly Expenditure Plan and thereby Quarterly
Expenditure Allocation. Spill over in respect of Monthly Expenditure Plan, not
inconsistent with Quarterly Expenditure Allocation would not require prior revalidation
from Ministry of Finance but may be included in the quarterly modification.
11. Ministry of Finance would consider such requests for revalidation within a
period of 15 days of receipt of such request, failing which the request for revalidation
would be deemed to have been granted.
12. The Monthly Expenditure Plan and Quarterly Expenditure Allocations
pertaining to the 4th quarter of the financial year would be subsumed in the finalization
of Revised Estimate for the financial year.
13. The Monthly Expenditure Plan and Quarterly Expenditure Allocations may
be made in gross terms.
14. In addition to the above, it is advised that even in respect of Demand for
Grants not covered by the modified exchequer management system, the expenditure
in the last quarter of the financial year may not exceed 33 per cent of the Budget
allocation for the Demand for Grants. However, in the event of Revised Estimates
being fixed lower than the Budget Estimate, actual expenditure may be kept within
the Revised Estimate. It is clarified that the above provision shall apply in the current
financial year as well.

100
15. This Office Memorandum supersedes the Office Memorandum of even
number dated January 10, 2006.
16. Receipt of this Office Memorandum may kindly be acknowledged.
Sd/-
(V .S. Chauhan)
OSD (Budget)
E mail:chauhan@nic.in
To,
1. All Financial Advisors.
2. Principal Director, O/o Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
3. Joint Controller General of Accounts.
4. All Directors/OSD/ABO/US/DD/Section Officers in Budget Division.
5. NIC, Ministry of Finance.

FAX/SPEED POST
No. A/II/3795/V ol-LX
Office of the PCDA(P)
Allahabad, Dated  25.02.2013
To,
Shri S.K. Jassal
AFA (MO)
Min. of Defence (MO)
New Delhi-110 010
Subject: Cash Management System in Central Govt.—Modified exchequer control
based expenditure management and restriction on expenditure during the
last quarter of the financial year— Regarding.
Reference: Hqrs. Office letter No. A/B/I9130/Mont-Corr/2012-13 Dt. 21.02.2013
Kindly refer to the Hqrs. office letter cited under reference wherein Monthly
Expenditure Plan and Quarterly Expenditure Allocation of BE 2013-14 in respect of
Demand No.-21 'Defence Pension' has been called for. The required information, as
desired, in the Hqrs. Office letter ibid is enclosed as an Annexure-I to this letter. In
this connection it is mentioned that the payment of Pension to the Defence Pensioners
is an obligatory expenditure and actual cash management is not feasible in case of
Defence Pension.
Addl. CDA(P) has seen.
Sd/-
(P.N. CHOPRA)
ACDA
Copy to:—
The Jt. CGDA (A/cs & Bud.)
O/o the CGDA a copy of the Annexure I
Ulan Batar Road; Palam, is enclosed for information.
Delhi Cantt.-110 010
Sd/-
(P.N. CHOPRA)
ACDA
101

102
ANNEXURE I
DEMAND NO. 21— DEFENCE PENSION 2013-2014
Name of the Ministry/Department: Ministry of Defence, Defence Accounts Department O/o the PCDA(P) Allahabad
Cash Management System in Central Government
(Rs. in crore)
Apr.-13 May-13 Jun.-13 Q.E.AI Jul.-13 Aug.-13 Sept.-13 Q.E.A II Oct.-13 Nov.-13 Dec.-13 Q.E.A.III Jan.-14 Feb.-14 Mar.-14 Q.E.A.IV
Monthly Expenditure Projection
Plan
Non-Plan 4200 3600 3600 11400 3600 3600 3600 10800 3600 4100 3650 11350 3650 3650 3650 10950
Total

103
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee note with concern that huge quantum of excess expenditure to
the tune of Rs. 2,864.02 crore, Rs. 138.85 crore and Rs. 1,235.32 crore had been
incurred under Revenue Section (Voted) of Grant No. 22—Defence Services — Army
and Grant No. 23 — Defence Services — Navy and Grant No. 27 — Capital Outlay
on Defence Services respectively during the financial year 2010-11. In respect of
Grant No. 22, the main contributory reasons, according to the Ministry of Defence,
were higher sanction of DA than anticipated, accretion of two new formations,
additional expenditure on disaster relief operation, increase in purchase rate and
demand of hay, exchange rate variation, supply of stores ex DGOF more than budgeted
amount, procurement of ammunition and devices and contractual obligations. As
regards the Grant No. 23, the main contributory reasons adduced were certain
unforeseen obligatory payments, increase in Temporary Duty, Permanent Duty,
Contractual Foreign Travel of Service and Civilian personnel as per their entitlements,
enhanced deployments for coastal security/anti-piracy and additional deployment of
ships and aircrafts to Libya at short notice, payment of liabilities for maintenance
dredging for operational requirements and additional expenditure on account of urgent
repairs for operational marine assets/buildings and contractual payments for pilots
training in USA. With regard to the Grant No. 27, the main contributory reasons were
more fructification of land acquisition cases than anticipated at MA stage, enhanced
deliveries of Instant Fire Detection and Suppression System than anticipated at MA
stage and initial advance for TA TRA for mounting Mobile Mast, enhanced deliveries/
payments in environmental control for BMP-II, modernization of safety and security
in Ammunition Report and in other miscellaneous schemes like SHAKTI and SUJA V
etc. and maturity of high value cases during this period, booking of expenditure with
respect to committeed liabilities, enhanced deliveries/payments in MBWT wagons,
higher progress and expenditure than anticipated under projects towards the close of
financial year, exchange rate variation in respect of foreign payments and booking of
letter of credit on account of foreign payments, certain unforeseen payments including
taxes, booking of expenditure with respect to committed shipyard payments, revised
requirement of funds towards schemes contracted with HAL and increased
requirements due to committed liabilities and adjustments due to enhanced rate of
exchange and greater progress under certain other works than anticipated. The
Committee do not consider these reasons compelling for incurring excess expenditure
as many of these could have been anticipated well in advance and factored into at the
time of finalization of the Grants through the three stages of Supplementary Grants.
In this regard, the Committee's examination has revealed that the Ministry of Defence
have continuously been incurring huge sums of excess expenditure under the Grant
No. 22 (Revenue V oted) — Defence Services — Army since the 2006-07 fiscal. To
elucidate, excess expenditure of Rs. 667.17 crore in 2006-07, Rs. 71.19 crore in
2007-08, Rs. 13.33 lakh in 2008-09, Rs. 2,464.11 crore in 2009-10, Rs. 2,864.02
crore in 2010-11 were incurred under this Grant. Similarly, excess expenditure of
Rs. 150.51 crore in 2009-10, and Rs. 138.85 crore in 2010-11 was incurred under the
Grant No. 23 (Revenue Voted) — Defence Services —Navy. Surprisingly as a remedial
measure, the Ministry have merely re-circulated their old instructions for containing

104
excess expenditure which have proved inadequate over these years. The Committee
wonder as to why a crucial Ministry like the Ministry of Defence responsible for the
defence of the country would remain so insensitive for such a long priod and would
continuously be founder wanting in their budgetary exercise. The Committee observe
that the quantum of unauthorized excess expenditure could have been greatly reduced
with proper care and attention to detail. However, this trend of recurring excess
expenditure proves that the Ministry have no mechanism to check or minimize excess
expenditure under the Grants operated by them. The Committee feel that to plug the
loopholes and rectify the deficiencies causing excess expenditure, it is imperative for
the Ministry of Defence to undergo serious introspection and devise concrete ways
and means in consultation with the Ministry of Finance to overhaul and streamline
their budgeting mechanism so that recurring excess expenditure is avoided altogether.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the specific additional corrective measures
taken by the Ministry in this direction.
[Sl. No. 9, Appendix-II, Para No. (Part-II)-9, of the 64th Report of the Public
Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
The Ministry of Defence has undertaken internal brainstorming to identify the
possible reasons for repeated instances of excess expenditure. Several areas have
been identified for closer study. This will be done by three Committees set up for the
purpose who will also devise alternate solutions for any weak internal controls that
may exist.
Sd/-
(V eena Prasad)
Joint Secretary & Addl. FA (VP)
[MoD (Fin.) ID No. 7(2)/Bud.-I/2013 dated 12.07.2013.]
Observation/Recommendation
During the financial year 2010-11, the Department of Posts incurred an excess
expenditure of Rs. 366.63 crore under a single Grant operated by them, i.e. Grant
No. 13—Postal Services. Scrutiny of the Explanatory Note furnished by the
Department shows that the excess expenditure was mainly due to pay and hike in
Dearness Allowance, Implementation of GDS Committee Report, Modified Assured
Career Progression (MACP) Scheme due to implementation of the 6th Pay
Commission Report and excess payment of superannuation and retirement benefit
including payment of family pension more than anticipated. The Committee have
been assured that instructions have been issued to the circles/units to project the
demand for fund realistically and keep the expenditure within the allotment. The
Committee are, however, worried to find that the same instruction was issued by the
Department when they incurred an excess expenditure of Rs. 818.13 crore during
2009-10 fiscal. Apparently, the instruction issued by the Department for containing
their excess expenditure are far from effective. The Committee urge upon the
Department to overhaul their prevailing expenditure review mechanism whereby a

105
system is evolved and enforced to provide sufficient checks and balance against any
possible want on sanction and utilisation of funds under the Grant so as to maintain
the requisite transparency and accountability. The Committee, therefore, desire that
precise action should be taken in this regard at the earliest.
[Sl. No. 10, Appendix II, Para No. 10, of 64th Report of the Public Accounts
Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Department of Posts
It is a fact that Department of Posts has incurred excess expenditure of
Rs. 818.13 crore during the year 2009-10 and Rs. 366.63 crore in 2010-11. The
video conference by the Secretary (posts) with heads of circles to review expenditure
of each circle on monthly basis is an effective expenditure management tool and it
would help the department in controlling over the expenditure and keeping the same
within budgetary allotment in future.
Department is implementing IT project through which business processes of
each action of the Department is going to be computerised which will enable to make
more accurate projection of demands for funds.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Communications & IT (Department of Post) OM No. 20-5/11-
BGT(PA) dt. 15.4.2013]
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee are concerned to note that despite their repeated exhortations,
the Ministry of Railways have not been able to stop misclassification of expenditure
in the accounts of the Ministry of Railways. During the last ten financial years, the
Committee have come across fifty-eight cases of misclassification of expenditure,
the details being five in 2001-02, three in 2002-03, five in 2003-04, nine in 2004-05,
six in 2005-06, five in 2006-07, three in 2007-08, six in 2008-09, seven in 2009-10 and
nine in 2010-11. The Committee deplore that this unabated trend of persistent
misclassification of expenditure in the Railways has reached endemic proportion
and they have repeatedly failed to address and eliminate such a fundamental flaw.
Apparently, no tangible action has been taken by the Ministry either to fix
responsibility for avoidable errors or for rectifying the terminological ambivalence
leading to misclassification. The Committee take a serious view of such callous
approach on the part of the Ministry of Railways, which if left unattended/unchecked,
would derail the budgetary exercise. The Committee recommend that the existing
budgetary mechanism in the Railways needs to be thoroughly reviewed and
revamped so that necessary corrective action, wherever warranted, could be taken
to overcome systemic lacunae/loopholes for progressive elimination of the
misclassification syndrome. Further, responsibility be fixed for each patent
misclassification so that there is greater caution and due diligence in classification
of expenditure in future.
[Sl. No. 8, Appendix II, Para No. 12 of 64th Report of the Public Accounts
Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]

106
Action Taken by the Ministry of Railways
The observations/recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee regarding
misclassification of expenditure are noted for strict compliance. In this regard, it is
advised that Zonal Railways have been issued strict instructions to ensure correct
classification of expenditure and that case of misclassification if any, should be rectified
before the closure of the annual accounts of the year. However, due to voluminous
transactions, some cases of misclassification go undetected during the internal check
but they constitute a very minuscule percentage of 0.003% of total accounting
transactions.
Instructions have also been issued by Railway Board that the staff responsible
for committing errors regarding classification of accounts should be taken up and
punitive action taken against such staff should be reported to Board. Railways are
regularly holding workshops/seminars to sensitize and educate the staff to avoid
misclassifications while booking expenditure. Besides, the defaulting staffs are also
being counseled to be more careful in future so that serious and similar natures of
misclassifications are not repeated year after year.
As a result of these measures and the ongoing computerization of accounts, it
is hoped that even the present minuscule percent of errors do not take place.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 25 RA-III/2-1/2012 dated 29.05.2013 have vetted
“the A TN with the remarks Seen Thanks.”
Sd/-
(V .V aidehi)
Exe. Director Finance (BC)
[Ministry of Railways' Case No. 2013-BC-PAC-XV/64 dated 27.06.2013]
Observation/Recommendation
Subject to the observations made in the preceding paragraphs, the Committee
recommend that the expenditure referred to in paragraph 14 of Part-I of this Report
be regularized in the manner prescribed in Article 115(1) (b) of the Constitution of
India.
[Sl. No. 13, Appendix II, Para No. 13, of 64th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance
As recommended by the Public Accounts Committee, the Demands for Excess
Grants for Expenditure of the Central Government (excluding Railways) relating to
2010-2011 were submitted to Parliament in the Budget Session, 2013. The Parliament
has passed the Excess Demands for Grants. Necessary Appropriation Bill for
regularising the money drawn in excess of the amounts authorised by the Parliament
for the year 2010-2011, has also been passed and the corresponding Act published in
the Gazette of India (Extraordinary) Part II, Section I dated March 23, 2013 as Act
No. 10 of 2013 (copy enclosed), after obtaining assent of the President. In view of
this, the excess amount drawn in 2010-2011 stands regularised. Action taken in this
regard is, therefore, completed.

107
2. The Office of the Principal Director of Audit, Economic & Service Ministries
has desired that a copy of Gazette of India (Extraordinary) Part II, Section I dated
23.03.2013 as Act No. 10 of 2013 may also be appended with ATN for proper
appreciation of the PAC.
3. This Note has been vetted by Audit vide their I.D. No. A.M.G .-V/VV/A TN/
2013-14/133-135 dated 10th July, 2013.
Sd/-
(Rajat Bhargava)
Joint Secretary (Budget)
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs (Budget Division),
New Delhi-110 001 O.M. No. F.7(2)-B(SD)/2012 (Pt. II) dated August, 2013]

MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
New Delhi, the 23rd March, 2013/Chaitra 2, 1935 (Saka)
The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the
President on the 22nd March, 2013, and is hereby published for general
information:—
THE APPROPRIA TION (No.  2) ACT, 2013
No.10 
OF 2013
[22nd March, 2013]
An Act to provide for the authorisation of appropriation of
moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India to meet the amounts
spent on certain services during the financial year ended on the 31st
day of March, 2011 in excess of the amounts granted for those services
and for that year.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth  Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Appropriation (No. 2 ) Act, 2013.Short title.
108


109
2.  From and out of the Consolidated Fund of India, the sums
specified in column 3 of the Schedule, amounting in the aggregate to
the sum of seven thousand nine hundred ninety crore, eight lakh, five
thousand two hundred twenty-four rupees shall be deemed to have
been authorised to be paid and applied to meet the amounts spent for
defraying the charges in respect of the services specified in column 2
of the Schedule during the financial year ended on 31st day of March,
2011,  in excess of the amounts granted for those services and for
that year.
3. The sums deemed to have been authorised to be paid and
applied from and out of the Consolidated Fund of India under this
Act shall be deemed to have been appropriated for the services and
purposes expressed in the Schedule in relation to the financial year
ended on the 31st day of March, 2011.
Issue of  Rs.
7990,08,05,224
out of the
Consolidated
Fund of India
to meet certain
excess expendi-
ture for the year
ended on the
31st March, 2011.
Appropriation.

110
THE  SCHEDULE
(See sections 2 and 3)
Excess
No. of Services and purposes    V oted Charged
V otes portion portion Total
\    Rs. Rs.           Rs.
11 Department of Commerce Capital 6,56,75,990 .. 6,56,75,990
13 Department of Posts Revenue 366,63,29,167 .. 366,63,29,167
21 Defence Pensions Revenue 3336,30,72,983 10,74,960 3336,41,47,943
22 Defence Services —  Army Revenue 2864,01,52,379 .. 2864,01,52,379
23 Defence Services —  Navy Revenue 138,84,60,256 .. 138,84,60,256
25 Defence  Ordnance Factories Revenue .. 1,16,34,961 1,16,34,961
27 Capital Outlay on Defence Services Capital 1235,31,94,576 .. 1235,31,94,576
31 Ministry of External Affairs Revenue 6,32,33,514 .. 6,32,33,514
Capital 26,97,65,506 .. 26,97,65,506
72 Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas Capital 14,000 .. 14,000
80 Ministry of Road T ransport and Highways Revenue .. 15,000 15,000
101 Public W orks Revenue 7,79,95,991 .. 7,79,95,991
102 Stationery and Printing Capital 1,85,941 .. 1,85,941
                        Total : 7988,80,80,303 1,27,24,921 7990,08,05,224
DR. SANJAY SINGH,
Additional Secretary to the Government of India.

111
Action Taken by the Department of Commerce
The excess of Rs. 6,56,75,990 has been regularised by Parliament and assented
to by the President on 22nd March, 2013 as prescribed in Article 115(1) (b) of the
Constitution of India.
Sd/-
AS&FA
The above A TN has been vetted by the Office of the Principal Director of
Audit, Economic & Service Ministries, New Delhi vide their U.O. No. AMG-V/VV/
A TN/2011-12/177-179, dated 29th August, 2013.
[Department of Commerce OM No. G . 20008/10/2011-B&A
(pt.) dated 13.09.2013]
Action Taken by the Ministry of External Affairs
The Demands for excess Grants relating to 2010-11 has since been passed by
the Parliament and assented to by the President of India on 22nd March, 2013 as per
Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs (Budget Division), New Delhi
letter No. E7(2)-B(SD)/2012 dated 23rd March 2013, thereby regularising the excess
expenditure.
Sd/-
(Kusumjit Sidhu)
Additional Secretary (Financial Advisor)
No. Q/Bud/125/02/2012 Ministry of External Affairs
Action Taken by the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
Ministry of Petroleum and  Natural Gas has requested Department of Economic
Affairs, Ministry of Finance vide letter dated 18.2.2013 for regularization of the excess
expenditure of Rs. 14,000/-.
Action to be Taken by Ministry of Finance.
(The above mentioned A TN has been examined and vetted by the Office of the
Principal Director of Audit, Economic and Service Ministries, vide their U.O. letter
No. AMG-VI/App.A/c/ATN/2013-14/11-13 dated 30.04.2013).
Sd/-
Additional Secretary & Financial Advisor
[Ministry of P&NG O.M. No G-24011/1/2010, Fin. 1, dated 31.10.2013.]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demand for excess Grants for expenditure of the Central Government related
to 2010-11 for Rs. 15,000/- in respect of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
have been passed by Lok Sabha and assented by the President of India, on March 22,
2013 as communicated vide Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure (Budget
Division) letter F. 7(2)-B/(SD)/2012 dated 23.03.2013.
Sd/-
Additional Secretary & Financial Advisor
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways

F.7(2)-B(SD)/2012
Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
(Budget Division)
New Delhi, the March 23, 2013
Subject: Demands for Excess Grants relating to 2010-2011.
The undersigned is directed to state that the Demands for Excess Grants relating
to 2010-2011 have been passed by the Lok Sabha. The connected Appropriation
Bill (No. 2), 2013 has also been passed by Parliament and assented to by the President
of India on March 22, 2013 and the Act has been published in the Gazette of India
(Extraordinary) Part II, Section I, dated March 23, 2013 as Act No. 10 of 2013.
Sd/-
(V . PRAKASH)
Deputy Director (Budget)
1. Smt. Anita Agnihotri, Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser, Department
of Commerce, Ministry of Commerce & Industry, Room No. 137, Udyog
Bhawan, New Delhi-110 011.
2. Ms. Saroj Punhani, Joint Secretary and Financial Adviser, Department of
Posts, Ministry of Communications & Information Technology, Dak Bhawan,
New Delhi-110 001.
3. Smt. Priti Mohanti, Financial Adviser (Defence Services), (21-Defence
Pensions, 22-Defence Services, Army, 23-Defence Services-Navy,
25-Defence Ordnance Factories & 27-Capital Outlay on Defence Services),
Ministry of Defence (Finance), South Block, New Delhi-110 001 (5 copies).
4. Shri Bimal Julka, Special Secretary & Financial Adviser, Ministry of External
Affairs, Room No. 162-F, South Block, New Delhi-110001.
5. Dr. S.C. Khuntia, Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser, Ministry of
Petroleum and Natural Gas, Room No. 208-A, Shastri Bhawan, A-Wing,
Dr. Rajendra Prasad Road, New Delhi-110 001.
6. Dr. (Ms.) Tuk Tuk Kumar, Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser,
 Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, Transport Bhawan, Sansad Marg,
New Delhi-110 001.
7. Shri Naresh Salecha, Joint Secretary & Financial Adviser (101-Public Works
& 102-Stationery and Printing), Ministry of Urban Development, Room
No. 141-C, Nirman Bhawan, Dr. Maulana Azad Road,  New Delhi-110 011.
8. The Finance Library (Publication Section) ( 10 copies ) with the request
that copies of the Gazette of India (Extra ordinary) Part II, Section I
112

113
dated March 23, 2013  as Act No. 10 of 2013 be obtained from the
Manager of Publication and supplied to Comptroller & Auditor General
of India, 10, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi-110 002.
9. The Parliament Library, Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi ( 10 Copies).
10. The Lok Sabha Secretariat (PAC Branch), Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi-110 001 (10 Copies).
11. The Director General of Audit, Central Revenues (R-I), AGCR Building,
New Delhi-110 002 (10 Copies).
12. The Director General of Audit, Central Expenditure, AGCR Building,
New Delhi-110 002 (10 Copies).
13. The Director General of Audit, Posts & Telecom, Sham Nath Marg, Civil
Lines, Delhi-54 (10 Copies).
14. The Director General of Audit, Defence Services, New Delhi-110 001
(10 Copies).
15. The Controller General of Accounts, Lok Nayak Bhawan, New Delhi
(10 Copies).
16. Comptroller and Auditor General of India, 10, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg,
New Delhi-110 002 (10 Copies).
17. Finance Library, North Block, New Delhi ( 10 Copies).
18. The Ministry of Planning, Planning Commission, Yojana Bhawan,
New Delhi-110 001.
19. Member FR/Adviser FR, Planning Commission, Yojana Bhawan,
New Delhi-110 001.
20. Joint Secretary (PF-I), Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance,
North Block, New Delhi.
21. Joint Secretary (PF-II), Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance,
North Block, New Delhi.
22. Finance Secretary & Secretary (Expenditure)
23. Secretary (Economic Affairs)
24. Secretary (Revenue)
25. Secretary (Financial Services).
26. PS to JS (Budget)
27. Director (NMJ), Director (PK), Director (RP), Deputy Secretary (PS)
28. Director (OL)/DD (Hindi)
29. Manager (Budget Press)
30. All USs/Deputy Directors in Budget Division.
31. All Sections in Budget Division and PF-I & PF-II Divisions.

114
 Action Taken by the Ministry of Urban Development
The excess expenditure over the budgeted grant occurred due to clearing
outstanding claims of the previous year. The explanatory note containing the reasons
for excess was sent to the Principal Directorate of Audit, Economic & Service
Ministries vide letter No. G-23012/1/2011-Bt. (UD) dated 02.09.2011 which has
been duly vetted by the Audit vide their U.O. No. AMG-1/VV/A TN/2011-12/480-
482 dated 16.11.2011 and U.O. No. AMG-1/VV/A TN/2011-12/544-546 dated
19.12.2011.
The excess demand statement was sent to the Ministry of Finance for
regularisation of the excess expenditure during the Budget Session vide this Ministry's
letter No. G-23012/1/2012-Bt.(UD) dated 11.02.2013. The Parliament has passed
the excess grants relating to 2010-11 and the Appropriation Bill (No. 2) of 2013 has
been passed by the Parliament and assented to by the President on 22nd March, 2013.
The contents of the Action Taken Note on the Recommendations of PAC were
sent to the Principal Director of Audit, Economic & Service Ministries vide letter
No.G-23012/04/2011 -Bt. (UD) dated 6th September, 2013 for vetting. The Principal
Director Audit vide their U.O. No. AMG-V/AA/A TN/2013-14/282-284 dated
18th October, 2013 has stated that the Action Taken Note has been examined in Audit
and the Audit has no comments to offer thereon.
Sd/-
(Naresh Salecha)
Joint Secretary and Financial Adviser
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence (Grant No. 21)
The Committee have recommended that the excess expenditure referred to in
the proceeding paragraphs be regularized in the manner prescribed in Article 115(1)(b)
of the Constitution of India.
2. The Demand for Excess Grants for Rs. 10,74,960 under (Revenue Charge)
and Rs. 3336,30,72,983 under (Revenue V oted) under Demand No. 21-Defence
Pensions relating to the financial year 2010-11 have already been passed by the
Lok Sabha and the connected Appropriation Bill (No. 2), 2013 has also been passed
by Parliament and assented to by the President of India on March 22nd, 2013 and the
Act has been published in the Gazette of India (Extra ordinary) Part II, Section I
dated 23rd March, 2013 as Act No. 10 of 2013.
Sd/-
(Rajnish Kumar)
JS & Addl. FA (RK)
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
The excess expenditure during the year 2010-11 has been regularized by the
Parliament as per Appropriation Bill (No. 2), 2013 and assented to by the President

115
of India on March 22, 2013 and the Act has been published in the Gazette of India
(Extraordinary) Part I, Section I dated March 23, 2013 as Act No. 10 of 2013.
Sd/-
(V eena Prasad)
Joint Secretary & Addl. FA (VP)
[MoD (Fin.) ID No. 7(2)/Bud.-I/2013 dated 12.07.2013]
Action Taken by the Department of Posts
The excess expenditure incurred during the year 2009-10 & 2010-11 under the
Demand No. 13 of the Department of Posts have been approved by the Parliament
vide the connected appropriation of March, 2012 and the connected appropriation
(No. 2) Bill, 2013 respectively, copies are enclosed.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Communications & IT (Department of Posts)
OM No. 20-5/11-BGT(PA) dt. 15.04.2013]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Railways
The excess expenditure of Rs. 3056.86 crore incurred by Ministry of Railways
during 2010-11 has been regularized by Parliament in its budget session, 2013.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 25 RA-III/2-1/2012 dated 29.05.2013 have vetted
the A TN with the remarks “Seen” Thanks”.
Sd/-
(V . V aidehi)
Exe. Director Finance (BC)

[Ministry of Railways' Case No. 2013-BC-PAC-XV/64 dated 27.06.2013]
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM
GOVERNMENT
—NIL—
116

CHAPTER IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee note with profound concern that out of the total twenty-nine
cases of excess registering Grants/Appropriations, an excess expenditure of
Rs. 10,966.95 crore was incurred in as many as twenty-three cases even after obtaining
Supplementary Grants/Appropriations to the tune of Rs. 19,065,46 crore. The
percentage of excess expenditure over the Supplementary Grants in respect of these
twenty-three Grants/Appropriations ranged from 0.001 per cent [Grant No. 72 Capital
V oted] (Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas) to 2,108 per cent [Grant No. 101
(Revenue V oted)-Public Works] and in thirteen cases this percentage was more than
50 per cent. To illustrate the sector-wise details, Supplementary Grants to the tune of
Rs. 9,846.90 crore, Rs. 4,523.68 crore, Rs. 2,097.95 crore and Rs. 2,596.93 crore
pertaining to the Civil, Defence, Postal and Railway Sectors respectively fell short of
the actual expenditure by Rs. 3,377.41 crore, Rs. 4,239.34 crore, Rs. 366.63 crore
and Rs. 2,983.56 crore in that order. In respect of seven Grants/Appropriations, the
quantum of excess expenditure incurred was even higher than the Supplementary
Grants/Appropriations sought. The Committee deplore the tendency on the part of
the defaulting Ministries/Departments in resorting to excess expenditure despite
obtaining huge sums of Supplementary Grants in a routine manner. What is more
perplexing is that these Ministries/Departments could not realistically project their
requirement of funds even after three stages of obtaining Supplementary Grants, the
latest being February-March, 2011  i.e. the fag end of the financial year. This is a
clear indication of bad budgeting as well as of the deeply pervading malaise in the
extant budgeting method/mechanism, which has resulted in lack of proper assessment
and accurate projection of the fund requirement despite ample opportunities for seeking
Parliamentary approval. It also exposes the hollow claim of the Ministries/Departments
concerned that they monitor the flow of the excess expenditure. The committee,
therefore, recommended that the Ministries/Department concerned probe into the
causes of this chronic malaise and find effective ways and means to make the
mechanism of estimating Supplementary Grants more realistic and that budget
controlling officers responsible so that no excess expenditure is incurred and strict
fiscal discipline is maintained. The Committee be apprised of the steps taken in this
regard within three months of the presentation of the Report.
[Sl. No. 5, Appendix II, Para No. 5 of the 64th Report of Public Accounts
Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
117

118
Action Taken by the Ministry of External Affairs
It is submitted that many of the Ministry's developmental projects are
implementated in the foreign countries which depend on the local conditions prevailing
in those countries. Very often, implementation of these projects is affected by the
political climate in the host country. Ministry, however, will continue to endeavour to
project more realistic budget demands taking into consideration all aspects of projects
under consideration and implementation.
With the implementation of the Integrated Mission Accounts Software (I-MAS)
in all the Missions/Posts in a phased manner, control of expenditure has improved.
Clear instructions are given to all the spending units at RE stage to stick to the RE
ceiling indicated and also to surrender any savings which are foreseen. The instructions
of Ministry of Finance regarding curtailment of expenditure and expenditure ceiling
are also given wide circulation among the spending units.
Sd/-
(Kusumjit Siddu)
Additional Secretary (Financial Advisor)
No. Q/Bud/125/02/2012    Ministry of External Affairs
Action Taken by the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
As may be seen from the reply given in para No. 1, this Ministry had requested
for the entire sum of Rs. 101,53,14,000, but in the budget document only Rs. 101.53
crore was shown due to rounding off leaving Rs. 14,000 unadjusted.
The amount of Rs. 101.53 crore (leaving Rs. 14,000/- unadjusted) was provided
to us in 3rd Supplementaries and the approval was conveyed on 18.03.2011. During
the next financial year i.e. 2011-12, this Ministry had vide letter dated 7.12.2011
requested Ministry of Finance to forward the Explanatory Note to Public Accounts
Committee for regularization of excess expenditure of Rs. 14,000/-.
(The above mentioned A TN has been examined and vetted by the office of the
Principal Director of Audit, Economic and Service Ministries, vide their U.O. letter
No. AMG-VI/App.A/c/ATN/2013-14/11013 dated 30.04.2013).
Sd/-
Additional Secretary & Financial Advisor
[Ministry of P& NG O.M. No. G-24011/1/2010 Fin. I dated 31.10.2013]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Road Transport and Highway
No supplementary grant was taken by the Ministry for this purpose. The Excess
expenditure of Rs. 15,000 was erroneously booked due to urgency in implementing
court order against Court Case No. WP(C) 787 of 2010 filed by Ravinder Vs UO. &
others.
Sd/-
Addl. Secretary & Financial Advisor
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways

119
Action Taken by the Ministry of Urban Development
Instructions have already been issued to all concerned to strengthen  monitoring
of expenditure and to keep the expenditure well within the budgeted allocation
and no excess expenditure over the grant/appropriation is allowed to occur vide
OM No. G-23012/6/2011-Bt. (UD) dated 12.08.2011 (Annexure-I & II). Further,
One Day Workshop on Awareness Building on re-appropriation and projection
of  Supplementary Demands for Grants was also conducted on 13.09.2011
(Annexure-III).
The contents of the Action Taken Note on the Recommendations of PAC were
sent to the Principal Director of Audit, Economic & Service Ministries vide letter
No. G-23012/04/2011-Bt.(UD) dated 11th April, 2013 for vetting. The Principal
Director Audit vide  their U.O. No. AMG-V/VV/ATN/2013-14/1 14-116 dated
26th June, 2013 has stated that the Action Taken Note has been examined in Audit
and the Audit has no comments to offer thereon.
Sd/-
(Naresh Salecha)
(Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor)

ANNEXURE I
No. G-23012/6/2011-Bt. (UD)
Government of India
Ministry of Urban Development
(Budget Section)
Nirman Bhawan, New Delhi-11
Dated the 17th August, 2011
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject:  Excess Expenditure over Grants/Appropriation
The undersigned is directed to state that Appropriation Account for the year
ended 31.03.2011 reveals excess expenditure over the grant/appropriation in all the
three demands of the Ministry (Annexure). Under Demand No. 101-Public Works
and demand No. 102 Stationery and Printing, the Excess Expenditure has taken place
beyond the total Grant under the Revenue Section and Capital Section respectively.
This is the glaring example of breach of financial propriety and violation of the
provision of the General Financial Rules. There are instances where expenditure has
exceeded the grant despite the fact that the division reported the savings.
2. Rule 52 of General Financial Rules states that no expenditure shall be incurred
which may have the effect of exceeding the total grant or appropriation authorized by
Parliament by law for a financial year. The mechanism for expenditure control which
inter alia involve Drawing & Disbursing Officer, Controlling Officer and the Pay &
Accounts Officer to reconcile the expenditure on monthly basis. Thus Head of the
Department and the Accounts Officer are jointly responsible for the monthly
reconciliation of the accounts.
3. All concerned are requested to strengthen the monitoring of expenditure to
keep the expenditure well with in the budgeted allocations and no excess expenditure
over the grant/appropriation is allowed to occur. It is also requested to furnish the
detailed and convincing reasons for savings and Excess of expenditure to the Budget
Section immediately i.e. latest by 18th August, 2011.
Sd/-
(Moti Lal)
Director (Budget)
Ph. No. 23062074
120

121
Encl. Annexure
To:
1. Joint Secretary (Admn.)
2. Director (Works)
3. Director (UD)
4. Director (PSP)
5. Director (DD)
6. Director (WS/LSG/UCD)
7. Director (UT)
8. Director (NURM I, II & III)
9. Deputy Secretary (MRTS)
10. Director (Coord.)

ANNEXURE
Cases of Excess Expenditure over Grant/Appropriation
(Rs. in thousand)
Major Head T otal Grant/ Expenditure Excess
Appropriation
Major Head 2216—Housing
(i) Demand No. 100-Department of Urban Development—
2216.05.053.06 89,25,00 90,72,67 1,47,67
2216.05.800.02 7,00,00 7,37,68 37,68
2216.07.053.05 41,00,00 45,67,87 4,67,87
2216.07.800.01 4,20,00 4,73,11 53,11
2217.80.004.01 20,70,00 21,50,66 **80,66
4216.01.700.04 10,00 13,75 ** 3,75
(ii) Demand No. 101-Public Works—
2059.01.051.01 15,00,00 15,03,97 3,97
2059.01.053.03 82,25,00 84,04,02 1,79,02
2059.01.104.01 112,00,00 117,56,16 5,56,16
2059.60.051.02 2,50,00 3,65,70 1,15,70
2059.60.053.02 31,20,00 31,98,19 78,19
2059.60.053.03 47,75,00 52,31,55 3,56,55
2059.80.001.02 365,81,56 371,74,77 **5,93,21
2059.80.001.03 9,21,60 9,88,67 67,07
2059.80.001.04 66,26,78 66,90,49 63,71
4059.80.051.11 5,00,00 5,08,96 8,96
4059.80.051.23 15,00 30,19 15,19
4202.01.600.01 3,38,00 3,61,02 **23,02
(iii) Demand No. 102-Stationery & Printing—
2058.00.105.01 22,30,50 23,61,23 1,30,73
4058.00.103.02 13,00 14,86 1,86
** Denotes the cases where funds were re-appropriated from these sub-heads and the actual expenditure
is in excess of the final grant.
122

ANNEXURE II
No. G-23 012/6/2011-Bt(UD)
Government of India
Ministry of Urban Development
(Budget Section)
Nirman Bhawan, New Delhi-11
Dated the 17 August, 2011
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject: Excess Expenditure over Grant/Appropriation.
The undersigned is directed to state that Appropriation Account for the year
ended 31.03.2011 reveals excess expenditure over the grant/appropriation in all the
three demands of the Ministry (Annexure). Under Demand No. 101-Public Works
and Demand No. 102-Stationery and Printing, the Excess Expenditure has taken place
beyond the total Grant under the Revenue Section and Capital Section respectively.
This is the glaring example of breach of financial propriety and violation of the
provision of the General Financial Rules.
2. Rule 52 of General Financial Rules as well as para 4.2.4 of Civil Accounts
Manual clearly stipulate that no expenditure shall be incurred which may have the
effect of exceeding the total grant or appropriation authorized by Parliament by law
for a financial year. Head of the Department and the Accounts Officer are jointly
responsible for the monthly reconciliation of the accounts. Further, Note below
para 4.2.4 Civil Accounts Manual empowers the Pay and Accounts officer to make
the payment only on receipt of the written assurance from the grant controlling authority
that the expenditure does not involve New Service/New Instrument of Service and
the funds will be provided by way of re-appropriation.
3. It is requested to issue suitable instructions to all the Pay and Accounts offices
under your control to reconcile the accounts on monthly basis and to strictly abide by
the above provisions so as to alleviate the possibility of excess expenditure over
grant/appropriation.
Encl: Annexure Sd/-
(Moti Lal)
Director (Budget)
Ph. No. 23062074
To:
The Controller of Accounts,
Ministry of Urban Development,
Nirman Bhawan, New Delhi.
123

ANNEXURE
Cases of Excess Expenditure over grant/appropriation
(Rs. in thousand)
Major Head     Total Grant/ Expenditure Excess
  Appropriation
1  2 3 4
Major Head 2216—Housing
(i) Demand No. 100—Department of Urban Development
2216.05.053.06 89,25,00 90,72,67 1,47,67
2216.05.800.02 7,00,00 7,37,68 37,68
2216.07.053.05 41,00,00 45,67,87 4,67,87
2216.07.800.01 4,20,00 4,73,11 53,11
2217.80.004.01 20,70,00 21,50,66 **80,66
4216.01.700.04 10,00 13,75 **3,75
(ii)  Demand No. 101-Public Works
2059.01.051.01 15,00,00 15,03,97 3,97
2059.01.053.03 82,25,00 84,04,02 1,79,02
2059.01.104.01 112,00,00 117,56,16 5,56,16
2059.60.051.02 2,50,00 3,65,70 1,15,70
2059.60.053.02 31,20,00 31,98,19 78,19
2059.60.053.03 47,75,00 52,31,55 3,56,55
2059.80.001.02 365,81,56 371,74,77 **5,93,21
2059.80.001.03 9,21,60 9,88,67 67,07
2059.80.001.04 66,26,78 66,90,49 63,71
4059.80.051.11 5,00,00 5,08,96 8,96
4059.80.051.23 15,00 30,19 15,19
4202.01.600.01 3,38,00 3,61,02 **23,02
(iii) Demand No. 102—Stationery and Printing
2058.00.105.01 22,30,50 23,61,23 1,30,73
4058.00.103.02 13,00 14,86 1,86
** Denotes the cases where funds were re-appropriated from these sub-heads and the actual expenditure
is in excess of the final grant.
124

ANNEXURE III
MOST IMMEDIATE
No. G2017/5/2011-Bt.(UD)
Government of India
Ministry of Urban Development
(Budget Section)
New Delhi, 06 September, 2011
Subject: One day workshop on awareness Building on re-appropriation and
projection of supplementary Demand for Grants on 13th Sept., 2011
organised by Ministry of Urban Development.
It has been decided to hold one day workshop on awareness Building on
re-appropriation and projection of supplementary Demand for Grants on 13.09.2011
from 9.30 A.M. onwards in Conference Room No. 101, A Wing, Nirman Bhawan,
New Delhi.
Officers/staff members of the concerned programme divisions associated with
preparation of re-appropriation and projection of supplementary Demand for Grants
(one each from every section/division) are invited to take part in the day-long session.
Sd/-
(Moti Lal)
Director (Budget)
Tel. 23062074/2867
To,
All Sections in the Ministry of Urban Development/Ministry of Housing and
Urban Poverty Alleviation.
Copy with the request that officials involved for re-appropriation/projection of
supplementary etc. may be directed to attend the workshop:
Joint Secretary (Admn.)/OSD (MRTS)/Director (UD)/Director (Works)/
Director (UT)/Director (DD)/Director (WS/LSG)/Director (UIDSSMT)/Deputy
Secretary (JNNURM)/Director (PSP)/Deputy Secretary (JNNURM), Ministry of
Urban Development.
Joint Secretary (Admn. and Coord.)/Director (Ray and HUDCO), Director
(JNNURM)/Director (Housing)/Deputy Secretary (UPA), Ministry of Housing and
Urban Poverty Alleviation.
Copy also to:
1. Director General (Works) CPWD, New Delhi.
2. Director, Directorate of Printing, New Delhi.
3. Director, Directorate of Estates.
125

126
4. Director, NBO.
5. Chief Planner, T&CPO, New Delhi.
6. Director (JNNURM), New Delhi.
7. Controller of Publication, Civil Lines, New Delhi.
8. Director, Land and Development Office, New Delhi.
9. Controller of Stationery and Printing, Kolkata.
Copy for information to:
1. Shri. P .K. Sharma, FO to DG(W) with the request to book the Conference
Room No. 101, A Wing, Nirman Bhawan, New Delhi-11 for 13.09.2011 from
9.30 AM to 5.15 PM.
2. PS to JS and FA
3. PS to CCA
Sd/-
(Moti Lal)
Director (Budget)
Tel. 23062074/2867

127
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence (Grant No. 21)
In this paragraph, the Committee have noted that out of the total 29 cases of
excess registering Grants/Appropriations, an excess expenditure of Rs. 10,966.958
crore was incurred in as many as 23 cases even after obtaining Supplementary Grants/
Appropriations to the tune of Rs. 19,065.46 crore. The Committee have deplored the
tendency in resorting to excess expenditure despite obtaining huge sums of
Supplementary in a routine manner and have accordingly recommended that the
Ministries/Departments concerned should probe into the causes of this chronic malaise
and find effective ways and means to make the mechanism of estimating Supplementary
Grants more realistic and the budget controlling officers responsible so that no excess
expenditure is incurred and strict fiscal discipline is maintained. The Committee have
also desired to be apprised of the steps taken in this regard within three months of the
presentation of the Report.
2. In this regard, the actual position under Grant No. 21—Defence Pensions
for the Financial year 2010-11 is as under:
(Rs. in crore)
Revenue Final Grant Actual Excess %age
Section Expenditure
Total 34,000.0000 37,336.4148 +3,336.4148 9.81%
3. The approved BE 2010-11 was Rs. 25000 crores and at RE 2010-11 stage,
an amount of Rs. 37647 crores was projected under Grant No. 21—Defence
Pensions, however, due to financial constraint, MoF approved only Rs. 34000 crores,
that is, a Supplementary Grant to the tune of Rs. 12647 crores was requested at RE
stage of 2010-11, but due to financial constraint only Rs. 9000 crores was approved
by MoF, which means less Supplementary Grant was approved than projected, which
resulted into excess expenditure of Rs. 3,336.41 crores. The actual expenditure of
Rs. 37,336 crores incurred under the Grant, was in line with the RE projection of
Rs. 37,647 crores submitted by the Ministry to MoF. Also, the payment of pension
to the Defence Pensioners is a committed expenditure and cannot be stopped for
the want of Budget.
4. As already explained above, the actual expenditure under Grant No. 21—
Defence Pensions for the financial year 2010-11 was in line with the projections
submitted by this Ministry to MoF at RE stage. However, the excess occurred due to
lack of availability of sufficient funds for payment of Defence Pension which is a
committed liability and payment of which cannot be stopped for want of funds. The

128
under mentioned table shows the amount projected by PCDA(P) Allahabad and the
amount approved by Ministry of Finance over the last few years.
(Rs. in crores)
Year-wise Amount Amount Less Actual RBI
Allocations Projected Approved Amount Expenditure Cash
by MoF Received flow
2010-11 37647 34000 3647.00 37336 36976
2011-12 37547 34000 3547.00 37569.39 38003
2012-13 41785 39500 2285.00 39328.15
(upto 3/2013)
2013-14 45304+2300* 44500 3104.00
BE = 47604
5. Regarding corrective measures, the Ministry of Defence have issued, from
time to time instructions to exercise strict control on progress of Expenditure in order
to avoid any large-scale savings or excess under any grant relating to Civil Estimates.
6. Subsequently, instructions were also issued to PCDA(P) Allahabad and
O/o the CGDA, New Delhi vide ID No. 2(6)/MO/2011 dt. 12.07.2012 wherein it was
advised to adopt e-governance model to utilize the information technology/tools so
as to establish a centralized database of Pensioners and networking of all the banks
so as to arrive at a correct estimation of pension liability and expenditure in a particular
year. Necessary monitoring and follow up action in this regard would be ensured.
O/o the CGDA vide their letter No. A/B/I/0107/AA-DP/10-11 dt. 6.6.2012 informed
about various measures initiated to promote e-governance model and use of IT.
7. Also, as per the directions of  Ministry of Finance, to Review of the existing
arrangement of Reporting and Accounting of Defence Pensions, an Internal Audit
was conducted by O/o the CGDA, and a brief report was furnished vide their letter
No. A/B/I/9130-Study Report/2012 dt. 11.5.2012 wherein various measures to improve
the system have been suggested by O/o the CGDA. The report was forwarded to
Ministry of Finance vide this office ID No. 2(8)/RE/BE/MO/2009/187 dt. 19.6.2012.
in accordance with the  recommendations contained in the report, following measures/
actions have been taken.
• The issue of incorrect or invalid PPO Nos. missing details in the scrolls
have been taken up with banks specifically with SBI, the largest PDA.
• PCDA(P), Allahabad has been asked to take into account pending scrolls
of the previous years while estimating budget for the next years.
• An exercise named 'Project Sangam' has been undertaken in order to
create an up-to-date Pensions database in collaboration with PCDA(P),
Allahabad and various pension disbursing agencies.
• PCDA(P) has taken up with Banks to provide Pension Payment scrolls
on electronic format.

129
• As per the latest development made under Project Sangam, it is mentioned
that there are about 23 lakh Pensioners enrolled under Defence Pensions
and out of these details of about 15 lakh pensioners have been
computerized and the remaining 8 lakh pensioners is in the process of
computerization.
• Apart from ‘‘Project Sangam”, a new web based application for ‘‘Pension
Accounting  System”  has also been developed, which is under trial running
process. The project once implemented will give a more accurate database
for monitoring the pace of expenditure and will be very useful while
predicting the future requirement of funds.
The above measures are expected to improve budgeting and accounting of
pension expenditure.
Sd/
(Rajnish Kumar)
JS & Addl. FA (RK)
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
In view of the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of Defence
is constituting three Committees comprising representatives from Defence Finance
Division, Budget Holders/Financial Planning Directorates of the Services and other
agencies under the Ministry of Defence and Controller General of Defence Accounts.
These Committees would make an in-depth examination of the issues to identify
weaknesses in the budgetary control systems that allow repeated instances of excess
expenditure and formulate solutions to the same. Detailed instructions have been
issued to all concerned vide MoD (Fin.) ID No. 7(5)/Bud-I/2011 dated 29/11/2011,
10(01)/Bud-I/2012(PC) dated 11/12/2012, 10(01)/Bud-I/2012 dated 06/02/2013,
10(01)/Bud-I/2013 (PC) dated 07/03/2013, 14/03/2013, 20/03/2013, 26/03/2013
(Copies enclosed) for strict monitoring of utilization of the budget to avoid excess
expenditure over allocation.
Sd/
(V eena Prasad)
Joint Secretary & Addl. FA (VP)
[MoD (Fin.) ID No. 7(2)/Bud.-I/2013 dated 12-07-2013]
Action Taken by the Department of Posts
It is a fact that there has been excess expenditure for Rs. 366.63 crore during
the year 2010-11. Austerity measures received from Ministry of Finance are also
being circulated to all field formations and their expenditures are reviewed by the
Secretary (Posts) on monthly basis through video conferencing. All heads of circles
are also advised from time to time to limit their expenditure within the budgetary
allocations.

130
Department is implementing IT project through which business processes of
each action of the Department is going to be computerized which will enable to make
more accurate projection of demands for funds.
Sd/
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Communications & IT (Department of Posts) OM No. 20-5/11-
BGT(PA) dt. 15.4.2013]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Railways
In March,  2011, Ministry of Railways obtained supplementary under 13 Grants
and 9 Appropriations. Of this, excess has occurred under 9 Grants, viz., 3, 4, 6, 7, 8,
10, 11, 12 & 13 and under 4 Appropriations, viz., 3, 6, 8, & 12.
Excess under charged appropriations could not be avoided despite taking
supplementary because more decretal payments materialized in March,  2011 whereas
the supplementary was finalized at the end of February,  2011 itself. As regards excess
under voted grants, the reasons have been given in the ATNs to the preceding
observations.
However, noting the concern of the Committee, the Railways have been
addressed on the issue vide the enclosed letter (No. 2013-B-342 dated 09-04-2013—
Annexure-I) and also in the General Managers' conference held in April, 2013.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 25 RA-III/2-1/2012 dated 29.05.2013 have vetted
the ATN with the remarks "Seen. However, Railways needs to draw up their demand
for supplementary grants keeping in view the future contingencies like decretal
payments. As far as possible, adequate and timely provisions should be made on the
basis of realistic assumptions".
Sd/
(V . V aidehi)
Exe. Director Finance (BC)
[Ministry of Railways case No. 2013-BC-PAC-XV/64 dated 27.06.2013]

ANNEXURE-I
Government of India
Ministry of Railways
(Railway Board)
No. 2013-B-342 New Delhi, dated 09.04.2013
The General Managers,
All Indian Railways.
Subject: Excess over V oted Grants/Charged Appropriations — 2010-11.
In 2010-11, Railways incurred a huge excess expenditure of Rs. 3,056.84 crores
in the following Demands:—
(Rs. in crores)
Dem. No. Grant Appropriation T otal
3 5.13 0.21 5.34
4 5.67 5.67
5 73.28 73.28
6 221.26 0.05 221.31
7 39.72 0.01 39.73
8 184.55 0.01 184.56
10 414.80 414.80
11 53.39 53.39
12 645.53 9.26 654.79
13 1403.97 1403.97
Total 3047.30 9.54 3056.84
The above 'Excess' has been viewed seriously by the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha), vide their 64th Report. The Committee, while expressing serious
concern, has made the following observations/recommendations:
1. The incidence of excess expenditure of such a huge magnitude is far from
justifiable given the provision for obtaining Supplementary Demands for Grants in
the course of a financial year. The Committee desire that such an endemic failure
arising out of want of essential alacrity in the budgetary estimations, sheer dereliction
of duty on the part of budget controlling authorities to monitor the pace of expenditure
and to invoke the provision of supplementary demands and failure on their part to
ensure observance of strict fiscal discipline should be prudently addressed in the
coming years.
2. The Committee wish to caution that expenditure over and above the budgetary
provisions sanctioned by the Parliament at different stages of the budget does not
augur well for fiscal prudence and fiscal consolidation besides undermining the
Parliamentary financial control. The unabated large excess expenditure by these
131

132
defaulting Ministries/Department is axiomatic of the fact that they miserably failed
to track the pace of expenditure vis-à-vis  the grants approved by Parliament.
Deplorably, such a trend also indicates that the defaulting Ministries/Departments
have not accorded due importance to the guiding principles of budgeting and abdicated
their responsibilities. The Committee urge upon the defaulting Ministries/Departments
to learn from the experience of the Ministries/Departments which did not incur excess
expenditure.
3. In respect of Grant No. 12 and Appropriation Nos. 3, 6 & 7, the percentage
of excess expenditure over the Total Grant was exceedingly high. Obviously, such a
huge percentage of excess expenditure shows beyond any manner of doubt that the
entire budgetary process has gone awry in these defaulting Ministries/Departments
and there has been abysmal failure on the part of the budget controlling authorities
and Financial Advisers in budget formulation, monitoring and in submission of revised
estimates in time.
4. The Committee deplore the tendency on the part of the (Ministry of Railways)
in resorting to excess expenditure despite obtaining huge sums of Supplementary
Grants in a routine manner. This is a clear indication of bad budgeting as well as of
the deeply pervading malaise in the extant budgeting method/mechanism, which has
resulted in lack of proper assessment and accurate projection of the funds requirement
despite ample opportunities for seeking Parliamentary approval. It also exposes the
hollow claim of the Ministry of Railways that it monitors the flow of the excess
expenditure. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Railways
probe into the causes of this chronic malaise and find effective ways and means to
make the mechanism of estimating Supplementary Grants more realistic and the budget
controlling officers responsible so that no excess expenditure is incurred and strict
fiscal discipline is maintained. The Committee be apprised of the steps taken in this
regard within three months of the presentation of the Report.
5. The Committee are constrained to observe that the Ministry of Railways had
been persistently incurring huge excess expenditure during the financial
years 2001-02 to 2010-11 This recurring phenomenon of wide variations between
the budgetary provisions and the actual expenditure by the (Ministry of Railways)
over such long periods has led the Committee to arrive at the conclusion that the
estimation of requirement of fund is still done in a haphazardly manner devoid of
sound budgetary presumptions. Needless to say the existing budgeting mechanism in
the (Ministry of Railways) still suffers from various loopholes and lacunae which are
nullifying the attempts of the Government to enhance accuracy level of their budgetary
projections to achieve the desired improvements. The persistence of such a pernicious
trend is bound to further deteriorate the fiscal discipline leading to financial ad-hocism,
and maladministration. The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Ministry of
Railways to overhaul their budgetary mechanism drastically, introduce and implement
IT and e-governance in their financial administration and fix responsibility against
the budget controlling authorities in case their estimation go awry leading to excess
expenditure.

133
6. Thus, incurring of excess expenditure under the Grants/Appropriations
operated by the Ministry of Railways is a recurring phenomenon indicating serious
flaws in their budgetary exercise. As such, the Committee are not enthused by the
Ministry's stock reply that every care has been taken to assess the expenditure under
various Grants/Appropriations as precisely as possible and to obtain supplementary
allotments where necessary so that excess is avoided to the maximum extent possible.
The Committee observed that while anticipating the requirement of funds by the
Railways, estimation for various Sub-Heads could have been projected more
realistically by analyzing properly the total monetary effect of salary hike, prevailing
expenditure trail, upcoming demands/requirements, rising cost etc. which was possible
by putting in a little more effort. The Committee cannot but conclude that the indolent
Ministry of Railways have not taken any timely corrective measures to improve their
budgeting mechanism with a view to avoiding such a huge unauthorized expenditure.
It is apparent that the Ministry have paid scant respect to enforcing fiscal discipline
while incurring wantonly excess expenditure, which is anything but regrettable. Taking
serious note of lack of concern and sustained efforts on the part of the Ministry in
observing fiscal discipline, the Committee recommend that the Ministry of Railways
strive earnestly for ensuing realistic estimation of their budgetary requirements under
various sub-heads of the Grants/Appropriations operated by them so that the existing
lapses/loopholes are identified and concrete remedial measures taken to obviate excess
expenditure.
In view of the above observations, the Railways are required to take immediate
action to curb the excess expenditure.
Sd/
(Jagmohan Gupta)
Executive Director, Finance (Budget)
Railway Board
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee are constrained to observe that the Ministry of Railway
had been persistently incurring huge excess expenditure during the financial
years 2001-02 to 2010-11 while the Ministry of Defence had been spending much
above the authorized expenditure during each of the financial years 2003-04 to
2010-11. To elucidate, the Ministry of Railways incurred excess expenditure of
Rs. 210.71 crore in eight Grants/Appropriations in 2001-02; Rs. 323.65 crore in
eleven Grants/Appropriations in 2002-03;  Rs. 1136.92 crore in nine Grants/
Appropriations in 2003-04;  Rs. 2,151.99 crore in ten Grants/Appropriations in
2004-05,  Rs. 2,322.46 crore in eleven Grants/Appropriations in 2005-06,  Rs. 365.16
crore in eight Grants/Appropriations in 2006-07,  Rs.51.22 crore in eight Grants/
Appropriations in 2007-08,  Rs. 532.12 crore in eight Grants/Appropriations in
2008-09;  Rs. 1,922.84 crore in nine Grants/Appropriations in 2009-10 and
Rs. 3,056.86 crore in ten Grants/Appropriations in 2010-11. The Committee also
find that under Defence Services sector, the Ministry of Defence incurred an excess
expenditure of Rs. 37.50 crore in a single Grant in 2003-04,  Rs. 41.99 crore in two
Grants in 2004-05,  Rs. 44.84 crore in two Grants in 2005-06,  Rs. 667.17 crore in a

134
single Grant in 2006-07,  Rs. 71.19 crore in a single Grant in 2007-08, Rs. 742.61
crore in two Grants in 2008-09, Rs. 2,615.23 crore in two Grants in 2009-10 and
Rs. 4,239.34 crore in four Grants/Appropriations in 2010-11. This recurring
phenomenon of wide variations between the budgetary provisions and the actual
expenditure by these important Ministries over such long periods has led the
Committee to arrive at the conclusion that the estimation of requirement of funds is
still done in a haphazardly manner devoid of sound budgetary presumptions. Needless
to say the existing budgeting mechanism in these Ministries still suffers from various
loopholes and lacunae which are nullifying the attempts of the Government to enhance
accuracy level of their budgetary projections to achieve the desired improvements.
The persistence of such a pernicious trend is bound to further deteriorate the fiscal
discipline leading to financial ad-hocism and maladministration. The Committee,
therefore, impress upon the Ministries of Railways and Defence to overhaul their
budgetary mechanism drastically, introduce and implement IT and e-governance in
their financial administration and fix responsbility against the budget controlling
authorities in case their estimation go awry leading to excess expenditure.
[Sl.No. 6; Appendix II, Para No. (Part-II)-6 of the 64th Report of the Public
Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
In light of the recommendations of the Committee, three Committees are being
constituted comprising authorities in Defence Finance Division, Budget Holders/
Financial Planning Directorates of the Services and other agencies under the Ministry
of Defence and Controller General of Defence Accounts. These Committees would
make an in-depth examination of the issues to identify the weaknesses in the budgetary
control systems that allow repeated instances of excess expenditure and formulate
solutions to the same. One of these Committees will be examining the extant IT
system used for compilation of defence expenditure for further refinements and will
also study the feasibility of conveying budget allotments by means of an IT solution.
The Navy has implemented an FIS system which will also be examined for possible
replication by other services.
Detailed instructions have been issued to all concerned vide MoD (Fin) ID
No. 7(5)/Bud/I/2011 dated 29.11.2011, 10(01)/Bud-I/2012(PC) dated 11.12.2012,
10(01)/Bud-I/2012 dated 06.02.2013, 10(01)/Bud-I/2013 (PC) dated 07.03.2013,
14.03.2013, 20.03.2013, 26.03.2013 (Copies enclosed) for strict monitoring of
utilization of the budget to avoid excess expenditure over allocation.
Sd/-
(V eena Prasad)
Joint Secretary & Addl. FA(VP)
[MoD(Fin.)ID No. 7(2)/Bud.-I/2013 dated 12.07.2013]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Railways
The excess expenditure on Railways has increased from Rs. 210.71 crores
in 2001-02 to Rs. 2,322.46 crores in 2005-06. However, it declined to Rs. 365.16 crores

135
in 2006-07 and further to Rs. 51.22 crores in 2007-08. But, it increased to Rs. 532.12
crores in 2008-09 to Rs. 1922.84 crores in 2009-10 and to Rs. 3056.86 crores in
2010-11. The increase in 2008-09 and 2009-10 had been mainly due to the difficulty
in assessing the impact of implementation of the recommendations of the 6th CPC as
has already been submitted to in ATNs to Reports of PAC on Excess over V oted
Grants and Charged Appropriations relating to those years. As regards the increase in
2010-11, the reasons have been given in the other A TNs to the present Report of
PAC.
Notwithstanding the same, the recommendation of the Committee has been
noted for compliance. The Committee may appreciate the fact that the excess
in 2011-12 has drastically reduced to around Rs. 1,050 crores.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 25 RA-III/2-1/2012 dated 29.05.2013 have vetted
the A TN with the remarks "Seen Thanks".
Sd/-
(V . V aidehi)
Exe. Director Finance (BC)
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2013-BC-PAC-XV/64 dated 27.06.2013]
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee observe that the Explanatory Notes pertaining to the excess
registering Grants/Appropriations as highlighted in the Union Government
Appropriation Accounts (Civil) for the financial year 2010-11 were due for submission
to the Committee on or before 24th April 2012. However, the Ministries of External
Affairs, Commerce and Industry (Department of Commerce), Petroleum and Natural
Gas and Defence furnished their Explanatory Notes pertaining to the financial year
2010-11 after a delay of 7 months 18 days; 7 months 5 days; 3 months 27 days; and
13 days respectively. The Committee do not find any valid justification for inordinate
delay in submission of the Explanatory Notes by these defaulting Ministries/
Departments as they had ample time to prepare and furnish and same to the Committee
well before the stipulated time as has been done by other Ministries/Departments.
Deploring the abysmal failure on the part of the Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways to furnish Explanatory Notes to the Committee (as on 28.12.2012) even
after repeated written and oral reminders, the Committee, being unable to endorse
regularization of the excess expenditure, recommend that responsibility be fixed by
the Ministry of Finance in consultation with the Ministry of Law & Justice for violation
of constitutional provision and they be apprised accordingly.
[Sl.No. 7, Appendix II, Para No. 7 of 64th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance
Deploring the abysmal failure on the part of the Ministry of Road Transport
and Highways to furnish Explanatory Notes to the Committee (as on 28.12.2012)
even after repeated written and oral reminders, the Committee, being unable to endorse

136
regularization of the excess expenditure, recommended that responsibility be fixed
by the Ministry of Finance in consultation with the Ministry of Law & Justice for
violation of constitutional provision and they be apprised accordingly. Accordingly,
letters dated 15th May, 2013, 14th June, 2013 and 8th October, 2013 (copy enclosed)
were sent to Ministry of Road Transport and Highways requesting them to initiate
and intimate the action taken for the lapse. Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
will ensure that the lapse does not recur in future and suitable action is taken against
those responsible.
2. This note has been vetted by Audit vide their ID No. A.M.G-V/A.A./ATN/
2013-14/310-312 dated 26th December, 2013.
Sd/-
(Rajat Bhargava)
Joint Secretary (Budget)
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs (Budget Division),
New Delhi-110 001
O.M. No. F.7(2)-B(SD)/2012 dated the January, 2014]

jftUnz flag xqtjky  Hkkjr ljdkj
foÙk lfpo foÙk ea=ky;
R.S. GUJRAL O;; foHkkx
FINANCE SECRETARY ukFkZ CykWd] ubZ fnYyh&110 001
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE
NORTH BLOCK, NEW DELHI-110 001
Tel.: 011-23092929, 23092663
Fax.: 011-23092546
E-mail:secyexp@nic.in
Web:http://finmin.nic.in
D.O. No. F. 7(2)-B(SD)/2012
15th May, 2013
Dear Vijay,
I am to forward herewith a copy of extracts of paragraph 7 of the
recommendations/observations of the Public Accounts Committee made in its
64th Report (15th Lok Sabha), wherein they have deplored the abysmal failure on the
part of the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways to furnish Explanatory Notes to
them even after repeated written and oral reminders. The Committee recommended
that the responsibility be fixed in consultation with M/o Law and Justice for violation
of the constitutional provision and they be apprised accordingly.
2. I would request you to initiate and intimate us of the action taken for this
lapse at the earliest so that we can apprise the Committee accordingly.
With kind regards,
Yours sincerely,
Sd/
(R.S. Gujral)
Shri Vijay Chhibber
Secretary,
M/o Road Transport & Highways,
Transport Bhawan,
New Dehi.
137

No. F.7 (2)-B (SD)/2012 (Pt. II)
Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
Budget Division
North Block, New Delhi
Dated the 14th June 2013
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject: Paragraph 7 of the recommendations/observations contained in the Sixty-
Fourth Report of the PAC (15 Lok Sabha) on “Excess over voted Grants
and Charged Appropriations (2010-2011)”—regarding.
The undersigned is directed to refer to the D.O. letter of even Number dated
15.5.2013 on the above subject from Finance Secretary and to request to intimate the
action taken immediately so that this Department is in a position to furnish A TN to
Lok Sabha Secretariat on the said Para by the stipulated date.
Sd/-
(C.K. Ramaswamy)
Under Secretary to the Government of India
Secretary,
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways,
Transport Bhawan,
Sansad Marg,
New Delhi.
138

MkWñ jtr HkkxZo] vkb,,l D.O. No. 7(2)-B (SD)/2012
la;qDr lfpo
DR. RAJAT BHARGAV A, IAS
JOINT SECRETARY
Hkkjr ljdkj
foÙk ea=ky;
vkfFkZd dk;Z foHkkx
ukWFkZ Cykd] ubZ fnYyh&110 001
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
North Block, New Delhi-110 001
Tel.: 23093183 Fax.: 23093133
E-mail:rajat.bhargava@nic.in
New Delhi, dated the 8th October, 2013
Dear Sir,
Kindly refer to D.O. letter of even number dated 15.5.2013 by FS (copy
enclosed) regarding para 7 of the recommendations/observations of the Public
Accounts Committee (PAC) made in their 64th Report  (15th Lok Sabha).
2. A  reminder dated 14.06.2013 was sent by FS subsequently. Since submission
of Action Taken Notes on PAC Report is time-bound, it is requested that  this Ministry
may be intimated about the action taken to draft the A TN for para 7 of the Report well
on time.
Warm regards,
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(Dr. Rajat Bhargava)
Shri Vijay Chhibber,
Secretary,
Ministry of Road Transport  & Highways,
Parivahan Bhawan,
New Delhi.
139

140
Action Taken by the Department of Posts
This also relates to various Ministries. So far as Department of Commerce is
concerned regarding delay of 7 months 5 days, the reason for delay is due to non-
receipt of V etting Notes from the Audit.
Audit Comments
Initially when the explanatory Note was sent in September, 2011, the same was
vetted and  returned  to Ministry on 23.11.2011 without offering any comment in
Capital section of the grant, since this was shown as saving of Rs. 6.57 crore i.e. less
than Rs. 100 crore. Subsequently, Ministry of Commerce & Industry submitted the
A TN on excess to audit for vetting on 27th November, 2012. The vetting comments
of Audit were forwarded to the Ministry on 7th December, 2012.
Sd/- 
AS&FA
The above A TN has been vetted by the Office of the Principal Director of
Audit, Economic & Service Ministries, New Delhi vide their U.O. No. AMG-V/VV/
A TN/2011-12/177-179, dated 29 August, 2013.
[Department of Commerce OM No. G. 20008/10/2011-B&A(pt. Dated.13.09.2013]
Action Taken by the Ministry of External Affairs
The delay in submission of explanatory notes on excess expenditure in
FY 2010-11 is regretted. However, it may be mentioned that some queries were raised
in the Excess Note sent to Audit for vetting, and gathering information on these queries
and their acceptance by the Audit led to delay. After clearance from Audit, the
Explanatory note was submitted to PAC. The delay could have been avoided.
Ministry will make all efforts to avoid such delay in future.
Sd/-
(Kusumjit Sidhu)
Additional Secretary (Financial Advisor)
Ministry of External Affairs
No. Q/Bud/125/02/2012
Action Taken by the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas had forwarded the "Explanatory note for
Excess" for the excess expenditure to Monitoring Cell, Department of Expenditure,
Ministry of Finance on 7th December 2011. Hence there was no delay at the level of
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas.
(The above- mentioned A TN has been examined and vetted by the office of the
Principal Director of Audit, Economic and Service Ministries, vide their U.O. letter
No. AMG-VI/App-A/C/A TN/2013-14/11-13 dated 30.04.2013).
Sd/-
 Additional Secretary & Financial Advisor
[Ministry of P&NG O.M. No. G-24011/1/2010 Fin. I dated 31.10.2013]

141
Action Taken by the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
1. The excess expenditure of Rs. 15,000 was incurred under the head
3451.00.090.11 (Revenue Section—Secretariat Economic Services). The Charged
Expenditure amount to Rs. 15,000 was booked by AO, GREF-agency of Border Road
Development Board-against a writ petition (Civil) No. 787 of 2010 against Union of
India V/s. Ravinder, in which the judge awarded an amount of Rs. 15,000 as a court
decree. The expenditure was incurred by an agency of BRDB which is not under the
direct payment control of the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways. However, the
provisional expenditure is made in the DDG of the Ministry of Road Transport &
Highways.
2. The above excess expenditure was brought to the knowledge of Pr. Accounts
Office of Ministry of Road Transport & Highways by the BRDB after the close of
financial year, which was later on incorporated in the Appropriation Accounts. (Copy
placed as Annexure-I)
3. On receiving the information regarding the excess expenditure immediately
the Pr. Accounts Office prepared the Excess Note as per the prescribed guidelines
and submitted to the O/o CGA after duly approved by AS&FA along with the remedial
action taken. The same was also submitted to O/o Director General of Audit, Economic
& Service, Ministry of U.O. No. Pr. AO/RTH/ATN/Gr. No. 80/2010-11/12, dated
20.11.2011 for vetting. The C&AG office confirms the receipt of the excess
expenditure note for the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways. (Copy placed as
Annexure-II)
4. The duly vetted audit comments were received by this office on 22.12.2011
in which the Audit had directed to submit explanatory note to the Monitoring Cell,
Deptt. of Expenditure, M/o Finance for onward transmission to the PAC branch,
Lok Sabha Secretariat for regularization of the excess expenditure. (Copy placed as
Annexure-III)
5. As per the direction of Audit 40 sets of English and 30 sets of Hindi V ersion
of Explanatory Note in respect of Gr. No. 80 for the year 2010-11 was submitted to
the Under Secretary, Monitoring Cell, vide letter No. PAO/RTH/Saving Note/2011-
12/118, dated 31.01.2012. (Copy placed as Annexure IV)
6. Further it was also confirmed by the monitoring cell that the duly vetted
excess expenditure note was duly forwarded by the Monitoring Cell to the Lok Sabha
Secretariat for consideration of the Committee vide letter dated 02.02.2012. (Copy
placed as Annexure-V)
7. All the required documents along with the Explanatory Notes on Excess
expenditure of Rs. 15,000 for regularization by the PAC were submitted by this office
well in time. Further, this office has not received any written and oral reminder for
non-submission of explanatory notes from Monitoring Cell or PAC.

142
8. From the above-mentioned facts it may be appreciated that there was no
delay in submission of explanatory notes for the excess expenditure. Hence, the action
to fix responsibility is not warranted. However suitable actions are being taken by the
BRDB to ensure that such lapse of excess expenditure over grants does not happen in
future.
Sd/-
Addl. Secretary & Financial Advisor
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways

ANNEXURE I
No. BR/Bud./906/Appr.Accts./2011-12 O/o the PCDA (BR)
Seema Sadak Bhawan Ring Road, Naraina,
Delhi Cantt.-110 010
Dated: 18.08.2011
To
The Chief Controller of Accounts
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways,
IDA Building, Jam Nagar House,
New Delhi-110 011.
Subject: Reconciliation of SCT figures under Major Head 3451.
Please refer to this office DO letter of even No. dt. 09.08.2011 forwarding
monthly expenditure statement for March Manual Account 2011-(15/2011).
2. On reconciliation of figures of the MES with the compiled actual, it is noticed
that a sum of Rs. 89,923.00 was booked by the CGDA office on behalf of this office
which was not included in the MES.
3. Further a sum of Rs. 15,000.00 was booked as charged expenditure in the
writ petition (Civil) No. 783 of 2010 in pursuance of the Delhi High Court order
dt. 09.12.2010 (copy enclosed).
4. In view of the above Non-Plan charged and Non-Plan voted figure are being
reflected separately.  A revised copy of MES in respect of Major Head 3451 is enclosed.
Sd/- 
ACDA
Copy to:
DGBR. (EJB) (Local)
143

ANNEXURE II
Government of India
Office  of  the  Pr.  Chief  Controller  of  Accounts
Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport & Highways
IDA Building, Jam Nagar House,
New Delhi-110 011
(MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS)
In continuation of this office U.O. No. Pr.AO/RTH/ATN/Gr.No. 80/2010-11/
103 dated: 07.10.2011 regarding Note of Public Accounts Committee on Savings
occurred under Capital and Revenue Section (V oted) of Grant No. 80—Ministry of
Road Transport and Highways. I am enclosing herewith two copies of  Explanatory
Note for Excess under Grant No. 80—Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
duly signed by the Additional Secretary and Financial Adviser for vetted and final
note duly vetted may be returned to this office for final submission to the Monitoring
Cell/CGA Office, Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure.
Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
(R.K. PATHAK)
Pay and Accounts Officer (RTH)
Shri S.S. Khatri, Sr. Audit Officer Appropriation Accounts, O/o Director General of
Audit Economic & Service Ministries, AGCR Building, New Delhi
[U.O. No. Pr.AO/RTH/A TN/Gr. No. 80/2010-11/112 dt: 20.10.2011]
144

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Explanatory Note for Excess
Note for the Public Accounts Committee for regularization of excess expenditure
that occurred Revenue Section Non-Plan (Charged) for Grant No. 80—Ministry of
Road Transport & Highways for the Financial Year 2010-11, as disclosed in the Union
Government Appropriation Accounts (Civil) for the year 2010-11.
Revenue Section Non-Plan (Charged) (Rupees in thousand)
Original Grant Nil
Supplementary Grant Nil
Total Grant Nil
Actual Expenditure 15
Excess 15
2.  Reason for Excess
During the year 2010-11, the Charged Expenditure Rs. 15,000/- booked by
AO, GREF Centre in connection with the writ petition (Civil) No. 87 against Union
of India V/s. Ravinder Singh S/o Shri Jai Lal in which the learned Judge quantified
the above amount as cost of petition in favour of the petitioner. Even though sufficient
allocation was not available the expenditure was booked as the payment was to be
made as per Court directions with in the prescribed time. The same was reflected by
BRBD, CGDA, in the Statement of Central Transaction (SCT).
3.  Remedial Action Taken
The above expenditure has been booked by Border Road Organization which
is not directly under the control of this Ministry. However the matter was taken up
with the O/o the CGDA and Border Road Organization to evaluate in future, all such
cases in advance and makes sufficient allocation in the Budget.
Keeping in view of the above facts, it may be appreciated that the above
expenditure was unforeseen and bound by the Court Directions;  the Public Accounts
Committee may please regularize the excess expenditure.
Sd/-
Additional Secretary and Financial Adviser
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways
145

ANNEXURE III
dk;kZy; iz/kku funs'kd ys[kkijh{kk] vkfFkZd ,oa lsok ea=ky;] ubZ fnYyh
d`i;k vius ea=ky; ds uhps fn, x, i= dk lanHkZ ysa ,oa mlls lacaf/kr bl dk;kZy; dh
vkxs dh dk;Zokgh dk fooj.k bl izdkj gS%—
The Ministry of Road Transport & Highways may please refer to their letter
No. U.O. No. Pr.AO/RTH/ATN/GrNo. 80/2010-11/112 dated 20.11.2011 fowarding
therewith Explanatory Note on the excess expenditure of Rs. 15(th) to revenue Section
Non-Plan (Charged) for the year 2010-11 occurred under Grant No. 80—Ministry of
RTH during the year 2010-2011.
2. The above-mentioned Explanatory Note have been examined in audit and
audit comments thereon are annexed herewith.
3. Ministry may incorporate the above-mentioned vetted comments ad-verbatim
in col. VI(b) of the A TN and prepare the Explanatory Note. Further comments of the
Ministry, if any, may be mentioned below the comments of Audit. The Explanatory
Note may not be referred to Audit again.
4. Ministry may prepare the final Note considering para 2 above. The requisite
number of copies in Hindi and English, duly signed by Secretary/Joint Secretary,
may be sent to the Monitoring Cell, Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance,
for onward transmission to Public Accounts Committee Branch, Lok Sabha Secretariat.
Both versions of the final explanatory notes may also be sent to this office and office
of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for reference and record.
5. A copy of the note is returned herewith.
Sd/-
mi funs'kd
¼foÙk ,oa fofu;ksx ys[kk½
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, Transport Bhawan, New Delhi
Kind Attn.: Additional Secretary and Financial Advisor.
[iz-fu-ys-i-vk- ,oa ls-ea-;w-vks- la[;k ,-,e-th-&I@fo-fo-@,-Vh-,u@2011&12@532&535
fnukad% 14 fnlEcj 2011-]
146

147
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways
Subject V etting Comments
Explanatory Note for The expenditure was incurred under the head
Excess of Rs. 15 (th) 3451.00.090.11 (Revenue Section—Secretariat
to Revenue Section Economic Services). The Charged Expenditure
Non-Plan (Charged) amounting to Rs. 15(th) was booked by AO, GREF-
agency of Border Road Development Board—against
a writ petition (Civil) No. 787 of 2010 against Union
of India V/s. Ravinder, in which the judge awarded
an amount of Rs. 15(th) as a court decree as a cost of
petition in the user, i.e. PCDA(BR), New Delhi vide
their letter No. BR/Bud/900/Corr/2010-11 dated
26.08.2011.
In the third stage of Appropriation Account, it had
been brought to the knowledge of the Pr. AO office
by the BRDB, which was later on incorporated in the
Appropriation Accounts. The expenditure was
incurred by an agency of BRDB named GREF, which
is not under the direct control of the Ministry of RTH;
however, the expenditure found mention in the
accounts of Ministry of RTH.
The remedial steps mentioned by the Ministry have
found no mention in the correspondence of the
Pr. AO office, as stated by the PAO (RTH)
Sd/-
Sr. Audit Officer

ANNEXURE IV
Government of India
Office of the Pr. Chief Controller of Accounts
Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport & Highways
IDA Building, Jam Nagar House, New Delhi.
(Ministry of Road Transport & Highways)
No. Pr. AO/RTH/Saving-Note/2011-12/118 Dated: 31.01.2012
To
The Under Secretary
Monitoring Cell
Room No. 29, 2nd Floor
Ministry of Finance,
Department of Expenditure
Lok Nayak  Bhawan, Khan Market
New Delhi.
Subject: Forwarding of 40 sets (English) and 30 sets (Hindi) of Saving Note 2010-11
regarding.
Sir,
Please find enclosed herewith 40 sets (English) and 30 sets (Hindi) version of
Explanatory Note/Saving Note  in respect of Grant No. 80 for the year  2010-11 of
Ministry of  Road Transport and Highways along with CD/Soft copy for Public Account
Committee.
Kindly acknowledge the receipt.
Y ours Faithfully,
Sd/-
(R.K. Pathak)
Encl.: As above. Accounts Officer (Pr. RTH)
148

ANNEXURE V
No. 4/10/2011-MC
Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
Monitoring Cell
Room No. 29, Second Floor, B-Wing
Loknayak Bhavan, Khan Market,
New Delhi-110003 dated the 2.2.2012
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject: Detailed explanatory notes from various  Ministries/Departments for saving
of Rs. 100 crores and above expenditure from the sanctioned budget grant
for the year 2010-11.
In continuation of this Ministry's O.M. of even number dated the 1.2.2012 on
the subject mentioned above, the undersigned is directed to forward herewith
40 copies in English and 25 copies  in Hindi version of the explanatory notes along
with CD/Soft copy for saving under revenue section (voted) of Grant No. 80—Ministry
of Road Transport & Highways for the year 2010-2011 duly vetted by Audit in respect
of Ministry of Road Transport & Highways for the consideration of the
Committee.
Sd/-
(Rajesh Kumar Jain)
Under Secretary to the Government of India
Tel. No. 24626829
Lok Sabha Secretariat
(Shri Sanjeev Sharma, Deputy Secretary) (PAC)
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi-110 001
Copy forwarded to R.K. Pathak, Accounts Officer, Ministry of Shipping, Transport
& Highways, Jam Nagar House, IDA Building, New Delhi for information.
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
The Appropriation Accounts (Defence Services) for 2010-11 was laid before
the Parliament on 24th April, 2012 and the connected Explanatory Notes for excess
expenditure was submitted to the PAC Branch and the Monitoring Cell of Ministry of
Finance on 2nd May, 2012. The nominal delay has been noted for future avoidance.
The Explanatory Notes for the year 2011-12 have already been vetted by the Audit
and ready for submission to the PAC along with the Appropriation Accounts (Defence
149

150
Services) for 2011-12 as and when the date for laying the same is intimated by the
Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs/Ministry of Finance.
Sd/-
(V eena Prasad)
Joint Secretary & Addl. FA (VP)
[MoD (Fin.) ID No. 7(2)/Bud-I/2013 dated 12-07-2013]
Observation Recommendation
The Committee's examination of the Appropriation Accounts (Railways) for
the financial year 2010-11 and scrutiny of Explanatory Notes has revealed that the
Ministry of Railways incurred a total excess expenditure of Rs. 3,056.86 crore (after
misclassification) in fifteen cases of ten excess registering Grants/Appropriations.
This amount of excess expenditure was 158.98 percent of the proceeding financial
year's total of Rs. 1,922.84 crore incurred in ten cases of nine excess registering
Grants/Appropriations. Out of the total excess expenditure of Rs. 3,056.86 crore, the
bulk of the expenditure amounting of Rs. 2,870.12 crore constituting 93.89 percent
was incurred under 5 Grants only i.e. (i) Grant No. 6—Working Expenses-Repairs
and Maintenance of Carriages and Wagons (Rs. 221.26 crore), (ii) Grant No. 8—
Working expenses — Operating Expenses-Rolling Stock and Equipment,
(Rs. 184.55 crore), (iii) Grant No. 10—Working Expenses—Operating Expenses-
Fuel (Rs.414.80 crore) (iv) Grant No. 12—Miscellaneous Working Expenses
(Rs. 645.53 crore), and (v) Grant No. 13—Working Expenses—Provident Fund,
Pension and Other Retirement Benefits (Rs. 1,403.98 crores). According to the
Ministry, the reasons for excess expenditure were incurrence of more expenditure on
staff cost due to implementation of the 6th Pay Commission Recommendations,
materialization of more contractual payment than anticipated, more direct purchase
due to increase in special repairs, more drawal of stores from stock, more adjustments
of wages and material on POH, increase in POH activity, more expenditure towards
consumption of HSD oil for more activity of diesel locos, increase in average of
HSD oil, adjustment of more details, more expenditure towards sales tax/excise duty
and V AT than anticipated, incurrence of more expenditure cost of electricity used for
traction services, clearance of heavy outstanding liabilities and more materialization
of claim and adjustment of details than anticipated, receipt of more details from
various pension disbursing authorities on account of implementation of the 6th Pay
Commission report. The Committee's examination has revealed that the Grant No. 6
(Revenue V oted)-Working Expenses—Repairs and Maintenance of Carriages and
Wagons had registered excess expenditure of Rs. 157.25 crore, Rs. 161.20 crore and
Rs. 221.26 crore during the financial years 2008-09, 2009-10 and 2010-11 respectively
while the Grant No. 8 (Revenue V oted)— Working expenses-operating Expenses-
Rolling Stock and Equipment had registered an excess expenditure of Rs. 128.30
crore, during the financial year 2008-09. Similarly, the Grant No. 12—(Revenue
V oted)— Miscellaneous Working Expenses registered excess expenditure to the tune
of Rs. 39.87 crore and Rs. 22.33 crore during the financial years 2009-10 and 2007-
08 respectively. The Committee also find that the Grant No. 13—(Revenue V oted)
Working Expenses—Provident Fund, Pension and Other Retirement Benefits had

151
registered excess expenditure of Rs. 1,51227 crore, during the financial year
2009-10. Thus, incurring of excess expenditure under the Grants/Appropriations
operated  by the Ministry of Railways is a recurring phenomenon indicating serious
flaws in their budgetary exercise. As such, the Committee are not enthused by the
Ministry's stock reply that every care has been taken to assess the expenditure under
various Grants/Appropriations as precisely as possible and to obtain supplementary
allotments where necessary so that excess is avoided to the maximum extent possible.
The Committee observed that while anticipating the requirement of funds by
the Railways, estimations for various Sub-Heads could have been projected more
realistically by analyzing properly the total monetary effect of a salary hike, prevailing
expenditure trial, upcoming demands/requirements, rising cost etc. which was possible
by putting in a little more effort. The Committee cannot but conclude that the indolent
Ministry of Railways have not taken any timely corrective measures to improve their
budgeting mechanism with a view to avoiding such a huge unauthorized expenditure.
It is apparent that the Ministry have paid scant respect to enforcing fiscal discipline
while incurring want only excess expenditure, which is anything but regrettable. Taking
serious note of lack of concern and sustained efforts on the part of the Ministry in
observing fiscal discipline, the Committee recommend that the Ministry of Railways
strive earnestly for ensuring realistic estimation of their budgetary requirements under
various sub-heads of the Grants/Appropriation operated by them so that the existing
lapses/loopholes are identified and concrete remedial measures taken to obviate excess
expenditure.
[Sl. No. 7, Appendix II Para No. 11 of 64th Report of Public Accounts
Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Railways
The excess expenditure in 2008-09 and 2009-10 had been mainly due to the
difficulty in assessing the impact of implementation of the recommendations of the
6th CPC as has already been submitted to in A TNs to Reports of PAC on Excess over
V oted Grants and Charged Appropriations relating to those years. As regards the
excess in 2010-11, the  reasons have been given in the other A TNs to the present
Reports of PAC.
Notwithstanding the same, the recommendation of the Committee has been
noted for compliance. The Committee may appreciate the fact that the excess in
2011-12 has drastically reduced to around Rs. 1,050 crores.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 25RA_III/2-1/2012 dated 29.05.2013 have vetted
the A TN with the remarks "Seen thanks".
Sd/-
(V . V aidehi)
Exe. Director Finance (BC)
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2013-BC-PAC-XV/64 dated: 27.06.2013]

CHAPTER V
OBSERV A TIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
GOVERNMENT HA VE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
—NIL—
NEW DELHI; PROF. K.V . THOMAS,
08 December, 2014 Chairperson,
17 Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
152

APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2014-15) HELD ON 2ND DECEMBER, 2014
The Committee sat on Tuesday the 2nd December, 2014 from 1500 hrs. to
1710 hrs. in Committee Room 'A', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. K.V . Thomas — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
3. Dr. Kirit Somaiya
Rajya Sabha
4. Shri Vijay Goel
5. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya
6. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
7. Shri Shantaram Naik
8. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Jayakumar T. — Additional Director
3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja — Deputy Secretary
Representatives from the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Smt. Suman Saxena — Dy. C&AG
2. Shri Rajeev Kumar — Principal Director
Pandey (Air Force & Navy)
3. Shri L.S. Singh — Principal Director (RC)
4. Shri P .K. Tiwari — Principal Director (Defence)
5. Shri P . Tiwari — Principal Director (PAC)
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the representatives
of the Office of the C&AG of India to the Sitting of the Committee. The Chairperson
then apprised the Members that in the first instance the Committee would consider
the two draft Reports for adoption. Thereafter, the Committee would take oral evidence
153

154
of the representatives of the Ministry of Defence on the subject 'Role and Functioning
of Indian Coast Guard'.
3. The Committee, then took the following draft Reports for consideration:—
(i) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixty-fourth
Report (15th Lok Sabha) on 'Excesses Over V oted Grants and
Charged Appropriations (2010-11)' and
(ii) ***** ***** ***** *****
4. Giving an overview of the issues contained in the draft Reports and the
comments of the Committee thereupon, the Chairperson solicited the views/
suggestions of the Members.
5. After some discussions, the Committee adopted the above mentioned draft
Reports with minor modifications as suggested by the Members. The Committee,
then, authorized the Chairperson to finalise the Reports in the light of the factual
verifications, if any, made by the Audit and present them to Parliament on a convenient
date.
6.***** ***** ***** *****
7.***** ***** ***** *****
8.***** ***** ***** *****
The witnesses then withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting was kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.
*****Matter does not pertain to this Report.

APPENDIX II
STATEMENT OF OBSERV A TIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
Sl. Para Ministry/ Observations/Recommendations
No.  No. Department
12 3 4
1. 4 Finance/Commerce/ The Committee are perturbed that despite
External Affairs/ repeated assurances given by the
Petroleum and Natural Ministries/Departments especially by the
Gas/Road Transport Ministry of Finance that necessary
and Highways/Urban  remedial measures have been taken to
Development ensure timely submission of Action Taken
Notes, none of the defaulting Ministries/
Departments barring the Ministry of
Defence, Department of Posts and the
Ministry of Railways could furnish the
requisite Action Taken Notes on the
Observations/Recommendations
contained in their Sixty-fourth Report
(15th Lok Sabha) within the prescribed
time of six months from the date of
presentation of the Report. The Ministry
of Finance, the nodal Ministry expected
to act as a role model in such matters,
performed miserably and  submitted their
Action Taken Notes after a maximum delay
of six months. Evidently, this shows gross
negligence and undermining of the
principles of the fiscal disciline and
financial propriety by the Ministries/
Departments concerned especially the
Ministry of Finance. The Committee
express their strong displeasure over such
inordinate delay in furnishing the requisite
Action Taken Notes resulting in avoidable
delays in preparation and presentation of
the relevant Action Taken Reports by the
Committee. While deploring the callous
and indifferent approach of the defaulting
Ministries/Departments, the Committee
impress upon the authorities concerned in
these Ministries/Departments to urgently
initiate requisite remedial and corrective
measures including fixation of
155

156
responsibility for lapses/negligence and
overhauling of their extant mechanism so
as to ensure that the Action Taken Notes
on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee are finalized and furnished
invariably within the stipulated deadline of
six months.
2. 17  Finance/Commerce/ The Committee are appalled to note that
External Affairs/ except for the Ministry of Finance issuing
Petroleum and Natural circulars, holding discussions and
Gas/Road Transport convening meetings and the Ministry of
and Highways/Urban Defence undertaking 'Project Sangam'
Development/Defence/ and 'Pension Accounting System' to
Posts/Railways streamline and computerize Defence
Pension Accounting System, none of the
Ministries/Departments concerned have
taken any concrete steps to ensure
application of IT and e-governance in their
budgeting so as to avoid excess
expenditure. Disappointingly, instead of
admitting their lapses and striving to learn
from the experience of the Ministries/
Departments which did not incur excess
expenditure as recommended by the
Committee, almost all these Ministries/
Departments have sought to justify the
excess expenditure incurred by them. The
Committee vehemently criticize such
tendency of the Ministries/Departments
concerned to unsuccessfully justify their
excess expenditure and violation of
Financial Rules instead of revamping their
existing mechanism with a view to
achieving concrete improvement in their
budget estimation exercise. The Committee
find that the Ministries/Departments which
scrupulously adhere to the General
Financial Rules and have unwavering
commitment to financial discipline and
propriety contain their expenditure within
the budget allocated  and approved by
Parliament. Moreover, in an age of
e-governance made feasible by
12 3 4

157
computerization and instant connectivity
between field formations, subordinate
Offices and Head quarters, there is no valid
justification for irregularities like
unauthorized excess expenditure. The
Committee, therefore, urge upon the
defaulting Ministries/Departments to learn
from the experience of the Ministries/
Departments which did not incur excess
expenditure and also ensure effective
application of IT and e-governance in their
budgeting to avoid excess expenditure.
Furthermore, since the instructions issued
for  containing excess expenditure have
failed to produce tangible result year after
year, the Committee desire that the Ministry
of  Finance should now take more stringent
and innovative measures and make it
incumbent upon the Financial Advisers and
the budget controlling authorities to ensure
that no excess expenditure is incurred in
future.
3. 28 External Affairs/Urban The Committee are dismayed to observe
Development/Defence/ that only the Ministry of Petroleum and
Posts/Railways Natural Gas, the Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways and the Ministry
of Defence (in respect of Grant No. 21—
Pensions) could give satisfactory  reply for
incurring excess expenditure despite
obtaining Supplementary Grants/
Appropriations. The reply given by the
remaining defaulting Ministries/
Departments i.e. the Ministry of External
Affairs, the Ministry of Urban
Development, the Ministry of Defence
(in respect of Grants No. 22  Defence
Services—Army, Grant No. 23—Defence
Services—Navy, Grant No. 25—Defence
Ordnance Factories and Grant No. 27—
Capital Outlay on Defence Services), the
Department of Posts and the Ministry of
Railways is far from convincing and as
12 3 4

158
such, they should have initiated probe into
the causes of excess expenditure despite
obtaining Supplementary  Grants/
Appropriations under the Grants/
Appropriations operated by them as
recommended by the Committee. It
signifies that no specific and  concrete
measures have been put in place as yet by
them to streamline their budgetary process
and overhaul the procedures adopted for
revised estimation of budget at the
Supplementary Grants/Appropriations
stage with view to avoid unjustified excess
expenditure. As there are no cogent reasons
for the inevitability of excess expenditure
when the Ministries/Departments get
opportunities to present and obtain
Supplementary Grants/Appropriations
during the three sessions of Parliament in
a year, the Committee deprecate the
defaulting  Ministries/Departments and
would once again like to remind them about
the sanctity of General Financial Rules
which stipulate that no expenditure should
be incurred which might have the effect of
exceeding the total Grant or Appropriation
authorized by Parliament by law for a
financial year except by way of obtaining
Supplementary Grants/Appropriations or
an advance  from the Contingency Fund.
The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the
Ministries/Departments concerned probe
into the causes of this chronic malaise and
find effective ways and means to make the
mechanism of estimating Supplementary
Grants/Appropriations more realistic and
the Financial Advisors and the budget
controlling officers responsible so that
strict fiscal discipline is maintained and no
excess expenditure is incurred after
obtaining Supplementary Grants/
Appropriations.
12 3 4

159
4. 32 Defence/Railways The Committee are pleased to note that
pursuant to their Recommendation, the
Ministry of Defence have initiated certain
measures by way of constituting three
Committees towards overhauling their
budgetary mechanism and introducing IT
and e-governance in the system. The
Committee would like the Ministry of
Defence to take further concerted efforts
in this direction to achieve successful
overhauling of their budgeting mechanism
wherein IT and e-governance are fully
integrated and fixation of responsibility
against the  erring budgeet controlling
authorities is ensured. The Committee are,
however, concerned to note that the
Ministry of Railways have merely noted
the Recommendation of the Committee and
sought to justify their recurring excess
expenditure on one pretext or  the other. It
is apparent that the Ministry of Railways,
instead of sincerely introspecting and
finding solutions to their  ever recurring
unjustified excess expenditure, have
chosen to remain incorrigible even to the
extent of grossly undermining the
Parliamentary financial control. Strongly
criticizing such a cavalier attitude, the
Committee  reiterate their
Recommendation impressing upon the
Ministry of Railways to overhaul their
budgetary mechanism drastically, introduce
and implement IT and e-governance in their
financial administration and fix
responsibility against the budget
controlling authorities in case their
estimation go awry leading to excess
expenditure.
5. 41 Finance/Commerce/ The Com mittee are shocked to find that the
External Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas had
Affairs/Petroleum forwarded their Excess Explanatory Note
and Natural to the Monitoring Cell, Department of
Gas/Road Transport Expenditure, Ministry of Finance on
and Highways/Defence 7th December 2011 but the same was
12 3 4

160
furnished to the Committee by the
Monitoring Cell only on 21st August 2012
after a delay of 8 months and 15 days.
Further, on checking the records in PAC
Secretariat pursuant to the reply of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
that their Excess Explanatory Note was
furnished to the Committee on
2nd February 2012, it was found that this
Excess Explanatory Note was
surresptitiously attached by the Monitoring
Cell to the Saving Note of the Ministry of
Road Transport and Highways furnished
by them with a forwarding O.M. which
mentioned about the Saving Note only.
Deplorably, when the PAC Secretariat
forwarded repeated oral and written
reminders to both the Monitoring Cell and
the Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways, none of them cared to inform
the Committee that  this Excess
Explanatory Note had already been
furnished. In fact, upon receiving the
reminders, the Monitoring Cell themselves
wrote to the Ministry of Road Transport
and Highways to expedite furnishing of this
Excess Explanatory Note. Such acts of
extreme carelessness and utter disregard of
the  Committee are unpardonable and the
Committee, therefore, recommend the
Ministry of Finance to institute a high level
enquiry into the matter, fix responsibility
for the lapse and take stringent punitive
action against  those found responsible.
While criticizing other defaulting
Ministries/Departments also for delay in
furnishing their Explanatory Notes, the
Committee would like them to learn
suitable lessons from this episode and
ensure timely submission of their
Explanatory Notes in future.
12 3 4

161
6. 44 Railways The Committee feel that its untenable on
the part of the Ministry of Railways to
exonerate themselves from incurring
excess expenditure by furnishing year after
year the similar contributory reasons such
as the implementation of the 6th Pay
Commission Recommendations, more
operational cost then anticipated, more
expenditure on purchases then anticipated,
more maintenance and repair costs etc.
These reasons/factors are not that
unforeseeable and estimations for various
sub-heads could have been projected more
realistically by analysing properly the total
monetary effect of salary hike, prevailing
expenditure trail, upcoming demands/
requirements, rising cost etc. which was
possible by putting in a little more effort.
The Committee find  much to their
consternation that the Ministry of Railways
have once again merely noted the
Recommendation of the Committee and
sought to justify their perpetual incurring
of unauthorized excess expenditure
without giving proper regard to their
Recommendation. As such, no action has
been taken to review and overhaul their
existing mechanism for estimation of
budgetary requirements which has proved
to be a failure year  after year. This is
symptomatic of the Ministry's penchant for
disrespecting fiscal discipline, incurring
wantonly excess expenditure and
undermining Parliamentary financial
control and hence unacceptable to the
Committee. Deploring such an apathetic,
boisterous and irredeemable attitude of the
Ministry, the Committee reiterate their
Recommendation asking the Ministry  of
Railways to strive earnestly for ensuring
realistic estimation of their budgetary
requirements under various sub-heads of
the Grants/Appropriations operated by
12 3 4

162
them so that the existing lapses/loopholes
are identified and concrete remedial
measures taken to obviate excess
expenditure.
7. 45 Finance/Commerce/ In sum, the Committee express their strong
External Affairs/ displeasure over incurring consistently
Petroleum and Natural uncontrolled unauthorized excess
Gas/Road Transport expenditure by the defaulting Ministries/
and Highways/Urban Departments and would like the nodal
Development/ Ministry i.e.  the Ministry of
Defence/Posts/Railways Finance to bring this feeling of the
Committee to the notice of the appointing
authority of the respective Chief
Accounting Authority as well as Financial
Advisers of the Ministries/Departments
concerned with a view to facilitating
remedial measures which inter-alia should
include fixation of responsibility so as to
avoid excess expenditure in future.
12 3 4

APPENDIX III
(Vide Paragraph 5 of  Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERV A TIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR
SIXTY-FOURTH REPORT
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations: 13
(ii) Observations/Recommendations, which have been accepted by the
Government:
Paragraph Nos. 1-4, 8-10, 12 and 13
Total: 9
Percentage: 69.23
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from Government:
Paragraph No. Nil
Total: Nil
Percentage: Nil
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and  which require
reiteration:
Paragraph Nos. 5-7 and 11
Total: 4
Percentage: 30.77
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government have
furnished interim replies:
Paragraph No. Nil
Total: Nil
Percentage: Nil
163
GMGIPMRND—4402LS—08-06-2015.