64

SHARED MOBILE INFRASTRUCTURE SCHEME

MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS & IT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

SIXTY FORTH REPORT

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI].


PAC NO._ 2097

SIXTY FORTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

SHARED MOBILE INFRASTRUCTURE
SCHEME

MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS & IT

Presented to Lok Sabha on: 17.03.2017

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 17.03.2017

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

March, 2017 /Phalguna, 1938 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2016-17)

COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE V OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2016-17)

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2015-16)

COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE V OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2015-16)

INTRODUCTION ४७

| REPORT

PART |
i Introductory
Hf Defective Agreement — Non Rollout of Services
Ml Non provision of mobile services in 290 sites
V_ Non-recovery of penalty for interruptions/downtime in
services

Vv Quality of service
Vi Absence of penal provisions on agreement resulting in

non-payment of operating expenses by USPs

PART II
Observations/ Recommendations... -..-.--+ ५०३ ५३३३०६ है बिन:
ANNEXURES

A “Minutes of the sitting of the Sub-Committee-V
of PAC (2015-16) on 10.08.2015

B Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2016-17) on 40.02.2017

PAGE

(iii)
(iv)

“)
wi)

(vi)

14 ७ ५०७ =

11

13


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2016-17)

Prof. K.V. Thomas - Chairperson
MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

eo Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay

3. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra

4. Shri Nishikant Dubey

5. Prof, Richard Hay

6. - ShriGajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
45 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

8, smt. Riti Pathak

9 Shri Neiphiu Rioh

40. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
44. Shri Abhishek Singh

42. Dr. Kirit Somaiya

43. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
44, Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi

45. Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA

46. Shri Naresh Agrawal

47. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
18... * Shri Bhupender Yadav
49. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
20. Shri Shantararn Naik

21. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
22. Shri Ajay Sancheti

SECRETARIAT
4. Shri A.K. Singh - Additional Secretary
2. Shri S.C Chaudhary - Joint Secretary
3. Shri Jaya Kumar - Director
4. Smt. Anju Kukreja - Under Secretary

* Blected w.c-f. 09.08.2016 vice Shri Vijay Goel, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f.
05.07.2016.

( in’)


Sub-Committee - V [Infrastructural Projects other than Railways]
of PAC (2०1४ -1+2

Convenor Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy

4
Alternate Convenor: 2. — Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
Members : 3. Shri Abhishek Singh

4... Shri Anurag Singh. Thakur

5.

Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi

(iv


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2015-16)

Prof. K.V. Thomas > Chairperson
MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

2 Shri S.S. Ahluwalia

3: Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
4. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey

6. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar

4: Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank"
9.. Shri Neiphiu Rio

10. Shri Dushyant Singh

11. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
42. Dr. Kirit Somaiya

13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
14. Shri Shivkumar Udasi

415. Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Naresh Agrawal

17. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
18. © ShriAnil Madhav Dave

49. Shri Vijay Goel

20. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita

21. Shri Shantaram Naik

22.

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy


Sub-Committee - ४ [Infrastructural Projects other than Railways]

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
Shri Gajanan Kirtikar

Shri Dushyant Singh

Shri Anurag Thakur

Convenor
Alternate Convenor :
Members

On See हे


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2016-17), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Sixty Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha) on ‘Shared Mobile Infrastructure Scheme’ based on Para 2.2 of C&AG
Report No. 17 of 2014, relating to the Ministry of Communications & {T(Department
of Telecommunications). i

2. The Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid on the
Table of the House on 1* August, 2014. ;

3, The Public Accounts Committee (2015-16) took up the subject for detailed
examination and report. The Sub-Committee-V was constituted under the
Convenorship of Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy, MP (RS) and Member of PAC that
took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Ministry of Communications &
(T(Department of Telecommunications) on the subject at their sitting held on 10"
August, 2015. Accordingly, a draft Report was prepared and finalized by the Sub-
Committee and placed before the Public Accounts Committee (2016-17) for their
consideration.

4. The Committee considered and adopted this draft Report at their sitting held
on 10" February, 2017. Minutes of the sittings are appended to the Report.

5. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part Il of the Report.

6. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Communications & IT (Department of Telecommunications) for tendering
evidence before them and furnishing information in connection with the examination
of the subject.

7. . The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

NEW DELHI; PROF. K.V. THOMAS
14 March, 2017 Chairperson,
23 Phalguna, 1938 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


1

REPORT
PART —1

1 INTRODUCTORY

The C&AG of India presented its Compliance Audit Report No. 17 of 2014 for the
year ended March. 2012. Accordingly, based on the findings of Audit and given the
importance to infrastructure and mobile services in remote rural areas, the Committee
took up Para No.2.2 of the Report on ‘Shared Mobile Infrastructure Scheme’ for detailed

examination.

2. Recognizing the importance of communications in achieving the country's social
and economic goals, the Government of India envisaged in its New Telecom Policy of

4999, provision of Universal Service of Telecommunications facilities to all uncovered
areas including rural,-remote, hilly and tribal areas at affordable prices. Accordingly 8
Scheme named ‘Shared Mobile Infrastructure Scheme’ was launched in 2007 by
Department of “Telecommunications (DoT) under ‘Universal Service Obligation Fund’

__(USOF). The Scheme was to.provide subsidy support for setting up and managing 7353

identified infrastructure sites for provisioning of mobile services in 500 districts spread
over 27 States which were otherwise not covered through wireless or mobile services.
Villages or clusters of villages with a population of 2000 or more were taken into
consideration for the scheme. Each infrastructure site so created was to be shared by

three service providers for provision of mobile services.

3. The above scheme had two components:-

_ Part'A’: Setting up and managing infrastructure sites (land, tower,
बे power, security, civil and electrical works) by Infrastructure ~
Providers (IPs) with subsidy support as 3 percentage of capital
recovery for seiting up the infrastructure.

Part ‘B’: Provisioning of mobile services by Universal Service Providers
(USPs) by installation of Base Trans-receiver Stations (BTS)
on towers/ infrastructures with subsidy . support as @


percentage of capital recovery for providing the equipment at
the infrastructure sites.

The operation and maintenance expenses of the infrastructure site were to be
shared by the Universal Service Providers (USPs) using that site for provisioning of

mobile services.

4. Tenders were invited by Department of Telecommunications in January 2007 for
81 clusters both for setting up, managing infrastructure sites and provision of mobile
services in specified rural and remote areas from Basic ‘Service Providers, Cellular
Mobile Telephone Service Providers, Unified Access Services Licensees and
“Infrastructure Providers. The agreements were signed (June 2007) with seven
successful bidders for providing infrastructure sites, who had quoted the lowest subsidy
for a cluster. As per the agreement, the infrastructure sites were to be made ready by
June, 2008 but considering the difficulties faced in remote areas, mostly in north eastern
region, two extensions were granted for postponing the date of completion to August,
2011. Against the target of 7353 towers/infrastructure sites required to be
commissioned, 7317 were actually commissioned as on October, 2016. A subsidy of =
406.82. crore has been paid to the infrastructure providers (up to September, 2016) as :
per the scheme. For implementation of the second part of the scheme, the Department
selected 14 USPs to provide mobile services in the identified areas. The agreement with
the USPs was valid for six and half years from the effective date i.e. 1st June 2007 (one
year for last rollout, five years subsidy period and half year for delayed. period, if any).
Further as per the Operating Conditions of Part-B of the agreement, the USPs were to
provide mobile services from each of the sites within two months of commissioning of
the infrastructure site by the IPs. Against the target of 22059 Base Trans-receiver
Stations (BTS), the IPs made ready 21921 sites out of which only 15767 BTS (71.93 per
cent) were installed till 31 August, 2012 as detailed in the Table given below:

SS


3 No, of : No. of BTS to| No. of : Sites Short द
USP (Group | from which | be from which | rolling out percentage
company) services are | commissioned services services

to be rolled | against tower | were tolled

out by | sites made | out
= USPs ready by IPs | है
Bhart? 1174 1173 =: 47 4.00 ‘|
BSNL —«| 5314 5268 5109 159 | 3,02 |
Aircel* 1586 1544 914 630 7 40.80
(Dishnet)
Idea” 2630 2627 2540 87 331 “|
RCL 4774 7 4771 4633 3138 65.77 |
RTL 3641 3599 1886 1713 47.60
Vodafone® }2043. 2989 2559 | 386 12.93
(Hutch) i :
Total 22059 21921 पक्लह्ला छिल्ला  छिम
किक शिब्य | कि 88 a: |

(Source: Information as furnished by the Administrator, USOF) Group of companies

During the oral evidence the representatives of the Ministry of Communications
and IT (Department of Telecommunications) stated that the number of BTS rose from
15,767 to 16,254.

‘DEFECTIVE AGREEMENT - NON-ROLLOUT OF SERVICES

5. Audit highlighted that as per the agreement, the Liquidated Damages (LD)
chargeable for delay in provisioning of, mobile services ranged between 5 to 10 per cent
of annual subsidy. The Performance Bank Guarantee (PBG) would be 5 per cent of the
“subsidy payable to the bidder, which could be forfeited by the Administrator in case of.
failure of performance of terms and conditions by the USP. A successful bid with minus
or negative subsidy could not attract LD or PBG but could also be a successful bidder.
This fact regarding ensuring safeguard of LD or forfeiture of PBG even for those bidders
“who quoted minus or negative subsidy was neither envisaged while finalizing the

scheme nor while calling for bids. It was further pointed out that in the final bid under


4

part-B of the scheme, in 74 out of 81 clusters, the successful bidders quoted negative or
___zero bids. The agreements thus sighed with these bidders did not-have any LD or PBG
clause to protect the interest of the DoT in case of non fulfillment of any conditions by
the USPs which envisaged that USPs were to provide mobile services within two
- months of the commissioning of the Infrastructure Site by the IP. However, it was
observed that the performance of the USPs, mainly M/s RCL, RTL, Aircel and Vodafone
in respect of commissioning of mobile services was very poor. As on October, 2016,
against 7317 sites out of the targeted 7353 sites provided by the IPs for provisioning of
‘services, the USPs could provide services only from 7065 sites till closure of the
Scheme i.e November 2013, Due to non-inclusion of safeguards and penal clauses in
‘ the agreements in case of non/delayed roll out of services, no action could be taken
against the defaulting USPs. The Ministry replied that 16254 Base Trans-receiver
Station (BTS) had been installed till closure of the Scheme for provisioning of mobile
services from 7317 tower-sites. 7317 of 7353 towers had BTS installed and radiating
thereby benefitting approximately 99 per cent of the villages / sites. Under this
circumstance the objective of the scheme was achieved to a very high extent.
Therefore, one of the objectives of the scheme i.e. setting up of infrastructure in rural
and remote areas for provisioning of mobilé services had been achieved, .The presence
‘of even one BTS radiating from each tower entails achievement of the objective and
hence, the second objective of the scheme ie. provisioning of mobile services had also

been achieved.

6. When asked about ensuring that zero/ negative bidding by the USPs do not
adversely affect the operation of the Scheme, the Ministry of Communications and IT

(Department of Telecommunications) replied as follows:

"As per terms and conditions of tender document the Performance Bank
Guarantees and Liquidated Damages are percentage of contract value’ of the
agreement. In the tender process for Part B of the scheme where zero or
negative bidding by the bidder, PBG and LD becomes zero or negative. For the
issues related to submission of PBG, and LD in case of.clusters with zero or
negative Representative Rates, discussions were held with USPs on 10.04.2007
& 20.04.2007. Since no unilateral decision on including of PBG and LD’clauses
could be taken after bidding process in these meetings, it was.decided that no


re

agree!

PBG would required to be submitted for the clusters with zero or negative
Representative Rate and no Liquidated Damage Charges are to be recovered
from USPs. However, .a penalty of Rs 500’ per day shall be charged on account
of interruption of services for part-B of the zero or negative subsidy."

When enquired on the amendments/ modifications made by the Ministry in the

ments to include clauses in case of non-rolling out of services on time by the

USPs, the Ministry of Communications and IT (Department of Telecommunications)

replied as follows:

8.

"The Department has tried to make amendments/modifications in the agreement

_ to include clauses in case of non — rolling out of services on time by USPs. The

competent authority has set up a committee under the “Chairmanship of

* Secretary (Telecom) to consider all the aspects of delay in roll out of mobile

services under Shared Mobile Infrastructure Scheme of USOF Scheme and
suggest appropriate action that may be taken.” A

When asked about the quality of service provided by the USPs, the

representatives of the Ministry of Communications and IT (Department of

Telecommunications) stated during evidence as follows:

9:

“When it comes to the quality of. service, there can be an issue that if the
competition is not there, then quality of service to that extent may not be

. available; if the competition would have ‘been there, probably, that competition

would have improved the quality of service. Now, quality of service is maintained
by two methods. One method is the competition; another method is the
regulation. | totally agree that there is no substitute for the competition.
Competition is the thing which is paramount for maintaining the quality or for
keeping the rates down. If it is not possible to keep the competition there, then

- there is a fall back system of regulations. Regulations are there and they can do

the needful. What |.am saying is this, in the backward areas, whenever we have
taken such schemes, our paramount purpose should be to take the mobile -
even if a single party is going, let us take the single party. If two parties are

- going, let the two parties go; if three parties, it is all the more. better.”

When asked about the achievements of the Scheme, the representatives of the

Ministry stated as follows:

“By and large, this scheme can be termed as a successful scheme. Out of these
towers, there are 252 towers where not even a single service’ provider reached.
We spent the money on putting up the towers, but nobody reached. It is a very,
very small percentage. We have more than 7,000 towers. Out of more than 7,000
towers, if only 252 towers are there, whether you will call this scheme successful


or not. Whenever you are making such kind of projections and people have
shown interest, and later on if they backed out, and if that number is very small,
you cannot say: that the scheme is not a successful one. There are only 252
towers through which we could not reach.”

NON PROVISIONING OF MOBILE SERVICES Nae MOBILE SERVICES IN 290 SITES

40. Audit pointed that in Maharashtra, Odisha, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, North
Eastll & Bihar Telecom Circles, 3488 numbers of infrastructure sites were
commissioned by the IPs under the Scheme. However, no mobile services were
provided by a single USP in 290 sites even after 18 to 36 months of their commissioning
as of March 2012. The Department had paid 5,67 crore to the |Ps towards subsidy (till
March 2012) in respect of 290 sites. Further, in four Telecom Circles (viz. Maharashtra,
Uttar Pradesh (East), UP (West) & Uttarakhand), out of 4582 commissioned sites, 474
sites were radiated by USPs with delays up to 949 days. The subsidy of हैं 4.09 crore
paid to the IPs for managing these 474 sites during non radiation period was thus
rendered unfruitful. The Ministry replied (December 2012) that there were separate
agreements with the IPs and USPs and the subsidy was being disbursed as per the
terms and conditions of the respective agreement. In fact, the subsidy paid to IPs was in
lieu oft {hé cést of infrastructure incurred by them and was not remuneration for radiation
रण mobile services. Nothing undue had been paid to the IPs, The infrastructure so RD
created would be utilized in future also for services in rural and remote areas even after .
the expiry of the USOF agreement and the USPs would continue services even after the
expiry of the subsidy period and hence subsidy paid to IPs could not be rendered

unfruitful.

41. When asked about the reason behind the non-provisioning of telecom services in
rural and remote areas, the Ministry of Communications and ‘IT (Department of

Telecommunications) replied as follows:

"The following difficulties experienced for provisioning/expansion of telecom
services in rural and remote areas are observed: +


(i) The areas are diversely located and are not financially
है Viable. The Average Revenue per User (ARPU) in these
Leer areas is very low. हु mE
(1) 118 CAPEX (Capital Expenditure) and OPEX (Operational
Expenditure) for development of telecom infrastructure in
these areas is very high.
(ii) Lack of backhaul connectivity.
(iv) Remote and tough terrain.
४ Lack of proper infrastructure (road, power etc.)
(vi) Areas affected by insurgency.”

42. When asked about the improvement in the performance of USPs in providing
services from these 290 sites, the Ministry of Communications and IT (Department of

Telecommunications) replied as under:

“The balance number of towers have been reduced from 290 to 252 by the USPs
where no USP has installed any BTS.” “ 9)

13... 118 Ministry further submitted as under: -

"The contracts of Shared Mobile Infrastructure Scheme for provision of mobile
services in uncovered villages of the country were signed with successful bidders ,
in May 2007. The agreements with the bidder(s) were valid upto 30.11.2013. As
per open and transparent bidding process, Universal Service Fund provided/
received the fund as per terms and conditions of the agreement. The ownership
of the assets rests with the Infrastructure Service Providers! Telecom Service
Providers. Department of Telecommunications has already-been seized of the
matter. The various options are being explored for starting the mobile services in’
the left over uncovered villages of the country”

NON-RECOVERY OF PENALTY FOR INTERRUF TIT कक बाप कं OF PENALTY FOR INTERRUPTIONS! DOWNTIME IN SERVICES

44. Audit scrutiny revealed that financial conditions of the Part-B Agreement
stipulates that a penalty shall be payable by the USP on pro-rata basis on account of
prolonged jnterruptions-of service due to any reason. The USPs shall furnish the details
of interruption/downtime of the service along with the payment statement as per
prescribed ‘proforma’. The agreement further stipulates that no penalty shall be payable
in case of interruption of mobile services for a period up to 7 days in a quarter. Penalty

@ = 500 per day shall be payable if there is interruption in service for more than 7 days


in'a quarter, However, if there is interruption in services for 45 days or more in a

quarter, penalty shall be payable for the whole quarter. Audit noticed that in Orissa 810. --

Karnataka Telecom Circles, USPs did not furnish the requisite information related to
interruptions/downtime to CCA office regularly in the prescribed format. On being
pointed out by Audit, demands were raised by Orissa circle against M/s Bharti Airtel
Limited (BAL) & M/s Dishnet Wireless Limited (DWL) for हैं 9.62 lakh and ₹ 2.40 lakh
respectively. M/s DWL has paid the downtime penalty of ₹ 2.40 lakh alongwith interest
: upto January 2018. M/s BAL stated that interruptions in services were on account of
infrastructure related failures which were to be attended by IPs and penalty could not be
levied on them. Karnataka circle raised a demand for रैं 53.84 lakh on M/s Bharti Airtel
after being pointed out by Audit and the said penalty amounting to Rs.53.84 lakh
alongwith interest has been paid by M/s Bharti Airtel Limited. In Madhya Pradesh
Telécam Circle, CCA office levied a penalty of 2.48 crore for interruption/downtime of
services on M/s IDEA for the period from April, 2008 to March, 2011 but no payment
was made to DoT so far. CCA office, Bhopal replied (July, 2012) that the matter had
been referred to DoT. The penalty of %3.14 crore levied on four USPs for down

time/interruptions in service had not been realized by DoT.

.15. When enquired about the latest status of recovery of penalty for interruptions and
downtime in services from the USPs, the representatives of the Ministry of
Communications and IT (Department of Telecommunications) stated during evidence as
follows: :

“Sir, audit had pointed out three specific cases. One was in Karnataka circle
where about Rs.54 lakh was outstanding from Bharti Airtel. That was up to a
particular year. But | am happy to say that we have actually recovered not just

%54 lakh but £1.14 crore till 2013-14 because of interest as well as the penalty
So, the full recovery has been done there

The second case which the audit had pointed out was in the case of Odisha

'

circle. Here two service providers are involved — one is Bharti and one is Dishnet. ©

The amount involved is somewhat less. For Bharti it was = 9.62 lakh and for
Dishnet it was about 2.4 lakh. This was a negative subsidy circle. So, we had no
performance bank guarantee. We have issued notices and we are following up
regularly so as to be able to recover this amount.


In the case of MP.which is the third circle which had been pointed out, the
service provider was Idea. Here we had issued them a notice. However, the
matter has gone to court and we are fighting it out in the court. The matter is sub
judice right now. it is in the High Court of Jabalpur."

Since then the Ministry have recovered the downtime penalty of % 2.40 lakh
alongwith interests upto January 2016, from M/s DWL of Odisha Circle.

46. With regard to the recovery of penalty for interruption/downtime of services from
Mls IDEA, the Ministry of Communications and IT (Department of Telecommunications)
have replied as follows:

"As per Audit para, the penalty against M/s IDEA has been stated as = 2.48

crore only whereas CCA, Madhya Pradesh has imposed the penalty and interest
as ₹ 27.10 crore on M/s IDEA. The details are as under:

In Rupees
Penalty up to 30-11-2013 = 48,67,24,000.00
Interest up to 06-2014 = 8,42,84,835.00

Total penalty and interest 27,10,08,835.00

M/s IDEA has not paid any amount. Writ Petition has been filed by M/s IDEA in.
Hon'ble High Court, Jabalpur against the demand of penalty. The matter is still
sub-judice and recovery will be made after decision of Hon'ble High Court. A
counter reply by the CCA office, Bhopal has been prepared. However, the
vetting process is yet to be completed.” हु

47. When asked about the existing monitoring mechanism in the DoT fo ensure
timely recovery of demands raised, the Ministry of Communications and IT (Department

of Telecommunications) in their written submission replied as under:

"It may be noted that the financial/subsidy support & its modalities of
_ disbursement from the Fund on the Net Cost (Operating Cost + Capital Recovery
- Revenue) basis along with the penal provisions such as Performance Bank
Guarantee is governed by an individual Agreement entered into with the

Universal Service Provider.
It may be stated that, generally, for recovery of any outstanding dues against

USP under a USOF agreement, demand notice is raised by the field office to
USP. If the matter is not resolved, despite repeated efforts, the issue is followed-



10

up at USOF, Hg, level. If the outstanding dues are not paid by the USP, even
then, the PBG for that particular agreement is invoked and encashed.

It may be highlighted that the CCA, Karnataka, the field office of USOF, did
recover the outstanding dues along with interest of €1,14,02,335/+ against M/s
Bharti Airtel Ltd. Further M/s Idea has filed writ petition against the demand
notice, for outstanding dues, raised by the CCA, MP and matter is thus sub-
judice. Thus, it may be seen that the steps are being taken to realise the
outstanding dues against USPs.

The attention may also be drawn to the fact that, during the tendering process for
Shared Mobile Infrastructure Scheme of USOF, it was so aggressively bidded by
the market players that there was even zero and negative subsidy quotes (i.e. no
subsidy outgo, instead of revenue receipts) for substantial clusters by the TSPs
for getting a BTS slot on the USOF-funded towers. Orissa Circle was one such

~ example, wherein there was no PBG, as the tender document linked the PBG
amount to 5% of the total subsidy amount disbursable to the USP under the
Scheme.

However the issue has been persistently being pursued by the CCA, Orissa. The
recovery of dues would also be followed up at USOF, HQ level.”

QUALITY OF SERVICE

- 18. The Shared Mobile Infrastructure Scheme envisages to provide wireless/ mobile
services to uncovered areas including rural, remote, hilly and tribal areas. The scheme
‘has two components, namely, setting up and managing of Infrastructure by IPs and
provisioning of mobile services by USPs. However, the success of the scheme can only
be measured through the quality of service provided to the consumers at reasonable

tariff rates.

19. When the Committee sought details on the measures/steps taken to improve the
internal controls relating to providing quality of service by USPs, the Ministry of

Communications and IT (Department of Telecommunications) replied as under:

“To avoid the undermining of the existing internal control measures, due fo
unanticipated negative and zero quotes in Shared Mobile Infrastructure Scheme
the upcoming USOF tenders would have the PBG clause linked to the project
estimate (or the ceiling for the subsidy support) for each bidding unit i.e. 5% of
the Total Benchmark value (upper ceiling for submission of bids) instead of
earlier contract value, to ensure the performance of the deliverables of the
respective USOF scheme.


ii

In addition, penalty clauses for mobile interruptions would be made more.
stringent with higher per day penalty per site @ ₹ 2,000 and recovery of one
quarter subsidy paid for the site, in case of interruption in services for more than
45 days in a quarter. है

Further provision would also be made for scrutiny of the relevant Network
Operation Centre (NOC) / Network Management System (NMS) data/systems to
facilitate independent verification of the subsidy claimed and paid such as to
verify the interruption period in a quarter, furnished with the subsidy claim by
USP to field office on self-certificate basis.”

ABSENCE OF PENAL PROVISIONS IN AGREEXEN ee PROVISIONS IN AGREEMENT RESULTING IN

NON-PAYMENT OF OPERATING EXPENSES eee OPERATING EXPENSES BY USPs

20. Audit scrutiny revealed that BSNL successfully bid for 63 clusters out of 81
clusters as Infrastructure Provider (IP) for setting up and managing infrastructure sites
and entered into agreement with DoT (May 2007) for a period of six and half years. As
per Commercial Conditions of the agreement under part-A of the Scheme, the
infrastructure sites were to be shared for a period of five years by three USPs on
payment of operational expenses to the IP (BSNL) for providing mobile services and
accordingly the IP (BSNL) entered into Service Level Agreements (SLAs) with the USPs
i namely, M/s Reliance, Mis Aircel and Mis Idea Cellular. The USPs were required to pay
the fixed maintenance charges and recurring operating expenses to the IP.on shareable
basis, The agreement stipulated payment of rolling advance and fixed maintenance -
charges within 15 days of receipt of invoices. USPs were liable to pay interest @ 2 per
cent per month for the period of default on any fee or other amount payable to the IPs.
Audit pointed out that the outstanding from five USPs had increased to £123 crore by
the end of August, 2012 constituting outstanding amount of 78.10 crore from Ms
Reliance, 15.69 crore from M/s Aircel, £10.80 crore from M/s Idea, ₹16.17 crore from
Vodafone and £2.24 crore from Airtel. It was also observed that there was no clause in
the SLA to take action either by BSNL or by DoT to rescind the agreement for non-
payment of operating expenses and hence this had resulted in unwarranted burden on
BSNL as IP.


2

24. During oral evidence, the representative of the Ministry had stated that the
outstanding amount of 7123. crore from_five.USPs namely Reliance, Vodafone, Idea,
Airtel and Aircel has been substantially realized. The Committee were further apprised
that major chunk of the outstanding was from Reliance Communications and Reliance
Telecom: Presently, the principal amount outstanding vis-a-vis Reliance Telecom and

Reliance Communications with BSNL is Rs 13.42 crore and %30 crore respectively.

22. When asked if any periodical joint meetings with IP (BSNL) and the defaulting
USPs have been facilitated by the USOF/ Ministry for clearance of dues, the Ministry of
Communications and IT (Department of Telecommunications) replied as under:
“Yes, the meetings were held in which payment issues of defaulting USPs have
been discussed. Various USPs have written letter to USOF that the up-time of

BSNL tower sites is very low and not as per parameters of SLAs. The USPs were
requested to sort out disputes as per agreement signed between them."

23. The Ministry, in this regard, further added:

"In future tenders of only USPs are under consideration for execution of all the
activities for provision of mobile services i.e. only USPs would be responsible for
installation of infrastructure and mobile BTS. The issue of payment with USPs
and IPs would not arise in future." eset «


13

PART-I
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS

हु The Committee note that Shared Mobile Infrastructure Scheme was
launched in 2007 by DoT under the Universal Service Obligation Fund, to provide
subsidy support for setting up and managing 7353 identified infrastructure sites
for provisioning of mobile services in 500 districts of 27 States which were not
_covered through wireless or mobile services. Villages or clusters of villages with
a population of 2000 or more were considered for the scheme. Accordingly
tenders for 81 clusters both for setting up and managing of infrastructure and
provisioning of mobile services, were invited and agreements were signed with 7
bidders, who quoted the lowest subsidy, for setting up infrastructure and 14
Universal Service Providers (USPs) for provisioning of mobile services. While
examining the subject, the Committee noted with serious concern about the
deficiencies such as defective subsidy support with USPs, non-provisioning of
mobile services in uncovered areas, non-recovery of penalty for non-provisioning
of mobile services, ineffective penal clauses in Service Level Agreement, non
existence of clauses to safeguard DoT against defaulting Infrastructure Providers
(IPs) and Universal Service Providers (USPs) etc. The Committee also desired
that action should be taken against those responsible for non-implementation of
green towers. Against this backdrop, the Committee have made certain

observations and recommendations on the following major aspects.

De DEFECTIVE AGREEMENT-NON-ROLL OCS AGREEMENT-NON-ROLL OUT OF SERVICES

The Committee are perturbed to note the poor performance of USPs,
mainly M/s Reliance Communications Limited (RCL), Reliance
Telecommunications Limited (RTL), Aircel and Vodafone in commissioning of
mobile services at the allotted sites. As on October, 2016, against 7317 sites out
of the targeted 7353 sites provided by the IPs for provisioning of services, the

USPs could provide services only from 7065 sites till closure of the Scheme i.e


14

November 2013. The Committee are dismayed to note that due to non-inclusion
of safeguards and penal clauses in the agreements to prevent non/delayed roll
out of services within the stipulated time, no action could be taken’ against the
defaulting USPs. However, the Department of Telecommunications had apprised
that they had tried to make amendments/modifications in the agreements to
include penalty clauses in case of non-rolling out of services on time by USPs.
Besides, a committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Telecom) had been
set up to consider all the aspects of delay in roll out of mobile Services under the
Scheme and suggest appropriate action that might be taken. The Committee also
note that the USPs were to provide mobile services from each of the sites within
two months of commissioning of the infrastructure site by the IPs, When the
Committee enquired on the shortfalls in commissioning mobile services in the
areas where towers have already been set up, the Ministry had reasoned that one
of the objectives of the scheme i.e. setting up of infrastructure in rural and remote
areas for provisioning of mobile services had been achieved as 16254 Base
Trans-recciver Stations (BTSs) had been installed till closure of the Scheme i.e
November 2013 for provisioning of mobile Services from 7317 tower sites, The
_ Committee are unable to comprehend the logic behind the argument made by the
Ministry and observe that since the objective of the scheme is two-fold, namely,
setting up and management of infrastructure and provisioning of mobile services,
the overall success of the scheme was dependent on the efficient and strict
implementation of both components of the scheme. The Committee are of the
considered view that implementation of these two components ought to go hand
in hand. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry ought to have
put in place an effective monitoring mechanism to obviate slippages in adherence
to the guidelines of the scheme by the IPs and USPs in order to achieve the target
set under the scheme. The Committee exhort that, henceforth, while: awarding
contract to bidders for establishment and management of infrastructure and
provisioning of mobile services, DoT should also check the past achievement
records and credibility of IPs and USPs before finalizing the contract. The
Committee are astonished to note that the DoT failed miserably to incorporate


15

relevant penalty clauses in the agreements before its finalization resulting in
_delayed/non roll out of mobile services within . the...stipulated. time The
Committee, therefore, desire that disciplinary action should be taken against
those officers responsible for preparing and entering into faulty agreements with

USPs.

3. NON-PROVISIONING OF MOBILE SERS OF MOBILE SERVICES IN 252 SITES

The Committee note that no mobile services were provided by a single USP
in 252 sites even after the agreements signed with the bidders expired on
30.11.2013. Moreover, in four Telecom Circles (viz. Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh
(East), UP (West) & Uttarakhand), out of 1582 commissioned sites, 474 sites were
radiated by USPs with delays upto-949 days and the subsidy of & 4.09 crore paid
to the IPs for managing these 474 sites during non radiation period had been
unfruitful. The Committee were apprised that DoT disbursed the subsidy to IPs
and USPs as per the separate agreements with them. DoT further stated that’
subsidy paid to IPs was in lieu of the cost of infrastructure incurred by them and
was not remuneration for radiation of mobile services. The Committee are unable
to understand the rationale behind disbursement of subsidy to USPs and IPs
despite prolonged delay in commissioning of services and non-radiation of
towers. The Committee are displeased to note the loss of money due to the
inaction and incompetence of the USPs and IPs and lack of proper planning and
indifference of. DoT -on the matter. The Committee, accordingly, desire to be
apprised of the reasons for the delay in commissioning and radiation of these
sites. The Committee are of the view that release of subsidy support should have’
been effected only after timely achievement of targets. The Committee also
recommend that immediate necessary steps may be taken to attract service
providers to these 252 sites so that radiation and provision of mobile services

can be commenced at these sites without further delay.


16

4, INCORPORATION |OF SUITABLE CLAUSES IN FUTURE TENDERS AND IN FUTURE TENDERS AND
SERVICE LEVEL AGREEMENT (SLA) LA)

The Committee note that 5 to 10 percent of annual subsidy is chargeable as
Liquidated Damages (LD) for delay in provisioning of mobile services. The
Performance Bank Guarantee (PBG) would be 5 per cent of the Subsidy payable
to the bidder, which could be forfeited by the Administrator in case of failure of
performance of terms and conditions by the USP. The Committee further note
that a successful bid with minus or negative subsidy could not attract LD or PBG.
The agreements thus signed. with these bidders did not have any LD or PBG
clause to protect the interest of the DoT in case of non fulfillment of any
conditions by the USPs which envisaged that USPs are to provide mobile
services within two months of the commissioning of the Infrastructure site by the
Infrastructure Provider (IP). The Committee observe that USPs that have
successfully bidded with minus or negative subsidy are not bound by any clause
in the agreement for timely provisioning of mobile services. The Committee,
therefore, reconimend that necessary amendments may be carried out and
suitable clauses be incorporated in all future tenders/ contract agreements as
well as Service Level Agreements so as to ensure timely and prompt provisioning
‘of mobile services and imposition of penalties against defaulting parties for any

delays.

5. PROVISIONING OF MOBILE SERVICES IN LEFTOUT REMOTE AREAS LEFTOUT REMOTE AREAS

Audit pointed out that though more than 99 per cent of target set for setting
up and managing of infrastructure sites by Infrastructure Providers (IPs) had
been achieved, the objective of providing wireless or mobile services to
uncovered areas including rural, remote, hilly and tribal areas had been achieved

- only to the extent of 72 per cent and services from 6026 sites were not rolled out
as on October, 2012. The Committee observe that an array of difficulties like
diverse location, lack of backhaul connectivity, remote and tough terrain, lack of

proper infrastructure, insurgency etc. had been enumerated by the Ministry in


7

provisioning/expansion of mobile services in rural and remote areas. Observing
that the basic aim of the Scheme .was -to. provide. telecom facilities to all
uncovered areas including rural, remote, hilly and tribal areas at affordable
prices, the Committee find the justification/arguments, given by the Ministry on
non-provisioning of mobile services in rural/ remote areas, unacceptable. While
acknowledging that hurdles mentioned by the Ministry are genuine concerns, the
Committee recommend that to overcome such bottlenecks in future, the Ministry
- should come up with better system of planning, coordination between different

implementing agencies and execution,

6. ह SAFEGUARD AGAINST 027 सन AGAINST DEFAULTING USPs

The Committee note that as per the agreement, penalty shall be payable by
the USP on pro-rata basis for prolonged interruptions of mobile service due to
any reason. The USPs shall furnish the details of interruption/downtime of the
service along with the payment statement as per prescribed ‘proforma’. The
agreement further stipulates that no penalty shall be payable in case of
interruption of mobile services for a period up to 7 days ina quarter and हैं 500 per
day shall be payable if there is interruption in service for more than 7 days in a ©
quarter. However, if there is interruption in service for 45 days or more in a
quarter, penalty shall be payable for the whole quarter. The Committee were
apprised that penalizing USPs with negative -subsidy for service
interruptions/downtime is problematic as the Ministry do. not have performance
bank guarantee. The Ministry have however issued notices to expedite recovery
of the penalty from the concerned USPs. The Committee are of the strong opinion
that the defective agreement and the absence of an elaborate provision for
recovery of interruption’ downtime penalty from USPs under contract with
negative subsidy, have left the Department of Telecommunications toothless in
pressing for speedy recovery from defaulting service providers. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that explicit. provisions! safeguards, clearly citing

appropriate penalties for service interruptions/downtime against all USPs


18

irrespective of those under subsidy or negative subsidy, be incorporated in all

future agreements/contracts.

7६ RECOVERY OF PENALTY FOR INTERRUPTIONS/ DOWNTIME

The Committee, while appreciating the recovery of penalty for service
interruptions from the USPs of Karnataka Circle and M/s Dishnet Wireless Limited
(DWL) of Odisha Circle, are disappointed to find that recovery of penalty of रैं 9.62
lakh has not been effected so far from M/s Bharti Airtel Limited (BAL) of Odisha
Circle. The Committee also note that the matter of recovery of र 27.10 crore as
penalty from M/s IDEA of CCA, Madhya Pradesh is sub-judice and hence it is
pending. The Committee recommend for expeditious recovery of the penalty
amount, along with the admissible interest from M/s Bharti Airtel Limited (BAL)

Odisha Circle, without any further delay,

The Committee also-note with concern about the sub-judice case of non-
recovery of penalty for interruptions/ downtime of service viz, हैं 27.10 crore on
Mis IDEA in Madhya Pradesh Telecom Circle. The Universal Service Providers
(USPs) in this regard-have stated that since the interruptions in the services were
on account of infrastructure related failures which were attended to by the
Infrastructure Providers (IPs), therefore, the penalty should not be levied on them.
The Committee, are of the view that since the responsibility of managing
infrastructure facilities lie with the IPs, the IPs should be held responsible for all
infrastructure related failures and penalties be imposed accordingly. The
Committee, therefore desire to be apprised of the latest status of the cases
pending in the court seeking recovery of penalty from M/s IDEA of CCA; Madhya
Pradesh. Further, to avoid such litigations in future, the Committee recommend
that while signing the Service Level Agreement, DoT should ensure that clauses,
denoting clear-cut responsibilities of the USPs and IPs, are incorporated in the
agreement not only to facilitate efficient and quality mobile services but also to
ensure fixation of responsibility and empower DoT to take the guilty party to task

without any delay.


19

8. STRINGENT PENALTY FOR SERVICE INTERRUF ike SERVICE INTERRUPTIONS! DOWNTIME

The Committe" aré pleased to note that penalty clauses for mobile
interruptions are being made more stringent with higher per day penalty per site
@ ₹ 2,000 and recovery of one quarter subsidy paid: for the site, in case of
interruption in services for more than 45 days in a quarter. The Committee,
however recommend that in future agreements, to discourage Service Providers
with negative! zero subsidy from laxity in providing continuous and quality
service, penalty for interruption in services should not only be levied from the
subsidy but also from the proceeds of the installed BTS. The Committee, also
recommend that in: all future agreements/contracts more stringent punishment
also be imposed on IPs for any lapse in their responsibility of maintenance and

management of towers.

9. ENSURING QUALITY OF SERVICE SERVICE

The Committee observe that some towers have only one BTS installed
indicating absence of competition amongst service providers in the area where
the towers are set up. The Ministry have also submitted that the paramount
purpose of the scheme should be provisioning of mobile services in as much
area as possible, even at the cost of compromising on the quality of service
While admitting that provisioning of mobile service is of outmost importance, the
Committee feel that provision of quality service is also of equal importance. The
Committee opine that competition between different service providers improve
the quality of service in the arealcircle, keep the tariff rates in check and
ultimately benefit the customers The Committee, also recommend that
Department of Telecommunications may come forward to sensitize the local:
customers about the benefits of competition amongst different service providers .
and invite different USPs to showcase/advertise their varied offers/services and

establish a market base for their services at the single BTS installed sites,


20

40, EFFECTIVE PENAL CLAUSES IN CONTRACT TENDERS & SERVICE LEVEL
AGREEMENTS FOR NON-PAYMENT OF OPERATING EXPENSES BY AGREEMENTS FOR NON-PAYMENT OF OPERATING EXPENSES BY USPs

The Committee are concerned to note that there is no clause in Service
Level Agreement for action either by BSNL (IP for 63 clusters out of 81 clusters)
or DoT against USPs for non-payment of operating expenses. The Committee are
further dismayed to note that taking advantage of the ambiguity in the penalty for
non-payment of operation charges, USPs have withhold payment of operation
charges, and the unwarranted burden of it is faced by BSNL. The Committee are
unable to comprehend as to why no clauses to safeguard BSNL against non-
payment of operation and maintenance charges by USPs were incorporated in the
Service Level Agreement (SLA). The Committee recommend that in all future
agreements/ contracts, clauses imposing stringent penalty on USPs for delay/
non-payment of operation charges may be incorporated. This would deter the
USPs from taking advantage of the existing lacunae in the agreement and
withhold operation and maintenance charges which would in turn discourage IPs

to manage the towers.

The Committee are pleased to note that outstanding amount of %423 crore
from five USPs namely Reliance, Vodafone, Idea, Airtel and Aircel have been
substantially realized by the DoT. During ‘oral evidence, the Committee were
apprised that presently, the principal amount outstanding against Reliance
Telecom and Reliance Communications with BSNL is %13.42 crore and %30 crore
respectively. The Committee observe that as per the agreement, USPs are
obligated-to make payment of rolling advance and fixed maintenance charges
within 15 days of reccipt of invoices. USPs are also liable to pay interest @ 2 per
cent per month for the period of default on any fee or other amount payable to the
IPs. The Committee strongly express their displeasure on non-compliance to the
extant agreement. The Committee would like to be apprised of the reasons for
non-payment and recommend that DoT may pursue the aforementioned USPs to

settle the operation charges along with the admissible interest for the period of

rs


24
default on payment, without any further delay. The Committee would aiso like to
be informed about the action taken in this regard.

NEW DELHI; PROF. K.V, THOMAS
Chairperson,

14 March, 2017
23 Phalguna, 1938 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee