71

MANAGEMENT OF SATELLITE CAPACITY FOR
DTH SERVICES BY DEPARTMENT OF SPACE

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of

the Committee contained in their Fortieth Report (16" Lok Sabha)]

DEPARTMENT OF SPACE

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

SEVENTY-FIRST REPORT

ेआआःआईय-क्‍:8):श स्‍-'्इ+८प८पफफ ककोरक्फ्--॒ |

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2104

SEVENTY-FIRST REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

MANAGEMENT OF SATELLITE
CAPACITY FOR DTH SERVICES BY

DEPARTMENT OF SPACE

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Fortieth Report (167 Lok Sabha)]

DEPARTMENT OF SPACE

Presented to Lok Sabha on:

Laid in Rajya Sabha on:

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI!

April, 2017 /Chaitra, 1939 (Saka)


CONTENTS

PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2016-17) (iii)
INTRODUCTION (v)
REPORT
CHAPTER! Introductory 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations of the Committee which 15
have been accepted by the Government
CHAPTER Ill Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 18

not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from
the Government

CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 19
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration

CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 32
Government have furnished interim replies

APPENDICES

I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
(2016-17) held on 6" April, 2017

ll. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts
Committee contained in their Seventy-Fourth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

I. Annexures


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

Prof, K.V. Thomas - Chairperson
MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

2 Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay

3. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
4. Shri Nishikant Dubey

5. Prof. Richard Hay

6 Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
7 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

8. Smt. Riti Pathak

9. Shri Neiphiu Rio

10. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
11. Shri Abhishek Singh

12. Dr. ॥ Somaiya

13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur

44, Shri Shivkumar 0. Udasi

15. Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Naresh Agrawal

17. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
48. * Shri Bhupender Yadav
19. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
20. Shri Shantaram Naik

21. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
22. Shri Ajay Sancheti

SECRETARIAT

Shri A.K. Singh - Additional Secretary
Shri S.C. Chaudhary - Joint Secretary
Shri T.Jayakumar - Director

Smt. Bharti 5. Tuteja  - Deputy Secretary
Shri Deepankar Kamble - Committee Officer

छा PONs

———

* Blected w.c.f, 09.08.2016 vice Shri Vijay Goel, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f, 05.07.2016.


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2016-17), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Seventy-First Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Fortieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Management of Satellite Capacity for DTH Services by Department of Space’
relating to the Department of Space.

2. The Fortieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on
26" April, 2016. Replies of the Government to the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 2207 September, 2016. The Public Accounts
Committee considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 6" April, 2017.
Minutes of the Sitting are given at Appendix-l.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fortieth Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha) is given at Appendix-ll.

NEW DELHI; PROF. K.V. THOMAS
60 April, 2017 Chairperson

16 Chaitra, 1939 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


CHAPTER - |
REPORT

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their Fortieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on “Management of Satellite Capacity
for DTH Services by Department of Space” based on the C&AG's Report No. 22 of
2014 (Performance Audit) relating to the Department of Space and Ministry of
Information & Broadcasting.

2. The Fortieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha), which was presented to Lok
Sabha/iaid in Rajya Sabha on 26 April, 2016, contained 15
Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the
Observations/Recommendations have been received from the Department of Space
and Ministry of Information & Broadcasting and these have been categorized as
under:

{i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the
Government:

Paragraph Nos. 1, 11,13, 14 and 15
Total: 05
Chapter- Il

(i) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:

-NIL-
Total: 00
Chapter- lil

(ii) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration:

Paragraph Nos. 2, 3, 50), 5(ti), 501), 60), 601), 9, 10 and 12
Total: 07
Chapter- IV

(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government
have furnished interim replies:

Paragraph Nos. 4, 7 and 80), 90)
Total: 03
Chapter- ४


2
3. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Department of Space and Ministry of
Information & Broadcasting on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Fortieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the
relevant Chapters of this Report. In the succeeding paragraphs, the Committee have
deait__with the Action Taken by the Government_on some of their of _their

Observations/Recommendations which either need reiteration or merit comments. comments.

1. Satellite Capacity not earmarked by ICC
(Recommendation Para No. 2)

4. The Committee had noted that the INSAT Coordination Committee (ICC), a
high level muiti departmental decision making body, consisting of Secretaries of
Department of Space, Department of Economic Affairs, Department of
Telecommunications, Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, Department of Science
& Technology and Department of Information & Technology was responsible for
coordinating and monitoring the implementation of space and ground segments of
INSAT projects. However, the Committee noted with serious concern that the ICC
was not convened after June 2004 and was reconstituted after a lapse of 7 years in
May 2011. The Committee observed that the DoS flouted the norms under SATCOM
policy by allocating transponder capacities on three satellites to DTH service
providers without convening ICC meetings which was responsible for earmarking
satellite capacity for Non-Government users. The Committee noted from the teply of
DoS that members of ICC were informed about the above mentioned arrangement in
meetings of Technical Advisory Group (TAG), a technical Sub-Committee of the ICC.
The Committee opined that 100 had been mandated to earmark the satellite capacity
for Non-Government users and therefore, only informing the members of [CC during
a Sub-committee meeting showed the callousness of the DoS towards the high level
decision making authority. The Committee were of the strong view that the DoS did
not follow the prescribed procedure and exceeded its sphere by taking unilateral
decisions bypassing the mechanism on issues which were beyond its expertise. The
Committee exhorted the DoS to regularly convene the ICC meetings which was
required as per norms or leasing of transponder capacity on Indian satellites since
allocating satellite capacity was a sensitive issue having financial implication on the
revenues of the Government. The Committee desired to be apprised of the reason for


3 .
not convening the ICC meetings, taking unilateral decisions bypassing the system
and the punitive action taken within three months of the presentation of this Report.

5. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:

“It ig submitted that as per the Government Rules of Business, the Depariment
of Space is the administrative ministry in respect of the satellite systems. The
Department hereby assures that it has always acted in a highly responsible
manner in line with the approved mandate. The Department has always kept
an open channel communication with the other associated departments like
DoT and Mol&B in the past and will continue to do so in future. With regard to
assigning transponder capacity for DTH services and the Department's
compliance to the Government guidelines, a detailed note of the establishment
of ICC and its transformation over the years is at Annexure. The Ministry
submitted that:

(i) Based on the delegated powers of the 100, the Department handled
the functions of managing DTH capacity allotments;

(ii) Cabinet approved norms and guidelines have accorded adequate
power to the Department fo administer transponder leasing function;and

(ii) The Department kept a formal communication arrangement with
Mol&B for each DTH case as agreed in the 67" meeting of the ICC.

itis also bought fo the notice of the PAC that:

(i) The Technical Advisory Group (TAG) of ICC, an inter-departmental
group of senior officers was functional during June 2004 to December
2008;

(ii) Apex Committee of DoT, an inter-departmental group was
functional for handling interactive communication licensing;

(iii) Formal communication mode between DoS and Mol&B was active
for all activity related broadcasting communications like DTH service
providers.

To further clarify that the Department followed a due consultation process with
Mol&B and adhered to the procedures, it may be noted that in the 67" meeting
of the ICC held on 7" October, 2002, under Agenda No.5 ‘Procedure for
INSAT capacity utilization for private telecom operator, Secretary, Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting stated that all applications for TV uplinking and
space segment requirements are being forwarded to DOS for clearance before
licenses are issued’. Therefore, it may be seen that the Department has not
taken a unilateral decision and has followed the system of consulting other
departments through formal communications with regard to allotment of
transponders for DTH services and performed actions as delegated by icc,
The direction of PAC to convene the ICC meetings regularly is being carried
out. The ICC meetings are being convened regularly as and when required. In


4

view of the above justification, the submission of the Department may be
considered favorably." :

I (a). Role of the Mol&B in the allocation of satellite capacity satellite capacit
(Recommendation Para No. 3)

6. The Committee highlighted the fact that since DTH being a broadcasting
service, it came directly under the purview of Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting (Mol&B) as it was responsible for all matters relating to broadcasting in
the country. According to the SATCOM policy, ail allocations were made by DOS with
the approval of the ICC. Also, being a’ member of the ICC, Mol&B was also involved
in satellite capacity allocation. Since the ICC was not convened, Mol&B and other
members were inadvertently left out of the decision making process. The Committee
were shocked to note the lackadaisical approach of the Ministry of Information &
Broadcasting as it remained a mute spectator while DOS was flouting norms by
directly allocating satellite capacities and the Moi&B even did not bother to intervene
for convening the ICC of which it was a member. The Committee were of the view
that it was high time that the different wings of the Government of India be proactive
in their approach and keeping in view the national interest, coordinate properly for
taking decisions which were crucial both commercially and strategically. The
Committee recommended that the Ministry as well as DOS make sincere and
concerted efforts to convene the IGC meetings regularly so that all the relevant
stakeholders were involved in the sound planning for allocation of transponder
capacity thereby paving way for a more transparent approach which could help in re-
building of trust and faith of DTH service providers in the DOS and the Ministry.

7. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:

"It may be noted that allocation of transponder capacity by the Department was made
in accordance with the directives of the ICC as explained in detail in answer to Para
No.2. It may further be noted that Mol&B is a member of the ICC and fully aware of
the formal mechanism as part of the ICC deliberation in the 67th meeting of the ICC
(7th October, 2002) that 'All applications for TV uplinking and space segment
requirements are being forwarded to DOS for clearance before licenses are issued’.
The procedure followed and the coordination between Mol&B and the Department
are as explained in Annexure-2. From this it is clear that there is constant interaction
and coordination between the Department and Mol&B from allotment of transponder
capacity to issue of DTH license. This coordination is central to the operation of DTH
services. The direction of PAC to convene the ICC meetings regularly is being carried
out. The 100 meetings are being convened regularly as and when required. The
recommendation of the PAC has also been communicated to Mol&B".


5

8. The Committee in their original Report had noted that, in violation of
SATCOM Policy, during the period from June, 2004 to May, 2011 when the ICC
was not convened even once, DoS allocated three DTH satellites to non-
Government users without the approval of ICC. The Committee had desired to
be apprised of the reason for not convening the ICC meetings, taking unilateral
decisions bypassing the system and initiating punitive action within three
months of the presentation of the Report. The Committee note from the reply of
the DoS that transponder capacity for DTH services were assigned on the basis
of (i) the Department handied the functions of managing DTH capacity
allotments through delegated powers of the ICC; (1) powers to the Department
to administer transponder leasing function as per Cabinet approved norms and
guidelines; and (iii) formal communication arrangement with Mol&B for each
DTH case as agreed in the 67th meeting of the ICC. The Committee, however,
find that as per para 2.6.2 of the SATCOM Policy approved by the Union
Cabinet In 2000, "the norms, guidelines and procedures for implementation of
the policy frame-work for. satellite communications in India" envisaged that
once capacity is earmarked by ICC for non-governmental users, Department of
Space/INSAT is authorised to provide this capacity to the non-governmental
users for services other than telecommunications, following fits own
procedures. The Committee are disappointed to note that DoS/INSAT
conveniently overlooked the prescribed norms and instead of convening the
inter-departmental Secretary level meetings, took unilateral decisions. The
Committee, further, note from the reply of the DoS that it has always kept an
open channel communication with the other associated Departments like DoT
and Mol&B. The Committee are of the view that interactions, even if formal,
between the officials of DoS and Mol&B during the said period is entirely
different from that of a decision taken in the meeting of ICC consisting of
Secretary level officers of the concerned Departments as stipulated under
SATCOM Policy. The Committee while finding no merit in DoS' contention that
it acted based on the “delegated powers" of ICC and opine that it cannot
overrule the norms prescribed in SATCOM Policy. The Committee, therefore,
reiterate their earlier observation that DoS did not follow the prescribed
procedure and exceeded its sphere by taking unilateral decisions bypassing


6

the mechanism on issues which were beyond its mandate and would like to be
apprised whether any punitive action has been taken in this regard.

The Committee further observe from the reply of the DoS that Mol&B is a
member of the [CC and fully aware of the formal mechanism as part of the
deliberation in the 67th meeting of the ICC that “all applications for TV
uplinking and space segment requirements are being forwarded to DoS for
clearance before licenses are issued". The Committee are of the considered
view that forwarding of all applications for clearance is again different from
allocating satellite capacity without earmarking for non-governmental users by
the ICC. The Committee while noting that Mol&B has not submitted its action
taken reply on the observation of the Committee, reiterate their earlier
recommendation that all the stakeholders be involved in the sound planning
and judicious decision for allocation of transponder capacity, paving way fora
more transparent approach which would help in re-building of trust and faith of
DTH service providers in the DoS and the Ministry.

The Committee while noting from the reply of the DoS that the ICC meetings
are being regularly convened as and when required desire to be apprised of the
total number of meetings held after 2011 and the capacity earmarked by the

ICC for allocation to non-governmental users.

IL Out of Turn Allocation of Satellite Capacity
[Recommendation Para No. 5(i)]

9. The Committee noted that while Tata Sky was fifth in order of preference of
satellite capacity allocation, it was granted precedence on INSAT-4A and given
exclusive rights at the prime slot of 83 degrees east in December 2005
superseding Doordarshan (DD) which was later allocated capacity on INSAST-4B |
launched in January 2007. The Committee further noted from the submission of
DoS that DD was allocated satellite capacity on a foreign satellite before
allocation of capacity to Tata Sky on INSAT-4A and DD migrated to INSAT-4B at
the end of the contract period. The Committee were shocked to note that the
national broadcaster was allocated capacity on a foreign satellite and then a
private broadcaster was given exclusive rights on INSAT-4A. The Committee
observed that the national broadcaster being the first in precedence should have

been given preference on Indian satellite being a free to air service accessed by


7

majority of population across India and also has an obligation towards the citizens
of this country. The Committee noted with dismay that the charges paid to a
foreign satellite for usage by Doordarshan was a wasteful expenditure, more so,
since Tata Sky could not be retained on INSAT-4A in addition to the revenue
forgone fearing litigations by Tata Sky, taking advantage of its first right of refusal.
The Committee desired to be apprised of the reason for apparent favoritism
towards Tata Sky and further desired that punitive action may be taken against all
those responsible for the same.

10. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:

"The Department submits that Tata Sky was not given preference over
Doordarshan. The details of transponder allotment for DTH services during the
initial period are summarized in Annexure-3 with a brief. From the same, it is
clear that Doordarshan started their test services in a foreign satellite during
June 2004. During this period, the INSAT/GSAT system did not have high
power Ku band satellites. The decision to start the DTH services was taken by
Doordarshan. After examining the options of starting DTH services in INSAT-
4A satellite (Annexure-4). {CC has also noted this decision in its 68th meeting
held on 17th June, 2004 (Annexure-5). Through the submissions made earlier
as well as through Annexure-4 & 5, it is clear that Doordarshan was not
superseded but instead, the Department helped them to start the DTH
services as per their request. Therefore, it is submitted that there was no
favoritism towards M/s Tata Sky. In view of the above justification, the
submission of the Department may be considered favorably."
41, The Committee note from the reply of the DoS that Doordarshan (DD)
started their test services for DTH on a foreign satellite during June 2004 as the
INSATI/GSAT satellites did not have high power Ku band transponders. The
Committee are dismayed to note that DoS could not meet the demands of even
the national broadcaster and failed miserably to have a sound planning and
adequate strategy in timely developing INSAT/GSAT satellites with Ku band
transponders resulting in even the existing private channel (Tata Sky)
migrating from INSAT-4A to a foreign satellite. Further, the Committee had
noted that that DD was allocated satellite capacity on a foreign satellite before
allocation of capacity to Tata Sky on INSAT-4A and DD migrated to INSAT-4B at
the end of the contract period. The Committee further note that from the reply
of DoS that in July 2004, Dish TV was allotted capacity on foreign satellite,
NSS-6 in lieu of INSAT-3A and in June 2004, DD was also given capacity on the

same foreign satellite. The Committee wonder when INSAT-3A‘s capacity was


8
to be freed within a month then why it was not considered for allocation to DD
thereby painting a poor picture on the Department's satellite capacity
management. Further, the DoS has not responded to the observations of the
Committee regarding the allocation of capacity to Tata Sky despite being fifth
in order of preference. The Committee would like the matter to be thoroughly
investigated through an appropriate agency and apprised of the outcome

thereof.

Mt. Grant of Exclusive Rights over Prime Orbital Slots Orbital Slots
[Recommendation Para No. 5(ii)]

42. The Committee noted with much concern that Tata Sky had a very
advantageous position over other DTH service providers as it had the exclusive first
tight of refusal for using Ku band transponders at 83 degrees east. Due to this, Ku
band transponders of GSAT-10 could not be allocated to any other DTH service
providers and remained idle thereby causing a loss of = 60 crore per year to the
exchequer and wondered why Tata Sky was given preferential treatment over others.
The Committee were shocked at such preferential treatment shown by DoS for a
private company and, therefore, desired that an enquiry may be conducted into the
transaction, stern action may be taken against those found guilty and apprise the
Committee within three months of the presentation of this Report.

43. — The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:

“INSAT-4A was the first high-power satellite realized by the Department and it
was new technology to the Department. It may be noted that inspite of
technology denial regime and incréasing domestic demand of realizing high
power transponders for DTH services, the Department made a good effort to
realize the satellite. In a scenario wherein multiple high power satellites. were
available over India, the Department not only realized the first high-power
satellite INSAT-4A, we could attract a user in the form of M/s Tata Sky for a
firm commitment of a long period without even going through in-orbit
performance. It may also be nated that though M/s Tata Sky approached the
Department for transponder allotment in August 2002, the services started only
after the realisation of INSAT-4A in December 2005. From the above
submission, it is clear that the Department not only achieved the realisation of
high-power Ku-band satellite INSAT-4A under technology denial regime, it
could also attract a long term customer without superseding Doordarshan. It
was a challenge for the Department to prove that indigenous satellite in the
highly performance specific DTH sector is accepted by the DTH industry
through a user like M/s Tata Sky. In view of the facts provided in Annexure-3 &
Annexure-4, the submission of the Department may be considered favourably.


9

A Committee is being constituted by the Department and the recommendation
of the Committee will be suitably addressed."

14. The Committee are extremely displeased that despite their
recommendation for conducting an enquiry in the matter and taking action
against the guilty within a period of three months, the Ministry is now setting
up a committee, The Committee hope that the said committee will conduct a
detailed enquiry in the matter to bring out the truth and to take punitive action
against those found responsible. The Committee are also unhappy with DoS
for non-furnishing of information relating to the conduct of an enquiry in to the
grant of exclusive right over the prime slot of 83 degree east to Tata Sky and to
take stern action against the guilty persons within three months of the
presentation of the Fortieth Report. This submission indicates the callous
attitude and approach of the Department towards the recommendation of a
Parliamentary Committee. Re-iterating their earlier recommendation, the
Committee, therefore, earnestly desire that the Department take cognizance of
the seriousness of the matter and expeditiously take action against the guilty
and furnish all the information desired by the Committee within three months

of the presentation of this report.

IV. Outstanding dues from back to back agreements back agreements
[Recommendation Para No. 6(ii)]

15. The Committee noted that DoS arranged foreign satellite capacity to indian
DTH service providers for short term period through Antrix as a temporary measure
to ensure that the service could be brought back to INSAT system when Indian
satellite capacity was eventually available. DoS entered in back to back agreements
for Dish TV, SUN DTH, Airtel, Reliance and Videocon. The transponder lease
charges to the tune of = 62.55 crore remained to be recovered from these parties.
The Committee further noted that till March 2014, an amount of % 57.17 crore was
recovered and the balance & 5.38 crore was still to be collected. The Committee
observed that Antrix did not follow the conditions of the transponder lease
agreements by not collecting money in advance thereby extending undue favor and
resultant accumulation of transponder lease charges. The Committee desired to be
informed about the action taken by DoS to collect the outstanding amount of € 5.38

crore. The Committee felt that satellite capacity allocation contributed a handsome


10
amount of revenue to the government treasury, and DoS faltering in administering

established rules and procedures leading to the flow of revenue was totally
unacceptable. The Committee further desired that DoS ensured the compliance of all
terms of the agreements and in the instant case to see that if liquidated
damages/penalties could be imposed on Antrix for non-compliance of the terms. The
Committee also recommended that erring officials be identified and accountability be
fixed on them by means of punitive action and also a thorough investigation be done
by agencies such as CBI, DRI, ED etc to further probe the matter and bring the guilty
parties to justice.

46. 116 Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have submitted as under:

"The following factual information is brought to the kind attention of the PAC:

() In all the back-to-back contracts entered into by Antrix in respect of DTH
capacity, the money is paid to foreign operators only on receipt of the same
from the users;

(ii) DTH operators have submitted security deposit in the form of a bank
guarantee equivalent to 3 months of space segment charges as per the terms
of the respective agreements;

(iil) In the case of back-to-back agreements, there is no loss to the Department
since the transponder capacity is leased by Antrix and payment is made to the
foreign supplier only when the end users pay the lease charges to Antrix. No
loss has been incurred by the Department in any of these transactions;

(iv) As on date, % 5.38 crore as referred io has been collected.

A system of checks and balances will be built so as to ensure that dues are
collected in time from users.

A Commitiee to 100९ into the subject matter is being constituted and its
recommendation will be addressed by the Department."

47. The Committee highlight the fact that the Department, time and again,
has been deviating from the established policies framed for effective
management of satellite capacities on foreign as well as indian satellites and
re-iterate their earlier observation that the Department did not collect money in
advance for transponder lease agreements which point towards the
Department's undue favour towards private entities and resultant accumulation

of dues. The Committee feel that deviation. from financial propriety directly


11
hurts the interests of the exchequer and favouring private entities by the DoS.
The Committee insist that a robust system of internal control should be
established while making financial transactions and desire that SOPs in this
regard may be issued urgently. They desire to be apprised of the findings of the
committee proposed to be constituted to look into the matter.

Vv. Loss due to non-revision of transponder charges transponder charges
(Recommendation Para No. 7)

18. The Committee noted that DTH transponder lease agreements had a lease
period from 5 to 10 years with no provision for revision of prices whereas lease
agreements with foreign satellites ranged from 1 to 6 years with provision for price
revision from 5 to 33%. The lack of such basic provisions resulted in revenue forgone
to the tune of = 36.17 crore. The Committee were displeased with such poor terms of
agreements where even a simple provision for price revision at regular intervals was
not included. The Committee desired that such agreements be reviewed and
reframed to include sound/prudent financial terms in the interest of the exchequer.
The Committee exhorted the DoS to fine tune their marketing strategies to attract and
retain service providers as well as to bring back those DTH service providers using
foreign satellites back to INSAT/GSAT systems. The Committee impressed upon the
Ministry that the service providers be charged at the competitive rates and preferably
the lease term be also uniform for everyone ensuring tevel playing field across the
DTH sector thereby leading to more transparency and healthy competition. The
Committee further desired that the DoS set up an inquiry to look into the lease
agreements with various parties and take stringent action against those responsible
for agreeing to terms that were against the interests of the exchequer and apprise the

Committee of the action taken within three months.

19. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have submitted as under:

"The Department submits the following key factors with regard to non-revision
of prices for transponders for the kind consideration of the PAC: -

(i) Lease agreements with foreign satellites are entered for a short term
in order to make a provision for the end user to migrate the services
from foreign satellite to the Indian satellite. This approach is in line with
the recommendation of the Cabinet approved ‘Norm, guidelines &


12
procedures for implementation of the policy framework for satellite
communication in India’;

(ii) As the foreign operators quote lease charges in dollar terms,
differential charges among indigenous capacity and foreign lease is
unavoidable due to currency fluctuations and withholding taxes.
However, the Department will work towards a scenario wherein the best
possible solution for DTH services will be arrived at.

It is submitted by the Department that a technical strategy to retain DTH
services in the indigenous INSAT/GSAT system as well as to migrate
DTH services from foreign satellite system to indigenous system is
under formulation.

A Committee to look into the subject matter is being constituted and its
recommendation will be addressed by the Department.”
20. The Committee are dismayed to note that despite their recommendation
to set up an inquiry by the DoS to look into the lease agreements with various
parties and take stringent action against those responsible for agreeing to
terms that were against the interest of the exchequer and apprise them of the
action taken within three months of the presentation of Fortieth Report (167
Lok Sabha), DoS has not initiated any action, as yet. Instead, DoS has
submitted that the lease agreements with foreign satellites were entered for a
short term period and to examine periodic revision clause, a committee would
be constituted. This is yet another manifestation of the Ministry's continued
lackadaisical approach in tackling the issue and subsequent loss being
suffered by the exchequer due to non-revision of transponder charges and non-
reduction of period of lease agreements. Further, the policy to retain DTH
services in the indigenous INSAT/GSAT satellite system as well as to migrate
DTH services from foreign satellite system to indigenous system is still under
formulation. The Committee reiterate that the price revision clause should be
incorporated in all the transponder lease agreements which extends beyond
one year irrespective its entire term. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their
earlier recommendation that the service providers be charged at competitive
rates and the lease term should also be uniform for everyone ensuring level
playing field across the DTH sector thereby leading to more transparency and
healthy competition and further desire that the Committee be apprised of the
action taken in this regard.


13
VI. Allocation of Bonus Time
[Recommendation Para No. 8(ii)]

21. The Committee noted that DoS had allowed bonus free period of 1.5 months
to Sun DTH which resulted in a benefit of = 3.56 crore to Sun DTH. The Committee
found the reply of the DoS untenable that Standing Committee of the DoS had taken
such a decision as Sun DTH could not get regulatory clearances from Network
Operating Control Centre(NOCCYDoT for uplink in first three months. The Committee
further noted that DoS demand for payment for the bonus free time earlier ended in
Sun DTH, initiating arbitration proceedings and bringing out an injunction from the
Hon'ble Madras High Court. The Committee were of the measured view that the
Government collectively was responsible for such a situation wherein DoS had to
bear costs fo save the commercial interesis of the service providers for retaining
them. The Committee, therefore, recommended that the Government of India should
streamline all the necessary procedures relating to satellite capacity allocation,
especially the clearances and approvals from the concerned Ministries in a time
bound manner. The Committee felt that exemplary disciplinary action be taken
against the then officials who did not give approvals in stipulated periods.

22. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have submitted as under:
"The recommendations of the PAC is noted and the Department has
forwarded the observations of the PAC to the Department of
Telecommunication. It may also be noted that the mechanisms of approval in
each administrative Ministry/Department has improved in recent days. The
Department on its part will also initiate adequate measures to reduce delay in
dealing with users.”
23. The Committee express their displeasure over the Department's
submission which again is bereft of the zeal to implement the recommendation
of the Committee which had very specifically directed the Department of
Telecommunications to take exemplary disciplinary action against the officials
who did not give approvals in stipulated time periods and the action taken in
this matter be furnished to them. Also, the Committee had recommended in
their Fortieth Report (16 Lok Sabha) that the Government of India should
streamiine all the necessary procedures relating to satellite capacity allocation,
especially the clearances and approvals from the concerned Ministries in a

time bound manner, which they feel, still needs a lot of effort for improving the


14
present system. Re-iterating their earlier recommendation, the Committee
desire that the Department/Ministry earnestly fine tune their system for
allocating satellite capacity and to reduce the time taken for
clearances/approvals from the stakeholders and intimate this Committee about

the developments in this area.

ऋऋ पर मजे के के के से के के


CHAPTER V

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS _ IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE GOV-
ERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED THERIM REPLIES

Satellite capacity Allocation Procedure not developed by Tbh and LA'S capacity Allocation Procedure not developed by ICC and DOS

The Committee observe that procedure for allocation of satellite capacity was
not framed by ICC as per SATCOM policy until February 2013 and during the years
2004 to 2011, the demand for satellite capacity exceeded supply in all the years. Fur-
ther, INSAT transponders providing DTH service decreased from 30 units in 2009 to
49 units in 2013 and a progressive increase in dependence on foreign satellites from
6.5 units in 2004 to 57 units in 2013. The Committee also note that according to
DOS's own submission, the demand was expected to increase over 200 units beyond
2013. The Committee are unable to comprehend as to how DOS went about allocation
of capacities in absence of any prescribed procedures. The Committee observe that
non-framing of a sound procedure led to filing of gap of satellite capacity by foreign
satellites causing a drastic drain on Government's revenue. In view of the above, the
Committee exhort that the ICC should frame procedure for satellite capacity allocation
as per SATCOM policy and further to follow the rules in letter and spirit since demand
for satellite capacity is steadily increasing over the years. The Committee desire to be
apprised within three months of the action taken in this regard.

(Para No.4 of the 40th Report of the Public Accounts Committee-16" Lok Sabha)

The Department followed the process of first-cum-first-served principle as de-
scribed in Para 2.6.2 of the cabinet approved norms, guidelines and procedures for
implementation of the policy frame-work for satellite communication in India (Annex-
ure-B1). The Department performed the function by identifying the transponder re-
source and informing TAG, in coordination with Mol&B as described in the reply to Pa-
18 No.2 & 3 above. Such a method was adapted to the complete satisfaction of all the
users. A suitable approach to manage space infrastructure in the country through re-
vised norms, guidelines and procedures have been drafted for approval by the Cabi-
net. The revised version is currently under government approval process.

Vetted Comments of Audit

tc  ————————E————ror

Approved revised norms, guidelines and procedures may be intimated.

eoande

Joint Secretary & FA

{Department of Space O.M No. 8.11 012/1/2016-Sec.2 dated 17.01.2017)

Loss due to non revision of transponder charges due to non revision of transponder charges

The Committee note that DTH transponder lease agreements had a lease peri-
od from 5 to 10 years with no provision for revision of prices whereas lease agree-


ments with foreign satellites ranged from 1 to 6 years with provision for price revision
from 5 to 33%. The lack of such basic provisions resulted in revenue forgone to the
tune of '36.17 crore. The committee are displeased with such poor terms of agree-
ments where even a simple provision for price revision at regular intervals was not in-
cluded, The Committee desire that such agreements be reviewed and reframed to in-
clude sound/prudent financial terms in the interest of the exchequer. The committee
exhort the DOS to fine tune their marketing strategies to attract and retain service pro-
viders as well as to bring back those DTH service providers using foreign satellites
back to INSAT/GSAT systems. The Committee impress upon the Ministry that the ser-
vice providers be charged at the competitive rates and preferably the lease term be
also uniform for everyone ensuring level playing field across the DTH sector thereby
leading to more transparency and healthy competition. The Committee further desire
that the DOS set up an inquiry to look into the lease agreements with various parties
and take stringent action against those responsible for agreeing to terms that were
against the interests of the exchequer and apprise the Committee of the action taken
within three months.

(Para No.7 of the 40th Report of the Public Accounts Committee-16thLokSabha)
Action Taken

The Department submits the following key factors with regard to non-revision of
prices for transponders for the kind consideration of the PAC:

(i) Lease agreements with foreign satellites are entered for a short term in order to
make a provision for the end user to migrate the services from foreign satellite to the
Indian satellite. This approach is in fine with the recommendation of the Cabinet ap-
proved 'Norm, guidelines & procedures for implementation of the policy framework for
satellite communication in India’;

(ii) As the foreign operators quote lease charges in dollar terms, differential charges
mong indigenous capacity and foreign lease is unavoidable due to currency fluctua-
tions and withholding taxes. However, the Department will work towards a scenario
wherein the best possible solution for DTH services will be arrived at. It is submitted
by the Department that a technicai strategy to tetain DTH services in the indigenous
INSAT/GSAT system as well as to migrate DTH services from foreign satellite system
to indigenous system is under formulation. A Committee to look into the subject mat-
ter is being constituted and its recommendation will be addressed by the Department.
Vetted Comments of Audit Central PAC desired that DOS to set up an inquiry to look
_ into the lease agreements with various parties and take stringent action against those
responsible for agreeing to terms that were against the interest of the exchequer and
apprise the Committee of the action taken within three months. DOS did not however
did not initiate any action. Instead, DOS replied that the lease agreements with foreign
satellites are entered for a short term period and to examine periodic revision clause it
has appointed a committee to look into these aspects. The fact however remained that
DTH transponder lease agreements had a lease period from 5 to 10 years with no
rovision for revision of prices whereas lease agreements with foreign satellites ranged
from 110 6 years with provision for price revision from 5 to 33%. The price revision
clause is required to be there in all the transponder lease agreements which extends


for more than one year irrespective of the fact that the contract is for a shorter duration
or longer duration.

(8.kum ste)
Joint Secratary & FA

(Department of Space O.M No. 8.11 012/1/2016-Sec.2 dated 17.01.2017)

Loss due to Undercharging of Transponder Trices Undercharging of Transponder Prices

The Committee take serious note of the DOS undercharging of transponders of
Sun DTH resulting in a loss of ~2.94 crore from January 2008 to July 2010. The DOS
first charged Sun DTH only for 6 transponders whereas 6.26 transponders were
leased to them. Subsequently, the transponder prices were reduced to ~4.70 crore
‘per transponder resulting in a loss of ~46.92 Lakh. The Committee also note from the
reply of DOS that Standing Committee of DOS was empowered for taking such deci-
sion but are of the firm opinion that reducing prices arbitrarily raises suspicion of favor-
itism and hurts the interest of the exchequer. The Committee further feel that just to
retain service providers on INSAT, the DOS went about distributing goodies to private
players. The committee desire that the Secretary, DOS to revisit the files relating to all
transactions, apprise the committee of the reasons for giving such undue benefits to a
private service provider and the penal action taken against the guilty officials to pre-
vent such capricious decisions in future.

(Para No.8(i) of the 40th Report of the Public Accounts Committee-16"
LokSabha)

Action Taken

The files relating to the subject matter are revisited and the following are the
key observations:

(i) Originally, Sun Direct's demand for transponder capacity to start DTH service was
firmed up through INSAT-4C capacity. However, due to the unfortunate loss of INSAT-
40 due to launch failure and also due to the desire of Sun Direct to start DTH services
at the earliest, a decision was taken by the Department to offer them INSAT-4B ca-
pacity;

(ii) INSAT-4B satellite has 12 Ku-band (3x27 MHz, 9x36 MHz) transponders. As per
firmed up arrangement between the Department and Doordarshan, 5 transponders in
INSAT-4B were provisioned for migration of Doordarashan services from foreign satel-
lite to Indian satellite,

(ii) Thus, it was not feasible to offer 7x36 MHz transponder capacity to Sun Direct as
desired by them. However, as a best possible solution, it was feasible to offer 4x36
MHz and 3x27 MHz capacity in INSAT-4B to Sun Direct;

(iv) Such an offer was not in line with Sun Direct's large investment in the ground
segment for DTh uplink system. Sun Direct had already made investment on ground


segment based on INSAT-4C agreement. Using INSAT-4B in lieu of INSAT-4C re-
quired additional investment due to 27 MHz transponders.

(v) Under such a complex context, the approach of reduction in price was arrived at by
an empowered committee of the Department in order to effectively use the INSAT-4B
satellite.

The PAC may kindly note that INSAT-4A and INSAT-4B are the first two high
power satellites realized with indigenous efforts to meet high quality requirements of
the DTH service provider. Given such a scenario, the agreement terms were arrived
based on sound technical and managerial judgement. It may also be noted that INSAT
-4B had a power anomaly in July 2010, resulting in reduced transponder capacity.
Subsequently, Sun Direct was moved out of INSAT-4B for 6 transponders causing
hardship to Sun Direct DTH services.

The Department has noted the concern of PAC and will take appropriate steps
in future commercial activities factoring the technology risks associated with indige-
nous satellites.

Vetted Comments of Audit

The appropriate steps taken by DOS not to repeat such mistakes as it happened in
undercharging the transponder prices of SUN DTH, may be intimated. A copy of the
direction/ circular/Office order issued to the concerned Centres/Programme office may

be furnished. by
sexcumahecon

Joint Secretary & FA

(Department of Space 0.M No. B.11012/1/2016-Sec.2 dated ti-01.2017)

Allocation of Bonus time

The committee note that DOS had allowed bonus free period of 1.5 months to
Sun DTH which resulted in a benefit of ~3.56 crore to Sun DTH. The Committee find
the reply of the DOS untenable that Standing Committee of the DOS had taken such a
decision as Sun DTH could not get regulatory clearances from Network operating
Control Centre (NOCC)/DoT for uplink in first three months. The committee further
note that DOS demand for payment for the bonus free time earlier ended in Sun DTH,
initiating arbitration proceedings and bringing out an injunction from the Hon'ble
Madras High Court. The Committee are of the measured view that the Government
collectively is responsible for such as situation wherein DOS had to bear costs to save
the commercial interests of the service providers for retaining them. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Government of India should streamline all the neces-
sary procedures relating to satellite capacity allocation, especially the clearances and
approvals from the concerned Ministries in a time bound manner. The committee feel
that exemplary disciplinary action be taken against the then officials who did not give
approvals in stipulated periods.


(Para No.8{(ii) of the 40th Report of the Public Accounts Committee 16
LokSabha)

Action Taken

The recommendations of the PAC is noted and the Department has forwarded
the observations of the PAC to the Department of Telecommunication. it may also be
noted that the mechanisms of approval in each administrative ministry/department has
improved in recent days. The Department on its part will also initiate adequate
measures to reduce delay in dealing with users.

Vetted Comments of Audit

The Central PAC had directed to take exemplary disciplinary action on the offi-
cials in the Department of Telecommunications who did not give approvals in stipulat-
ed periods. Action taken in the matter by DOT may be arranged to be furnished.

cumbng,

Joint Secretary & FA

(Department of Space O.M No. B.11012/1/2016-Sec.2 dated 11.01.2017)

NEW DELHI; PROF. K.V. THOMAS
6! April, 2017 Chairperson

46 Chaitra, 1939 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


APPENDIX-II
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

CONTAINED IN THEIR FORTIETH REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

Total number of Observations/Recommendations

Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
which have been accepted by the Government:

Para Nos. 1 and 11

Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received
from the Government:

-NIL-
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

Para Nos. 2, 3, 5(i), 5(ii), 5(iii), 6(i), 6(ii), 9 and 10

Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which the Government have furnished interim replies:

Para Nos. 4, 7, 8(i) and 8(ii)

15

Total : 02
Percentage: 13.3%

Total : 0

‘Percentage: 0%

Total : 09
Percentage: 60%

Total : 04
Percentage: 26.6%