413

FERTILIZER SUBSIDY

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Eighty-first Report (15 Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE alg a
(2014-15) ;

THIRTEENTH REPORT

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO.2044
THIRTEENTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2014-15)

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

FERTILIZER SUBSIDY

[Action Taken by the Government on fhe Observations/ Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Eighty-first Report (157 Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS)

sae अचल
Presented to Lok Sabha on: ...........-५--००-

Laid in Rajya Sabha जा; ............५५५५५००-

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

December, 2014/ Agrahayana 1936 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2044-15)

INTRODUCTION  ...............--- ७७० ०" त्््ज्ल्‍्_ल्‍त्,व- विन मक es ae

CHAPTER | REPO oe cee ee eee eettteenerereriers serie

CHAPTER Il Observations/Recommendations which have
been accepted by the Government ..

CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
replies received from Government ............

CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration ores beeen मशीन

CHAPTER ५ Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which the Government have furnished interim
129188............ ... जल जन हल जहा नह

APPENDICES
i Minutes of the Twelfth Sitting of Public Accounts
Committee (2014-15) held on 16!" December, 2014.
॥ Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on

the Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their Eighty-first

Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

16,
17.
18.
19.
20,
ai,
22.

(2014-15)

Prof. K.V, Thomas

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

hri 5.8, Ahluwalia

hri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura

hri Nishtkant Dubey

Shri Gajanan Kirtikar

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank”
hri Neiphiu Rio

Shri Dushyant Singh

5
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
§
5

दर

Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi

Dr. Kirit Somaiya

Shri Anurag Thakur

Dr. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA

Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi

Shri Vijay Goel

Dr. Satyanarayan Jattya

Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita

Shri Shantaram Naik

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh

SECRETARIAT

Shri AK. Singh
Shri Jayakumar T.
Smt, Anju Kukreja

Chairperson

Joint Secretary
Additional Director
Under Secretary

* Blected w.c.f. 3 December, 2014 vice Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy who has been appointed as Minister w.e.f, 9" November, 2014,

1 Blected wef. 3" December, 2014 vice Shri Jayant Sinka who has been appointed as Minister w.e.f, 97 November, 2014,

+ Elected w.e.f 3 December, 2014 vice Dr. M. Thambidurai who has been chosen as Hon'ble Deputy Speaker, Lok Sabha and has
since resigned from the membership of the Committee.


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2014-15), having been
authorized by the Committee, do present this Thirteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
on Action Taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Eighty-first Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Fertilizer
Subsidy’ relating to the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department. of
Fertilizers).

2. The Eighty-first Report was presenied to Lok Sabha/laid Rajya Sabha on 30.04.2013.
Replies of the Government to the Observations/Recommendations contained in the
Report were received on 18.11.2014. The Public Accounts Committee considered and
adapted this Report at the Sitting held on 16.12.2014. Minutes of the Sitting are given at
Appendix |.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of.the
Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighty-first Report (Fifteenth Lok
Sabha) is given at Appendix II.

NEW DELHI; PROF. K.V. THOMAS
है December, 2014 Chairperson,

4 Agrahayana 1936 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.


REPORT
PART —1

INTRODUCTORY

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in their
Eighty-first Report (157 Lok Sabha) on ‘Fertilizer Subsidy’ based on C&AG Report No. 8 of
2041-12 (Performance Audit) Union Government (Civil) relating to the Ministry of Chemicals
and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers).

2. The Eighty-first Report (187 Lok Sabha), which was presented to Lok Sabha/Laid in
Rajya Sabha on 30" April, 2013, contained 19 Observations and Recommendations. Action
Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations and Recommendations have been received
from the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) and are broadly
categorized as under :

(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:

Para Nos. 1-4, 10 and 13-19
Total: 12
Chapter - It

(id) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the replies received from the Government:

Para Nos, : NIL
Total: Nil.
Chapter - IH

(ii) Observations/Recormmendations in respect of which replies of Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:

Para Nos, 5, 6, 9 and 12
Total: 04
Chapter - IV

(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished
interim repties:

Para Nos. 7, 8 and 17
Total: 03
Chapter — V


2

3. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed certain
shortcoming/deficiencies on the part of the Department of Fertilizer which inter-alia included

deficient assessment of fertilizer requirement; huge gap between the demand and supply of
fertilizers; lack of scientific and realistic assessment of the fertilizer requirement; failure to
incentivize increase in the domestic production of fertilizer even after effecting changes in the
subsidy regime; virtual stagnation in the production of Urea during the last five years;
numerous instances of non-availability/shortage of fertilizers; absence of physical verification
of stocks and sale of fertilizers beyond the first stock point; selling of subsidized fertilizers by
unauthorized outlets; irregularities in and excess payment on import of urea; diversion of
subsidized fertilizers to the mixing units; inadequacy in the fertilizer quality testing
infrastructure; deficient monitoring mechanism etc, The Committee had accordingly given

their Observations and Recommendations in their Eighty-first Report (15th Lok Sabha).

4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers
(Department of Fertilizers) in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee have been reproduced in the relevant chapters of this Report. The Committee
will now deal with the Action Taken by the Goverment on some of their
Observations/Recommendations made in the Eighty -First Report, which need reiteration or

merit comments.

5. The Committee desire that Government should furnish final/conclusive action taken
replies to the Recommendations for which interim replies have been furnished.


1. NEW PRICING SCHEME (NPS)

(Recommendation Para No. 5)

6. The Committee were deeply concerned to find the high increase in the energy cost of
the domestic urea manufacturing units amounting to % 4010 crore during 2010-11 and हैं 9127
crore during 2011-12. According to the Department, the pricing of APM and KG D-6 gas
combinedly constitute 60 per cent of the increased energy cost i.e. 32 per cent attributable to
GAIL/ONGG/OIL for APM supplies and 28 per cent attributable to RIL for KG 0-6 gas. As the
pricing of such energy resources was directly or indirectly governed by the policies adopted
by the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas for gas and the Ministry of Coal for coal, the Urea
units or the Department of Fertilisers have no control over it. The Committee also found that
due to lack of commitment by the Government on availability of domestic natural gas at a
pre-determined price formula, the objectives to revamp, expand and revive the existing Urea
units besides setting up of Brownfield/Greenfield projects, as enunciated in the New
Investment Policy, 2008 had not been fructified and the formulation of the New Investment
Policy, 2012 was statedly under consideration. In- view of the imperatives involved and
increase in the subsidy burden on the Government of India due to increase in the energy
cost, the Committee impressed upon the DoF and the DAC to take up the matter with utmost
urgency at the appropriate fora to find workable and sustainable solutions to the extant
policies governing allocation of gas and coal so that new investments are attracted, the
existing Urea units are revamped, expanded and revived and the Brownfield/Greenfield
Projects are set up, as envisaged. The Committee had further recommended that the Ministry
should strengthen and intensify the R&D activities towards exploring alternative cheaper
feedstock options and adapt successful time tested options being practiced in other

Countries to boost indigenous urea production.


4

7. The Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) in their Action

Taken Note have stated as under :

"80 far as the allocation of gas to urea manufacturing units is concerned, the
matter has been taken up with Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas several
times at various levels for existing urea units, units converting from Naptha,
FO/LSHS to Gas and new Brownfield/Greenfield projects. However, the reply
is still awaited from Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas.

It is pertinent to mention here that, as per the EGoM’s decision dated
23.08.2013, the total domestic gas supply to fertilizer sector has been capped
at their present jevel of 31.5 MMSCMD and that all additional domestic gas in
the year 2013-14, 2014-15 and 2015-16 has been allotted to the power sector
to help improve power generation. EGoM will review the gas production
scenario thereafter for deciding the allocation of additional domestic gas
available from 2016-17 onwards.

As regard exploring possibility of cheaper feedstock, it is mentioned that as per
CCEA’s decision, Taicher unit of FCIL is going to be revived by consortium of
PSU's namely GAIL, RCF and CIL on coal gasification

Furthermore, department of Fertilizers has notified New Investment Policy -
2012 on 0271 January 2013 in order to facilitate fresh investment in urea sector
and to reduce India’s import dependency in urea production.

In response to Notification of 2012, as of now, 14 companies (including PSUs)
have responded to the NIP-2012 and filed compliance report for setting up new
Brownfield/Greenfield/JV project. In addition, Nagarjuna Fertilizers and
Chemicals Nigeria Limited (NFCNL) has proposed a joint venture in Nigeria
with annual 2MMT off-take arrangement to India.

As per deliberation and discussion held in the meeting on 01.07.2013 under
Chairmanship of PS to Hon'ble Prime Minister, it was decided to move an
amendment in New investment Policy, 2012 through CCEA for substituting the
phrase “guaranteed buyback” with expression that subsidies will be given only
upon domestic sale as at present with proper safeguards. The draft CCEA
Note has been circulated on 211 August, 2013 for Inter-Ministerial consultation
before placing it for consideration of CCEA"

8. Concerned with increasing energy costs in the domestic urea manufacturing
units and delay in finalizing a workable solution to the extant policies governing
allocation of gas and coal for attracting new investments in the sector, the Committee

had desired that the Ministry should strengthen and intensify the R&D activities


5

towards exploring possibility of alternative cheaper feedstock options and try to
emulate time tested options being practiced in other countries to boost indigenous
urea production. The Committee observe from Ministry's reply that the gas
requirement of fertilizer sector is 46 MMSCMD while the domestic gas supply to this
sector at present has been capped at the level of 31.5 MMSCMD till 2015-2016 and that
all additional domestic gas supply has been allotted to the power sectors. The
Committee are also informed that EGOM will review the gas production scenario in
2016 for deciding the allocation of additional domestic gas supply. The Committee
taking note of the constraints behind keeping a cap of 31.5 mmscmd when the gas
requirement of fertilizer sector at present is 46 MMSCMD and which will undoubtedly
be increasing in the coming years, desire that the Ministry besides taking up the
matter of revising the cap on supply of gas (0 damestic urea units should give more
emphasis on alternative sources to meet their growing energy demands. Further, the
Committee observe that in pursuance of their recommendation regarding exploring
possibility of cheaper feedstock the Ministry have mentioned only one instance of
Talcher Unit of FCIL being proposed for revival by consortium of PSUs on coal
gasification, The Committee exhort the Department to focus towards exploring and
creating more cheaper feedstock options, revamping, reviving and expanding the
Fertilizer. units, strengthening and intensifying the R&D efforts to explore viabie and
cheaper feedstock options and adopting time tested options/technologies being
practiced abroad to achieve the target of becoming self reliant in production of urea.
The Committee would also like to be apprised of the present status of the proposed
amendment in New Investment Policy, 2012 for substituting the Phrase “guaranteed
buyback” with expression that subsidies will be given only upon domestic sale as at

present with proper safeguards.


6

I. REVIVAL OF CLOSED FERTILIZER UNITS

(Recommendation Para No. 6)

9. According to the Department, Urea(N) is the only fertilizer, the requirement of which is
largely (around 75 per cent) met through indigenous production which can inter-alia be
enhanced by the revival of the closed Urea units of the Fertilizer Corporation of India Ltd
(FCIL) and Hindustan Fertilizer Corporation Ltd (HFCL). But, the Committee were perturbed
to find that the process of revival of various closed units of FCIL and HFCL initiated by the
Government in the year 2007 was still under examination of the Board for Industrial and
Financial Restructuring (BIFR) even after the recommendations made by the Empowered
Committee of Secretaries (ECOS) to revive the closed units. Surprisingly, the State
Governments were neither consulted nor taken into confidence in the implementation
process while adopting the New Investment Policy, 2008 under which the revamp/revival
process was to be effected. The Committee were also distressed to find that the additional
demand of natural gas has to be met through imports for meeting the estimated requirement
of 34 million tonnes of urea production based entirely on gas by the end of 127 Plan period
vis-a-vis the expected production of urea fram existing gas and non gas plants working out to
only 22 million tonnes. With the cost of subsidy for imported urea obviously much higher
than that for indigenous urea, the Committee had felt that the continued dependence on
imports creates a distortion in subsidy as well as in the fertilizer pricing policy. In view of the
fact that the Government had accorded in principle approval for considering the write off of
Government of India loans and interest liabilities of FCIL and HFCL subject to submission of
fully tied up proposals, the Committee had exhorted the DoF to take requisite urgent
measures for the revival of the closed fertilizer units of FCIL & HFCL so that indigenous
production of Urea is enhanced to a large extent. The Committee had further desired that

the New Investment Policy 2012 which is in the offing and would facilitate strategic


7

investments by Indian entities in resource rich countries abroad having comparatively
cheaper feedstock/energy options, be expedited for implementation so that the joint ventures
abroad already negotiated/initiated are fructified to enable the Country to gain significant

foothold in the international fertilizer sector.

10, tn this regard, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) in their
Action Taken Note have stated as under:

"The BIFR in its oral hearing held on 22.11.2012 in respect of FCIL and in
another meeting held on 19.12.2012 in respect of HFCL advised that
Department of Fertilizers should explore the possibility of the companies’ net-
worth becoming positive and directed to work out way to repay the dues of
creditors of the FCIL and HFCL to enable the companies to move out of
purview of BIFR.

A meeting of Empowered Committee of Secretaries (ECoS) was heid on
23,01.2013 to discuss the various issues concerning revival of HFCL/FCIL
along with above direction of BIFR. ECoS recommended that the matter be
placed before the CCEA. Meanwhile, Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister
took a meeting on 28.01.2013 on revival of closed fertilizer urea units. During
the meeting, it was inter-alia decided that the Department of Fertilizers will bring
a note for CCEA in respect of FCIL seeking waiver of government dues and
also seeking inter corporate loans to FCIL. In respect of closed units of HFCL, it
was decided that proposal/action plan on revival of HFCL be taken up once
revival of FCIL is on track.

Based on the recommendation of ECoS and directions of PMO, a proposal for
revival of clased units of FCIL was placed before CCEA. CCEA in its meeting
held on 9.5.2013, inter-alia, approved waiver of Government of India loan and
interest of Fertilizer Corporation of India Limited (FCIL) to facilitate FCIL to
arrive at positive net worth. In respect of closed units of HFCL, it has been
decided that proposal /action plan on revival of HFCL will be taken up once
revival of FCIL is on track.

The above decision enabled FCIL to get de-registered from. the purview of
Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction. Further HFCL. in its 271%
Board Meeting held on 16.7.2013 desired that a CCEA note for revival of HFCL
on the pattern of FCIL is required to be initiated to make HFCL’s net worth
positive, so that the company may come out of the purview of BIFR. HFCL has
submitted a draft proposal to be submitted before CCEA for making the
company's net-worth positive and enabling it to exit from the BIFR purview. The
proposal of HFCL is under consideration.”


8

41. Further, apprising the Committee about the progress of revival of Fertilizer Corporation
of India Limited (FCIL) and Hindustan Fertilizer Company Limited (HFCL), the Ministry

submitted as under:

“The pre-project activities for revival of Talcher Unit (Odisha) of FCIL by the
nominated PSUs, namely, Rashtriya Chemicals & Fertilizers Limited (RCF),
Coal India Limited (CIL), Gas Authority of India Limited (GAIL) & FCIL are in
progress to set-up a coal-based fertilizer plant. It has been proposed to
establish two joint venture (JV) companies viz. First company for upstream coal
gasification section with GAJL and second company comprising RCF, CIL and
FCIL for downstream section of Armmonia-urea, Nitric Acid, Ammonia Nitrate
plants, off sites and utilities. The Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) among
consortium PSUs ie. CIL, RCF, GAIL and FCIL, has been signed on 5.9.2013.
Selection of coal gasification technology is in process. The time line for revival
of Taicher unit is as under:

i. JV formation through Registrar of Companies: By 15.11.2014
i, Financial closure & Zero date : By 1.01.2015
iii, Cornmissioning of Project : By 31.12.2018

Ramagundam Unit:

The pre-project activities for revival of Ramagundam Unit (Telangana) of FCIL
by the nominated PSUs, namely, Engineers India Limited (FIL) & National
Fertilizers Limited (NFL) are in progress to set-up a gas-based fertilizer plant.
The Joint Venture agreement and Concession agreement are under discussion
and are being targeted for conclusion/ approval by respective boards. ElL &
NFL are having discussions with the Technology providers. Technology
selection for Ammonia and Urea process unit would be completed by the end of
October, 2014. The JV company would operate the plant and ElL would take
up the detailed Engineering Procurement of equipment and Construction (EPC)
of the plant, The time line for revival of Ramagundam unit is as under:

i. JV formation > By 31.12.2014
ii. Award of contract to Technology Licensors  : By 31.03.2015
li. Project completion : By 309.2018

Sindri unit

For Sindri unit, SAIL-Sindri Projects Ltd. (SSPL), a wholly owned subsidiary of
SAIL, has been incorporated in November 2011 for the purpose of revival of
Sindri Unit of FCIL. However, not much progress has been made due to non-
availability of around 3000 Acres of contiguous piece of land for the Steel Plant.
Out of total land of 6652 acres with FCIL at Sindri, 5482 acres of land is
considered for revival and contiguous piece of 3247 acres of encroachment free
land for setting up the proposed facilities by SAIL is required.


9

Revival of Gorakhpur Unit (Uttar Pradesh) & Korba Project (Chhattisgarh) of
FCIL through bidding process has not yet been taken.up.

Hindustan Fertilizer Company Limited (HFCL):

Proposal’ action plan on revival of HFCL to be taken up once revival of FCIL
units is on track”.

12. Keeping in view the higher cost of subsidy on imported urea than indigenous
urea and Government's in principle approval for the writing off of Government of India
loans and liabilities of FCIL. and HFCL, subject to submission of fully tied up
proposals, the Committee had desired that Department of Fertilizer should take urgent
measures for revival of closed units of FCIL and HFCL, DoF in their reply have stated
that process of revival of Talcher and Ramagundam unit of FCI. has been initiated and
time line for revival of first stage of finalization of Joint Ventures (JVs) are set at
15.11.2014 and 34.12.14 respectively and their completion would be expected by
31.12,18 and 30.09.18 respectively. The Committee desire the Department should
proactively ensure that all deadlines set for the revival of Talcher and Ramagundam
unit for FGIL should positively be met and any delay in this respect should be taken
very seriously. The Committee is further pained to note that not much progress has
been made for the revival of Sindri unit due to non-availability of around 3000 acres of
contiguous land for the steel plant even after lapse of three years since the
incorporation of SAIL-Sindri Projects Ltd in November 2011, The Committee are,
however, surprised to note that the reply is silent about the action taken by the
Ministry to procure the required fand. Further, the Ministry have also not explained the
reasons for not taking up the revival of Gorakhpur unit (UP) and Korba Project
(Chhatisgarh) even after a lapse of three years. Taking note of the fact that revival of

Sindri Unit which is the first fertilizer plant of independent India will be a positive step


10

in direction of achieving self reliance in fertilizer production, the Committee
emphasize that the progress of all other units be monitored regularly at the higher
level, The Gommittee would like to be apprised of the stipulated date of completion of
each project and the actual status of the work completed as on 31.12.14. Further as
regards the revival of Hindustan Fertilizer Company Ltd. (HFCL), the Committee desire
that the proposal/ action plan for revival of HFCL which is under consideration of
CCEA should not be linked to revival of FCIL but pursued simultaneously to a logical

conclusion without any further delay.

HL = NUTRIENT BASED SUBSIDY POLICY (NBS)
(Recommendation Para No. 9)

13. The Committee found that the Government of India are promoting soil test based
balanced and judicious use of chemical fertilizers, bio fertilizers and locally available organic
manures, like Farm Yard Manure (FYM), compost, vermicompost and green manure to
maintain soil health and its productivity. The Committee also found that funds were being
provided to the State Governments through various schemes of the DAC like Macro
Management of Agriculture (MMA), Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojna (RKVY) and National
Project on Management of Soil Health & Fertility (NPMSF) for taking up ail the activities for
popularization of organic and biological nutrients. While taking due note of the various
initiatives taken up by the Government of India to promote organic and biological nutrients,
the Committee had desired that a centralized monitoring command be established to oversee
strict enforcement of the measures initiated/contemplated so as to ensure educating the
farmers on the benefits of balanced use of fertilizers for efficiency and protecting the soil
health. In view of the reportedly good performance of some states like Andhra Pradesh and

Kamataka in ensuring increased productivity by maximum use of organic manure, the


11

Committee had further desired that the DoF and DAC convince and prevail upon other State
Governments to emulate Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka so that there is increased

productivity across the Country.

14. The Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) in their Action

Taken Note made the following submission :

"The farmers are educated on benefits of balanced use of fertilizers through the
component of farmers training under National Project on Management of Soil
Health & Fertility (NPMSH&F). This component is implemented through State
Governments, ICAR, SAUs etc. The State Governments have been advised to
take advantage under NPMSH&F and Macro Management of Agriculture
Schemes for training of farmers. The State Nodal Officers (ATMA Scheme)
have been instructed for providing suitable training to farmers. GPS based soil
fertility maps are being prepared by Indian Institute of Soil Science (158),
Bhopal to provide soil fertility status and fertilizer recommendation to the
farmers.

For maximizing use of organic manure, an advice note has been sent to all
States/Sugar factories to take the benefit of back ended subsidy scheme of
National Project on Organic Farming for establishment of bio-compost units.
Time to time advice is also given to states for encouraging greater use of
manures like Farm Yard Manure, vermi-compost, green manure, fruit &
vegetable waste compost & Municipal Solid Waste compost etc."

15.  Apprising the Committee about the efforts made with Department of Agriculture and
Co-operation and progress made by Indian Institute of Soil Science (॥58), Bhopal to
increase the agricultural productivity across the country, the Ministry submitted as followos:

“Under Soil Health Management component of National Mission for Sustainable
Agriculture, there is provision for training prograrame for farmers on balanced
use of fertilizers. The training is of two days duration for which Rs.10,000/- per
training is provided. The training consists of topics such as importance of soil
testing in Soil Health Management; importance of balanced fertilizer use in crop
productivity and soil health management, sampling protocols and sending
samples to testing laboratories; importance of organic manures and bio-~
fertilizers in balanced growth of crap etc.

Under the scheme, 934 number of trainings for farmers have been
sanctioned from 2008-09 to 2013-14,


12

GPS based soil fertility maps have been prepared by Indian Institute of
Soil Science, Bhopal for 171 districts to provide soil fertility status and fertilizer
recommendation to farmers”.

16, The Committee have taken note of the various actions taken by the Department
for furtherance of awareness among the farmer community regarding benefits of
- balanced use of fertilizers. The Committee also note that most of the schemes and
initiatives being taken are under the purview of State Governments and it is apparent
that the effective implementation of all the proposed measures and initiatives depend
upon the respective State Governments. Considering the importance of this issue, the
Committee had recommended for provision of a centralized monitoring command to
oversee strict enforcement of the measures contemplated/initiated. However,
Committee are displeased to note that even after a lapse of more than one year, the
Department has not taken any action with regard to establishment of a centralized
monitoring command. The Committee exhort the Department to urgently work की the
direction of establishing a centralized monitoring command at the earliest which will
not only oversee the measures proposed/being undertaken in the realm of educating
farmers on the benefits of balanced use of fertilizers for efficiency and protecting the
soil health. It will also act as an overseeing/evaluating authority which will provide
necessary inputs and guidance to various State Governments for effective and fruitful
implementation of various planned initiatives which would in turn fead to judicious
use of fertilizers and increased productivity on pan India scale. The Department have
also informed that under Soil Health Management Component of National Mission for
Sustainable Agriculture, 934 number of trainings for farmers have been sanctioned
from 2008-09 to 2013-14. The Committee desire to know about the outcome of these

trainings including details about the number of States who conducted those trainings,


13

number of farmers trained and details of proposed schedules of such trainings. The
Committee also desire that the Department should ensure that benefits of these
trainings should reach the intended beneficiaries and maximum number of farmers
across country are covered, The Committee also desire the Ministry to use
printfelectronic media to spread awareness about the benefits of judicious and
informed use of fertilizers and harmful impact of its inconsiderate and excessive use
on soil health as evident in different parts of country. The Committee further desire
that organic farming as practiced in hilly and tribal areas should algo be promoted in
other parts of the country.

The Committee are happy to note that the Indian Institute of Soil Sciences have
prepared GPS based soil fertility maps of 171 districts to provide soil fertility status
and fertilizer recommendation to farmers. However, the Action Taken Note Is silent
about the further course of action taken on such maps. In order to encourage the idea
of scientific and appropriate use of fertilizers, the Committee desire that the
exhaustive GPS based soil fertility status/maps of all the cultivable districts of the
country should be prepared on a regular basis and timely and correct advise can be
rendered to the farming community accordingly.

lil. NEED TO REVISIT THE EXTANT LICENSING/MEMORANDUM OF INTIMATION
SYSTEM
{Recommendation Para No. 12)

17. The Committee had noted that prior to January, 2003, it was mandatory under the
Fertilizer Control Order (FCO) for the dealer to possess the certificate of registration for
carrying out the business of selling of fertilizers. Later on, w.e.f. 16" January, 2003, the
Ministry had dispensed with the registration certificate of dealers and replaced it with the
system of Memorandum of intimation i.e. every person intending to sell or offer for sale or

carrying the business of selling fertilizers shall make memorandum of Intimation to the


14

notified authority and the acknowledgment of the Intimation would constitute the authorization
letter which would be valid for a period of three years from the date of issue. The Committee
had also been informed that the State Governments were responsible to issue licences to the
dealers for carrying out wholesale/retail business of fertilizers as well as for the timely
renewal of the licences. But, several deficiencies had come to the notice of the Committee
like dealers carrying out fertilizer business without either valid licence from the State
Agriculture Department or any certificate of registration from the appropriate authority; non-
maintenance of the stock registers by the dealers; black marketing of the fertilizers etc. The
Secretary, DoF was candid enough to admit before the Committee that there have been
instances of smuggling of fertilizers not only to neighbouring States but to even neighbouring
Countries also. In view of the alarming situation the Committee had desired the Department
to revisit the extant licensing/Memorandum of Intimation mechanism and take requisite but
urgent corrective measures to plug the loopholes so that unscrupulous dealers are unable to
take undue advantage of the lacunae and unauthorized sale, black marketing and smuggling
of fertilizers are stopped. The Committee have also stressed that vigorous and concerted
efforts are required to make the subsidy administration clean, transparent and foolproof so
that every penny of the tax payers’ money utilized towards fertilizer subsidy is accounted for

and the intended benefits accrue to the farmers.

18. The Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) in their Action
Taken Note have stated as under:

“Ministry of Agriculture has informed that no change in clause 8 of FCO,
pertaining to Memorandum of Intimation has taken place after 2003 and at
present no change in the said clause is contemplated or under consideration in
the Ministry of Agriculture.

As regards smuggling of fertilizers, this Department has been sensitizing the
State Agriculture Authorities for issuing instructions to ail enforcement agencies
under their jurisdiction to keep a strict vigil and check smuggling of fertilizers
from India to other neighboring countries through land and sea routes. The


15

States have also been requested to activate these agencies for taking all
necessary steps under Fertilizer Control Order (FCO), 1985 for preventing
misuse of subsidized fertilizers, hoarding/ black-marketing/ breach of MRP and
tagging of fertilizer.

Ministry of Home Affairs, Department of Revenue, Directors General of Police
of all States having international border/BSF etc. and Director General, Assam
Rifles, Shillong, have aiso been requested to take necessary steps in this
regard”.

19. Alarmed at the glaring lacunae present in the system of granting and renewing
licenses leading to large scale smuggling and unauthorized sale and black marketing
of fertilizer, the Committee had desired that the Department should revisit the clauses
pertaining to Memorandum of Intimation in the Fertilizer Controf Order (FCO). The
Committee, however, are perturbed to note that no change has been made in clause 8
of FCO pertaining to Memorandum of Intimation since 2003 and at present no change
in the said clause is contemplated or under consideration of the Ministry of
Agriculture. The Committee feel that there is urgent need of reviewing the system of
granting and renewing the issue of Memorandum of Intimation and to strengthen this
system by plugging various loopholes. The Committee desire that the Department
should proactively engage with the Ministry of Agriculture on this issue and point out
the need to consider revising this clause citing the instances of misuse of and
exploitation by unscrupulous elements causing great loss to the exchequer. The
Committee, therefore, feel that concerted efforts in this direction are much warranted
as it would not only ensure subsidy administration clean and transparent but would
also ensure timely and adequate supply of fertilizer to farmers in every nook and

corner of country.

The Committee are also concerned to note that in pursuance of their

recommendation for taking urgent corrective measures to plug the loopholes so that


16

unscrupulous dealers are unable to take undue advantage of the facunae and
unauthorized sale, black marketing and smuggling of fertilizers are stopped, the
Department have merely sensitized the State Agricultural Authorities and the Ministry
of Home Affairs for issuing instructions to ail enforcement agencies to keep a strict
vigil and check smuggling of fertilizers from to neighbouring states and to
neighbouring countries. 59028 have also been requested to activate these agencies
for taking ail necessary steps to prevent misuse of subsidized fertilizers,
hoarding/black-marketing etc. The Committee consider it unfortunate that the
Department have left the entire system of plugging the loopholes in selling of
fertilizers at the mercy of State Governments although monitoring of the
implementation of the steps taken is the responsibility of the Department. The
Gommittee, therefore, urge the Department to periodically monitor the steps taken in
this regard so that corrective measures, as and when required, can be resorted to, The
Committee also exhort the Department to explore the pessibility of implementing the
Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) method to pass the benefit of subsidy on fertilizers to
the farmers by linking them through Aadhaar number as done in other sectors. The
Committee desire the Ministry to furnish a detailed study weighing all pros and cons

of the same.

WV. QUALITY CONTROL
(Recommendation Para No. 15 & 16)

20. The Commitiee noted with profound concern several deficiencies and inadequacies
that plague the quality testing of fertilizers such areas of concern inter-alia include grossly
inadequate annual capacity of the existing quality control laboratories vis-a-vis the required
capacity for testing samples from all sales outlets; deficient physical and human infrastructure

in many of the jaboratories, significant shortfalls in the actual number of samples tested and


17

above all, the non-adherence to the time limit prescribed for analysis and communication of
results of fertilizer quality testing. The Committee had, therefore, impressed upon both the
Departments (Fertilizers and Agriculture) to seriously consider the imperatives invoived in the
quality testing of fertilizers and constantly endeavour for augmenting and strengthening both
physical and human infrastructure of the quality testing and soil testing laboratories so that
possibilities of supplying sub-standard fertilizers to the farmers are completely eliminated.
The Committee had recommended that by working in tandem with the State Governments
and involving Research Institutes like Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) and
Indian Institute of Soll Science (ISS), the Departments will certainiy be able to bring in
noticeable improvements in the quality testing of fertilizers. Taking note of the adverse
implications of the delay in communicating results of the fertilizer quality testing within the
stipulated time period of 52 days, the Committee had also exhorted the Departments to
persuade the State Governments to take stringent action against the officials for violation of
clause 30 of the FCO which provides for strict compliance with the time limit stipulated for

analysis and communication of the quality testing results.

21. The Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) in their Action
Taken Note have stated as under:

“The Committee has impressed.upon to improve the functioning mechanism of
Fertilizer Quality Control and implementation of FCO in the states. This Ministry
from time to time takes up with the State Governments the need for
strengthening of fertilizer quality control set-up and enforcement machinery of
FCO in States to ensure quality fertilizers to the farmers etc. Recently also, the
directions have been issued to ail the State Governments vide this Ministry's
letter dated 31.07.2013 for taking corrective/remedial actions on various points”.

22. Further, with regard to the number of sampiés tested and position of sub-standard

samples noticed by each laboratory during 2012-13, the Ministry submitted as follows:


18

S.No. Ff of State | Labs No. of Samples” | Tolal NO. of
Analysed samples found
_ Non Standard
1. Assam __ 1. 292 8 .
2. Mizoram _ रह... 1 _ 1. Oo.
3. Jharkhand _ 1 824 6
4. Bihar wt _| 1719 117
5. Odisha | . 2 . 2217 sv
Total East & NER $ 8024 564
7. __ Gujarat 3 9990 77” छा 77
8. MP. 4 5497 719
3. Chhattisgarh बाद 2150 77 ™
10. | Maharashtra 5. "T6939 2728
—_ 1. Rajasthan 4 15586 268
| Total West Zone व. 77 «OTE 3889 हु
12. | Haryana 3 4277 83
13” HP, ™ 2 1770 “l27 ™
14. [Wak 2 ~ 7980 62
15. | Punjab ™ 3 3629 “T92 a
16. | UP. हे हु 10227 556 7
47. | Uttarakhand 2 215 “12 _
“Total North Zone 16 22098 832,
18. | AP. _ 5 15284 “) 250 ~~
19. | Karnataka” 7 | 8642 337°
20. Kerala 2 2262 158
21. | Pondicherry m4 _ 627-0 3
22. | TamilNadu 44 16540 436 ”
“| Total South Zone 200 44365 1228"
23. | Govt. of India | 4 9233 | 334
Total All India 77 133872 6857
23. From the figures of state-wise number of fertilizer samples analyzed during

2012-13, the Committee noticed that out of 6857 samples found sub-standard at all

India level, maximum number of samples i.e. 3889 samples were found sub-standard

in west zone only followed by 1228 samples in South Zone. Further, maximum number

of cases 7.6, 2728 of sub-standard fertilizers were found in Maharashtra only. The


19

Committee regret to note that the Department of Fertilizers have not spelt out the
follow-up administrative/punitive actions taken against the guilty for selling sub-
standard fertilizers, They must constantly monitor to ensure that fertilizer samples are
analysed regularly throughout the country and stringent punishments are awarded to
the producers and sellers of sub standard fertilizers. In this regard the Committee are
of the view that analysis of samples of fertilizers alone will not help maintain the
requisite standards unless some strict penal measures are taken against the culprits,
The Committee would thus desire to be apprised of the measures taken in this regard

and outcome thereof.

Further, the Committee find 15 Laboratories were approved to be set up in the
country in addition to existing 75 Fertilizer Quality Control Laboratories, Out of these
laboratories one each at Rayagada (Odisha) and Kolhapur have started functioning.
The laboratories at other places are under various stages of completion. However, the
Action Taken Note is completely silent about the target date for their completion and
reasons for delay in their completion. Since the number of quality control laboratories
is too inadequate than the required number, the Committee urge the Ministry to draw

up a time bound programme for completion of all these laboratories.

Jokinen:


CURYTER TT

“DEPARTMENT-OF FERTILIZERS —

on the Action Taken Note (A.T.N) on Ej eport (81%
g mendations Of the Public. i

~ParaNo-t-

PAC Observations ‘Recommendations

(QM-No-4 44/4/2014 UPAC dt 4° May,.2013

The fertilizer subsidy regime in India has had a long and chequered history
dating back to 1957. Currently, while urea is the only contralled fertilizer, which is
subject to price distribution and movement control under the Fertilizer Control Order and
Fertilizer Movement Control Order to the extent of 50 percent of production, other
fertilizers like DAP, MAP, SSP, TSP, MOP and NPK complexes are decontrolled
fertilizers, whose use for agricultural purposes is subsidized. In actual practice,
however, fertilizers, whether controlled or decontrolled which are subsidized for
agricultural consumption are, in effect, subject to explicit/implicit control by the
Government of India (GOI) to ensure a uniform sale price throughout the country, which
is substantially lower than the cost of production/mport and also to ensure proper
targeting of fertilizer subsidy. The Committee's examination of the subject in light of the
Audit observations has revealed that despite huge amount of expenditure incurred by
GOI on fertilizer subsidy, annual production of fertilizers increased only marginally.
Even the changes in the subsidy regime from the Retention Price Scheme (RPS) to the
New Pricing Scheme (NPS) have failed to incentivize increase in domestic production of
fertilizers, leaving the Country dependent.on imports, whose pricing is volatile. The
subsidy on imported fertilizers during the years 1998-99 to 2008-09 increased from 3
per cent to 47 percent of the total subsidy. The quantum of expenditure on fertilizer
subsidy touched Rs. 96,603 crore in 2008-09 before coming down to Rs. 61,636 crore
in 2009-10, While the assessed requirement of fertilizers went up by more than 70
percent during the eleven years period from 1998-99 to 2008-09, the total production
went up by just 11 per cent leading to increase in the imports by nearly 236 per cant.
The Gommittee also find lack of assessment of fertilizer requirement on a scientific
basis and relatively weak correlation between fertilizer consumption, which increased by
46 per cent from 2003-04 to 2008-09, and agricultural production, the major
components of which increased by just 16 per cent over the same period. The
Committee further observe numerous instances of non-availability/shortage as well as
diversion of fertilizers for non-agricultural purposes despite huge amounts of subsidy
disbursed, In short, the Committee's examination of the subject has revealed certain
very disquieting aspects which inter-alia include deficient assessment of fertilizer
fequirement; huge gap between the demand and supply of fertilizers; lack of scientific
and realistic assessment of the fertilizer requirement; failure to incentivize increase in

4s


the domestic production of fertilizer even after effecting changes in the subsidy regime;
virtual stagnation in the production of Urea during the last five years; numerous
instances of non-avaitability/shortage of fertilizers; absence of physical verification of
stocks and sale of fertilizers beyond the first stock paint; selling of subsidized fertilizers
by unauthorized outlets; irregularities in and excess payment on import of urea;
diversion of subsidized fertilizers to the mixing units; inadequacy in the fertilizer quality
tasting infrastructure; deficient monitoring mechanism etc. The Committee have
accordingly given their observations /recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.

Department reply
(O.M. No. 11024/14/2013-Parl. dt. 67 Nov., 2013)

The demand for the fertilizer is projected by the States one or two months in
advance of commencement of the next season. The demand of fertilizer for a season is
assessed by the respective States, on the basis of consumption during preceding
seasons, are proposed to be sown, forecast for rainfall etc. Generally, the assessment
of demand for fertilizer by the States is skewed towards safer side, and hence there is
tendency to over demand.

The Department of Fertilizers (DOF) tries to ensure the availability of fertilizers as
per the assessed demand projected by the State Governments. But the supply/
availability of fertilizer to a particular State depends not only upon its assessed demand
but also lifting of fertilizer by the State by placing timely orders with the fertilizer
companies through their marketing institutions and actual sales at dealer/retailer level in
the States. It is, generally seen that fertilizers are consurned during two to three months
window in each season. Therefore, though the States give projection for all the months
but lift less than projected requirement during lean months. Therefore, the cumulative
statistics of the season may show the supply of fertilizer less than the projected demand
but at the field level, there may be no scarcity of fertilizers throughout the season. Here
it is pertinent to mention that actual sales is a reflection of actual demand during the
season, whereas the initial projection (at the start of the season) is mere an
assessment. The assessed demand for fertilizer is based on ideal conditions whereas
due to changes in actual sown. area, pattern of rainfall and other conditions prevailing
during the season the actual demand of fertilizers by farmers changes in real time basis.

9


w Therefore, there may be a gap between the assessed demand, actual availability and
sales of fertilizers but the availability of fertilizers at the field level is comfortable.

Audit comment
(No. AMG-/PAC/159/8 of 2010-1 1/Vol. IV/315 dt.10.2.14

This is an introductory para containing briefs ‘summary of observations
‘recommendations of the succeeding paragraphs.

Effective steps taken for each paragraph may be intimated to PAC

Further comments
{OM No.H-11024/11/2013-Part. (Part) dt, 1,10,2014)

No further comments.

Add), Segrefary/Joint Secretary

(ar ere viet)
(SHAM LAL GOYAL)
संयुक्त सचिय /Joim Secretary
पजायन LET weer Tet

‘of Ghamicals & Fertilizers
oie विभाग /06891॥, of Fertiilzers
/New Delbi


Para No. 2

PAC Observations /Recommendations
(OM No.44/4/4/2014/PAC dt. 1" May, 2013)

The Committee note with serious concern the non cooperation and stubborn
defiance on the part of the Department of Fertilizers in not providing the requisite
records nor responding to the letters sent by Audit seeking comments on the draft Audit
Report as well as in the Exit Conference which resulted in unwarranted delay in the
finalization of the Audit Report. it is really disturbing that the Principal Director, Audit's
letter addressed to the Secretary, DoF reminding him to indicate a convenient date for
the Exit Gonference also went unheeded. Notably, the concept of Entry and Exit
conferences with audited entities is intended to finetune audit methodology so that the
Audit Report thus prepared is objective, transparent and balanced and it 18 indeed
helpful to the PAC in exercising parliamentary Financial Oversight function. The
Committee deplore the callous attitude of the Department Intended to thwart proper
scrutiny by the PAC. However, in view of the unconditional apologies tendered by the
representative of the Department during evidence for the lapses and his assurance that
such things would not recur, the Committee fervently hope that the Department would
extend full cooperation to Audit in discharge of its Constitutional mandate.

Department reply
(O.M. No. 11024/4 4/2013-Parl. dt. 6" Nov., 2013)

Noted for compliance for future.

Audit comment
(No. AMG-I/PAGC/189/8 of 2010-11/Vol, ४४315 dt.10.2.14}
No comments.
Further Comments
(OM No.H-11021/41/2013-Parl, (Part) dt, 1,10.2014)

No further comments.

Signature of Secretary/
Addi. $i ainiGecretary.

SHAM LAL GOYAL)
age सचिव /Jolat Secretary
ove uy eee wey जर्यरक ATT
~ Min. of Chamicais & Fertilizers

frat /Oepit. of Fertilizers
उर्वरक ee Scar


Para No, 3

PAC Observations /Recommendations
(OM No.14/1/4/2014/PAC dt. 1°* May, 2013

The Committee deprecate that the assessment of fertilizer requirement was not
done in a scientific manner, but in a pedestrian manner by enhancing the requirement
generally by 5 to 10 per cent over the previous season’s/year's consumption. The last
five years data furnished to the Committee reveal that while the actual consumption
figures of major fertilizers are considerably less than the requirements projected, the
availability has been more than the assessed requirement in almost all the cases.
Admittedly, the assessments are currently based on figures of actual fertilizer
consumption pattern during the last three years and atternpts are now reportedly being
made to revise the proforma used for collection of requisite data from the field pertaining
to soil health reports, cropping pattern, level of irrigation of the area, etc. to ensure a
more scientific, realistic and rational assessment of fertilizers. The issue of assessment
of fertilizer demand of each State by augmentation of the collection of a more relevant,
accurate and informed statistical data bearing semblance to the ground realities in
collaboration with the Ministry of Statistics is also reportedly under the examination of
the Department of Fertilisers, Subsequent to the Audit observation, the Department of
Agriculture (DAC) has also started recording minutes of deliberations of zonal
conferences w.e.f. Rabi 2011-12. The Committee desire that since the zonal meetings
deliberate crucial issues like intensive study of the cropping and consumption pattern,
cropped and irrigated area, per hectare consumption of fertilizers, requirement’ of
nutrient in soil in different parts of the States etc., it is all the more important that
detailed minutes of such meetings are meticulously maintained so as to keep track of
things and take corrective measures, wherever warranted, Moreover, the criticality of
the need for appropriate and accurate demand assessment for each type of fertilizer for
all districts of the Country as input for a diligent planning at the commencement of the
year and the respective seasons to make available the required quantity of fertilizer at
the right time, deserves due attention. Needless to say, the consequential
arrangements for required storage, transport, staffing, credit, financial and foreign
exchange are vastly dependent on such assessed demands, the lack of which may lead
to severe financial implications and affect the agronomic productivity and related
fallouts. The Committee, therefore, urge that the overall assessment process be
comprehensively reviewed for moving towards a more scientific approach based on
realistic and accurate statistical data obtained from the fields and also taking resort to
more cost effective futuristic technology applications like remote sensing and satellite
imagery for plot assessment so that fertilizer requirement movement and distribution are
done in a prudent and effective manner.


Department reply
(O.M. No. 11021/44/2013-Parl, dt, 67 Nov., 2013)

() This Ministry introduced new proformas and modified few earlier proformas (used for
assessment of requirement of fertilizers) incorporating various suggestions made by
CAG in its audit to make the assessment of requirement of fertilizers more scientific. ©
The requirement of fertilizers for Rabi 2012-13 and Kharif 2013 seasons were
assessed on the basis of the information compiled in these new proformas only.
Copies of the modified proformas to assess the requirement of fertiizers are
enclosed herewith as Annexure | (Proforma 1-12) (P.37-54).

The States were requested to compile the information related to gross cropped area,
area under irrigation, area under crops at block level and information pertaining to
deficiency in terms of nutrients, requirements in terms of NPK nutrients etc at district
level in these new proformas. These are the factors which primarily govern the
requirement of fertilizers.

(ii) The matter relating to calléction of statistical data was taken up with Ministry of
Statistics and Programme Implementation by.this Ministry. A letter in this regard was
sent to them and they were requested to nominate officers from their Ministry, which
would be required to be involved in collection of accurate statistical data pertaining to
assessment of requirements of fertilizers. Copy of the said letter is enclosed herewith
as Annexure ॥ (P.55). They nominated Deputy Director General, Kendriya Sadan,
Bangalore for coordinating with the states of Southern region. Copy received by this
Ministry in this regard is enclosed herewith as Annexure Il! (P.56). है

Simultaneously, Directorate of Economics and Statistics of this Ministry was also
requested to constitute a team, which will be requested to be involved with’
representatives of States in collection of accurate statistical data telated to
assessment of )requirement of fertilizers. Copy of the said letter is enclosed herewith
as Annexure [IV (P.57-58). In response to this, Directorate of Economics and
Statistics nominated four institutes namely Institute of Economic Growth (Delhi),
Agricultural Development & Rural Transformation (Bangalore), Agro-Economic
Research Centre, Santiniketan and IM, Ahmadabad for North, South, East and
West regions respectively. Representatives of these institutes attended the Zonal
Conference held in September, 2013.

(ill) This Ministry has already started recording detailed minutes of Zonal
Meetings/Conferences since last September. Copies of the minutes of the
Meetings/Zonal Conferences held in September, 2012 for assessment of
requirement of fertilizers for Rabi 2012-13 season and in February, 2013 for
assessment of requirement for Kharlf, 2013 season are enclosed herewith as
Annexure V (P.59-92) and: Annexure VI (P.93-131) respectively.

-6~


(iv)This Ministry has sanctioned a project fo Indian institute of Soil Sciences Bhopal for
preparation of Geo-referenced soil fertility maps to generate site specific
recommendations for fertilizer application in 19 major states (171 districts). As on
date, soit maps of 152 districts have been completed against 171 districts and
remaining is in progress. The component on preparation of digitized maps is
proposed to be continued in 12” pian period to cover remaining districts.

-. , Audit comment -
(No. AMG-I/PAC/159/8 of 2010-14/Vol. IV/315. dt.10.2.2014)
No comments.

The detail of action taken with supporting documents may be furnished / intimated to
PAC.

Further Comments
(OM-No.H-11021/4 41201 3-Parl. (Part) dt. 1.10.2014)}

Department of Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC) has already started recording
detailed minutes of Zonal Meetings/Conferences since September, 12. Copies of
minutes for assessment of requirement of fertilizers for Rabi 2012-13 season, Kharif
2013, Rabi 2013-14 and Kharif 2014 are enclosed herewith as Annexure-l to
Annexure-lV (Page No, 42-149) respectively. ‘Representatives- from the ISEC and tIM
Ahmadabad attended the Zona! Conference held in February, 14.

DAC has sanctioned a project to Indian Institute of Soil Science, Bhopal for
preparation of Geo-referenced soil fertility maps to generate site specific
recommendations for fertilizer application in 19 major States (171 Districts). As on date,
soil maps of all 171 districts has been completed. A copy of list received from Indian
Institute-of Soil Science, Bhopal conveying completion of all 177 districts is enclosed as
Annexure-V (Page No. 150-154). The component on preparation of digitized maps is
proposed to be continued in 127 Plan period to cover 371 districts. है

}

¢ |
oo be

A
sigiatine of Secretary/
Addt-Secretary/Joint Secretary

{give लाल गोयल)

_ (SHAM LAL GOYAL)
खंबुबतत /30%' Secrotnry
SS ee ete मंत्रालय

Min. of Chemlcats & Feriilizere
‘Sthep विभाग /Daptt, of Feriilize
नई दिल्‍ली /New Delhi


Para No. 4

PAC Observations /Recommendations

(OM No.14/4/4/2011/PAC dt. 1४ May, 2013

The Committee observe that the New Pricing Scheme (NPS) for Urea units which
was notified on 30" January, 2003 and came into existence w.e-f. 4* April, 2003 was
being implemented in three stages. Stage-| was of one year duration from 1 Aprit 2003
to 31* March 2004; Stage-ll was of two’ years duration, from 1% April, 2006 to 30"
September, 2006; and Stage-Ill, the modalities of which would be decided by the
Department after review of the implementation of the first two stages. The NPS aimed
at greater transparency, uniformity and efficiency in subsidy disbursements to Urea
units and inducing the Urea manufacturing units to take cost reduction measures and be
competitive. But the Committee find that the change in Urea subsidy policy regime from
individual unit based pricing i.e. Retention Pricing Scheme (RPS) to group based pricing
ie. New Pricing Scheme (NPS) did not result in any significant increase in either
capacity or production of urea. Rather, the production of urea during the 11 years period
from 1998-99 to 2008-09 registered a negligible increase of 3.6 percent, with a marginal
decrease of three per cent during the RPS period from 1998-99 to 2002-03 and an
increase of just seven per cent thereafter till 2008-09 during the NPS regime.
Moreover, the group wise weighted average cost of production of urea also increased
substantially by 83 per cent to 120 percent during the NPS period. While the Country's
requirement of potassic fertilizers were met fully through Imports, the actual production
of DAP and NPK complexes increased by only 30 per cent although the capacity for
production of phosphatic fertilizers nearly doubled fromm 1998-99 to 2008-09. The
increase in cost of production of urea has been attributed by the Department to increase
in cost of energy input which was beyond the control of the NPS implementing
authorities. The DoF have further submitted that though there was no direct benefit to
the Government from the subsidy point of view, there was an energy efficiency gain
which was purportedly a national gain and to that extent the NPS has incentivised
efficient working of the existing plants. The Committee also find that after the
announcement of New Investment Policy in 2008, there has been an increase of
production of about 1.5 million to two million tones of Urea: Taking into consideration
admission of the representative of DoF that there is a lot of scope in becoming more
self-sufficient in Urea, the Committee urge the Ministry to step up the initiatives in the
right earnest so as to address the concerns of the potential investors and also to create
a conducive incentive based enviranment for attracting new investments in the Urea
sector by suitably tweaking the investment policy.

a

Ag


Department raply
(O.M, No. 14024/11/2013-Parl. dt. 6 Nov., 2013)

New Pricing Scheme (NPS) which is a group-based scheme for urea units has
come into existence w.e.f. 01.04,2003 replacing the erstwhile RPS. It aimed at
including the urea units to achieve internationally competitive levels of efficiency,
besides bringing in greater transparency and simplification in subsidy administration.

A pricing policy was announced on 29.01.2004 for setting up new urea projects
and expansion of existing urea projects for augmenting the domestic production
capacity of urea to meet the growing demand for enhancing the agricultural production
in the country. This policy aimed at enabling the entrepreneurs to decide about their
investment plans in the fertilizer sector. The policy was expected to encourage setting
up of plants with, international efficiency standards for fresh investment in new projects
and expansion of existing units. The policy was based on the principle of Long Run
Average Cost (LRAC). However, this policy was not successful in attracting investment
in this sector. The non-availability of natural gas which is the critical feedstock for
production of urea, has also been one of the major constraints in further addition of
indigenous capacity for production of urea.

The details of production of urea for the year 2006 onwards are as under:

Year Production of Urea
2006-07 [20384
2007-08 198.8
2008-09 है : 199.22
2909-10 21112
2010-11 218.8
2011-12 219.84
2012-13 225.75

The policy for stage |! of New Pricing Scheme (NPS-lil) was effective from
01.10.2006 till 31.03.2010. The provisions of Policy for Stage-Ill of NPS have been
extended beyond the validity period of 75-11 1.8. 31.03.2010 till further orders. The
matter of formulation of policy for the existing urea units beyond stage-lll of New Pricing
Scheme (NPS) is under consideration of Group of Ministers constituted to review the
fertilizer policy, the meeting of which was held on 5" June, 2013 and during the
meeting, it was decided that further deliberation on the issues are required before
formulation of policy for existing urea units beyond New Pricing Scheme.

Furthermore, based on the recommendations of a Committee chaired by Prof.
Abhijit Sen, Member Planning Commission. with Secretary (Fertilizers), Secretary
(Agriculture) and Secretary (Expenditure) as Members, a policy for investments:in the

oe


Urea sector was finalized and notified by the Department of Fertilizers for Revamp,
Expansion, Revival/Brownfield and Greenfield projects in September 2008.

The policy notification of 2008 resulted in fructification of a few Revamp projects
with an increase in Urea production of about two million tonnes per annum. However,
due to lack of commitment on availability of domestic natural gas by the Government at
a determined price formula, no Expansion/Brownfield plants could fructify. This policy -
was based on IPP Benchmark.

Department of Fertilizers has notified New Investment Policy ~ 2012 on 0204
January 2013 in order to facilitate fresh investment in urea sector and to reduce India’s
import dependency in urea production,

In response to Notification of 2012, as of now, 14 companies (including PSUs)
have responded to the NIP-2012 and filed compliance report for setting up new
Brownfield/Greentield/JV project. in addition, Nagarjuna Fertilizers and Chemicals
Nigeria Limited (NFGNL) has proposed a joint venture in Nigeria with annual 2MMT off-
take arrangement to India.

As per deliberation and discussion held in the meeting on 01.07.2013 under
Chairmanship. of PS to Hon'ble Prime Minister, it was decided to move an amendment
in New Investment Policy, 2012 through CCEA for substituting the phrase “guaranteed
buyback” with expression that subsidies will be given only upon domestic sale as at
present with proper safeguards. The draft GCEA Note has been circulated on ai"
August, 2013 for Inter-Ministerlal consultation before placing it for consideration of
CCEA.

Audit comment
(No. AMG-VPAC/159/8 of 2010-11/Vol. ४३15 dt.10.2.2014)

The action for new investment policy ~ 2012 and extension of New Pricing
Scheme (NPS) beyond stage Ill in order to facilitate fresh investment in urea sector and
to reduce import dependency in urea production may be reported to PAC. In addition
the progress about fructification of revamp projects may also be reported to PAC.

Further Comments:
(OM No.H-11021/41/2013-Parl. (Part) dt. 1.10.2014)

Recently, the Government has notified NPS-Ili for existing urea units on ane
April,14 in order to address the issue of under recoveries of the existing urea units due
fo freezing of Fixed Cost at the level of cost year 2002-03. The policy will be implemen-
ted for a period of one year from the date of issue of notificStion. The policy envisages
the continuation of calculation of concession rates of urea units as per NPS-ill with


. certain amendments. .As per the said policy, the existing urea. units will be, paid. the
maximum additional fixed cost (towards increase in the four components, viz. salaries &
wages, contract labour, selling expensed and repair & maintenance) of Rs.350/MT to
existing urea units or actual increase in above four components of fixed cost during the
year 2012-13 as compared to ihe year 2002-03, whichever is lower. However, in
respect of KFCL and BVFCL-II units, for which cost data of four components is not
available either for the year 2002-03 or 2012-13, the actual increase in these four
components as per the certified cost data for the latest year over and above Rs. 521/MT
(weighted industry average during 2002-03) subject to maximum of Rs.350/MT will be
allowed. गा

The policy also provides for the grant of the minimum fixed cost of Rs.2300/MT
or actual fixed cost prevailing during 2012-13, whichever is lower, after taking into
account the aforesaid additional fixed cost. This will be based on certified fixed cost
data for the year 2012-13, to be provided by all urea units. Further, in order to protect
the efficient units which have converted to gas and are more than 30 years old, the
policy has the provision of compensating these units by way of grant of the special
compensation of Rs.150/MT.

So far as amendment to New Investment Policy (NIP)-2012 is concerned, the
proposal to amend the New Invesiment Policy-2012 has been approved by CCEA on
28" Feb.,2012 and the notification of amendment to NIP-2012 is under consideration for
approval.

In addition to the above the progress report. about fructification of revarfp
projects is also annexed at Annexure-VI (Page No.158).

Revamp production during 2012-13 and 2013-14 is 19.72 and 22.55 LMT,
respectively.

sees) lof Secretary/
Addl Secreiary/Joint Secretary

(ara लाल भौयल)
{SHAM LAL GOYAL)
संयुक्त 'सचिव Aoint Socretaty
रसायम Wa site संग्रालिंश
Mes In. of Chamiloals & Fectittears
विभाग “Deptt of Pariizers
बिल्ली /New Dain

— if


Para No, 10

PAC Observations ‘Recommendations

(OM No. t4/1/4/2G41/PAC dé. 1 May, 2073} -

The Committee are perturbed to noie numerous instances of fon-
availability/shortage of fertilizers despite huge amounis of subsidy doled out. The
Committee also observe with concern the scarcity of fertilizers; cases of delays in
supply of adequate quantities of fertilizers leading to farmers agitations; inequitable
distribution: absence of norms to regulate Sale; skewed distribution with higher supply to
districts with better accessibility and lesser supply to distant and disjointed districts; etc.
The Committee ara informed that timely supply and movement of fertilizers to the
fertilizer consuming areas depends upon the availability of Rallway rakes, labour force
at the various ports and plants as weil as speady evacuation in loading, unloading of the
rakes at origin and destination, effects of natural calamities, etc. On being queried
about the manures being taken to make adequate fertilizers available on time to the
farmers in various States, the DoF have submitted that they are taking up a number of
measures which inter-alia include monitoring of the movement of all major subsidized

_fertilizers throughout the Country by an on-line ‘web based system; meeting through
imports the gap between the réquirement and indigenous availability of Urea; advising
the State Governments to instruct the State Institutional agencies to coordinate with
manufactures and importers of fertilizers for streamlining the supplies; joint review by
the DoF and DAC of the fertilizer availability with the State Agriculture Depariments
through weekly video conferences, encouraging private sector and Public Sector
Companies to explore the possibilities for joint ventures abroad to ensure uninterrupted
supply of fertilizer inputs to the P&K sector etc. Mindful of the fact that timely availability
of fertilizers is the essence of agronomic requirement having serious ramifications on
the crop yield and consequent effects on the overall food security and taking into
consideration the Secretary Dof's assurance that the fertilizer availability position is
comfortable at present and. adequate arrangements would be made for fertilizer
availability in the coming years also as demand grows, the Committee recommend that
the Department should intensify the measures initiated, strengthen the existing
mechanisms and constantly endeavour towards equitable and timely distribution of
requisite and appropriate types of fertilizers to all the needy farmers of the Country with
special attention towards far flung and inaccessible Districts. ‘

Department reply
(O.M. No, 11024/11/2013-Parl. dt. 67 Nov., 2013)

The following steps aré being taken by the Government to ensure adequate and
timely availability and to control the artificial scarcity of fertilizers inciuding remote,
inaccessible and low consuming areas: -


oot कद Neenah HES lease. wet beer Meee
५.८०
(०४

*

‘Para he-$—
PAG Observations /Recommendations

- (OR NortH4Mise4 PAG ot 48 May 204 3)

The Commities are deeply concerned fo find the high increase in the energy cost
of the domestic urea manufacturing unit amounting to ' 4010 crore during 2010-11 and *
9127 crore during 2011-12. According to the Department, the pricing of APM and KG
0-8 gas combinedly constitute 60 per cent of the increased energy cost 1.8, 32 per cent
attributable to GAIL/ONGC/OIL for APM supplies and 28 per cent attributable to RIL for
KG D-6 gas. As the pricing of such energy resources are directly or indirectly governed
by the policies adopted by the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas for gas and the
Ministry of Coal for coal, the Urea units or the Department of Fertilizers have no control
over it. In this context, the Committee find that the companies interested in new
investments in Urea sector have been regularly requesting the Government for either
firm allocation of gas at pre-determined fixed prices from domestic gas sources or to
protect the industry fram any additional liability arising due to increase in the delivered
price of gas by correspondingly providing adequate protection of the floor prices. But
due to tack of cammitment by the Government on availability of domestic natural gas at
8 pre-determined price formula, the objectives to revamp,-expand and revive the
existing Urea units besides setting up of Brownfield/Greenfield projects, as enunciated
in the New Investment Policy, 2008 have not been fructified. The DoF have therefore
felt a strong need to revise the existing policy addressing various concerns of the
potential investors and to attract new investment in the Urea sector. Accordingly, a draft
CCEA note has been prepared and circulated by the 007 on 26" June, 2012 seeking
intér-ministerial consultation and comments on the formulation of the New Invesiment
Policy, 2012. While the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas and the Department of
Agriculture. submitted their comments, the views of the other Ministries were still
awaited. in view of the imperatives involved and increase in the subsidy burden on the
Government of India due to increase in the energy cost, tha Committee impress upon
the DoF and the DAC to take up the matter with utmost urgency at the appropriate fora
to find workable and sustainable solutions to the extant policies governing allocation of
gas and coal so that new investments are attracted, the existing Urea units are
revamped, expanded and revived and the Brownfield/Greenfield Projects are set up, as
envisaged, The Committee further desire that the Ministry strould strengthen and
intensify the R&D activities towards exploring possibility of altemative cheaper
feedstock options and adapting successful time tested options being practiced in other
Countries to boost indigenous urea production.

wu [Dm


Department reply
(O.M. No. 11024/11/2013-Pari. dt. 6" Nov., 2013)

So far as the allocation of gas to urea manufacturing units is concerned, the
matter has been taken up with Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas several times at
various levels for existing urea units, units converting from Naptha, FO/LSHS to Gas
and new_Brownfield/Greenfield projects. However, the reply is still awaited from
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas. a

It is pertinent to mention here that, as per the EGoM’s decision dated
23.08.2043, the total domestic gas supply to fertiizer sector has been capped at their
present level of 31.5 MMSCMD and that all additional domestic gas in the year 2013-14,
2014-15 and 2015-16 has been allotted to the power sector to help improve power
generation. EGoM will review the gas production scenario thereafter for deciding the
allocation of additional domestic gas available from 2016-17 onwards.

As regard exploring possibility of cheaper feedstock, it is mentioned that as per
CGEA’s decision, Talcher unit of FCIL is going to be revived by consortium of PSU's
namely GAIL, RCF and CIL on coal gasification,

Furthermore, department of Fertilizers has notified New Investment Policy — 2012
on 0277 January 2013 in order to facilitate fresh investment in urea sector and to reduce
india’s import dependency in urea production.

In response to Notification of 2012, as of now, 14 companies (including PSUs)
have responded to the NIP-2012 and filed compliance. report for setting up new
Brownfield/Greenfield/JV project. in addition, Nagarjuna Fertilizers and Chemicals
Nigeria Limited (NFCNL) has proposed a joint venture in Nigeria with annual 2MMT off-
take arrangement to India.

As per deliberation and discussion held in the meeting on 01.07.2013 under
Chairmanship of PS to Hon'ble Prime Minister, it was decided to move an amendment
in New Investment Policy, 2012 through CCEA for substituting the phrase “guaranteed
buyback" with expression that subsidies will be given only upon domestic sale as at
present with proper safeguards. The draft CCEA Note has been circulated on ai
August, 2013 for Inier-Ministerial consultation before placing it for consideration of
CCEA. :

Audit comment
(No. AMG-I/PAC/159/8 of 2010-1 1/Vol. 1V/315 dt.10,2,2014)

The progress made with Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, for availability of
gas for converting Naptha, FO/LSHS units to Gas and Brownfield/Greenfield projects
etc. may be intimated to PAC.

iAH.


Further Comments.
(OM No.H-11021/11/2013-Parl. (Part) dt. 1.10.2014)

The gas requirement of the fertilizer sector is 46mmscmd, During the year 2013-
-14, 42.96 mmsemd of gas (domestict+RLNG) was supplied to Fertilizer Sector.
However, as per the decision of EGoM dated 23 August, 2013 an Gas Pricing and
Commercial Utilization of Gas, it was decided that supplies of domestic gas to fertilizer
sector be maintained at a level of 31.5 mmscmd. Moreover, to ensure the supply of
domestic gas to urea units, Depariment of Fertilizers takes up the matter with M/o

Petroleum & Natural Gas on reguiar basis.
h we of Secretary/

Addi Seeretary/Joint Secretary

(शाम लाल गोयल)
(SHAM LAL GOYAL)
जचिय /Joint Secretary
इसायन Wry कर्धरक मंत्रालय
Mid, of Chemicals & Fertiliaars
जर्वश्क थिभाग /Depit or fF uriiizers:
नई दिल्‍ली ew उस

1G


Para No. 6

PAC Observations /Recommendations
(OM No.14/1/4/2014/PAG dt. 47 May, 2013)

Accordingly to the Department, Urea(N) is the only fertilizer, the requirement of
which is largely (around 75 per cent) met through indigenous production which can
inter-alia be enhanced: by the revival of the closed Urea units of the Fertilizer
Corporation of India Ltd (FCIL) and Hindustan Fertilizer Corporation Ltd (HFCL), But,
the Committee are perturbed to find that the process of revival of various closed units of
FCIL and HFCL initiated by the Government in the year 2007 is still under examination
of the Board for Industrial and Financial Restructuring (BIFR) even after the
recommendations made by the Empowered Committee of Secretaries (ECOS) to revive
the closed units. Surprisingly, the State Governments were neither consulted nor taken
into confidence in the implementation process while adopting the New Investment
Policy, 2008 under which the revamp/revival process was to be effected.
Disappointingly, even the various initiatives for joint ventures abroad in various
countries like Canada, Australia, Yemen, Ghana, Syria and Indonesia under this New
Policy are mostly at the negotiation stage and still to go a long way for fructification.
The Committee are also distressed to find that the additional demand of natural gas has
ta be met through imports for meeting the estimated requirement of 34 million tonnes of
urea production based entirely on gas by the end of 127 Pian period vis-d-vis the
expected production of urea from existing gas and non gas. plants working out to only 22
million tonnes. With the cost of subsidy for imported urea obviously much higher than
that for indigenous urea, the Committee feel that the continued dependence on imports
creates a distortion in subsidy as well-as in the fertilizer pricing policy. In view of the
fact that the Government have accorded in principle approval for considering the write
off of Government of India loans and interest liabilities of FCIL and HFCL subject to
submission of fully tied up proposals, the Committee exhort the DoF to take requisite
urgent measures for fhe revival of the closed fertilizer units of FCIL & HFCL so that
indigenous production of Urea is enhanced to a large extent. The Committee further
desire that the New Investment Policy 2012 which is in the offing and would facilitate
strategic investments by Indian entities in resource rich countries abroad having
comparatively cheaper feedstock/energy options, be expedited for implementation so
that the joint ventures abroad already negotiated/initiated are fructified to enable the
Country to gain significant foothold in the international fertilizer sector.

Department reply
(O.M. No. 11021/11/2013-Parl, dt. 6" Nov., 2013)

Revival of the closed units of FCIL and HFCL: HFCL:

The BIFR in its oral hearing held on 22.11.2012 in respect of FCIL and in another
meeting held on 19.12.2012 in respect of HFCL advised that Department of Fertilizers
should explore the possibility of the companies’ net-worth becoming positive and

छः
7

— Vs -


w

directed fo work out way to repay the dues of creditors of the FCIL and HFCL to enable
the companies to mave out of purview of BIFR.

A meeting of Empowered Committee of Secretaries (ECOS) was held on
23.01.2013 to discuss the various issues concerning revival of HFCL/FCIL along with
above direction of BIFR. ECOS recommended that the matter be placed before the
CCEA. Meanwhile, Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister took a meeting on
28.01.2013 on revival of closed fertilizer urea units. During the meeting, it was inter-alia
decided that the Department of Fertilizers will bring a note for CCEA in respect of FCIL
seeking waiver of government dues and also seeking inter corporate loans to FCIL. In
respect of closed units of HFCL, it was decided that proposal/action plan on revival of
HFCL be taken up once revival of FCIL is on track.

Based on the recommendation of ECOS and directions of PMO, a proposal for
revival of closed units of FCIL was placed before CCEA. CCEA in its meeting held on
9.5.2013, inter-alia, approved waiver of Government of [India loan and interest of
Fertilizer Corporation of India Limited (FCIL) to facilitate FCIL to arrive at positive net
worth. In respect of closed units of HFCL, it has been decided that proposal /action plan
on revival of HFCL will be taken up once revival of FCIL is on track.

The above decision enabled FCIL to get de-registered from the purview of Board
For Industrial and Financial reconstruction. Further HFCL in its 271° Board Meeting
held on 16.7.2013 desired that a CCEA note for revival of HFCL on the pattern of FCIL
is required to be initiated to make HFCL.'s net worth positive, so the company may come
out of the purview of BIFR. HFCL has submitted a draft proposal to be submitted before
CCEA for making the company’s net-worth positive and enabling it to exit from the BIFR
purview. The proposal of HFCL is under consideration.

_ Audit comment
(No. AMG-YPAG/459/8 of 2010-14/Vol. 1V/315 dt,10.2.2014)

The action taken for revival of closed units of FCIL. and HFCL with supporting
documents may be furnished / reported to PAC.

Further Comments
{OM No.H-1 10241/11/2013-Parl. (Part) dt. 1.10.2014)

Progress of revival of Fertilizer Corporation of India Limited (FCIL) & Hindustan
Fertilizer Company Limited (HFCL)

Fertilizer Corporation of India Limited
Taicher Unit

The pre-project activities for revival of Talcher Unit (Odisha) of FCIL by the
nominated PSUs, namely, Rashtriya Chemicals & Fertilizers Limited (RCF), Goal India
Limited (CIL), Gas Authority of India Limited (GAIL) & FCIL are in progress to set-up a

~~


coal-based fertilizer. plant. lt has been proposed. to establish two joint venture (JV).
companies viz. First company for upstream coal gasification section with GAIL and
second company comprising RCF, CIL and FCIL for downstibam section of Ammonia-
urea, Nitric Acid, Ammonia Nitrate plants, off sites and utilities. The Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU) among consortium PSUs ie. GIL, RCF, GAIL and FCIL, has
been signed on 5.9.2013. Selection of coal gasification technolagy is in process. The
time line for revival of Talcher unit is as under:

i. JV formation through Registrar of Companies: By 15.11.2014
ii. Financial closure & Zero date By 41.04.2015
ili. Commissioning of Project toe : By 31.12.2018

Ramagundam Unit:

The pre-project activities for revival of Ramagundam Unit (Telangana) of FCIL. by
the nominated PSUs, namely, Engineers India Limited (EIL) & National Fertilizers
Limited (NFL) are in progress to set-up a gas-based fertilizer plant. The Joint Venture
agreement and Concession agreement are under discussion and are being targeted for
conclusion/ approval by respective boards. 81 & NFL are having discussions with the
Technology providers. Technology selection far Ammonia and Urea process unit would
be completed by the end of October, 2014. The JV company would operate the plant
and Ell. would take up the detailed Engineering Procurement of equipment and
Construction (EPC) of the plant. The time line for revival of Ramagundam unit is as
under: ह

i, JV formation : By 31.12.2014
ii. Award of contract to Technology Licensors : By 31.03.2015
iii. Project completion : By 30.9.2018

Sindri unit

For Sindri unit, SAIL-Sindri Projects Ltd. (SSPL), a wholly owned subsidiary of
SAIL, has been incorporated in November 2011 for the purpose of revival of Sindri Unit
of FCIL. However, not much progress has been made due to non-availability of around
3000 Acres of contiguous piece of land for the Steel Plant, Qut of total land of 6652
acres with FCIL at Sindri, 5482 acres of and is considered for revival and contiguous
piece of 3247 acres of encroachment free land for setting up the proposed facilities by
SAIL is required.

Revival of Gorakhpur Unit (Uttar Pradesh) & Korba Project (Chhattisgarh) of
FCIL through bidding process has not yet been taken up.

Hindustan Fertilizer Company Limited (HFCL):

Proposal/ action plan on revival of HFCL to be taken up once revival of FCIL
units is on track doowe ; ५

Sig 'Sacrétary/
Addb.Seenstary/Joint Secretary

i
(शाम लाल गोयल)
(SHAN LAL GOYAL)
संयुवत सचिय /10॥1 Secratary
sear) एयन ede मंत्रालय
Min. of Chemicals थै Fartiixare
Bee विभाग /Daptt, of Ferliizers
जई दिल्‍ली /Now Delhi

Th)


Para No.7 /

PAG Observations /Recommendations
> (OM No.14/4/4/2014/PAC dt. 1** May, 2013)

The Committee note with profound concern that A fits on account of
fertilizer subsidy increased more than eight fold from ~ 8 9० crore in 2003-04 to
96,603 crore in 2008-09 before coming down to 61,636 crore in 2009-10. The
Committee also note that decontrolled fertilizers were the i ry factor on high subsidy
payments with an increase of almost 20 times from * 3326 cpores in 2003-04 to * 65,555
crores in 2008-09, According to the Department, the incréase in subsidy amount was
due to the cost of import of raw material for production of P&K fertilizers, fluctuation in
the Indian Currency and the increased 74८ | Sing to continued increase in
the delivered cost of the fertilizers as the MRP remained unchanged from February,
2002 to March, 2010. The Committee are also cohcerned to note that although the
capacity for phosphatic fertilizers doubled. from1998-99 to 2008-09, actual production
increased by only 30 per cent. As the increase in consumptions of DAP/MAP/NPK
complexes over this period was met primarily # imports at very high prices, there
were multifold increases in the subsidy burg The Committee find that while the
installed capacity of DAP units increased 1 im 28,70,000 MT in 1998-99 to 72,99,000
MT (amounting to 154 per cent) in 2008-09, the production registered a negative growth
of 22 per cent as it decreased’ from 38,857,000 MT to 29,93,000 MT during the same
period. Intriguingly, though the production of DAP increased considerably during the
subsequent years touching more than 2) ‘per cent capacity utilization in the years 2009-
10 and 2010-11 and 80.8 per cent in 2011-12, the dependence on imports for finished
phosphatic fertilisers. or phosphati¢ raw materials/intermediaries for indigeneous
production of phosphatic ore ands at 90 per cent as the Country's endowments
of rock phosphate are minimal and/of poor quality. Worse, the dependence on imports
for potassic fertilizers for agricultural usage is 100 per cent. The Department of
Fertilisers are reportedly 07००7 ging exploration/surveys for locating fresh deposits of
rack phosphate and potash. The Committee, however, desire that in addition to the
steps initiated for further expl iptation of raw material for P&K fertilizers, the Department
should also initiate adequate steps to secure long term supplies of not only finished
fertilizers but also for new faw materials through strategic investments and tie ups with
fertilizer resource rich / ntries especially for those sectors which are substantially
import dependent.

Department reply
(O.M. No. 41021/11/2013-Pari. dt. 6 Nov., 2013)

In order to mest the gap between the total requirement of P&K fertilizers and
indigenous production, the Department of Fertilizers has also been encouraging

lS ०


Para No, 9

PAC Observations /Recommendations
(OM No.14/1/4/204 4/PAC dt. 17 May, 2013)

In the above context, the Committee find that the Government of India are
promoting soil test based balanced and judicious use of chemical fertilizers, bio
fertilizers and locally available organic manures, like Farm Yard Manure (FYM),
compost, vermicompost and green manure to maintain soil health and its productivity.
The Committee aiso find that funds are being provided to the Stale Governments
through various schemes of the DAC like Macro Management of Agriculture (MMA),
Rashtriya Krish Vikas Yoina (RKVY) and Nationa! Project on Management of Soil
Health & Fertility (NPMSF) for taking up ail the activities for popularization of organic
and biological nutrients. Publicity through newspaper, TV and Radio programmes is
also being taken up. Further, the Union Agriculture Minister has taken up the matter
with the Chief Ministers. While taking due note of the various initiatives taken up by the
Government of India to promote organic and biological nutrients, the Committee desire
that a centralized monitoring command be- established to oversee strict enforcement of
the measures initiated/contemplated so as to ensure educating the farmers on the
benefits of balanced use of fertilizers for efficiency and protecting the soil health. In
view of the reportedly good performance of some states like Andhra Pradesh and
Karnataka in ensuring increased productivity by maximum use of organic manure, the
Committee further desire that the DoF and DAC convince and prevail upon other State
Governments to emulate Andhra Pradesh and. Karnataka so that there is increased
productivity across the Country.

Department reply
(O.M. No, 11021/11/2013-Parl. dt. 6" Nov., 2013)

The farmers are educated on benefits of balanced use of fertilizers through the
component of farmers training under Nationat Project on Management of Soil Health &
Fertility (NPMSH&F)}. This component is implemented through State Governments,
ICAR, SAUs etc. The State Governments have been advised to take advantage under _
NPMSHE&F and Macro Management of Agricuiture Schemes for training of farmers. The
State Nodal Officers (ATMA Scheme) have been instructed for providing suitable
training to farmers. GPS based soil fertility maps are being prepared by Indian Institute
of Soil Science (159), Bhopal to provide soil fertility status and fertilizer
recommendation to the farmers.

For maximizing use of organic manure, an advice note hag been sent to all
States/Sugar factories to take the benefit of back ended subsidy scheme of National


Project on Organic Farming for establishment of bio-compost units. Time to time advice
is also given to states for encouraging greater use of manures like Farm Yard Manure,
vermi-compost, green manure, fruit & vagetable waste compost & Municipal Solid
Waste compost etc. ;

Audit comment
(No. AMG-I/PAC/159/8 of 2010-11/Vol. IV/318 dt.10,2.2014)

Efforts made with Department of Agriculture and Go-operation (DAC) and pragress
made by indian Institute of Soil Science (155), Bhopal fo increase the agricultural
productivity across the country may be reported to PAC.

Further Comments
(OM No.H-11021/11/2013-Parl. (Part) dt. 1.10.2014)

Under Soil Health Management component of National Mission for Sustainable
Agriculture, there is provision for training programme for farmers on balanced use of
fertilizers. The training is of two days duration for which Rs.10,000/- per training is
provided. The training consists of topics such as importance of soil testing in Soil
Health Management; importance of balanced fertilizer use in crop productivity and soil
health management, sampling protocols and sending samples to testing faboratories;
importance of organic manures and bio-fertilizers in balanced of crop etc.

Under the scheme, 934 number of trainings for farmers have heen sanctioned
from 2008-09 to 2013-14.

GPS based soil fertility maps have been prepared by Indian Institute of Soil
Science, Bhopal for 171 districts to provide soil fertility status and fertilizer
te@commendation to farmers.

Addiztemeiaty/Joint Secretary

Gara लाले गोयल)
(SHAM LAL GOYAL)
aaa [/20160 Sactatery
'शसायन सम
ile. inal chemicals & .
s (0690, vi Peaster
नई दिल्‍ली “New Dern!

- Q4- a


Para No. 10

PAC Observations /Recommendations
(OM No.14/1/4/201 PAC dt. 17 May, 2013)

The Committee are perturbed fo note numerous instances of non-
availability/shortage of fertilizers despite huge amounts of subsidy doled out. The
Committee also observe with concern the scarcity of fertilizers; cases of delays in
supply of adequate quantities of fertilizers leading to farmers agitations; inequitabie
distribution; absence of norms to ragulate sale; skewed distribution with higher supply to
districts with better accessibility and lesser supply to distant and disjointed districts; etc.
The Committee are informed that timely supply and movement of fertilizers to the
fertilizer consuming areas depends upon the availability of Railway rakes, labour force
at the various ports and plants as well as speedy evacuation in loading, unloading of the
rakes at origin and destination, effects. of natural calamities, ete. On being queried
about the manures being taken to make adequate fertilizers available on time to the
farmers in various States, the DoF have submitted that they are taking up a number of
measures which jnter-alia incllide monitoring of the movement of all major subsidized
fertilizers throughout the Country by an on-line web based system; meeting through
imports the gap between the requirement and indigenous availability of Urea; advising
the State Governments to instruct the State Institutional agencies to coordinate with
manufactures and importers of fertilizers for streamlining the supplies; joint review by
the DoF and DAC of the fertilizer availability with the State Agriculture Departments
through weekly video conferences, encouraging private sector and Public Sector
Companies to explore the possibilities for joint ventures abroad to ensure uninterrupted
supply of fertilizer inputs to the P&K sector etc. Mindful of the fact that timely availability
of fertilizers is the essence of agronomic requirement having serious ramifications on
the crop yield and consequent effects on the overall food security and taking into
consideration the Secretary DoF's assurance that the fertilizer availability position is
comfortable at present and adequate arrangements would be made for fertilizer
availability in the coming years also as demand grows, the Committee recommend that
the Department should intensify the measures initiated, strengthen the existing
mechanisms and constantly endeavour towards equitable and timely distribution of
requisite and appropriate types of fertilizers to all the needy farmers of the Country with
special attention towards far flung and inaccessible Districts. हु

Department reply हि
(O.M, No, 11021/11/2013-Pari. dt. 6" Nov., 2013)

The following steps are being taken by the Government to ensure adequate and
timely availability and to control the artificial scarcity of fertilizers including remote,
inaccessible and low consuming areas: -

— DY


(a).

(b)

(०)

SSP)

The month-wise demand is assessed. and projacted by the Department of
Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC) in consultation with the State Governments
before commencement of each cropping season

On the basis of month-wise & state-wise projection given by Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation, Deparment of Fertilizers allocates
sufficient/adequate quantities of fertilizers to the States by issuing monthly
supply plan and continuously monitors the availability through following system:
(i) The movement of all major subsidized fertilizers is being monitored
throughout the country by an on-line web based monitoring system
(www.urvarak.co,in) also called as Fertilizer Monitoring System (FMS);

(ii) The State Governments are regularly advised to coordinate with
manufacturers and importers of fertilizers for streamlining the supplies through
timely placement of indents for railway rakes through their state institutional
agencies like Markfed etc.

(li) Regular weekly Video conference is conducted jointly by. Department of
Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC), Department of Fertilizers (DoF), and Ministry
‘of Railways with State Agriculture Officials arid corrective actions are taken to
dispatch fertilizer as indicated by the State governments.

(iv) The gap in the demand and domestic production of fertilizer is met through
imports.

Department of Fertilizer is providing reimbursement of rail freight for all the
fertilizers as a primary freight subsidy and along with this secondary freight i.e.
distribution from rail head to block level subsidy is also provided to urea only.

Further, Department of Fertilizers (DOF) has notified for P &K fertilizers (except
Special Freight Scheme w. e. f. 01.04.2012 for giving special freight for difficult,

hilly and accessible States like Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, all
North Eastern States and Andaman & Nicobar Islands in order to have equitable
distribution of fertilizers.

Audit comment
(No. AMG-UPAC/159/8 of 2010-11/Vol. IV/315 dt.10.2.2014)
No comments.

The relevant supporting documents for special freight scheme from 01.04.2012

along with supply plan as per requirement of fertilizers in each state may be furnished to

PAC,

— We.


Further Comments

(OM No.H-11024/14/2013-Parl. (Part) dt. 1.10.2014)
Special Freight (An nexure —VIl (a} (Page No, 156-159 )

Supply Plan (Annexure- Vil (b) (Page No. 160-161 )

Si Sods re of Sela

AddbSectetary/Joint Secretary

fr जाल गोयल)
we HAM LAL GOYAL)
सचिव AJaint Sacratary:
इसाग्नन ea sive मंत्रालय
Mp of fener als & Fertlizars
89. of Feritizers
जई दिल्‍ली /New Dein!


Para No, 12.

PAC Observations ‘Recommendations
(OM No.14/1/4/2041/PAC dt. 17 May, 2013)

The Committee note that prior to January, 2003, it was mandatory under the
Fertilizer Control Order (FCO) for the dealer to possess the certificate of registration for
carrying out the business of selling of fertilizers. Later on, w.e.f. 16" January, 2003, the
Ministry dispensed with the registration certificate of dealers and replaced it with the
system of Memorandum of intimation Le. every person intending to sell or offer for sale
or carrying the business of selling fertilizers shall make memorandum of intimation to
the notified authority and the acknowledgment of the Intimation would constitute the
authorization letter which would be valid for a period of three years from the date of
issue. The Committee are also informed that the State Governments are responsible to
issue licences fo the dealers for carrying out wholesale/retail business of fertilizers as
well as for the timely renewai of the licences. But, the efficacy of the system put in
place can be well gauged from several deficiencies that has come to the notice of the
Committee like dealers carrying out fertilizer business without either valid licence from
the State Agriculture Department or any certificate of registration from the appropriate
authority; non-maintenance of the stock registers by the dealers: black marketing of the
fertilizers etc. The Secretary, DoF was candid ehough to admit before the Committee
that there have been instances of smuggling of fertilizers not only to neighbouring
States but to even neighbouring Countries also. In view of the alarming situation, it
becomes imperative on the part: of the Department to ‘revisit the extant”
licensing/Memorandum of Intimation mechanism and take requisite but urgent
corrective measures to plug the loopholes so that unscrupulous dealers are unable to
take undue advantage of the lucanae. and unauthorized sale, black marketing and
smuggling of fertilizers are stopped, Acknowledging the Fertilizer Secretary's assurance
that the Department have to make constant efforts in the direction, the Committee
stress that vigorous and concerted efforts are required to make the subsidy
administration clean, transparent and foolproof so that every penny (out of 80,000 crore
(approx.)) of the tax payers' money utilized towards fertilizer subsidy is accounted for
and the intended benefits accrue to the farmers.

Department reply
(O.M. No. 11021/11/2013-Part, dt. 6" Nov., 2013)

Ministry of Agriculture has informed that no change in clause 8 of FCO
pertaining to Memorandum of intimation has taken place after 2003 and at present no
change in the said clause is contemplated or under consideration in the Ministry of
Agriculture

As regards smuggling of fertilizers, this Department has been sensitizing the
State Agriculture Authorities for issuing instructions to all enforcement agencies under
their jurisdiction to keep a strict vigil and check smuggling of fertilizers. from India to

Ly

न oy


W

other neighboring countries through land and sea routes. The States have also been
requested to activate these agencies for taking all necessary steps under Fertilizer
Control Order (FCO), 1985 for preventing misuse of subsidized fertilizers, hoarding/
black-marketing/ breach of MRP and tagging of fertilizer.

Ministry of Home Affairs, Departrhent of Revenue, Directors General of Police of
all States having international border/BSF etc. and Director General, Assam Rifles,
Shillong, have also been requested to take necessary steps in this regard.

Audit comment
(No, AMG-IPAC/159/8 of 2010-14/Vol. 1४४15 dt.10.2.2014)

No change has been made in Fertilizer Controf Order (FCO) since 2003 for
proper registration certificates and memorandum of intimation issued / renewed to the
dealers by the appropriate authority for sale of fertilizers.

Further Comments
(OM No.H-11021/11/2013-Parl. (Part) dt, 1.10,2014)

os Wo

Addt-Gectetary/Joint Secretary

No further comments,

er, ज्ञाल गोयल)
(SHAM LAL GOYAL)
संयुफ्ध BT /00॥॥ Sacrotary
ware wart ‘ates मंत्रालस
‘of Chamlcals & Fertilizers
हे सती ॥. of Fertilizers
नह बिल्ली “Naw 0801

~B0-


Para No. 13

PAC Observations ‘Recommendations [Recommendations
(OM No.14/1/4/2014/PAC dt. 1% May, 2013)

The Committee's attention has been drawn to the irregularities in the import of
DAP by IPL during 2007-08; excess payment on import of urea by IPL during 2008-09
and 2009-10; erroneous fixing’of rates of concession of imported DAP and MOP;
absence of supply plan for urea imported by IPL, etc. The DoF have clarified that the
apparent discrepancy arose due to the switch of the payment procedure to 'On Account
Subsidy’ w.e.f. 01.12.2008 and adjustment of left over quantity of 0.01 LMT of the
closing stock as on 30.11.08 which was carried forward as receipt in the month of
December, 2008. The Department have further submitted that the interest amounting to
* 428.56 crore was recovered from IPL from July, 2011 ‘On Account’ claim for the
irregularities in import of DAP by IPL. during 2007-08. Though corrective measures
have been taken by the DoF subsequent to the Audit findings, the Committee
nevertheless feel that such irregularities reveal systemic deficiencies in the import
process of fertilizers and therefore warrant a stricter regulation to avoid mismatches and
creeping infirmities considering the growing volume of import of fertilizers and the
concomitant subsidy burden to the exchequer.

Department reply
(O.M. No. 11021/14/2013-Parl. dt. 6" Nov., 2013)

The import of fertilizer is made on Government account, The Government has
issued the broad guidelines for import of Urea and the State Trading Enterprises
namely STC, MMTC and IPL, are independently contracting with the global suppliers in
terms of the chapter 2.11 of the foreign trade policy issued by DGFT. The broad
guidelines issued by the Government are reviewed from time to time and recently the
penaity clause for failure in shipment schedule has been revised to protect the interest
of Government.

So far as P&K fertilizers are concerned, these grades are decontrolled fertilizers
and any entity can import these fertilizers on their own as per the terms and conditions
negotiated with the global suppliers. Subsidy on P&K fertilizers, on receipt in the
districts for agriculture use, is paid after ascertaining the quality and quantity of these
fertilizers as per NBS policy.

However, as per the vetted audit comments the racovery of interest of Rs.128.56
crore @ 13% interest from M/s IPL has been effected vide sanction No.2.3-49/11-
FA/OF dt.12.1.12 (copy enclosed at Annexure-VIl) (P.132),

—%U~


Audit comment
(0, AMG-I/PAC/159/8 of 2010-11/Vol. IV/315 dt.10.2.2014}

Reply was not supported with the relevant documents with broad guidelines for
import, its review from time to.time by DoF besides terms on foreign trade policy issued
by DGFT(Chapter 2.11). The details of pending amount with IPL and non-issue of
supply plan to IPL for imported urea during the period 2007-08 to 2009-10 may be
furnished to PAC.

Further Comments
(OM No.H-11021/14/2013-Parl. (Part) dt. 41.10.2044)

As desired, a copy of relevant document i.e. copy of booklet on Procedure of
Import of Urea at Annexure-IX (a) (Page No.165-183) , broad guidelines for import at
Annexure-IX(b) (Page No.184-186 ) and copy of the DGFT Chapter (2.11) at
Annexure-IX (6) (Page No.187-197) are enclosed.

Further no amount is pending from.IPL in this regard. During the year 2007-08
to 2009-10, M/s. IPL has moved the imported urea as per the movement order issued

by the movement division of DOF.
Sign boo! of Sioa)

Addit SeerstanJoint Secretary

(शाम लाल गौयल)
(SHAM LAL GOYAL)
संयुक्त wits (Joint Secretary
इसाग्नन way wees मंत्रालय
Mis, of Chemicals & Fertilizers
छर्यरक्त विभाग “Dept. of Fertlizers
नई दिल्‍ली “New paint

-29 -


Para No, 14

PAC Observations ‘Recommendations
(OM No.14/1/4/2011/PAC dt. 17 May, 2013)

The Committee are perturbed to note that subsidized fertilizers are being
consumed for preparation of mixed fertilizers by mixing units thereby breaking the
subsidy chain and at the cost of the beneficiaries/farmers. The Department have
clarified that the mixing units in the, States have been permitted to use subsidized
fertilizers due to the specific requirements as no subsidy is available separately on the
sale of customized fertilizers and mixture fertilizers. Accordingly, the use of subsidized
fertilizers for manufacturing NPK mixture fertilizers was as such allowed under the
erstwhile concession scheme and the Nutrient Based Subsidy Policy for decontrolled
phasphatic and potassic fertilizers. The Committee find that the Department have
recently decided to monitor the sourcing of subsidized fertilizers by the
mixture/customized units making it compulsory for them to source subsidized urea and
P&K fertilizers from the manufacturers directly after receipt at the District level, instead
of from dealers/retailers, and to upload the data in the FMS web based monitoring
system. The Department have also decided to release the balance payment of subsidy
to the manufacturers/importers only after receipt of complete information though the
mobile FMS, The Committee feels that these are measures in right direction and urge
the Department to further intensify their efforts in properly monitoring the sourcing of
subsidized fertilizers by the mixture/customized units, so that the subsidy chain is not
broken and the beneficiaries are not affected. tn view of the unorganised character of
the mixed units and mindful of the Fertiliser Secretary's candid confession of the need
for a better oversight control over these units, the Committee impress upon the
Department to initiate urgent requisite measures, including prescription of a tighter set
of Guidelines, to have a better feedback, enabling exercise of greater controV/oversight
over the sourcing and quality of subsidized fertilizers used by the mixed units.

Department reply
(O.M. No. 11021/11/2013-Parl. dt, eh Nov., 2043)

in order to review the existing. regulatory framework and set tighter guidelines in
addition to monitor usage of subsidized fertilizers by mixture/customized fertilizer units,
@ meeting was called on 23.9.2013 in which the representatives of State Governments
and customized/mixture were aiso invited. Since the customized/mixture are under the
purview, of the State Governments, which register those units, the State Governments
have been advised to issue directions to customized/mixture fertilizer manufacturers in
their states to register in the FMS immediately and start uploading of data in mFMS
besides emphasizing also that in the event of failure to register and uploading of date in

—3a-


FMS/mFMS, suitable action including cancellation of licensces can be taken against the
defaulters. Separate instructions are also being issued to State Governments in this
regard.

हु Audit comment
(No, AMG-I/PAC/189/8 of 2010-11/Vol. IV/315 dt.10.2.2014)
No comments,

Further Comments
(OM No.H-11021/41/2013-Parl, (Part) dt. 1.10,2014)

No further comments.

Ga!

Sigha YG Sache

Add Gecretary/Joint Secretary

ere गोयल)
( Shay LAL GOYAL)
संशुदत [दर सी 48 Secretary
1 111 %४ | gegen मंत्नालय
Mee in, of Chemicals & Festillzars
चिभाग /Deptt. of Fecillzers
sag दिल्‍ली New Deini

. ee


Para No. 15

PAC Observations /Recomiiendations Observations ‘Recommendations
(OM No.14/1/4/2014/PAC dt. 17 May, 2013)

The Committee note with profound concern several deficiencies and
inadequacies that plague the quality testing of fertilizers. Such areas of concern inter-
alia include grossly inadequate annual capacity of the existing quality control .
laboratories vis-a-vis the required capacity for testing samples from all sales outlets;
deficient physical and human infrastructure in many of the laboratories; significant
shortfalls in the actual number of samples tested, etc. What concerns the Committee
more is the non-adherence to the time limit prescribed for analysis and communication
of results of fertilizer quality testing. Though the Department is reportedly taking a
number of measures which jnter-alia include strengthening of 39 existing FQCLs;
sanctioning 15 new FQCLs; increasing the number of soil testing laboratories to 1049
with analyzing capacity of 10.7 million samples as on 31.03.2012; planning to add
another 180 static and 145 mobile soil testing laboratories etc; the Committee are still
worried over the reported existing bottlenecks in proper quality checking of fertilizers
and use of sub-standard fertilizers. The problem is compounded with the FCO
provisions under which the responsibility of ensuring the quality of fertilizers is solely left
to the State Governments, though the Central Government provide financial assistance
to the State Governments under the National Project on Management of Soil Health and
Fertility (NPMSH&F). The Committee therefore impress upon both the Departments
(Fertilisers and Agriculture) to seriously consider the imperatives involved in the quality
testing of fertilizers and constantly endeavour towards augmenting and strengthening
both physical and human infrastructure of the quality testing and soit testing laboratories
so that possibilities of supplying sub-standard fertilizers to the farmers are completely
eliminated. The Committee believe that working in tandem with the State Governments
and involving Research institutes like’ Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR)
and Indian institute of Soil Science (IISS), the Departments will certainly be able to bring
in noticeable improvements in the quality testing of fertilizers.

Para No. 16

PAC Observations /Recommendations
(OM No.14/1/4/201 /PAC dt. 17 May, 2013)

Taking note of the adverse implications of the delay in communicating results of
the fertilizer quality testing within the stipulated time period of 52 days, the Committee
exhort the Departments to prevail upon the State Governments to take stringent action
against the officials for violation of clause 30 of the FCO which provides for strict
compliance with the time limit stipulated for analysis and communication of the quality
testing results. The Committee further recommend that the penal provisions under the
Essential Commodity Act (ECA), which prescribe prosecution of offenders and

—34o-


sentence, if convicted, upto seven years of imprisonment besides cancellation of the
authorization certificate and other administrative action, be invoked against the
offenders/defaulters to deter sale/supply of sub-standard fertilizers.

Department reply
(0.0. No; 11021/11/2013-Parl. dt. 6 Nov., 2013)

For point No. 15 & 16:

The Committee has impressed upon to improve the functioning mechanism of
Fertilizer Quality Control and implementation of FCO in the states. This Ministry from
time to time takes up with the State Governments the need for strengthening of fertilizer
quality control set-up and enforcement machinery of FCO in States to ensure quality

fertilizers to the farmers etc. Recently also, the directions have been issued to all the

State Governments vide this Ministry's letter dated 31.07.2013 for taking
corrective/remedial actions on various points. Copies of various letters issued to State
Governments in this regard are enclosed as Annexure- Vill P.133-136).

Audit comment
(No. AMG-I/PAG/159/8 of 2010-14/Vol. 1V/315 dt.10.2.2014)

For point No. 15 & 16.
The reply with the following details may be forwarded to the PAC.

1. The status of increase in setting up of new quality control laboratories in each state
with proper infrastructure. है

Il. The number of samples tested and position of sub-standard samples noticed by
each laboratory.

IN. Madification of time limit for testing of samples and provision of penalty under ECA
Act.

Further Comments
(OM No.H-11021/11/2013-Parl, (Part) dt. 1.10.2074) .

Point No, 15 & 16

For details please see Annexure-X. at Page No.198-200.

Sb

be te of Secreatary/

Bttdl-Seeretary/Joint Secretary

a (शाम लाल गोयल)
है _ (SHAM LAL GOYAL)
Ayr HTT Aloint Secretary:
ome हि - wares ver, odea Faery
tain, of Ghembeals हक आकार
PRIA “Deptt, of Feilizers
नई बिल्ली “new Seni


Para No. 17

भर PAG Observations /Recommendations
(OM No.14/1/4/2011/PAC dt. 1" May, 2013)

Taking note of the admission of the representative of the DoF about complaints
of supply of sub-standard fertilizers, the Committee recommend that the farmers’
complaint lodging mechanism for sub-standard quality of fertilizers be streamlined and
they be allowed to lodge their complaints with the District Magistrate/District Agriculture
officer for expeditious and appropriate action. It is also equally important that the MPs,
MLAs and other representatives of the people as also the NGOs be provided with the
list of the exact location of the fertilizers Quality Testing Centres in the respective States
80 as to enable them to take necessary action, whenever warranted, The Committee
further desire that requisite measures be taken by the Departments so that the National
Project on Management of Soil Health and Fertility addresses the issue of contaminated
water used by the farmers while harvesting.

Department reply
(O.M, No. 11024/11/2013-Parl. dt. 6 Nov., 2013)

The Department of Agriculture & Cooperation, M/o Agriculture has issued letter
to all the State Governments advising them to streamline the farmers’ complaint lodging
mechanism for sub-standard quality of fertilizers. Besides, they have also.been advised
to provide the information in respect of Fertilizer Quality Testing laboratories to MPs,
MLAs and other representatives of the people etc. Copy of the letter issued in this
regard is enclosed as Annexure —IX (P.137).

The Committee has desired that measures be taken so that National Project on
Management of Soil Health & Fertility addresses the issue of contaminated water used
by farmers. In this regard, it is mentioned that the subject matter of irrigation water fall
under the purview of Ministry of Water Resources and information may be obtained
from them.

Audit comment
(No. AMG-I/PAC/159/8 of 2010-11/Vol. IV/315 dt.10.2.2014)
No Comments.
Further Comments
(OM No.H+11021/11/2013-Parl, (Part) dt. 1.10.2014)

No further comments. : - ae हि
मु हट पी ae

ye
sj iat ure-of Secretary/

ity/Joint Secretary

Gr लाल tos
५ a (SHAM LAL 30 ty
_ - Sige सचिव Alolat Secretary
. rary eal ‘other स्थालप्त
af Cnamlats neers
विभाग /Cepe. छा seri cers
सई Pech /New ini



Para 1१०, 18
PAC Observations /Recommendations
(OM No. 14/1/4/2014/PAC dt. 1° May, 2013)

The Committee note that at present fertilizer subsidy is given by the Government
to the manufactures/mporters. directly. In order to address the challenges in the
fertilizer subsidy framework, the DoF propase to adopt a three phased approach to
reform the subsidy disbursement mechanism through which it is envisaged to provide
subsidy to the retailers and ultimately to the intended beneficiaries i.e. farmers. In short,
Phase-l invoives creation of information visibility of the movement of fertilizers along the
supply chain from the manufacture till the retailer; Phase-il envisages release of subsidy
to retailer upon the receipt of fertilizer; and Phase-Ill proposes subsidy disbursement
directly into the bank accounts of the farmers through Aadhar enabled payment system.
While acknowledging the initiatives taken/contemplated by the DoF to reform the
subsidy dis-bursement mechanism, the Committee desire that wider national level
consultations, especially invalving the State Governments be held to so as to reforms
the system for efficient service delivery. The Committee also recommend that the
monitoring mechanism be further strengthened in unison with the State Governments to
address the challenges for ensuring an enhanced transparent fertilizer flow across the
supply chain and better delivery to the end users for a more sustainable subsidy
burden. ह ह

Department reply
(O.M. No. 11021/11/2013-Parl. dt. 6" Nov., 2013)

Following development are submitted on phased approach for subsidy disbursement:

(0). The Phase-l of application system has made operational (www.mFMS.nic.in). The
issue of Direct Benefit Transfer(DBT) in fertilizer was discussed in the PMO on 06-
05-2013. Minutes of Meeting issued vide PMO 10 No.110/31/C/32/2012-ES.2
dated 13.5.2013 refers that “National Committee on DBT has decided that the
transfer of Food and Fertilizer Subsidy through DBT ts not under consideration at
present. Therefore, Department of Fertilizers could focus other aspects of the
system they are putting in place for the time being.

(ii) The Department of Fertilizers has decided not to implement Phase-Ill and IV as of
now. Subsequent to that, Department of Fertilizers has planned to launch the pilot
for mFMS Phase-ll in the 6 out of 12 pilot district initially identified.. This would
entail capturing the sales’ details and buyers'/purchasers’ details of the sales made
by the retailer. The pilots are being implemented with the help of the Lead
Fertilizer Supptiers (LFS) of the concerned States.

As regards State level consultation & strengthening monitoring mechanism, it is
submitted that DoF has done State level consultation through Ministry fevei
implementation committee. DoF has taken State Govt. on board for Phase-| of mFMS

— wee


and also launching pilot of Phase-Il in 6 pilot district, Further, DoF has conducted
periodical discussion with Chief Secy/Pr, Secy. (Agriculture Deptt.) of major fertilizer
consuming State. State Govt. & District authorities have also been given access on
mEMS for monitoring the movement of fertilizers. Various reports on availability of
fertilizer at the retailer level have also been hosted in public domain on mFMS.nic.in

Audit comment comment
(No. AMG-I/PAC/159/8 of 2010-11/Vol. IV/318 dt,10.2.2014)

No comments

‘The periodicity of phase 1, ॥ and IV along with reasons for nion-implementation of
phase ॥॥ & IV may be furnished to PAC.

Further Comments
(OM No.H-11021/41/2013-Parl. (Part) dt. 1.10.2014)

it Is re-iterated that as per the decision taken in the meeting on Direct Transfer of
Fertilizer Subsidy chaired by Principal Secretary to PM on 6.5.2013, it was discussed
and decided that DBT in fertilizers was complex matters as there are problems in
targeting, determining entitlements and preparing beneficiary databases. Therefore, for
the moment it would be better to keep DBT away from fertilizers. Accordingly, Phase-IIl
and IV of subsidy disbursement project has been kept on hold. (for details please see
Annexure-Xi at Page No. 201-203).

The status of the operational phases is as follows:-

1. Phase —| of mobile Fertilizer Monitoring System (mFMS) has been operational
since 1°* November, 2012, and is rolled out though all the registered fertilizers
manufacturers (116), wholesalers (20,000) and retailers (2 lakhs) across the
country. Accordingly, a portion of the subsidy (§-15% depending on the grade of
fertilizers) is given to manufacturers only when the retailers acknowledge the receipt
in the Mobile Fertilizer Management Systems (mFMS). An incentive of INR 50 MT
is also given to the retailers in this phase for acknowledging the transactions. This
phase is approaching stabilization. DOF is in process of releasing balance subsidy
for the month of November, 2012 basis the fertilizer acknawledgement done by
retailers in MFMS system.

2. Phase-ll of mEMS which capture the retailer sales of fertilizers to ‘buyer’ is in pilot
state and was rolled out in 6 districts (Nawanshahar-Punjab, East Godavari-Andhra
Pradesh, Sonipat-Haryana, Bilaspur- Himachal Pradesh, Ajmer-Rajasthan and
Madurai-Tamil Nadu) on 11 August, 2013. This phase envisage building up of
beneficiary's database. DoF has also decided to extended this phase in next 6
districts (Bhadrak -Odisha, Raighar-Maharashtra, Ranchi-Jharkhand, Sehore-
Madhya Pradesh, Tinsuka-Assam,, Narmade-Gujarat). a

F
x दिए ० ही
अपर Sestetary
Addl-Searetary/Joint Secretary

(amet ‘eet भौयल)
{SHAM LAL GOYAL)
a संयुफ्त सचिव (1901 Secretary
3 STG एधन wees रुत्रालथ
— 23 -.. Min, of Chamiceta & Fortilzers
+ SARS विभाग Deptt. oF Fontlieers
oy feet /Naw Bein


Para No. 19

PAC Observations /Recommendations

{OM No.14/1/4/2014/PAC dt. 17 May, 2013)

To sum up, the Committee find that several key issues merit urgent attention which
inter-alia include overall review of the. assessment of fertilizer demand/requirement
through relevant and accurate compilation of data; capacity/production augmentation of
vatious kinds of fertilizers; creation of a conducive environment for the investors;
expansion/revival of the closed Urea units; curtailment of dependence of import of
fertilizers; due importance to Integrated Nutrient Management encompassing
conjunctive use of chemical fertilizers and’ organic manure; timely availability/supply of
fertilizers; curbing the menace of pilferage, diversion and leakage of subsidized
fertilizers; need for a better oversight/control over the mixed units using subsidized
fertilizers; augmentation in the physical and human infrastructure of the Quality Testing
and 801 Testing Laboratories; putting in place a clean and transparent subsidy
administration regime and strengthening the monitoring mechanism in tandem with the
State Governments. The Committee impress upon both the Departments i.e. Fertilizers
and Agriculture to take speedy action on. their suggestions/recommendations and
apprise them in due course. :

Department reply
(O.M. No, 11021/41/2043-Parl. dt. 6 Nov., 2013)

The reply to point in respect of assessment of requirement of fertilizers has already
been given in preceding para under recommendation No 3. Further, there is provision
for setting up of Fertilizer Quality Control Laboratories (FQCLs) and Soil Testing
Laboratories (STLs) along with human resources under National Project on
Management of Soil Health & Fertility. The scheme is proposed to continue during 12
Plan as a Sub-Mission under National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture.

Audit comment

(No. AMG-I/PAC/159/8 of 2010-11/Vol. IV/315 dt.10.2.2014)

The progress under the National Project on Management of Soil Health & Fertility
along with copy of proposal for its continuation during 12" plan as a Sub-Mission under
National Mission for sustainable agriculture may also be furnished to PAC.

— YD


Further Comments.

(OM No.H-11021/11/2013-Parl, (Part) dt. 1.10.2014)

Under National Project on Management of Soil Health & Fertility (NPMSH&F),
setting up of new 16 Fertilizer Quality Laboratories (FQCLs), strengthing of 46 number
of Fertilizer Quality Control Laboratories, setting up of new 134 Static and 123 Mobile
Soil Testing Laboratories and strengthening of 173 Soil Testing Laboratories has been
sanctioned upto 2013-14.

The scheme has been subsumed as Soil Health Management (SHM) component
under National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) in the 127 Plan from 1%
April, 2014. A copy of Administrative Approval for continuance of scheme during 2014-
15 is enclosed at Annexure-XIl (P.No. 204-206).

[रन /
A ure of Sectétary/
_-Addl. Seeratary/Joint Secretary

(शान जाल गोयल)
(81200 LAL GOYAL)
संगुक्त सचिव Jolt 8408

जज Te Gpamicals & Fertilizers
cod

en © 0. of Fortilizers
के OT (088 201

भा 1 --


CHAPTER ~ Ill

Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the
Government.

-NIL-


Clhagita V ह teat wt:
raemstins [Recemrnenacions atin TIP B
Ake, Cyvenmeand have fuente Fda Koplass |

Para Nov?

PAC Observations Recommendations

(ONE RactataiSeTHRAG- dt ay 2043}

The Committee note with profound concern that payments on account of
fertilizer subsidy increased more than eight fold from * 11835 crore in 2003-04 fo
96,803 crore in 2008-09 before coming down to 81,636 crore in 2009-10. The
Committee also note that decontroiled fertilizers were the primary factor on high subsidy
payments with an increase of almost 20 times from | 3326 crores in 2003-04 to 7 65,555
crores in 2008-09. According to the Department, the increase in subsidy amount was
due to thé cost of import of raw material for production of P&K fertilizers, fluctuation in
the Indian Currency and the increased consumption leading to continued increase in
the delivered cost of the fertilizers as the MRP remained unchanged from February,
2002 to March, 2010. The Committee are also concerned to note that although the
capacity for phosphatic fertilizers doubled fromi998-99 to 2008-09, actual production
increased by only 30 per cent. As the increase in consumptions of DAP/MAP/NPK
complexes aver this period was met primarily through imports at very high prices, there
were multi-fold increases in the subsidy burden. The Committee find that while the
installed capacity of DAP units increased from 28,70,000 MT in 1998-29 to 72,99 000
MT (arnounting to 154 per cent) in 2008-09, the production registered a negative growth
of 22 percent as it decreased from 38,867,000 MT 10 29,893,000 MT during the same
period. Intriguingly, though the production of DAP increased considerably during the
subsequent years. touching more than 84.per cent capacity utilization in the years 2009-
40 and 2010-11 and 80.8 pet cent in 2011-12, the dependence on imports for finished
phosphatic fertilisers. or phosphatic raw materials/intermediaries for indigeneous
production of phosphatic fertilisers stands at 90 per cent as the Gountry's endowments
of rock phosphate are minimal and of poor quality. Worse, the dependence on imports
for potassic fertilizers for agricultural usage is 100 per cent. The Department of
Fertilisers are reportedly encouraging exploration/surveys for locating fresh deposits of
rock phosphate and potash. The Committee, however, desire that in addition to the
steps initiated for further exploration of raw material for P&K fertilizers, the Department
should also initiate adequate steps to secure long term supplies of not only finished
fertilizers but also for new raw materials through strategic investtnents and tle ups with
fertilizer resource rich Countries especially for those sectors which are substantially
import dependent.

Department reply
(O.M. No. 11021/11/2013-Parl. dt. 6" Nov., 2013)

In order to meet the gap between the total requirement of P&K fertilizers and
indigenous production, the Department of Fertilizers has also been encouraging


fertilizer companies to explore the possibility of establishing Joint Venture (JV) projects,
acquiring fertilizer assets abroad and-entering into long. term agreements for supply of
raw materials/finished fertilizers under beneficial pricing arrangement.

In this regard, Indian companies have already set up Joint Ventures in Oman,
Senegal, Morocco, Tunisia, Jordan and Nigeria. Cooperation in fertilizers sector is
being pursued in countries tike Ghana, Togo, Belarus, Canada, Russia, Ukraine, Iran,
lrag, Jordon, Algeria etc. .

Audit comment
(No. AMG-I/PAC/159/8 of 2010-11/Vol. IV/315 dt.10.2.2014}

Action taken for setting up of joint venture projects abroad may be reported to PAC.

Further Comments
(OM No.H-11021/11/2013-Parl. (Part) dt. 1.10.2014)

Joint Ventures projects in fran, Russia, Togo and long term purchase agreement
of Potash from Canada are under consideration in the Department.

Lp

oot eueret न
ss} y tureof Sacretary/

Addi-Seerstary/Joint Secretary
& है ™
4 w ,
‘ wr

; ier
we Zeek

—(F-


Para No, 8

PAC Observations ‘Recommendations
(OM No.14/1/4/2014/PAG dt. 1°* May, 2013)

With the introduction of the Nutrient Based Subsidy Policy w.e.f. 01.04.2010, no
further rise in the subsidy amount on P&K fertilizers has been observed and in fact, the
total subsidy outgo in P&K sector saw a decline i.e, 36,107 crore for the year 2011-12
and 28,576.12 crore for the year 2012-13 (BE). On the rationale of subsidizing a
decontrotied item, the Committee are informed that the decontrol of P&K fertilizers w.e-f.
25.08.1992 adversely affected the consumption of these fertilizers as subsidy was lifted
affecting the small and marginal farmers and ultimately led to imbalance in the usage of
NPK nutrients. The Committee find that while fertilizer consumption increased by 46
per cent from 2003-04 to 2008-09, the major components of agricultural production
{foodgrains oilseeds and sugarcane) increased by just 16 per cent over the same
period, indicating a relatively weak correlation. Mindful of the fact that imbalanced use
of chemical fertilizers and neglect of organic manure results in low yields causing
stagnation in agricultural productivity; low fertilizer use efficiency with consequent low
farmer profit and further depletion of the most deficient nutrients in the soil, the
Committee impress upon the Department to accord due importance to the Integrated
Nutrient Management as contemplated, encompassing conjunctive use of Chemical
fertilizers and organic manures so as to maintain soil organic carbon for higher fertilizer
response vis-a-vis crop productivity. Further, as increasing fertilizer use efficiency
undoubtedly has a high potential of saving a huge quantity of fertilizers without affecting
the crop yield, it is of utmost importance that equal emphasis is also paid to the
adoption of better agronomic practices and use of better quality fertilizers including
organic and.bio fertilizers for sustainable agriculture. The Committee, therefore, desire
the Department to address the balanced fertilization need of the nation as a dynamic
concept with appropriate linkages and necessary inputs so that the intended goals of
NBS policy are achieved within a targeted time fame.

हि Department reply
(O.M, No. 11021/11/2043-Parl. dt. 6 Nov., 2013)

The Committee has impressed to accord due importance to Integrated Nutrient
Management and to adopt better agronomic practices. Due importance is accorded to
Integrated Nutrient Management, conjunctive use of chemical fertilizers and organic
manures is advocated to sustain soil health and promoted under National Project on
Management of Soil Health & Fertility (NPMSH&F). The scheme is also proposed to
continue during 12" Plan as a Sub-Mission under National Mission for Sustainable
Agriculture. Better agronomic practices are provided to farmers by the State
Governments and State Agricultural Universities (SAUs) through Package of Practices

— 20 +-


Audit comment
(No. AMG4/PACH59/8 of 2010-11/Vol. 1V/315 dt.10.2.2014)

The NBS policy was introduced with the objective for usage of balanced
fertilization, w. e f. 01.04.2010. The specific steps taken to achieve the intended
objectives in the light of recommendation may be intimated to PAC

Further Gomments
{OM No.H-11024/11/2013-Parl. (Part) dt, 1.10.2014)

In order to have better results in implementation of NBS Policy, the Department
has assigned a task to study the impact of NBS policy to a consultancy firm namely M/s.
Ernst & Young (EY). The key focus areas of the study are as under:~

(i) Impact of NBS policy on prices and availability of fertilizers in india.

(i) Impact of NBS policy on balance fertilization of soil and its impact on agricultural
productivity.

(iii) Mechanism to ascertain ‘reasonability’ of MRP.

(iv) Identification of additional mechanism under NBS policy to make it more effective
in achieving its objectives.

(v) — Maniotring and regulation of prices.

(vi) Price discovery and fixation of prices.

The final study report from M/s. EY is awaited. After examining the final study
report and taking views from stake holder Departments/ Companies, the Department
will take appropriate measures to achieve intended objectives of NBS Policy.

Nad
Signature of Sécretary/
Addi=Serretary/Joint Secretary

(शाम लॉल गोयल)
(SHAN LAL GOYAL)
संयुक्ता BRM /Joint Secretary
eng et adeat
Bae char lents & Feriiizars
विभाग /Peptt, of Feailizers:
नई विंशली /116७ Delhi


Para No. 9

PAC Observations /Recommendations

(OM No.14/1/4/2014/PAC dt. 1४ May, 2013)

‘

In the above context, the Committee find that the Governrhent of India are
promoting soil test based balanced and judicious use may chemical fertilizers, bio
fertilizers and locally available organic manures, like eal Manure (FYM),
compost, vermicompost and green manure to maintain soil Health and its productivity.
The Committee also find that funds are being गए to the State Governments
through various schemes of the DAC like Macro VP ement of Agriculture (MMA),
Rashiriya Krish Vikas Yojna (RKVY) and गाज lect on Management of Soil
Health & Fertility (NPMSF) for taking up all the हि & for popularization of organic
and biological nutrients, Publicity through newspaper, TV and Radio programmes is
also being taken up. Further, the Union Agrigditure Minister has taken up the matter
with the Chief Ministers; While taking due noe [8 of the various initiatives taken up by the
Government of India to promote organic and biological nutrients, the Committee desire
that a centralized monitoring ets bs: established to oversee strict enforcement of
the measures initiated/contemplated 5; “as to ensure educating the farmers on the
benefits of balanced use of fertilizers’for efficiency and protecting the soil health, In
view of the reportedly good performance of some states like Andhra Pradesh and
Karnataka in ensuring momar roductivity by maximum use of organic manure, the
Committee further desire that the DoF and DAC convince and prevail upon other State
Governments to emulate Andfira Pradesh and. Karnataka so that there is increased
productivity across the Country.

Department reply
lA No. 11021/141/2013-Parl. dt. 6" Nov., 2013)

The = ‘are educated on benefits of balanced use of fertilizers through the
component of farpiers training under National Project on Management of Soil Health &
Fertility (NPMSH&F). This component is implemented through State Governments,
ICAR, SAUs etc. The State Governments have been advised to take advantage under
NPMSH&F and Macro Management of Agriculture Schemes for training of farmers. The
State Nodal Officers (ATMA Scheme) have been instructed for providing suitable
training to farmers. GPS based soil fertility maps are being prepared by Indian Institute
of Soil Science (155), Bhopal to provide soil fertility status and fertilizer
recommendation to the farmers.

For maximizing use of organic manure, an advice note has been sent to ail
States/Sugar factories to take the benefit of back ended subsidy scheme of National

—~ 2


Para No. 14 *

PAC Observations /Recommendations
(ON No. 14/4/4/201 1/PAG ct. बह May, 2013)

५... The Committee note that the requirement for certification in Proforma ‘B' by the
State Governments for sale of decontrolled fertilizers for agricultural purposes is the
only major control over end use of fertilizers, but with the removal of such linkage since
June, 2007, adequate incentive to ensure certification by the competent authorities (viz.
the State Governmenis) of end use of decontrolled fertilizers for agricultural purposes
no longer exists. As a result, there was a steep increase in the arnount of unreconciled
sales figures which stood at © 50,587 crore for the years 2007-08 to 2009-10 as
compared to only * 111 crore for the years 2003-04 to 2006-07. The Department have
clarified that the outstanding amount as on 14.12.2011 for the period 2003 10 2010
stood at" 2447.08 crore and the latest pendency figure was ° 1947 crore subsequent to
a drive undertaken by the Department based on the Audit findings as submitted by the
Secretary, DoF in evidence, On the audit recommendation for re-introduction of the
earlier system of relating 10-15 per cent of subsidy till receipt of certification in Proforma
'B’, the DoF have contended that the Proforma 'B' was getting less relevant as the
Department is gearing up for the mobile Fertilizer Monitoring System (FMS) which will
record on a daily basis, the fertilizer receipt and sales at the retailer level in the first
stage. According to the Department, such information would be available online and
once the system stabilizes within the financial year 2012-13, subsidy payment would be
made based on the mobile FMS, which would not only obviate the need for
reconciliation of sales figures but also act as an effective disincentive against black
marketing and hoarding. Taking into consideration the Department's own admission
that there is no existing mechanism of verification of sales and stocks beyond the
district level and secondary sales and consumption patterns are being monitored by the
State Agricultural Departments, the Committee are of the considered opinion that the
DoF's role should not be limited to merely sensitizing the State Governments in light of
various reported instances of diversion of subsidized fertilizer for non-agricultural use.
Further, in view of the magnitude of the problem and the underlying consequences on
the subsidy burden due to the malpractices, it is imperative that a strict verification
regime with stringent enforcement of deterrent punitive/financial penalties based on real
time information/data be put in place. As assured by the Secretary, DoF in evidence
that the Department is developing a pilot plan to track the fertilizer movement upto the
farmer level, the Committee desire that the DoF should urgently came out with a more
robust monitoring mechanism and inspection regime with foolproof procedure for
verification of stocks/sales so as to curb the menace of pilferage, diversion and
leakages of subsidized fertilizers. हे

90) «-


Department reply
(0.9, No. 41921/11/2073-Parl, dt, 6 Nev., 2043)

Department of Fertilizers has launched mobile FMS (mFMS) system which
extends the existing FMS from district level to the retailer level . Phase-] of mFMS
plans to capture the receipts of fertilizers till the retailer level. This has been operational
since Nov' 2012 and is getting stabilized now. Phase-ll of mFMS plans to capture the
sales details & buyers deiails for ihe sales made by the retailer (ie. last point sale).
Phese-ll application has been tested successfully in Ajmer district by 6 retailers during
Feb' 2013. The application has been modified based on ihe feedback from companies,
retailer & User Acceptance Test (UAT) participants. Pilot for Phase-li is being launched
from 15" Augusi’ 2013 in 6 pilot districts initially. Once the Phase-Il stabilized, mF MS
will not only provide availability of fertilizer till retailer teval but also sales made for each
category of fertilizers to the concerned individual. This would provide DoF with a robust
monitoring mechanism for verification of stock/sales till. the retailer level.

Audit comment
(No. AMG-VPAC/H8S/8 of 2040-11/Vol. 1४/३१5 dé.10.2.2014)

Reply may be supported with the latest position of pending proforma हि
certificate from concerned state governement for proper ré-concillation of sales and
verification of stocks of fertilizers to curb the menace and diversion of subsidized
fertilizers for non-agricultural use.

Furher Comments
(OM No. H-11924/11/2043-Parl, (Part) dt. 1,10,2014)

Further, all the Director of Agriculture of concerned states has alteady been
Tequested to expediied the issuance of proforma ‘B’ pending vide this office letter No.
2.3-8/13-FA/OF dated 16.6.2014 (copy enclosed at Annexure-VIll) (Page No. 162-
164).

woot

le
Signathre of ryt

cr aryJoint Secretary

(शान लॉल गोयल)
(SHAM LAL GOYAL)
संबुक्त STA Joint Sacralary

sine उर्वरक

Min. of Chemicals & Fertilize: =
— Ie ~ उर्वरक EL apt of Ferttiy

/Mnw Math

NEW DELHI; PROF. K.V. THOMAS
७. December, 2044 Chairperson,
Agrahayana 1936 (Saka) Public Accounts Commitiee.


KUNE BORE |

No. 22004/204 2-Fert. Siat, *
Govt. of India
Ministry of Agricutture
Depit. of Agriculture & Cooperation
(NM Division)
Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi
Dated 24" Sepiembar 2072

Secretary Agriculture / Director (Agriculture;
Ali State Governmenis (Except North Easiern States)

Subject'-Zonal Conference on Agricultural Inputs for Rabi 2012-13 season regarding.

Sir / Madam,

1 am directed to refer fo the subject as Mentioned above and to forward herewith
4 copy of the minute of the conference / Meeting held under the Chairmanship of Joint
Secretary (INM) on 117 & 137 September 2012 at National Cooperative Union of India,
Conference Hall, 3, Siri Institutional Area, Hauz Khas, New Delhi 110016 for your
information and further Necessary action,

Yours faithfully,

(Shailesh)

Deputy Secretary (INM)
Encls: As Stated. eal Le

7 Adee 25) १ | .

Copy io [. 261 etretary (F&M), Department of Fertilizers (DoF),

Shashtri Bhawan, New Delhi.
2. Executive Director (TTF); Ministry of Railways, Rail Bhawan,
New Delhi

3. Director General, FAI, 10, Shaheed Jit Singh Marg, New a: A

Nuh de
Copy for information:- ९ Be

«eg pp)
20000 00 + Economic & Statistical Adviser, JS-ANM/PP) “SAS, me
),

/® (Seeds), JS (Mac! ky JS mee”. Hosticuture Commissioner, 2-7 है be

ADG (Soll), ICAR, Pu t (NCOF) Ys /“ Os “Ss 6
A पु CA. eae
\\ 4 Copy or to: EO aN a AAS A \\
“a ; PS to Secretary (A C), PPS to AS&EA, PPS io AS(BKI*
my aul valve
y \ fe,
"81... 091.

Deputy Secretary (IN M)

| (4 (Shailesh)
\


MINUTES OF THE ZONAL CONFERENCE FOR AGRICULTURAL INPUTS FOR
RABI 2012-13 RELD ON 11" SEPETEMBER, 2012

Venue: Commitee Room ‘A’, National Cooperative Union of India, Hauz Khas, New Delhi-
110016 रा

Present: As per list annexed
Subject: Assessment of requirement of féitilizers for Rabi 2012-23
tn the Zonal Conference, the main issues raised and discussed were as follow:

1. Joint Secretary (INM), Department of Agriculture & Cooperation welcomed the
participants and introduced the agenda.

७)... ६ was informed by JS (INM) that Performance Audit of fertilizer subsidy was carried ont
by Comptroller and Auditor General (C&AG) of India and there was a complete chapter on
assessment of requirement of fertilizers, It has been indicated in the report that no scientific
method is followed for assessing the requirement of fertilizers. C&AG in its report have
recommended that DAC should ensure that the seasonal fertilizers requirements are assessed 00
a scientific basis, and not merely by adding a specified percentage 10 last year’s consumption.
For this purpose, DAC should ask for submission of detailed fertilizer requirements (ideally up
to block level), preferably in electronic format so as to facilitate analysis and highlighting of
discrepancies.

In ‘order to comply with recommendations of C&AG, DAC modified the various
proformas for the coming Rabi Season, wherein an attempt was made to incorporate ‘various
suggestions made by C&:AG in its audit report.

(b) Requirement of fertilizers shall be assessed on the basis af requirements of N, P, & K
nutrients, which shall be calculated after the comparison of consumption in last season vis-a-vis
recommended dose. Gross Cropped Area, lrrigated Area and Cropping Pattern shall also be
taken into account while calculating the total requirements of N, P & K nutrlents.

(c} Besides, Directorate of Boonomics and Statistics, DAC has also been got associated in
the process of assessment of requirement of fertilizers. They have nominated four officers viz.

(i) Dr Brajesh Jha, Head In Charge, Agro-Economic Research Unit (IEG), Delhi for
North Zone

(ii) Prof Pramod Kumar, Head, Agril. Dev. & Rural ‘Transformation (ADRT), Bangalore
for South Zone

(iii) Dr Debashis Sarkar, Director, Agro-Economic Research Center, Santiniketan for
East Zone

2 ५९-


oe J ; w
#

(iv) Prof Sulchpal Singh, Chairman, CMA, TIM Ahmedabad for West LOWE

(a) MRPs of DAP, MOP and variou’ prades of complex fertilizers have risen sharply in last
two years whereas MRP of tea has remained fixed. The impact of shar p tise in MRPs of PRK
fertilizers has been the inclination of farmers to use more uvea respective of
deficiency/sufficiency of nitrogen in the soil and it has led to imbalance in the NPK ratio. Hetice,”
there is a need to promote use of crop specific, area (district) specific and soil specific
customized fertilizers. Both State Government representatives and various lead fertilizers’
Companies were requested to promote the coficept and use of customized fertilizers,

{e) Assessment of requirement
South Zone
Andhra Pradesh

2008-10 20-1 Y20fnaa 2012-13
Gross Cropped | 43.5% 45.95 40.4] आटे 7
Area (Lakh है
hectares)
Irrigated “पाक | 123,72 aj - “|
Area(Lakh
hectares)
Fertilizers (000 Req Cons “(Req | Gone Req |Cous | Proje | Assesd
tonnes) . cted Req
Req
४ .
(७) Urea 1400 1411 1560 THs8s [reds [Tara 11950 1600
(b)DAP " 475, 7315 300. 305 “5007 aaa 80 का
(c) MOP है उठ 1378 335280 175 छा Goo हि

(a) Complexes 900 Toa 900 [4079 [168 11? tase) asap

(०) SSP T1350 [| 199 (13350 गीछ 71 ऋ" apa

Consumption of Urea was 1474 (000५1) in 2011-12 against requirement of 1600 (O00MT)
Hence, requirement of ures was kept as 1600.

Similarly, as consumption was less than the requirement in last season, requirement of DAP and
MOP was kept as 500 and 334 Tespectively, same ag last season's requirement,

Requirement of Complexes and SSP was kept as demanded, ~

aie


लिन मत है Rs a . For urea, out of total quantity of 1606 (O00MT), 15000 MT was
earmarked for customized fertilizers and for MOP, out of total quantity of 335 (000७1), 16,000
MT was earmarked for customized fertilizers.

Karnataka: - , =
~ 7009-10 Ces wii 2012-13 हु
“Gross Cropped किट 7 I755 3210 06
Area (Lakh
hectares)
Trvigated 13.27” 123 [339 12.78
Area(Lakh हु
hectares)
Fertilizers (000 P| Cons Req Cons | Req Cons | Projected | Asses
tonnes) Req Req
Oty a 7 कि छा 664 | 750 700
(b) DAP “पु [aso 360 PRO 5 493} 400 25
(Mop ms [Re (2s 1छ 278 Ro किक «dB
(@ Complexes 1/550 7 570) 550 663 होती RAS) 750 700"
(० SSP 78.90 | 15 37,50 | 22 ox) के किंडठत ४ 8

J. sen — 1 a

Customized Fertilizers: No allocation in the current Rabi season, NRCL informed that they are
planing to come up with some grade of customized fertilizer in the state.


Tamil Madu:

2 :

| Gross Cropped | 36.68

Area (Lakh
hectares}

irrigated 29.27
Area(Laich
hectares}

oO

Fertitizers (000 Req Cons
‘ttonnes)

(8) Urea 700 587
(b) DAP 225 127
(3) Mor Ee 321
(d)Complexes {335 320
(9) SSP 357 _

Increase jn ST Oss cropped area and inrigated a
Consumption of fertilizers was also more ar
patrement in 2012-13 is also

and projected re

year, hence, requirement of fertili

Customized fertilizers:
with some grade in the st

Representative of NFCL
ate.

er

us|

rea is not much over the last season.
r Jess the same as the assesse
mote or less the same
pt as same as the demar

0. quantity in 20]
4S assessed quantities of Jast
nded quantities,

conveyed that they are planning to come up

—4l-


Kerala:
~~ 7009-10 mien [wii ee है
.. ..- — ve __ | |
‘Gross Cropped | 25.54 25.40 25.23 25.48
Area (Lakh
hectares) .
Irrigated 386 कीड़ा 7 4.6 ”
Area(Lakh :
heetares) “
Fertilizers (900 Req | Cons I Req Cons Req “T Cons Projected | Agses
tonnes) 5 Req
Req

(o Urea a |G छा कि ७ क्रठठ 165 105
छाए ys 9 15 16 py 33.30 30 20

. . हि ven
() MOP 6 [73 ni) 90 101 104 104

ml

{iy Complexes [90 [103° | 125 os” | 125 Ta at 121
(ey SSP 3 009 [3 Too [is 190 él 6.1

Increase in gross cropped and irrigated area is marginal over the area in last season.

Since consumption was more or less same as the assessed requirement in Rabi 2011-12-and
projected requirernent in 2012-13 is more or less same as the requirement in year 2011-12,
hence, requirement of Urea, DAP, MOP, Complexes and SSP was kept the same as the
demanded quantity.

Customized Fertilizers: No allocation in the current Rabi season. FACT informed that they are
tying to finalize some grade in the siate.

५१-


Puducherry:

i pe ny

2009-16. 567) 707 अहठ्पड
1 + .
Cropped [030° [0.35 गाए हैक
Avea (Lakh
hectares)
Trrigated 0.30 SE as - o30
Area(Lakh
hectares)
Ferfilizers (000 Req Cons Req Cons Req Cons Projected “Asses
tonnes) Req Req
(a) Urea 7 19 17 20 a er)
के) DAP 6 rie” (6 228 | 5.60 we | 4 4
@MOP P| le72 [9 45 19 196 1 4 ya
(Complexes 1040 [0.08 O20 हक फिछा 64 [44 rP
(SSP 2 (038 [2 “Tose 13 637° (20

Increase in gross cropped and irrigated area over year 2011-12 is not much. Besides, requirement
of fertilizers ig less than the last year's requirement. Hence, requirement of fertilizers in 2012-13
was kept same as the projected requirement,

Andaman Nicobar:

im tf Olt wii f .
= 007 / 0.06 “70.06 0.09
Area (Lakh
hectares)
Irrigated " a हु 7 गए
व AreafLakh
hectares)

— | - __ ~. .
Fertilizers (000 [Req | Cons Req Cons | Req Cons | Projected | Asses
tonnes) Req

Req पा
L. tn vs न
%


= 0.60 [0.28 [045 10.90 10.50 029" 7 6.86 0.60
(b) DAF | | aie 040 | 035 हक 036 की | 8.60
(©) MOP 025 [009 [0.15

(Complexes 0.40 | 0.06 0.20

(© SSP 0 0 0

निम्न वि nen ata a

Requirement of fertilizers was kept same as the projected/demanded quantities.

WEST ZONE

Gujarat
2009-10 2010-11 71747 : ~
Gross Cropped किक कक 30.03 56.04
Area (Lakh
hectares)

}. —
irrigated 26.75 45.87 46.36 34.22 1
Area(Lakh
hectares)

Fertilizers (000 Req ™ Conus “TReq “Cons Req Cons Projected Asses
tonnes) Reg
Reg

(a) Urea 950 736 [1023 | Ti36 ais छा | 1250 "475
(b) DAP 375 345" 360" S87) 400 24 | 400 400
(c) MOP 10/66 M60 Tso  पिद्व 330 5 | 100 106
‘(a Complexes [239° | 216 1350” [230 7250 205 | 280 380) -
छ SSP 60 35 60 66 00 97 जि 120

Percentage increase in gros:

12.11 %. Consumption of urea in 2011-12 was 1028 against 1175 and demanded

season is 1250. Hence, req
Requivement of balance ferti

8 cropped area over 2011-12 is 12 % and increase in

ilizers was Kept same as demanded quantities.

imigated area is
quantity in this

airement of urea was kept as 1175, same as last year's requirement.

Customized fertilizers: Representative of NFCL conveyed that they are planning to do some
research in the state.

(१.


Madhya Pradesh

im

r

pee

. किमसा

2s 77

E Cropped पाया
Area (Lakh

09.42

—h.
214.33

215-66

hectares)
Irrigated हु हु ; ~ हु ™
=
hhectares)
Bertilizers ( (000 | Reg Cons | Req [Cong Req | Cons दि
tonnes) Reg
Req
(a) Urea 900 1021 1050 | 1068 “[ Tia5" | qoe0” 1100 1100
L ne
(b) DAP 400 374 1400 [453 aes पक B00 500
(©) MGP 56 4 95 a7 75 46 30 50
(7) Complexes | 135 RS 200k Sis ie 214
(e) S5P 30 S190 एड aoe Pane 6097 | 650
Increase in gross cropped area over 2011-12 is negligible. Consumption of urea in lasl season
was 1060 against 1125 and this year projected requirement was 1100, Hence, assessed *
requirement of urea was kept same as demanded quantity,

Requirement of AP, MOP and conmplexes was kepi
Consumption of SSP was 609 in 2011-12 against a

was kept same as last year's consumption i.e. 609,
‘ ¥ a

Chattisgarh;

t same as demanded quanitities.
sessed quantity of 650, Hence, requirement

ai

2610-11

i 2-12

£

= Cropped | 1615
Area (Lakh
hectares)

16.20

17.07

18.53

Irrigated 4.69
Area(Lakh
hectares}

6.49

6.99

7.76



= mers (000 Reg Cons Req है पक Reg Const Projected Asses
tonges) ee ee _ Req | Req
(a) Urea 98 96 220 | 124 150 194 PS 190

है a [as Pa शत an कल 7 a oo
7 नम a ee पद — be 7

(के MOP 19 18 21 14 30 4] - 4%

{Complexes | 4210130 किक «aC 30S

छक्का है 53 rye eee I आओ, 80 हु ars

‘Sncrease in gross cropped area is not much over the area in last season.

‘This year projected requirement of urea was 225. Consumption of urea in year 2011-12 985 194
against requirement of 150. Hence, requirement of urea in the current season was kept as 190,
Requirement of DAP was kept as 90 against demanded quantity of 100 as last year consuniption
of DAP was 81 only.

Requirement of other fertilizers was kept same as demanded quantities

Customized Fertilizers: Representative of NFCL conveyed that they have conducted some
survey in the state to finalize the grade of customized fertilizer.

Maharashtra:
2009-10 2010-14 «| 2001-12 ina

Gros Cropped | 75.10 7x छठ बाज

Ayea (Lakh

fnectares)
| irrigated 952° 11.38 11.38 1138 7]
Aren(Lakh .

hectares)

. - चर - |

Fertilizers (000 | Req Cons | Req | Cons | Req | Cons Projected | Asses
tonnes _ Req | Reg
(a) Urea 7050) 886 [708 7250 [1030.78 [1350 | 1250
(b) DAP कह 7380 हि 650 1590 560 “560 |
() MOP वर 8 989 67 | 31S | 305 300 300

(a) Complexes | 500 1303” हित. हिल 1987 751 950 ~~ 950

,०>००५>७५७५७०५०-००० a sf sareomraf san se

(थे SSP 330 $197 [380 F265 [300 | 442 450 450

a


Consumption of urea was 103) against requirement of 1250 in year 201 1-12, Maximum Bross
Cropped area was 77.0) in Year 2010-11 and in the Current season it js Expected 10 be 79,3 6. his
279 % increase, Consumption in Fear 2010-11 was 4208, Hence, requirement of urea jn year
2012-13 was assessed as 1240),

Requirement of other fertilizers was assessed same ag demanded quantities,

Customized Partilizers No allocation in the current season. Deepak dertilizers have £07 notified
few grades of customized fertilizers in the state but they are unable to Produce it due to some
technological problems, Representative of RCF conveyed that they are also working in the state,

Rajasthan:
= 211 2012 2012-33 7
; Cropped |69.74 99.87 71.95 80.52
Area (Lakh
hectares)
Errigated ~~ 1 379g 66.83 S035 “हक
Area(Lakh
hectares)
Fertilizers x Cons | : Cong Req Cons | Projected Asses
(000 tonne tonnes) —__! कि ; Reg + Reg
(a) Urea 950 824 1000 103] 1050 1020 1135 1050
(6) Dar 1300 उन 330 Ty उठ "aaa 386
(४) MOP "TG 8 Tag Tt 26 15 7 Fas 116.45
(a) Complexes 38 44 55 32 86 65 76.10 76
(e) SSP 122” [39 125 Ws पक्ष 237 | 35530 258
—. _. L. ma
Gross cropped area was 99.87 in year 2010-11 and consumption of urea in that year was 1031
against requirement of 1000, In the current season projected 1088 cropped ares is 80 52. Hence,
requirement of urea Was assessed as 1050,

Consumption of DAP was 359 in Year 2011-12 against requirement of 350, Hence, requirement

- O27


Goa

cor less the same as the assessed quantities of last year.

assessed same as demanded quantities.

2009-10 2030-21 i 042-13
: Eropped [O37 tn 5 7 हक 637
Ayea (Lakh हु
hectares}
“Trrigated 0.40 6.36: ee oA
Avea(Lakh
hectares)
प् roe
Fertilizers Req | Cons | Req Coens | Req Cong | Projected | Asses
| (000 ६0 tonnes. . . Reg Reg
(a) Urea 7 166. | 1.54 1.80 1,82 2.30 3.40 2.50 2.50
{b) DAP Ceti fraser [130 डिश | 120 120
<c) MOP da lias” fod [037 | 0.40 Tad) 0.40 | ee
r (a) Complexes 2.65 | 2.04 1 2.14 1.37 2.50 3.00 2.65 2.65
न
(SSP 6 0 0 0 i] 0 0 0
‘Increase in goss cropped area is marginal. Consumption of fertilizers in year 2011-12 was more
orless the sameé 85 assessed requirement and projected requirement in year 2012-13 js also more

Hence, requirement of fertilizers was

D&N Haveli
Et 2010-11 = = |

= . ~ 4
Gross Cropped | 0.04 0.04 0.03 0.03
Area (Lakh
hectares)
irrigated 6.07 0.07 6.06 0.07 ~
Area(Lakh
hectares)

: . : _—
Fertilizers (000 | Req Cons Req Cons | Reg Cons = Asses
tonnes) Reg

Req
(a) Urea B36 10.29) 037 (0.26 | 0.42 a84 [0.29 039
a l है om
a


(b) DAP ane 634°" टिक

() MOP 7 हल्का eae fee
= 0 fe fo =
हज | “Tr हि ब्रा

Requirement of fertilizers was assessed samd.as the demanded Guantities

- 5५--


Assessed Roqulrement of Used, DAP, MOP, Comptbxes & SSI For Rabi 2072-13 Season

हुए ‘obt'sannos)

era UREA. DAP mor | —o S8P
ewe 2. a 4 _ coed . _ 6
_ ada Pradash 4900,00 338.00 eet _ 0000
Karreatalea 700.00 275.00 700,00,
Kereta al 405.00 104.00 724.00 —
Tamil Nadu 700.00 344.00 | 79008 |
Puducherry
ABN Islands हा |
sz7otal | 3149.60 020.80 -| . 1062.50 435
Gujarat 1175.00 400.00 100.00. | 280.00 120,00
Madhya Pradesh 1400.00 500,00 50,00 214.00 609.00
- $09.00 808.00 |
Chhatiegarh 190,00 90.00 42.00 50.00 83.00
Maharashtra _1280.00 580,00. | 300.00 950,00 450.00
Rajasthan 4050.90 380.00 1615 | _-76.00 225.00 |
Goa 2.50 1.20 0.90 | 2.88 9.00.
Bamana 0.13 003 | 004 0.07 0,01
DEN Havol 0.28 0.23 0.05 0.00 0.00
WZ TOTAL 67.92 4991.46 508.64 | 1572.72 7487.01
Haryana 1125.00 | 400.00 40.0 | 50.00 50.00
Punjab 1315.00 1 330.00 50.00 70.08 50.00
Uttar Pradesh 3400.00 | 218.00 250.00 600.00 175.00
- [Whayaktiand 410,00 “15,00 5.00 32.00 5,00
Himactal Pradesh | 29.00 0,00 6.00 | 30.0 “3.20
12K __ 78.00 45.00 28.00 0.00 __ 0.00
नीति] 5.00 3.00 | 150 2.00 Ort
Chandigarh 9.00 | 0.00 | 0.00 0,00 0.00
NZ TOTAL 6062.00 |__ 1708.00 377.50 784.00 283.90
Bihar "1180.00 278.00 480.00 200.00 100,00
harkhand 100.00 45,00 _ 18.00 __ 65.00 24.00
Orissa 200,00 190.00 90.00 120.00 9.00
West Bengal 850,00 _275.00 275.00 525.00, 308,00
EZTOTAL | 2300.00 | 688,00 530.00 310.00 441.00



MINUTES OF THE ZONAL CONFERENCE FOR AGRICULTURAL IMPUTS
FOR RABI 2012-13 HELD ON 13" SEPRTEMBER, 2612

Venue: Committe Room ‘A’, National Cooperative Union of India, Hauz Khas, New
Delhi- 110016

Present: As per list anhexed

Subject: Assessment of requirement of {ertilizers for Rabi 2012-13
In the Zonal Conference, the main issues raised and discussed were as follaw:
व्‌ Joint Secretary (NM), Department of Agriculture & Cooperation welcomed
the participants and introduced the agenda.
(a) It was informed by JS ((NM) that Performance Audit of fertilizer subsidy was
carried out by Comptroller and Auditor General (C&AG) of India and there was a
complete chapter on assessment of requirement of fertilizers. 1 has been indicated in
the report that no scientific method is followed for assessing the requirement of
fertilizers, C&AG-in its report have recommended that DAC should ensure thet the
seasonal fertilizers requirements are assessed on a scientific basis, and not merely by
adding 8 specified percentage to fast year’s consumption, For this purpose, DAC
asked for submission of detailed fertilizer requirements (ideally up to block level),
preferably in electronic format so as to facilitate analysis and highlighting of
discrepancies

In order to ‘comply with recommendations of C&AG, DAC modified the
various proformas for the coming Rabi Season, wherein an attempt was made to
incorporate various suggestions made by C&AG in its audit report.-
(b) Requirement of fertilizers shail be assessed on the basis of requirements of N,
PR&k nutrients, which shajl be calculated after the comparison of consumption in
last season vis--vis recommended dose. Gross Cropped Area, Irrigated Ares and
Cropping Pattern shall also be taken into account while calculating the total
requirements of N, P & K hutrients,
(c) Besides, Directorate.of Economics and Statistics, DAC has also been gat
associated in the process of assessrnent of requirement of fertilizers, They have

nominated four officers viz.

So"


(dy

G) Dr Brajesh Jha, Head in Chargy, Agro-Economic Research Uni (EG),
Delhi for North Zone

(i) Prof Pramod Kumar, Head,.Agril. Dev. & Rural Transformation (ADRT),
Bangalore for South Zone

(iii) Dr Debashis Sarkar, Director, Agro-Economic Research Center,
Santiniketan for Bast Zone

(iv) Prof Sukhpal Singh, Chainnan, CMA, lM Ahinedabad for West Zone

MRPs of DAP, MOP and vaiious grades of complex fertilizers have riser:

sharply in last two years whereas MRP of Urea has remained fixed. The impact of

sharp rise in MRPs of Pé&K fertilizers has been the inclination of farmers to use more

Urea irrespective of deficiency/sufficiency of nitrogen in the soi} and it has ied to

imbalance in the NPK ratio, Hence, there is a need to promote use of crop specific,

area (district) specific and soil specific customized fertilizers. Both State Government

representatives and various lead fertilizers’ companies were requested 10 promote the

concept and use of customized fertilizers.

(६) Assessment of requirement

EAST ZONE

3. Bihar

T_T e-0"T2pn0-tr | 2074-12 212-13
Gross 734.85 36.06 38.82 37.80

Cropped Area

(Lakh

hectares) - ee en _ _

Irrigated 10 11.47 11.58 12.17
Area(Lalh

hectares) oe —_

Fertilizers Req | Cons | Req | Cons | Req Cons |-Projected | Asses
‘900 tounes) _ है .. Req | Reg
a) Urea 11000 | 942 [1050 | 1026 | 1150 | 1013 1400 11150
p)DAP 1275 [244 1975234 | 975 [264 (200 275
o)MOF  110 6169 150 | 141] 165 1 1150 150
‘d) Complexes (160 | 162_ [175 [182 [200 (203 | 250 200
९) SSP [166 |4 109 [2 8o7] 00 [2 1100 100,

Consumption of Urea in 2011-12 was 1013 against assessed requirement of 1150.

Hence,

requirement of Urea was assessed as 1150 only,

599७



Consumption of DAP and Complexes in 20) 1-12 was 264 and 203 agains;
requirement of 275 and 200 respectively, Hence, fequirement of DAP and Complexes
was kept as 275 and 200. Same as last year's assessed quantity

Requirement of MOP and SSP was assessed Same as demanded quantities,

Customized Bertilizers: State 15 willing to consider the industion of castom ized
fertilizers. Interested companies were requested to approach them.

4 Jharkhand

2009-18 [2010-43 WI 2013-13 _

Gross 3.92 4.47 9.99 7,82

Cropped

Area (Lakh

hectares ji. है J
Irrigated 2.09 2.29 319 3.93

Area(Lakh :

hectares) 4 7
Fertilizers Req (०७ | Reg | Cons Req | Cons Projected [Asses
000 tonnes Re: Re
[(a) Urea] Urea [707 | 60 | 70 50 1100 90.56 [117.53 | 100

by) DAP —— 36 40_ (20 45 33.93 70,24 45 a
(c) MOP 3 ins 2.6 lia 7s 29.30 15

(a) 20 42. कि 17g PI 20.46 [65.77 65
Complexes _ . | —__|
६) SSP 5 है] 10 [3.24 [24h ag J.
Projected pross cropped area in 2012-13 jg less than the area in 2011-12,

Consuinption of Urea in 2011-12 was 90.56 against assessed quantity of 100,
Consumption of DAP wag 23.93 against requirement 6 45. Hence, requirement of

Urea and DAP were kept as 100 and 45 respectively, same as last year’s quantities,
Requirement of MOP Was kept as the quantity assessed in 20} 1-12 he. 15,
Requirement of Complexes and SSP was kept the same ag demanded quantities,

Customized Fertilizers: Representative of state conveyed that they have not yet
planned for customized fertilizer.

3. Odisha

a ae 2011-12 a 2012-13

a 25.44 26.11 23.90 30.95

Cropped

Area (Lakh

hectares) है P _.
Irrigated 9.52 997 10 10.01

Area(Lakh

hectares) aT . x Tee रे .

Fertilizers Reg | Cons | Re Cons Req | Cons Projected [Asses Asses



: a — - = ce = — aE = oy
a qounes) . et (I Reg _ + |]
9) Urea = aE Tia 175. | 134 yoo 1136 “| 200 200
it par 190165 190 की |4g री joo
तक रे 48 ह2 [586 | 88 48 190 90
(6) Too Par 1 िंड: (16 89 145 120
Complerct | _. _| ac a
(See. patie 19. 1125 130 3 LS 5

Gross cropped area has ynoreased 10 30.95 laldh hectares in the current Rabi season as
compared to 25.90 lakh hectares in Jast year.

Consumption of fertilizers in yedr 201 1-12 was less than the assessed quantities and
projected requirement of fertilizers in 2 13 is more or Jess the same as jast year’s
quantities. Hence, requirement of fertilizers was ausessed the same as demanded

quantities.

Customized Fertilizers: Representative of state conveyed that they have not yet
planned for ‘customized fertilizer.

4, West Bengal

| 2009-10 “1 2010-11 Wie a "|
Gross 39 38.5) 38.92 43.4)
Cropped
Area (Lakh
hectares: : . : a
Irrigated 6.78 11.70 8.02 7.69
Area(Lakit
hectares) _. .
Fertilizers Req | Cons Req | Cons Reg | Cons Projected | Asses
000 tonnes, _. है J Reg Reg
a) Urea छत हि [80 79 | 828 = 1125.08 _ | 850
9] DAP 1260 । 211 260 1221 | 260 276 357.06 _ (275
छठ  [265_ 278 750 [196 {250 [270 300,90 | 275
(a) 440 502 475 | 476 | 500 AST 682.87 §25
Complexes __ _
(e) SSP 290 185 350 | 231 (275 | “| 238 308.19 308
Gross cropped area has increased to 43,11 Jalch hectares in the cwrent Rabi season as

compared to 38.92 lakh hectares in last year.

Consumption of Urea in 201 1-12 was 790 against requirement of 825. Required
quantity in 2012-13 was slightly increased and kept as 850.

Consumption. of DAP in 2011-12 was 276 agaist requirement of 260. Hence,
requirement in the current season was kept as 275. हु

Similarly, consumption of MOP was 270 against yequirement of 250 in year 2011-12.
Requirement in current season was kept as 275.

Requirement of Complexes was assessed as 525,

ry wo . ६1१ -


. 8s as
Requirement of SSP was kept same as the demanded quaniiy,

Representative of state informed that companies do not supply Urea at designated
MRP. Joint Secretary (F&M) assured that they would look in ta the matter, Besides.
they instracted all the companies, which Supply Urea in the state, that such incidents
shal} nov be repeated.

Cusiomized Fertilizers: Representative of state conveyed that they have not vet
planned for customized fertilizer, -

NORTE ZONE

be Uttarakhand
3 2010-17 2011-12 2012-13 .
रे 5.86 5.82 5.75 5.84
Cropped
Area (Lalch
hectares) .. |
Irrigated 3.46 345 3.43 3.65
Area(Lakh
hectares) हे
Fertilizers Req [Cons Reg Cons Reg Cons | Projec Asses
(600 tonnes) ted Req
_ | | Req_
fa) Urea" 100 12] | 100 100 118.26 [108 118.26 (0
b)DAP [95 ld = 14 30.30 [16 30.30 [45
2) MOP 5 35 75 3.53 (14 95 [308 14.95 [5
{d\Complexes [15 “13046 7 35 a3 [arg [2g Tafa
(६) SSP हि [4.58 | To 3.92 [70 4.06 [5.05 [4 od
Increase in 87055 croppad and irrigated area ig Mmargina).
Requirement of Urea, DAP, MO) P, Complexes and SSP was assessed as 110, 155,32
and 5 respectively on the demand of state representatives,

Customized Fertilizers: Representative of state conveyed that they have not yet
Planned for customized fertilizer. पु

2. Himachal Pradesh

दे

i Ft 2017-12 is 2012-13
Gross 4.5) 4.58 4.55 “| 458

Cropped
Area (Lakh
hectares) है
Irrigated 0.94 0.94
Area(Lakh पु
hectares) हि i . . हा



= ° _ पल eq Cons | Req See =e 55588
‘000 tonnes) . . _| Req. Reg
a) Urea 22 356 (29 127 | 28 28.12 | 29.50 29

(७) 907 1.o gto fo 0 8 0 8

MOF te aap [ox 44 [6 sai | 6 6
(a)Complexes | 32 _ at 2813 1 32.5 (32.4 | 35 20,39 | 30.5 30 |
esr [450 1346 [5 213.88 3 3.06 (32 3,

Increage in gross cropped and iyrigated 8188 is marginal.
Consumption of fertilizers in 2011-12 was more or less the same aS assessed
quantities and projected quantities in 2612-13 are more or 1688 the same as assessed
quantities, Hence, requirement of fertilizers was kept same as demanded quantities.

3. Jammu & Kashinir
2009-16 21 2000-12 [2032-13

:

Cropped

Area (Lakh

hectares a

Yrrigated

Area(Lakh

hectares). कि

Fertilizers Feq | Cons | Req | Cons Req | Cons Projected | Asses
000 tonnes) _t + 4 Req | Req
3) Urea 70 170 75 gi 78 wa 8 78
b) DAP 140 | 24.5 40 52 45 3] _ AS 45 |

Mor [ie 1176 12) ye [25 19 25 25
_(a)Complexes lo | 0 0 0 0 = 0 lo
2S 0 0 i re _|
Consumption of fertilizers in 2011-12 was more or Jess the same as assessed
quantities and projected quantities in 2012-13 same as assessed quantities i year
20) 1-12. Hence, requirement of fertilizers was kept same 89 demanded quantities.
Further, state rep reseytative requested that NEL may be asked to supply Urea and TPL

may be asked to supply DAP and MOP. Besides, butfer stocks of Urea may: also be
created by NFL.

4, Baryapa

2s = ft | 2012-23
= Cropped | 31.26 31.68 31.79 32.86
Area (Lakh
hectares . हि हि _—
Irrigated 0.31 0.33 031 0.34
Area(Lakh
hectares, . Ra .
Fertilizers (00 006 Re | Cons | Re { Cons Req |. Cons | Projec [Asses

-+ |.


[toma nes) जप °
3 ne TS
(by DAP 1 400
(0) MOF 25
8) Complexes 20
OF 07

Increase in gross cropped and irrigated area is marginal.

Consumption of fertilizers in 2011-12 was more or jess the same ag assessed
quantities and projected quantities in 2012-13 are same as assessed quantities in year
2011-12, Hence, requirement of fertilizers was kept same as demanded quantities,

Customized Fertilizers: State is willing to consitler the induction of customized

fertilizers. Interested companies were téquested to approach them,

Joint Secretary, DOF requested state representative that there should be a mechanism
to contro} diversion of agricultural grate Urea to non-agricultural sectors, particularly
in Yamuna Nagar district. Besides, requirement of Urea for non-agricultural use shal]
also be assessed and conveyed to DOF, DOF will be creating a facility to ensure
supply of industrial grade fertilizers (non-subsidized urea) to states. State
representative conveyed that they have Jodged 51 FIRs in this regard and they would
send the details to DOF. State representative requested DOF that rake point at Gohana

may be made operational.

5. Punjab

2009-10. 2040-11 2011-12 2012-13 |
39.01 38.79 39.09 39.08
Cropped Area
(Lakh
hectares) . .. _
Irrigated 38.38 38.21 38.62 38.62
Area(Lakh
hectares) | 7 _ -
Fertilizers Reg [Cons | Req Cons | Reg Cons | Projected | Asses
000 tonnes) | _ . .. Reg nj Reg
(a) Urea. 1300 | 1372 (15350 [1432 | 1350 | 1354 | 1315 1315

b) DAP 530 [452 [325 [ass [ars जि 13386 330

|(c)MOP 35 30. 137 40 46 50 50
0) Complexes | 25 40 42 130 58 | 100 me
(६) SEP 25 13.17 | 25 23,6) | 25 3 50 50
Increase in Gross cropped and irrigated area in 2012-13 is marginal,

Consumption of Urea, DAP, MOP was more or tess the same a$ assessed quantities in
year 2011-12 and projected quantities in 2012-13 are same as assessed quantities in
year 2011-12, Hence, requirement of Urea, DAP and MOP was kept same as

demanded quantities,

he



Consumption of Complexes was 68 against the requirement of $0 in year 2011-12 and
accordingly, requirement was kept as 70 in year 2012-13,
Requirement of SSP was kept same as demanded quantity

Customized Fertilizers; State is willing to consider the induction of customized
fertilizers. Interested companies were requested to approach them.

a. Uttar Pradesit

: . [2009-48 wit [201-2 aia 1

Gross 150.83 152.12 152.76 152.76

Cropped ह ‘

Area (Lakh

hectares’ . . _

Irrigated

Area(Lakh

hectares) . हि . he te :

Fertilizers Req | Con | Cons | Req Cons | Proje | Req Assd

(060 tonnes) eted | for Req

Req | Custo

. ~ . . mised

4 (a) Urea 3600 [3072 [325 | 3133 | 3300 3156 | 3850 [1.5 3400
0

b) DAP Tse [ors हित | 393 5 लिए [1150 Ts 918

2) MOP {50 [251 | 200 [114 | 250 133 250 | 14 250

oe 450 [708 {350 | 502 - | 600 473 700 600

i(e) SSP 1150 1167 [200 | 126 | 250 167 iw ft एड |

@ TSP re

There is no increase in estimated gross cropped area in year 2012-13 over the last
year. :

The state informed in writing the requirement of Urea as 3994 but state representative
during the conference reported that their demand of Urea in the coming Rabi season is
3850. Department of Fertilizers conveyed that there is no increase in the estimated
gross cropped area in 2012-13 over the area in 2011-12 and consumption of Urea in
7011-12 was 3156 only against the assessed requirement of 3300. Hence, the
requirement of Urea shall be kept as 3300 only. But after detailed discussions and
constant insistence of state representative to increase the quantity of Urea, finally the
requirement of Urea was assessed as 3400 for Rabi 2012-13.

Requirement of DAP was assessed same as last year’s requirement i.e, 915.
Requirement of MOP and SSP was assessed same as the demanded quantities.
Consumption of Complexes was 473 only against the assessed requirement of 600 in
year 2011-12) Hence, requirement of Complexes in the year 2012-13 was assessed as
600.

Customized Peres Out of 3400 quantity of Urea, 1500 MI 1500 MT shall be earmarked
for customized fertilizers. Similarly, out of total assessed quantities, 15000 MT and
14000 MT of DAP and MOP shall be earmarked for customized fertilizers

respectively. 3000 MT may be earmarked in case of TSP.

~—63-


State representative fequested DOF that. 50 % of the total allocation of Urea shal} be
given through co-cooperatives,

4. Belk
= . जा far ~ ia i
Gross 0.34 0.3] 0.36 “10.36
Cropped | :

Area (Lakh | [|

Hectares) eg : a .. हि —_ i. हे
Irrigated 0.41 0.42 0.40 0.40
Area(Lakh

hectares) || . .

Fertilizers Reg | Cons Reg” | Cons Reg Cons TR Asses |
000 tonnes) | .. . _ 1 Reg
fa) Urea kh है 13 [0.59 5 5
b) DAP J 3 0.15 3 3
c) MOP है Ls 10 Ls 1.5
| (d)Complezes | 2.0 0 20 2

€) SSP [070 [| iy 9.70 19.70

Requirement of fertilizers was assessed same as the demanded quantities,


Asaessed Requirement of Urea, DAP, MOP, Complexes & SSP For Rabi 2012-42 Seseon

eon (085)

is = ~ “UREA, DAR MOP acne Compipxes SSE
. A. 2 बे 5 5

ER “hye न __ 1600.00 336.00 1250.00 ____ 200,00
Karnatake 700,00 275.00 7oo00, | 350 ||
Kerala 105.06 i 427.00

rami Nadu बी 700.00 344.00 || 376.00

[Puducherry 14,00 नई 14.00

ABN Jelands 060 0.०0 0.50 OBE _|
4SZ TOTAL 3119.60 4028.60 1062.60 | zaetes

eyjarat ‘175.90 | 400,00 |: 100.00 280.00 “120.00
Madhya Pradesh | 1100.00 500.00 1 50.00 1 2400 | 609.00 4
Chhatisgam 190,00 90.00 | 42.00 50.00 83,00
Maharashtra 1250.00 560,00 300.00 380.00 __ 480.00
Rajasthan ___1060,00, 380.00 | 16.15 76:00 225.00
Goa 2.50 4.20 0.46 2.65 0.00
[Daman Diy 0.13 0.03 0.04 0.07 लि

D&N Haveli | 0.29 | 0.23 eon 2205 ~~ une 00 0.00

Wz TOTAL 4767.92 1934.48 508.64 4872.72 1467.01 |
Haryana 1425,00 400.00

Punjab - 4315.00 330.00 eo

Uttar Pradesh 3400.00 915.00

Yttaraichand | 310.00 18,00

Himachal Pradesh 8, [000 |

Jak 7800 | 48.00

Delhi 5.00 300 ७

Chandigarh 0.00 0.00

NZTOTAL | 6062.00 1708.00

Bihar “(4180.00 [278.00

Jharkhand 100.00

Orissa 200.00

West Bengal 850,00

EZ TOTAL 2300.00



No. 22004/2042-Fert.Stat,
Govt. of India
Ministry of Agriculture
Deptt. of Agriculture & Cooperation
(INM Division)
Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi
Dated 21° September 2012,

To, .
Secreiary Agriculture / Director (Agricutiure)
Ali North Eastern States -

Subject:-Zonal Conference on-Agricultural Inputs for Rabi 2012-13 season regarding.
Sir / Madarn,

| am directed io refer to the subject as mentioned above and to forward herewith
@ copy of the minute of the conference / meeting held under the Chairmanship of Joint
Secretary (F&M), Department of Fertilizers on 197 September 2012 at May Fair.
Ranipool, Gangtok, Sikkim for your information and further necessary action.

Yours faithfully,

a
(Shailesh)
Deputy Secretary (INM)
Encis: As Stated. sigh ye
. ye
Copy to:- 1. JojetSecretfary (F&M), Department of Fertilizers (DoF).
Shashtri Bhawan, New Delhi.
2. Executive Director (TTF), Ministry of Railways, Rail Bhawan,
New Delhi
3. Director General, FAI, 10, Shaheed Jit Singh Marg, New Delhi — 67

Ah
Copy va formation:- Beg Bead af ao
eee Mee Conti sioner, Economic & Statistical Adviser, JS (INM/BPY 36 9
JS (888०8), IS (Machinery), JS(Crop$), JS ie Horticulture Commissioner, |

ADG (Soil), ICAR, Pusa, Director (NCOF) Ae tg,
AVN bras

ra
PPS ip Secretary (A&C), PPS to “re PPS to AS(BK);——— 7)
(Shailesh) _

aspen Jie
| 4
ar Ay
Deputy Secretary (INM)

00

~C6- \

Copy alse to:

60.०0


MINUTES oF THE ZONAL CONFERENCE OF NORTH EASTERN STATES
FOR AGRICULTURAL INPUTS FOR RABI 2012-13 HELD ON 29"
SEPETEMBER, 2012

Venue: Teesta, Conference Room, MayFaix, Ranipool, Gangtok, Sikkim

Subject: Astessment of requirement of fertilizers for Rabi 2012-13

In the Zonal Conference, the main issues raised and discussed were as follow:

Joint Secretary (F&M), Department of Fertilizers welcomed the participants and
introduced the agenda. हे

1. Assessment of Requirement:

NORTH EAST ZONE

4. Assam

a 2009-10 «| 2020-11 21-2012
Fertilizers Req Cons | Reg Cons | Req Cons | Proj | Asses
O00 tonnes) ff de os Req ___| Req
a) Urea | 140.00 | 139.58 | 140.00 | 138.41 | 160.00 | 168.41 | 200.00 | 170

b) DAP | 20.00 [38.47 [40.00 [41.50 [40.00 | 44.50 | 40.00 [40
[MOP [70.00 [659 | 70.00 [67.23 [80.00 | 73.22 [90.00 | 90

d)Complexes [0.00 10.00 [0.00 [0.00 [20.00 [0.00 (20.00, | 20
[@ ssp [60.00 [59.38 [60.00 [57.55 [7000 | 63.55 (8000 180

Consumption of Urea in 2011-12 was 168 against requirement of 160. Hence,
requirement of urea was assessed as 170.
Requirement of other fertilizers was assessed as demanded.

2. Tripura
2009-10 | 2030-44 _

Gross

Cropped Area | 1.98 2.06 | 2.14 2.18

(Lakh

hectares) i} है .
Irrigated है

Area(Lakh 0.49 0.52 0.53 0.53

hectares) की

Fertilizers Req Cons [Rea | Cons | Req

‘000 tonnes
‘a) Urea 20.00 13.69 | 23.00 [8.60 | 24.00 | 12.

b) DAP 2.52 0.93 12.60 [1.10 (2.60 [11

९0) MOP 3.60 339 (850 [350 (950

9) Complexes [0.00 [0.00 10.00 (000 | 0.00
(08570 7 [9.05 8.29 (22.30 [11.21 [23.50

-99-



Requirement of fertilizers was assessed same as demanded quantities. *

3 Manipur

2009-10 2010-11 टी 2012-13
Gross .
Cropped Area | 1.31 1.01 1.02 1.22
(Lakh . -
heetares) 0७ a न | paneer लि nnn
Irrigated .
Area(Lakh 0.0689 0.1768 0.2867 0.4500
hectares) : 4
Fertilizers (000 | Req | Cons | Req | Cons | Req Cons | Proj | Asses
tonnes _ वि Req | Req
a) Urea {io (245 हिट [1250 [2.69 "711.06 | 14.06
b) DAP LA7 | 0.45 mi 2.50 | 0.82 [1.41 0.39 6.81 | 6.81
ce) MOP 1.44 [0.19 | 1.50 (0.27 [0.87 0.27. (4.76 | 4.76
है) Complexes [0.00 | 0.00 00 10.00 [0.00 0.00 0.00 | 8
e) SSP 113 [044 [0.95 | 0.71 1108 0,27 6.61 | 6.81

Requirement of fertilizers was assessed same as demanded quantities.

4, Meghalaya

—_ 2009-10 2010-11 (| 2021-12 2012-13
Gross Cropped :

Area (Lakh 0.28 0.28 9.33 0.42
hectares ae

Irrigated

AreaCLakh 0.0706 0.0759 0.0825 9.0908
hectares on hee . a
Fertilizers (000 | Req |Cons.| Req | Cons | Req | Cons | Proj | Asses
tonnes} _ ee Req | Req
a) Urea 390 (2.9 (3.90 13.17 | 4.50_| 3.05 4.50 14.50
b) DAP 190 [011 [150 11.53 [2.00 | 0.45 3.00_|3
(c) MOP 0.45 10.39 (0.45 0.57 [070 | 017 0.75 10.75
(d) Complexes | 0.00 10.00 | 0.00 (000 (000 10.00 0.00 | 0
e) SSP 420 [2.27 [3.50 (202 [3.50 [2.19 2.70 12.70

Requirement of fertilizers was assessed same as demanded quantities.

-८९-


& Nagaland

[ ~ 2009-16 2010-11 71-13 1 2012-13
Gross 1.072 0.73 0.72 0.74
Cropped
Area (Lai:
hectares ee fn, —_ =
irrigated
Area(Lakh 0.05 6.015 0.025 0.035
hectares - . है
Fertilizers Req Cons | Reg, | Cons | Req Cons | Proj | Asses
000 tonnes) |. eS nok .. Re Reg
a) Urea 045 [0370.08 [055 [009 [6.61 [10 [no
b) DAP 0.35 0.29 | 0.55 0.43 [060 [051 10.74 0,74
o)MOF (0.15 [012° [020 [013 िह [0.18 [031 | 0.34
d)Complexes | 0.00 10.00 | 0.00 0,00 0.09 0.15 0.24 0.24
e) SSP 0.17 0.02 [0.14 90.12 | 0.14 0.21 0.21 0.21
Requirement of fertilizers was assessed same as demanded quantities.
6.  Arwpachal Pradesh
= 2009-10 2070-11 2014-12 2012-13
Fertilizers Req | Cons | Req Cons | Req Cons Proj | Asses
| (900 tonnes . _ . Re Re
a) Urea {0.40 | 0.40 10.57 0.40 | 0.57 0.28 0.28
(0) 989 _ 1 630 (010 [00s [010 666 | 0.35 | 0.35
MOP [0.10 [020 [005 [020 (0.06 016 [0.४ |
d)Complexes 10.00 10.00 [00 [0800 (0.00 ठ 0 |
०887 [0.20 [030 [00% [030 [0.08 मा शान
Requirement of fertilizers was assessed same as demanded quantities.
7. Mizoram
[2009-10 "3012-13
Gross
Cropped 0.024 0,129
Area (Lakh
- hectares’ +} .
Fertilizers Req | Cons [Req | Cons | Reg Cons | Proj | Asses
000 tonnes हि _ : Req | Reg
a) Urea 224 [O18 [O19 [O19 [डी [og1 [toi लिए |

C9.



m

eet DAP ae oad 045 [045 [047 [030 16% एछष
‘c} MOP £06 10.09 (0.09 [0.09 [O11 0.20 0.43 | 0.43
d)Complexes | 0.00 [0.00 [0.00 [600 [620 1000 [10.09 | 0.00
शो 9000 10.00 000 [0.00 [0800 000 0 | 0.80 | 0.80
Requirement of fertilizers was assessed same as demanded quantities

2.” Other issues:

(a) Most of the State representatives raised their concemm regarding timely
movement and transportation ‘of fertilizers in their respective regions. Joint
Secretary (F&M) assured all of them that they would look in to the matter.
Besides, he also informed that Department of Fertilizers is in the process of
finalizing the rates per kilometer/MT for secondary freight subsidy for Urea.
Regarding P&K fertilizers, orders have already been issued.

(0) Director (Sikdcim) raised the issue re;

fertilizers etc,

garding subsidy on bio-fertilizers/organic



Assessed Requirement of Urea, DAP, MOP, Complexes anc SSP for
Rabi 2012-13 Season

(in ‘000 tonnes)

3 UREA DAP. MOP” |Complexes| SSP
a 2 3 _ 4 5 iS
Assam ह 170.00 40.00 “9000 20.00 80.00
Tripura 23.40 3.10 933 _ 6.00 22.05 |
Manipur 11.06 6.84 476 0.00 6.81
Meghalaya aD 0.75 0.00 2.70
Nagaland 100 0.74 031 0.24 “oat |
Arunachal 8:28 | 0.36 0.16 0.00 |]
Pradesh

Sikkim 0.00 0.00 6.00 0.00 | 0.00
) Mizoram हु 7.01 पक 0.43 6.00 0.80
NET TOTAL “310.95 “$4.28 408.74 20.24 12657 |



F.No, 22002/ 2012 - Fert. Stat PAINEURE 7
Government of India
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation
(Fertilizer Statistics Section) हे
Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi
Dated the 20th February, 2013

To

Secretary (Agriculture) / Director (Agriculture),
-All State Governments

Subject: Zonal Conference on Agricultur:

al Inputs for Kharif 2013
Season. regarding

Sir / Madam,

arch (ICAR),

NASC Complex, Pusa, New Delhi for your information and further

necessary action,

This has approval of the Joint Secretary {INN}. 7)
Go prec जिस

$e,
(M.S. Dhanda}
Assistant Director(s}

Copy for information and necessary action to :

1. Joint Secretary (Pa, M) Department of Fertihzers (DOF), Shastr
Bhawan, New Delhi.

2. Director (Movement), Department of Fertilizers (DOF)
Bhawan, New Delhi.

3. Executive Director (TTF
Dethi.

4. Director General, FAY, 10 Saheed Jit

Shastri
], Ministry ot Railways, Rail Bhawan, New.
Singh Marg, New Delhi.

Copy for information to:

JS(Seeds), JS(Machiner ), JS(Crops),
Horticulture Comm 3
Divector(NCOF),

JS(Extension), JS(PP),
1 ADG(Scilj, CAR, Pusa,

Copy also to:

Sr. PPS to Secretary (A&C), PPS to SS(AKT), PPS ३6 SS(SH), PPS to
AS&FA (RC), PPS to AS[AKS)


MINUTES OF THE ZONAL CONFERENCE FOR AGRICULTURAL Irurs FOR
HETARIF 2013 HELD ON 9g” FEBRUARY, 2013

Venue: Lecture Hall, If Floor, NASC Complex, OPS Marg, Pusa, New Delhi
Present: As per list annexed

Subject: Assessment of requirement of fertilizers for Kharif 2013

In the Zonal Conference, the main issues raised and discussed were as follow:

1. Joint Secretary (INM), Department of Agriculture & Cooperation weloomed the participants
and introduced the agende.

(a) It was informed by JS (INM) that Performance Audit of fertilizer subsidy was carried out by
Comptroiier and Auditor General (C&AG) of India and there was a complete chapter on assessment
of requirement of fertilizers. It has been indicated in the report that no scientific method is followed
for assessing the requirement of fertilizers, CRAG in its report have recommended that DAC should
ensure that the seasonal fertilizers requirements are assessed on a scientific basis, and not merely by
adding a specified percentage to last year’s consumption. For this purpose, DAC has since last Rabi
2012-13 introduced Revised Proformas and requested State Governments to do at least block-wise
analysis (ideally it should be Village-wise) and assess requirement as per actual need,

(>) It has been observed in the current Rabi season that the gales oF P&K fettilizers are very Jow
despite these fertilizers being available in sufficient quantities, Department of Fertilizers (DOP) has
been constantly requesting State Governments in weekly video conferences. to lift the fertilizers as
per their allocation plan, but they are not lifting the fertilizers,

In light of huge subsidy outgo from Consolidated Fund of India, State Governments were
Tequested to be realistic in their projection of requirement of fertilizers in the Upcoming Kharif
season. Besides, the unsold stocks of current season and historical consumption trend of fertilizers
(capacity of farmers to use fertilizers) shall also be taken in to account while projecting the -
requirements for the upcoming season.

Further, State Governments were advised to prepare the monthly requirement plans keeping
in mind their peak season for requirement so that they could have sufficient stock of fertilizers with
them when the demand of fertilizers actually increases.

(०)... MRPs of DAP, MOP and various grades of complex fertilizers have risen sharply in last two
years whereas MRP of urea has remained fixed. The impact of sharp rise in MRPs of P&K fertilizers
in relation to Urea has been the inclination of farmers to use more urea irrespective of

deficiency/sufficiency of nitrogen in the soi and it has led to imbalance in the NPK ratic.. Hence,

3 -


there is a need to promote balanced use of fertilizers by using various methods such as soil testing,
nutrient manager tool, usé of area Specific customized fertilizers etc, Both State Crovernment
representatives and various joa? fertilizers’ cormipanies were requested to promote the above
mentioned concepts/methods.

Department of Fertilizers is also trying to take measures, which would help in reducing the
distortion among the prices of various fertilizers.
(0) State Governments were also requested to make efforts for creation of new soil testing
laboratories and improvements in the existing laboratories int their respective States. ES (NM) also
informed that Indian Institute of Soil Sciences (189), Bhopal has uploaded the soil fertility maps of
around 190 districts on their website. State Governments shall try to have a fook on these maps and
make efforts to develop such kind of maps in their respective states.
(e) International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) has developed ICT tool for Nutrient Manager
which is tailored for rice production in major tice growing countries or regions. This Nutrient
Manager tool ‘provides a field specific fertilizers guidelines/dosage based on information obtained
from the response to questions about rice growing conditions in the field like season of rive growing,
method of rice! establishment, type of variety, duration of’ crops, total yield of rice typically:
attainable, method to manage the crop residue at harvest of previous rice crops, soil texture, *
application of organic material etc. ‘This is in advance stage of testing in Tamil Nadu.

All the State Governments were requested to have.a look at this too! and may endeavor in the
coming years to promote these types of strategies/tools.
ice The representative from Railways informed that loading/unloading time of fertilizers at many
rake points is much more than the stipulated time, Hence, he requested all the representatives of the
fertilizers’ suppliers that this matter may be looked into and corrective measures may be taken on
priority. JS (INM) suggested that a consolidated list showing comparison of loading/unloading time
taken by various companies at various rake points, where such problem occurs repeatedly, may be

communicated to all the manufacturers by Railways.

(g) Assessment of requirement:
NORTH ZONE

1, Haryana

rae “ee है ae हु aml

Fee Cropped 263.15 264.19 243.95 269.57
Area (Lakh

Hy -


= ik a रा है पा हा _*
Irrigated 259.3] 271.08 271.16 271.46 i
Area(Lakh i
hectares) . i = — .
Fertilizers (000 | Reg Cons | Reg Cons | Reg Cons | Proj Asses |
tonnes} Req Req |
|

Ls _ sn 7 vs on ae
(8) Urea 850.00 | 718.67 850.00 | 846.63 875.00 | 793.20 875.00 | 856.00 i
= i

= DAP 320.00 [270.50 1320.00 | 33316) 330.00 302.53 | 320.60 | aad.60 |

(०) MOP or 36.65 [3500 | T1158 बराफ “Tes 25.00" | 35 96

&
a ae

{d} Campiexeg 25.00 1734.88 35.00 | 38-72 50.00 19.79 150.00 35.00 | !
©) Sap 25.00 [2657 किक जिक Tho aa 5000" किक!

. |
Urea:

Consumption of urea was 793 LMT in 2012 against the requirement of 875 LMT. But State
Government has Projected an increase in the श7088 cropped area in the upcoming season. Hence,
Tequirement of urea was Kept close ta jast Season's requirement i.e. 850, LMT.

DAP, MOP, Complexes, SSP;

Looking at the trend of consumption against the requirement in last 3 years (since Kharif 2010) and
Projected demand during the upcoming Kharif Season. requirement of DAP, MOP, Complexes and
SSP was kept as 300, 25, 35 and 40 LMT respectively.

Assues/Concerns:

1. Representatives from State Government requested that new railway rake point at Jhajjar for
fertilizers may be created and newly created rake point at Gchanna (Sonipat) may be made
operational, The representative from railways requested them that the proposal along with
justification may be sent to concerned DRM/Railway Board for their consideration.

2 ‘They requested that existing maximum Timit/oap on license fee required for registration of
fertilizer dealers ete may be increased. It was requested that proposal(s) in this regard may be gent to
Ministry for their examination.

2. Punjab

जि न बल


Kharif 2010 Kharit 2811 Kharif 2012 WKharif 201368)
Gross 39.30 39.33 39.33 39.34
Cropped
Area (Latch
hectares) . हि .
irrigated 38.20 38.27 38.27 62.91
Area(Lakh
hectares) . _. हि
Fertilizers - | Req Cons | Reg Cons Reg Cons Proj Asses
(000 Reg Reg
tonnes) —_— i ~ 24 गा हे
(a) Urea 1250.00 | 1248.28 [1250.00 | 1333.61 1325.00 | 1340.63 | 1350.00 | 1325.00

(DAP (600.60 | 378.46 | 600.00 raey Sy | 550.00] 39240 | 580.00 | 598.09

@ Mor 156.00- [39.86 156.00 [23.30 हक 135.26 | 56.00 | 40.00

(Complex 3000 . 3479 (30.00 146.64 150.00 | 25.97 30.00 | $0.00

(©) SSP कु | 2605 किक | 27-68 | 25.00 3702 125.00 | 25.00
1. L. mad

Urea, DAP, MOP, Complexes, SSP:

Looking at the trend of consumption against the requirement in last 3 years (since Khatif 20] 0) and
projected demand during the upeoming Kharif season, requirement of Urea, DAP, MOP, Complexes
and SSP was kept as 1325, 500, 40, 50 and 25 LMT respectively.

Usswe/Comeern:

Representative from State Government requested that addresses and other details regarding soil

testing and fertilizers testing laboratories may be uploaded on the websites,

3. ° Uttar Pradesh

aa Kharif 2011 r ea _{ Kharif a
Gross 122.01 123.77 123.42 124.13
Cropped , हु
Area (Lakh
hectares tie 4
Irrigated : - ae _.



= "

i) ectares} . = ५, es a

Fertilizers | Reg : Reg Cons Req Cone Proj Asa Reg
(090 Reg

fonnes)

(a) Urea 2510.00 | 2286.05 2500.00 | 3855.08 [260060 1368.50 3000.00 | 5976"

(0) 0७8... 18 7" | #4931 1050.08 | कह 10 | 76493" 1 95000 | Sanat”

() MOP "| 176.00 किक 1130.80 कक कि 106.00] 95.85" | 360.00 19018

(d)Compiex | 59300 1 कखउड | 335,05 593.89 7575.00} 373.28 | 70000 | aang

(77 Tea ator [a 200.00" 264.85 | 25000 दिक्लछ 7४

(ce) SSP 170.80

Urea:

Consumption ‘of urea was 2684 LMT in 2012 against the requirement of 2600 LMT. But
representative of the State pointed out that consumption was less as urea was not available in
sufficient quantity in the months of J uly and August of last season otherwise consumption would
have been more. Besides, an increase in gross cropped area of paddy, wheat etc is also expected,
Hence, requirement of urea was kept as 2800 LMT.

DAP, MOP, Complexes, SSP:

Looking at the trend of consumption against the requirement in last 3 years (since Kharif 2010) and
projected demand during the upcoming Kharif Season, requirement of DAP, MOP, Complexes and
SSP was kept as 950, 100, 600 and 250 LMT respectively.

Customized fertilizers: For DAP, out of the total quantity of 950 LMT, 6500 MT was earmarked

for customized fertilizers and for MOP, 4500 MT was earmarked out of the total quantity of 100
LMT.

4. Uttarakhand

. . 2010 er Kharif 2011 | Kharif 2012 ine 2856) _}
S 0.0664 0.0730 0.0650 0.0664
Cropped
Area (Lakh .
hectares) |

> १) -


Irrigated 0.035 0.0343 0343 0.0379 1
Area(Lakh 1
hectares. ही ae . . a
Fertilizers Reg Cons Req Cons | Req Cons/ | Proj ASSES
(000 tonmes) : Sale Reg Reg
क्र 1155.00 PTS415 P T9500 [135.95 [135.24 7 | 135.00
८४० न णल पल mn sme ५०४ ware ewan vee |
(b) DAP 3.00 11331 120.00 | 1920 2000. [10.32 [25.14 | 2¢.08
q
2.० हु "०: का
(©) MOF 460 1177 [466 [080 [5.00 [2.73 | 5.30 BE
(@Compier | 13:00 छड़ी 125.007] 18.78 [25.00 [14.86 | 35.22 25.68
७) SSP 10.00 | 3.09 | 10.00 (3.97 1 10.00 70.00 | 8.06
. aed oe
Urea:

Consumption of urea was 135.24 LMT in 2012 against the requirement of 135.95 LMT. Hence,

requirement 0

DAP, MOP,

Complexes, SSP:

urea was kept same as demanded quantity i.¢.135 LMT.

Looking at the trend of consumption against the requirement in last 3 years (since Kharif 2010) and

projected demand during the upcoming Kharif season, requirement of DAP, MOP, Complexes and
SSP was kept as 20, 3.5, 25 and 5 LMT respectively.

5. imachal Pradesh

a aaa Kharif 2012 an
. . ‘ 20138)
Gross 0.0455 0.0457 0.0467 0.0474
Cropped ‘
Area (Lakh
hectares .... . .
; ES ता a


= 7a हु हु mes 0.017 7

Area(Lakth

hectares) बे नव . ; al ee ee _

Fertilizers Req | Cons [Reg | Cons | Reg Cone | Proj 2
(008 tonnes) Reg | Reg

(a) Drea 35.00] 3183 किक 3088 | 3800 जिक्र" sane aaa

'छ) DAP 0.00 70.03" 0.00] 0.00" 6656 To.00 =e हुक |
(}MOP 1.00 [0.36 | 100 1e3é Togo 10.83 T100 00
(@)Complezes (56 कक 67597 117.50 707 1756क Tie
(e) SSE 6 036 [700 fom tor (eer [em छछ
Urea: “

Consumption of urea was 31.75 LMT in 2012 against the requirement of 35.00 LMT. Besides, slight
increasé in gross cropped area in the upcoming Kharif season has also been projected by the State

Hence, requirement of urea was kept same. as demanded quantity j.e.33 LMT.

DAP, MOP, Complexes, SSP:

Looking at the trend of Consumption against the requirement in last 3 years (since Kharif 2010) and
projected demand during the upcoming Kharif season, requirement of DAP, MOP, Complexes and

SSP was kept same as demanded quantities.

6 Jamme & Kashmir

7 = ai ee Kharit - हि

: - . or 2013(E)
Gross 14.84 15.05 15.07 15.18
Cropped
Area (Lakh
hectares) oe

XN
a

-19-


:
Area(Lakk W
hectares) = _ a . zg .
Fertilizers Req | Cons | Req | Cons | Req Cons Proj | Asses
(900 tonnes} Req | Req
(a) Urea 75.00 | 45.46 |e कठप | 6750 155.54 किए लि
(by DAP FON छठ 140.00 किला 4000 T7645" 740.00 32.00

. _ i: . i i -
छ MOP 75.00 | 0.93 | 10.06 10.60 13.20 | 10.00 | 6.00
{d)Complexes [30 | var (eGo 68 680 [0.00 9.067 | 6.06
छ SSP «0.00 [0.00 6.00 [6.00 “9.00 10.00 8.00 18.00
Urea:

Consumption of Urea was only 55.34 LMT in 2012 against the requirement of 67.50 LMT but
the ‘state was insistent that they would be able to consume the demanded quantity. Hence, the

requirement was kept same 89 demanded quantity.

DAP, MOP, Complexes, SSP:

Looking at the trend of consumption against the requirement in last 3 years (since Kharif 2010) and
projected demand during the upcoming Kharif season, requirement of DAP, MOP, Complexes and
SSP was kept 32, 6, 0 and 0 LMT respectively.

7. Delhi
= at Kharif | सह 2012 Kharif
= रा 4 20108)
Gross 0.0024 0.0025 0.0022 0.0024
Cropped
Area (Lakh
hectares. . .



पर = ” - “Tr |
डे
Siete | al
Fertilizers Req | Cans | Req | Cons | Reg Cons Proj | Asses
(800 tonnes) Rea | Req
‘@) Ures 230 Tor” 10.00 [22h “TTaa (1330 (faa
focus. ; pours —- le =i — meena
(b) BAP 2.00 10.10 $2.00 2.00 0.00 2.00. | 2.08
(Mor T0507) 6506 |” 68 ose" Tos0 ase
(a)Complexes [0.60 660 [080 [O00 Toso हक कक हक
@) SSP 0.00 667 [0.00 hoo oar 7186 oe इक
Urea, DAP, MOP, Complexes, SSP:
Requirement of all the fertilizers was kept same as the demanded quantities.
EAST ZONE
8. Bihar
i Kharif 2010 aan : “ Kharif 20:38) |
Gross 33.16 39.24 38.10 40,04
Cropped |
Area (Lakk . झा मिल soma

ae


=

Irrigated | 17.37 = 20.18 : 22.25 =
Area(Lakh

oy [व _ . on
Fertilizers | Rea | Cons | Req | Cons Req Cons | Pra}
(006 tonnes) Reg

(a) Urea = हज | 995.00 | 798.56 | 1000.00 | 903.03 a THERE

tb) DAP | 266.00 [225-76 | 235.00 “= 335.00 | 216.52 | 250.00 =

(c} MOP हक 15558 | 8000 | 15.23 | 80.00 | 44.53 | 140.00 ‘20.00 |

(a) Complex | 160.00 [732.05 | 175.00 752,67 1175.00 [98.83 [200.00 | 175.00

(e) SSP ‘00.00 T3035 11000011988 | 100.00 (37.13 | 100.00 | 60.06

Urea:

Consumption of urea was 903 LMT in 2012 against the requirement of 1000 LMT. But Director,
Agriculture stated that Agricultural Road maps have been prepared in the State and thus, targets are

very high. Hence, requirement of urea was kept same as demanded quantity 1¢. 1900 LMT.

DAP, MOP, Compiexes, SSP:

Looking at the trend of consumption agamst the requirement in last 3 years (since Kharif 2010) and
projected demand during the upcoming Kharif season, requirement of DAP, MOP, Complexes and
5SP was kept 250, 80, 175 and 60 LMT respectively.

Issues/Concerns:

1. Director, Agrioulture reported that infrastructural facilities at the rake points in the State are
not up to the mark, Representative of TATA Chemicals was also of the same view. In responst to
this, the representative from Railways stated that this issue may be taken up with the concerned
DRM of the Railways and simultaneously, Railway Board may also be informed in writing.

2. Further, Director, Agriculture informed that TATA Chemicals, lead fertilizer supplier of the
State, has been unable to supply SSP. The representative of TATA Chemicals informed that there
were few problems earlier but now they are ina position to supply SSP and assured that they would

supply SSP as per the requirement of the State.

9. Jharkhand

B82 -


_ : या ही रिहा Khari 2011 व [ J
Gross 426 Tang 20.67 |
Cropped |
Area (Lakh
Rectares) ही fh to _ _ at . _.
Irrigated BOS किक Tae 208 7
Area(Lakh |

hectares) हे _ . _ _. SE J
Fertilizers Reg Cons | Req ; Req | Cone Prof Asses |
(800. tonnes) Req Reg |
= 000 Beas बिक 135.46 al 119-14 318.80 स्का
(b} DAP 70.00 44.89 TROD 43.06 ८ ४4.46 छठ किला
(©) MOF 10.00 दंड T0.00 Ta 20.00 | 3.37 किक 15.60"

— ५-0. . कर
(8) Compiex 40.00 “T2787 38.00 26558 40.00 [15.46 68.33 35,06

(६) SSP 5.00 “10.001 F506 40.00 70.83 3274 26.06
Urea:

Consumption of urea was about 119 LMT in 2012 against the requirement of 175 LMT. But State
Government has Projected an increase in the grogs cropped area in the Upcoming season, Hence,
fequirement of urea was kept as 160 LMT.

DAP, Mop, Compienes, SSP:

Looking at the trend of consumption against the requirement in last 3 years (since Kharif 2019) and
Projected demand during the upcoming Kharif Season, requirement of DAB Mop, Complexes and
SSP was kept as 50, 15, 35 and 20 LAT respectively.

Issues/Concerng:

Tatanagar, Lapung, Dhanbad may be created. The Tepresentative from Tailways requested them thai
the proposal along with Justification May be sent to concerned DRM/Railway Board for their
consideration.

+- 88% -


ihe Odisha

7 Kharif 2030 Kharif 2011 in 2012 . i 20135(॥)
Gross 59.47 57.99 58.38 41.30
Cropped

Area (lakh

hectares) 1. . . . 2

Irrigated 30.36 30,64 30.64 { 3102

| Area(Lakis

hectares . . . —
Fertilizers | Req Cons | Reg Cons | Reg Cong | Proj | Asses
(000 tomnes) Req | Reg
(a) Urea | 400.00 | 318.08 FdG0 | ISAS | 450.00 | 375.3) | 288.00 430.00

(b) BAP 760.00 | 158.31 | 170.00 {08.92 | 175.00 | 109.04 238.00 | 175.00

(MOP | 108.00 | 99.69 730.00 | 32.87 [110.00 | 52.00 1360.00 | 100.00 7

o al .
(9) Complex 300.00 [162.14 | 200.00 304.08 [205.00 | 133.63 400.00 | 250,00

(e) SSP 22.70 | 8.89 15.00 | 9.37 7 | 4,62 25.00 | 27.00

Urea:

Consumption of Urea was only 375.41 LMT in 2012 against the requirement of 450 LMT. The
projected increase in the gross cropped area in the upcoming Kharif season is also about 5.0%
over the area of 2012 season but the representatives from State Government were insistent that

they, would be able to consume more. Hence, the requirement was kept as 450 LMT.

DAF:

Consumption of DAP was only 109.04 LMT in 2012 against the requirement of 175 LMT. The
projected increase in the gross cropped area in the upcoming Kharif season jg also about 5.0%
over the area of 2012 season but the representatives from State Government were insistent that
they would be able to consume more. Hence, the requirement was kept same as the demanded

quantity.

MOP, Complexes, SSP:

Looking at the trend of consumption against the requirement in last 3 years (since Kharif 2010) and
projected demand during the upcoming Kharif season, requirement of MOP, Complexes and SSP
was kept 100, 250 and 17 LMT respectively.

_


Isenes/Concerns: रन

i. Representatives from Siate Government reported that infrastructural facilities at various rake
points in the State such as Jeypore, Sambalpur, Jagannath etc aré not up to the mark. The
representative from railways requested them this issue may be taken up with concemed DRM.

2. ‘They informed that they require funds under NPMSH&F Scheme in the next financial year.
45 (INM) asked them to send the proposals to the Ministry in this regard.

3. The representative from RCF informed that dealers are required to first make entries in the
AGRISNET of the State and from their data is supposed to be transferred to FMS for releasing of
their payment. Rue 10 some technical problem data does net get transferred tc. FMS from
AGRISNET and thus, dealers are required to make entries manually again in FMS, which is a time
consuming activity. Hence, it was requested that this redundant exercise may be avoided. JS (INM)
requested Director (DOF) that this issue may be taken up with NIC/ State NIC

ii, West Bengai

हे Kharif 2010 Kharif 2011 Kharif 2012 | Kharif 2013(£
Gross | 48.37 55.59 55.89 56.13

Cropped
Area (Lakh
hectares. . ee 0...
Irrigated 35.96 36.56 38.01 39.03
Area(Lakh
hectares a —_
Fertilizers | Req Cons | Req Cons. | Reg Cons | Pro} Asses
(000 tonnes) Req Reg

— a nef
{a) Urea 506.00 | 386.38 | 500.00 | 483.40 | 506.00 | 518.72 ; 563.97 | 566.00

(b) DAP 1350.60 1 237-43 | 350.00 | 200.38 250.607 375.40 | 322.53 [300.00

() Mop 750.00 | 127.04 | 150,00] 31.46 | 150.00 | 77.26 | 193.82 | 150.00"

(4) Comples | 350.00 | 391.02 | 400.00 | 288-47 [400.00 | 332,72 | 445.35" | 400.08

(०) SSP 175,00 | 183.04 | 200.00 | 194.90 [200.00 [7126.29 1201.25 [200.00

Urea:

—SS-


Consumption of Urea was about 519 LMT in 2012 against the requirement of 500 LMT and
slight increase in gross cropped area hag also been projected in the upcoming Khartf season.

Hence, the requirement was kept more or less same as demanded quantity ic. 560LMT.

DAP, MOP, Complexes, SSP:

Looking at the trend of consumption against the requirement in last 3 years (since Kharif 2010) and
projected demand during the upcoming Kharif season, requirement of DAP, MOP, Complexes and
SSP was kepi as 300, 150, 400 and 200 LMT respectively.

Issue/Concern:

The representative from State Government requested that railway rake point at Bast MediniPur may
be made operational for fertilizers. The represeutative from railways requested them that the
proposal along with justification may be sent to concemed DRIM/Railway Board for their

consideration.


Pardcipanis of Zonal Conference. an A

List of Participants

Oricultural Inputs

tor Khavif 2073

held on Gath February 2013
Name of Participants i esignation State | = |
Tor Ani) Rumar Bens Jol Director (Soil teat} Agriculture Deptt. Haryana 9878 343683"
5h.5.L. Punla Asstt, Director (F2.A) Agriculture Deptt, Haryana 9463208629
gh.J. S. Brar DA (०2) Agriculture Deptt, Haryana 8416 243990
Sh.NK.Bhadu Dy. G.M.KRIBHCO HR LFS KRIBHCO HR 9998747504
2 h.K.C.Pathatr Joint Director (Pian&Monitoring) Director (Agri), Uttarakhand 841205864)
itor. Parma Rem Joint Director {aG) Director {Agri}, Uttarakhand 8412955615
Sh. 0.00, Singh Director (Agriculture) Director (Agri), Uttar Pradesh 9235629397
Sh. Soraj Singh [४.0.# (Fertilizer) Agiculture Directorate UP 9238629377
(Or. M. Jaganiionan Reddy 896. M(mktg) IFFCO New Dethi 9810024657
40) Sh.S.8.Khare Dy 9. M.miktg) Worth Region IKRIBHCO, NOIDA 9554006888 न
44] ४5 8. 1. 8, Rao OGM (Mktg) East KRIBHCO, NOIDA 9741207778
जु 21 3h. Anil Motsara Chief Manager {I} NFL A-td See 24 NOIDA 9310905736
23) Sh. 8.6. Singh R, Manager PPL GB Park, MG Road, Gurgoan 9910037872
qa} 2h. Genesh Babu KR, Manager Corporate Affairs, ZACL,GEP, MG Road Gurgaon 99704 70449
q5] Sh. 8. Chauhan Joint Director (Agriculture) Directorate of Agri, ‘Simla, HP. 9818631957
46| Sh Shyam Lay Deputy Director (Agr?) Piractorate of Agri, Simta, H.P. 3418455866
47| Sh. K. A. Oashe Joint Director (Agri), Lal Mandir, Srinagar, Kashmir 9449065267
tal Sh-Ashok Kumar Sinks Deputy Director (9) #॥91॥ Bhawan, Kane rd, Ranchi 8873779488
49] Sh. M. Saravanan Director {Agriculture} Patna (Bthar) 9431878706
201 Sh. Ashok Pragaa Deputy Director (Agri,} Vikas Bhawan, Bibar, Patna
21] Sh. Samir Kumar Deputy Biractor (का) Vikas Bhawan, Bihar, Patna 9477002655
22| for. Rajesh Das State Blo-chemist Directorate of Agri, Odissha 9437067706
23}. Sh. Anupam Bose Deputy Director (Agri), Extenslon| Directorate of, ‘Agri, Oulssha 9938950290
24| Dr. P. Bhattacharya Director of Agriculture Dts.of dg, West Bengal 9433820300
25 | Sh. Murari Yaday Dy. Director Agri, M& Fert Dte.of da, Wast Bengal 9836841861
26 | 81 Himanshu Kr. Mondal Dy. Director Agri, HO. Dte.of dg, West Bengal 9434160935
27 | Or, AN.Reddy ५ |Senerat Manager INFCL, Hyderabad 98499847650.
2g] Sh. 0. 5, Yaday Director (Marketing) FAL, New Dethi 9560034949
29] Dr. 0. $. Teotia {Regional Exocutive-NR FAI, New Dethi 9814663390
30] Sh. YV.N Murthy Reglonal Executive-Gast 3, Lake Road, Kolkatta 9239756736
31 | Sh. Narankar Singh Joint Director (Agri) inputs Punjab, Chandigarh हि )814269$06
32] Sh. Jyotl Agarwal Resident Manager GSFC, 4 A Ring Road, LP Delhi 9873000462
33 | Sh. KN, Kutkerni Add! Commissioner [870 Delhi 9810495076
34/Sh.4.R. Kothari Mktg. Manager GMFC Lid, F-223, FDIG, New D 9717773664
36] Sh. 5. K. Thakur GM (Sales) ‘Chambal Fertilizer Naw Delhi 9959883987
36 | Sh. NR Satyapatan GM (AMktg,) NFL, NOIDA 9971435333
37 | 3.4. K. Sharma DGM (Mktg) NFL, Lucknow 9389406442
3a] 31% Ranjan Gupta Dy. GM (itktg) NFL, ‘Chandigarh 9342025060
391 819 Dhir Singh 20 (Ny NFL, NOIDA 9660466400
40 | Sh. H. Ganesh ४, 9, Corp affairs ह Coromondat Panchshes! $i, 8130600888
अब Sh. Harshdeep Singh Asstt, Vice President commerctal {Tata Chemicals Lic 9212747895
42| Sh. Sudheer Retan GMB IPL, 9910066673
43| Sh. KK, Dhingra Director CFQCT! Faridabad 9899267363
44 | Sh. Alay . Tretan General Manager Indo Guif. Manager 9990202003
45/Sh. Sunil Bhatt Demo 3.0. (Agri) Dev, Delhi Govt 9868450845
8 छा, Slhari Lal DTT (F) 641, Rail Bhawan, New Delhi 9958293845
47{Sh. 5. 0, Saxeng ACIM ‘Shashtri Bhawan, 97176476738
45] Smt. Aruna Verma 3.0 (FIM) Shashtri Bhawan 9810280857
49 | छत. ॥. 5, Dhanda Asstt, Director Agriculture DAC, Kish! Bhawan, ND 9540000867
50 | $h. Bhagwan Sahat PS to 080. DAC, Krishi Bhawan, ND 9810945855

+ ऐिपे-


F.No, 22002/ 2012 = Fert. Stat.
Government of India
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation
1 (Fertilizer Statistics Section)
Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi
Dated the 26th February, 2013
2

To

Secretary (Agriculture) / Director (Agriculture},
All State Governments.

Subject:- Zonal Conference on Agricultural Inputs for Kharif 2013
Season- regarding.

Sir / Madam,

I am directed to refer on the subject mentioned above and to
forward herewith a copy of the mimutes of the conference 4 meeting held
at Assam Administrative Staff College [88950 ), Khanapara ~ Guwahati
-Agsam on 13! February, 2013 for North Eastern States for your
information and further necessary action.

‘This has approval of the Joint Secretary (INM).
Ciemdes
opi

(M.S. Dhanda}
Assistant Director(FS)

Copy for information and necessary action to:

1 Joint Secretary (P& M) Department of Fertilizers (DOF). Shastri
Bhawan, New Delhi.

2 Director (Movement), Department of Fertilizers (DOF). Shastri
Bhawan, New Delhi.

3. Executive Director (TTF), Ministry of Railways, Rail Bhawan, New
Delhi.

4. Director General, FAL, 10 Saheed Jit Singh Marg, New Delhi.

Copy for information to:
JS(Seeds), JS(Machinery], Js(Crops}, JS{Extension), JS(PP},
Horticulture Commissioner, ADG(Soil}, ICAR, Pusa,
Director(NCOF).

Copy also to:

Sr. PPS to Secretary (A&C), PPS to SS(AKT), PPS to SS8(SH), PPS to
AS&FA (RC), PPS to AS(AKS).

-88 -


MINUTES OF THE ZONAL CONFERENCE FOR AGRICULTURAL IMPWrs FOR
KEARIF 2013 HELD OM 13" FEBRUARY, 2013

Venue: Assam Adminisirative Staff College (AASC), Khanapara, Guwahati, Assam
Subject: Assessment of requirement af fertilizers for Kharif 2913
EAST ZONE

A Assan

i an ‘Titharit 2011” | Khari 2017 | Khari 201308)

Gress 416 4.16 416 a6
Cropped

Ares (Lakh

hectares) . _ ene

Irrigated . 7 - :
Area(Lakh

hectares) * i हि लि
Fertilizers Cons [Reg | Cons | Req | Asses
000 tonnes’ —— Reg

| (@) Urea | 136.20 | 145 66 [140,60 | 170.00 | 145.00
(09) DAP 13.35 [25.00 11835 | 40.00 | 25.00
©) MOP 57.31 (60.00 | 28.05" 195.20 [60.00
(d)Complexes (0.00 [756 00 [672 17.50
४) SSP 63.14 [8000 [776 [8250 | 80.00

Urea, DAP, MOP, Complexes, SSP:

Looking at the trend of consumption against the requirement in last 3 years (since Kharif 2010} and

projected demand during the upcoming Kharif season, requirement of Urea, BAP, MOP, Complexes
and SSP was kept as 145, 25, 60, 7.50 and 80 LMT respectively.

Issues/Concerns:

Representative from State reported that out of 14 rake points in the State, only 5 are operational for
fertilizers. They requested that balance rake points may also be made operational for fertilizers.
Director (movement), DOF stated that this issue may be taken up with the concerned DRM of the

Railways and simultaneously, Railway Board may also be informed in writing,

- 8१-


2. Tripura

a psec 4 -
Kharif 2010 Kherif20i1 | Kharif 2012 | Kharif
.. _ ‘ emesis enue 2O13(E
Gross 0.0212 0.0218 0,0०1 0.0229
Cropped Arca
(Lakh
hectares) हे
Irrigated - | | |. | ~
Area(Lakis
hectares _. _
Fertilizers Reg Cons | Req | Cons | Req | Cons | Req | Asses

{009 tonnes - विन विनिमय है KEG
2) Urea 21.60] 8.19 (28.00 8.89 [28.00 [8.54 [30.18 130.00 |
0) DAP 1.10 0.50 2.60 152 [280 [0.70 [300 ६3.00
0 MOP 980" 27 13.75 12.09 50 12.48 1870 506

a) Complexes | 0.00 [0.00 [0.00 10.00 10.00 [0.007 [0.00 [10.06
(ce) SSP s 125.90 | 4.76 (20.00 [7.79 (26.00 | 9.51 | 32.61 | 26.00

Urea, DAP, MOP, Complexes, SSP:

Looking at the trend of consumption against the requirement in last 3. years (since Kharif 2010) and
projected demand during the upcoming Kharif season, requirement of Urea, DAP, MOP, Complexes
and SSP was kept 88 30, 3; 5, 0 and 26 LMT respectively.

3. Manipur
Kharif 2010 | Khavif 2011 | Kharif 2012 Kharif

_ 13
Gross 2.32 2.34 1.37 2.36
Cropped Area
(Lakh
hectares _
Irrigated न - a a
Area{Lakh
hectares) रे
Fertilizers (000 Rea | Cons | Req | Cons | Reg Cons ea | Asses
tonnes) Reg
a)Urea [3700 [607 137.50 110.95 [70 | 16.87 | 30.60 | 30.60
byDAP [475 {119 [4.85 [140 520 11.58 [8.25 (5.00
©) MOP 1651023 [या O4e [215 06s” [345 [215
(8) Complexes [070 1760 [0.00 [0.00 [0.00 [0.00 10.90 [6.00
कर L213 6356 (215 [0.70 $195 096 [1.39 | 1.39

= FOr


Ures, DAP, MOP, Complexes, SSP:

Looking at the tend of consumption against the requirement in last 3 years (since Kharif 2010) and
projected demand during the upcoming Kharif season, requirement of Utea, DAP, MOP, Complexes
and SSP was kept as 30.60, 5, 2.15, 0 and 1.39 LMT respectively

4, Meghaiaya

Kharif 2616 Kharif 2011 | Kharif 2012 Kharif
| है 20130).
Gross Cropped 3.38 का 3.38 338
Area (Lakh
hectares) | . oe
Irrigated 1.65 1,62 1.65 1.70
Area(Lakh .
hectares’ . ..  |
Fertilizers (000 | Req [Cons | Req | Cons Rea Cons Reg | Asses
tonnes) . LL. vena REG.
a) Urea 375 264 [4.001350 [3.95 [389 जि16 7410
(b)DAP [2.30 056 (2.50 10.94 | 2.70. | 0.89 3.00 | 3.00
'c) MOP 0.22 0.24 10.26 [0.25 10.30 [0,33 030 [0.30
(9) Compiexes | 0.00 0.00 [0.00 [000 0.00 10.00 1 0.00 । 8.00 ही
६) SSP 2.10 [1.471220 [54 250 11.98 [300 3.00

Urea, DAF, MOP, Complexes, SSP:

Looking at the trend of consumption against the requirement in last 3 years (since Kharif 2010) and
projected demand during the upooming Kharif season, requirement of Urea, DAP, MOP, Complexes

and SSP was kept same as demanded quantities.

~G}-


5 Nagaland

a
...... Kharif 2016 1 76711 | Kharif 2012 Kharif 201308)

Gross | - - -
Cropped Area

(Lakh

hectares) _ ewe _ a
Tnrigated - - - -
AreafLakh

hectares: cde . wf
Kertitizers Reg | "Cons | Reg Coas | Reg Cons | Req Asses
(OOO tonnes} | || हि Req
(a) Urea 0.45 0./4 | 0.90 059 [111 10.50 10.848 | 0.848
b)DAP | 0.30 0.51 10.60 0.43 [0.65 [0.43 (0.50 | 0.50
(©) MOP 015 (016 025 [035 [025 [ois (0720 [0.36
(d)Complexes | 0.00 8.00 [0.00 015 (019 (0.65 10.00 10.00
&) SSP <1 O14 0.14 [0.23 (020 1024 10.20 [0.24 10.24

Urea, DAP, MOP, Complexes, SSP:

- Looking at the trend of consumption against the requirement in last 3 years (since Kharijf 2010) and
projected demand during the upcoming Kharif season, requirement of Urea, DAP, MOP, Complexes

and SSP was kept same as demanded quantities.

6. Artnachal Pradesh

Kharif 2020 | Kharif 202) | Kharif 2012 Khavif
; 2613)
Gross Cropped = = - +
Area (Lakh
hectares, ne el cee cesses _.
Irrigated कि ० ति -
Area(Lakh :
hectares) — a
Fertilizers Req | Coms {Req | Cons | Req Cons/Sale | Req =| Asses
(000 tonnes) a Reg
a) Urea rsa 10% | 0.50
b) DAP 9.90 10.30 | 0.30
९) MOP il |__.0.00 0.10 10.10
(Complexes 60" 19.00 । 0.00
SSP [ - 109 680

Urea, DAP, MOP, Complexes, SSP:

-१9-


Lookirig at the trend cf consumption against the requirement in last 3 years (since Kharif 2010} and
projected demand during the upcoming Kharif season, requirement of Urea, DAP, ४६७४, Complexes

and SSP was kept same as demanded quantities.

7, Mizoram
Kharif 2616 | Kharif 2021 Khari Kharif

. | _... (201308
Gross Cropped 0895 | + 0.56 0.50 0.52 _
Aves (Lakh
hectares} es eee
Irrigated 0.78 0.78 1.17 1.22
Area(Lakh
hectares) _
Fertilizers Req | Cons | Req | Cons | Reg Cons Ret | Asses
900 tonnes Req
(9) Urea 2.91 18.00 | 8.00
७) DAP 0.00 [4.00 | 4.00
‘c) MOP 0.25” [4.00 | 4.00
{d)Complexes | 0.00 (0.00 (10.00 |
8) 59. 0.16 [3.00 | 3.00

Urea, DAP, MOP, Complexes, SSP:

Looking at the trend of consumption against the requirement in last 3 years (since Kharif 2010) and
projected demand during the upcoming Kharif season, requirement of Urea, DAP, MOP, Complexes

and SSP was kept same as demanded quantities.

--49 -


AMM E 7700६ Em
No.22001/2013-Fert Stat
Government of India
Ministry of Agriculture
Department of Agri. & Coopn.

Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi
‘Dated the 11% September, 2013.

3

Secretary (Agriculture) / Director (Agriculture),
AU State Governments (Except North Eastern States}.

Sub: Zonal Conference on Agricultural Inputs for Rabi 2013-14 season -
regarding. . हैं

Sir/ Madam,

1 am directed to refer on the subject mentioned above and to forward
herewith a copy of the minutes, of the conference/meeting held under the
Chairmanship of Joint Secretary(INM) on SH Bebtenth 2013for South and
West Zones and 5th September, 2013 for North and East Zones at NAAS
Building, ICAR, NASC Complex, Pusa, New Delhi for your information and
further necessary action.

This has approval of the Joint Secretary(INM).
Yours faithfully,
Salah.
(Shailésh}

Dy. Secretary te the Gevt. of India
Teb233824g0

J =
Copy for information and necessary action te: a
oa Joint Secretary(P&M), Department’ of Fertilizers, Shastri Bhawan, New
(ine 1.2 eit "DirectorBMoremen) ‘Department of Fertilizers, Shastri Bhawan, New
. 3. Executive Director(T TP), Ministry of Railways, Rail Bhawan, New Delhi.
4, Director General, FAI, 10 Saheed Jit Sing h Marg, New Delhi.
Copy for iaformation to:

J8(Seeds), J8(Machinery}, JS(Crops), JS(Extension), JS(PP), Horticulture
‘Commissioner, ADG(Soil), ICAR, Pusa, Director(NCOF).

Copy also to;

Sr. PPS to Secretary(A&C}, PPS to AS(AKS)

~94..


MINUTES OF TRIE ZONAL CONFERENCE FOR AGRICULTURAL INPUTS FOR RABI 2
ELD ON 03 SEPTEMBER, 2013

‘
Wenue; Lecttire Fall, 1! Floor, WASC Complex, DPS Marg, Puse, New Delhi
Present: As per list annexed 4

Subject: Assessment of requirement of fertilizers fOr Rabi 2013-14

Inthe Zonal Conference, the main issues raised and discussed were as follow:

1 Joint Secretary (INM), Department of! griculture & Cooperation welcomed the participants and
introduced the agenda. है

(a) JS GNM) emphasized on the promotion of balanced use of fertilizers. It has been observed that
despite decrease in the prices of P&K fertilizérs at the start of the ongoing Kharif season, sales of शिवा:
fertilizers in the ongoing Kharif season ate Jess than the sales of P&K fertilizers in the previous Kharif
season 38 use of P&K, fertilizers is equally important thus, there is a need to promote balanced use of
fertilizers by using varjous methods such as soil testing, usé of area specific customized fertilizers, organic
manure, bio-fertilizers ete. Both State Government representatives and Various lead fertilizers’ companies
were requested to promote the above mentioned policies in the long term interests of soil health and crop
productivity.

Further; JS (NM) informed that’ consumption of urea in some of the states such as Uttar Pradesh,
Andhra Pradesh, Punjab, Haryana etc is increasing day by day and its consumption (kgfhectare) has
increased beyond the dose/value recommended by ICAR/State Agricultural Universities whereas in some of
the states per hectare consumption of ‘N? nutrierit is mich below the renommended.valve. Hence, this aspect
of Inter-State balance in terms of consumption of ‘N? tutrient may also be required to Jook into.

(b) JS (INM) conveyed that it was decided in one of the Committee of Secretaries’ (COS) yneetings that
Department of Agriculture would consider making arrangements for encouraging greater use of other
phosphatic fertilizers in place of DAP. Now this had become relevant and necessary a8 demand destruction of
PAK fertilizers is still going and no improvement has been observed despite fal} in international prices of
P&K fertilizers. SSP is a straight phosphetic multi-nutrient fertilizer containing 16% Pr 11% <8? , 16% एक
and other essential micro-nutrients Suiphur and Caleipm are also recognized as major essential plant
nutrients in addition to three primary nutrients “N’, ‘P’, 'K? for growth and development of plants. Resource
poor farmers rarely apply sulphur, calcium and micro mutrients independently resulting In depletion of these
nutrients in soils causing decline in crop productivity on long term basis. Promotion of use of SSP would

result in to application of nutrients like Calcium, Sulphur without any additional cost.

>> "५ 8


” Moreover, DAP is costlier fertilizer than SSP and bulk of the requirement of DAP is met by im.orts.
whereas SSP is manufactured indigenously. Hence, encouraging use of SSP merits serious consideration and
thas, State Govemment representatives were requested to make an ‘attempt to reduce the requirement of DAP
by 5% for upconiing Rabi 2013-14 seagon and requirement of $SP may be increased by the quantity
squivalent to ‘P’ content to be provided by reduced quantiny of DAP.

{c) State Government representatives were requested to promote the use of Phosphorous mobilizing bio-
fertilizers (PSB) so that 1?" nse efficiency tould be etthanced. It was requested that State Govermments will
Yequired to be produced for ensuring coverage of more than 80%

fonsure to cover this area by funding fom REVV/GOVState

make an assessment of how much of PSB4

of press sown area and start a cathpaign t
‘Government schemes. Further, they were requested to make an assessment (district-wise) of status of ‘Ke
nutrient in their respective states and dependiag upen the status of पूरा nutrient, potassic fertilizers (MOP},

“K’ mobilizing bio-fertilizers etc may be promoted. They were also requested to identify the deficiency of
Olganic carbon and to promote use of orgariic manures in deficient districts,

(d} State Government Tepresentatives were also requested to make an assessment of per-hectare
use/requirement of bio-fertilizers in their respective states and use of bio-fertilizers including liquid bio-
fertilizers may be promoted.

(@) JS CNM) also conveyed that Indian lnstitute of Soil Sciences (058), Bhopal has uploaded the soil
fettility maps of around 152 districts on their website. State Governments shal] iy to have a Jook on these
maps and make comparison with their in-house available soi] fertility dataénaps and ensure that farmers are
educated about use of these maps.

CTS (CNM) informed that SMS portal-has been made functional by Ministry of Agriculture through
which advisories by SMS could be sent to all the Tegistered farmers. Officials of State Governments were
requested to make maximum use of this portal Dy sending important advisories to farmers at appropriate
time.

(g) Joint Secretary (DOF) conveyed that they have, all the fertilizers in plenty and he assured that all the
fertilizers would be supplied to the states irrespective of their Tequirements. Hence, he requested all the State
Govemments-to be realistic in projecting the requirements for Rabi, 2013-14 season,

He also emphasized on the availability of fertilizers on time at appropriate/desired places, Thus, State
Governments were advised to prioritize the movement of rakes 88 per the requirement and place indents
accordingly so thal fertilizers may be supplied/moved to the requisite places, .

He informed that prices of PRK fertilizers have come down but depreciation of Indian Rupee hasalso
taken place simultaneously. Hence, the combinedMmet effect of both the developments has resulted in. to
increase in the rates of P&K fertilizers Gn terms of INR) due to which companies have been found to be

reluctant to finalize their contracts for import of these fertilizers. Thus, State Govertments were requested to

‘ Te.


y

place firm orders of PRK, fertilizers with the companies in advance 50 that they could get these ‘fertilizers on
tone. +

का) Dr. B.S. Bhandari, Adviser, Directorate of Economics & Statistics, DAC made & Presentation on
scientific assessment of requirement of fertilizers. He informed that four nodal officiais/nstitutes namely (a)
Dr: Brajesh Jha, Head (Acting), Agro-Boonomic Resear ch Unit, Institute of Beonomic Growth, Delhi (०) Dr
Pramod Kumar, Head, Agricultural Development & Rural Transformation(ADRT), Institute fox Social &
_ Beonemic Change, Post!Nagarbhavi, Bangalore (०) Dr. Debashish Sarkar, Director, ABR Centre,
—"Bhantiniketan, West Bengal @) Prof. Sukhgil Singh, Chairman, CMA, TIM, Ahmedabad have been
identified by him for north, south, east and west regions respectively, which will help the state governments

jn analysis of assessment of requirement of fertilizers. State Government officials were requested to get in

touch with their respective nodal institutes.

Further, he emphasized on the use of fertilizers as per the recommended dose by LCAR. He algo
highlighted that per hectare consumption of “N? nutrient in some of the states such as Haryana, Punjab, Uttar
Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh ete is much higher than the recommended dose, whereas in some of the states such
as Jharkhand, Odisha, West Bengal etc, it is lower than the recommended dose. He requested all the State
Governments to look in to this factor while projecting the requirement of fertilizers.

2. Assessment of requirement:
दर

Joint Secretary (INM) informed that a new concept is being introduced in case of urea from this season and
as per the new concept total assessed requirement of urea for Rabi 2013-14 season will be divided into parts
1.8, (i) Actual allocation and (ii) Reserve allocation. State Governments will prepare their monthly
requirement on the basis of the quantities assessed under ‘actual allocation and they could demand
additional urea from theit quantities kept under ‘reserve allocation’ whenever they require it provided they
have completely utilized/consumed the quantity of urea kept under ‘actual allocation’. Also for customized

fertilizers, separate allocation will be indicated within the total allocation of the states.

“9 - n


SOUTH ZONE

L Andbrs Pradesh

oo [Rabin 2016-17 Rabi 2072-13 7 T Rabi 2013-16" :
Gross 45.59 7 4077 4047 49.59 (Proposed) 1
Cropped Arey ! _.!
(Lakh -

Aectares हि
Hrigated wa Ia ar
| Area(Laich न
hectares J .

Fertilizers Reg fons | Reg i Raq Cons | Projected a —|
000 MET) : Requirement | Regutrement
Thousand . Acinal | Reserve
MI(TMT) : alloca alloca

th, tion Hon

(@) Urea 2500 | 1564 | 1600 | 145 | 1604 | 1396 1750 7600 कि

@) DAP 00 | 305 | 500 | 48 | ३0 | aap 600 | 570 | aan -
(MOP Re 290 | 335 | goo | 3355 | 139 400 * 300 .

| fr +.
©} Complexes 90 wore 1080 | 1130 | 7100 | 825 1250 | #00 -
छक्का “पा “

का | 19 | 20 | 16938 | 200 baa 300 | 315 | 500 -
‘Urea:

allocation’ head,

DAP, MOP, Complexes:

Looking at the trend of consumption against the requirement in last 3 seasons (since Rabi 2010-11) projected
requirement & Proposed cropped area during the upcoming Rabi season and policy of promotion of SSP(in
sase Of DAP), requirement of DAP, MOP, Complexes was Kept as 400, 300 and 1100 TMT respectively,

SSP:
In view of policy of promotion of use of SSP and simultaneously looking at the projected demand &
Proposed cropped area, requirement of SSP was kept as 500 TMT, |

Lo, a

Lae.


y

Customized fertilizers: For Urea, 16000 MT in addition to 1600 TMT & 100 TMT was given for
customized fertilizers. For DAF, out of the total quantity 6f 400 TMT, 29000 MT was earmarked for
customized fertilizers-and for MOP, 9350 RMT awas earmarked out of the total quantity of 306 TMT. DOF will

take further necessary action on this.

Tesnes/Comcerts: .
State Government representatives were. yequested to send Annual Progress report for year 2012-13 on

Fotilizer Quality Control te Central “Feitiizer Quality Control & Trdining “Institute (CFQCETH

immediately. %

2 Karnataka

aban [Ree आइए] Rabi 202-15 "Rabi bist
Gross काका 3057 40.07 “.ा कक (Proposed),
Cropped Area
Gakh
hectares, : a
Trignted re en Te
“Area(Lakh
Nectar es, _.
Fertilizers Req Eons | Req Cons | Req Zour | Projected | ——Astesed
coo MT) Requirement Requirement
‘Thousand ‘Actual | Reserve
MTCMY) । ; alloca | alloca
__: | tion, | tion
(qj Urea | 590 | ae उ्ा | 664 | 700 | 798 525 750 50
0) DAP 260. | 20 | 260 | 492 25 | 220 | 350 | 350 | 250 | - |
+ L~ 2 te
(MOP ws | 189 | 256 | 280 | 27 | 6 300 250 -
‘Heamplexes | ssp | ss | oto | 8४६ | 700 | 48 750 700 -
4 .
7
(e) $8? 0 | mos | 73.00 | 3227 | 35.00 | 3005 46.95 | 46.95 | 100 -
Urea:

Consumption of urea was 798 TMT in 2012-13 and Gross Cropped area was 40.07 lakh hectares. Proposed .
eropped area for Rabi 2013-14 season js 40.45 Lakh hectares, which is marginally more. Hence, jooking at
the trend of consumption in jast season, proposed cropped area, projected requirement and per hectare
consimption of “N’ nutrient in the state, requirement was kept as 750 TMT under ‘actual allocation’ head

and 50 TMT under ‘reserve allocation’ head.

say

-१-


W

DAP, MOP, Complexes: हे
Looking at the trend of consumption against the requirement in Jast 3 seasons (aince Rabi 201 0-11) projected
requirement & proposed cropped area during the upcoming Rebi season and Policy of promotion of SSPtin

cast of DAP), reqiirement of DAP, MO} Omplexes was kept as 250, 250 and 700 TMT respectively.

SSP:

dn view of policy of ‘promotion of use of SSP and simultaneously looking at the projected demand &

Proposed cropped area, requirement of SSP was kept as 100 TMT.

3. Kerala

= " Rabi 2010-17 Rabi 2012-13 “Rabi 2013-44"

‘Gross 25.40 4g 7 25.61 (Proposed)

Cropped Area

(Lakh

hectares) | . .

Irrigated ais 46 a7 718

Avea(Lakh

hectares

Fertilizers Reg Cons | Req Cons | Req Cons | Projected Assesed

(000 MT) Requirement Requirement

Thousand Actoal | Reserve

MTCIMT) alloca | alloca

हे . {tion tion

(2) Urea 100 «| 70 100 | 92.29 | 10 | % 100 100 | - |

; wag 72

(b) DAP 15 16; 22 | 3330 | 720 33 | 8.10 | 7.70 | 770 न
t

() MOP 65 70 90 701 | 104 | 100 10 101 -

a "न ff ;

(A) Complenes Fa | og 125 पट | 21-1 109 nies fais] -

vs fens = ns
(e) SSP 3.00 | 1.09 | 175 6.10 9 190 | 29.81 | 30 |

Urea, DAP, MOP, Complexes:

Tt was observed that Sonsumption of the fertilizers during 189 season was more or less the sarne as
assessed tequirement: hence Tequirement of Urea, DAP, MOP and Complexes was kept same as the

demanded quantities.

SSP;

In view of policy of promotion of use of SSP and simultaneously looking at the projected demand &

proposed cropped area, requirement of SSP was kept as 30 TMT, &

>+ [69 +


4, Tamil Nada

x
Rabi al Rabi 2011-12 Rabi ons 1 | Rabi 213-14"
Gross [a7 70.87 aEae a8 Proposed)
Cropped Area
(Lakh
bectares: an . 7 . . : _
Wrigated 29.36 30.79 27.64 31.94
Area(Lsakth _
hectares) ' a a Cv .
Werilizers | Rea Cons [Req | faq” | Cons | Projected विकार
(000 MT) Requirement Requirement
Thousand Actual | Reserve
MT(IMT) alloca | allova
.... . j : हर 607 tion
(a) Urea 700 663 700 619 700 575 769 600 | 50
(00948 225 16 | 230 iga | 290. | 717 | 343.08 | 297.40 | 200 .
(Mor zie | 269 | 320 | 96 | 344 | 128 356 250 .
" “गा र्ग
(@Complexes | 995 | आ | 390 1 400 | 376 | 247 423 400 -
4 an Len = - |
(व) S8P saso"|'a748 | 71 49 79 | 40.63 | 58.70 | 103.70 | 125 -
a
‘Urea:

Maximum Gross Cropped area was 40.87 jah hectares in season 2011-12 and consumption was 619 TMT.
Proposed cropped area for Rabi 2013-14 season 19 43.53 Lakh hectares, which is around 6.5 % more. Hence,
looking at the trend of consumption in previous seasons, proposed cropped area, projected requirement and
per hectare consumption of ‘NP nutrient in the stat) requirement was kept as 600 - TMT under ‘actual

allocation” head and 50 TMT under ‘reserve allocation’ head.

DAP, MOP, Complexes:

Looking at the trend of consumption against the requirement in last 3 seasons (since Rabi 2010-11) projected
requirement & proposed cropped area during the upcoming Rabi season and policy of promotion of SSP(in
case of DAP), requirement of DAP, MOP, Complexes was-kept as 200, 250 and 400 TMT respectively.

SSP:

In view of policy of promotion of use of SSP and simultaneously looking at the projected demand &°

proposed cropped area, requirement of SSP was ‘kept as 125 TMT.

—lOJ—


5. Puducherry
Co Rabi = Rabi 20-2 [Rab Wida3 7 Rabi 2013-94"
came " vase 4
Gross 0.28 O25 0.24 028
Cropped Area | '
Lakh -
hectares) : . _ - 7 . . —_
lrrigated 0.28 है O34 0.28
Area(Lakh wt
5 hectares) . .. . हे . a saat
Fertilizers Reg Cons | Reg Reg Cons | Projected Agsesed
(000 MT) Requirement |__Requirement _
Thousand . Actual | Reserve
MT(EMT) alloca} alloca
. 7 a . . tion | tion
(a) Urea 17 20 17 Rojo u 14.50 14.50 .
(b) DAP 6 | 6 2 6 077 | 4 094 | 250 | 2.35. | 238 -
() MOP eps 9 306 | 4 09 230 2.30 -
(Peomplexes | 198 | 624 | 1930 | atv | 1 | Ge 11.05 nos}.
4
(el SSP 2 | 0.96 ॥ 2 037 | 2 | 058 [140 | [ 185. | as I .
Urea, DAP, MOP, Complexes, SSP:
Requirement of all the fertilizers was kept same ag the demanded quantities.

6. Andaman Nicobar

Rabi 20007 [Rabi toi Rabi 101-12 "| Rabi 2012-33 Rabi 2013-14"

Gross 0.06 006 oe ४
Cropped Ares
(Lakh
hectares) of -
irrigated * - - -
Area(Lakh
hectares .. की
Fertilizers Reg Cons | Rey Cons | Reg Cons | Projected Assesed
(7000 MT) . Requirement Requirement |
Thousand Actual } Reserve
MI(TMY) aHoca | alloca

. . हि on tion tion
(a) Urea 045 | 036 050 | 029 | 0.60 | 0.32 030 0.50 >
(b) DAP 6.40 | 0.29 | 070 | 029 | 060 | 034 | 050 | 050 | 0.50 = |

_ vs vn as vn

(2 MOP 01s | 014 | 038 | 032 | 650 | 021 0.40 0.40 =
(9) Complexes | 100 | 0.06 | 0.40 [297 | 985 | 008 0.50 0.50 -

ia aa | तु
छ्ोड्क 0 a 0 9 0 0 | o | { Q a -



Urea, DAP, MOP, Complexes, S8F
Requirement of all the fertilizers was kept same as the demanded quantities.

WEST ZONE ;
7 ‘Gujarat है

जि Rat 2070-27 Rabi 2015-12 Rabi201243 | «Rabi 2013-14" है
हक err = 50.03" “Ho "45-46 (proposed)
Cropped Area है
(akh .

| hectares), _. ak . हि

“Grrigated 85.87 46.36 365 ads ..
Area(Lakh
hectares) | . 2 ss
Fertilizers Req Cons | Req Cons a Cons 4 Projected Assesed
(‘000 MT) . Requirement |. Requirement -
‘Thousand Actual | Reserve
MI(TMT) हु alloca | alloca

| 7 . 7 | ten i tion
(a) Urea yous | 1126 | 3175 | i028 | 1175 | 860 1125 1028 100
0) DAP 360 | 39 | 400 | 224 | 400. | 210 | 280 | 280 | 240 - iF
cmMor | व | ioe | 120 | & | Od) 4 70 0 -
(@)Complexes | 359 | 239 | 250 | 205 | 280 | 148 230 230 -
ser का |

@ | ७ | छोड | 100 | 9660 | 120 | 60 | 80 | 80 | 120 :
Urea:

Maximum Gross Cropped area was 50.03 lakh hectares in season 2011-12 and consumption was 1028 IMT.
Proposed cropped area for Rabi 2013-14 season is 46:46 Lakh hectares, which is less than that of season
2011-12. Hence, looking at the trend of consumption in previous seasons, proposed cropped area, projected
requirement and per hectare consumption of ‘NP putrient in the state, requirement was kept as 1025 TMT

under ‘actual allocation’ head and 100 TMT under ‘reserve allocation’ head.

DAP, MOP, Complexes:

Looking at the trend of consumption against the requirement in last 3 seasons (since Rabi 2010-11) projected
requirement & proposed cropped area duririg the upcoming Rabi season and policy of promotion of SSP(in

case of DAP), requirement of DAP, MOP Complexes was kept as 240, 70 and 230 1! ‘MT respectively.

SSP:

In view of policy of promotion of use of SSP and simultaneously looking at the projected demand &

proposed cropped area, requirement of SSP was kept as 120 TMT.

—(03- 7)


y

ag. Madhya Pradesh

Ravi abien [4 Rabi 20H 7 7] Rabiaeizas Rabi 2003-14"

‘Gross es 339" ii ee ~ जा
Cropped Aveg |. i

(hates oe

Ahectares) ... oe .
Urrigated > — ~~ T हु -

Aroa(Laikh

_pdectares) हा . . .
Fertilizers [Req | Gone Reg Reg fens | Projected TP "Asgesed
(000 MT) Requirement Requirement
Thousand ? Actual | Reserve
MT(TMT) alloca ! alloca
हि हे tiow tion

(9) Urea 1050 | 1068 | 1125 | 1060 | 10 | ries 1250 ns | 78
(DAP 200 | 453 | 485 | asa | 500 | aio | 550 | 550 | apo -
[ror — . i

(<)Mor 75 | का 75 46 | 350 | 23 50 40 >

Ci ™ "t हु
()Gompleres | 200 | 158 | aes Tang za | 87 200 wo |.
| .
(छः 330 | 409 |. aos | ७9 | 650: | 447 | 650 | 630 | 780 .

Nobody was present from the State Government in the conference.

Urea:

Consumption of urea was 1168 TMT in 2012-13 and Gross Cropped area was 103.86 lakh hectares.
Proposed Gross Cropped area for upcoming Rabi season has not been conveyed by the State Government.
Hence, looking at the trend of consumption in Test season, projected requirement and per hectare
Sonsumption of ‘N’ nutrient in the state, requirement was kept as 1175 TMT under ‘actual allocation’ head

and 75 TMT under ‘reserve allocation? head.

DAP, MOP, Complexes:

Looking at the trend of consumption against the requirement in last 3 seasons (since Rabi 2010-1 1) projected
requirement é& proposed cropped area during the upcoming Rabi season and policy of promotion of SSP(in
case of DAP), requirement of DAP, MOP, Complexes was kept as 500, 40 and 200 TMT respectively.

SSP:
In view of policy of promotion of use of SSP and simultaneously looking at the projected demand &
proposed cropped area, requirement of SSP was kept as 750 TMT. sas '

a O45


3. Chattisgarh

एप RIO | aa NS Rabt ie
Gross जपहक 707 का पा "7853 Proposed)
Cropped Aven |
(ua
heotares . . . . . 4
Irrigated 38 a58 ८ -
Area(Lakh :
of heetaresy ot oa - Peers
Fertilizers Reg Cons | Req Reg Cons | Projected Assesed
|, (000 MT) Requirement | Requirement |
Thousand : Actual | Reserve
MTCIMT) . alloca | alloce
. tion tor
(a) Drea wo | wa | iso | igs | 9 | 208 250 200 50
0) DAP 59 5) 65 8] 90 = no | 10 | 300 -
_ _—t | .
() MOP a 14 30 a ao) 43 40 -
sah _ ‘
(@) Complexes | an | % | 34.50 | 49 50 30 60 60
(0 SSP 3A 30 56 80 83 - | ss | 85 | ino -
Urea: *

‘Consumption of urea was 208 TMT in 2012-13 and Gross Cropped area was 18.53 lakhi hectares. Proposed
Gross Cropped area for upcoming Rabi season is also the same as area in 2012-13. Hence, looking at the
trend of consumption in previous seasons, projected ‘tequirement, proposed cropped area and per hectare
consumption of *N’ nutrient in the state, requirement was kept as 200 TMT under ‘actual allocation’ head

and 50 TMT ander ‘reserve allocation’ head.

1937, MOP, Complexes:

Looking, at the trend of consumption against the requirement in last 3 seasons (since Rabi 2010-11) projected
requirement & proposed cropped area during the upcoming Rabi season and policy of promotion of SSP(in
case of DAP), requirement of DAP, MOP, Complexes was kept as 100, 40 and 60 TMT respectively.

SSP;

in view of policy of promotion of use of SSP and simultaneously looking at the projected demand &

proposed cropped area, tequirement of SSP was kept as 100 TMT.

नारे


131 Makarashira s

है 7] काउकहना जगा आहत सिणगन कक |
Gross 770i 37.81 “F700 (proposed) ~~}
Cropped Area
(akh . | |
fioctares) cena an —_
irrigated 71.38 313800 38 ~ T4238
Area(Lakh
-b-bectares 5 मिनी लिन ल . _ . : oo
Fertilizers Req Cons | Req Cons | Projected Assesed
(कक MT} Requirement Requirement
Thousand . Actual | Resorve
MT(TMT) alteca | alloca
_ - — . tion tion
@} Urea i700 | 1205 | 1250 | 1030.78; 1280 | 957 “4490 | 1150 | 700
@) DAP om |. वाह | क0 | 390 | 560. | 361 | 508 | 500 | 450 | .
{Mop aso | 300 | ais | 306 | 300 | 193 300 200 -
—1 a sae 7
() Complexes | 580 | 907 | 930 | 757 | 950 | 497 1000 300 .
(e) BSP 360 | 265 | 300 | 442 | 450 | 365 | 395 | 460 | 600 -
jee मम अमर van panaurresne
Urea:
Maximum Gross Cropped area was 77.01 lakh hectares in season 2010-11 and consumption was 1205 TMT.

Proposed cropped area for Rabi 2013-14 season is 77 Lakh hectares (as conveyed in the conférence), which
is more or less the same as that of season 2010-11. Hence, looking at the trend of consumption in previous
seasons, proposed cropped area, projected requirement and per hectare consumption of “N* nutrient in the

state, requirement was kept as 1150 TMT under ‘actual allocation’ head and 100 TMT under ‘reserve

_ allocation’ head.

DAP, MOP, Complexes:
Looking at the trend of consumption against the requirement in last 3 seasons (since Rabi 2010-11) projected
requirement हे: proposed cropped area during the upcoming Rabi season and policy of promotion of SSPGn

case of DAP), requirement of DAP, MOP,.Complexes was kept as 450, 200 and 800 TMT respectively.

SSP:

In view of policy of promotion of use of SSP and simultaneously looking at the projected demand &

proposed cropped area, requirement of SSP was kept as 600 TMT.

=~ (6%.


issnes/Concerns: ढ़

1 Representative from State Government informed that Nagarjuna Fertilizers is not giving ‘FOR’ delivery of

wea in the state, they are charging extra for ‘transportation of urea to the dealers’ level. JS (DOF) clarified

that prices of urea are applicable for ‘FOR’ delivery and State Governmeiits are empowered to take action
“under FCO against the defaulting compiitiies. Hence, they were advised to take action against the defaulting

companies and-simultaneously a report.in thigiregard may also be sent to DOF-so-that they may take action

against the defaulting companies at the time of release/recovery of subsidy.

2. State Government requested DOF to revise rates of secondary freight. DOF conveyed that the matter

would be examined at the level of Ministry.

5. State Government representatives were requested to send Annual Progress réport for year 2012-13 on

Fertilizer Quality Control to Central Fertilizer Quality Control & Training Institute (CFQC&1)

immediately.

11, Rajasthan

हक 2000-17 Rabi 2012-13 Rabi 1-14"

Gross 100.42 86.74 “9500
Cropped Area
(Lakh
jiectares) ann —
Grrigated 66.95 WaT -
Area(Lakh °
hectares _—— sei ee
Fertilizers Reg Cons | Reg Cons Req Conus | Projected Assesed
C800 MT) Requiremeat Requirement
"Thousand : Actual | Reserve
MT(TMT) alloca | alloca

_ i .....0........] OH tion
(a) Urea yooo | i037 | 1080 | 1020 |. 1050 | 1216 1254 1100 190
(b) DAP 350 | 28 | 350 | 359 | 380 | 338 | 30 | 307°! 300 | -_|
(ey MOP 25 lt 20 15 16 | 8 -| . ws | - |
{a) Complexes | 55 52 86 65 कह 9 31 5 -
(e) SBP as | ns | 1७ | कण | 285 | 225 | 225 | 225 | 400 -
Urea; os

Consumption of urea was 1216 TMT in 2012-13 and Gross Cropped area was 86.74 lakh hectares. Proposed
Gross Cropped area for upcoming Rabi season is 85 lakh hectares, which is almost the same as area ii2 2012-

=—fo.-


13. Hence, looking at the trend of consumption in previous seasons, projected requirement, proposed cropped

area and per hectare consumption of ‘N’ nutrient in the state, requirement was kept as } 100 TMT under

‘actual allocation’ head and 100 TMT under ‘reserve allocation’ head.

DAF, MOP, Complexes:

Looking at the rend of consumption against the requirement in last 3 seasons (since Rabi 2010-11) projected
requirement & proposed cropped area during the upcoming Rabi season.and policy of promotion of SSP(in

case OF DAP), requirement of DAP, MOP, Complexes was kept as 300, 15 and 51,7]

SSP:

In view of policy of promotion of use of SSP and simultaneously looking at the projected demand &

proposed cropped area, requirement of SSP was kept as 400 TMT.

respectively.

12. Goa

: Rabi 2010-41 Rabi 2013-32 Rabi 2012-13 | Rabi 2013-14" —
Gross 0.53 or orc 059
Cropped Area
(Lakh
Nectares) वि a
Errigated 0.40 0.36 0.40 -
Arvea(Lakh
hectares) .
Fortilizers Reg Cons | | Req Cons | Projected Assesed
(000 MT) Requirement Reanjrement
Thousand ‘Actual | Reserve
MT(TMT) alloca | altace
unasaanue tion, tion
{a) Ure: 1.59 “28 135 is BS fo
00 Dar 1.05 | asi | 130 | 053 | a2 | 057 | 1 : i -
(©) MOP 040. | 031. | 04 | 931 oa 04 .
(a) Complexes | 9.14 1.37 | 2.50 128 | 26 | 3.17 1.90 190 -

0 | o |

(e) 88P 0 ० 0 0 0 o | o | 6 बिन | - |

Drea, DAP, MOP, Complexes, SSP:

Requirement of al} the fertilizers was kept same as the demanded quantities.

[0S —


158 Damaw & Din

Rabi 2010-77 1 Rabi 2012 abi 2013-14*
Gross : = 1
Cropped Area a
(Lakh * sO
Meectnves) | 7 cnn ne _ . vod
Invigated - ~ rn - "|
Area(Lakh 7
Bectares) de तन की 7
Pertilizers Reg Cons | Req Cops Req Cons Projected | Assesed
(00 MT) . Requirement Requirement.
Thousand Actual | Reserve
MICIMT) .. wo -- -|aloca - |-alloca
[tos tion tion,
(a) Urea - - - = - - 0.13 9.13 -
_ -_ i . ener
()DAP - - (- | 5 = 0.03 1 008 | 0.03 -
(|) MOP 7 _ | - | - | - | 0.03 0.01 7
(d) Comptexes = [| . . | 2 0.01 0.04 -
(e)S5P - - - पु - ‘| - | 00 | 001 | 0.03 -
: es — न

Urea, DAP, MOP, Complexes, 887:

Requirement of all the fertilizers was kept same as the demanded quantities.

id, D& N Haveli

है Rabi 2070-0) Rabi 2011-12 Rabi 2012-13 Rabi 2073-14"

Grass न + है - ” -

Cropped Area

(lakh |

whectaves) लि ool =

Errigated - जि .

Area(Lakh

hectares). - _ _ _
Fertilizers. | Req Cons | Req Cons Req Cons | Projected Assesed
C000 MT) Regnirement Requirement
Thousand Actual | Reserve
MT(TMT) allpca | alloca
.... ... ns _ anna tion tion

(a) Urea - - - 0.42 | 0.84 0.38 0.38 -

(h) DAP - - - o4o | 078 | 032 | 032 | 0.52

(o) MOP - पु - on | - 0.10 6.10

(d} Complexes . . . | ० | पं 0 0 ”

(है! | - | - = - | 0 0 | 0 9 8

Urea, DAP, MOP, Complexes, SSP:

Requirement of all the fertilizers was kept same as the demanded quantities.

- (0 -



No.22001/2013-rert Stat van

Government of India i
Ministry of Agriculture

Department of Agri. कि Coopn.

a
Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi
“Dated the 11 Septern ber, 2013.

To
Secretary (Agriculture) / Director (Agriculture),
All State Governments (Except North Eastern States).

Sub: Zonal Conference on Agricultural: Inputs for Rabi 2013-14 season -
regarding.

Sir/ Madam:

1 am directed to refer on the subject mentioned above and to forward
herewith a copy of the minutes of the conference/meeting held tumder the
Chairmanship of Joint Secretary(INM) on 39 September, 2013 for South and
West Zones and §Geptember;22013"for North and East Zones at NAAS
Building, ICAR, NASC Complex, Pusa, New Delhi for your information and
further necessary action.

This has approval of the Joint Secretary{INM)}.
Yours faithfully,

Sul.
(Shailesh)
Dy. Seeretary to the Govt. of India

: a c Tebeas82480

Copy for information and uecessary attion to:

“a,
w / 1. Joint Secretary(P&M), Department of Fertilizers, Shastri Bhawan, New
a: Delhi,

\9 oint Director(Movement}, Department of Fertilizers, Shastri Bhawan, New

Delhi.
3. Executive Director(T TF), Ministry of Railways, Rail Bhawan, New Delhi.
4, Director General, FAI, 10 Saheed Jit Sing h Marg, New Delhi.
Copy for information to:

JS(Seeds), JS(Machinery), JS(Crops), JS(Extension), J&(PP), Horticulture
Commissioner, ADG(Soil), ICAR, Pusa, Director{NCOF).

Copy also to:

Sr. PPS 16 Secretary(A&C), PPS to AS{AKS)

“7110 -


Poayt

MINUTES OF THE ZONAL CONFERENCE FOR AGRICULTURAL INPUTS POR Raul 2085-34
HELD GN 65" SEPTEMBER, 2013

Venue: Lecture Hall, 1) Floor, NASC Complex, DPS Marg, Pisa, New Delhi
Present: “As per list annexed &

Subject: Assessment of requirement of fertilizers for Rabi MLB1d,

ln the Zonal Conference, the main issues raised and discussed were as follow:

1 Joint Seoretary (NM), Departmdnt of Agriculture: é& Cooperation wéleorhed the participants and

introduced the agenda.
@ JS ({NM) emphasized on the promotion of balanced use of fertilizers. It has been. observed that
despite decrease in the prices of P&K fertilizers at the start of the ongoing Kharif season, sales of P&K
fertilizers in the ongoing Kharif season are jess than the sales of P&K fertilizers in the previous Khavif
season. As use of P&K fertilizers: is equally important thus, there is 8 need to promote balanced use of
fertilizers by using various methods such as soil testing, use of area specific customized fertilizers, organic
manure; bio-fertilizerg etc. Both State Government yepresentatives and various lead fertilizers’ companies
‘were requested to promote the above mentioned policies in the long term interests of soi! health and crop
productivity.

Further, 18 (INM) informed that consumption of urea in some of the states such as Uttar Pradesh,
Andhra Pradesh, Punjab, Haryana etc is increasing day by day and its consumption (kg/hectare} has
increased beyond the dose/value recommended by ICAR/State Agricultural Universities whereas in some of
the states per hectare consumption of 1 nutrient is tach below the recommended value. Hence, this aspect
of Inter-State balance in terms of consumption of ‘N* nutrient may also be required to look into.

(9) 1S (INM) conveyed that it was decided in one of the Committee of Secretaries’ (COS) meetings that
Department of Agricultwre would consider making arrangements for encouraging greater use of other
phosphatic fertilizers in place of DAP, Now this hag become relevant and necessary a8 démand destruction of
PAK fertilizers is still going and no improvement has been observed despite fall in international prices of
PAI fertilizers. SSP is a straight phosphatic multi-nutrient fertilizer containing 16% (7, 11% ‘S* , 16% ‘Ca

and other essential micro-nutrients. Sulphur and Calcium are also recognized as major essential plant
nutrients in addition to three primary nutrients “N’, ‘P’, “KK? for growth and development of plants. Resource
poor farmers rarely apply sulphur, calcium and micro-nutrients independently resulting in depletion of these
nutrients in soils causing decline in crop productivity on long term basis. Promotion of use of SSP would

resulf in to application of nutrients like Calcium, Sulphur without any additional cost,


Moreover, DAF is costlier fertilizer than SSP and bulk of the requirement of DAP is met by imports,
whereas SSP is manufactured indigenously. Hence, encouraging us¢ of SSP merits serious consideration and
thus, State Government representatives were requested io make an attempt te reduce the requirement of DAP
by 5% for upcoming Rabi 2013-14 séabon ‘and requirement of SSP may be increased by the quatitity
equivalent to ‘P* content to be provided by reduced quantity of DAP.

(c) State Government representatives were reduested to promote the use of Phosphorous mobilizing bio-
fertilizers (PSB) so that ‘P* use efficiency. could be enhanced. 1 was requested that State Govermnents will
Sw! MUCH Of PSB is required to be produced for ériauting coverage OT more than 20%

sure to cover this area by fimding from RE VY/GOMState

Thake an assi

of gross sown area and start a campaign
Govermnent schemes. Further, they were reqhested to make an assessment (district-wise) of status of ‘K’
nutrient in their respective states and depending upon the status of 107 nutrient, potassic fertilizers (MOP),
‘K’ mobilizing bio-fertilizers etc may be promoted, They were also requested to identify the deficiency of
organic carbon and to promote use of organic manures in deficient districts.

(0) State Goverment representatives were also requested to make an assessment of per-heclare
use/requirement of bio-fertilizers in their respective states and use of. bio-fertilizers including liquid bio-
fertilizers may be promoted.

(2)... 38 (गो) also conveyed that Indian Jnstitute of Soil Sciences (189), Bhopal has uploaded the soil
fertility maps of around 152 districts on their website. State Governments shall try to have a look on these
maps and sake comparison with their in-house available soil fertility data/maps and ensure that farmers are
educated about use of these maps. ,

(f) 18 (INM) informed that SMS portal has been’ made functional by Ministry of Agriculture through
which advisories by SMS could be sent to all the rogistered farmers, Officials of State Governments were
requested to make maximum use of this portal by sending important advisories to farmers at appropriate
time.

(g) 18 (NM) also informed that the Ministry is also planning io amend FCO in a big way and new FCO
may contain notification of only those fertilizers on which subsidy is given by Department of Fertilizers. In
respect of non-subsidized fertilizers, fertilizer companies may be empowered to notify their specifications.
(bh) Joint Secretary (DOF) conveyed that they have ail the fertilizers in plenty and he assured that all the
fertilizers would be supplied to the states irrespective of their requirements. Hence, be requested ali the State
Governments to be realistic in projecting the requirements for Rabi, 2013-14 season:
He also emphasized on the availability of fertilizers on time at appropriate/desired places. Thus, State

Governments were advised to prioritize the movement of rakes as per the requirement and place indents

accordingly so that fertilizers may be supplied/moved to the requisite places.

—[{2e


He informed that prices of P&I, fertilizers have come down but depreciation of Indian Rapee has also

taken place simultaneously. Hence, the combined/net effect, of both the developments has :esulted in to

. increase in the rates of P&K fertilizers-{in terms of INR) due to which companies have been found to be
reluctant to finalize their contracts for import of these fertilizers, Thus, State Governments were requestad tc

place firm ordars of P&K fertilizers with the companies in advance so that they could get fertilizers on time.

2 Assessment of requirement:

Joint Secretary (INM) informed that a slew c@ncept is being introduced in case of urea from this season and
as per the new concept total assessed requirement of urea for Rabi 2013-14 season will be divided jnto parts
is. (3) Actual allocation and Gi) Reserve allocation, State Governments will prepare their monthly
requirement on the basis of the quantities assesséd under ‘actual allocation’ and they could demand
additional urea from their quantities kept under ‘reserve allocation’ whenever they require it provided they
have completely utilized/consumed the quantity of urea kept under ‘actual allocation’. Also for customized

fertilizers, separate allpoation will be indicated within the total allocation of the states.

NORTH ZONE
1 Haryana
Rabi 2010-11 Rabi 2011-12 Rabi 2032-13
Gross 31748 325.01 शा a
Cropped Area हैं
Lakh
hectares = |... .. nes
Arrigated 329.08 303.00 334.32 346.29
Area(Lakh हु
hectares’ es in 7
Fertilizers Reg Cons Reg Cons Reg Cans Projected Assesed
(000 MT) Requirement Reguiremepi
Thousand ‘Actual | Reserve
MTI(TMT) alloca alloca
..... veer iz es tion tion
(a) Urea 415 | 111639} 1125 | 1065.02 | 3125 | 1174.89 1200 1300 50
ib) DAP हल | 40० | हि “
(e) 400. | 402.27 | 400 | 392.69 | 400 | 326.45 | 200 | 200 | 200 -
न le . ee . |
(c)MOP . 4o | 2726 | 40 | 3509 | 40 31 40 10 -
sme . न
(0) Complexes | 55 | 27% | 50 | 33.65 | 50. | 105 50 20 -
(e) SSP 30 | 2381 | 30 | 3426 | 50 | 4230 | 30 | 50 [100% yo.

B= .


Drea: v

Proposed cropped area for Rabi 2013-14 season is 331.55 lakh hectares which is aboul 2.0 १ more than the
area in 1351 season.-Consumption of Urea id theilast season was 1174.89 TMT but per hectare’ consumption of
‘N* nutrient is mach higher than the recommended dose by JCAR. Hence, looking at the per hectare

consumption of 37 nutrient in the state, proposed cropped area and projected requirement, requirement was

kept as 1100 TMT under ‘actual allocation’ head and 50 TMT under ‘reserve allocation’ head,

DAP, MOP, C
Looking al the trend of consumption against the requirement in last 3 seasons (since Rabj 2010-11),

projected requirement & proposed cropped area during the upcoming Rabi season and policy of promotion of
S8P(in case of DAP), requirement of DAP, MOP, Complexes was kept as 200, 10 and 20 TMT respectively.

SSP:

In view of policy of promotion of use of SSP and simultaneously looking at the projected demand &

proposed cropped area, requirement of SSP was kept as 100 TMT.

2. Punjab
™ Rabi 2010-11 Rabi 2001-12 Rabi 2012-13 Raby 2073-14" .
Gross 38.79 39.09 38.97 “38.91 (Proposed)
Cropped Area
(Latch
hectares —_ हि — 1
Irrigated > / aie -
Area(Lakh
hectares ! i
Fertilizers Req Cons Req Cons a Cons Projected Assesed
(000 MT) Requirement Requirement
Thousand Actual | Reserve
MT(TMT} alloca | alloca
7 ... . tion fion मी
fa) Urea y4sza1 | 1350 | 1354.27 f 1315 | 150047 1450 B15 -
(b) DAP बट | 413 | 482.02 | 330 | 56095 | 500 | s00 | ais :
(i MOP so | 3677 | so | 4535 | 50 | 90 | 50 30 -
(व) Complexes | «| aims} 50 | 6783 | 70 | 30.93 100 70 पु
५०७४ ‘25 | 236i | 25 | 3920 | 50° | 4657 | 50 | 50 | 100 -

a


Urea:

# .
Proposed cropped area for Rabi 2013-14 season 18 38.91 lakh hectares which is same as the area in last
season. Consumption of Urea in the last season was 1500.41.TMT' but per hectare consumption of “N
nutrient is much higher than the recommended dose by ICAR. Hence, looking at the per hectare consumption
of हि ‘N° जया in the state, proposed cropped area and projected requirement, requirement was kept as 1215

‘TMT under ‘actual allocation’ head and 0 ‘TMT under ‘reserve allocation’ head.

.. BAP, MOP, Complexes: .

Looking at the trend of consumption against the requirement in last 3 seasons (since Rab} 2010-11) ,

projected requirement & proposed cropped aréa during the upcoming Rabi season ahd policy of promotion of
SSP(in case of DAP), requirement of DAP, MOP, Complexes was kept as 415, 30 and 70 TM'T respectively.

SSP:

In view of policy of promotion of use of SSP and simultaneously looking at the projected demand हैं:

proposed cropped ared, requirement of SSP was kept as 100 TMT.

3. Utter Pradesh

— 2013-14

Rabi 2070-11
Gross 152.12 152.76 T5276 “"T55,05(Proposed) 7
Cropped Area
(Laich
hectares) se el .....
Irrigated 196.28 16.3 ea 196.33
AreaQvalch
hectares) ....... .
Fertilizers Req Cons Reg Cons Req Cons Projected Assesed
(4000 MT) | Requirement Requirement
Thowsand Actual | Reserve
MT(TMY) . alloca ; alloca
—_ es ns :............... है लि ene {ton tion
(a) Ures 3250 | 313289 3300 | 3155.75 | 3400 | 3560.81 3850 3400 | 350
Lf [> a किक a हे
(७) DAP 85 | 8925 | gis |101.83 | ois | 12727) 1250 | 1250 | 95 | - |
(०1४०४ 200 | 1142 | 7590 | 1999 | 250 | 32.83 250 100 |.
(४0 Complexes | 355 | sors | 600 | 473.69 | 600 | 258.82 500 500 |.
......-.-- 1 हि : :
(e) SSP 200 | 126.06 | 250 | 155.45 | 195 | 155.35 | 300 | 300 | 500 -



1
Urea:
Proposed cropped area for Rabi 2013-14 season is 145.05 lakh hectares which is about 1.5 % more than the
area in-last season. ‘Consumption of Urea in the last season was 3560.8] TMT but per hectare consumption of
“Ne nutrient is at the level of dose recommended by ICAR. Henoe, looking at the per hectare conguimpiion of
नर nutrient in the state, congumption in last season, proposed cropped area and projected requirement,
requirement was kept 38 3400 TMT under ‘actual allocation’ head and 150 TMT under ‘reserve allocation’

owhead. . cs

DAP i

Though consumption of DAP in last Rabi season was 1273.27 TMT against the requirement of 915 TMT but
it has been observed that curnulative sales of DAP in the ongoing Kharif season (as on 30.08.2013) is only to
the tune 150 TMT against the total requirement of 900 LMT for the entire season. Further,. it was also
conveyed by one of the companies that stock of DAP lifted by state in the last Rabi season js stil) available in
the godowns. Hence, requirement of DAP was kept same as requirement assessed in the last season ie. 915
TMT.

MOP, Complexes:

Looking at the trend of consumption against the requirement in last 3 seasons (since Rabi 2010-11),
projected: requirement & proposed cropped area during the upcoming Rabi season. yequirement of MOP.

Complexes was kept as 100 and 500 TMT respectively”

SSP:

In view of policy of promotion of use of SSP and simultaneously looking at ‘the projected demand &

proposed cropped area, requirement of SSP was kept as 500 TMT.

Customized Fertilizers: 7000 MT of DAP and MOP each were given for customized fertilizers in addition
to the quantities 915 and 100 TMT respectively. DOF will take further necessary action on this.

&


4, Uttarakhand

a
: Rabi 2010-1 Rabi 2001-12 Babi 20izae*

Gross डक 5.68 5.52 (Proposed) 7 7
Cropped Aree “4

{uakh
|_teetares) 1. ee ee ee

Irrigated 331 332

Area(Lakh

hectares) 7 ..... att
Fertilizers Reg Cons | Rea Conz | Req Cons Assesed

(000 MT) - Requirement Requirement _

“+ Thousand a vr weno Sera] RESET He
MT(TMT) alloca | alioca
seamen ~ .... झा ..... tion tion

(8) Urea 100 | 100.15] 115 110} 108.59 115 ts

©) DAP is fia} 18 is | 16.88 | 15 | 15 75 | « |
(Mop 5 3.53 5 3.05 5 110 2 2 =

D Compl हर Sp |
0) Complexes | 359 | 502.05 | eo | 473,69.| 600 | 258.82 2° 29 -

© SsP io | 392 | ४9 | 10 | 4.06 5 it 3 5 “| 5 6 i

Urea, DAP, MOP, Complexes, SSP:

Requirement of Urea, DAP, MOP, Comp

TMT.

5; Himachal Pradesh

lexes was kept same as the demanded quantities and SSP as 6

\ Rabi 2010-1) | Rabi 2011-12 Rabi 2000-13 Rabi 2013-14"
: ™ 494 3.07 3.08 5 .24(Proposed)
Cropped Area
Guakth *
hectares) | soe — _ _
Irrigated - - - -
Area(Lakh
|_bectares) ~ .. है .... -
Fertilizers Req Cons | Req Cons | Reg Cons | Projected Agsesed
(000 MT) Requirement |_| Requirement
Phousand Actual | Reserve
MT(TMT) alloca | alloca
tion. tion
- . _ 7 =
(a) Drea 29 | 77.14 29 28.12 | 29.50 | 31.62 30 30
(b) DAP 0 0 pe 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 -
(©) MOP 6 44 6 551 6 558 7.50 450 -
(@Compleres | 2250 | 3240 | # | 20% | 305 | aie | 20 | ४ | .
(e) SSP 5 385 5 306 | 320, | 424 | 5 5 | 5» | न -


Urea, DAI, MOP, Complexes, SSF: ‘

3
Requirement of al} the fertilizers was kept same as the demanded quantities

§ Jaumu & Kashmir
77०1 Rabi 2010-11 Rabi 20735 Rabi 2012-13 Rabi wire |
"Gross ™~ a oe 15.07 15,1 8(Proposea)
Cropped Area
wf Cah पु जलन ob eee
hectares:
Irrigated . | । -
Avea(Laich
Hectares} a —
Wertilizers Req Cons | Req Cons “| Cons | Projected Assesed
(000 MT) Requirement Requirement __
Thousand . Actual | Reserve
MT(TMT) alteca j alloce
. \. ition | tion
(8) Urea ms | 84.12 78 70.80 | 78.00 | 89.01 78 B =
(b) DaP 40 | 5276 | 45. | 3088 | 5 | 35.95. a 42.75 | 42.78 -
' कि ee nes हि on
() MOP 21) 71766 | 25 | 8.82 | 25 | 13.05 25 20 -
(d) Complexes | ०0 | | 0 | | ० | | 0 | कक = 0 0 | - |
()S8P 4 0 0 | ०0 | 0 ty 9 ॥ 647 | 6.87 | - |

Urea, DAP, MOP, Complexes, SSP:

Requirement of Urea, DAP, Complexes, SSP was kept same as the demanded quantities and MOP as

20 TMT.

Issnes/Concerns:
1. Representative from State Government reported that NFL was.required to supply 1000 MT of Urea
to Leh/Laddakh in the month of September and they have supplied only 400 MT till date. Hence, they

requested DOF to advise NFL to supply balance quantity of 600 MT.
2. They also informed that they have identified NPK 12:32:16 for use in the state, which will be

marketed/manufactured by IFFCO.

HIG


1 Delhi

Rabi 2010-11 Rabi गण
Gross Te =e ~ ” ~ _
Cropped Area
(Lakh
hectares) cnt mm me ne -
Irrigated - = mi : -

Ares{Lakh
hectares’ . Lk. : . :

{ Fertilizers Req | Cons | Req Reg Cons | Projected == | Asseset
(ooo mn) . ह Requirement | “Requirement
‘Thousand. Actual | Reserve
MTCIMT) alloca | alloca

tion | tion

Toure | 5 [ए है है
@) Urea 5 058 5 5 5 .
0) Dar 2,50 = 3 0.15 3 - > [2 2 2 -
(9 MOP ro | | 18 - 130 | - -
@ Complexes 4 || 2 . ” 2 . हु . हु

—. —
(SSP 0.70 | | | 0.70 - | 070 | - | os | 05 | 05 :

Urea, DAP, MOP, Complexes, SSP:

Requirement of all the fertilizers was kept same as the demanded quantities.

4

AP


w हि
EAST ZONK

ह. Bihar
— — Rabi =f Rabi 2071-12 Rabe eae 1
Gross 7 एफ a 36.28" खा “38.0 Proposeay
Area पर .
(Lakh i -oG
hectares हि . - - 1
Trjgated r 38.42 - -
| Area(Lal ee ieee ey 1
hectares) | \ a tae _
Fertilizers Reg Conus Reg Cong; Reg Cons Projected Assesed
(000 1४१) a Requirement Requirement
Thousand : Actual | Reserve
ताप) . alloca | alloca
: - bh tion tion
(@) Uren 1050 | 1026.81 | 1150 [ tors | 1150 | 1192.92 1250 1150 .
©) DAP 275 | 233.6 | 2७ | 26441 [2s | 20516 | 30 [ 25 | 275 =
है
(<) MOP 150 | 1424 165 | 112.09 | 150 | 693 150 100 -
vf vale a =
()Compeaes | 178 | 18299 | ३0० 203.14 | 200 |: 178,83 250 200 कि
(e) SSP 100 | 280 | 100 | 2238 | 100 | 2742 | 100 | ७ | 150 .
Urea: .

Proposed cropped area for Rabi 2013-14 season is 38.10 lakh hectares which is about 5.0 % more than the
area in last season. Consumption of Urea in the last season was 1192.92 TMT but per hectare consumption of
“‘N’ nutrient is much higher than the recommended dése, Hence, looking at the per hectare consumption of
‘N’ nutrient in the state, proposed cropped area and projécted requirenient, vequirement was kept same as
requirement of Jast season 1.6, 1150 TMT under ‘actual allocation’ head and 0 TMT under ‘reserve

allocation’ head.

DAP, MOP, Complexes:

Looking at the tend of consumption against the requirement in last 3 seasons (since Rabi 2010-11) ,
projected requirement & proposed cropped area during the upcoming Rabi season and policy of promotion of
SSPGn case of DAP), requirement of DAP, MOP, Complexes was kept as 275, 100 and 200 TMT

respectively.

SSP:

In view of policy of promotion of use of 889 and simultaneously looking at the projected demand &

Proposed cropped area, requirement of SSP was kept as 150 TMT.

je


Tssues/Concerns:

1, Representative from Btate Government requested Ministry of Railways and DOF to make Thawe rake
point operational for fertilizers. :

2, State Government requested DOF to allocate imported Urea to Nagarjuna Fertilizers frora Mundra port
instead of Vizag port. 18 (DOF) clarified that imported urea at Vizag port jg allotted to IFL, not to Nagarjuna

Fertilizers.

9. Sharkhand

~ ~ हि हा आईना] Rabi “Rabi aD "Rabi 212-13 Rabi 2013-14*
‘Gross har 7० OT कक एज छाकाकक्की ४
Cropped Area .
(lakh
hectares _ L 4
irrigated 2.07 2.83 2.95 3.95
Area(Lakb
hectares .
Fertilizers. Req | Cons | Req Cons | Req ‘Cons | Projected Assesed
(000 MT) Requirement Requirement
‘Thousand Actual | Reserve
MTCIMT) : alloca. | alloca
be tion tion,
(a) Urea 79 50.28 100 | 90.56 | 10 | 79.25 105 | 100 | -
(py DAP 40 | 2024 | 45 Tages | के | 2767 | 6050 | 60.50 = -
|. — 4 -
)MOP 5 1.60 4 | 50 ws | 026 | 22.50 18 >
लोव्काब्गी gs [पक | 70 | 204 | 6 | 958 6 40 -
.. : .
(o) SSP 0 a 10 | 3.24 | 24 3 13 | B 5 :
‘Urea:
State Government representative conveyed in the conference that proposed cropped area in the upcoming
Rabi season will be 10.0 lakh hectares. Ht was also observed that per hectare consumption of ‘N’ nutrient in

the state is lower than the yecommended dose. Hence, looking at the trend of consumption in previous
seasons, projected requirement and per hectare consumption of ‘N’ nutrient in the state, requirement Was

kept as 100 TMT under ‘actual allocation’ head and 0 TMT under ‘reserve allocation’ head, -

DAP, MOP, Complexes:

Looking at the trend of consumption against the requirement in Jast 3 seasons (since Rabi 2010-11) ,
projected requirement & proposed cropped area during the upcoming Rabi season and policy of promotion of
SSP( in case of DAP), requirement of DAP, MOP, Complexes was kept as 40, 10 and 40 TMT tespectiyely.

— (19/- वि

के


tn view of policy of promotion of use of SSP and simultaneously looking ai the projected demand &
proposed cropped area, requirement of SSP was Kept as 75 TMT.
Issues/Concerns:

1. Representative from State Goverment requested Ministry of Railways and DOF to make four rake points

“ypooooreopamely Dumka-Bhanbad>lsohardaga amd Jamshedpur operational for fertilizers. "या + =

10. Odisha :

[Rebs 3010-17 Rabi 201 1-22 Rabi 2012-13 abi 2013-14" एएए
Gross 2611 खाक 275 31. 50(Proposedy
Cropped Area
Gald
hoctares’ ec . ws
Trrigated 6.91 6.98 7.04 . 7.04
Area(Lakh
hectares) fn ....
Fertilizers Reg Cons | Reg Cons | Req Cons | Projected Assesed
(000 MT) Requirement and eguirement
Thousand . Actual | Reserve
MTCIMT) alloca {| alloca

veal . le tion tion वि
(a) Urea ‘WS | 134271 190. | 135.65} 200 | 140.96 230 200 30
() DAP | % | e272 | 90 | 44is | 100 | a170 | 90 | 850 | &0 :

1. ee ao
() MOP x |3579 | es | ano | 90 | 2426 30 60 .
1 an ies ~
@) Complexes | too | 65.46 | usa | 9916 | 20 | 100.08 170 130 -
६8) BSP iz 9 | 1.25 9 | ser | 20 | 33 | 100 -
... ... .. 1 दि अं ....-

Wrea:

Consumption of Urea in the last season was 140,96 TMT. Proposed cropped area for Rabi 2013-14 season is
31.50 lalch hectares which is about 15.0 % more than the area in Jast season and per hectare consumption of
“N’ nutrient is also much lower than the zecommended. dose. Hence, looking at the per hectare consumption
of ‘N’ nutrient in the state, proposed cropped area and projected requirement, requirement was kept 200

TMT under ‘actual allocation’ head and 30 ‘TMT under ‘reserve allocation’ head. .

~ 42 +

= 129 -


BAP, MOP, Complexes:

Looking at the trend of consumption against the requirement in last 3 seasons (since Rabi 2010-11) , ;

projected requirement & proposed cropped area during the'upcomin:

8 Rabi season and policy of promotion of

§SP(in case of DAP), requirement of DAP, MOP, Complexes was kept as 60, 60.and 130 TMT respectively.

SSP:

In view of policy of promotion of use-of SSP and simultaneously looking at the projected demand &

~-— proposed -cropped-areayrequirement-of SSP was kept as 100 TMT.

Ii, | West Bengal

Rabi d01i-12

Rabi 2010-11 Rabi 2032-13. Rabi-2013-14*

‘Gross 4687 45.56 a 43.11 (Proposed)

Cropped Area .

(Lakh

hectares) _

Errigated 170 8.02 Te

Area(Lakh

hectares} :

Fertilizers Req Cons | Cons | Req Cons | Projected Assesed

(000 MT) है Requirement Requirement

Thousand Actual | Reserve
-MTI(TMT) alloca { alloca
— im ... tion tion

(a) Urea “soo | 739.70 | 225 [11008 | 850... | 868.51 890.18 ao | 40 |

Se [ae =
9) DAP 60 2.60 | 260 | 27555 | 275 | 281.57 | 284.36 | 270.14 [250 | -
(o MOP 29% | 19622 | 20 | 27009 | 27 | 136.54 26.44 216 -
a न —

(Compleses | 415... 476,72 | 300 | 43674 | 385 | 476.99 649.32 | 0 | -

जा . : + .
"कलश 250. 23.08 | 275. | 23768 | 308 | 293.1 | 292.47 | 333.35 | 400
Urea:

State Government’ representative’ conveyed in the conference that proposed cropped area in the upcoming
Rabi season will be 43.11 lakh hectares. It was also observed that per hectare consumption of ‘N’ nutrient in

the state is lower than the recommended dose. Looking at the per hectare consumption of पर nutrient in the

state, trend of consumption in previous seasoris, proposed cropped area and projected requirement,

requirement was kept as 850 TMT under ‘actual allocation’ head and 40 TMT under ‘reserve allocation’

43.

head.

— |2R-


“In view of policy of Bi

DAP, MOF, Complexes:

Looking at the trand of coilgsumption against the. requirement in jast 3 seasons (since Rabi 2010-11) ,
Projected requitement & proposed cropped area during the upcoming Rabi season and policy of promotion of
SSP(in. case of DAP}, requirement of ‘DAB, MOP, Complexes was kept as 250. 215 and 550 TMT

vespactively.

SSP: -:

HOR OF use’ FSP and simultaneously looking at “He projected demand &

proposed cropped area, requirement of SSP wee kept as 400 TMT.

Issues/Concerns:

1. Representative from State Government raised the matter related to issue of Form ‘O° from one wholesaler
to another wholesaler in context of office order recently issued by DOF. JS (DOF) clarified that State
Government may write to the Ministry and they would clarity it.

wf lye


Nov 22002/2013-Fert, Stat
Government of india
Ministry of Agriculture
“b/s Agriculture & Co-operation
INM Division (Fertilizer Statistics)

DMIMECIATE

PRIORITY

To,
Director (Agriculture),
All North Eastern States.

Krishi Bhawan,
New Deihi
Dt: 16" September, 2013

Subject: Minutes of the Zonal Conference for agricultural inputs for Rabi 2013-14 held on 10°

September 2013.

Sir,

The undersigned is directed to enclose the Minutes of the Zonal Conference for

agricultural inputs for Rabi 2013-14 held on 10" September 2013 at Shillong, Meghalaya.

Further it is requested that the month wise requirement for Rabi 2013-14 may please be
furnished immediately through e-mail at these mailing address bhagwansahai64@amailcom
and mrsinduS9@yahoo.co.in. The assessed requirement statement of Urea, DAP, MOP,

Complexes and SSP is enclosed herewith.

Yours faithtully,

stele .

(Shailesh)
Deputy Secretary
Tel: 23382480


Copy for information and necessary action to:

Joint Secretary (P&M), Department of Fertilizers, Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi.
Joint Director {Movement}, Department of Fertilizers, Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi.
Executive Director (TF), Minsiry of Railways, Ralf Bhawan, New Delhi,

Director General, Fal, 10 Saheed Jit Singh Marg, New Delhi,

Be we

Copy for information to:
43 (Seeds), 15 (Machinery), 48 (Crops), 35 (Extension), JS {PP}, Horticulture Corrnissionar,
ADG (Soil), ICAR Pusa, Director (NCOF),

Copy also ta:

Sr. PPS to Secretary (A&C), PPS to as (AKS)

sgh:

Shale b
(Shailesh)
Deputy Secretary

(26 -


a

MINUTES OF THE ZONAL CONFERENCE FOR AGRICULTURAL INPUT’S FOR RABI

2013-14 HELD ON 10 SEPTEMBER, 2013

Venue: Siloam, Umiam, Khwan, Barapani, Meghalaya

NORTH EAST ZONE

L Aggame
Cr . [2010-19 211-32 3035-15 2013-14
Grogs Cropped - - - -
Area (lakh
hectares) 4 va
Fertilizers Reg | Cons | Req | Cons Req | Cons | Proj | Asses
(000 Req | Req
tonnes)(TME ॥॒ हे .
9) Urea 140.00 [138.41 | 160.00 | 168.41 | 170 L 138.33 | 160 200
b) DAP a0 141,50 140.00 | 44.50 (40 11846 130 | 35
८) MOP 76.00 167.22 | 80.00 | 73.22 90 46.31 | 70 90
Complexes [0.00 10.00 | 20.00 [0.00 | 20 | : 20” | 20
[ey क [6.0 [57.55 | 70,007 63.55 [80 10) 31 feo, (80 |

The representative from Tea board, Assam requested for additional quantities of 55, 5,
20 and 3 TMT for Urea, DAP, MOP and SSP respectively. Hence, requirement for

Urea, DAP, MOP, NPE and SSP was kept as 200,

35, 90, 20 and 80 TMT

respectively.
2. Tripara

2010-11 Wits | 2042-13, 2013-14
Gross Cropped ह
Area (Lakh 2.06 2.14 2.18 -
hectares) ही
Trrigated
Area(Lakh 0.52 - 0.33 0.53 :
hectares) _. |
Fertilizers (000 | Req Cons | Req | Cons | Req Cons | Proj | Asses
tonnes)TMT L. हि | | Req | Reg
a) Urea 73.00 [8.60 | 24.00 | 12.71 23.10 - 23 23
b) DAP 260 [110 12.00 1.19 (3.10 हा 3 3
९) MOP (है.50 | 3501 - 9.50 | 2.46 | 9.33 i & 6
व) Complexes (0.00 (9.00 (1.00 10.90 | शिया | 0 10
fey ss SSE. 230 11121 123.50 | 13.17 22.05 - 22 22

हु [99



Requirement for Urea, DAP, MOP, NPK and SSP was assessed as 23, 3, 6, 0 and 22

TMT respectively.

Tssnes/Concerme

3

Director (Agriculture) reported that about 2-3 kg of quantity of fertilizers gets wasted
fromi each bag while handling/unloading fertilizers at Lumding rake point. JS (DOF)
directed that a team of representatives of BVFCL, IPL, IFFCO and official(s) of State

Government may visit Lumding rake point and subsequently a report may be sent to

Department of Fertilizers for necessary action.

3. Manipur

2010-51 2012-13 2013-14

Gross

Cropped Area 1.01 1.02 1.03 1.23
(Lakh

hectares) J हि
Irrigated

Area(Lakh 0.1768 0.2867 0.1715 0.4550
hectares _| tL . हे
Fertilizers (000 Rea | Cons | Req | Cons | Req Cons Brat Asses
tonnes) TMT . eq | Req

a) Urea 12.00 14.21 | 12.50 | 2. 71.06 39 9081 9 |

b) DAP 2.50 [082 [1.41 10. 6.81 06 (478 | 5 |
0) MOP 150 1027 [0.87 [027 (4.76 [0.19 (239 | 2.5
0) Complexes [0.00 0.00 10.00 10.00 [0 पी 0 To |

e) SSP 0.95 (0.71 [1.08 | 0.27 | 6.81 [0.54 2.67 7

Requirement for Urea, DAP, MOP, NPK. and SSP was assessed as 9, 5, 2.5, 0 and 7

TMT respectively.

Tsswes/Concerns:

State Government representative reported about wastage of fertilizers while

handlingmloading at Lumding rake point. J§ (DOF) directed that a team of
representatives of BVFCL, IPL, IFFCO and official(s) of State Government (Tripura
and Manipur) may visit Lumding rake point and subsequently a report may be sent to

Department of Fertilizers for necessary action.


4, Meghalaya

2010-11 BILD 204-13 ise

Gross Cropped

Area (Lakh मु 1.02
ectares) 089 | 030 a [|
Irrigated

Avea(Lakit -
hectares) _ 0.246 __0083 __ 9.09

Fertilizers (000 | Keg Cons | Reg Cons | Req | Coms Proj | Asses
tonnes) TMT . i Req | Req
23) Urea 3.90 (3.17 [450 (3.05 [4.50 [2.99 5.1 7
bypar _ 1150 [1 (200 [O42 |3 6.21 152 5
०) MOP, 045 (0.37 (6.70 [0.17 1075 [024 080 | 2
‘d) Complexes [0.00 [0.00 [0.00 | 0.00 |0 - 0 9

6) SSP 350 (202 [350 [219 1270 [2.01 31 5

State Government representative informed that they may require quantities more than
the quantities what they are projecting at present, Hence, requirement for Urea, DAP,
MOP, NPK and SSP wag kept as 7, 5, 2, 0 and 5 TMT respectively.

Issues/Concerns:

1. State Government representative reported that many a times they do not get
fertilizers on time. 18 (DOF) directed BVFCL to supply fertilizers to all the North
Eastern States on time. Further, he also directed IFFCO to supply double the quantity
of fertilizers (what they are supplying at present) from Phulpur so that the state gets

fertilizers on time.

2. They also raised the issue related to secondary freight subsidy.

(29 -


5. Nagaland

a

_ 2010-17 2011-12 2015-13 2015-14
Gross
शा हि 073 on 0.74 0.75
hectares) _ oe
Iprigated
prea aie 0.05 0.013 0.06
Fertilizers Req Cons | Req Cons [Req | Cons Proj | Asses
00 Req Req
| fonnes)T MT Z i —
a) Urea 0.68 (0.53 $0.69 1061. 116 06] (0624 | 1.00
b) DAP 055 [95766 [635] [074 1051 [0556 | 0.75
©) MOF 6.20 [013 [0167 018 031 (018 (0236 | 0.30
(d)Complexes | 0.00 10.00 10.07 (1615 [0.24 16075 1784 | 0.50
e) SSP O14 TOI" [O [021 [O21 [ois 928 | 837

Requirement for Urea, DAP, MOP, NPK and SSP was kept as 1, 0.75, 0.30, 0.30 and
0.30 TMT respectively.

6. Arunachal Pradesh

ee 2010-11 2011 12 2012-13 2013-14
Gross
Cropped
‘Apea (in lakh 0.92 1.02 1.02 1.03
hectares
Area under
irrigated (in 0.634 0.644 0.646 1.447
laich hectares’ a .
Fertilizers Reg | Cons | Req | Cons | Req Cong =| Proj | Asses
(000 tonnes) Req | Req
IMT. ..........
a) ree {0.57 140 [057 | 040 [040 | 0.50
b)DAP {0.05 (0.10 | 0.06 010 [0.10 | 0.35
९) MOP 0.05 1020 [0,06 {0.20 0.20 | 0.30
d)Complexes [0.00 [0.00 [0.00 | 0 a 6
६) SSP है 0.08 (0.30 [0.08 0.30 0.30 [ 1.50 |

Requirement for Urea, DAP, MOP, चर and SSP was kept as 0.50, 0.35, 0.30, 0 and
0.50 TMT respectively.

[390 - ह


7. Mizoram

2

218-11 11-15 2012-15 2613-14

Gross

Cropped 0.022 0.027 0.068 9.074
Area (Lakh
hectares . . हर

Fertilizers rReg | Cons [Req | Cons | Req TCons ~ | Proj .| Ssses
000 tonnes) न Req | Reg
बा [0.19 हि [ozi 1027 10 [06 0.528 | 1.00
DAP dae 1045 [07 1820 1028 | Ois 10.329 | 0.50

2) MOF 0.09 | 0.09 10.11 | 8.20 | 0.43 0.01 0.253 | 0.56

a

‘dj Complexes 0.00 1060 [0.20 | 0.00 10.00 | 10.00 - | 10.00 | 09

e) SSP 1060 [000 [0.00 [000 10.80 _ 10.00 10.00 [08 |

Requirement for Urea, DAP, MOP, NPK. and SSP was kept as i, 0.50, 0.50, 0 and
0.80 TMT respectively.

Isswes/Coucerns:

1. State Government representative reported that earlier there used to be 15
dealers of BVFCL in the state but at present there are only 4 dealers in the State. JS
(DOF) directed BVFCL to appoint 11 more dealers as per the recommendations of
State Government.

2. Further, 18 (DOF) directed BVFCL to hire godowns for storage of fertilizers.
State Government representative assured that they would help them in identifying the

godowns.

1%} -



ASSESSED REQUIREMENT OF FERTILISERS FOR RABI 2013-14

Figures in ‘$00 tonnes»
aa tere oe
StateUnlon a UREA DAP oa COMPLEX; SSF
Actual eliagation| Reserve
Tertitor aflocation TOTAL
2 [ 3 z | 6 |. ¢ [7
(ORTH-EAST ZONE : a
SSAM 200.60 __. 8.00 200.00 20.00) 80.00)
RIPURA 23.00 0.00 23.00 ooo[ 22.06
ANIPUR मिल 9.00 0.00 0.00 7.00
TEGHALAYA 7.00 } 2.08 . 2.00 5.00
\AGALAND 100 7030 0.30
‘RUMACHAL PRADESH 0.50 0.00 __ 0.00 0.50
HZORAM foo] 0.00 0,00] .0.80
SIKKIM, 0.00 0,90 | 000| | 0.00|
OAL उबर 50 छत Bane i "gea0) बह



No.22003/2013-Fert Stat
Government of India
Mirustry of Agriculture
Department of Agri. & Coopn.

Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi
Dated the 28" February, 2014,

it

Secretary (Agriculture) / Director (Agriculture),
. All State Governmenis. ~

Sub: Zonal Conference on Agrieultural Inputs for Kharif 2014 season - regarding,

Sir/ Madam,

Tam directed to refer on the subject mentioned above and to forward herewith
a copy of the minutes of the con: erence/meecting held under the Chairmanship of
Joint Secretary(INM) on 14% February, 2014 for North and Bast Zones and 21s
February, 2014 for South Zones, West Zones and North Eastern States at NAAS
Building, ICAR, NASC Complex, Pusa, New Delhi for your information and further
necessary action.

This has approval of the Joint Secretary(INM}.
Yours faithfully,
8-0०
पे ६ (Shaitéshy)
\
\

Dy, Secretary to the Govt. of India
Pel: 23382480

Copy for information and necessary action to:

As ५22 Joint Secretary(SC), Department of Fertilizers, Sha stri Bhawan, New Delhi.

aly _Director(Movernent), Department of Fertilizers, Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi.
Gale पड, Executive Director(T TF), Ministry of Railways, Rail Bhawan, New Delhi.
bee 4, Director General, FAI, 10 Saheed Jit Sing h Marg, New Delhi.

ge

: Copy for information to: ~~ छल a
1 थे Poet

JS(Seeds), IS(Machinenyf 5 0180० JS(Extension), ¢ P), Horticulture
«Commissioner, ADG(Soil), ICAR, Pusa, Director(NCOF), j ३2८7५
& BI
7 Copy also to; * _

|
Sr, PPS to Secretary(A&C)}, PPS to AS(AKS)
ee | we हु
है; .
ca J :
a
~ 7 दि ५.
me TD ~


MINUTES OF T ZONAL CONFERENCE FOR ASSESSMENT OF REQUIREMENT OF
FERTILIZERS F@R Khari! 2014 SEASON HELD ON 14" FEBRUARY, 2014

Venue: Lecture Mall, I-Floor, NASC Complex, DPS Marg, Pusa, New Delhi
Present: As per list annexed

Subject: Assessment of requirement of fertilizers for Kharif 2014

In the Zonal Conference, the main issues raised and discussed were as follow:

1. Joint Secretary (INM), Department of Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC) welcomed the participants

and introduced the agenda,

(2) 18 (INM) conveyed’ that Performance Audit of fertilizer subsidy was carried out by Comptroller and
Auditor General (CAG) of India and it has been indicated in the report that no scientific method is followed
for assessing the requirement of fertilizers. In order to comply with the recommendations of CAG, the
Department introduced new/modified proformas incorporating various suggestions made by CAG in its
audit report and information is being sought in the modified proformas for last three cropping seasons.

Further, with the help of Directorate of Eoonomics and Statistics of DAC, four nodal institutes
namely 0) Agro-Eoonomic Research Unit, Institute of Economic Growth, Delhi Gi) Agricultural

Development है: Rural Transformation (ADRT), Institute for Social & Economic Change (15720), Bangalore

Gil) AER. Centre, Shantiniketan, West Bengal (iv) TIM, Ahmedabad have been, nominated for north, south,
east and west regions respectively, which will help the state governments in analysis of assessment of

requirement of fertilizers. State Government officials were requested to get in touch with their respective

nodal institutes.

(b) JS (INM) emphasized on the promotion of balanced use of fertilizers. lt has been observed that

despite decrease in the prices of Pat fertilizers at the start of the year 2013, sales of P&K fertilizers in the

current year are less than the sales of Péels fertilizers in the previous year. As use of P&K fertilizers is
equally important thus, there is a need to promote balanced use of fertilizers by using various methods such
as soil testing, use of area specific, customized fertilizers, use of soil fertility maps etc. JS (INM) also
informed about ‘Nutrient Expert’ tool for maize and wheat, developed by International Plant

Nutrition Institute (IPN), which can formutate/recommend dose of fertilizers based on simple

information/input to be provided by the user. Both State Government representatives and various lead

fertilizers’ companies were requested to promote the above mentioned policies in the long term interests of
soi] health and crop productivity
Further, 25 (INM) informed that consumption of urea in some of the states such as Andhra Pradesh,

Punjab is increasing day by day and its consumption (kg/hectare) has increased beyond the dose/value

“ es ae


yd
111

qecommended by ICAR/State Agricultural Universities whereas in some of the states per hectare
consumption of “N* nutrient is much bejow the recommended value. Accordingly, ICAR was requested to
calculate the total requirement of ‘N’, ‘P? & हू! nutrients of such states. ICAR on the basis of recommended
dose for various crops as per soil health status has submitted that total requirement of ‘N* and 7 nutrients
for the State of Punjab may be to the tune of 5.69 Lakh MT (LMT) ‘and 1.23 LMT respectively. For the
purpose of calculation, notional area as maximum of the area under crops reported by State Government in
last three seasons was considered. Consumption of N (6.51 - 6.94 LMT) and P (1.86 + 1.97 LMT) nutrients
in previous Kharif seasons has been much more than the requirement calculated by 1041. Hence, there is a
need 10 propose/curtail requirement of fertilizers accordingly and make farmers aware about imbalance &
promote balanced use through focused extension activities.

State Government representatives were also requested to promote use of efficient fertilizers such as
zine coated urea, sulphur coated urea, urea briquettes ete.
(c) JS (INM) coriveyed that it was decided in one of the Committee of Secretaries? (COS) meetings that
Department of Agriculture would consider making arrangements for encouraging greater use of other
phosphatic fertilizers in place of DAP. Now this has become relevant and necessary as demand destruction of
P&K fertilizers is still going and no improvement has been observed despite fal! in international prices of
P&K fertilizers. SSP is a straight phosphatic multi-puirient fertilizer containing 16% “P’, 11% ‘S” , 16% ‘Ca’
and other essential micro-mytrients, Sulphur and Calcium are also recognized as major essential plant
nutrients in addition to three primary nutrients ‘N’, ‘P’, 4K? for growth and development of plants. Resource
poor farmers rarely apply sulphur, calcium and micro-nutrients independently resulting in depletion of these
nutrients in soils causing decline in crop productivity on long term basis, Promotion of use of SSP would
jesult in to application of nutrients like Calcium, Sulphur without any additional cost

Moreover, DAP is costlier fertilizer than 887 and butk of the requirement of DAF is met by imports,
whereas $SP is manufactured indigenously. Hence, encouraging use of SSP merits serious consideration and
thug, State Government representatives were requested to make an attempt to reduce the requirement of DAP
by 5% for upcoming Kharif 2014 season and requirement of 597 may be increased by the quantity
equivalent to ‘P* content to be provided by reduced quantity of DAP.
(Q . State Government representatives were requested to promote the use of Phosphorous mobilizing bio-
fertilizers (PSR) so that ‘P’ use efficiency could be enhanced. As per information available with this
Ministry, current production of bio-fertilizers as per recommended dose of bjo-fertilizers (ke/hectare) can
cover only about 10% of total gross sown area of our country, Henoe, this Ministry has been requesting State
Government to enhance this coverage on various forums. Now, there is a need to fix a target Le. coverage

may be to the extent of 40-50% of gross sown area and accordingly start the campaign to achieve it.

— [ae


Further, they were vequested to make an assessment (district-wise) of status of ‘IC’ nutrient in their
respective states and depending upon the status of “Kk” nutrient, potassic fertilizers (MOP), कद mobilizing
bio-fertilizers ett may be promoted. They were also requested to identify the deficiency of organic carbon
and to promote use of organic manures in deficient districts.

(६) State Government representatives were also requested to make an assessment .of per-hectare
use/requirement of bio-fertilizers in their respective states and use of bio-fertilizers including liquid bio-
fertilizers may be promoted, 1 was also informed that Consortia Bio-fertilizers is being notified in Fertilizer
Control Order (FCC) shortly, | -

() 18 (INM) also conveyed that Indian Institute of Soil Sciences (155), Bhopal hes uploaded the soil
fartility maps of around 165-170 districts on their website. State Governments shall try to have a iook on
these maps and make comparison with their in-house available soil fertility data/maps and ensure that
farmers are educated about use of these maps. States were requested to organize a one day workshop of
extension workers/dgricultural officers of districts for which maps have been prepared and invite IIS& to
train them.

( 38 (INM) informed that SMS portal has been made functional by Ministry of Agriculture through
which advisories by SMS could be sent 10 all the registered farmers. Officials of State Governments were
requested to make maximum use of this portal by sending: important advisories to farmers at appropriate
time. पु

(g) JS (17५) also informed that the Ministry is also planning to amend FCO in a big way and new FCO
may contain notification of only those fertilizers on which subsidy is given by Department of Fertilizers. In
respect of non-subsidized fertilizers, fertilizer comparties may be empowered to notify their specifications.
State Governments were requested to furnish suggestions, if any, in this regard.

(h} Director (Movement), DOF conveyed that they have all the fertilizers in plenty and he assured that all
the fertilizers would -be supplied to the states as per their requirements. He also intimated that it has been
observed during various weekly video-conferences that State Governments do not lift fertilizers as per their
monthly supply plan, Hence, he requested all the State Governments to be realistic in projecting the
requirements for Kharif 2014 season.

Further, he clarified to State Governments that they are supposed to lift the fertilizers as per their
monthly supply plan. In case they fail to lift it in a partioular month, the backiog of that particular month will
not be entertained in subsequent months. |

He requested State Governments to feed district wise requirement also in-PMS§ so that the movement
of rakes बड़े per the requirement-could be prioritized and loéalized shortage in a particular district could be

ayoided despite having sufficient stock of fertilizers at the State level.

* . —136~


@) Dr Kaushik Majumdar, Divector IPNJ made a presentation on “Nutrient Expert’ too! developed by
them for maize & wheat for maximizatidh of yield & economic benefit of farmers. The main features of the
tool are surminarized below: हे
a, A new, computer-based decision suppor tool (stand alone) to assist extension workers to
quickly formulate fertilizer guidelines based on the principles of site specific nutrient
management for maize and wheat .
b. It acquires necessary information required for developing fertilizer recommendations through

- simple questions.

rom Location specific integrated nutrient recommendations can be developed without a soil test.
a. Provides recommendation that fits the farmers’ pocket,
e Grain yield, Gross return above fertilizer cost has been found to be more in farm fields where

fertilizers as per recommendations of ‘Nutrient Expert’ tool were applied for maize and wheat
craps.
Stale Governments were requested to implement this tool by ‘making pilot projects for
demonstration/application in their respective States. Representatives of Uttar Pradesh, Jammu & Keshmiy
and West Bengal conveyed that they would like to implement the tool in their States.
i. Shri Sushil Pal, Director DOF made a presentation on mobile Fertilizer Management System
(mFM8). State Government representatives were requested to take action ‘on the following points; Stocks
01.11.2012, Letter from State Government to DAQs, Notification to Dealers — Follow timelines,
Identification of defauiters & advise to comply the instruction, DAO to regular check reports on mFMS to
handle non compliance, DAO to refer stock & sales report on mFMS&, Notification on Incentive -50 R¢ to

dealers, Training in coordination with LFS, Nodal officer to undertake Monthly review meeting with DAO.

2 Assessment of requirement:

Joint Secretary (INM) informed that a new eoncept has been introduced in case of urea from last
Season and as per the new concept total assessed requirement of urea for Kharif 2013 season will be divided
into parts i.e, (i) Actual allocation and (ii) Reserve allocation. State Governments will prepare their monthly
requirement on the basis of the quantities assessed under ‘actual allocation’ and they could demand
additional urea from their quantities kept under ‘reserve allocation’ whenever they require it provided they
have completely utilized/consumed the quantity of urea kept under ‘actual allocation’

It was observed that probably only one state Hfted urea fom the quantity/quota kept under ‘reserve
allocation” head in the ensuing Rabi 2013-14 season. Hence, DOF was requested to make arrangement(s) for
only 50% of the total quantity assessed under ‘reserve allocation’ head in addition to the total quantity

assessed under ‘actual allocation’ head.

13) —


Also for customized fertilizers, separate aliocation will be indicated within the total allocation of the

states.

NORTH ZONE

iL Waryana

ता Khari 201% Khari2012 | Kivif 2013 "Yoharif 2014(8)

Gross, 36.49 7435 34.40 217

Cropped Area

(Lakh

hectares _ Ione

Trigated 3S Ta FTAD) Tia

Area(Lakh

hectares) . _

Fertilizers a Cons Req Cons Reg Cons! Projected Assesed

(000 MT) Sales | Requirement |__Reguirement

Thousand Actual | Reserve

MT(TMT) alloca | alloca

. tion ‘ton

(a) Urea 8500. | #466 | 850 | 793.2 | 600 | 850 |. 850.0 80.0 | 40

७) DAP 300.0 | 3322. | 320.0 | 3025 1 3000 | 120 oe 300 | 200.0 -
3 0 1510 .

' MOP 330 | 16 | aso | tea | 250 | 20 25.0 15.0 |

+

(Complexes 59 | का | soo | 198 | 350 | 38 50.0 25.0 | - |

(घ5छः 35.0 | 345 | $00 | 36.5 | 40.0 | 368: | 50.0 | 50.0 | 75.0 | - |

Urea:

Maximuin cropped area was in year 2011 and consumption in that year was 846.6 T) MT. Proposed cropped
area for Kharif 2013 season is 27.17 lalth hectares which is about 2.8 % more than the area in year 2011
Looking at the trend of consumption against the requirement in last 3 seasons.(since Kharif 2011), projected
requirement & proposed cropped area during the upcoming iCharif season, requirement was kept as 810 TMT

under ‘actual allocation’ head and 40 TMT under ‘reserve allocation’ head.

DAP, MOP, Complexes:

Looking, at the trend of consumption against the requirement in last 3 seasons (since Kharif 2011), projected

requirement & proposed cropped area during the upcoming Kharif season and policy of promotion of SSP(in

case of DAP), requirement of DAP, MOP, Complexes was kept as 206, 15 and 25 TMT respectively.

(38°


SSP:

Ja view of policy of promotion of use of SSP and simultaneously

proposed cropped area, requirement of SSP was kept as 75 TMT.

looking at the projected demand &

2 Punjab

™ बिग Kiarif 2072 Kharif 2013 2 20140; ™

“Gross 39.33 39.33 - - * ~
Cropped Area

(Lakh

hectares . 7 im - an

Irrigated 38.27 38.27 38.26 न

Area(Lakh

hectares) 80 . aw,

Fortilizers Reg Cons Req Cons Req Consi | Projected Assesed

000 MT) Sales Reguirement Requirement
Thousand Actual | Reserve
MI{TMT) alloca | alloca

. wk हि वि tion | tion
1300.0/

() Urea 1325.0) 1340.6 | 1325 | 13406 | 1328.9 11980 1350.0 1164.0} 100.0
@) DAP $50.0 | 2924 | 5590 | 3924 | sono | 2010 | 5800 50.0 | 400.0 -
MOP 560 | 353 | 360 | 253 | 400 | BO | 3560 30.0 -
L jn mu ~ 1

Complexes | 500 | 259. | 300 | 259, soo | कई 50.0 25.0 >
(६559 25.0 | 220 25.0 1 2202 | 95.9 पु 25.0 | 25.0 | 40.0 :
Urea:

Consumption of N (6.51 - 6.94 LMT) nutrient in previous Kharif seasons has been much more than the
requirement calculated by ICAR (5.69 LMT), Hence, looking at requirement. computed by ICAR as per

recommended dose consumption of ‘N* nutrient in the state and projecied requirement, requirement was’ kept

as 1164 TMT under ‘actual allocation’ head and 100 TMT under ‘reserve allocation’ head.

DAP

Consumption of P (1.86 - 1.97 LMT) nutrient in previous Kharif seasons has been much more than the

requirement calculated by ICAR (1.23 LMT}. Hence, looking at consumption of ‘P* nutrient in the state,

projected requirement and policy of promotion of SSP, requirement was kept as 400 TMT.


MOF, Complexes:

. y
Looking at the trend of consumption against the requirement in last 3 seasons (since Mharif 2011), projected
requirement curing the upcoming Khari season, requirement of MOP & Complexes was kept as 30 & 25
TM? respectively.
SSP:
In view of policy of promotion of use of SSP and simultaneously looking at the projected demand,

requirement of SSP was kept as 40 TMT.

3. Uttar Pradesh

Kharif20u | ‘Kharifa0i2 | Khari 2013 "Weharif 2014(E)
Gross ™ हैं — |
anes Area 123.77 123.42 122.54 129.16(Proposed}
hectares: . ..... sou
Trrigated
Area(Lakh 79.37 79.97 19.31 79.37
hectares ... —
Fertilizers | Cons Req Cons | Cons/ Projected _Assesed
(000 MT) Sales Requirement Requirement
‘Thousand, Actual | Reserve
MT(EMT) altoca | alloca
L . हा _ tion _| tion
(a) Ures 2500.0 | 2595.1 | 2600.0 | 2683.8 | 2800 on 3200.0 | 2700.0 | 2000
(७) DAP 1050.0 | 6771 | 9000 | 7649 | 9500 | “3° | 1150 | 1067 | 7500 -
(MOP 61500 | 464 | 1000 | 95.7 | 1000 | ae 200.0 18.0 —
GH) Complexes | 0500 | 593.9. | 575.0 | 3733 | 6000 | 1 700.0 400.0
ना कि a w
(थे S5P 18000 | 220.1 | 2000 | 2649 | 2500 | 130.37 | 2000 | 300.0 | 4000 | - |
Urea:
Looking at the trend of consumption against the requirement in last 3 seasons (since Kharif 2011), projected

requirement & proposed cropped area during the upcoming Kharif season, requirement was kept as 2700
TMT under ‘actual allocation’ head and 200 TMT under ‘reserve allocation’ head.
DAP, MOP, Complexes:

Locking at the trend of consumption against the requirement in last 3 seasons (since Kharif 201 1), projected
requirement & proposed cropped area during the upcoming Kharif season and policy of promotion of SSP(in
case of DAP), requirement of DAP, MOP, Complexes was kept as 750, 75 and 400 TMT respectively.

—lYo-—


“SSP:
In view of policy of promotion of use of SSP and simultaneously looking at the projected demand &

proposed cropped area, requirement of SSP was kept as 400 TMT.
Customized Fertilizers: For DAP, out of the total quantity of 750 TMT, 14000 MT was earmarked for
customized fertilizers and for MOP, 10500 MT was earmarked out of the total quantity of 75 TMT,

4,” Uttarakhand

Kharif 2011 Kharif 2013 a
Grass दर ~ ~ ”
dA

mee rea 655 6.67 6.85 6.35 (Praposed}

héviares, [..

Trrigated |

Avea(Lakh 3.40 3.36 3.40 3.42

hectares} L है . . |

Fertilizers iy Req Cons | Req Cons | Req Cons! | Projected Assesed
(७0 MT) Sales Requirement Requirement
‘Thousand Actual | Reserve
MI(TMT) alloca | alloca

tion, tion

तक js 13 ” 150.07 हु

(a) Urea 1250 | 1342 | 135.0 | 1361 | 135.0 150.0 134.13 135.0

(0047 २00 | 192 | 200 | 193 | 200 | 828! 1895 [19 1.95 | 20.9 -

: |
()MoP 46 4 08 30 ap | 75 | OMe 5.22 35 -
fad r ™ _ |

(@)Complexes | 250 | 188 | 25g jie fase ao 24.68 25.0 -
(2887 100 | 307 | 100 | 32 | so fuse | 5] | 51 | 100 -
Urea, DAF, MOP, Complexes, SSF;

Requirement of Urea, DAP, MOP, Complexes was kept as 135, 20, 3.5, 25 and 10 TMT respectively.

5. Himachal Pradesh

Khari 2011 जा havik | हु Kharif 014(E)
Gross “ oO ™ ™ ~
Cropped Area |
aun 4.52 461 4.66 4.72 (Proposed)
hectares
Irrigated
Avea(Lakh पु 1.16 oe 1.16
hectares



38, Odisha

= ™
Cropped Area 7
ane 57.93 51.16
hectares) vel unsunatanerae set nme .. «|
नि]
Area(Lakh 19.40 19.64 19.74 19.94
hectares) _ sows
Fertitizers Rag Cons a Cons! Projected Assesed
000 MT) 74, Sales | Requirement Requirement
Thousand Actual | Reserve
MT(TMT) alloca | alloca

. oo _— ton tion.

- 7 5.6)

(a) Urea 450.0 374.1 450.0 575.3 450.0 440.0 480.0 450.0 1 30.0
()DAP 080 | 1089 | 15.0 | 1090 | 150 हि | 36835 | 1500 | त00 | -
() MOP 1200 | 329 | 1100 | 820 | 1000 | है 90.0 78.0 |
(@) Complexes |. 09.9 | 2042 | 205.0 | 133.6 | 500 | 100 | 2000. 20.0 | -

ee a nf ema vs -
(ब SSP | iso | 94 | 1720 | 46 | 170 | 6.27 50.0 | 50,0 -

. Lo nn . -

Urea:

Looking at the trend of consumption against the requirement in last 3 seasons (since Kharif 2011), projected
requirement & proposed cropped area during the upcoming Kharif season, requirement was kept as 450 TMT

under ‘actual allocation’ head and 30 TMT under ‘reserve allocation’ head.

DAP, MOP, Complexes:

Looking at the trend of consumption against the requirement in last 3 seasons (since Charif 2011) , projected
requirement & proposed cropped area during the upcoming Kharif season and policy of promotion of SSP(in
case of DAP}, requirement of DAP, MOP, Complexes was kept as 110, 75 and 200 TMT respectively.

SSP:

In view of policy of promotion of use of SSP and simultaneously looking at the projected demand &

proposed cropped area, requirement Gf SSP was kept as 50 TMT.


Vi, "West Bengal

vse a ee sas som
Kharif 2011 Kharif 2012 i Kharif 2033 Kharif 2014 03
ई ™ _ है ™ i
Cropped 4
(awk rea 55.59 55.89 55.68 55.70(Proposed)
hectares) ee. ही enn a
Irrigated °
‘Area(Lakh 36.57 38.02 38.53 38.84
hectares) - हि .. . _
Fevtiizers | Req [Cons | Req [Cons | Req 1 Cone 7 Projected x —_
(000 MT) हि Sales | Requirement | Requirement
Thousand Atte Reserve
MT(TMT) . al alloca
alloca | tion
. ... am an — tion |
330887 हि
(a) Urea 2000 | 4834 | 300.0 | 3187 | 5600 | *2068 603.18 520.0 | ago
{b) DAP 2500 | 2004 | 2500 | 1401 | 3000 | 729" | 15049 | 150,57 | 125.0
() MOP 1500 | 335 | 1500 | 773 | 1800 | 94 182.72 160.0 —
(7) Complexes । (000 | aan | 400.0 296.7 | 400.0 ee _ 393.94 "350.0 -
(¢) SSP 2000 | 1949 | 2000 | 1263 | 2000 | 10.0 | 7 | 1938 | 200.0 | - |
० tome — vad
Urea;

Looking at the trend of consumption against the requirement in last 3 seasons (since Kharif 2011), projected
Tequirement & proposed cropped area during the upcoming’ Kharif season, requirement was kept as 520 TMT

under ‘actual allocation’ head and 40 TMT under ‘reserve allocation* head

DAP, MOP, Complexes:

Looking at the trend of consumption against the requirement in last 3 seasons (sinee Kharif 201 1), projected
requirement & proposed cropped area during the upcoming Kharif season and policy of promotion of SSP(in

case Of DAP), requirement of DAP, MOP, Complexes wag kept as 125, 100 and 350 TMT respectively,

SSP:

In view of policy of promotion of use of SSP and simultaneously looking at the projected demand &

proposed cropped area, requirement of SSP was kept as 200 TMT.

११ =


SARTICIPANTS OF ZONA
*IPUTS. FOR KHARIF 2074, HELD on 14° FEBRUARY 2014 (Friday) At
Lecture Hall, NASC COMPLEX, Incian Council of Agricultural Researeh

L CONFERENCE ON

AGRICULTURAL

(iC AR), DPS Marg Pusa, New Dethi 110012
S.No |. Name of Parfcipants Designation Address
1. 91 SudheerReian | GMIN Peo
2. Sh. Abhinav Agrawal DMM_ IPL है
3. Sh, Shyam Lal Oy. Director Agriculture Dte. of Agri, H.-P. Shimla
4. ही). हि. 8. Parmar Joint Director (Agriculture Govi_of Himachal Pradesh
5. Sh. KN. Kulkarni i Addi. G. M. 570
8. Sh. 5. 3. Singh AVPC (A) TCL ..
हक 8h, 5.1६ Singh RM [PPL
10. Sh. 5. Dube Dy. Director Agri. (Ger) Govi. of Jharkhand
(9. | Dr. Rajesh Das Dy. Director Agri, (Q.C. Govt. of Oridhsa
10, | Sh. 0. Srikanth Associate Product Manager NECL, Hyderabad
11. | Sh. K. Jayaraman Sr, Manager (Coopn.) ‘New Delhi .
12, {| ShM. Yadav Dy. Director (M&F) Govt. of West Bengal
13. 4 Sh, Himanshu Kr. Mondal__| Dy. Director of Agricutture Govt. of West Bengal
14, __| Sh. Prahlad Ch Boro Supply Officer Tea Board Kolkatta
16. | Sh. Sunil Bhatt Demonstration Officer Govt. of NCT Delhi
16. Sh. A. K. Gupta Addl. C.E.{I BVFCL Noida
17. Sh. Sachin Khurana _____ Gonsultant (PWC DOF Udyog Bhawan
. _K. 7, Kaushik AGM(KRK) GSFC, New Delhi
19. Sh. K. N. Sinha Manager GSEC, New Delhi
20. | Sh. A. R. Kothari Mktg. Manager GSEC, New Delhi
21. | Dr $.S.Kamwa, | Director (Agriculture) Govt. of J& K
22, Sh. K. K, Sehgal _. Manager, Coordination CFCL, New Dethi tues
23. | Sh. Ashok Prasad_ Dy. Director Agriculture Govt... of Bihar, Patna
24, | Sh. Samir Kumar Dy. Director Agriculture (Seed) | Govt. of Bihar, Patna
25. (091. J. S.‘Brar JDA Govt. of Haryana _
26. __| Sh. Anil Kr, Rana IDA (ST. Govt. of Haryana
27. Dr. VK. Tiwari Manager (Mktg. KRIBHCO .
28. -| Sh. A. K. Pande Chief Manager (Mkig.) KRIBHCO हे
29, | Shri N. K. Bhadu DGM KRIBHCO Chandigarh
30. | Dr. MJ.M-Redd [Jr GMC (Mkigy ___ [1चटिठ
31. Dr. Parma Ram JDA(Q. C = of Agriculture
32. Sh. P. N. Katiyar Additional Director Agriculture | Govt. of U.P. Lucknow
33, | Sh. D. M. Singh Director of Agriculture Govt. of U.P. Lucknow
34. | Sh. Narankar Singh Joint Director Agriculture Govt. of Punjab
35. | Sh. Rajan Gupta DGM (2M) _ Govt. of Punjab
36. __| Sh. Anii Motsara “LOM (M) Noida =
37. | Sh. N. K, Sharma | Zonal Manager _. NFL, Lucknow a
38. | Dr. U.S. Teotia _LRE-MR FAIL, New Delhi
39 __ Sh. D. 8 Yadav ____| Director (Mkig.) FAI, New Delhi ”
40 Sh. 1. K. Chanda Director FAI, New Dethi

_ [U3


= VN. Murthy

== Executive

FAI, Kolkatta

2. | Dr -Ramappa KB _ Associate professor. ISEC, Bangalore
3. | Dr . Associate professor TISEC, Bangalore _
44, 1 Dalbir Singh. Sr, Demonstrator Govt. of Delhi:

45 Ms Tripti Batra Consultant DOF PWC Gurgoan
46. Shri Bhagwan Sahai PS INM Division
47. | Sh. S. D. Saxena ACM DOF
(48. TSH ALK Roy | So (FM) . DOF _.
49. _| Sh. Vaibhav Bhauriya - . IM Ahmedabad
50 Smt Ritu Budhiraja | Sr. Stat Officer INM Division
31. | Smt. Indu Manocha DEO. LINM Division |



at

GIS GPS based soll fertility maps of 17} districts (list provid

. Latest progress relating to uploading of maps in the website.

ANMEXURE

ed below) uploaded in the

website.
State “| silo, । Biat:Name No. Soil Sample

KERALA [1 शक, ' [|
2 eee . 156,
2 440
A L 102
— 8 me 90
ERNAKULAM 166
है है 7 | ARLAPPUZHA 1 . 88
THIRUVANTHAPURAM 90
a |e ४१४४५ 6
| | न : “1189,
KARNATAKA 123 —§. 10. _ | MANDYA 1 [ea
[जज it | RAMINAGARAM aaa
+12 | BANGLORE RURAL |
180. [HASAN 128
44 CHIKBALLAPURA | 188
| 45 0॥1090868 818
48 MYSORE . 808
47 TUMKUR 1332.
_———— 18 | KOLAR -| 818
| है 7485
GUURAT 49 | ANAND _ 24
20 | KHEDA a [3
[mt | PANCHMAHAL : 520
|_22__ | PATAN, 4 [ 2
258. | VADODARA. . _. | 602
L 24 BHaRUGH A . 393
| 26 | AHAMDABAD : . 335
| 28 SABARKANTHA : 60
हु 20 | MEHSARA ! 380
| Ct : 90
we _ aor
29 | ee HOD
. 30_| JALNA 6
31 SANGALL ३... <M

ate 1s0 -



DHAULE aut
विनय KOLHAPUR 270
WATMAL 358
AMARAVATI _ 768
१ 80 0180 806
— | Nasik _ 873.
GHARIDRAPUR 881
AURANGABAD 2
414
__ 140
THANDAVUR 488
NAGABATTINAN 288
_CUDDALORE 414
cy | THIRUVARUR 918
: 2 ERICH! 818
ERODE |
VELLUPURAM, 364
COIEMBTORE 2B
[पा TRIPPUR
SALEM [a |
_ han see a ‘3510
AP ft] KuRNoOL, 582
काम : |
NEHBOOBNAGAR, : 992
KARIMNAGAR . [|
KADAP ‘ a |
7 - 7 i
GUNTUR : 989
हे ANANTPUR Le 800
RANGAREDDY a8
80७ नव ss
= WESTGODAVAR! a3 |
1. NIZAMABAD _| 922
— Bra
[we “| JALPAIQURL 426
__LNORTH DINAJPUR .. 655
है... BANKURA _. 1428
_L,__| NORTH 24, PARAGANAS i 880
PT [sour काश r 82
HOOGHLY we be 105
न आए 7 | MURSHIDABAD 584
i, | BAROHAMAN | 868
७ lM / ' “ 660

-]81-


L . 8901
HP ToL ramainelie 530
ढ़ है [a | BILASPUR - a 420
72__ LUNA . - 480
73__| CHAMBA 512
| 4 20
5 —— i
78 BG
गा . 612
78 20
रे a2
ORISSA a lum 330
a | ७ | currack 818
81 | KHURDA a)
| 02 | DHENKANAL sae |
js wc 878
CT = a4 __| BHADRAK t 714
ण न | $ | 80400: | 5
+ | % | कं ०777 ait
a7
RAL “ey | BiANER ist |,
8 tt | 580
| 80... GANGANAGAR 924
| 90 | ALWAR ही 930
— [ot __| BHARATPUR हि 89 |
| 92 | 30008 804
ही ga | DHAULEUR 41
941०8 aa [sat |
हा 1. 95 | JAIBALMER 7 [|
: 5228
ASSAN | 9 | JORAHAT 367
| SIBSAGAR ca 498
80 | GOLAGHAT . 498
_. 190 | NORTHNLAKHINPUR 1 881
I 1 40 | nasaow _ 820
30 MERIGAON ; 211
we || BARPETA a 493
— 403__| KAMRUP 953
406 __| KAGHAR - { 800"
_405__| SONITPUR - 812
| 5127

-|SQ+.


HISAR

HARYANA 406 270.
* 407_“PBHIWANI झा 20

Sof 108 [panear a aro
— 403__ | FATEHABAD |

{10 | MAHENORAGARK 20

dt nae 20

482 _ 270

. 413 है| 20

..... 114 [| शआ0|

ie i ee 269
. ri 2509

PUNJAB 118. | LUOHIANA | 52
117. JALANDHAR _ # 2

व fia | FiROZPUR a 846

419 1 NAWANSHAHAR an

120. | SANGRUR a5

— 181 ROOP NAGAR a 6

. 422 | HOSHIARPUR ‘bat

| 1238 | BaTHNDA, | 50

| 124 | AMRITSAR हि 504

_ el te 4509
BIHAR i 128 | SAMASTIPUR : : 5a
: [426 | VAISHALL . 836
127 JeHANABAD : | RG |

| 128 | pata « ५ 633

| 19 | papsanaua 498

— 430 nau _ 830
| dt 0२७४ i = 210
Lae | wawapa : = 88

. je MUZAFRARPUR ; 4020

हा 388

? आता 284
हर | 1%8 | erawan * _ 00,

| 136, | FARRUKHABAD : T 309

137 paso | 586

| 188 | RAIBAREL! ~~ 570

| 19 | puvenir i= 25).

a | 140! eoraxueur in 868,
[.... 131 | ALLAHABAD ee i ~ Bag
. 442 | SANT RAVIDAS NAGAR . 5a

| 190 | VaRaNast T 338

5७ -


144: | MIRZA PUR

114
145५ | क॥॥ || आय 62
किक 8999
॥ 18 445.__| JABALPUR हि 836
_. 316
eens 750
290
“yakonicpur _ 912
181 5 JORE 360
—— 452 JAHADOL. elon _ ted
155 ANDALA _ . a2
Li _ _ 3390
CG 4154 KABEERDHAN, 499
ae | 155 | axon __. M7
[it | BASTAR है 403
19 | RAIPUR 202 |
168 __| RAIGARH 800
कि 189... 80009/2/फ .. 482
[160 _ | BEMETARA 25
1811 KONDAGAON 284
00. 152 || BURG . 1
1881 MAHASAMUND विधि लिन 529
164 | Kontva aa
195 KORBA 43
ATS
UTTARAKHARND [_ “156 | UDHAM SINGH NAGAR 486
j 10 | GHAMPAWAT AGT
100 | NAINITAL _ 510
— jeo__| HARIOWAR _ 360
. 4055
GOA 470 SOUTH GOA DISTRICT 250.
—a 424__| NORTH GOA pISTRICT 420
— i ra tree 888
10310



Unite which completed the revamp upto 2011-12 and units which completed the

W

Annexure -\

revamp in 2012-13
Groug 1
Sr. Unit Revarap Rs/ Capital ral ~ Revamp
Na, en Crore (Rs/MT) Momth/ Year
3) |IFECO-AONLA | 81510 | 95 17711 Oet-2008
20 [INDO GULF - 82500 | 141 17137 | May 2007
3) [| NFCL-1 50160 108 21509 | Sept-2009
4) _| CFL-1 78540 304 38653 | March 2008
5) | TATA 197670 204 10320 | Dec-2008
[6) | = KSFL 80190 | 65 8158 | April 2009
72 [फटा 65340 145 22141 | Sept-2009
IFFCO-AONLA ; Oct-2008
7 i 83820 70 8408 |
IFFCO - PHULPUR Nov-2008
9) I 115830 123 10647
10 [IFFCO - PHULPUR Deo-2608
|| 54780 62 11322 *
71) CFL-o _ 97770 130] 13346 | March 2008
| 12) NEECO. KALOL 36690 30 8138 | April 2009
Group Ifa)
Sr. Unit ele Rs, है Capital cost Revamp
Ne. Production c Rs MT Month /
__ (MT) 208 ¢ ) Year
13) RCF- THAL 230010 294 12776 April 2017
14) | NFL-VUAIPUR ff 1600 [374 [33667 Tuly 2012
Group 10):
15) SRBC | iz tose ae “21572 April 2013
16) KRIBHCO 433950 ‘(| 7276 38259 May 2012

न See


ee
1... Atternativaty,

he. spéciat compe
PRK tectiltzers lexciepe SSP) shail begs;



: . aS
F:No.15+05/2009.3hip4 ro न
‘Govbiniantotlndia.- ee :

Mitnistry-af Cheenicgh & Feitllizars ! rr)

Debate है

जिएबकादा( जे Fertitizais a
है ४4५3६

2 L;cotmpensation,of fret on ‘wcoduint second
difficult digas aré provisional subject to finalWation of rates 035४7 othe आंत by Taj

‘Be fo TBlglssyes with the concuitrence’of 69 No. BAB/Sph. Seey/dei2 data 11 9:9013-aai “appibvz

Krishi Bhawan, New Dethil, हि ;
ittijent वीक North Black; New Dalhy,
rishi i.

} Joint Sedtetaty (Pret); Department:

an, l.
iKpenditigng,:Nert

Ji Secretary, Prime Minister's of wy Dib

Diekeror (Cabinet), Cablitat Set i hawan; New Delhi
कभी. | Wetutive Director, FICC, Bepartnent of Fettlizees; Udyog Bhawan, New Delhi

Direstar of Accounts, Departinent uf Pertilieaes, Udyay

hawari, NéwDelhl,
‘Director General, FAl, New-Delhi, है 2

LO: Allthe than Ufacturers & importers of PRK Fettillzsrs,

नह *


: | Annenere-$9) (b )

wy

SFigures ne Lt

co

हि 10: 111 & Nicobar
Andhra Pradesh

ee

छक्का

17.48] ar

3.23
[aa s3]

miatiicannhteat finds ine 4५44४



[Assam |
|
[Chandigarh
\chattisgarh |

Dadra & Naat Havell
Daman & Diu =
7
IGOR
[Gujarat
Harayena
Himachal Pracesh
(jek sd
jIharkhand |
Karnataka
Kerala SSC~*
Lakshadweep
Madhya Pradesh
Maharashtra
Manipur
\Megalays Sd
[Mizoram
Nagaland
(Origa
(Pondicherry, |
[Punjab
Rajasthan : C
skim |

Tarn Nadu
Pripura

luttar Pradesh
Uttaranchal
West Bengal
[foral Sd

— (61


Ann ७७०८ - दूत
°F, No, 22-8 APACE
Govern, ९
Rinisery oF Chemicats & Fert
Departme,

nt OF Fertilizers
FA Wing

Room No, 4734, E-Wing
Udyag Bhawan, New Dethi
Ot 18.06.2044
To,
Director o¢ Agricuttuns ar All States,

Sub; Submission °F Proforma 8

in respect Of PRK Fertilizers
Dear ay,

This is fegarding
Fertilizers (both j igeno:

Pendency OF Pri
Indig

IS and imported),

Oforma 8 from State Sovernments for Pak
As

YOU Would be aware State. Governments Ae required to Send the
Proforma 1 Certifying the quantity received in tha districts within 30 days on the IT
@hableq System i.e, FMS. ns

On the TEVIEW of status OF Profo,
Proforma B from 2007.

rma 8, ig has been observed that a humber of
हि 08. on ards are gtiy Pending trom your §
companias OMpany-wise and Year-wise
ah, ay attached for your reference,

tate for various
Statemeny of Pending Proforma B is
C&AG Audit hag been advers
'SSUEd from the State 5,

ely. commenting On thi
‘Overnments, Moi i
from fertilizer Companies

le Pendency of Proforma 8
reaver, it also impacts the recovery, if any,
9” account Of their Supply ete
nh view oF above, YOu are
Priority basis. You

requesteg 0
May also ensure

10 issue g
that alt Proform

it Pending Pro
के जि are ed on
Witty regards,

my
| जद
Oo

a

ea

3

@

@

<

NY
=:

(Sushi Pal

Director (FA)
Tel, No, 011-23062608

Enct: As above

— [62


Summary of Pending Proforma “8” Status as on 24,05,2018

2007-08 1 GOS 2008-10 2010-12
State ” Proforma 8 | Unadjusted | Proforma | Unadjusted | ProfarmaB | Unadjusted | Proforma Unadjust
to Be Given | On Account | vo Be Given On to Be Given | On Account | to Be Given on
॥ Ce) Account {in Cr.) Accoun
7 on tin gr, . .. lin cr,
Andaman & a 0.319 4a 0.368
Nicobar .
Andhra Pradesh . ~ “ | tT _ 1 3.5:
Arunachal ~ ™ ~ है “y 31 06:
Pradesh 8 ne Le - . t
Assam ___ 4 3.670 17 | 1219.684 {42 | 83.083 16| 59.6;
Bihar . . 3 0,663 _
Chattisgarh ~ 2 0.027 i] 89a2 | 1 2.466 5] 134:
Dadra & Nagar ~ हु i 0.00
Haveli . _ _. है .. -t

Daman & Diu

Delhi 5 हु है " है| | ह

Gujarat 4| 16.497 3 LAE
Haryana = 6| 47.017 " ता हु 1 0.08
उद्धार “I

[uharkhand | 13 8.873 कि 14.95
Karnataka 4 6.402

Kerala [ 4 0.307 6 48.533 2 3.88
Madhya Pradesh

Maharashtra f T ; : : | 4
Manipur 2 0.267 | 4[ 3.269 1 0.089 1 1.10
Meghalaya in 1 0.016 | “6 0.959 | 7 0.506

Mizoram ‘2[ 0.230 हु

Nagaland 4 ” ~ 1 0.08
Orissa i 1,619 a 11.99
Pondicherry + हु " 5 10.482| 1

Punjab _ है a[7ae7[ 6| 65887 31 0.30
Rajasthan 52 [248.858 "40 [1136.20 | = “fs 4.48
Tamil Nadu |

Tripura हे ~ 7 ” .
Utter Pradesh i I हु हु 21 45.54
Uttaranchal | L. 7 6.27!
West Bengal 21. 0,662 2 3.49%
Grand Total 92 | 309,034 98 | 1360.649 कि 153738 [89] 170.01

>+ 053 ~


Summary of Pending Proforma 187 Status 85 ah 21.05.2014 »

2014-12 2012-13 2023-44 Total Total
Proforma | Unadjusted
State Proforma’ | Unadjusted | Proforma के |“ Unadjusted | Proforraa B7] unadjusted | B tobe On
tobe Given | On Account to Be On Account to Be On Account | Given Account.
L . . (in cr} Given (in दा.) Given (in Cr.) _ linc) |

Andaman & \ 2 0.4687

Nicobar “4 tL ; ~

Andtira Pradesh 3 7.665 301 96.617 20} 300.024 a4| 407.834

Arunachal \~ ~~ 0.014

Pradesh |. : .

Assam 16 76.846 je) ssga5| 71] 17049 | .98| 396.703
Bihar 45 | 178.452 65 | 566.815 48 | 262.351 761 | 1008,282
Chattisgarh “62 [308.238 [ 5 | 414.932 40 | 256.845 176 | 4004.51 |

Dadra & Nagar [| 1 9.002

Haveli L _| _|

Daman & Diu 1 0.017 1 0,012 1 0,010 [8 0.039

Delhi i 1 0.189 1 0.189

Gujarat | «sae | 281.342 33 | 19997 46 | [258.316 | 102 | 587.527
[Haryana | TT 32) ais2so| a ः 34557 | is |” 26858 | 66 | 633.79

18K [| हा 24235 | 7 14.583 131 38.799

dharkhand 16 84,289 321 47.285 9| 34.007 52] 189.402

Karnataka 3) a32e7| 81 6.963 ज्ञा[ 113.652

Kerala है| 4 14.339 18 [25.517 5 6.241 411 98.825

Madhya 2 6.652 ig! 96.879 Te] 103.531

Pradesh _| है |

Maharashtra. | 3 |__— 24.939 हा 79 | 222.488 का aoga.si9 |... 119 | 1320.947

Manipur | 8 4.701

Meghalaya हर है | 9 1.482

Mizoram . 1 0.180 3 0.409

Nagaland { . 1 0.097

Orissa 5 1ies2| a6 | 76.429 281 144.291 छा 215.9ue
Pondicher है al 2 0.262 il 1,445 ie) 12386

Punjab _. 4 17.364 14 94,128

Rajasthan 2[ 7.346 | 21. 6.596 01 | 1403.18¢

Tamil Nadu’ 27| 88.700 "73| 297.286 — % 395.178 463 | 78116:
‘Tripura 3 7.229 51 10.337 3 4.215 aif 2178:

Utter Pradesh | 28 1 233.829) 126 | 1362.52 ga} 493.803 | 709 | 2135.33

Uttaranchal 6 8.315 9177 6.887 til, सब | 3 42.56:

West Bengal __ 11 1.360 2 4.321 T . 7 9.841

Grand Total 395 | 1639.778 514 | 3439.932 478 | 3550.43 4549 | 10623.28

ily


Annepure. Ce,

PROCEDU
POR
| IMPORT OF UREA IN INDIA

DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
- SHASTRI BHAWAN

NEW DELH!

—(6S-


PROCEDURE
FOR
REA IN INDIA

peter पी

DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
SHASTA! BHAWAN, NEW DELHI

JANUARY 1999

—|66-


CONTENTS

1, Message from the Minister

2 Preface

&

Y

3 Procedure for Import of Urea in India

Assessment of Lmport requirement
Contracting of Imports.

Handling of Imported Urea by Handling

Agencies at Indian ports.

AUMERUTES

—(Ojp~

~

13


Copyright G Depariment of Perilizers. चिकादगा" of Thavmeals avd Pestilizes
Bl ५१11

05 छह wi सजी &.

Eumail Address ; pide की fereatuthianic.in

No part of this publication may be stored m a retrieval sysiom, Wransntitied ता reproduced in any way,
including bul nov ‘limited to phowcopy. phitograph, magenelic or other record. withour the prior
agreement and written permission of the राम,

Price + Rs. 50/-

Published by : Dope. of Fertilizers, Ministry of Chemicals. & Fertilizers, Govt of India, New Deli

Printed at ; National Cooperative Printing Press, New Delniel 10016


4&2 January, 1999

MESSAGE

am happy that the Deparment of Fenilizers has prepared the
document on ‘Procedure for Import of Urea in India’ which gives full details
about the procedures that are adopted for tendering, making payments as weil
as the arrangements in place for handling imported urea at the ports,

i commend the efforts made in preparation of the document and hope
that this will be Useful to all those who are concerned with import of urea as
weil as handling of imported urea which is th only fertilizer under price,
movement arid distribution conirol of the Government, The document isa very
good example of the Government's eamest efforts to lend tansparency to
valious segments of administration

i wish the officers, who have made special efforts to compile it, all
success,

/ अल, Bana

Surit Singh Barnala}

~189-


eeentiy;, ures is tne oniy fertilizer whose

atiports eve ‘made on Government account. All other

a

fertilizers have been dGeconkrolled since August, 1992 sng
their impor have been decanalised hetween August oo

and June ‘93,

The ‘Procedure for Import of Ures in India’ has
been documented with the objective of providing up~to-
date information on the guidelines which have been laid
down by the Government fer imports of urea through
designated State canmalising agencies. The document
provides an insight into the tendering procedures, mode
of payments to suppliers as well as canalising agencies
and alse the arrangements in vogue for handling of
imported urea at the ports. The system of tendering is
non-discriminatroy and affords fair opportunity to all

producers and traders of urea = to participate.

Tam confident that the members of the industry
end others who have interests in imports of urea will
find the document extremely useful and informative. I
compliment the efforts of those in the Department whe
have worked hard and contributed to the preparation. of

this publication.

हि ( fyypls KAK }
Secretary to the Govt. of India

New Delhi

Dated: 22,1,1999

—190-


ported 6 bridge the gar

between its demand and indigenous availability in the country,

The procedure for import ef urea by the Departaient has three

components

10

2.0

ASSESSMENT OF IMPORT REQUIREMENT

The requirement of urea imports is assessed by GOI in telation to the
estimated demand, indigenous production, availability of stocks and

pipeline requirement.
CONTRACTING OF IMPORTS

mated cenalising agents are authorised

Based on the estimates of imports, fat
15 (DOP) to arrange for the imports,

by the Department of Fertili
Procurement of Urea - Canalising spenciag

Alywesent, ther are ihrec agencies, which are designated by GOT to canalise

the import on its behalf. The agencies are :
0) MMTC Lid,
(i) Indian Potash Limited GPL)

(iit) State Trading Corporation (STC)

g

Vt


21000], ाश8/0एकह!:

advance of the requirenen

Tendering +

221 The canalising agencies may suitably combine open global tenders with
limited tendering looking tc the exigency of requirement. 9 limited
tendering, preference will be in favour of producers and accredited
suppliers only. Long term contracting with producers is permitted with 8
view to ensure security of supplies at the internationally competitive prices

most advantageous to the country.

2.2.2 Imports are made only with the approval of the Board of Directors or the
Sale-Purchase Conunittee (SPC) constituted by the Board. No single indi-
vidual is permitted to take decisions relating to purchases, payments etc. |

2.2.3 Asperthe Govt. policy guidelines on Ocean Transportation, iaports are to
be contracted only on FOB basis, In cases wherein contracting on C&P
basis 18 being cheaper, waiver from Transchart in accordance with the

Government policy on Crean Transportation is a pre-condition.
2.3 Payment by canalising agencies :

241. All payments are lo be made against Letter of Credit (L/C}, which shall
normally not be transferable, divisible or assignable. However, transferable
L/C’s can also be opened in special circumstances with the express
approval of the Board or Sales Purchase Committee L/C shall be opened
after receipt of the Performance Guarantee and a copy of the signed

contract.

— (92 -


Those suppuc.s who have not seuled cans for toe one ‘year,

1089 tit such tine asthe ue

rencter themselves tc be placed

disputes ave tesel ved
a4 Choice of Suppliers ;

24.) In procurement of urea, the reputed intemational producers and accredited
suppliers of urea enjoy preference in respect of bid bond and performance

bond conditions vis-a-vis new suppliers. These are laid down as under :

Category of Bid Bond Performance CreditRating Bank

Suppliers (in $PMT) Bond (As % — Required Reference
Of Contract Required
Value)

* Category I

Producers Nil 1% No No
** Category If

Accredited

suppliers USS 3 3% No No

Category 1

All others act
falling under

Categories

Ley USS 10 10% 1. Standard Yes
& Poor
Moody’s, or,

3. Dun & Bradstreet

*  Asper IFA publication ‘survey of urea capacities, 1995 or any updated edition of the same.
** Who have successfully supplied to India for at Jeast two years in the last 5 years

VW

“(99 -


Ww
on

2.6.1

Second stage . Balance 2% payment alesg with the banke/service

charges, loadpert inspection charges etc. are'released on the basis of

the expenditure sanction issued by the Department.

The supporting documents required for processing 98% advance and
PP & | B

balance 2% payment. are detailed at Part l of Annexure ‘A’.

Payment of ocean freight including despatch / demurrage with vessel

owner and settlement with handling agencies :

The ocean freight is payable in two stages :

3)

(0)

siage ; Advance 90% of the ocean freight is paid within 7

Firs

working days of the sailing of the vessel if i108 less than 15 8: Hy

age, In case the vegsel is over 15 years of age, it is made after cate

arrival al the discharge port

Second stage : Balance 10% freight with demurrage (if any), or less
despatch Gf any), is payable to charterers within 120 days of

completion of discharge.

The documents required for processing the Ocean freight payment are

detailed at Part IE of Anmexure ‘4

194.


3.0

iS paldic

lage p

QROMGL "फटा pr atGaed? Tip6es (02 vel ७८ dt Lie SA CMAN RG fate [28% ५9115

४ On Geriurrag iF any, is

The Setlenient of despatch / demurrage with ship owner is dome by DOF

on the basis of the lay tme calculations given the Transchart at the time of

settlement of 10% balance freight.

The Settlement of despaich/ demurrage with the Handling agency is made

on the advise of shipping cell in DOF and after secking necessary approval

The demurtage on vessels on account of pre-berthing detention and
detention before commencement of the discharge at the ports is borne by

the DOE

HANDLING OF IMPORTED UREA BY HANDLING AGENCIES
AT INDIAN PORTS ,

Haneling of Iimuports :

On arrival of vesselg at the nominated Indian ports, utea inaporty arc
handled by agencies appointed by GOI every ysar on contract. The
handling agencies are also responsible for undertaking the distribution in
accordance with the allocations made for each crop season under the
Essential Commodities Act (ECA), 1953 by the Department of Agriculture
and Cooperation (DAC) and the movement orders issued individually in

the case of each shipment by DOF.

43

ताजे


oY the hand

Pregisahiing

sroondure cuibnad at Parcel of Ane

period of | ‘urrently, there ar

deiails are at Part iin Annexure 2!

The DOF invites tenders from pre-quatifi

ging, ste

transporiation, distribution and marketing of imported urea inthe various

idardisation,

handling of urea vessels af the poris, ¢

States/UTs within the county on an annnal basis.
inland Transportation & Delivery of Imported Urea
This is payable in two stages :

(a) 75% inland freight is adjusted by the handling agency at the time of
establishment of the irrevocable LC. (The detailed procedure for
establishment of Lettér of Credit towards the cost of Cargo is at
Awnexure *C)’.

(9) The balance 25% of the inland freight is reimbursed on submission of
Debit Note by handling agents after completing the actual movement

of the carga.

Miscellaneous expenses reimbursable to the handling agencies

The expenses reimbursed on actuals by the DOF to the handlisg age
ag per the Handling & Distribution Contract are :

@) Cargo related berth hire charges, prlority ousting priority berthmg

charges, as peyable by the charterers/consignees on their agents.
Tornever tax,

Additional ICC on stock-flow basis for the quantities handled during

the financial year bus which were not covered by the

orremained unsold.
जन के maces fy tenes

14

--[)6-


Pat - 5६

SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS REQUIRED FOR PROCESSING OF
PAYMENT TO CANALISING AGENCIES +

th) Advance 98% payment i”

(8) Copy of contract;

ib) a certificate from the bank in support of ihe opening of the Letter of
Credit by the canalising agency in favour of the foreign supplier;

{c) certificate from banker that no credit facility has been availed against
the L/C;
(व) confirmation of the fixture of the vessel, quantity loaded and lay days
of the vessel at the loadport. हे
(By) Balance 2% payment:
(a) bank advice for full payment to foreign supplier in USS with relevant
exchange rale;
(b) Copy of BYL invoice;
{c} Supplier's invoice;
id) Certificate of origin:
(8). Pre-shipment inspection report, and
(f) Storage plan.
1018 mandatory for the canalising agency to submit the balance 2% balance
bill within 30 days from the date of drawal of 98% advance payment failing which
canalising agency is liable to pay interest at the commercial tate of interest rate frora

the 3 ist day tll the date of submission of the certificates

15

“10१ =


rival of vesgei
(५) Copy of bill of iading

fc} Copy of Debit Note

(व) Copy of important provision of C/P Agreement

(ce) Sailing advice

() Copy of purchase contract.

(B) Balance 10% freight :
ti) Transchart authorisation
(ii) Copy of debit note
दी) Copy of bill of lading
Gv) Charter party agreement
(v) Statement of facts at loadpart
(vi) Notice of readiness
(ii) Port crust authorisation certificals
(viii) Exchange control copy of bill of entry
(iz) Time sheets.
The owners are to confirm the receipt of funds within 10 days from the

remittance of initial and final payments.

46


* Avimerara (h*

PROCEDURE FOR PREQUALIFICATION OF
BANDLING AGENCIES

PART = 7

Agencies are pre-qualified by the DOF on the basis of response to national
advertisement for a period of 3 years. The criteria for pre-qualification as it is in

force currently are :

{i) The bidder should have experience of handling | lakh MTs of
imported bulk urea in any of the Indian ports during any of the
preceding five calendar years.

ii} It should have experience of transporting and marketing mass
consumption articles of the value of at least Rs.50 crores in a year.

(iii) It should have a sound financial background and should be able to
organise credit facilities. of at least Rs.25 crores with any of the
scheduled Indian banks. It would be an added qualification if the
average credit facilities availed of during the last three years is notless

than Rs.25 crores.

The supporting documents which are required to be furnished alongwith
the application for pre-qualification are documentary evidence of the bulk cargo
handled during last 5 years, marketing of mass consumption goods, copies of the
sales tax assessment orders and audited accounts for the last three years, bank
solvency certificate for minimum Rs.25 crores, evidence of cash credit limits
extended, income iax assessment orders and list of clients to verify the authenticity.

17


Lash of pre-qualified hari

Peblic Sector

« & Chemica
2 Findustan Fertilizer Corpn. Lid

3 Madras Fertilizers Lid

4, Rashtriya Chemicals & Fertilizers Lid
5 Pyrites, Phosphates & Chemicals Ltd

6. Paradeep Phosphates Lid.

Cooperative Societies

1. Indian Farmers Fertilizers Cooperative Led.

State Govt. Company

i Godavari Fertilizers & Chemicals Lid

Private Sector

f. Mis Indian Potash Lid,

2 indo Gulf Fertilizers & Chemicals Corpn.
3 Chambal Fertilizers & Chemucals Ltd.

4 Mangalore Chemicals & Fertilizers Ltd,
5. Shriram Fertilizers & Chemicals Lee

18

—(3d-

for Ig

ONG :


Sourhern Petroch

Deepak Fertilizer & Petro Chemie pr. Lid.

Zuari Agra Chemicals Lid

BUD Parry (1) Lid.

Coromandal Fertilizers Lid.

Nagarjuna Fertilizers & Chemicals Ltd
Duncan Industries Ltd.

Gujarat State Fertilizers & Chemicals Led,

Gujarat Narmada Valley Fertilizers Co. Lid.

—lsl-


Dlished by che handling agency after deducting हिल su

quoted for handling pore charges, ICC for 2 months and 75% ofthe inland freight
charges based on movement plan p-4 besides port dues from the: tota! amount
worked out on the carge carried by the vessel in accordance with the BAL quantiy
Phis is compuied at the pool issue price of urea prevalent on that dace

The handling agencies is sequired to handle imported fertilizers on the basis
of ownership of the material, The ownership is transferred to the handling agency
while the vessel is on high seas. The agency handling agent is required to establish
an irtevocable Letter of Credit (valid for 3 months) for the B/L quanti ty through a
scheduled bank at New Delhi in favour of the DOF within 3 working days from
the date of issue of Movement Order or a maximum of 10 days from the date of
issue of nomination cable of the vessel, whichever is earlier, In the event handling
agency fails to comply with it, DOF will levy liquidated damages (LD)
@ Rs.25,000/ per day. The delay beyond the commencement of discharge is
charged at penal rate of interest,

The LC is encashed on the 30th day from the date of completion of
discharge of the vessel except where the Joint Draught Survey Report indicates 4
difference 6f more than +/- 1% over the quantity shown in the Bill of Lading. For
the difference exceeding 1% B/L quantity, the handling agencies are required to
furnish the equivalent value of quantity received in excess at the Poot issue price.
The DSR/Port outturn report is required to be submitted invariably to the DOF by
the handling agent, along with the Statement of Facts (SOF) and time sheet within
30 days after completion of discharge of the vessel

नए 0 अनाज की eC orev

20


MAJOR SOURCES OF UREA IMPORTS

QUANTITY GN LAKH MF?

PRODUCTION, IMPORT & CONSUMPTION. OF UREA IM INDIA

H.C कर —____+__-

200 00 «

है| 179.08

130.00 ।

1010

80.00 = :
oon L 11 |
93-94 काकालाकाः ग् 95-96 96-97 97-98 :
PRODUCTION DIMPORTSECONSUMPTION i

|

i n


tw

iS)

KUKDAN SINHA

VERNMENT OF Wes

oma भोए gies मंत्रणण ARE SLR &

JOINT, COMMISS TONER ( STRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS
हि 7 ade जिराण . my
Tel Wo. 3382582 DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS ~
: ag fepal—tie रह?
aoe NEW DELHI116 901
G.G.No. 5-397 96-MPR (rate | _. _Aaril 10, 1997.
Dated

be Bo, Neh

The Government, aftar a comprehensive review of
procurement arrangements for imported urea and other
commodities, haf: décided upon the oread guidelinés
which must Jiowed by importing agenctes. The
Hin the case of urea imports
Cifscally igs-énclosed for compliance.

एजनूनएल्लल्टल
हा 2. I may also apprise you that in accordance with
the decision taken by Gover-ment, Department of Public
Enterprises (DPE) shall separately be issuing broad
Pa guidelines of do's and dont's which shall be generally
applicable for all imports by various PSUs. These

must also be ‘taken into account while f ting your

procedures for urea imperis and suring Total
ed compliance of the guidelincs-

3. A review of these -sedurés will be undertaken

aha a in September ! 97. To omay then request you co kindly

) jl, furnish by 31.8.1997 proposals based on your

uly experience, régarding further reavirements which ‘could
be incorporated in the guidelines

; १ आए था

(४८५९)
चुत | gue)
yu 4 awe L 7 Yee aT

ca (Kunc ty Sinha

7 B.C. Mallik,

a Direc tox

“ “9 + SCOPE ‘COMPLEX
NEW DELHI.



iBile No.8-39/96-MpRi

BROAD GUIDELINES. बा BE, FOLLOWED BY DESTGNaren

Ta order to ‘encdurage dealings with iiternational
producers and accredited suppliers of urea and at *he Same
time lay down conditions for ‘grey market!
operators, the i agencies shati categorise
Suppliers as per the following terms and conditions:

Category of ” Bia Bond Performance Credit Bank

Suppliers _ (In इक) Bond (As % Rating Reference
. . Of Contract. Required? Required?
value)

Category T

Producers as

per IEA publi-

cation “Survey

of Urea Capacities,

1995" or any up-

dated édition of :

the same. WIL 1a Ko - No

Acexedited suppliers |

(who have successfully

supplied to India for

at least two years in : .

the last 8 yeara) uss 3 38 Ho Mo

Gategory IT

All others not falling

under Categories US$ १.0 10% From either Yes
Tait (1) Standard sPoor
. L (11) Moody! sox,

(441) Duns Bradstreet
2. CONTRACTING OF IMPORTS

2.1 Imports shall be undertaken only with the approval of
the Board of Directors or the Sale - Purchase Commi (SPC)
constituted by the Board. No single individual sheoule he
permitted to take decisions relating to purcihsses, payments,
ete.

नल+ 5: -


_ 2.2 The canalising agencies may suitably combine’ og‘
‘ gldbal tenders with jamited tendering Looking to tin
exigency of requirement- In limited tendering, Preference
will be in favour of producers snd act vedited suppliess
only. Long ~ tem contracting with producers, is recommanded
with a view to ensure security of supplies at the
internationally competitive prices most advantageous to the
gountry- ५ हि है

2.3 As far as possible, imports shal]: be contracted anly on
FOB basis. In cases wherein contracting on CEP Basis is
considered necessary, the canalising agencies shall seek
prior waiver from Transchart in accordance with the.
Government policy on-Ocean Transportation.

3, Mope oF PAyMEnts

3.1 All payments shall be made against Letter of Credit
(B/C), which‘shal] nekmally net ba transferable, divisible
and assignable. Hoyeyax, transferable L/C's can alao be
opened in. special ciraimatances with the express approval of
the Board: oz Sdles Purchase Comittee as ‘authorised. 10
shall be. opened on réceipt of a Performance Guarantee and 3
copy of the signed Contract. : .

3.2 ‘The Parformanée Guarantee ‘will NOT be yeleased fill all
claims have been settled by suppliers-

3.3 Those suppliers who have not settled ¢.aims for the
lask one year shall be placed on’ *holiday’ gill such time es
the outstanding disputes are pesolved. पु

4. ZHNSPECTION OF CARGO

4,1 The canalising agencies’ shall ensure that the
internationally xveputed inspection agencies detailed for
coiductdng quaitity / quality inspection at the Load - port
e¥ercige due cate and diligence in the performance of their
duties. i

4.2 Ba far as practicable, ‘giantity and quality as
determined at the-discharge port ‘shall be treated aa final.
The specific quantity / quality testing requirements are
left to the commercial judgement of the canalising agencies.

186 -



Annect Bc

27" August 2009 - 31% March 2014

Government of India
Ministry of Commerce and Industry
Department of Commerce

[Website ip 7aeh gown] http://dgft. gov.in

183 -


TO BE PUBLISHED IN THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
, PART-H, SECTION-3, SUB SECTION (४)

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE

NOTIFICATION No, /2009.2014
NEW DELHE, THE 270 August,2009

In exercise of powers conferred by Section 5 of the Foreign Trade (Development
& Regulation) Act,1992 (No.22 of 1992) read with paragraph 1.2 of the Foreign
Trade Policy, 2009-2014, the Central Government hereby notifies the Foreign Trade
Policy, 2009-2014 as contained in Annexure to this notification. The Policy shall
come into force w.e.f. 27th August, 2009.

‘This issues in Public mterest.

Bie R. 8. Gujral)
Director General of Foreign Trade and
Ex Officio Additional Secretary to the Government of India

(issued from F.No. 01/94/1 80/Foreign Trade Policy/AM10/PC-4)

ii

(8 -


Authorisation / Licence 2.9
/ Certificate / Permission
noi a Right

y

Penalty 2.10
State Trading 211
Importer-Exporter 2.12
Cade (EC) Number
trade with 2.13
Neighbouring
Countries
Transit Facility 2.14
Trade with Russia 2.45
under Debt-
- Repayment Agreement
a

fi

Noperson may claim an Authorization ag aright and DGET
orRAshail. vepowerto refuse to grant orrenew the same
in accordance with provisions of FT (D&R) Act, Rules
made there under and FTP.

If an Authorisation holder violates any condition of such
Authorisation or fails to fulfill export obligation, he shall
be liable for action in accordance with FT (ER) Act, the
Rules and Orders made there under, bP and any other
law for time being in force व

Any, goods, import or export of which is governed
through exclusive or special privileges granted to STE(s),
tnay be imported or exported by STE(s).as per conditions
specified in ITC (HS). DGFT may, however, grant an
Acuthorisation to any other person to import or export any
of these goods.

Such STE(s) shall make any such purchases or sales
involving imports or exports solely in accordance with
commercial considerations, including price, quality,
availability, marketability, transportation and other
conditions of purchase or sale in a non discriminatory
manner and shail afford enterprises of other countries
adequate opportunity, in accordance with customary
business practices, to compete for participation in such
purchases or sales.

No export or import shall be made by any person without an
TBC number unless specifically exempted. An IEC number
shall be granted on application by competent authority in
accordance with procedure specified in HBP v1.

DGFT may issue instructions or frame schemes as may be
requiredto promote tradeand strengthen economic ties with
neighbouring countries,

Transit of goods through India from / or to countries
adjacent to India shall be regulated in accordance with
bilateral treaties between, India and those countries and
wil] be subject to such restrictions ag may be specified by
DGFT in accordance with International Conventions,

In case of trade with Russia under Debt Repayment
Agreement, DGFT may issue instructions or frame
schemes as may be required, and anything contained in

20

195.


ay Te - HS Code / Import Policy - Chapter Mo. 34 - Fertilisers.

= - HS Code / Import Policy

Chapter No, 31

Fertilisers |

NOTES :

1. This Chapter does not cover :

(a) animal blood of heading 0511; .

(b) separate chemically defined compounds [other than those answering to the descriptions in
‘Note 2(A), 3A), 4{A) or 5 below]; or

(९) cultured potassium chloride crystals (other than optical elements weighing not less than 25g.
each, of heading 3824); optical elements of potassium chloride (ieading 9001).

2. Heading 3102 applies only to the following goods, provided that they are ‘not put up im the
forms or packages described in heading 3105:

(A) goods which answer to one or other of the descriptions given below:

(i) sodium nitrate, whether or not pure;

(ii) asatnonium nitrate, whether or not pure,

(ii) double salts, whether or not pure, of'ammoniwn sulphate and ammonium nitrate;

Gv) ammonium sulphate, whether or not pure;

(v) double salts (whether or not pute) or mixtures of calcium nitrate and ammonium nitrate;
(vi) double salts (whether or not pure) or mixtures of calcium nitrate and magnesium nitrate,
(vit) calejum cyanamide, whether or not pure ot treated with oi;

(viii) urea, whether or not pure;

(B) fertilisers consisting of any of the goods described in (A) above mixed together;

(C) fertilisers consisting of ammonium chloride or of any of the goods described in (A) or (9)
above mixed with chalk, gypsum or other jnorganic non-fertilising substances;

(D) liquid fertilisers consisting of the goods of sub-paragraph €A) ii) or (viii) above, oF of
mixtures of those goods, in an aqueous or ammoniacal solution.

3, Heading 3103 applies only to the following goods, provided that they are not put up in the
forms or packages described in heading 3105:

(A) goods which answer to one or other of the descriptions given below:

(i) basic slag,

(i) natural phosphates of heading 2510, calcined or further heat-treated than for the removal of
impurities;

(ii) superphosphates (single, double or triple);

(iv) calcium hydrogen orthophosphate containing not less than 0.2 per cent. ‘by weight of fluorine
calculated on the dry anhydrous product,

—(O«


| a consisting of any of the goods described in (A) abowe mixed together, but with no |
account being taken of the flourine content limit; है

(C) fertilisers consisting of any of the goods described in (A) or (B) above, but with ne account
being taken of the fluorine content limit, mixed with chalk, gypsum or other inorganic mon-
fertilising substances.

4. Heading 3104 applies only to the following goods, provided that they are not put up inthe
forms or packages described in heading 3105 :

(A) goods which answer to one or other of the descriptions given below:

(1) crude natural potassium salts (for example, carnallite, kainite and sylvite);
(ii) potassium chloride, whether or not pure, except as provided in Note 1(c} above;
(मं) potassium sulphate, whether or not pure;

(iv) magnesium potassium sulphate, whether or not pure;

(B) fertilisers consisting of any of the goods described in (A) above mixed together.
5. Ammonium dihydrogen orthophosphate (monoammonium phosphate) and diammoniurn
hydrogen orthophosphate (diammonium phosphate) whether or not pure, and intermixtures
thereof, are to be classified in heading 3105. हि
6. For the purposes of heading 3105, the term "other fertilisers" applies only to products of a
kind used as fertilisers and containing, as an essential constituent, at least one of the fertilizing
elements nitrogen, phosphorus or potassium.

[ |
EXIM
Code

ro @) जा 3) (4) nT a

“Tt T
3101 | ANIMALOR
VEGETABLE
FERTILISERS,
WHETHER OR
NOT MIXED
TOGETHER OR
CHEMICALLY
TREATED;
FERTILISERS
PRODUCED BY
THE MIXING
OR CHEMICAL
TREATMENT
OF ANIMAL
OR
VEGETABLE
PRODUCTS

Description Policy Policy Conditions

ttt"


| 00 | Animal or
vegetable
fertilisers,
whether or not
maixed together or
chemically
treated; fertilisers
produced by the
mixing or
chemical
treatment of
animal or
vegetable
= : |

3101 00 | Guano Free

| —— | |
|| joer _ | =

3101 00 | Animal dung | Restricted

91
3101 00 | Animal excreta Restricted
92
3101 00 fm | | Free
99
toe |
3102 MINERAL OR
CHEMICAL
FERTILISERS,
NITROGENOUS
|| 3102 10 | Urea, whether or | Btate Trading
00 not in aqueous | Enterprises
solution जि
a
Ammonium
sulphate; double
salts and
mixtures of
ammonivn
sulphate-and
ammonium.

AI


v

a

310221 | Ammonium Free :
00 sulphate
r [ fone | +
3102 29 | Other :
3102 29 | Ammonium Free
10 sulphonitrate
3102 29 | Other . Free
90
3102 30 | Ammonium Free
00 nitrate, whether
or not in aqueous
sohition
r a
3102 40 | Mixtures of Free
00 ammonium
nitrate with
calcium
carbonate or
other inorganic
non-fertilising
| substances | |

3102 50 | Sodium nitrate Free
00

3102 60 | Double salts and Free

00 mixtures of

calcium nitrate

and ammonium

Thitrate
3102 70 | Calcium Free
00 cyanamide

3192 80 Mixtures of urea_| Free

00 and ammonium
nitrate in aqueous
Or ammmoniacal
| solution
J

“U93~.


_ 90 | Other, including
7 mixtures not
specified in the
foregoing sub-
headings :
| _
3102 90 | Double $ल्कांड 0 Free
10 mixtures of
calcium nitrate
and magnesium
nitrate दि
3102 90 | Other Free
हि -
3103 MINERAL OR [
CHEMICAL
FERTILISERS,
PHOSPHATIC |
3103 10 | Superphosphates | Free
00 |
3163 20 | Basic slag Free
00 _|
3103 90 | Other Free
00 -|
3104 MINERAL OR
CHEMICAL
FERTILISERS,
POTASSIC
L.
310410 | Camallite, sylvite | Free
00 and other crude
natural potassium
salts |
3104 20 | Potassium Free
00 chioride
: fo
3104 30 | Potassium Free
00 sulphate है
4
a AG tH



H
007

Other

Free

3105

MINERAL OR
CHEMICAL
FERTILISERS
CONTAINING
TWO OR
THREE OF THE
FERTILISING
ELEMENTS
NITROGEN ,
PHOSPHORUS
AND
POTASSIUM;
OTHER
FERTILISERS;
GOODS OF
THIS CHAPTER
IN TABLETS
OR SIMILAR
FORMS OR IN
PACKAGES OF
AGROSS
WEIGHT NOT
EXCEEDING 10
KG

3105 10
00

Goods of this
Chapter in tablets
or similar forms
or in packages of
a gross weight
not exceeding 10
kg.

Free

3105 20
00

Mineral or
chemical
fertilisers
containing the
three fertilising
elements
nitrogen,
phosphorus and
potassium

Free

ASE.



द 10 30 | Diammonium Free
00 hydrogen ortho
phosphate
(diammontum
phosphate)

| बी
3105 40 | Ammonium Free
00 dihydrogen ortho
phosphate
(monoammonium
phosphate) and-
mixtures thereof
with
diaramoniun
hydrogen
orthophosphate
(diammonium
phosphate}

7 “ ||
Other mineral or
_| chemical
fertilisers
containing the
two fertilising
elements nitrogen
and phosphorus :

3105 51 | Containing Free
00 nitrates and
phosphates

कि ne ae जज भय
3105 59 | Other Free
00

3105 60 | Mineral or Free
00 chemical
fertilisers
containing the
two fertilising
elements

| phosphorus and

potassium

3105 90 | Other :

-- (१८ _


im 90 | Mineral or Free
10 | chemical
fertilisers
containing two
fertilising
elements namely
nitrogen and
potassium
3105 90 | Other Free
90

[E

|

Impert Licensing Notes
NEL

~(9-


Aihexure-X tor Point for Point No. 18 & 16:

() Presently there are 75 Fertilizer Quality Control Laboratories in the country
including 4 laboratories under the contro} of Central Government.

(i) During the 44” Plan, 15° Fertilizer Quality Control Laboratories were
approved in the States as per the following details under National Project
on Management of Soil Health & Fertility:

S.No. State” 77 No. Of Labs ~ | Location of COGL
1 | Orissa —— 7 ” | Rayagada
2, Rajasthan en Ajmer, Stinagar & Kola
3. | Andhra Pradesh t “2 ottapalli, Vijaywada
4.” [Bihar 1 1 Bhagalpur
5. | Jharkhand 1 ~TBumka
6. Maharashtra 1 Kolhapur
7. [Punjab TF 7 Gurdaspur
| * | Uttar Pradesh’ 3 Agra, Bareilly, Faizabad
| $ | Gujarat 1 Nadiyad:

Out of these laboratories at Rayagada (Orissa) and Kolhapur have stated
functioning. The laboratories’ at ‘other places are under various Stages of
completion. The Fertilizer Testing Laboratory at Agartala (Tripura) is also likely to
Start functioning later this year.

(ii) The number of fertilizer samples analyzed and found Non-standard in
various States during 2012-13 ig enclosed at Annexure. 8९12. 1 soa

{iv) The time limits for testing of Samples eic., as given under Clause 30 of
Fertilizer Control Order, 1985 are as follows:

(a) Forwarding of Samples for analysis by the Fertilizer Inspector - 7
days from the date of drawal,

(b) Analysis of fertilizer sample and dispatch of report date of receipt by
laboratory — 30 days from the date of raceipt by laboratory.

(०) Forwarding of report to the dealer by Inspector — 15 days from the
date of receipt of analysis report,

(v) Provision of Penalty under EGA are as fottows:-
(a) Imprisonment for 3 months to 7 years and fine.

{b) All the offences are cognizable,

"140,


(0)

(४)

®

As the FCO has been declared a special order, all the offences will

be tried summarily.

in summary trail the Magistrate can pass a sentence of imprisonrrent
for a term not exceeding oné year.

The Letter of Authority will be cancelled.
af which the order has been contravened who

The property, in respect
shall be forfeited to the Government.


Annexure dA

Statewise Number of Fertilizer samples. samples analysed and found Now-Standard During s0Le-ky Noa-Standard During 2012-13

?

SNe. Name of Siate No. of Labs No. of Samples Total No. of
Analysed samples found Non
नि . . Standard
1, Assam 1 292 8
2. Mizoram 1 i 0
~ 3. __|___Jharkhand i a 6
4, Biber 1 [ i719 it पाए
5. Odisha 2. 2217 37
__ 6 West Bengal 3 2971 "376 =
. Total Last. & WER 9 8024 564
i. Gujarat 3 9990 57 "|
8. MP. 4 5497 719
[9 | Chhatisgarh L 1 2150 77
| 10. | 0. Maharashtra 5 16939 2728
IL. Rajasthan 4 | 1586 i" 268
Total West Zone 7 50162 3889
| 12. Haryana 3 [a 4277 83
13. | BP 2 ~ 1770 a |
14, J&K 2d 1980 62
15. Punjab 2 3629 ला! 92
[16 [| UP 5 16227. 536
17. Uttrakhand 2 215 an: |
है _|_Totai North Zone 16 22098 a |
18. [AP AP. 30 15284 250
19. Karnataka i 9642 381 "|
20. Kerala 2 2262. 158
[2 रू Pondisherr 1 627 3
22. Tamil Nadu 14 _ 16598 436
_ __ Total South Zone 121 44555 1228
i | Govt. of India 4 1 ~ 9333 344
_ Total AN India 6 133872 6857,



ITE OORE BE
——— ne

~\

56 बह)
Ge —
ral on SP “ ;
uit 2 PRIME MINISTER'S OFFICE

| South Block
New Delhi- 110 017

Enclosed please find for necessary action, a copy of the Record of
Discussions of the meeting taken by the Principal Secretary to PM on
6.5.2013 at 3:00 p.m. in South Block, on Direct Transfer of Fertilizers

Subsidy.
Wey

(Krishan Kumar)
Director
Tel: 2301 7442

Finance Secretary

Seeretary, Planning Commission

Secretary, Department of Financial Services

Seosetenye Department of Blectronics & IT
tary, Department of Fertilizers

Director General, UIDAI

Registrar General of India

PMO ID No. 110/31/C/39/2012-ES.2 7 dated: 13.5,2013 7

«४2015


Summary Record of Discussions of the DBT Executive Committee meeting Record of Discussions of the DBT Executive Committee meetim:
{aken by Principal Secretary to discuss Fertilizers subsidy held on 6,5,2013 by Principal Seeretary to discuss Fertilizers subsidy held on 6.5,201 3
at 3.00 p.m. in South Block 3.00 p.m. in South Biock

The list of participants is dnnexed,

2. The Principal: Secretary to PM mentioned that the National Committee on
DBT had decided that transferring food and fertilizer subsidy through DBT is
not ynder consideration at present. Therefore, D/o Fertilizers could focus on
other aspects of the system they are putting in place for the time being,

3. Secretary (Fertilizers) made a presentation giving the details of the
System put in place for tracking fertilizer movement at the moment. Currently,
Phases 3 and 4 which involve DBT to farmers are not under consideration. Only
Phases 1 and 2 are under implementation and these are a preparation for any
future decisions on other phases. Secretary, DIT described Phases 1 and 2 as a
Supply Chain to MIS. A copy of the presentation is annexed.

4, Finance Secretary was of the view that Phases | and 2 will not resolve
diversion or misuse of fertilizers which could be done only in Phases 3 and 4.
Finance Seoretary was of the view that the Department has to make separare
efforts to prepare digital databases which have details of Jand holdings, Kisan
Credit Cards, etc.

5. After detailed discussion, it was decided that:

a) DBT in fertilizers ‘was a complex matter as there were problems in
largeting, determining entitlements and preparing beneficiary databases.
For the moment, it would be better to keep DBT away from fertilizers,

b) However, D/o Fertilizers would take steps to build up a digital database
_of ‘buyers’, -buyers’, to begin with. The Tora tobe used-could daw hom DET —
clude RG ita nese re Commis # 1, issued by the Planning Commission. This could be tweaked to

include KCC dita, Aaanar HiMbEry लत (NIC could facilitale this) This
information could be colle है So ecied Oar at lest two cropping seasons ३० ४३ ४ Over at least two cropping seasons so as to
throw up data as to who was actua o_Was actually buying the fertilizers; in what
quantities, etc. -

2) Phase I] - pilots could be taken up in 12 districts from mid-June.
eee ee -

9) Secretary (Fertilizers) clarified that the main issue: in question at the
moment is the use of the additional fee being charged @ है 30 PMT,
which is to be given to the retailer, to be retained by fertilizer companies

ance the procurement of POS Terminals. This would pulid p the

rdware inf or fecilitating DBT in 2

val in this regard

~ 02.


Annexure

List of participants for the Discussions of the DBT Executive Committee
meeting taken by Principal Secretary to discuss Fertilisers subsidy held oF
6.8.2013 at 3.00 p.m. in South Block

D/o Expenditure

of Shri R. 8. Gujaral ,Secretary
2. Ms, Anjali Chhib Duggal, Addl, Secretary
3. Dr. Saurabh Garg, 1. Secretary

Planuing Commission
4. Ms. Nidhi Khare, Adviser

D/o Financial Services
5. Shri Rajiv Takeru, Secretary

Dio Electronics & Information Technology
6. Shri J. Satyanarayana, Secretary

D/o Fertilizers

व... Shri Sudhir Mittal, Secretary

8. Shri Satish Chandra, Joint Secretary
9, Shri Sushil Pal, Director

Director General, UMDAI
10. Shri Vijay Shankar Madan, Director General

Registrar General of India
11. Dr. Chandramoli, RGT
12, Shi Sk Chakrabarti, DDG

Cc .
13, Sb M. Moni, Director General



To

Govertment of India गए पथ,
Ministry of Agriculture हु रा
- Departinent of Agriculture & Cooperation
GNM Division) ः
« ह Krishi Bhavan, New Delhi
Dated the 28 April 2014

Secretary (Agriculture)

All States/UTs

The Director,

Central Fertilizer Quality Control & Training Institute,
NH -IV, Faridabad.

The Director, a

National Centre of Organic Faring

Seotor 19, Near CBI Academy

Ghaziabad - 201 002 ‘

Subject : Administrative approval for implementation ef Soil Health Mamagement

Sir,

(SEM) component under ‘National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture
(NMSA)? during 2014-15, ; ;

fam directed to convey approval of Competent Authority for ime lementation of Soil

Health ‘Management (SHM) component under ‘National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture
(NMSA)’ with an outlay of Rs.49.00 Crore (Rupees Forty Nine Crore only) lduring fingncial year
2014-25, Expenditure will be debited from the following Budget Heads of Account: . §

. i Rs, 'in lakhs )
कि Head : Budget
Ne, [. . ! Provision

National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (CS : _
i National Project on Promotion of C Project on Promotion of Organic Fanning Fanning” :
= MB — 2401.00.105 105.18 ~ National Project on Promotio 18 - National Project on Promotion of Organic Fatming 1390.06
MH — 4401.00.105.19 - National Project on Promotion of Organic Falming _| 210.00
Total : National Project on Promotion of Organic Farming है «1600.00
2. Nations! Project on Management of Soil Heal Project on Management of Soil Health & Fertility i!
MH ~ 3601.02.437.01 — National Project on Management of Soil Health &
Fertility
न ME = 3601.02,437.01.010031 ~ Grants-in-aid General ; ee _ 2330.00
MH — 3601.02.789— Special Component Plan for Scheduled Caste :
MEL - 3601.02.789,09.01 - National Project on Management of Soil Health
& Fertility
MH — 3601.02,789.09.01.090131 ONT 02 789 08.01 090131 -Grants-in-aid General - _ 286.00
MH — 3601.02,796— Tribal Area Sub-Plan / }
MH — 3601.02.796.09.01 - National Project on Management of Soil Health
& Fertility है | .
MH ~- 3601.02.796,09.01.090131- Grants-in-aid - General 1: 140,00
MH — 2401.00-105.21 -, National Project on Management of Soil Health & 550.00
= Fertili : . . न .
Total ; National Project on Management of Soil Health & Fertility taf 3300.00
Grand Total : . . : . 4900.00
Shale



ha AVAIL GULLPOUGLLS Wa Lee ues हे बिना व si titLinag.atenene पलक ड़ mee ee ween ए
A. Soil Health components of SHM seder NMSA

i, Setting up of new Mobile/Static soil testing laboratories (MSTL/ SSTL).

ii. Stwengthening of existing SSTL/MSTL.,

iii, Training and demonstration og Soil Health Management.
_iv.~' Creation of databank on location specific balanced use of fertilizers,

y, Création of Distti¢twise Digital Soil fertility maps:

vi. Providing Portable Soil Testing Kit to field level officers of State Govt.

vii, Promotion and distribution of micronutrients.

viii, Strengthening of existing Fertilizer Quality Control Labs (FTLs) by State Govermments
ig, Setting up of new Fertilizer Quality Control Labs by State Governments. :

B. Organic& INM components of SHM'under NMSA
i. Setting up of mechanized Fruit/Vegetable market wasie/ Apto wasté compost produttion

unit... ;
ii, Setting up of State of art Liquid/ carrier based Biofertilizer/ Biopesticide units.
iii, Setting yp of Bio-fertilizer -and Organic fertilizer testing Quality. Control Raboratory
(BOQCL) or Strengthening of existing Laboratory under FOO. :
iv. Promotion of Organic Inputs on farmer's field (Manure, Yermi-compost, Bio-Feitilizere
solid; Waste compost, Herbal extracts etc.) . }
Adoption of organic farming ‘through chister approach pnder Paiticipatory Guarantee
System GS) certification. ; ce I
vi. Support to PGS system for on-line data management and residue analysis. :
vii. Organie’Village adoption for mam “management and biological nitfogen harvesting.
vill, ‘Traiiing and demonstration on Organic Farming. ः !
ix. Support'to research for development of organic package of practices specific 19 state and
cropping system. * : :
x. Setting up of separate Organic Agriculture Research and Teaching Department. |

Vv

3. National Centre for Organic Farming (NCOF) and i's Regional Centers will cpntinue its
activities on promotion of organic farming through technical capacity building of stakeholders,
technology development, transfer of technology, promotion é production of quality ofganic and
biological inputs, awareness creation & publicity, quality contro! requirements of bio-fertilizers

& organic fertilizers including revision of standards & testing protocols, organic input resource
management and market development.

4. Central Fertilizer Quality Control & Training Institute (CFQC&TI) and it’s Regional
Laboratories will continue its activities on inspection and analysis. of indigenous and imported
fertilizers, standardization. of methods of analysis and providing technical guidance to the States.

3. Release of fumds to insplementing agencies will be on the basis of past performance and
fresh proposals.
. 6. This is subject to following conditions:-

(a) Financial Assistance for various components shall be allowed as, pet cost norms a
pattern of assistance mentioned in the operational guidelines of National Mission: for

aS



aS

Sestainable Agriculture (NMSA) circulated to al! Srates/UTs and also available on the
Department website Www.apricogp.nicin, - :

(b) At least 30% of budget allocations are earmarked for women beneficiaries/farmers. This
also may be intimated to the Central Goverment in the monthly progress report,

(6) The implementing agency shall maintain proper accounts of expenditure incumed and
submit the statement of Audited Accounts and uiilization certificate to this Department
&% soon as possible along with" progress report for further release of fimds. The
implementing agency will also furnish quarterly progress report regularly with details of
physical and financial target and achievement as per prescribed formats which have been
given for various components $६ vately in guidelines. They will also be responsible to
monitor utilization of funds far SC/ ST) Women beneficiaries ih respect of said scheme
and maintain database for th AB

(१) Unspent balance of Grants-in Aj Preleased in previous financial year, ie. 2013-14 and

" interest earned will be counted towards Grants-in-Aid under the Scheme for the current
year.

(6) Revalidated amount of interest ehmned and unspent balance will be adjusted against
release of 17/ 27९ installment and allocation of cwrent financial year will be reduced 10
that extant,

() Balance Sheet & Audited Statement of Accounts telating to the scheme to be furnished
by State Governments/Implementing Agencies shall clearly reflect unspent balance and
amount earned 4s interest at the beginning of the financial year, so that these amounts
aré accounted for in a transparent and unambiguous manner, है

8. It may be ensured that actual expenditure for the period April-July, 2014 is téstricted te
U3"? of the budget provision for thé Aiancial year 2014-15 approved under Vote on
Account and no expenditure on a ‘new service’ is incurred until the Demands for Grants

for the whole ; aera een ee
year are voted by Parliament and the related Approptiation Bill is assented: to by the
President. हे

9. This issues with approval of Integrated Finance Division vide their Diary No. 120.454

dated 43.4. 2014,
Yours faithfully,

90..)७)) one
(Shailesh)

Deputy Secretary io the, Government of India
Copy for information to--

Pay & Accounts Officer, 16, Akbar Road Hutments, New Delhi.

Pay & Accounts Office-I, DAC, Krishi Bhavan.

Pay & Accounts Officer, PPM, Faridabad.

Dir. of Audit Commerce Works Misc, AGCR Building, IP Estate, N. Delhi.

Director (Agriculture), All States/UTs,

PS to AS&FA/DS (Finance) / US (Finance) / Budget & Accounts Section / INM Section,
Plan Coordination Division, DAC, Krishi Bhavan, New Delhi, है
Agriculture Advisor, Planning Commission, Yojatia Bhavan, New Delhi.

4S lan Fin), Department of Expenditure, North Block, New Delhi.

—~QVH6—

OND के ६० ० ०