      133  
 
 
PREPAREDNESS FOR IMPLEMEN TATION OF 
NATIONAL FOOD SECURITY ACT, 2013 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND 
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND 
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
              
  
                      
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 

 
PAC NO.  2172 
 
 
O N E  H U N D R E D  A N D  T H I R T Y  
T H I R D R E P O R T 
 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(20 18-19) 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH  LOK SABHA)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND 
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND 
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
                                       
   
                                                                              
Presented to Lok Sabha on:  ………….…… 
 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on:   ………………. 
 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
December, 2018 /Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)  
 
PREPAREDNESS FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF 
NATIONAL FOOD SECURITY ACT, 2013 
 
 
 

  
CONTENTS 
  PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE –VI OF THE PUBLIC 
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2017-18)  
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2018-
19)      
 
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………... …………………….. 
  
 
 
REPORT 
………………………………………………. 
 
A IDENTIFICATION OF BENEFICIARIES AND 
ISSUANCE OF RATION CARDS 
 
 
B PREPAREDNESS IN LOGISTICS: 
ALLOCATION, MOVEMENT AND STORAGE 
OF FOODGRAINS 
 
 
C REFORMS IN THE TARGETED PUBLIC 
DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM (TPDS) 
 
 
D GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL AND 
MONITORING MECHANISM  
 
 
  
PART II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
 
APPENDICES*  
 
I 
 
Minutes of the sitting of the Sub-Committee VI of 
Public Accounts Committee (2017 -18) held on   
7th September, 2017 
 
 
II Minutes of the 21 st sitting of the Public Accounts 
Committee (2018 -19) held on   
14th December, 2018 
 
 
 
 
 *Not appended to the cyclostyled copy of the Report 

Sub-Committee – VI (Social Sector) 
 
 
 
Convenor                 : 1. Shri  Shivkumar C. Udasi 
Alternate Convenor : 2. Shri P. Venugopal 
Members                 : 3. Shri  Neiphiu Rio  
 4. Shri  Naresh Agrawal  
 5. Shri  Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar  
 6. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2018-19) 
 
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge   - Chairperson 
 M E M B E R S  
L O K  S A B H A  
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria  
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra 
5.    Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar   
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
7. Smt. Riti Pathak 
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank” 
9. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
10. Shri Abhishek Singh 
11. Shri Gopal Shetty 
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya  
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
15. Dr. Ponnusamy  Venugopal 
 R A J Y A  S A B H A  
16. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda 
17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
18. Shri Shwait Malik 
19. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
21. Shri C.M. Ramesh 
22. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A.K. Singh  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Director 
3. Smt. Anju Kukreja  - Under Secretary 
4. Shri Ashikho Alemo  - Senior Executive Assistant 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2018-19), having been authorised by 
the Committee, do present this One Hundred and Thirty Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) 
on "Preparedness for Implementation of National Food Security Act, 2013"  relating to 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public 
Distribution). 
 
2. The Sub-Committee VI of Public Accounts Committee (201 7-18) took up the subject 
for detailed examination and report. T he Sub -Committee-VI was constituted under the 
Convenorship of Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi, M.P and Member of PAC that took evidence of t he 
representatives of the Department of Food and Public Distribution  on the subject at their 
sitting held on 7th September, 201 7. The Public Accounts Committee (2018 -19) took 
evidence of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Depar tment of 
Food and Public Distribution) on 5 th December, 2018. Accordingly, a draft Report was 
prepared and adopted by the Public Accounts Committee (2018 -19) on 14th December, 
2018. Minutes of the sittings are appended to the Report.  
 
3.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold and form Part II of the Report.  
 
4.  The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministries of Consumer Affairs, Food  and Public Distribution (Department of Food and 
Public Distribution)  for tendering evidence before them and furnishing information in 
connection with the examination of the subject.  
 
5.  The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to them 
in the matter by the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.  
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                           MALLIKARJUN KHARGE 
20 December, 2018                         Chairperson, 
29 Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)                 Public Accounts Committee 

R E P O R T 
PART – I 
I INTRODUCTORY 
This Report is based on C&AG Report No.54 of 2015 on the 
"Preparedness for Implementation of National Food Security Act, 2013 ", 
pertaining to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution. 
2. The Sub-Committee –VI (Social Sector) of Public Accounts Committee 
(2017-18) and Public Accounts Committee (2018 -19) took up the subject for 
detailed examination, took oral evidences of the representatives of the Ministry 
of Consumer Affairs, Food an d Public Distribution and obtained written replies 
on the subject. Based on the oral evidence and written replies, the Sub -
Committee examined the subject in detail. 
 
3. The Committee have stated that National Food Security Act, 2013 
(NFSA) which came into effect from July 5, 2013 aims to provide foodgrains to 
81.34 crore beneficiaries at highly subsidized rates. One of the major 
implications of NFSA is that the identified beneficiaries have the right to get 
subsidized foodgrains. NFSA provides a statutory basi s for a framework which 
assures food security for nearly two -thirds of the population and seeks to 
make the right to food a legal entitlement by providing subsidized foodgrains 
on the existing Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS). NFSA suffered 
from several deficiencies such as errors in targeting, inefficient delivery 
mechanisms resulting in high leakages and lack of transparency in its 
operations. Up to 75 per cent of the rural and 50 per cent of urban population 
as per Census 2011 at all India leve l is envisaged to be covered under NFSA 
and the States/UT (Union Territory) shall be allocated foodgrains as specified 
for the above coverage. The annual allocation of the State were to be 
protected in case the allocation under NFSA was less than the average annual 
off take of foodgrains for last three years. The implementation of NFSA implies 
an additional subsidy of ` 26,780 crore per year.  
The Salient features or provisions of the National Food Security 
Act, 2013 
 Identification of beneficiaries under NFSA to be completed in one 
year’s time i.e. by 4 July 2014. 
 Within the coverage determined for each State, the State 
Governments were to identify the Antyodaya Anna Yojana  (AAY) and 
the Priority Households; Entitlement of existing AAY households to be 
protected at 35 kg per household per month, while each member of 
such priority household to get 5 kg of foodgrains per month. 

 Subsidized prices- `3, `2, `1 per kg for rice, wheat and coarse 
grain respectively fixed for a period of 3 years from the date of 
commencement of NFSA and is to be suitably linked to the Minimum 
Support Price (MSP) thereafter. 
 Protection of annual average off -take of foodgrains for last the 
three years under normal TPDS in case annual allocation of foodgrains 
under NFSA to any State was less than their average annual off-take of 
foodgrains. 
 Pregnant women and lactating mothers are entitled to meals and 
maternity benefit of not less than ` 6,000 per delivery. 
 Children in the age group of 6 months to 14 years are entitled to 
meals under Inte grated Child Development Services (ICDS) and Mid 
Day Meal (MDM) schemes being implemented by Ministry of Women 
and Child Development and Ministry of Human Resource Development 
respectively. 
 Eldest woman of the household of 18 years or above is to be 
treated as the head of the household for the purpose of issuing ration 
cards. 
 Provisions for food security allowance to entitled beneficiaries in 
case of non-supply of foodgrains as per their entitlement. 
 Establishment of Grievance Redressal Mechanism at the dis trict 
and state levels, with states having the flexibility to use the existing 
machinery or set up separate mechanism. 
 Central Government to provide assistance to the State in 
meeting the expenditure incurred by it towards intra -state movement, 
handling of  foodgrains and margins paid to the fair price shop (FPS) 
dealers. Provisions for transparency and accountability by placing 
TPDS related records in public domain, Social Audit and Vigilance 
Committees. 
 Provision for penalty on public servant or authority,  to be 
imposed by the State Food Commission, in case of failure to comply 
with relief recommended by the District Grievance Redressal Officer. 
 In case of short supply of foodgrains from the central pool to a 
State, the Central Government shall provide fund s to the extent of short 
supply to the State Government. 
Time-Frame for implementation of NFSA 
4. The Committee have learnt State Governments were to identify the 
eligible households within one year from the commencement of the NFSA i.e. 
upto 4 July 2014. The  Ministry later extended this timeframe in June 2014 by 

three months. It was subsequently extended for a period of another six months 
and then again by six months up to 30 September 2015. As of October 2015, 
18 States/UTs were reported to have implemented the NFSA by covering 
41.57 crore (51 per cent) beneficiaries against the total 81.34 crore 
beneficiaries to be covered in all 36 States/UTs. 
 
5. Therefore, before implementation of the NFSA, Audit carried out an 
evaluation on the preparatory measures for the implementation of the Act with 
reference following specific objectives: 
i) Whether the States/UTs identified the eligible households and 
issued ration cards to all the identified eligible beneficiaries. 
 
ii) Whether the States/UTs had the requisite infrast ructure and 
were augmenting the same for increased requirement in transportation 
and storage capacity. 
 
iii) Whether the States initiated reforms in the Targeted Public 
Distribution System with regard to doorstep delivery and 
computerization.  
 
iv) Whether the States/UTs had put in place a grievance redressal 
system including Food Security Allowance as per the provisions of 
NFSA and whether an effective monitoring mechanism was put in 
place. 
 
6. The Committee found from the Report of C&AG that following 
irregularities have been pointed out in the implementation of national Food 
Security Act, 2013 (NFSA): 
 
Identification of beneficiaries and issuance of ration cards  
 
 Eleven States/UTs reported identification of eligible households within 
the stipulated timeline of 365 days whereas seven States/UTs reported 
identification of eligible households under NFSA during June -October 
2015 taking the figure of implementing States/UTs to 18. Only 51 per 
cent of the eligible beneficiaries had been identified and 49 per cent 
beneficiaries were yet to be identified in all the States/UTs. 
 The reasons for delay in implementation of NFSA by non -implementing 
States/UTs were non -finalization of figures under Socio Economic 
Caste Census, lack of infrastructural facilities, insufficie nt funds and 
manpower. Ministry extended the timeline for implementation thrice, 
latest being till September, 2015, though there was no such provision 
under NFSA.  

 Most of the implementing States did not identify the Antyodaya Anna 
Yojana (AAY) and priorit y household’s beneficiaries as per the 
provisions of the NFSA but used the old database of beneficiaries for 
extending the benefits.  
 In Himachal Pradesh, 6.9 lakh old ration cards were stamped as priority 
household and AAY households and re -issued as NFSA  compliant. In 
Karnataka, 8.90 lakh bogus and ineligible ration cards were found (June 
2015) in the existing system during seeding of Elector’s Photo Identity 
Card details. However, instead of cancelling these bogus or ineligible 
ration cards, State Govern ment continued to issue foodgrains to them. 
In Maharashtra, the ration cards were revalidated by merely affixing 
stamps on the existing ration cards under different categories.  
 
Preparedness in Logistics: Allocation, Movement and Storage of 
Foodgrains 
 
 National Foodgrains Movement Plan was not prepared despite being 
decided in the year 2012.  
 In the test checked States the storage capacity of foodgrains was not 
adequate for holding three months requirement and the condition of 
existing storage capacity with the States/UTs needed upgradation.  
 
Reforms in Targeted Public Distribution System 
 
 Doorstep delivery of foodgrains was not implemented in Assam, 
whereas in Uttar Pradesh and Maharashtra it was implemented 
partially. In Himachal Pradesh and Karnataka, d oorstep delivery was 
being done by FPS dealers themselves against the provision of NFSA.  
 Computerization of TPDS operations was not completed in the selected 
States/UTs and was at different stages of implementation. 
 Unavailability of required computer app lication and hardware were the 
limiting factors in the selected States/UTs. Inadequate digitization of the 
identified beneficiaries’ data was observed in the States/UTs.  
 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism and Monitoring 
 
 The grievance redressal system was con stituted in most of the states, 
albeit not till the last tier. Though, six out of nine selected States/UTs 
were found to have put in place the grievance redressal mechanism, 
these were not fully functional. Vigilance committees at all the four 
levels were not in existence in any of the selected States \UTs. Ministry 
did not have the information on grievance redressal mechanism and 
vigilance committee, and was not in position to monitor the 

implementation. Similarly, monitoring done by the States was 
inadequate and there were shortfalls in inspections. 
 
The aforesaid findings of Audit are discussed in the succeeding Paragraphs: 
A. IDENTIFICATION OF BENEFICIARIES AND ISSUANCE OF RATION 
CARDS 
7. In their Report, Audit pointed out that as per Section 10 (1) (b) of NFSA, 
identification of eligible households/units was to be completed by the State 
within 365 days of commencement of NFSA. AAY Households were to be 
identified by States/UTs in accordance with the guidelines applicable to the 
scheme and remaining household s as priority households in accordance with 
the guidelines framed by the respective State/ UT Governments. NFSA 
provides for coverage of 75 per cent and 50 per cent of the rural and urban 
population at the all India level, corresponding to which the State -wise 
coverage was determined by the Planning Commission. However it was found 
that only 11 States/UTs had reported identification of eligible households 
within the stipulated timeline of 365 days and were getting foodgrains under 
NFSA during September 2013 - March 2014; Seven more States/UTs reported 
identification of eligible households under NFSA during June -October 2015 
taking the figure of implementing States/UTs to 18. In effect, only 51 per cent 
of the eligible beneficiaries had been identified. It wa s further noted that out of 
the above 18 States, eight States/UTs fully completed the identification as per 
coverage under NFSA. However, it was noted that in the case of 10 
States/UTs NFSA was implemented even though these States did not 
complete identifi cation of required number of beneficiaries under NFSA. In 
these 10 States/UTs, as against the total 2621.29 lakh beneficiaries, only 
2077.88 lakh were identified. This resulted in benefit of subsidized foodgrains 
under NFSA not reaching 543.41 lakh remaini ng unidentified of the targeted 
beneficiaries. For 18 States/UTs which had not reported completion of the 
identification, Ministry extended the timeline for implementation thrice latest 
being till September, 2015. 
 
8. When enquired about the reasons behind th e non -identification and 
delay in the identification of beneficiaries, the Ministry intimated as under:- 
 “Delays in identification of eligible households in States/UTs was due 
to non -availability of complete data, time being taken to conduct 
survey/verification, completion of requisite preparatory activities for 
implementation of NFSA, formation of new State (in the case of Andhra 
Pradesh and Telangana), imposition of Model Code of Conduct due to 
General Elections, etc. Due to above factors, the identifica tion exercise 
was delayed. Subsequently, with the passage of time as and when 

States/UTs completed the exercise of identification and their 
preparatory activities, implementation of NFSA was started. It is also to 
be kept in view that Identification is a c ontinuous process, which 
involves exclusion of ineligible/ fake/ duplicate ration cards and 
inclusion of genuine left -out households. The list of eligible households 
requires regular updation due to various factors like corrections, births, 
deaths, migrations, etc. At present, the Act is being implemented in all 
the 36 States/UTs covering 80.57 crores beneficiaries out of the total 
estimated coverage of 81.34 crore. Thus, the present coverage is 
almost complete, being 99.05% of the total estimated coverage under 
NFSA.” 
9. When asked as to what steps have been taken by the Ministry to 
ensure complete identification of beneficiaries by all States/UTs under the 
NFSA, the Ministry stated as follows:- 
 “This Department had circulated guidelines to all the State 
Governments detailing the preparatory work to be done by them before 
they start implementation of the NFSA. This inter-alia included the steps 
to be taken by them for evolving criteria for inclusion/exclusion of 
eligible households/beneficiaries within the Sta te-wise coverage, 
process of actual identification of households, display of eligible 
households/beneficiaries, issue of ration cards under NFSA, etc. A 
Proforma was also sent to the State Governments in which they had to 
certify their preparedness to impl ement the provisions of the Act. 
Besides the above mentioned pre -requisites pertaining to identification, 
the State Governments had to certify other essential parameters like 
door-step delivery of foodgrains upto fair price shops, sufficient and 
scientific storage capacity, computerisation of beneficiary data  and 
grievance redressal mechanism. The Department regularly reviewed 
the status of preparedness of various States to implement the Act 
through meetings, Conferences at the level of Secretary, F&PD and the 
Hon’ble Union Minister of Food. Based on the issues raised by the 
State Governments, clarifications were also issued from time to time. 
As a result of the concerted efforts of the Department, in close co -
ordination with States/UTs, NFSA is presently be ing implemented by all 
the 36 States/UTs with an overall all India coverage of 99.05% of the 
total estimated coverage under NFSA.” 
 
 A comparative analysis with the earlier Targeted Public Distribution 
System (TPDS) with that of NFSA, note that against 99. 22 crore beneficiaries 
coverage under TPDS, only about 81.34 crore beneficiaries as per Census 
2011 had been covered under NFSA. The Committee also note that out of the 
99.22 crore beneficiaries under TPDS, 63.22 crore were APL beneficiaries.  To 
remove the  deficiencies in the existing TPDS and ensure food security to 
intended beneficiaries, certain new features have been incorporated in the 
TPDS under NFSA. 

Irregular extension of time for identification of beneficiaries 
 
10. The Committee found through Audit Report that as per Section 10 (1) of 
the NFSA, State Governments were to identify the eligible households within 
one year from the commencement of the NFSA i.e. upto 4 July 2014. 
However, it was noted that only 11 States/UTs reported completion of this 
preparatory work within the stipulated one year. The Ministry later extended 
this timeframe in June 2014 by three months. Since no other states had 
reported completion of identification of the beneficiaries during the extended 
period, it was further extended fo r a period of another six months and then 
again by six months up to 30 September 2015. It was found  that without any 
enabling provision in the NFSA, the Ministry extended the time frame for 
identification of beneficiaries which was irregular. Ministry stat ed that 
States/UTs highlighted delays in identification of eligible households due to 
various reasons such as non -availability of complete data, time being taken to 
conduct survey/verification, completion of requisite preparatory activities for 
implementation of NFSA, and so on, hence a decision was taken to extend the 
time limit for identification of eligible beneficiaries under NFSA and satisfactory 
completion of other preparatory activities by the State Governments. Ministry 
further stated that as of Nov ember 2015, the NFSA was being implemented in 
23 States/UTs, and considering that a long time had passed since the NFSA 
came into force, it had now been decided not to extend the time period further 
so that complete responsibility for any further delay in implementing the NFSA 
was borne by the respective State/UT. NFSA had no provision for extension of 
time. However, Section 42 (1) of the NFSA, stipulated that if any difficulty 
arises in giving effect to the provisions of the NFSA, the Central Government 
may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, for 
removing the difficulty, within two years from the commencement of the NFSA. 
Every such order was to be laid before the each House of the Parliament. 
Audit noted that the Ministry di d not take recourse to resolve the problems 
faced by the states in identification of eligible households. Instead, it extended 
the time limit of 365 days laid down in the NFSA thrice, despite no such 
provision for extension available under NFSA. 
 
11. Apprising the Committee about the cases in which the Ministry 
extended time for identification of beneficiaries, the Ministry submitted as 
follows: 
 
"NFSA is now being implemented by all the States/UTs after completion 
of the exercise of identification of beneficia ries and other preparatory 
activities.  However, earlier, the timelines for identification of 
beneficiaries and other preparatory measures was extended three 

times upto 30.09.2015. No extension was given thereafter and 
States/UTs were expected to join NFSA  without any delay.  However, 
the State Governments, which were yet to join NFSA, continued to 
receive allocation of foodgrains under the erstwhile Targeted Public 
Distribution System (TPDS) as per second proviso below Section 
10(1)(b). Allocation of foodg rains to such States under NFSA was 
started only after ensuring that they had completed all the specified 
preparatory activities." 
 
12. On being asked as to whether the Ministry had obtained Parliamentary 
approval for all extensions of timelines, the Ministry stated as under: 
 
"During review of the status of implementation of the Act, the 
States/UTs highlighted delays in identification of eligible households 
due to non -availability of complete data, time being taken to conduct 
survey/verification, completion of  requisite preparatory activities for 
implementation of NFSA, formation of new State (in the case of Andhra 
Pradesh and Telangana), imposition of Model Code of Conduct due to 
General Elections, etc. Keeping all such factors in view and also the 
fact that majority of the States/UTs were yet to join NFSA, at the end of 
one year period, these States/UTs were requested vide letter dated 
30.6.2014, with the approval of Hon’ble Minister for Consumer Affairs, 
Food & Public Distribution (CAF&PD), to complete the ex ercise of 
identification and ensure implementation of the act within three months, 
after completing other preparatory measures  
 
The issue of extension of time for identification of eligible 
households was examined in consultation with Department of Legal 
Affairs.  Opinion of that Department was sought on the course of action 
available to the Central Government in the event of States/UTs not 
completing the identification of households within the stipulated time 
line and start implementation of the Act and w hether the period can be 
extended through an executive order. With reference to the power of 
the Central Government to remove difficulties under Section 42 of the 
Act, opinion was also sought on whether the executive order for 
extending the timeline will b e construed as order issued under Section 
42 and the period upto which order under Section 42 can be issued as 
such an order could not be issued after expiry of two years from the 
commencement of the Act.  
 
The Department of Legal Affairs advised that a st atutory 
notification can only be issued under Section 42 of the Act to remove 

the difficulties arising in giving effect to the provisions of the Act, and 
that for how long, is a pure executive discretionary power and, 
therefore, the administrative Ministry  may decide on the basis of the 
existing circumstances. 
 
The matter was examined in the Department and it was noted 
that as per advice of D/Legal Affairs, Notifications can be issued under 
Section 42 only for removal of difficulties. In the present case, i t was 
clear that so far as Central Government was concerned, there was no 
problem. Since the main responsibility for implementation of the Act lied 
with the State Governments, it was not considered appropriate to treat 
this matter under ‘removal of difficu lties’ under Section 42. Further, 
such action under Section 42 could only be taken within the time limit of 
2 years.  
 
Considering the above facts and the fact that by that time only 11 
States/UT had started implementation of the Act, it was decided with 
the approval of Hon’ble Minister, CAF&PD to extend the time limit by 3 
months without issuing a Notification under Section 42 of NFSA and to 
inform such decisions to the concerned State Governments through 
D.O. letters as and when such decisions are taken. Such extensions of 
time have been given on three occasions, the last one being upto 
30.09.2015." 
 
13. During the oral evidence on the subject, the representatives of the 
Ministry stated as follows:- 
“About the extension of timelines on the identification of 
beneficiaries by the State Governments, the Act definitely provides that 
the State Governments are expected to identify the beneficiaries under 
the NFSA within 365 days from the commencement of the Act.  It is true 
that only eleven States had done the identi fication of beneficiaries by 
that deadline and the remaining States which came under the fold of 
NFSA, they came much later, that is, after the prescribed one year time.  
Actually the identification of beneficiaries by those States are done after 
the deadline prescribed under the Act.  At that point of time, in 2014 -15, 
the department had taken a conscious decision with the approval of the 
hon. Minister to allow the other States also to come on board under the 
NFSA and thereby extending the deadline for ide ntification of 
beneficiaries.  Strictly going by the provision of the Act, the Act provided 
for 365 days for identification of beneficiaries. We might have exceeded 
the mandate of the legislature but the other point which need to be 
noted is that the Act a lso provide till the time the beneficiaries are 
selected, the States are to be supplied with the quantity of foodgrains 

which is entitled to them before coming into the force of the National 
Food Security Act.” 
Coverage in the selected States 
 
14. Audit highli ghted that details of coverage of beneficiaries against the 
total beneficiaries as per NFSA in the selected implementing States/UTs, 
revealed delay in implementation of NFSA by the States due to non -
finalization of SECC figures, lack of infrastructural fac ilities, insufficient fund 
and manpower, delay in finalization of criteria for identification of priority 
households as the State Government s and incomplete survey for 
identification. Audit also noted that most of the implementing States did not 
identify t he Antyodaya Anna Yojana (AAY) and priority household’s 
beneficiaries as per the provisions of the NFSA but used the old database of 
beneficiaries for extending the benefits  and the State Government s did not 
carry out fresh exercise for identification of A AY households but included the 
existing AAY families under TPDS as AAY households that too without any 
survey/verification. Ministry contended that it was not necessary to undertake 
fresh identification exercise, as the AAY was an ongoing scheme and the 
number of AAY households as well as the criteria for their identification was 
already specified for each State. For priority households, the States already 
had a universe of population comprising of BPL, AAY and APL households 
under the erstwhile TPDS. The S tates were required to evolve 
guidelines/criteria for identifying priority households within the number 
determined for it. However, audit noted that the Section 10 of NFSA used the 
word ‘identify’ which denoted that a process of identification is required.  
Further, the Ministry’s instructions to the States/UTs of 17 July 2013 clearly 
indicated that fresh identification exercise was to be carried out.  
 
15. On being asked as to whether the Ministry has resolved the 
contradiction by issuing appropriate orders, the Ministry replied as under: 
 
"Section 10 of the Act states that the State Government shall identify 
the households to be covered under AAY in accordance with the 
guidelines applicable to the said scheme, the remaining households as 
priority households in accordance with such guidelines as the State 
Government may specify. The Ministry’s reference dated 17.07.2013 
conveys that the State Governments are required to evolve their own 
criteria for inclusion/exclusion of households/beneficiaries. All the 
States/UTs have, accordingly, evolved their State specific criteria for 
identification of eligible households/beneficiaries under NFSA. As 
regards identification exercise, it was upto the States to carry out fresh 
survey or utilize any ongoing/recently concluded reliable survey to 

identify eligible households/beneficiaries for the purpose of coverage 
under the Act. Thus, there is no contradiction as the identification of 
beneficiaries under NFSA has been done by the Stated/UTs in 
accordance with the guidelines evolved by them." 
 
Issue of Ration Cards to identified households 
 
16. In their Report Audit pointed out that as per the directions , relating to 
necessary preparatory action for implementation of NFSA, issued by the 
Central Government (17 July 2013) new ration ca rds were required to be 
issued with eldest women as head of the household by the States/UTs. 
 
17. On the matter of recognizing the eldest woman in every household as 
head of the household and issuance of new ration cards under the Act, and 
instructions issued in this regard, the Ministry stated as follows:-  
 “The Department vide its letter dated 17.07.2013 inter -alia instructed 
the States/UTs to issue ration cards under NFSA with eldest woman as 
head of household.  The Proforma for certifying preparedness of t he 
States to implement NFSA also sought confirmation from the State 
Governments on whether ration cards under NFSA have incorporated 
the provisions relating to empowerment of women (Section 13 of the 
Act). Though all the States/UTs had replied in affirmati ve to this point, it 
was noted from the digitized data of beneficiaries on the PDS portal that 
the said provision has not been complied with by some States. Since 
this is a mandatory provision aimed at empowerment of women, the 
Department vide its letter d ated 30.11.2015 again requested the 
States/UTs to review the status of implementation and take all requisite 
measures to ensure that the ration cards issued to NFSA beneficiaries 
specifically show eligible female member as head of household. These 
instructions were also reiterated in the conferences/meetings held with 
States/UTs at various levels.” 
18. In their report Audit found that  in the State of Himachal Pradesh, 6.9 
lakh old ration cards were stamped as priority household and AAY households 
and re -issued as NFSA compliant. In Karnataka, 8.90 lakh bogus and 
ineligible ration cards were found (June 2015) in the existing system during 
seeding of Elector’s Photo Identity Card details. However, instead of 
cancelling these bogus or ineligible ration cards, State  Government continued 
to issue foodgrains to them. In Maharashtra, the ration cards were revalidated 
by merely affixing stamps on the existing ration cards under different 
categories. 
 
 

19. During oral evidence, the representatives of the Ministry had submitted 
that not all ration cards without authentication can be treated as bogus cards. 
Apart from bogus cards and ghost cards, cards without authentication can also 
arise in the event of migration of families from one State/District to another or 
temporary move ment of the beneficiary on employment or any other reason 
from one place to another. To plug this portability loophole, the Ministry are 
making efforts to ensure portability across all States and the State of Andhra 
Pradesh have achieved portability of rat ion card. For example a beneficiary 
from Nellore can collect his/her ration in Krishna District. 
 
20. With regard to the action taken by the Ministry against diversion of food 
grains to bogus and ineligible ration card holders, the Ministry stated as 
follows:- 
“For checking of leakages and diversions of foodgrains, Central 
Govt. has asked States/UTs to opt for any of the two models of Direct 
Benefit Transfer – Cash transfer of food subsidy into the bank account 
of beneficiaries or Fair Price Shop (FPS) automati on, which involves 
installation of Point of Sale (PoS) device at FPS,  for authentication of 
beneficiaries and electronic capturing of transactions. The cash transfer 
of food subsidy is being implemented in 3 UTs on pilot basis namely 
Chandigarh, Puducherry w.e.f. 1.9.2015 and partially in Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli w.e.f. 1.3.2016. So far 2.74 lakh FPSs out of total 5.26 lakh 
FPSs have been automated across the country.  
 
Apart from the above, in order to identify and weed -out 
duplicate/ineligible beneficiaries f rom the TPDS, and to enable better 
targeting of food subsidies – Government is undertaking Seeding of 
Aadhaar number in ration cards / beneficiaries database in all the 
States and Union Territories. Presently, overall seeding of Aadhaar with 
ration cards stands at 80% at National level.” 
 
 To bring about portability of ration cards, the Committee were also 
apprised as follows:-  
“The Department are now implementing a new scheme called, 
IMPDS, where we are also thinking of inter -State portability. The 
scheme has been started to be implemented in the current financial 
year but this scheme basically envisages that inter -State portability will 
also be possible. Presently, if a migrant labour from UP goes to 
Maharashtra, he has to draw his ration in the home Stat e only but we 
will have the provision that once we have inter -State portability, the 
migrant from UP going to Maharashtra can utilize his own original ration 
card issued in the State of UP and still draw food grains under the 
National Food Security Act fro m any fair price shop in the State of 
Maharashtra. So, we are looking forward to that kind of state where 

inter-State portability will be possible and that will be very beneficial for 
the migratory population, especially, the migrant labour.” 
21. Apprising the  Committee about State -wise position of identification of 
ration cards, the Ministry submitted as follows: 
"Himachal Pradesh 
 
The NFSA has been implemented in the State of HP w.e.f 
October, 2013.  The State Government has informed that the existing 
paper b ased ration cards were continued due to non -availability of 
digital ration cards and no cards were digitized at that time.  
 
Now the State Government has issued QR Coded PVC Digital 
Ration Cards to all the beneficiaries in the State. The State Government 
has also informed that fresh forms are still being received by them for 
digitization, which are being digitized. 
 
Karnataka 
 
The State had initiated a special drive for cancellation of 
ineligible ration cards from August 2015 and around 8,59,736 ineligible 
cards were identified and cancelled. As and when cancelled, food grain 
allocation has been discontinued to these cards. 
 
Maharashtra 
In Maharashtra, for implementation of NFSA, the State 
Government revalidated the ration cards by affixing stamps on the 
existing ration cards under different categories and foodgrains are 
being supplied to eligible beneficiaries from February, 2014 onwards. 
Once seeding of Aadhaar numbers into the ration cards will be 
completed, then only the new ration cards will be issued. A s on 
19.09.2017, the level of Aadhaar seeding is 87%." 
 
Implementation of provisions relating to women empowerment in 
the ration cards 
 
22. In their Report Audit noted that a iming at women empowerment, 
Section 13(1) of NFSA, 2013 provides that in every eligibl e household, the 
eldest woman not below 18 years of age was to be recognised as head of the 
household for the purpose of the issue of ration cards. Where a household at 
any time, did not have a woman or a woman of eighteen years of age or 
above, only then the ration cards could be issued to male member of the 
household and even in such cases the female member, on attaining the age of 
eighteen years, would become the head of the household. The ration cards 
under NFSA were also to be compliant with the entitl ement norms on per 

person basis. A test check of records at the field level revealed the 
observations brought out in the succeeding paragraphs.  
 
23. In Himachal Pradesh it was noted that existing old ration cards, which 
did not specially identify the eldest w omen as head of household, were being 
used. In Karnataka, it was noted that the State Government issued 21.14 lakh 
ration cards with male member as head of family despite having a female 
member of 18 years and above. The State Government replied that while  
issuing new online ration cards to these families, eldest women would be 
made head of household. In Assam, the situation was similar. Though there 
were women member in the households, 207 ration cards were prepared in 
the name of male member. Cases were noticed in which, the ration cards were 
prepared in the name of women member other than the eldest women of the 
households. In Maharashtra, the provision of NFSA aimed at empowerment of 
women was not complied with, as fresh ration cards were not issued and 
existing cards were revalidated. 
 
Maternity benefits provided under NFSA not extended across the 
country 
 
24. The Committee have also learnt that as per section 4 (b) of NFSA, 
subject to such schemes as may be framed by the Central Government, every 
pregnant woman and lactating mother shall be entitled to maternity benefit of 
not less that rupees six thousand in such instalments as may be prescribed by 
the Central Government. The Ministry of Women and Child Development 
(MWCD) has been implementing Conditional C ash Transfer scheme, namely, 
Indira Gandhi Matritva Sahyog Yojana (IGMSY), for Pregnant and Lactating 
(P&L) women, on pilot basis in 53 districts across the country since October, 
2010. After the implementation of NFSA, maternity benefit was revised from ` 
4,000 to ` 6,000 from 5 July 2013 under the scheme. However, it was noted 
that the scheme was being implemented only in the 53 pilot districts as the 
cost sharing pattern between Central Government and State/UT Governments 
was not finalized by Ministry of  Finance. The MWCD stated (December, 2015) 
the cost sharing pattern for IGMSY was decided by Ministry of Finance in 
October, 2015. MWCD further added that it initiated the action for obtaining 
approval of the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs for expan sion of the 
IGMSY to all districts of the country. Thus the maternity benefit, though made 
mandatory through NFSA, were yet to be extended to pregnant woman and 
lactating mothers in the country and was available to a few chosen districts. 
 
 

25. When asked as t o whether the maternity benefits under NFSA has 
been implemented across the country, the Ministry intimated as under: 
 
"Government of India has announced Pan -India implementation 
of Pradhan Mantri Matru Vandana Yojana (PMMVY), a conditional 
cash transfer s cheme for Pregnant Women & Lactating Mothers 
(PW&LM) with effect from 01.01.2017. The Administrative Approval 
has been conveyed to the States/UTs vide this Ministry’s letter dated 
19.05.2017 ( Annexure-1). Scheme implementation Guidelines, 
PMMVY-CAS and its  User Manual have been launched by Ministry of 
Women & Child Development (MWCD) on 01.09.2017." 
 
The representatives of the Ministry further stated as under:- 
 
“Pradhan Mantri Matru Vandana Yojana (PMMVY) has been 
introduced in January 2017 on a pan India basis. Under this scheme, 
the pregnant and lactating mothers are provided the maternity benefits 
in three instalments of Rs.1000, Rs.2000 and Rs.2000 respectively. 
First instalment is given at the time of registration of pregnancy; 
second instalment is giv en at least at one antenatal check -up and the 
third one is given when the child is born and is given immunization 
injections.  
The beneficiary is also entitled to get the benefits which are 
available under Janani Suraksha Yojana, which ranges from Rs.700 t o 
Rs.1400 per beneficiary. All eligible pregnant women for first living 
child of the family are entitled for benefits under this scheme. All the 
Government/ PSU employees or those who are in receipt of similar 
benefits under any law for the time being are excluded from the 
scheme.  
This is a Centrally -sponsored scheme and the funds are 
allocated to the States in the prescribed cost sharing ratio, that, 60:40 
for all States; 90:10 for all Northeast and Himalayan States and 100 
per cent for all UTs without legislature.” 
 
26. The Ministry further submitted that so far 25 States/UTs have opened 
dedicated Escrow Account to be maintained at State/UT level and intimated 
the details to MWCD. An amount of `.880.00 Crore (approx.) has been 
released to 24 States/UTs. 
 
 
 

 
B. PREPAREDNESS IN LOGISTICS : ALLOCATION, MOVEMENT AND 
STORAGE OF FOODGRAINS 
 
Allocation of foodgrains 
27. The Committee have learnt from Audit Report that as per Section 22(1) 
of NFSA, the Central Government shall, for ensuring the regular supply of 
foodgrains to persons belonging to eligible households, allocate from the 
central pool the required quantity of foodgrains to the State Governments 
under the TPDS. For allocation of foodgrains, States/UTs were required to 
certify their preparedness for implementatio n of NFSA through a proforma 
devised by the Ministry, as referred to in Para 1.5. After examining the 
proforma furnished by the States/UTs, Ministry started allocating wheat and 
rice at ` 2 per kg and ` 3 per kg respectively to them. The Ministry allocated  
wheat and rice to the rest of the non -implementing States at the central issue 
prices under the normal TPDS. 
 
Movement of foodgrains 
28. It was also pointed out that as per section as per Section 22(4) (e) of 
NFSA, the Central Government shall provide for tra nsportation of foodgrains, 
as per allocation, to the depots by the Central Government in each State/UT. 
Distribution of foodgrains under TPDS and Other Welfare Schemes (OWS) is 
carried out on the basis of monthly allocation made by the GOI and off -take of 
foodgrains from the Central Pool by various states. Stock of foodgrains is also 
to be moved to consuming states irrespective of consumption requirement to 
create buffer stocks as a measure of food security. 
28. The information relating to requirement of ra kes by FCI for 
transportation of foodgrains and making available of the same by the Railways 
during the years 2010 -11 to 2014 -15 revealed that there was shortfall in the 
range of 13 per cent to 18 per cent in arranging the rakes by the Railways. On 
this being pointed out, Ministry stated in October, 2015 that variation in rakes 
planned vis -à-vis actual dispatch is mainly due to inadequate availability of 
rakes by the railways and heavy traffic and sometimes also due to operational 
constraints of FCI like non availability of vacant space at recipient depots, less 
lifting by State Governments and increase in procurement in consuming 
regions etc. Audit noted that on full implementation of NFSA, the quantity of 
foodgrains required to be moved from procuring Stat es to consuming States 
would increase considerably and requirement of rakes would also increase by 
about 20 per cent as noted by the Standing Committee. 

29. On being asked about the steps taken by the Ministry to ensure that 
there is no mismatch between th e availability of foodgrains and availability of 
rakes, the Ministry informed as under: 
"In order to ensure that there is no mismatch between the 
availability of food grains and availability of rakes, an Inter -Ministerial 
Co-ordination Committee with Joint  Secretary (P&FCI) Department of 
Food & Public Distribution, Executive Director (T), Food Corporation of 
India and Executive Director (TTF), Railway Board as members has 
been working since January 2013 to actively take up the operational 
issues with Railways.  
  
In addition, coordination committees at Zonal and Regional levels have 
also been formed to increase the coordination between Railways and 
FCI. 
  
There is daily review of loading by FCI  as per plan and is discussed 
with Railways to sort out operational issue, if any." 
30. The Ministry further apprised that in 2015 -16, as against the plan of 
12486 rakes, 11111 rakes were dispatched. 
Non-preparation of National Foodgrains Movement Plan 
31. While examining the subject, the Committee took note of the fact  that 
the Ministry (in October, 2012) while submitting information to Standing 
Committee on National Food Security Bill, had informed that a National 
Foodgrains Movement Plan to address the road movement related problem in 
the North Eastern States, mechani zation of FCI godowns to reduce rake 
handling time, priority good sheds for development of basic facilities by 
railways, etc. supply of rakes, levying of demurrage charges movement by the 
Railways, upgradation of infrastructure at unloading railway stations was under 
preparation and a study was entrusted to M/s Pricewaterhouse Coopers Pvt. 
Ltd. by FCI for this purpose. The Ministry stated (November, 2015) that study 
report of M/s Pricewaterhouse Coopers Pvt. Ltd. on Supply Chain 
Management has been received . Report has been taken into account by FCI 
for improving the movement of foodgrains. Ministry further stated that there 
was no major bottleneck in the movement of food grains, as sufficient food 
grains are available in different states for distribution in  TDPS/OWS/NFSA. 
However, the Ministry neither indicated the specific steps taken by FCI to 
address the above issues nor provided any evidence of consideration of the 
Report by FCI/Ministry and action taken. 
32. When the Committee sought to know as to wheth er the National 
Foodgrains Movement Plan has been prepared and implemented, the Ministry 
replied: 

"No specific National movement Plan has been prepared, 
however monthly movement plan is always prepared on regular basis 
and acted upon. This is dynamic plan depending on quantity available 
in surplus regions, quantity demanded by deficit region, likely 
procurement, vacant storage capacity & monthly allotment/off -take of 
foodgrains etc." 
33. On being asked to know about the recommendations of M/s Price 
Waterhouse Coopers Pvt. Ltd. on supply chain management, the Ministry 
stated: 
"M/s Price Waterhouse Coopers Pvt. Ltd recommended for 
improvement in FCI systems and support required from Railways and 
State Governments. The major recommendation  was development of 
Movement Monitoring System (MMS). Accordingly, System 
Requirement Specification (SRS) in respect to MMS has been prepared 
which has been  integrated into Depot Online System (DOS) as 
Movement Module." 
Storage capacity for foodgrains 
34. In their Report Audit observed that as per Section 22(4) (e), the Central 
Government shall create and maintain required modern and scientific storage 
facilities at various locations. Further, in terms of obligation of state 
government for Food Security, Section 24(5) (a) of NFS A provides that every 
State Government shall create and maintain required number of modern and 
scientific storage facilities at various levels, being sufficient to accommodate 
foodgrains required under the TPDS, for ensuring uninterrupted supply of 
foodgrains to the entitled beneficiaries, the state would require storage of 
sufficient foodgrains. However, NFSA did not fix any timeline for upgradation 
of storage facilities nor were any instructions issued by the Ministry in this 
regard. 
35. With regard creation and maintenance of suitable and sufficient storage 
facilities for food grains at the Centre and State levels and monitoring 
mechanism in place to ensure compliance, the Ministry stated as under:-  
“In order to augment the storage facilities in the coun try a 
scheme called Private Entrepreneurship Guarantee (PEG) Scheme was 
introduced for non-DCP (Decentralized Procurement Scheme) States in 
2008 and then extended to DCP states in 2010, under which godown to 
be constructed in various states with the help of private parties in Public 
Private Partnership (PPP) mode. As per guidelines issued for the 
scheme, a State level committee (SLC) was required to examine 
storage needs considering procurement and consumption of the 
foodgrains in the state and send recomme ndation to FCI headquarter 
for approval of projects.  
 

The SLC is headed by Secretary (Food) of the state in case of 
DCP state and ED, Zone, FCI in case of non -DCP states with 
representative of the state govt. in the SLC. In consuming states 
capacity upto 4 months requirement could be created. In procuring 
states, the highest stock level of preceding three years was to be 
considered for capacity augmentation. In case of DCP states capacity 
to be created was to be restricted to maximum of 14 months 
requirement and minimum of 4 months requirement.  The High level 
committee (HLC) at FCI headquarter headed by CMD, FCI and has 
representatives from State Governments. Thus, suitable instructions to 
State Governments were already in place at the time of enactment of 
NFSA. Many godowns have already been constructed as per the 
guidelines before enactment of NFSA.  Under this Scheme, storage 
capacity is created by private parties, Central Warehousing Corporation 
(CWC) and State Agencies for guaranteed hiring by FCI. No fu nds are 
given for construction. This scheme is operational in 21 States and a 
capacity of 138.51 lakh MT in the country has been completed as on 
31.07.2017 since inception of the scheme. 
 
In addition, this Department is also implementing a Central 
Sector ( CS) Scheme for construction of godowns with a focus on the 
North Eastern States. Funds are released by the Government to FCI 
and also directly to the State Governments for construction of godowns. 
During 12th Five Year Plan (2012 -17), a capacity of 1,17,68 0 MT in 
North Eastern (NE) States and 20,000 MT in other than NE States has 
been completed by FCI. Further, a capacity of 46,495 MT has been 
created by State Governments. This scheme will be continued for next 
three years (2017 -20). Total 2,52,330 MT capac ity is envisaged to be 
created with a budget outlay of about ` 455.72 Cr during these three 
years. 
 
With a view to modernize storage infrastructure with bulk 
handling of foodgrains, Model Concession Agreement was finalized in 
consultation with NITI Aayog a nd Department of Economic Affairs and 
issued to FCI in September, 2014, for floating of tenders. Further, 
guidelines have been issued in February, 2016, for construction of 100 
LMT silos. HLC has been constituted specifically for silo to consider 
proposal of SLCs. The State Governments  were requested to take up 
construction of silos through letters in February, 2016, followed by video 
conferences and meetings with State Food Secretaries.  Thus, suitable 
instructions have been issued for creation of sufficien t storage 
capacities by Central and State Agencies." 
 
36. With regard to upgradation of existing storage facilities, the Ministry 
informed the Committee as follows:- 
 
“It is informed that routine repairs and upgradation is undertaken 
by FCI & Central Wareh ousing Corporation ( CWC) for their godowns 

regularly. Besides, augmentation of storage facilities in the country is an 
ongoing process and is being implemented by the schemes run by this 
Department viz. PEG Scheme, Central Sector Scheme & construction 
of steel silos. Under PEG Scheme as on 31.07.2017 a total capacity of 
138.51 LMT has been created. While under the Central Sector Scheme 
(Plan Scheme) during 12 th Five Year Plan (2012 -17), a capacity of 
1,17,680 MT in North Eastern (NE) States and 20,000 MT in  other than 
NE States has been completed by FCI. Further, a capacity of 46,495 
MT has been created by State Governments. With regard to action plan 
for construction of steel silos, tenders have been awarded for 38.50 
LMT and 6.25 LMT silos have been constructed so far. 
 
FCI & CWC continuously keep modernizing/upgrading their 
godowns to ensure scientific storage of foodgrains. Godowns of SWCs 
are hired by FCI only when the services offered by them are at par with 
the standards of FCI/CWC. Similarly, new godo wns which are 
constructed through private parties under PEG Scheme are hired by 
FCI only if they meet the specifications of FCI. This ensures that any 
godown hired by FCI for storage of central pool stock meet the required 
standards & specifications for sa fe storage of foodgrains. In so far as 
godowns of State Governments/State Warehousing Corporation 
(SWCs)/State Agencies are concerned they are the primary 
responsibility of State Governments. 
 
The year wise details of godowns upgraded/improved by FCI 
and CWC are given below: 
 
Year No. of godowns  
improved/upgraded 
Capacity of these 
godowns       (in LMT) 
Amount spent ( in Rs Cr) 
FCI CWC Total FCI CWC Total FCI CWC Total 
2013-14 100 - 100 31.00 - 31.00 153.17 - 153.17 
2014-15 21 - 21 9.14 - 9.14 181.90 - 181.90 
2015-16 53 23 76 10.98 5.27 16.25 256.95 40.00 296.95 
2016-17 41 16 57 6.60 3.85 10.45 232.26 38.50 270.76 
2017-18 
(as on 
31.08.2017
) 
6 12 18 2.50 1.80 4.30 11.30 20.00 31.30 
 
Shortfall in storage capacity with FCI for the Central Pool Stock 
37. Audit also observed that with the increasing foodgrains stock in the 
central pool held by FCI and State Government Agencies {excluding 
foodgrains procured by Decentralized procurement (DCP) states}, there was 
shortfall in the storage capacity with the FC I in the range of 9 to 35 per cent 
during the years 2010 -2014 except in the year 2015, in which the stock of 
foodgrains in the central pool was less due to increase in procurement by DCP 

states and less foodgrains in the central pool. Moreover, physical ve rification 
of FPS and godowns in the test checked States, revealed shortfalls like 
inadequate storage capacity, storage of foodgrains in damp condition and in 
open area, damage godowns and construction of godowns in remote location 
rendering it unfit for use, incomplete construction of godowns etc. 
C. REFORMS IN THE TARGETED PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM 
(TPDS) 
38. The Committee learnt that as per Section 12 of NFSA, the Central and 
State Governments shall endeavour progressively to undertake necessary 
reforms in the TPDS. The areas of reforms identified included doorstep 
delivery of foodgrains to the TPDS outlets for ensuring supply to entitled 
persons, application of information and communication technology tools 
including end-to-end computerization in order to ensure transparent recording 
of transactions at all levels and to prevent diversion and ensuring full 
transparency. 
Doorstep Delivery Of Foodgrains  
39. Through the Audit Report the Committee noted that a s per Section 24 
(2) of NFSA, it shall be the duty of the State Government to: 
• Take delivery of foodgrains from the designated depots of the 
Central Government in the State, at the prices specified in 
Schedule I of NFSA;  
• Organise intra -state allocations for delivery of the allocated 
foodgrains through their authorised agencies at the doorstep of 
each fair price shop; and  
• Ensure actual delivery or supply of the foodgrains to the 
entitled persons.  
Further, as per Clause 7(12) of TPDS (Control) Order 2015, the 
State Government shall furnish a report  regarding doorstep delivery on 
quarterly basis to the Central Government. The Ministry based on the 
information obtained prior to the notification of TPDS (C) Order 2015 
informed that it had received reports from 27 states/UTs only. Further, 
an online sys tem for getting information has been introduced since 
September 2015. 
 
40. Audit however brought out that in the test checked States/UTs, some 
States had not taken up doorstep delivery, in cases where doorstep delivery 
was implemented, there were inconsist encies in reports generated through e -
PDS and reports obtained from the offices of the District Managers, weak 
implementation of door -to-door due to software problem of the system 
integrator, absence of real-time monitoring of movement of foodgrains with the 
help of GPS enabled devices and load sensors, transportation of foodgrains 
by the FPS dealers from the godowns even though transportation of 
foodgrains was to be done by the State Government, engagement of 

contractors for door -to-door delivery of foodgr ains etc. It was also found that 
computerization of TPDS operations was at different stages of implementation 
in the States/UTs. Cases of unavailability of required computer application and 
hardware were found to be the limiting factors in some of the sele cted States/ 
UTs. Digitized data of beneficiaries was not uploaded on the States/UTs 
portal. Doorstep delivery of foodgrains was found to be implemented in Uttar 
Pradesh on only pilot basis. In Himachal Pradesh and Karnataka, doorstep 
delivery was being do ne by FPS dealers themselves and not by the State 
Governments. With regard to the status on doorstep delivery, the Ministry 
instituted an online system of monitoring only in September 2015. 
 
 
41. When enquired on the latest status on the implementation of door to 
door delivery food grains, the Ministry in a written replies stated as under:- 
“Under NFSA, the issue price for allocation of foodgrains to 
States/UTs and the final issue price to be charged from beneficiaries 
are the same.  Therefore, any expendit ure incurred in the distribution of 
foodgrains through FPSs including on its transportation upto FPSs 
cannot be charged from beneficiaries.  Accordingly, the provision of 
door step delivery has been made under the Act, so that FPS dealers 
are not required to incur the expenditure on transportation. 
 
As per certificate of preparedness furnished by the State 
Governments before implementing NFSA, the door step delivery upto 
the fair price shops is being implemented in all the States/UTs.  It is 
being done eith er by the concerned State Government Department or 
their authorized Agencies after lifting the foodgrains from the FCI 
Depots. In a few cases where foodgrains are lifted by the Fair Price 
Shop Dealers, the State Government reimburses the expenditure to 
them.  The requirement of door step delivery is met as long as FPS 
dealers are not made to bear the expenditure for transporting the 
foodgrains upto their shops. 
 
As regards, the expenditure incurred on intra -State 
transportation and FPS dealers’ margin, the Act provides for Central 
assistance to States/UTs for meeting this expenditure.  Accordingly, 
The Food Security (Assistance to State Governments) Rules, 2015 has 
been notified under NFSA prescribing norms of Central assistance and 
pattern of Central sharing.” 
 
End-to-End Computerization of TPDS 
 
42. The Committee found that t he Ministry had launched in December, 
2012 a plan scheme on ‘end -to-end Computerization of TPDS’ for 
implementation during 12th five year plan period. The Scheme had two 
components; Component I comprised digitization of ration cards/beneficiaries 
and other database, computerization of supply chain management, setting up 
of transparency portal and grievance redressal mechanism and Component II 
included FPS automation which involved instal lation of Point of Sale (PoS) 

devices at FPS for authentication of beneficiaries, recording of sales to 
beneficiaries at the FPS and uploading of transaction data in central server. 
Central Government issued directions in July 2014 that States/UTs intendin g 
to implement NFSA will be required to certify completion of component I of the 
end to end Computerisation. Central Government approved ` 884.07 crore out 
of which Government of India share was ` 489.37 crore and States/UTs share 
was ` 394.70 crore. The t imelines stipulated for implementation of digitization 
of beneficiaries and other database and computerization of supply chain 
management were March 2013 and October 2013 respectively. 
43. In the test checked States Audit found delay in releasing of funds,  
under utilization of fund, digitization of ration cards without allocating ration 
card number, incomplete implementation of online supply chain management, 
non-availability of electronic equipments for implementation of 
computerization, incomplete digitiz ation of details of beneficiaries, delay in 
development of modules for digitization of ration cards and real -time reporting 
of the movement of grains, activities of computerization of TPDS operation not 
implemented, limited cover of computerization activities etc. 
 
44. In regard to the status of end -to-end computerization of beneficiary 
data, the Ministry informed the Committee as under:- 
“Under the end -to-end computerization scheme, there is 
emphasis on complete digitization of beneficiary data along with other 
essential parameters like online allocation of foodgrains, 
computerization of supply chain management, Aadhaar Seeding, 
installation of e-PoS (electronic point of sale) devices etc.  This scheme 
is being implemented by the Department in close coordin ation with all 
the States/UTs and every aspect is being monitored by the Department. 
 
Considerable progress has been made under the scheme, as 
can be seen from the table below: 
 
Computerization of TPDS has brought transparency in its 
implementation and facilitated online monitoring.  As can be seen from 
the table above, ration cards have been completely digitized in all the 
States/UTs and Aadhaar seeding in the ration cards data is about 80 %. 
In the run upto implementation of NFSA, 2.48 crore ration cards have 
been deleted due to detection  of 
ghost/fraudulent/duplicate/ineligible/migration/death etc. This has 
Sl.
No. 
Component No. of States/UTs 
As on 
30.04.2014 
As on 
03.10.2017 
1 Complete digitization of beneficiary data base 15 36 
2 Online allocation of foodgrains 6 30 
3 Online grievance redressal facility/Toll free No. 27 36 
4 Automation of supply chain 4 20 
5 PoS installation (No. of fair price shops) 4,368 2,74,834 

resulted in better targeting of fund subsidy amounting to ` 15,300/- 
crore annually. 
 
One of the components of the scheme is computerization of 
supply chain, under which entire movement of foodgrains from the 
designated depots of the FCI in the State upto the fair price shop can 
be tracked online.  This has been implemented in 20 States/ UTs and 
remaining are at different stages of implementation. 
 
45. When asked whether the Ministry have real time data on procurement 
and distribution of foodgrains, the Ministry through written replies informed:- 
 
“Real time data on procurement of foodgrai ns in different States 
is maintained by Food Corporation of India and is available in the 
Department. The data of distribution of foodgrains is provided by the 
States/UTs to the FCI on monthly basis. The distribution data on real 
time basis in respect of t hose FPSs where ePoS devices have been 
installed, is available in State PDS Portal.  A software named Ann 
Vitran has been developed by NIC in this regard, which is being tested 
at present.” 
 
46. When asked as to what steps have been taken by the Ministry t o 
remove the bottlenecks in computerization of TPDS operations in all 
States/UTs for efficient implementation of NFSA, the Ministry stated as under:- 
 
“The scheme of computerization of TPDS is being executed 
through States/UTs and the Central Government provides technical and 
financial assistance.  Progress of the scheme varies across States/UTs 
depending upto initiatives taken by the State Governments.  As far as 
Central Government is concerned, this Department is making vigorous 
efforts through constant m onitoring of the project through meetings, 
Video Conferences, visits, letters and advisories with States/UTs to 
review their progress/problems being faced etc. Any technical issue 
raised by States/UTs are resolved on priority by National Informatics 
Centre (NIC).  Further, best practices adopted by good performing 
States were shared with other States/UTs in the conferences held on 
23.11.2015, 16 th-17th September, 2016 and 19.01.2017. A special 
workshop was organized for NE states in Guwahati on 18 th-19th 
November, 2015 and 03 rd-4th October, 2016.  As a result of regular 
persuasion and monitoring, there has been significant progress under 
the scheme, as can be seen from the table at Annexure-2.” 
 
47. During oral evidence, noting that though the Government of India gives 
90 per cent of the subsidy, some State Government s are projecting it as its 
own project , the Committee desired to be apprised of any guidelines and 
action taken by the Ministry in this regard, the representatives of the Ministry 
during evidence stated:- 
 

“There is no name given except that it is under NFSA. Our Hon. 
Minister has also written to all the States that in every FPS, they should 
display the share of the Central Government in food grains. We are also 
trying to do that through social media and through some advertisements 
of and on.” 
 
D. GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL AND MONITORING MECHANISM  
 
48. The Committee found through Audit Report found that As per NFSA, 
the following system has been evolved to monitor and redress grievances.  
 
i) As per Sectio n 14 of the NFSA, every State Government shall 
put in place an internal grievance redressal mechanism which 
may include toll free call centres, State web portal, help lines, 
designation of nodal officers or such other mechanism as may 
be prescribed.  
 
ii) As p er Section 15 of the NFSA, the State Government shall 
appoint or designate an officer to be District Grievance 
Redressal Officer (DGRO) for each district for expeditious and 
effective redressal of grievances of the aggrieved persons in 
matters relating to distribution of entitled foodgrains under TPDS 
and prescribe the qualification, power, terms and conditions of 
the office of the DGROs.  
 
iii)  As per Section 16 of NFSA, for the purpose of monitoring and 
review of implementation of NFSA, every State shall , by 
notification, constitute a State Food Commission (SFC). Further 
as per sub -Clause 8 under Clause 11 of TPDS (Control) Order, 
2015 an appeal against the order of the DGRO shall be preferred 
before the SFC constituted under NFSA. 
 
49. When asked as to w hat mechanism have been introduced by the 
Ministry to ensure that States comply with the provisions of NFSA regarding 
grievances redressal mechanism and Vigilance Committees at various levels , 
the Ministry stated as under:- 
 
“Under NFSA, the States/UTs are  responsible for effective 
implementation of the Act, which inter -alia includes identification of 
eligible households, issuing ration cards to them, distribution of 
foodgrains entitlements to eligible households through Fair P rice Shops 
(FPS), setting up e ffective grievance redressal mechanism, and 
necessary strengthening of Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) 
including its end-to-end computerization. Implementation of the Act was 
reviewed on regular basis through official communications, meetings 
with States/UTs at various levels and advisories were issued, wherever 
necessary.  The States/UTs were asked to confirm and send report 
about the status of implementation action taken by them on each issue. 

Recently meetings were taken by Secretary (F&PD) wi th Food 
Secretaries of all States/UTs on 25.07.2017, 17.08.2017 and 
31.08.2017 (video conferencing) to review the status of implementation 
of provisions of the Act pertaining to appointment of District Grievance 
Redressal Officer, constitution of State Foo d Commission, putting in 
place grievance redressal mechanism, etc.  All these aspects are being 
monitored by the Department on regular basis.  The Hon’ble Supreme 
Court is also monitoring these issues in WP(C) No.857 of 2015 – 
Swaraj Abhiyan Vs. UoI and others. 
 
Most of the States/UTs have taken steps in this direction to 
implement various provisions of the Act.” 
 
50. State-wise position of Internal Grievance Redressal, appointment of 
District Grievance Redressal Officers (DGROs) and constitution of State F ood 
Commission in the test checked States/UTs indicated varied levels of 
preparedness in implementing the provision of NFSA is given below:- 
 
State  Internal Grievance 
Redressal 
District Grievance 
Redressal Officers  
State Food 
Commission 
Assam The State 
Government 
reported about 
launching of toll 
free numbers. 
However, the 
numbers were not 
found to be active. 
Similarly online 
registration of 
complaint and SMS 
alerts were not 
found to be active. 
The State 
Government 
designated the 
Additional Deputy 
Commissioners 
(Development) of 
the districts as 
DGROs in February 
2014 for all districts 
of the State. 
However, the 
qualification, power, 
terms and conditions 
of the office of the 
DGROs and 
allowances had not 
been prescribed in 
the notification. 
The State 
Government 
designated 
(February 2014) 
the Assam State 
Woman 
Commission as 
SFC as an interim 
measure and a 
regular SFC was 
yet to be 
constituted as of 
June 2015. 
Bihar Toll Free number 
has been 
operationalized for 
registering 
complaints. 
However, the 
details of 
complaints received 
and addressed 
were not made 
Additional District 
Magistrates (ADMs) 
were designated as 
DGRO (February 
2014).Posts of its 
support staff were 
created in April 
2015. 
The State 
Government 
constituted State 
Food Commission 
in January 2014. 
However, it was 
not functioning as 
posts of its 
support staffs 
were created in 

available to audit. 
SMS facility was 
not started. 
Appointment of 
nodal officer was 
notified but no work 
was observed to 
have been done 
April 2015. 
Chhattisgarh Internal Grievance 
redressal 
mechanism was in 
existence. During 
the period 2010 -11 
to 2014 -15, the 
State Government 
received 7170 
complaints out of 
which 1218 
complaints were 
pending for three 
months to five 
years. 
The State Govt. 
designated Collector 
of every district as a 
DGRO. However, 
the rules and 
regulations 
regarding 
functioning of DGRO 
were not notified 
The State 
Government 
designated the 
Chhattisgarh 
State Consumer 
Dispute Redressal 
Commission to 
exercise the 
powers and 
perform the 
functions of the 
State Food 
Commission. 
However, the 
appointment of 
members of the 
State Food 
Commission was 
not done (June 
2015). 
Delhi Toll Free number 
has been 
operationalized for 
registering 
complaints 
In one of the two test 
checked districts, 
District Grievance 
Redressal Officer 
was n ot appointed 
till June 2015. 
The State 
Government 
designated (July 
2013) Public 
Grievance 
Commission 
(PGC) as State 
Food Commission 
as an interim 
measure. Regular 
SFC was yet to be 
constituted as of 
June 2015. 
However, no work 
related to 
functioning of 
State Food 
Commission was 
observed to have 

been done in the 
state. 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
Toll Free numbers 
have been 
operationalized for 
registering 
complaints 
The State Govt. had 
appointed a DGRO 
in each district. 
SFC had not been 
constituted in the 
State as of 
October 2015. 
Jharkhand Toll Free number 
has been 
operationalized for 
registering 
complaints. Facility 
to lodge complaint 
was available in 
portal with auto 
escalation of 
grievances. 
The State 
Government 
nominated 
Additional Collector 
of the district as 
District Grievance 
Redressal Officer in 
May 2015 but no 
work related to 
grievance redressal 
was observed in 
district and block 
levels in the sample 
districts. 
State Food 
Commission was 
not constituted in 
the State as of 
July 2015. 
Karnataka Toll Free number  
has been 
operationalized for 
registering 
complaints 
DGROs have not 
been appointed by 
the State. 
The State 
Government 
constituted (May 
2014) an SFC. 
However, no work 
related to 
functioning of 
State Food 
Commission was 
observed to have 
been done in the 
State. 
Maharashtra Toll Free number 
has been 
operationalized for 
registering 
complaints 
Toll Free number 
has been 
operationalized for 
registering 
complaints 
The State 
Government 
decided (January 
2014) to establish 
a committee 
headed by 
Secretary, Food, 
Civil Supply and 
Consumer 
Protection 
Department. 
Uttar 
Pradesh 
Toll Free number 
has been 
operationalized for 
Appointment of 
DGRO was yet to be 
made. 
State Food 
Commission was 
not constituted as 

registering 
complaints. 
However, 
unresolved 
complaints were 
not escalated to 
higher authority for 
redressal. 
of May 2015. 
 
Vigilance Committees  
 
51. The Committee found that in their Report, Audit observed that a s per 
Section 29(1) of the NFSA, for ensuring transparency and proper functioning 
of the TPDS and accountabil ity of the functionaries in such system, every 
State Government was to set up Vigilance Committees (VCs) at the State, 
District, Block and FPS levels. Further, this has also been mentioned in Sub -
clause (6) under Clause 11 of TPDS (Control) Order 2015. The  State 
Governments had to send a report annually to the Central Government on the 
functioning of vigilance committees. 
 
52. It was also found that no State Government out of the test checked 
States, had submitted annual reports to the Ministry under the af oresaid 
Control Order. It was also noted that Ministry issued online formats to States 
for submission in September 2015 only. Ministry stated the information from 
most of the States/UTs on functioning of vigilance committees was awaited in 
the prescribed f ormat under the TPDS (Control) Order, 2015.  State-wise 
position of the test checked States on the status of Vigilance Committee is 
given below:- 
 
State Status of Vigilance Committees  
Assam The State Government has constituted State level vigilance 
committee and vigilance and monitoring committee at district/ 
block and circle level in August 2014. However details of 
irregularities detected and observations made by the 
vigilance committees were not found on records in the test 
checked districts. 
Bihar Records showed that State level vigilance committee was 
constituted and only one meeting was held up to March 2015. 
In test checked districts, district level VC was constituted only 
in Muzaffarpur district and in two blocks, but no meeting was 
held. The VC was not constituted in any panchayat/ward level 
in all test checked blocks. 
Chhattisgarh Though the order for constitution of VC was issued, records 
relating to minutes of meetings of the VC were not found 
maintained. 
Delhi State level Vigilance Committee w as not set up and two 
committees constituted at the district level were found to be 
non-functional. 

Himachal 
Pradesh 
Vigilance Committees at the State level and in all the 12 
districts of the State were formed. No meeting of VC was, 
however, convened at t he State level between September 
2013 and March 2015. However, such committees in 77 
blocks as per the norms of NFSA had not been constituted as 
of June 2015. 
Jharkhand District level Vigilance Committee was formed in Giridih 
district only and in only 18 out of 49 Block level Vigilance 
Committees were formed. 
Karnataka Set up in 14 out of 30 districts. However, copy of the minutes 
of meetings was not furnished to audit and hence their 
effectiveness in discharging the duties could not be verified in 
audit. 
Maharashtra State level committee was set up but only two state -level 
meetings of Vigilance Committee were conducted during 
2013-15. 
Uttar Pradesh Vigilance committees were not set up at any level. 
 
53. When enquired as to what monitoring mechanism is in place to ensure 
periodical reporting by the States and action taken against the States for non -
submission of quarterly reports, the Ministry stated as under:- 
 
“Under TPDS (Control) Order, 2015 quarterly reports are 
required to be sent by States/UTs to DFPD.  These reports are 
compiled and updated from time to time and used for the purpose of 
monitoring PDS and for facilitating policy framing etc. Reminders are 
sent to State/UT Governments from time to time for seeking this 
information. States/UTs are al so requested through advisories to 
provide timely information in this regard. 
 
It is pertinent to mention that NFSA is being implemented under 
the joint responsibility of the Centre and States/UTs and the 
responsibilities of both have been defined under th e Act.  It is expected 
that the States will also fulfill their responsibility under the Act while 
implementing it. In a federal structure, it is not possible to initiate any 
coercive action against State Governments. 
 
The solution lies in use of technology in monitoring and to ensure 
accountability and transparency.  In this regard, Government is 
implementing a scheme of TPDS computerization in close coordination 
with States/UTs and regularly monitoring the progress of the scheme 
for its early completion.  The scheme covers essential parameters like 
digitization of beneficiary data base along with Aadhaar seeding, online 
allocation of foodgrains, computerization of supply chain management, 
online grievance redressal facility and installation of e -PoS devices at 
fair price shops for authentication of beneficiaries and electronic 
capturing of transactions.” 
 

54. In their report Audit found that the grievance redressal system was 
constituted in most of the States, albeit not till the last tier. Though, six out o f 
nine selected States/UTs were found to have put in place the grievance 
redressal mechanism, these were not fully functional. Audit further highlighted 
that Vigilance committees were found to be constituted only at few 
districts/blocks in the selected Sta tes/UTs. Further, due to non -availability of 
information on grievance redressal mechanism and vigilance committees, the 
Ministry was not in position to monitor the implementation of the same in all 
the States/UTs. Audit found that m onitoring done by the St ates was not 
satisfactory as either there were no inspections or less than targeted 
inspections. 
 
55. When inquired about the constitution of independent State Food 
Commission and appointment of independent District Grievance Redressal 
Officers (DGROs), the Ministry through written note informed as under:- 
 
“As per Section 16 of NFSA, every State Government shall, by 
notification, Constitute a State Food Commission (SFC) for the purpose 
of monitoring and review of implementation of this Act.  Further, Secti on 
18 of the Act provides that the State Government may designate any 
statutory commission or body to exercise the powers and perform the 
functions of SFC.  
 
In pursuance of the above provisions of NFSA, all the State 
Governments/ UTs, except Himachal Prad esh, Tamil Nadu and West 
Bengal have either constituted independent SFCs or designated any 
other statutory Commission to exercise the powers and perform the 
functions of SFC for the purpose of monitoring and reviewing the 
provisions of NFSA.  
 
In the Writ Petition (Civil) 857 of 2015 Swaraj Abhiyan Vs UoI & 
Ors by States/UTs pertaining to National Food Security Act, 2013 
(NFSA), the Hon’ble Supreme Court, vide their Orders dated 1.12.2016 
and 21.7.2017 has directed that the SFC, whether independently 
constituted by a State Government or some other body designated to 
act as State Food Commission, must meet the requirements of Section 
16 of NFSA. The Supreme Court has also directed the State 
Governments and Union Territories to constitute, establish and make 
fully functional a State Food Commission under the provisions of the 
NFS Act before the end of the year. The directions also mention that it 
would not be appropriate to appoint another Commission or Body to 
function as SFC unless it is absolutely necessary and completely 
unavoidable and only as a last resort. 
 
In the light of the directions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court, 
several States/UTs who had designated an existing Commission/ 
Forum to act as SFC, are in the process of appointing an independent 
SFC or ar e in the process of finding an alternative mechanism. The 
State Governments of Himachal Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal 

have also informed that they are in the process of constituting an 
independent SFC.” 
 
 
56. During oral evidence, the representatives of the Ministry submitted:- 
 
“In 16 States, an independent State Food Commission has been 
constituted. They are Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, 
Haryana, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, 
Meghalaya, Odisha, Punjab, Telangana,  Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand 
and Andaman and Nicobar Islands. Setting up an independent SFC is 
in the process in West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, 
Rajasthan and Sikkim. Sir, two small UTs, Dadra and Nagar Haveli and 
Daman and Diu, have constituted the Food Commissions but they have 
constituted it under the Food Secretary. We have advised them to make 
it independent. It should not be under the Food Secretary. There are 12 
States in which currently some other Commission has been designated 
as State Food Commission. These are mainly smaller States, namely, 
Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Delhi, Goa, J&K, Manipur, Mizoram, 
Nagaland, Tripura, Lakshadweep, Chandigarh and Puducherry.  North-
Eastern States have slight issues in the sense that since they are  very 
small States, they are consulting their own Legal Departments as to 
whether adding some member could serve the purpose. Then, as the 
Supreme Court said, as a last resort, you can designate the existing 
Commission also. So we will be submitting that to the Supreme Court.” 
 
57. Pointing out that Deputy Commissioners and Additional Deputy 
Commissioners also act as District Grievance Redressal Officers (DGROs) in 
some States, the Committee expressed the need to maintain the independent 
functioning of Dist rict Grievance Redressal Officers (DGROs). In this regard, 
the representatives of the Ministry during evidence stated:- 
 
“The Act says that the DGROs are to be either appointed or 
designated by the State Government.  But the Supreme Court has 
clarified on this that the officer to be designated as the DGROs should 
be independent of a person against whom complaints can be made or 
he should not be subordinate to him.  Our understanding is that the 
Deputy Commissioners or the ADMs, who are looking after 
Administration or work other than civil supplies, are independent of civil 
supplies; and it has been made abundantly clear to all the State 
Governments that if any officer has been designated as DGRO, it 
should be changed immediately.  We have been told that the DCs are 
not involved in the day to day functioning of BDS in the State. About the 
overall functioning, the DCs look after everything.  But they are not the 
licensing authority.  They are not the disciplinary authority” 
 
 
 

Monitoring by the States  
 
58. In their Report Audit pointed out that as per Clause 8 of the TPDS 
(Control) Order, 2001 read with paragraph 6 of the annexure, the State 
Governments shall ensure regular inspections of fair price shops not less than 
once in six months by the designated autho rity. State Governments may issue 
orders specifying the inspection schedule, list of check points and the authority 
responsible for ensuring compliance with the said orders. 
 
Role of the Ministry 
 
59. The Committee note that under Clause 11 of TPDS (Contro l) Order, 
2015, the Ministry monitored the grievance redressal mechanism by requiring 
the States/UTs to report at the end of each quarter the number of 
unsettled/outstanding grievances at the level of call centres, State portal and 
DGRO. A test checks of r ecords at the level of the Ministry it was observed 
that no State/ UT submitted quarterly report to the Ministry under aforesaid 
Control Order. It was also noted that Ministry had initiated online formats to be 
furnished by the States only in September 201 5. Ministry stated that 
information related to handling of grievance redressal mechanism had been 
received from 4 State/UTs and remaining states were yet to submit the same. 
 
60. When asked about the present position in regard to  receiving of 
information r elated to handling of grievance redressal mechanism from the 
States/UTs and the progress made in this regard, the Ministry intimated as 
under:- 
 
“The Department has been continuously interacting with 
States/UTs for ensuring implementation of various provis ions of NFSA, 
including putting in place the Grievance Redressal Mechanism as 
envisaged in Chapter VII of the Act before the Department starts 
allocation of foodgrains as per entitlements under NFSA.  
 
The matter is also being reviewed by Hon’ble Supreme C ourt in 
the Writ Petition (Civil) 857 of 2015 Swaraj Abhiyan Vs UoI & Ors by 
States/UTs pertaining to National Food Security Act, 2013 (NFSA). As 
directed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in its Order dated 21.7.2017, 
two meetings and a video conference were h eld under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary, F&PD with the States/UTs on 25.07.2017, 
17.08.2017 and 31.08.2017. In these meetings, the States/UTs who 
had not implemented the provisions of NFSA pertaining to putting in 
place Grievance Redressal Mechanism includ ing appointment of 
District Grievance Redressal Officer, constitution of State Food 
Commission, constitution of Vigilance Committees at four levels, etc. 
were asked to take immediate action to comply with the provisions of 
the Act, keeping in view the dire ctions of Hon’ble Supreme Court. They 
were asked to make sure that provisions of the Act pertaining to 
grievance redressal should be implemented at the earliest and in any 
case, before the end of this year as per directions of the Apex Court. 
 

As per infor mation available, all the States/UTs have appointed 
District Grievance Redressal Officer (DGRO) as per provisions of 
Section 15 of NFSA for expeditious and effective redressal of 
grievances in matters relating to distribution of entitled foodgrains or 
meals under the Act. It has been ensured that such officers have no link 
with the distribution of entitlements under the Act.  
 
All the State Governments/ UTs, except Himachal Pradesh, 
Tamil Nadu and West Bengal have either constituted independent 
SFCs or desi gnated any other statutory Commission to exercise the 
powers and perform the functions of SFC for the purpose of monitoring 
and reviewing the provisions of NFSA. The State Governments of 
Himachal Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal have also informed 
that they are in the process of constituting an independent SFC. 
 
Further, under End -to-end Computerisation Scheme, all the 
States/UTs have established Transparency Portal and also have 
functional Toll Free Helplines. All the States/UTs, except Arunachal 
Pradesh have put in place software for online redressal of grievances 
under NFSA. 
 
The matter is being regularly reviewed by the Department for 
time bound implementation of provisions of the Act by all the 
States/UTs keeping in view directions of Hon’ble Supreme Court.” 
 
 

PART II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
IDENTIFICATION OF BENEFICIARIES UNDER THE NFSA 
1. The current examination of the Committee is based the Report of 
Comptroller & Auditor General of India, which has scrutinised the 
National Food Security Act,  2013 (NFSA). After gleaning through the 
material and information available with the Committee as well as the 
evidence tendered before them, the Committee’s recommendations/ 
observations are reproduced in the succeeding Paras. 
    
 In regard to the non -identification and delay in identification of 
beneficiaries of NFSA, 2013, the Committee note that the reasons as 
given to them were non-availability of complete data, time taken to 
conduct survey/verification, completion of requisite preparatory 
activities f or implementation of NFSA, formation of new State (in the 
case of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana), imposition of Model Code of 
Conduct due to General Elections, etc. The Committee find the reply of 
the Ministry untenable  as the Committee observe that Section 10 of the 
Act enjoins upon  the State Governments to identify the eligible 
households to be covered under Antyodaya Anna Yojana (AAY) in 
accordance with guidelines applicable to the scheme and the remaining 
households as priority households in accordance w ith such guidelines 
to be specified by the State Government. The Committee are of the view 
that since the beneficiary data of AAY, a Government of India sponsored 
scheme to provide highly subsidized food to millions of the poorest 
families, which was under  implementation since December, 2000, is 
readily available with the Min istry and the State Governments, non-
identification of beneficiaries is not acceptable  as a bona fide reason for 
the inordinate delay . The Committee have every reason to believe that 
identification and registration of eligible beneficiaries under the NFSA 
ought to have been completed efficiently within the stipulated time of 
365 days from the commencement of the Act. They are astonished to 
note that a majority of the States/UTs had not adhered to the deadline for 
identification of beneficiaries and a number of States had included 
existing AAY households under the NFSA without carrying out any fresh 
exercise for identification of AAY households under the Act. The 
Committee are disheartened  to see the non -committal attitude of the 
State Governments/UTs which goes not only against the spirit of the Act 
but also against the residents of their own respective States. The 
Committee feel that it is evident that there existed conspicuous lack of a 
systematic planning, coordination and integration of data in the 
implementation of NFSA. The Committee, at this delayed stage, cannot 
but recommend that punitive action should be taken against the erring 
officials at all levels who were responsible for the  lapses that hindered 
efficient and timely implementation of the Act. The Committee desire that 
they be kept abreast with all developments that ensue on this 
recommendation. 

2. The Committee note that the initial timeline for identification of the 
eligible households under the Act was within one year, i.e., upto 4 th July, 
2014.  However, they are disconcerted to note that after a prolonged 
period of more than 3 years, the Act is now being implemented in all 36 
States/UTs covering 80.57 crore beneficiaries o ut of the total estimate of 
81.34 crore , thus bringing the coverage to 99.05%.   In a populous 
country like India, even 1% of the poor and weaker sections translate 
into a big number.  In the opinion of the Committee, the States cannot 
keep such a section deprived of food security which is the very basis of 
this Act.    They, therefore, in unequivocal terms recommend that all -out 
efforts should be made under strict monitoring of the Ministry so as to 
achieve cent per cent coverage of the beneficiaries.   Th en only the true 
objectives of the Act would be accomplished. 
 
3. The Committee, while drawing comparison with the earlier 
Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) with that of NFSA, note that 
against 99.22 crore beneficiaries coverage under TPDS, only a bout 81.34 
crore beneficiaries as per Census 2011 had been covered under NFSA. 
The Committee also note that out of the 99.22 crore beneficiaries under 
TPDS, 63.22 crore were APL beneficiaries. Since coverage of 
beneficiaries under NFSA is more towards redu cing the unintended 
beneficiaries, the Committee impress upon the Department that all out 
effort should be taken towards ensuring rightful targeting of 
beneficiaries and recommend necessary measures to bring all eligible 
beneficiaries of NFSA under TPDS immediately. 
 
IRREGULAR EXTENSION OF TIME FOR IDENTIFICATION OF 
BENEFICIARIES 
4. As brought out in the preceding paragraph, t he Committee find 
that as per  the provisions contained in Section 10 (1) of the NFSA, the 
State Governments were  entrusted with the r esponsibility to identify the 
eligible households within a period of one year from the commencement 
of the NFSA i.e. upto 4 July 2014. However, they note with concern that 
only 11 States/UTs reported completion of this preparatory work within 
the stipulate d one year. The Committee further note  that without any 
enabling provision in the NFSA, the Ministry extended the timeframe in 
June 2014 by three months .   They are pained to witness a scenario 
wherein no State reported completion of identification of the 
beneficiaries during the extended period .  What can be further disquiet 
for the Committee to learn that instead of coming out with any concrete 
solutions for the laxity on the part of States/UTs, the Ministry further 
extended the period for six months twic e and finally giving extension 
upto 30th September, 2015.  When sought clarification for such repeated 
extensions, the Ministry stated that t he issue of extension of time for 
identification of eligible households was examined in consultation with 
Department of Legal Affairs advised that a statutory notification could 

only be issued under Section 42 of the Act to remove the difficulties 
arising in giving effect to the provisions of the Act.  It was also opined by 
the Department of Legal Affairs that the time  for giving extension was a 
purely discretionary power of the executive and, therefore, the 
administrative Ministry may decide on the basis of the circumstances.  
From the reply of the Ministry it is clear that so far as Central 
Government was concerned,  they had no difficulty in implementing the 
legal advice.  
The Committee note with surprise that the Ministry landed itself in 
a dichotomous situation by stating that the main responsibility for 
implementation of the Act l ied with the State Governments and he nce it 
was not considered appropriate to treat this matter under ‘removal of 
difficulties’ under Section 42. Further, such  an action under Section 42 
could only be taken within the time limit of 2 years. The Committee are of 
the firm opinion that had the M inistry put in place a system to ensure 
identification of beneficiaries within the stipulated timeframe of 365 days 
from the commencement of the Act  and instructed each States/UTs to 
strictly comply to the system, the need for extension of time would not 
have arisen per se. The Committee are appalled to note that the Ministry 
had extended the deadline for identification of beneficiaries three times 
without taking effective measures to ensure no further extension of time 
was granted to non-compliant States. It is evident from going through all 
the information submitted to the Committee that the Ministry, had 
instead, surrendered the onus of implementing the Act to the State 
Governments and failed to take necessary measures to ensure that all 
States/UTs adhere to the provision of the Act for timely identification of 
beneficiaries. The Committee, therefore, aver that the Ministry should 
adopt a more pragmatic approach in future in implementing such 
important flagship programmes which affect the life of millions of 
citizens belonging to the weaker sections of the society  and at least now 
ensure effective review, monitoring and vigilance in the implementation 
of the Act.  They also recommend that the Ministry devise a mechanism 
under intimation to the Committee wh ereby propitious conditions are 
created for the smooth and seamless implementation of the Act in all the 
States/UTs.   
PORTABILITY OF RATION CARDS ACROSS DISTRICTS/STATES 
 
5. The Committee note that in the test -checked States of Himachal, 
Karnataka, Mahara shtra a huge number of old, ineligible, bogus and 
ghost ration card holders were found. However, to the utter dismay of 
the Committee rather than cancelling such cards, the State Governments 
revalidated the cards and continued issuance of food -grains.   Th e 
Committee are not contented with the reply of the Ministry that not all 
cards without authentication can be categorized as bogus cards and 
ghost cards. The Committee also treat the assertion of the Ministry that 

the cards without authentication can also arise in the event of migration 
of families from one State/District to another or temporary movement of 
the beneficiary on employment or any other reason from one place to 
another. To plug this portability loophole, efforts are being made to 
ensure portabi lity across all States and the State of Andhra Pradesh 
have achieved portability of ration card so as to ensure that all entitled 
beneficiary are catered to under the NSFA .  The Committee would have 
accepted the version of the Ministry had such authenticat ed cards been 
quantified and a system established for their timely authentification so 
as to include the genuine card holders. 
    
While being appreciative of the efforts of the Ministry to achieve 
portability in all States/Districts, the Committee feel th at necessary prior 
review and validation checks on the questionable ration cards should 
have been done before distribution of ration. 
 
The Committee in no uncertain words recommend that a thorough 
review and revalidation check of all bogus and ghost ration  cards in all 
States/UTs may be carried out in tandem with the efforts of achieving 
ration card portability across Districts/States and aadhaar seeding so as 
to get rid of the problem of bogus ration cards once and for all.  It may 
also be ensured that rig htful targeting of beneficiaries and easy access 
to place of sale for collection of ration are put in place. The Committee 
be apprised about the details of bogus ration cards found during the last 
three years along with the action taken against FPS dealers /State 
Government agencies in the case of diversion of foodgrains to bogus or 
ineligible card holders.  It is needless to point out at this stage that the 
Committee would have been more satisfied had the details of the efforts 
being made to ensure portabil ity across the State been provided to them 
for scrutiny. 
 
ISSUE OF RATION CARDS TO THE ELDEST WOMAN AS HEAD OF 
THE HOUSEHOLD  
 
6. The Committee find that the Ministry had instructed all States/UTs 
to issue ration cards under NFSA to eldest woman as head of household. 
In the proforma of certifying preparedness of the States/U Ts to 
implement NFSA, the Ministry also sought confirmation from the State 
Governments on whether ration cards under NFSA have incorporated 
the provisions relating to empowerment of wome n. The Committee note 
that though all the States/UTs had replied in affirmative, it was found 
from the digitized data of beneficiaries on the Public Distribution System 
(PDS) portal that the said provision has not been complied with by some 
States. However the Committee are informed that the Ministry vide letter 
dated 30.11.2015,  had again requested the States/UTs to review the 
status of implementation and take all requisite measures to ensure that 
the ration cards issued to NFSA beneficiaries specifically show eligible 

female member as head of household. The Ministry had also reiterated 
these instructions in conferences/meetings held with States/UTs at 
various levels.  Notwithstanding the fact the Committee would like to be 
apprised of the action taken by t he Ministry since 30.11.2015 in this 
regard to ensure compliance of the provisions of the Act by the States in 
letter and spirit. The Committee are of the view that non -compliance to 
Section 13 of the Act despite affirmative response for the same by the 
States/UTs, indicate an apparent gap/lacunae and passive attitude 
towards strict adherence to the provisions of the Act by the 
implementing States/UTs. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry should undertake a survey to quantify the data, brin g out the 
implicit and explicit figures, and based on that evaluate actual 
implementation of the provision of the Act. On this issue also, the 
Committee have no option but to recommend that issue should be 
vigorously followed with the States/UTs in order t o put on record 
submission of wrong information to the Ministry and obviously to initiate 
inquiry and mull on fixing the responsibility against the officers on 
whose negligence this predicament was created. 
MATERNITY BENEFITS PROVIDED UNDER NFSA NOT EXTEND ED 
ACROSS THE COUNTRY 
 
7. The Committee note that as per section 4 (b) of NFSA, subject to 
such schemes as may be framed by the Central Government, every 
pregnant woman and lactating mother is  entitled to maternity benefit of 
not less tha n six thousand rupees in such instalments as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government.  The Commitee find that t he 
Ministry of Women and Child Development (MWCD) had been 
implementing Conditional Cash Transfer S cheme, namely, Indira Gandhi 
Matritva Sahyog Yojana (IGMSY),  for Pregnant and Lactating (P&L) 
women, on pilot  project basis in 53 districts across the country since 
October, 2010. The Committee note that after the implementation of 
NFSA, maternity benefit was revised from Rs.4,000 to Rs.6,000 from 5 
July 2013 under the scheme.  
 
However, the Committee are again astonished to note the scheme, 
which was being implemented only in 53 pilot districts as the cost 
sharing pattern between Central Government and State/UT Governments 
was not finalized by Ministry of Finance. The MWCD stated (December, 
2015) that the cost sharing pattern for IGMSY was decided by Ministry of 
Finance in October, 2015 and the MWCD had initiated action for 
obtaining approval of the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs for 
expansion of the IGMSY to all districts of the country.   In this regard, the 
Committee note that the Government had introduced a  Pan-India 

implementation of Pradhan Mantri Matru Vandana Yojana (PMMVY), a 
conditional cash transfer scheme for Pregnant Women & Lactating 
Mothers (PW& LM) with effect from 01.01.2017 and the Scheme 
implementation Guidelines, PMMVY -CAS and its User Manual have also 
been launched by Ministry of Women & Child Development (MWCD) on 
01.09.2017. The Committee, however note that so far only 25 States/UTs 
have o pened dedicated Escrow Account, maintained at State/UT level 
and details of the same intimated to the MWCD and an amount of ` 
880.00 Crore (approx.) has been released to 24 States/UTs.   The 
Committee in this regard emphatically recommend that they be apprised 
of the present status of the expansion of erstwhile IGMSY (since re -
christened as Pradhan Mantri Matru Vandana Yojana)  in all districts of 
the country, especially to note the developments which have taken 
consequently almost after one year since the Co mmittee was last 
apprised.    Noting that maternity benefits envisioned under the NSFA 
have not been implemented in all States/UTs, the Committee recommend 
that the Ministry, in close co -ordination with the Ministry of Women and 
Child Development and conce rned States/UTs should take all tenable 
measures to ensure that maternity benefits are provided to all 
beneficiaries across the country. 
ALLOCATION AND TRANSPORTATION OF FOODGRAINS 
8. The Committee note that requirement of rakes by Food 
Corporation of Indi a (FCI) for transportation of foodgrains and making 
available of the same by the Railways during the years 2010 -11 to 2014-
15 revealed that there was shortfall in the range of 13 per cent to 18 per 
cent in arranging the rakes by the Railways. The Ministry stated that in 
October, 2015 that variation in rakes planned vis -à-vis actual dispatch is 
mainly due to inadequate availability of rakes by the railways and heavy 
traffic and sometimes also due to operational constraints of FCI like non 
availability of vac ant space at recipient depots, less lifting by State 
Governments and increase in procurement in consuming regions etc. 
The Committee also note that an Inter -Ministerial Co -ordination 
Committee with Joint Secretary (P&FCI) Department of Food & Public 
Distribution, Executive Director (T), Food Corporation of India  and 
Executive Director (TTF), Railway Board as members , had been working 
since January 2013 to actively take up the operational issues with 
Railways, however 11111 rakes were dispatched against the plan of 
12486 rakes in 2014 -15. The Committee are concerned to note the 
consistent shortage of rakes for transportation of foodgrains. 
Emphasizing on the need to ensure adequate supply and distribution of 
foodgrains despite shortage of rakes, the Committee  recommend that 
they be apprised whether the Ministry and FCI have put in place a 

system to ensure adequate transportation of foodgrains despite 
shortage in availability of rakes and recommend that a contingency plan 
within a timeframe may be devised and p ut in place to obviate this 
predicament too.  This assumes significance for the reason that in the 
absence of adequate transportation facilities, the real intent of the Act 
would not be achieved and the sufferers would again be the 
beneficiaries.   
PREPARATION OF A NATIONAL FOODGRAINS PROCUREMENT, 
MOVEMENT AND STORAGE PLAN 
 
9. The Committee find that the Ministry (in October, 2012) informed 
the Standing Committee on National Food Security Bill that a National 
Foodgrains Movement Plan to address the road mov ement related 
problem in the North Eastern States, mechanization of FCI godowns to 
reduce rake handling time, priority good sheds for development of basic 
facilities by railways, etc. supply of rakes, levying of demurrage charges 
movement by the Railways, upgradation of infrastructure at unloading 
railway stations was under preparation and a study was entrusted to M/s 
Pricewaterhouse Coopers Pvt. Ltd. by FCI for this purpose. They further 
find that on the recommendation of M/s Price Waterhouse Coopers Pvt. 
Ltd, the Ministry prepared a System Requirement Specification (SRS) in 
respect to Movement Monitoring System ( MMS) and integrated into 
Depot Online System (DOS) as Movement Module.   Despite the above 
development, the Committee note with concern that no spe cific National 
Movement Plan has yet been prepared, rather a monthly movement plan 
is prepared on a regular basis depending on quantity available in surplus 
regions, quantity demanded by deficit regions, likely procurement, 
vacant storage capacity, monthly  allotment/off-take of foodgrains etc. 
The Committee are of the view that while region specific short term plan 
like the monthly plans are necessary, an exhaustive and comprehensive 
plan for the entire country is an inevitable requirement. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should put in place a national 
contingency plan for procurement, movement and storage of foodgrains 
for unforeseen events like natural disasters, destruction of crops, 
droughts, inaccessible regions due to landslides/f loods etc. to ensure 
adequate and timely distribution of foodgrains to all eligible beneficiaries 
even in times of emergency/crisis which includes man -made and natural 
disasters both. 
 
STORAGE CAPACITY FOR FOODGRAINS 
  
10. The Committee note that as per Se ction 22(4) (e), the Central 
Government shall create and maintain required modern and scientific 
storage facilities at various locations. Further, in terms of obligation of 
State Government for Food Security, Section 24(5) (a) of NFSA enjoins 
upon every State Government to create and maintain required number of 
modern and scientific storage facilities .   Such facilities  at various levels 

should be  sufficient to accommodate foodgrains procured under the 
TPDS, for ensuring uninterrupted supply of foodgrains t o the entitled 
beneficiaries.  However, NFSA did not fix any timeline for upgradation of 
storage facilities  and there has been consistent shortage of storage 
capacity from 2011 -2015. To bridge the storage gap the Ministry had 
introduced the Private Entrepr eneurship Guarantee (PEG) Scheme for 
non-DCP (Decentralized Procurement Scheme ) S tates in 2008 and then 
extended to DCP  States in 2010  to augment the storage facilities in the 
country. In addition to the PEG, the Ministry is also implementing a 
Central Sector (CS) Scheme for construction of godowns with a focus on 
the North Eastern States with a budget outlay of Rs. 455.72 crore for 
construction of 2,25,330 MT storage capacity in three years (2017 -2020). 
The Committee, however, find that the DCP Scheme was only operational 
in 21 States and a storage capacity of 138.51 lakh MT has been 
completed around the country as on 31 July, 2017. The Committee also 
note that physical verification of FPS and godowns in the test checked 
States, revealed shortfalls like ina dequate storage capacity, storage of 
foodgrains in damp condition and in open area, damage godowns and 
construction of godowns in remote location rendering it unfit for use, 
incomplete construction of godowns etc. The Com mittee are of the view 
that the Min istry ought to have undertaken a survey to assess the 
requirement for storage and godowns, fixed a target and a timeline for 
completion of construction/upgradation of required storage facilities in 
each States/UTs at the time of introducing the Act. The Committee desire 
to be apprised whether the Ministry along with FCI had undertaken a 
survey to assess the progress of construction and upgradation of 
storage facilities as well as the quality of existing storage facilities 
across the country. The Committee, at this stage, recommend that the 
Ministry and FCI should undertake a survey to assess the requirement of 
storage facilities so as to ensure adequate and quality storage of 
foodgrains in every State/UT. The Committee also recommend that a 
strict timeline b e fixed for completion of storage facilities and also 
ensure completion of construction of storage facilities under the Central 
Sector Scheme within the timeframe under intimation to the Committee. 
 
PILOT PROJECT TO MINIMISE PROCUREMENT, 
TRANSPORTATION AND DISTRIBUTION COST OF FOODGRAINS 
 
11. The Committee note that foodgrains are procured on Minimum 
Support Price (MSP) across the country by Government agencies and 
there is no difference in the procurement price payable to the farmers in 
different States. T he Committee also not that the total cost of 
procurement differs from State to State depending on State’s 
taxes/levies and different rates of expenditure on other items such as 
mandi labour, Arhatiya charges (agricultural produce commission 
agents) and tra nsportation charges. With the intention of ensuring 
maximum benefit to farmers by minimizing the total cost of procurement, 

transportation and distribution of foodgrains, the Committee recommend 
that the Ministry should implement a pilot programme in a Sta te by 
notifying tenders and inviting interested private businesses/players for 
procurement, transportation and distribution of foodgrains at a lower 
cost than that of the Government agencies and apprise the Committee of 
the outcome of the exercise and exte nd such practices to other 
States/UTs too, if found viable and beneficial to the farmers. 
 
END-TO-END COMPUTERISATION OF PDS OPERATIONS 
 
12. The Committee observe that the Ministry, in close coordination 
with the States/UTs, had given emphasis on complete digitization of 
beneficiary data along with other essential parameters like online 
allocation of foodgrains, computerization of supply chain management, 
Aadhaar Seeding, installation of e-Point of Sale (PoS) devices etc.  While 
the Ministry had achieved 10 0% digitization of ration cards and online 
grievance redressal facility with toll free number has been set up in all 36 
States/UTs, the Ministry had fallen short on other parameters like online 
allocation of food -grains, computerization of supply food chai n 
management, Aadhaar seeding, installation of PoS devices etc. The 
Committee also note that one of the component s of the scheme is 
computerization of supply chain, under which entire movement of 
foodgrains from the designated depots of the FCI in the Stat e upto the 
fair price shop can be tracked online.  However , computerization of 
supply chain has been implemented only in 20 States/UTs and is at 
different stages of implementation  in the remaining States/UTs . The 
Committee are of the view that successful a nd efficient implementation 
of NFSA can be guaranteed only after ensuring complete end -to-end 
computerization of all other relevant parameters. Moreover, educating 
the beneficiary of the benefits of digitization and dissemination of 
information regarding t he grievance redressal facility and fair price 
shops in the locality etc. is an important component in ensuring smooth 
and successful implementation of the Act. The Committee, therefore, 
desire to be apprised of the latest status of computerization of the 
supply chain. In this regard, the Committee recommend that the Ministry, 
in close co -ordination with the States/UTs, undertake immediate steps 
for completion of computerization of all other parameters without any 
further delay. The Committee also recommend  that the Ministry impress 
upon all States/UTs to maintain and provide complete and updated 
information in the online monitoring system to facilitate efficient 
implementation of the Act.  Here, it is important to mention that the 
computerized system should be as secured and foolproof as it should be 
to disable the hackers from penetrating into the website and siphoning 
off the data for their benefit as has appeared in the recent news. 
 
 

ADVERTISEMENT AND INFORMATION DISSEMINATION ON THE 
ACT 
 
13. The Committee find that the Central Government is funding 90% of 
the subsidy in the implementation of the NFSA and the State 
Governments are entrusted the responsibility of implementing the Act.  
However, the Committee are surprised to note that State Governments 
have been projecting the schemes under NFSA as their own project.   
The Committee desire that the information on the subsidy share of the 
Central Government should be clearly advertised on each bag of 
foodgrains distributed under the Act and it be ensured tha t the State 
Governments do not project the schemes under NFSA as their own and 
thereby misuse of the Act is avoided. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry issue necessary instructions and 
guidelines to the State Governments in this regard. In this sequel, the 
Committee desire that information boards on the NSFA, price of 
foodgrains, fair price shop dealers etc. be installed at each and every 
Fair Price Shops (FPS). The Committee also recommend that the Ministry 
along with States/UTs should u ndertake an awareness and information 
dissemination campaign to educate the beneficiaries of their rights and 
benefits under the Act by all possible means including print, audio-visual 
aids, especially radio, and social media fora. 
  
INTERNAL GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL 
 
14. The Committee note that as per Section 14 of the NFSA, every 
State Government shall put in place an internal grievance redressal 
mechanism which may include toll free call centres, State web portal, 
help lines, designation of nodal officers or such other mechanism as 
may be prescribed.  The Committee, however, find that in some of the 
test checked States, toll free numbers, online registration of complaints, 
SMS alerts were not found or were inactive, details of complaints 
received and addressed were not made available to Audit, nodal officers 
were not appointed, there was long pendency of unresolved complaints 
and non-escalation of unresolved complaints to higher authority for their  
redressal. Noting the inefficient implementation of the provisi ons of the 
Act despite setting up an Internal Grievance Redressal mechanism by 
the States, the Committee are constrained to observe that the Ministry 
and the State/UTs are not committed to ensuring efficient 
implementation of the provisions of the Act. The  Committee are unable 
to comprehend as to how the Ministry and States could ensure 
transparency and efficiency in the implementation of the Act and fix 
accountability if required on the functionaries without even having a 
robust grievance redressal mechani sm in place. The Committee, in 
unequivocal terms recommend that the Ministry may persuade all 
States/UTs to undertake an internal review of the working of the 
grievance redressal system and ensure its smooth functioning by 

appointing a nodal officer for th e same and initiate necessary action and 
fix responsibility against those officials responsible for pendency of 
unresolved complaints, non -activation of toll free numbers, SMS alerts 
and online registration of complaints.  
 
SETTING UP OF STATE VIGILANCE CO MMITTEE AND TIMELY 
SUBMISSION OF ANNUAL REPORT ON ITS FUNCTIONING 
  
15. The Committee note that to ensure transparency and proper 
functioning of the TPDS and accountability of the functionaries, every 
State Government was to set up Vigilance Committees (VCs) at the State, 
District, Block and FPS levels as per the Sub -clause (6) under Clause 11 
of TPDS (Control) Order 2015. The State Governments had to send a 
report annually to the Central Government on the functioning of 
Vigilance Committees. The Committee,  however find that no State 
Government out of the test checked States, had submitted annual 
reports to the Ministry under the aforesaid Control Order. Moreover, the 
Ministry issued online formats to States for submission  of such reports  
in September 2015 o nly and information from most of the States/UTs on 
functioning of Vigilance Committees as per the prescribed format under 
the TPDS (Control) Order, 2015 is still awaited. In addition, the 
Committee find non -functional VCs, irregular vigilance meetings, non -
maintenance of records etc. even in those States where VCs have been 
constituted. The Committee desire to be apprised of the mechanism put 
in place by the Ministry to ensure timely submission of annual reports on 
the functioning of the Vigilance Committee  and the course of action 
taken against those States/UTs that have not complied to the Control 
orders, 2015. The Committee recommend that the Ministry issue 
necessary instructions to impress upon all States/UTs to urgently set up 
the Vigilance Committee an d submit a report on the functioning of the 
same within three months of presentation of the Report. 
 
CONSTITUTION OF INDEPENDENT STATE FOOD COMMISSION 
 
16. The Committee note that 16 States namely Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, 
Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Jhar khand, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Odisha, Punjab, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh, 
Uttarakhand and Andaman and Nicobar Islands have constituted 
independent State Food Commission. Six States namely West Bengal, 
Tamil Nadu, Himachal Pradesh,  Kerala, Rajasthan and Sikkim are in the 
process of setting up independent State Food Commission s. However, 
two small UTs namely Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu, ha d 
constituted th eir Food Commissions under the charge of Food 
Secretary. The Committee are not oblivious of the fact that the Ministry 
had though instructed the UTs to  constitute independent Food 
Commission. The Committee also note that as per Supreme Court orders 
dated 1.12.2016 and 21.7.2017, the State Governments and Union 
Territories were to constitute, establish and make fully functional a State 

Food Commission under the provisions of the NFS Act before the end of 
the year. The directions also mentioned that it would not be appropriate 
to appoint another Commission or Body to functio n as SFC unless it is 
absolutely necessary and completely unavoidable and recourse to it be 
taken only as a last resort.  The Committee express displeasure on the 
non compliance to the Court Orders and desire that States/UTs 
concerned take immediate action for setting up of an independent Food 
Commission without further delay. The Committee impress upon the 
Ministry to issue necessary directions to the concerned States/UTs and 
ensure establishment of fully functional independent Food Commissions 
in all State s/UTs within 3 months of presentation of their Report in 
Parliament. 
 
INDEPENDENT FUNCTIONING OF DGROS 
 
17. From the scrutiny of the subject, the Committee are unable to 
comprehend the rationale behind the functioning of Deputy 
Commissioners (DC) and Addit ional Deputy Commissioners (ADC) as 
District Grievance Redressal Officers (DGROs) in some Districts. The 
Committee opine that by virtue of designating the DC/ADC as DGRO, 
accountability of the DC, who is the administrative head of the District, 
cannot be ensured and the situations of conflict of interest are bound to 
arise. Independent functioning and the impartiality of the office of DGRO 
in such a scenario is sine qua non and is in the benefit of all 
stakeholders. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the practice of 
DCs/ADCs functioning as DGROs may be discontinued to ensure 
transparency and accountability of all concerned officials. The 
Committee also recommend that the Ministry may take due diligence in 
the appointment of DGROs so as to ensure impart ial and independent 
functioning of DGROs without undergoing into conflicting situations. 
 
CONSTITUTION OF A ROBUST CENTRAL 
VIGILANCE/MONITORING COMMITTEE 
 
18. The Committee note that despite putting in place grievance 
redressal systems and setting up of vi gilance and monitoring 
committees in some States, most of them were non -functional and there 
was little or no information on the grievance redressal mechanism and 
vigilance committees, due to which the Ministry were unable to assess 
and monitor the impleme ntation of the Act in the States/UTs. The 
Committee are disheartened to note the non -committal attitude of the 
States/UTs and its apparatus towards smooth and efficient 
implementation of the Act. Noting the sorry state of affairs of the 
functioning of vigi lance and monitoring committees in the Audit test 
checked States, the Committee desire that National level 
vigilance/monitoring committee consisting of representatives from the 
District level, State level and the Central level, headed by the Central 
representative may be constituted to oversee the functioning of all 

District and State level committees and ensure strict compliance to the 
guidelines of the Act. The Committee recommend that the Ministry 
undertake regular inspections and follow up with respecti ve States/UTs 
by obtaining quarterly reports from the States/UTs to ensure strict 
vigilance and compliance to all guidelines of the Act. The Committee 
also recommend that the vigilance and monitoring committee should 
conduct surprise field inspections to e nsure rightful targeting of 
beneficiaries, distribution of foodgrains at the subsidized rate fixed as 
per the Minimum Support Price (MSP), provision of meals and maternity 
benefit of ` 6,000 per delivery to the pregnant women and lactating 
mothers, provision of meals to children in the age group of 6 months to 
14 years under the Integrated Child Deve lopment Services (ICDS), Mid -
Day Meal (MDM) schemes and issuance of ration cards to the eldest 
woman of the household of 18 years or above as the head of the 
household etc. as envisioned in the NSFA.  
  
 In summation, the Food Security Act is not only a vox populi but 
the need of the hour to build a strong a responsible nation.  The 
Committee as such desire that their recommendations be taken in a true 
spirit and  action taken notes be furnished within the stipulated 
timeframe.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Annexure-1 
 
 

 
 
 
 

Annexure 2 
Status of End-to-End Computerization of PDS Operations 
(as on 19.09.2017) 
 
Sl. States/UTs 
Digitiza
tion    
of 
Ration 
Cards 
Aadha
ar 
Seedin
g in 
RCs 
Online 
Allocation of 
Foodgrains 
Computeriza
tion 
of Supply 
Chain 
Management 
Trans
parenc
y 
Portal 
Online 
Grievance 
Redressal 
Toll 
Free 
Helpli
ne 
Numbe
rs 
Total No. 
of Fair 
Price 
Shops 
No. of 
FPSs with 
operation
al e-PoS 
1 Andhra 
Pradesh  100% 100% Implemente
d 
Implemente
d Yes Yes Yes 28,663 28,663 
2 A & N 
Islands  100% 100% Implemente
d 
Implemente
d Yes Yes Yes 482 373 
3 Arunachal 
Pradesh 100% 45% - - Yes - Yes 1,731 0 
4 Assam 100% 0% Implemente
d - Yes Yes Yes 38,769 0 
5 Bihar 100% 78% Implemente
d 
Implemente
d Yes Yes Yes 41,483 59 
6 Chandigarh 100% 100% NA NA Yes Yes Yes 0 0 
7 Chhattisgarh 100% 99% Implemente
d 
Implemente
d Yes Yes Yes 12,324 11,928 
8 D & N 
Haveli 100% 97% Implemente
d 
Implemente
d Yes Yes Yes 62 62 
9 Daman & 
Diu 100% 100% Implemente
d 
Implemente
d Yes Yes Yes 51 51 
10 Delhi 100% 100% Implemente
d 
Implemente
d Yes Yes Yes 2,260 17 
11 Goa 100% 100% Implemente
d 
Implemente
d Yes Yes Yes 446 42 
12 Gujarat 100% 96% Implemente
d 
Implemente
d Yes Yes Yes 17,194 17,194 
13 Haryana 100% 88% Implemente
d 
Implemente
d Yes Yes Yes 9,578 9,578 
14 Himachal 
Pradesh 100% 92% Implemente
d 
Implemente
d Yes Yes Yes 4,917 4,176 
15 Jammu 
&Kashmir 100% 51% Up to 
TSOs* - Yes Yes Yes 5,970 0 
16 Jharkhand 100% 97% Implemente
d 
Implemente
d Yes Yes Yes 23,356 23,115 
17 Karnataka 100% 100% Implemente
d 
Implemente
d Yes Yes Yes 20,455 10,919 
18 Kerala 100% 98% Implemente
d - Yes Yes Yes 14,335 0 
19 Lakshadwee
p 100% 98% - NA Yes Yes Yes 39 0 
20 Madhya 
Pradesh 100% 91% Implemente
d 
Implemente
d Yes Yes Yes 22,401 22,401 
21 Maharashtra 100% 87% Implemente
d 
Implemente
d Yes Yes Yes 52,505 50,106 
22 Manipur 100% 23.98
% Partial* - Yes Yes Yes 2,154 0 
23 Meghalaya 100% 0% - - Yes Yes Yes 4,651 0 
24 Mizoram 100% 58.7% Implemente
d - Yes Yes Yes 1,249 0 
25 Nagaland 100% 7% - - Yes Yes Yes 1,691 0 
26 Odisha 100% 89% Implemente
d 
Implemente
d Yes Yes Yes 13,306 13,306 
27 Puducherry  100% 100% NA NA Yes Yes Yes 0 0 
28 Punjab 100% 97% Implemente
d - Yes Yes Yes 16,657 0 
29 Rajasthan 100% 96% Implemente
d - Yes Yes Yes 25,767 25,632 
30 Sikkim 100% 87% Implemente
d - Yes Yes Yes 1,421 20 
31 Tamil Nadu 100% 100% Implemente
d 
Implemente
d Yes Yes Yes 34,773 34,773 
32 Telangana 100% 100% Implemente Implemente Yes Yes Yes 17,159 8,546 

d d 
33 Tripura 100% 98% Implemente
d 
Implemente
d Yes Yes Yes 1,800 25 
34 Uttar 
Pradesh 100% 79% Implemente
d - Yes Yes Yes 79,789 13,100 
35 Uttarakhand 100% 90% Implemente
d - Yes Yes Yes 9,212 8 
36 West Bengal 100% 63% Implemente
d 
Implemente
d Yes Yes Yes 20,278 0 
 All India 100% 80.11
% 30* 20 36 35 36 5,26,928   
2,74,094 
* Partial implementation of Online Allocation in Jammu & Kashmir and Manipur are also counted in the summary. 
 
 
 
 