       137 
 
PROCUREMENT OF AIR COMBAT MANEUVERING 
INSTRUMENTATION SYSTEM 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
               
                   
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
PAC NO. 2176                 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
(2018 -19)  
 
( SI XTEENTH LO K S ABH A)  
 
 
 
 
                            MINISTRY OF DEFENCE  
 
                                                                                                          
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on:   
 
           Laid in Rajya Sabha on:    
 
 
L O K  S A B H A  S E C R E T A R I A T  
N E W  D E L H I  
 
FEBRUARY, 2019/MAGHA, 1940 (SAKA)  
 
PROCUREMENT OF AIR COMBAT 
MANEUVERING INSTRUMENTATION 
SYSTEM 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
PAGES 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2018-19)  ……      (iii) 
     
INTRODUCTION                                                                                         ……           (v) 
 
                 
 
PART- I 
1 Introductory 2 
2 Procurement of Air Combat Maneuvering Instrumentation System 2 
3 Extra Expenditure on Flight Trial Integration 7 
4 Delay in Fleet Modification 24 
 
PART - II 
5 Observations/Recommendations 14 
 
1APPENDICES 
I Minutes of the Fourth  Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2018 -
19) held on 6th June, 2018. 
 
II Minutes of the Twenty -third Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee  
(2018-19) held on 7th January, 2019. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
  to be appended at the time of printing 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge   - Chairperson 
  
M E M B E R S  
L O K  S A B H A  
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria  
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra 
5.    Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar   
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
7. Smt. Riti Pathak 
8. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank” 
9. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal 
10. Shri Abhishek Singh 
11. Shri Gopal Shetty 
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya  
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
14. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi 
15. Dr. Ponnusamy Venugopal 
  
R A J Y A  S A B H A  
16. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda 
17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
18. Shri Shwait Malik 
19. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
21. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
22. Shri C.M. Ramesh 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Abhijit Kumar -  Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Sanjeev Sharma -  Director 
3. Shri Deepankar Kamble -  Under Secretary 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson , Public Accounts Committee , having been authorized by the 
Committee, do present this One Hundred and Thirty Seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 
"Procurement of Air Combat Maneuvering Instrumentation System" based on Para No. 2.3 
of the C&AG's Report Nos. 34 of 2014 relating to the Ministry of Defence.  
2. The above-mentioned Reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India were laid 
on the Table of the House on 19th December, 2014. 
3. The Public Accounts Committee (2018-19) took up the subject for detailed examination 
and report. The Committee took evidence of the representativ es of the Ministry of Defence 
(MoD), Indian Air Force (IAF)  and Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) on the subject at their 
sitting held on 6 th June, 2018. Accordingly, a draft Report was prepared and placed before the 
Committee for their consideration. Th e Committee considered and adopted this draft Report at 
their sitting held on 7th January, 2019. The minutes of the Sittings are appended to the Report. 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and  Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in thick type and form Part- II of the Report.   
5. The Committee would also like to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministry of Defence (MoD), Indian Air Force (IAF)  and Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) for 
tendering e vidence before them and furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in 
connection with the examination of the subject.    
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to them in 
the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India and the Committee 
Secretariat in preparation of the Report. 
 
NEW DELHI;                                        MALLIKARJUN KHARGE                                          
7 January, 2019                                                                             Chairperson, 
2 Pausha, 1941 (Saka)                                                   Public Accounts Committee.  
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
REPORT 
PART - I 
 
I. INTRODUCTORY 
1. The Committee selected Para No. 2.3 relating to "Procurement of Air Combat 
Maneuvering Instrumentation System" based on  the C&AG's Report No.  34 of 201 4 
relating to Indian Air Force (IAF) and the Ministry of Defence  (MoD) for detailed 
examination and report.  
2. Against this backdrop, the Public Accounts Committee (20 18-19) obtained 
background note, requisite replies and sought clarifications from the MoD and IAF. The 
Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the MoD and IAF on both the 
para on 06.06.2018 and consequently obtained information on the subject. Based on 
the information gathered, the Committee proceeded with examination of the relevant 
issues in detail as outlined in the succeeding paragraphs. 
Para No. 2.3: Procurement of Air Combat Maneuvering Instrumentation  
   System (ACMI) 
3. The Committee found that Air Combat Ma neuvering Instrumentation (ACMI) 
system provides an electronic replay of the entire combat sorties ensur ing thorough 
effective post-flight debriefings, resulting in improvement of the air combat skills of pilots 
with lesser flying effort thereby directly contributing to operational skills . It also has the 
facility to monitor the combat parameters, in real time, at a ground station with an option 
to communicate immediate warning of unsafe/collision regimes, thu s contributing to 
flight safety. The system comprises of Static and Ground Mobile Station,  External pods, 
Network terminals and Very/High Ultra Frequency Receive/Transmit (V/UHF R/T) sets. 
4. On the query of the Committee, t he Ministry, while explaining the necessity for 
procuring ACMI system to the Committee, furnished as under: 
  "During air combat training sorties, multiple aircraft manoeuvre in three 
 dimensions with fast changing positio ns along all three axes. For debriefing, the 
 recap is done manually with aircrew recapitulating the air situation after the 
 mission. This is very time consuming and at times not very accurate because of 
 human limitations. These limitations resulted in m ore flying effort required to 
 attain the desired proficiency level by the pilot.  For better assimilation of combat 
 training missions and to economise on flying effort, the training system capable 

 
 
 of electronically recording and replaying the air combat manoeuvres in real time 
 at a central location and its post -flight analysis was envisaged by IAF. Similar 
 training systems are followed by the best of the Air Forces for training their 
 aircrew. " 
5. Giving background of the ACMI system, the Ministry informed the Committee as 
under: 
 "Air Combat Manoeuvring Instrumentation System (ACMI) provides an in -depth 
electronic replay of combat sorties for all aircraft that are integrated with ACMI 
system. The central ground station is used to monitor aircraft parameters with the 
feature to communicate with the fighter aircraft for advising it of any unsafe flight 
conditions such as collision or exceedances.  Similar training systems are 
followed by the best of Air Forces for training their aircrew. 
 
 Air Combat Manoeuvring Instrumentation System (ACMI) consists of the following 
 two major components:- 
 (a) Airborne Instrumentation System (AIS pod)/ACMI Pod:   
 This is a single pod which is externally mounted on the aircraft. The pod contains 
position and time sensors (GPS/IMU), data -link with Dynamic Allocation of Time 
Slots (DATS), Removable Data Storage (RDS) and powerful Central Processing 
Unit. The pod interfaces with aircraft systems and records the aircraft data for its 
transmission to the ground station. 
 
 (b) Ground Exploitation (Debriefing) Station (GES): 
 It is used to define pre -flight mission specific parameters, real -time monitoring of 
combat mission s and post -flight analysis and debriefing. A Real Time Tracking 
Position (RTTP) system is part of the GES which allows real -time tracking of the 
aircraft with ACMI pod." 
  
6. The Ministry highlighting the advantages of ACMI system over conventional 
training, intimated as under: 
 " The ACMI system provides following advantages:- 
 
(a)  Cost effective real-time training. 
(b)   Effective debriefing. 
(c)   High fidelity weapon and EW threats simulation. 
(d)   Real time weapon hit/miss assessments. 
(e)   Enhanced safety during air-combat exercises. 
 To provide more effective training to its aircrew and economise the flying effort, 
 Indian Air Force procured Air Combat Manoeuvring Instrumentation (ACMI) 
 Systems. " 
 

 
 
7. The Vice Chief of IAF, during oral e vidence, while explaining the procedure 
before induction of ACMI system, submitted as under: 
"I have been to that air base, which is our fountain head of all knowledge related 
to air combat situations. A question was asked how we used to do it earlier. 
Earlier, we had the ability to recap, whatever happened in a sortie, we had to 
come; we had to write down; we had to make diagrams on floppies and then we 
had to listen to the tape -recorded sortie hauls and then the debrief was 
conducted. This debrief for a t ypical sortie where eight aircraft are fighting 
together used to take at times eight hours." 
8. The Committee desired to know as to what was the practice/mechanism in IAF to 
get post flight debriefings from fighter pilots before induction of ACMI system.  In this 
regard, the Ministry in their written reply, stated as under:  
 "Prior to induction of  the first ACMI system in Apr 98, post flight debriefs were 
based on the ability of pilots to recall their manoeuvring in the air and the relative 
position of other aircraft in time and space.  This resulted in differing perspective 
on the sequence of events and was not the best method of debriefing. This also 
resulted in ambiguities and errors that creep in because of the human memory." 
9. During their examination, t he Committee found that the MoD, in October 2007, 
concluded a contract with M/s BVR System Ltd. , Israel, an original equipment 
manufacturer (OEM), for procurement of three ACMI systems inclusive of 46 external 
pods and associated equipment at  a total cost of 19.46 million US$ or ` 79.57 crore. 
These systems were delivered between December 2009 and January 2010 and 
commissioned between April 2011 and September 2011 at three Air Force Station s 
(AFS), 'M', 'N' and 'O'. The IAF procured two additional ACMI systems inclusive of 54 
pods along with associate d equipment at a total cost of 18 million US$ or ` 87.56 crore 
in December 2010 under opti on clause of the main contract . These were delivered 
during July-August 2012 and installed in July 2013 at AFS ‘P’ and ‘Q’.  
10. The Committee sought to know the details  of ACMI contract. The Ministry in their 
Background Note, submitted to the Committee, stated as under: 
 "Air Combat Manoeuvring Instrumentation System (ACMI) was procured from 
 M/s BVR of Israel in two stages where in a total of 100 ACMI pods, five static 
 ground stations and three mobile ground stations were procured  at a total cost of  
 Rs. 167 crore.  The contracts were signed on 29.10.2007 and on 14.12.2010 
 respectively." 

 
 
11. During oral evidence, the Vice Chief of IAF, apprised the Committee about the 
contract details by submitting as under: 
"In terms of contractual issues, this is a multi -vendor contract. Out of this multi -
vendor contract, four companies qualified. Out of the fo ur companies that passed 
the FPT, one company that quoted the lowest was the company that was 
selected. So, I would like to suggest that any time you integrate a system that is 
coming from a different company on an aircraft that has come from France, on an 
aircraft that has come from Russia, on an aircraft that has come from England 
and on our own LCA subsequently like what we are doing, it is a difficult task. It is 
a difficult technical task but the efforts that we have put in, have helped us. It 
reaped the benefits of the money that was invested into the system. Nothing has 
gone waste. This is what I would like to suggest." 
12. The Committee sought to know the reasons for delay of more than one year in 
commissioning of ACMI system at res pective AFSs. In this regard, the Ministry clarified 
that the commissioning of the Ground Stations of the ACMI system was linked to the 
successful integration of the ACMI pods on the initial three aircrafts. 
13. The Committee desired to know the reasons of procuring the ACMI system from 
M/s BVR System Ltd., Israel. The Ministry, in their written reply, furnished as under: 
 "The criteria of selection of L1 vendor for procurement of ACMI system was 
 followed as per the procedure mentioned in the DPP-2005. RFP for ACMI system 
 was issued to nine vendors on 10 Nov 2005. Following four vendors submitted 
 their Techno-commercial Proposal in response to RFP:- 
(a)  M/s BVR, Israel 
(b)  M/s RADA, Israel 
(c) M/s Cubic Defence, USA 
(d)  M/s Prescient System &Technologies, Singapore 
 Out of these four vendors , M/s RADA, Israel was rejected at TEC (Technic al 
Evaluation Committee) stage and M/s Prescient System & Technologies, 
Singapore was rejected at Field Evaluation stage. Commercial proposal of two 
vendorsi.e M/s BVR, Israel and M/s Cubic Defence , USA were opened by the 
CNC and M/s BVR, Israel was found to be the L1 vendor."  
14. Further, the Committee wanted to know whether the Transfer of Technology 
(ToT) clause was included while si gning the contract with the OEM.  The Ministry, in 
their written reply, informed the Committee as under: 

 
 
 "No, it was not included while signing the contract with OEM as the same was not 
envisaged in the RFP. The procurement was for a limited number (46 pods + 3 
Ground stations in the first contract followed by procure ment of 56 pods + 2  
Ground stations under option clause) and hence ToT was not envisaged." 
15. The Committee also sought to know whether the Ministry had taken/proposed 
any steps towards the indigenous manufacture of the ACMI system. The Ministry replied 
in the negative and through their written reply, further apprised the Committee as under:  
 "No, indigenous manufacture of ACMI pods is not planned as the availability of 
 100 ACMI Pods is adequate for the current training requirements of IAF. These 
 pods have been made universal i.e it can be exploited on all the platforms 
 modified for its carriage."  
16. The Vice Chief of IAF, during oral evidence, apprised the Committee about the 
safety features of the ACMI system by stating as under: 
"....Also, I am happy to report that we have not had any accident during combat 
after this pod has been inducted because it is very easy to understand quickly. 
What took a long time to understand about combat, we understand quickly, 
thanks to the system."  
17. The Committee further desired to be apprised about the reduction in number of 
collisions between aircrafts during routine/training sorties and also the long term 
benefits accrued to the IAF. In this regard , the Ministry , through their written reply,  
submitted as under: 
 "The objective of ACMI pods is to enhance the training value for the aircrew. 
 However indirect contribution to the flight safety in preventing mid - air collision 
 was achieved by enhancing the air combat skills of the pilots. It also  contributes 
 to flight safety by providing an audio warning to the aircrew whenever the aircraft 
 parameters or flight path is likely to violate the laid down restrictions. Thus 
 significant long term benefits of ACMI pods in enhancing flight safety and t raining 
 values was accrued to IAF. The induction of ACMI has led to a complete 
 change in the mechanism of post flight debriefings.  The ACMI pod fitted on the 
 ac constantly transmits ac flight path information to the ground station.  On 
 ground, when replayed along with the inputs from many other pods, it reproduces 
 an accurate and a comprehensive picture of the air combat.  Wrong inferences 
 can lead to poor tactics and these are avoided. This helps to eliminate the 
 ambiguities and errors that creep i n because of the human memory.  Thus the 
 ACMI has helped multiply the combat training value manifold.  Real time 
 monitoring of a combat air situation is also possible by the ground -based 
 supervisors.  If required, corrective instructions are passed on R adio thus 

 
 
 resulting in better assimilation of an air situation and enhancing flight safety. 
 Tactics development is enhanced with the assistance of ACMI records." 
I. Extra Expenditure on Flight Integration Trial 
18. The Committee found that the ACMI pod fitted on the aircraft constantly transmits 
aircraft flight path information to the ground station. At the ground stations, it reproduces 
an accurate and a complete picture of the air combat when replayed along with the 
inputs from many other pods . These 100 pods were to be adapted to the six different 
aircrafts through placement of Repair, Manufacture and Supply Orders (RMSO) on 
Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL). Out of the six aircrafts, integration of system on 
aircraft ‘C’ wa s to be carried o ut during their upgradation programme by 2020 by the 
OEM. For the remaining five aircrafts, flight test of these pods was prescribed at the rate 
of three days per aircraft i.e. a total of 15 days for five aircrafts . These test flights were 
referred to as “Transparent Flights” and were planned and debriefed by the seller.   
19. The Committee further found that these flight tests were to be completed in two 
phases i.e. in first phase, Integration Flight Test (IFT) inclusive of Pod Integration Trials 
(PIT) was  to be carried out in 15 days for all the five variants of aircraft to refine 
interface control document between pod and the aircraft. In second phase, On Site 
Acceptance Test (OSAT) was to be carried out to check the performance of the pod and 
the entire ACMI system for which no time line was prescribed in the contract.  
20. The Ministry, in their Background Note, furnished to the Committee, apprised 
them about the ACMI Integration Plan by stating as under: 
 " The ACMI system (ACMI pod) was not an Original Equipment Manufacturer 
 (OEM) fitted system and was required to be integrated as a new system on the 
 IAF aircraft. 
 ACMI pods were re quired to be integrated on six different airborne platforms 
(aircraft) with their respective avionics systems. The platforms earmarked for 
integration of ACMI in avionics mode were Su -30, Mig-21Bison, Jaguar DARIN I 
and II, MiG-27 Upgrade, Mirage-2000 and MiG-29 Upgrade. After the finalisation 
of integration scheme during design stages, the trial integrations were planned 
on these aircraft. After successful completion of trial modification and flight 
evaluation of the integrated system, the series/fleet mod ifications were to be 
undertaken by IAF through Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) by placing 
Repair, Manufacture and Supply Order (RMSO). The responsibility of aircraft 

 
 
modification i.e. structural modification, avionics system modifications was that of 
IAF, which was to be executed through HAL/OEM.  
 The seller was required to modify and update the ACMI  pod hardware and 
 software towards integration on the designated aircraft. Integration of ACMI on 
 five aircraft viz. Su -30, Mig -21Bison, Jaguar, MiG -27 and Mirage -2000 was to 
 commence in the existing configuration (Standard of Preparation) of the aircraft 
 and integration on MiG -29 Upgrade was to be carried out during its upgrade by 
 OEM i.e. RAC MIG."  
21. The Committee note that a s per the contract , IAF carried out Pre Despatch 
Inspection (PDI) of the equipment at seller’s premises, in order to check their 
compliance with specifications in accordance with its usual standard procedures. 
However, the Committee observed that from the flight integration trial report that when 
the vendor brought the equipment to India for first phase of  flight trials, it could not 
integrate the pods succ essfully with various aircraft at IAF bases due to software 
problems. As a result, IAF had to fly 5 fighter aircraft in s even phases from 15 
December 2009 to 5 March 2011 for validation of Pod Integration Trials (PIT).  The 
vendor could not clear PIT within stipulated time i.e 15 days @ 3 days per aircraft. 
Instead, the vendor  had taken 43 days for PIT i.e. 28 days in excess  of the prescribed 
time in which 84 additional sorties were undertaken for the clearance of flight integration 
trials. Although contract provision stipulate d a total of 15 days for  five aircraft for flight 
tests. Also, no provision for recovery from vendor  on account of excess fligh t trials was 
provided therein and c onsequently, IAF had to bear an extra expenditure of ` 10.35 
crore on account of these 84 excess sorties towards PIT. 
22. Explaining the process of integration of ACMI system to the Committee , the 
Ministry, in their Background Note, furnished as under: 
 "New pod integration process involves aero -mechanical, electrical and software 
 integration stages.  
(a) The aero-mechanical integration  is carried out to ensure that the pod 
interfaces (connects) w ith aircraft structure satisfactorily without mechanical and 
aerodynamic interference. The aero -mechanical integration trial, also referred as 
Pod Integration Test/Trials (PIT), allows the new store to be carried on the 
aircraft. 
(b) For operational utilisatio n, the electrical integration  is required to ensure 
that the electrical power and signals are interconnected satisfactorily between 
aircraft and ACMI pod. 
(c) The software integration of the ACMI pod ensures that the pod obtains 
requisite aircraft data and pil ot selections of weapon switches / buttons / trigger 

 
 
from aircraft avionics system for its processing and transmission to Ground 
Exploitation System (GES). 
The PIT enables carriage of the pod while exploitation of pod functionality is 
possible only after s uccessful completion of the electrical and software 
integration trials. 
 The software integration with aircraft is a complex and iterative process, as single 
unified software of the ACMI pod is required to interface with different types of 
aircraft avionics system software. Additionally, the host aircraft are designed and 
manufactured by different OEMs from different countries. Hence, availability of 
information of avionics system software is limited which leads to additional effort 
to integrate the ACMI so ftware. The responsibility of modification of software of 
the ACMI pod rests with the OEM of the ACMI pod while IAF is responsible for 
the modification on the software of aircraft system side. " 
 
23. Clarifying the position, the Vice Chief of IAF, submitted as under: 
 
"....Insofar as the Air Combat Manoeuvring Instrumentation is concerned, I want 
to clarify that PIT, Pod Integration Test, was done within three days. The 
manufacturer of this pod is not manufacturer of the aircraft. He is not assuring 
you in any way how the aircraft will behave after the pod has been fitted on the 
aircraft. He has no access to confidential data of this aircraft and its behaviour, 
particularly in combat situations. It is the responsibility of the Air Force. What the 
manufacturer responsible for is that once the pod is kept on the aircraft’s wing 
and the pylon, all on the ground, the two interfaces, the interface document that 
was given to him and the interface document that was given by him, are 
matching with each other. This is what he is supposed to be responsible for.  
 
24. Supplementing the above, he further submitted: 
 
"Thereafter, once this pod is integrated in this manner on the ground, then we 
carry out flight trial. With specific to the pod, whatever is the speed that the pod is 
supposed to go, whatever is the data link capability of the pod, those things are 
met. Once those things are done, then using that pod on the aircraft in a combat 
situation by taking the aircraft to edge of its envelope and seeing that because of 
the pod the aircraft’s handling does not get compromised which is a part of the 
trial, is what takes time.  
 
25. In this regard, the witness further stated as under: 
 
"We are unable to give all these data to the manufacturer of the pod for the one 
reason which is security. Supposing Su -30’s data of what happens up higher 
angle of attack, what the Su -30 can do—if this information is given to Israel, we 
will be held accountable. So, it is our task and that is what takes time.  No 
manufacturer will give a time because he knows that LD will be imposed on him. 
He will give a time that is reasonable. So, this three-days’ time per aircraft is 
reasonable to check the ICDs and to check pod integration trials on the aircraft. 
But subsequently, what is being misunderstood is that aircraft’s performance trial 
with this pod opening of the envelope of the aircraft, has  to take time and that is 

 
 
what has happened. So, this is what we attempted to explain in our presentation. 
Perhaps, we are not as articulate as we should have been. But I hope this puts to 
rest the issue of what is a pod integration trial and what is clear ance eventually 
for pod to fly on the aircraft operationally. That is one issue." 
 
26. The Committee sought to know  the total number of air bases/aircraft on which 
ACMI system was envisaged to be installed and also sought to know the number of 
aircrafts it was successfully installed. The Ministry through a written reply informed as 
under: 
 
 "The project included three static debriefing stations and that were planned to set 
 up at three Air Force Stations located at Jodhpur, Adampur and Kalaikunda as 
 per the original contract. 
 As per the additional Contract under Option clause, two Static stations were 
planned to be set up at Air Force Stations Pune and Gwalior.  
 As per the contract, only the type of aircraft to be modified for carriage of ACMI 
pod was specified. Total number of aircraft to be modified is on required basis to 
exploit the available pods. 
 ACMI pods were requ ired to be integrated on six different airborne platforms 
(aircraft) with their respective avionics systems. The platforms earmarked for 
integration of ACMI in avionics mode were Su -30, Mig-21 Bison, Jaguar, MiG -27 
Upgrade, Mirage-2000 and MiG-29 Upgrade. 
 The number of aircraft in which ACMI system has been successfully installed as 
on date are as follows:- 
S 
No. 
Type of Aircraft Number of aircraft modified 
1. Su-30 MKI 209 
2. Mig 27 UPG 38 
3. Jaguar D-II 12 
4. Mig 21 (BISON) 65 
5. Mig 29 UPG 24 
6. Mirage 2000 15 
7. Total  363 

 
 
27. The Committee specifically  wanted to know whether the vendor could clear PIT 
within the stipulated time i.e. 15 days viz. 3 aircraft per day according to the contract 
and also wanted to know as to what action was taken by the IAF against the vendor 
who took 43 days for PIT . The Com mittee note that on the matter regarding excess 
flight trials/sorties, the Ministry stated that the total 138 flights/sorties i.e. 109 sorties  for 
PIT and 29 sorties for OSAT were undertaken and were silent on the 84 excess sorties 
undertaken in extra 28 d ays for pod integration trials and the expenditure incurred 
thereon. The Ministry further stated that the extra expenditure worked out towards PIT 
was not completely incurred towards PIT but also include d comprehensive flight 
evaluation through flight inte gration trials. They also further added that PIT tests were 
carried out during flight evaluation trials within the prescribed period as per contract.  
  
28. The Committee found that all flight trials were conducted to integrate the ACMI 
pod for which the v endor had taken 43 days to clear the flight trials as against the 
stipulated 15 days for PIT. As a result, IAF had to incur an extra expenditure of ` 10.35 
crore on extra sorties undertaken during the 2 8 days for PIT of the system besides the 
flight test efforts for OSAT were carried out in addition to the pod integration test.  
 
II. Delay in Fleet Modification 
 
29. The Committee noticed that, in April 2014, out of six variants of aircraft, IAF had  
placed Repair, Manufacture and Supply Orders (RMSO) on Hindustan Aeronautics 
Limited ( HAL) for series mo dification in respect of only three variants of aircraft s 
between April-November 2011. For the remaining three variants, the RMSO for 15 ‘A’ 
aircrafts was concluded in April 2014 and balance 30 ‘A’ aircraft s were to be modified 
after their up-gradation in 2020-21. The RMSO for ‘B’ aircrafts was to be place d and in 
respect of ‘C’ aircrafts, no separate RMSO had been placed as all ‘C’ aircrafts would be 
upgraded by aircraft  OEM in which ACMI integration wa s a p art of Final Operational 
Clearance. 
 
30. The Committee further observed that the shelf life of ACMI system is 20 years 
from the date of delivery and till July 2014, series modification of on ly one variant of 
aircraft ‘D’ had been fully completed whereas th e fleet of aircraft ‘E’ and ‘F’ had been 

 
 
partially modified. Considering the up -gradation plan of aircraft ‘A’ and ‘C’, which were 
under their various phases, the complete fleet modification of all the variants of aircraft 
for integration of ACMI system would not be accomplished till the end of 2020 -21. Thus, 
half of the shelf life of these ACMI system since delivery would expire. 
 
31. The Ministry, in their Background Note, furnished to the Committee, explained to 
the Committee about the shelf life of ACMI system by stating as under: 
 "It is reiterated that ACMI being electronics system in a mechanical enclosure has 
 life based on condition basis. The OEM has confirmed that the service life of the 
 equipment shall be at least 20 years from the date of deliv ery. The series 
 modification of the IAF aircraft is a continuous process and presently 363 aircraft 
 are modified to use 100 ACMI pods. Therefore presently for every three modified 
 aircraft there is at least one ACMI pod available. All the ACMI pods are being 
 used by the modified aircraft and the system is being fully exploited for its 
 intended purpose. Where Fleet Modification is in progress, the training is being 
 imparted through conventional methods." 
 
32. The Committee sought to know the reasons for placing RMSO on HAL for only 
three variants from its aircraft fleet. The Ministry, through a written reply, submitted as 
under: 
 "IAF placed an initial RMSO on HAL for Su -30, Mig -21 Bison and Mig -27 
 Upgrade.  
 The RMSO of the Jaguar aircraft could be placed only after getting the clearance 
of carriage of R -73 pod on the aircraft after successful completion of flight 
evaluation trials on the aircraft. This delay was anticipated at the time of signing 
of the contract and was annotated in the contract in the form of Note - “Flight 
testing of the ACMI pod on the Jaguar aircraft shall be carried out after IAF 
obtains clearance and certification for R-73 carriage on the Jaguar aircraft, which 
will be no later than 19 months after ARA of this contract. 
 It was clearly mentioned in the contract that for ACMI integration on Mirage 
aircraft  “ May be installed if possible, in avionics mode, following the aircraft 
survey by SELLER ”.  This was due to non -availability of aircraft information with 
IAF.  
 The ACMI adaptation on Mig-29 aircraft was linked to the upgrade programme 
and hence no RMSO was placed with M/s HAL." 
 
33. The Committee wanted to be further apprised of the delay in fleet modification in 
the aircraft for ACMI integration, the Ministry, in their written submission, furnished to 
the Committee, submitted as under: 

 
 
 "The OEM has confirmed that the service life of the equipment shall not be 
limited to 20 years and be at least 20 years from the date of delivery. ACMI being 
an electronics system in a mechanical enclosure, has life based on condition 
basis and hence can be exploited we ll past the limit of 20 years. The  experience 
of Indian Air Force of  life extension on all the earlie r inducted systems like 
Chetak/Chetah, Avro, THD-1955 etc. indicates that life extension of ACMI can be 
ensured. Additionally, the contracts specifies that the  seller has to give at least 
two year notice to the buyer before closing the production line so as to enable the 
buyer to buy life time supply of spares. 
 The modification of Mirage 2000 and MiG 29 aircraft was linked to the respective 
upgrade programme and delays in these programmes affected the timelines in 
ACMI integration. However the training standards in these fleets were not 
affected due to this delay. It is rei terated that the ACMI pod is now a universal 
podand can be utilised on any ACMI modified aircraft . There is no expired 
equipment in this regard. 
 The series modification of remaining aircraft is being under taken in ph ased 
manner. 363  ACMI modified aircraft are presently available for using the 100 
ACMI pod for training.  Therefore, for every 03 modified aircraft there is at least 
one ACMI pod available. All the ACMI pods are being used by the modified 
aircraft and the system is being fully exploited for its intended purpose." 
34. During the course of the examination of the subject, the Committee found that 
due to non synchronization of fleet modification plan with the  procurement and 
integration of ACMI system with all the variants of  platforms, the system procured at the 
total cost of `167 crore could not be  exploited fully for training of pilots. Further, by the 
time all the system would  be integrated, half of the shelf life of the pods would expire 
since delivery. 
 
************************************* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
PART-II 
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
 After gleaning through all the documents and information submitted to the 
Committee and during the course of examination of the current subject, the 
Committee find that Indian Air Force had incurred an extra expenditure to the 
tune of Rs. 10.35 crore on ac count of excess flight trials.  These flight trials were 
undertaken for integration of Air Combat Maneuvering Instrumentation System 
(ACMI) with the existing fleet of Indian Air Force.   They find due to non 
synchronization of fleet modification plan with the procurement and integration of 
ACMI system with all the variants of platforms, the system procured at the total 
cost of Rs. 167 crore could not be exploited fully for training of pilots. The 
Committee further observe that by the time all the system would be integrated, 
half of the shelf life of the pods would expire since delivery. The observations and 
recommendations of the Committee are brought out in the succeeding 
paragraphs.   
2. The Committee note that the ACMI system provides an electronic rep lay of 
the entire combat sorties ensuring post -flight debriefings, improvement of the air 
combat and operational skills of pilots. It also monitor s the combat parameters in 
real time at a ground station with an option to communicate immediate warning of 
unsafe/collision regimes contributing to flight safety. The system comprises of 
Static and Ground Mobile Station, External pods, Network terminals and 
Very/Ultra High Frequency Receive/Transmit (V/UHF R/T) sets.   The ACMI pod 
fitted on the aircraft constantl y transmits aircraft flight path information to the 
ground station s and reproduces an accurate and a complete picture of the air 
combat when replayed along with the inputs from many other pods  to the 
aircrafts. 
3. The Committee note that ACMI system, which is being integrated in the IAF, 
is an advanced aircraft maneuvering system, the technology of which is available 
only with a few manufactures in the world.  This system was purchased from M/s. 
BVR System Limited, Israel, which is the Original Equipment Ma nufacturer (OEM) 
and stood as L-1 vendor for procurement of the system.  However, the Committee 

 
 
find that there existed several shortcomings right from the stage of signing of the 
contract with the OEM.  In the first instance, the Committee fail to understand as 
to why the Transfer of Technology (ToT) was not included while signing the 
Contract. The Committee in this regard are not convinced with the assertion of 
the Ministry that ToT was not included in the Contract as the same was not 
envisaged in the Request For Proposal (RFP).  Again the Committee cannot 
understand that why it was not envisaged in the RFP.  In their opinion, a number 
of 102 pods and 5 ground stations costing Rs. 167 crore is neither a small 
number nor a frivolous amount and ToT would definitely help the IAF  in the long 
run in not only in maintaining the system but also giving self -sufficiency towards 
the indigenous manufacture of the system if need be.  The Committee would like 
to be apprised of the circumstances which lead to non -inclusion of ToT in the 
Contracts.   
 4. The Committee learn that Integration Flight Test (IFT) inclusive of the Pod 
Integration Trials (PIT) were stipulated to be cleared within 15 days with three 
days having allotted for a single aircraft.  Against this  stipulated time-frame, the 
Committee note with concern that the vendor took as long as 43 days for PIT, i.e., 
28 days in excess of the timeframe.   Due to this reason, 84 additional sorties had 
to be undertaken for the clearance of IFT, which resulted in an extra expenditure 
of Rs. 10.35 crore . In this case, it is evident that onus of successful and timely 
integration of the pods on the aircraft lay with IAF.  The Committee  caution the 
IAF that in future, they should undertake due diligence much in advance  so that 
instances of this nature could be avoided.   
5. Another example of lack of planning and foresight on the part of the 
Ministry as well as IAF has come before the Committee. They have been informed 
that one of the reasons for time and cost overrun was the software compatibility 
being faced during PIT due to the fact that fleet in the IAF were manufactured by 
different OEMs from different countries.  In its own admission, the Ministry had 
stated that the responsibility of modifi cation of software of the ACMI pod rest ed 
with the OEM of the ACMI pod while IAF wa s responsible for the modification on 
the software of aircraft system side.  The Committee are contented with the 

 
 
viewpoint of the IAF that the sensitive information about th e planes could not be 
provided to the OEM of ACMI, nevertheless they feel that had the Ministry/IAF 
brooded upon the issues seriously, this problem could have been avoided.  At the 
very stage of the inception of this Project, IAF should have envisaged that  there 
might occur some difficulties in the integration of pods as their aircrafts come 
from different manufacturers.  It is needless to mention that efforts be made to 
devise a sound mechanism for effectively and timely integrating such sensitive 
systems with the IAF Fleet and to obviate recurrence of such instances in future.    
6. One more disconcerting aspect which has come before the Committee is 
the delay in fleet modification which has a direct bearing on the s helf life of the 
ACMI system.  The Committee note that the shelf life of ACMI system is 20 years 
from the date of delivery  and that series modification of only one variant of 
aircraft ‘D’  had been fully completed.  As regards the fleet of aircraft ‘E’ and ‘F’, it 
has been stated by the Ministry/IAF that they have been partially modified.  They 
further note that the complete fleet modification of all the variants of aircraft fleet 
of IAF for integration of ACMI system would not be accomplishe d till the end of 
2020-21. From these facts, the Committee are concerned view that by the time the 
entire fleet of IAF gets  modified, half of the shelf life of the ACMI system would 
have expired thereby defeating the optimal operational exploitation of the system 
during its life time.  The Ministry/IAF, o n the one hand, have asserted that the 
system would still be functional and operational beyond its shelf life  and, on the 
other hand, the Ministry, in the Background Note  furnished to the Committee , 
have stated that the system's life is  conditional. The Co mmittee do not concur 
with the assertion of the Ministry in this regard and  wonder whether IAF's fleet 
modified to integrate with the ACMI system would be relevant in the present day 
scenario. This contradiction in the stand of the Ministry  once again  highlights 
lack of proper planning and foresight on behalf of the Ministry/IAF. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry/IAF should look into the entire 
issue and come out with the reasons as to why the modernization of the fleet was 
delayed w ith subsequent cost escalation. They also recommend that the 
Ministry/IAF should revisit and constitute firm guidelines for acquiring and 

 
 
commissioning any hardware/technology in future  and do proper home work .  
They further recommend that all upgradation job s be completed with the 
minimum delay in a cost-effective manner.  
 
************************************* 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                         MALLIKARJUN KHARGE                                          
7 January, 2019                                                                                Chairperson, 
2 Pausha, 1941 (Saka)                                                     Public Accounts Committee.   