44

FUNCTIONING OF CREDIT GUARANTEE FUND TRUST
FOR MICRO AND SMALL ENTERPRISES

MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM
ENTERPRISES

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2021-22)

FORTY-FOURTH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2272

FORTY-FOURTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2021-22)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

FUNCTIONING OF CREDIT GUARANTEE FUND

TRUST FOR MICRO AND SMALL ENTERPRISES

MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM
ENTERPRISES

Presented to Lok Sabha on:

Laid in Rajya Sabha on:

March, 2022 /Phalguna, 1943 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2021-22)
INTRODUCTION

REPORT
PART- I

INTRODUCTORY
ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE

(i) Establishment and Manpower
(ii) CGTMSE —Comparison with other organizations

OPERATIONAL FRAMEWORK OF THE TRUST

(i) Business Model of the Trust

(ii) Regulatory Framework

(iii) | Overlap of Functions - NCGTC and CGTMSE
(iv) | Coverage and Impact of the Guarantee Scheme
(v) Provision for weaker sections

(vi) Impact of COVID 19 Pandemic

(vii) | Decline in number of Guarantee cases

PERFORMANCE OF THE TRUST

(i) Financial performance

(ii) Operational Problems relating to Data

(iii) Business Operations

(iv) Investment grading, credit rating & its Impact
(v) Collaterals

NPAS, CLAIMS AND RECOVERIES

(i) Inspection and Recovery from MLIs

(ii) Recoveries from MLIs post settlement of claim
(iii) 15508 of NPAs

(iv) Delays in submission of application

(v) | Guarantee to ‘non-micro’/small category units
(vi) | Extending Credit on Personal Guarantee

(vii) Irregular Loans

PART -॥

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS

APPENDICES

PAGES
(iii
(iv)

Minutes of the Ninth sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2020-21)

held on 04-01-2021.

Minutes of the Tenth sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2021-22)

held on 10-02-2022.


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2021-22)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2 Shri T. R. Baalu
3 Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
4. Shri Sudheer Gupta
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6 Shri Jagdambika Pal
7 Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
8. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi”
9. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

10. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwarat
11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
12. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

13. Shri Jayant Sinha

14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

RAJYA SABHA
16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil

17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
18. Dr. C.M. Ramesh

19. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray
20. Dr. M. Thambidurai

21. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy*
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi8

SECRETARIAT

ShriT. 6. Chandrasekhar - Joint Secretary
Shri Surya Ranjan Mishra Director

Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja Additional Director
Shri Alok Mani Tripathi - Deputy Secretary

RON

Elected w.e.f. 29.07.2021 vice Smt. Darshana Jardosh, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f. 07.07.2021.
* Elected w.e.f. 29.07.2021 vice Shri Ajay Kumar Mishra, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f. 07.07.2021.
* Elected w.e.f 09.08.2021 vice Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar, MP appointed as Minister of State w.e.f. 07.07.2021
¥ Elected ७.९. 09.08.2021 vice Shri Bhupender Yadav, MP appointed as Union Minister w.e.f. 07.07.2021,

ae

(nw


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2021-22) having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Forty-Fourth Report (Seventeenth
Lok Sabha) on ‘Functioning of Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and
Small Enterprises’ based on Para 4.1 of C&AG Report No. 10 of 2020 related to
the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises.

2. The above-mentioned Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of
India was laid on the Table of the House on 23 September, 2020.

3. The Public Accounts Committee (2020-21) took up the subject for detailed
examination and report. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of
the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises on the subject at their sitting
held on 4" January, 2021. Accordingly, a Draft Report was prepared and placed
before the Public Accounts Committee (2021-22) for their consideration. The
Committee considered and adopted this Draft Report at their sitting held on 10"
February, 2022. The Minutes of the Sittings are appended to the Report.

4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part- II of
the Report.

5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of
the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises for tendering evidence before
them and furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in connection with
the examination of the subject.

6. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance
rendered to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor
General of india.

NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
__March, 2022 Chairperson,
Phalguna, 1943 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

(wo


REPORT

, PART-1
CHAPTER - |
1. INTRODUCTORY
1. Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) are a growth engine of economy for any

nation across the world. The importance of this sector lies not only in its positive
contribution towards economy and GDP, but also in providing employment in a wider
geographical space and thus SMEs play a very crucial role in India. As per the Micro,
Small and Medium Enterprises Development (MSMED) Act, 2006 the Micro, Small and
Medium industries have been categorized on the basis of investment in either
manufacturing or in service sector. Recognising the significant contribution of this sector
in economic growth and also in employment generation in our country, Government of
India has taken a number of initiatives to develop the sector.

2. A major problem faced by SMEs is that they do not have a strong capital base
and lack of collateral etc. to offer for securing loans, which posed problems for
bankability of their firms. Although SMEs are considered to be movers of the growing
economy and sustainable for development, seeking collateral free loans is observed to
be one of the major impediments for Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises (MSMEs)
sector. The Government and policy makers have introduced policy incentives which
signify concern and importance of the sector in economy. These policy measures are
key drivers of MSME finance. One such policy measure which has a profound and
definitive impact on the financing of MSME sector is Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for
Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE).

3. The Ministry of Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises (MSME) and Small Industries
Development Bank of India (SIDBI), established in July 2000 a Trust named ‘Credit
Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises’ (CGTMSE/ Trust) to provide
guarantee in respect of the credit facilities (term loan and/ or working capital
assistance), extended by the lending institutions without any collateral security and/ or
third party guarantees to the new or existing Micro & Small Enterprises and to levy
guarantee fee/ annual service fee/ other charges on the lending institutions. The
purpose of formation of the Trust was more socio-economic as against a commercial
activity.

1|


4. Following two schemes are being implemented to provide guarantee against

loans extended by the financial institutions:

(i) Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGS-I)
for banks and financial institutions; (The Scheme came into force from 1
August, 2000)

(ii) Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme for Non-Banking Financial Companies
(CGS-II) ( The Scheme was launched on 25 January, 2017)

5. The C&AG Report No. 10 of 2020, wherein Chapter IV dealt exclusively with
CGTMSE and its functioning was laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 23.09.2020 and the
present report is largely based on the response of the Ministry of Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprises on the findings of the Audit as detailed in the above said C&AG
Report.

॥. ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE

i. Establishment and Manpower

6. As per the Annual Report of CGTMSE the Management and organization of the
Trust during FY 2020, comprise of the Board of Trustees viz. Chairman & Managing
Director of 5108 as ex-officio Chairman, Additional Secretary & Development
Commissioner (MSME), Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium enterprises (MSME),
Government of India as ex-officio Vice-Chairman, the Chairman, Indian Banks’
Association (IBA) as ex-officio Member and Chief Executive Officer of CGTMSE as
Member Secretary. As on March 31, 2020 four officers including the CEO were on
deputation with CGTMSE from SIDBI.

7. In contrast with other countries, CGTMSE is operating Pan India through only
one office with only 45 staff members. All the higher management personnel (Chief
Executive Officer, General Manager, and Deputy General Manager) are on deputation
from SIDBI, while the rest are on contact basis and this has made direct outreach of
CGTMSE difficult for MLIs and has posed the risk of inefficient management of the
scheme. In contrast, the Committee found that a similar organization in-Korea (KODIT)
has 2381 staff, Japan which has two such organizations namely JFC & JFG has 7364
and 6211 Staff Members. So far as fund size is concerned, in comparison with similar

2|


organisations of other countries, the CGTMSE’s corpus fund (US$ 1.5 billion) is much
smaller than the fund size of other countries such as Japan and South Korea. The fund
size in Korean organization is US$ 4.1billion, in JFC US$16.37billion, and in JFG,
USD$16.69 billion. Another aspect of the operating mechanism is there is no direct
contact between CGTMSE and the MSE unit requiring funds.

8. In this regard, the U.K. Sinha Committee on MSME infer-alia observed as
follows:-

"It is necessary that the top management of CGTMSE are professionalised
and sourced from a wider pool. It would also be appropriate that SIDBI
disengages itself from day to day management and board of CGTMSE".

9. To a query regarding disengagement of SIDBI from CGTMSE, as suggested by
the U.K. Sinha Committee, the Ministry in a written reply mentioned as under:

“..., having people on deputation from SIDBI actually helps the Trust as the staff
on the one hand understands credit/lending and on the other hand have
understanding of guarantee operations... Engagement of SIDBI in managing the
affairs of CGTMSE also helps the Trust in utilizing the former's platform for
popularsing the Schemes as well as business efforts.”

10. On this issue, the Ministry in their post evidence written reply stated as under:-

“CGTMSE has successfully completed 20 years of its operation under the overall
supervision of Ministry of MSME and management of operations of the Trust by
SIDBI. It may be mentioned that having people on deputation from SIDBI actually
helps the Trust as the staff on the one hand understands credit / lending and on
the other hand have understanding of guarantee operations. It is evident from the
growth history of CGTMSE in respect of its guarantee operations viz.
cumulatively, as on March 31, 2020, a total of over 43 lakh guarantees have
been accorded approvals for 2.22 lakh crore. Further, during FY 2020, the
amount of guarantees approved increased to %45,852 crore from %30,168 crore
during the previous year registering a growth of 52%. The number of guarantees
has increased from 4.36 lakh in FY 2019 to 8.47 lakh in FY 2020 registering a
growth of over 94%. This was highest ever growth in guarantee approvals.
Engagement of SIDBI in managing the affairs of C6TMSE also helps the Trust in
utilising the former's platform for popularising the Schemes as well as business
development efforts. Accordingly, we are sanguine that the role played by SIDBI
in promoting CGTMSE as an enabler in the financial ecosystem will continue to
benefit the new generation entrepreneurs in their entrepreneurial journey.”

11. | The Committee specifically questioned about the availability of a nodal officer at
the State level for interaction and resolving problems as MSMEs primarily are located at

3]


the district level. In this regard, the Ministry in their post evidence written reply stated as
under:-
"The guarantee is being extended by the MLIs in coordination with CGTMSE.
Most of the MLIs have exclusive branches at District Level to facilitate the credit
needs of the SMEs. This network of MLIs branches provides assistance to MSEs
for availing the benefit of various government Schemes including CGTMSE.
Therefore, a Nodal person at the State level from the Trust would be
superfluous."
12. In a written note the Ministry have stated that MSEs requiring guidance can use a
dedicated free telephone service of CGTMSE. Further, all occasions of meeting with
Industries Associations and other relevant bodies are utilized by both the Trust
(CGTMSE) and SIDBI to popularize the Guarantee Scheme and guide interested
entrepreneurs.

ii. CGTMSE —Comparison with other organizations

13. Asked for a comparative account of Credit Guarantee Fund for Medium and Small
Enterprises with similar organizations of other countries, the Ministry informed as under:

"As on March 31, 2020 the corpus of CGTSME was %8,682 crore and the total
fund size was*12,848 crore. The present leverage of CGTMSE considering the
corpus is at around 8 times which is in line with the international best practices as
opined by a professional agency engaged by the Trust to review the Enterprise
Risk Management of the Trust."

14. Elaborating on the functioning of the guarantee instrument of the Trust vis-a-vis
other such schemes being operated by other countries across the globe, the Ministry
stated as under:

“CGTMSE is a member of Asian Credit Supplementation Institutions
Confederation (ACSIC). The ACSIC is the largest Asian Corporative body for the
Small & Medium Enterprises (SMEs) consisting of 16 member institutions from 11
countries. The current member countries of the ACSIC are India, Indonesia,
Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Mongolia, Nepal, Philippines, Sri Lanka, Taiwan and
Thailand. The ACSIC was established in 1987 with the objective of promoting and
developing sound credit supplementation systems. Every year each member
country hosts conference of the members in their respective country by rotation.
The Conference is attended by participants and it serves an opportunity for
knowledge sharing on credit supplementation. It also paves way to deepen
relationships among members, while creating a positive image about the country
contributing to a sustainable development in the future. Each member country
operates Credit Guarantee Programmes in their respective countries which
operate within the scope and requirement of their respective economies. During
the annual conferences the participants, based on the theme of the conference,

4|


exchange their views by giving presentations and this brings greater degree of
cooperation among the existing guarantee organisations in Asian Region and the
guarantee organisations benefit by the experience gathered. However, there are
no exact parallel guarantee instruments being run to enable comparison on best
practices, as pointed out by Audit, as the guarantee programmes are being run by
each country as per the requirement of their respective economies. However,
based on experience gained during these conferences/interactions, CGTMSE has
modified its guarantee scheme from time to time. Further, to increase the
expertise at the top level, CGTMSE has appointed Chief Operating Officer and
Chief IT Officer from the open market."

15. In response to a query of the Committee about the status of India vis-a-vis the
other Asian countries in so far as credit guarantee facilities are concerned, the Ministry
stated as under:
"....1t is felt that there is no institution in existence which is similar to CGTMSE not
only in terms of type of business but also in terms of variety of services offered,
size, availability of funds etc."
16. Asked about the views of the Ministry about the need for structural reforms in the

CGTMSE, the Ministry in a reply stated as follows:

“CGTMSE had engaged the services of consultants by carrying out Business
Process Reengineering and Enterprise Risk Management Framework. The
consultants have submitted their report and the same is being implemented.
Further, a Chief Risk Officer has been appointed and a Risk Management
committee has been constituted. These are expected to guide the Trust in
managing the risk related issues. Further, Trust is also in the process of
engaging an HR Consultant to guide it for HR Organisational structure related
matters.”

tl. OPERATIONAL FRAMEWORK OF THE TRUST

{i) Business Model of the Trust
17. The Credit Guarantee Scheme (CGS) of CGTMSE is a government intervention
Scheme with an objective of fulfilling the credit needs of Micro & Small Enterprises. The
main objective of the scheme is smooth flow of credit to the MSME sector in which the

lender should give importance to project viability and secure the credit facility purely on
the primary security of the assets financed. The other objective is that lender availing
guarantee facility should endeavor to give composite credit (term loan and working
capital facilities from single agency) to the borrowers under Micro & Small Enterprises

Sector.

5]


18. The representative of the Ministry of Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises also
submitted that presently, the projects upto Rs. 200 lakh were being guaranteed by
CGTMSE on a web based digital platform. The Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises in a written reply to the Committee has informed that the present corpus of
the CGTMSE, to be Rs. 8682 crore and the total fund size to be Rs. 12848 crore.

19. As per 73rd round of National Sample Survey (NSS) (July 2015- June 2016)
conducted by Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation (MoSPI), the
estimated employed persons in MSME sector is about 11.10 Crore. As per the
information of Central Statistics office, Ministry of Statistics & Programme
Implementation (MoSPI), MSME sector contributed 30.30 % in all India GDP and 37.30
% of manufacturing output in all India Manufacturing output during 2018-19, and export
share of MSME related products in all India exports during 2019-20 was 49.80%.On the
data furnished, the Audit has observed that the impact of CGTMSE in terms of turnover,

exports and employment figures of MSEs were all estimated based on the information

furnished by MLIs at the time of lodging application for seeking quarantee cover.

20. Having underlined the importance of MSMEs and the role of CGTMSE in
promoting the sector, it is pertinent to detail the business model of CGTMSE, the

salient features of which are as follows:-

a) Corpus fund is contributed by Gol and SIDBI, which is also a Gol
Undertaking.

b) CGTMSE is registered as a Trust and its operations are limited to the
provisions of the Trust deed executed between Gol and SIDBI. CGTMSE
indirectly supports funds flow to the Micro and Small Enterprises (MSEs).

०) The sanction and disbursement of loans to MSEs is done by the Financial
Institutions (FIs). There is no relationship between CGTMSE and borrower
MSEs. CGTMSE does not in.any way provide supporting facilities to MSEs for
availing credit from the Fls.

d) The eligible Fis known as Member Lending Institutions (MLIs) have to
register themselves for availing guarantee from CGTMSE against the credit
extended to MSEs. The MLIs have to execute an agreement with CGTMSE for
this purpose.

e) The MLIs can obtain guarantee cover from CGTMSE for credit extended
upto Rs.2 crore only. The credit facility should be free from any collateral security
or third party guarantee for availing guarantee from CGTMSE.

6 |


f) The appraisal of loan applications or appraisal of proposed business is the
sole responsibility of the MLIs. Credit rating of loans above Rs. 50 lakh is
mandatory for the MLIs.

9) CGTMSE approves guarantee once the scheme parameters are fulfilled.
CGTMSE issues guarantee on payment of prescribed fees by the MLIs.

h) The guarantee instrument of CGTMSE covers 50/ 75/ 80/ 85 per cent (as
per various categories of products/ entrepreneurs/ region) of the loan amount.
21. The Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises in their Background note

furnished to the Committee gave the following details in regard to the Member Lending
Institutions:

"All scheduled commercial banks and specified Regional Rural Banks, NSIC,
NEDFI, SIDBI, SFCs, Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs), Small
Finance Banks (SFBs) & Cooperative Banks which have entered into an
agreement with the Trust (CGTMSE) for the purpose are the eligible lending
institutions for Credit Guarantee Scheme. The eligible lending Institutions,
upon entering into an agreement with CGTMSE, become Member Lending
Institutions (MLIs) of CGTMSE. Presently, there are 145 registered MLIs of
CGTMSE availing the benefit of Credit Guarantee Scheme (CGS)."

(ii) | Regulatory Framework
22. The Trust does not come under/have a regulatory authority like RBI in case of
banking sector and Securities and Exchange Board of India in case of financial sector
and stock markets. The Government of India/Trust has not fixed any norms/benchmarks
with regard to minimum liquidity requirements for the Trust vis-a-vis guarantees
approved/issued and also, it has been observed that there were no laws to regulate
many aspects of the Trust like scope of its operations, governance, capital and

operating requirements as well as access to the State owned funds etc.

23. 116 Trust is not involved in facilitating credit to the unfunded MSEs as appraisal,
sanction, disbursement and recovery proceedings are entirely the responsibility of the

MLIs as per the approved schemes.

24. As per the information made available the trust has not also established/framed
Audit Committee, Risk Management Committee, Human Resource Policy etc. Also
there is no Chief Risk Officer for ensuring that risks relating to credit, market, operations
and liquidity of the corpus fund are identified, assessed, managed, monitored and

reported to the senior management and Board.

71


25.

On the issue of absence of a proper regulatory framework, the representative of

MSME while disposing before the Committee stated as under:-

26.

".... The only issue is that during our own internal discussion, two to three views
have emerged. One is that whether there should be two separate regulators for
these two mechanisms, namely NCGTSE and CGTMSE. The second view is that
there should be a joint regulator so that they know what is happening in each of
these so that they can fill the gaps and if any gap is arising in one whether the
same can be filled up by the second mechanism. The third view is that the role
can be played by some existing regulator. It could be RBI, it could be IRDA etc.
These are the three views. On this also we have been discussing. We will go
back to Government with your direction and guidance. We will take a view."

At the time of formation of CGTMSE a representative from RBI (ED Level

functionary) was part of the Board of Trustees. However, subsequently on the specific
request of RBI, the said representation was withdrawn by GOI and Chairman of IBA

was inducted in the Board of Trustees as a replacement. On a query in regard to the

regulatory framework, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:-

8|

“CGTMSE has been functioning for over 20 years and has never faced any
issues related to liquidity/erosion of corpus. The Trust has been self-sustaining
with capital seeded by Settlors (Ministry of MSME and SIDBI). Till now there has
not been a single instance where the trust has experienced depletion of its
corpus. CGTMSE’s primary role is to facilitate credit to MSEs through Lending
Institutions. As could be seen from the guarantee operations, CGTMSE is
achieving its objective in facilitating credit to MSE borrowers who may not
otherwise access required credit from the formal lenders. Further, it may also be
noted that the Lending Institutions (through which the scheme operates) are
regulated by RBI and their operational guidelines for resource raising, lending,
recovery, investment, and risk mitigation policies with regard to above
operations, etc. are framed by their respective Boards/Managements which are
framed within the overall framework of RBI guidelines. CGTMSE has put in place
Board approved guidelines for its entire operations viz. guarantee operations,
investments, etc. It may be mentioned that CGTMSE is providing guarantee
services only to the Lending Institutions which are regulated by RBI. Further,
such Lending Institutions have their board level committees viz. Audit Committee,
Risk Management Committee, etc. for taking care of, inter alia, risk arising out of
lending to MSE borrowers. Hence, as CGTMSE is having direct dealing only with
Institutions regulated by RBI, setting up of Audit Committee, etc. may not be
required. Further, CGTMSE has also framed Enterprise Risk Management Policy
through a professional agency and the same is being implemented. Moreover, a
Risk Officer has been appointed and a Risk Committee has been constituted
which takes care of risk arising out of guarantee operations, investments, etc."


27. In response to a query regarding the constitution of a Credit guarantee Authority,
the Ministry in their post evidence written reply, stated that it would be difficult to

indicate a time frame within which the same would be fructified.

28. The main recommendation in the Report of the Expert Committee on Micro,
Small and Medium Enterprise chaired by Shri U.K. Sinha, is that all credit guarantee
schemes should be subject to the regulation and supervision of RBI. These guidelines
could draw upon the well acknowledged principles for design implementation and
evaluation of public credit guarantee schemes for SMEs, which has been evolved by the
World Bank Group.

29. Further, when probed about whether the lack of regulatory framework and
supervisory authority has impaired the functioning and control of the Trust, the Ministry

in their written reply, stated as under:-

"It may be mentioned that CGTMSE is providing guarantee services to the
Lending Institutions which are regulated by RBI. Since CGTMSE is dealing with
RBI regulated institutions, lack of a separate regulator has not impaired the
functioning and control of the Trust. As could be seen from the guarantee
operations, CGTMSE during its 20 years of operations, has facilitated cumulative
credit worth Rs. 2.22 lakh crore in respect of more than 43 lakh beneficiary
accounts."

30. In response to a further query in this regard, the Ministry, in their reply stated as
under:

"CGTMSE is monitored by its Board and the Settlors (Ministry of MSME, GOI and
SIDBI).It may be mentioned that at the time of formation of CGTMSE, a
representative from RBI (ED Level functionary) was part of the Board of Trustee.
However, subsequently on the specific request of RBI, the said representation
was withdrawn by GOI and Chairman of IBA was inducted in the Board of
Trustees as a replacement.CGTMSE has been functioning for over 20 years and
has never faced any issues related to liquidity/erosion of corpus. The Trust has
been self-sustaining with capital seeded by Settlors (Ministry of MSME and
SIDBI). Till now there has not been a single instance where the trust has
experienced depletion of its corpus. हि

CGTMSE’s primary role is to facilitate credit to MSEs through Lending
Institutions. As could be seen from the guarantee operations, CGTMSE during its
20 years of operations, has facilitated cumulative credit worth %2.22 lakh crore in
respect of more than 43 lakh beneficiary accounts. Thus, CGTMSE has played
an important role as an enabler in the financial ecosystem and has benefited the
entrepreneurs including new generation in their entrepreneurial journey. Hence, it
may be seen that CGTMSE is achieving its objective in facilitating credit to MSE

9|


borrowers who may not otherwise access required credit from the formal lenders.
CGTMSE has put in place duly approved by the Board the requisite guidelines
for its entire range of operations viz. guarantee operations, investments, etc. It
may be noted that CGTMSE only provides guarantee services to the Lending
Institutions and these institutions are regulated by RBI. The operational
guidelines for resource raising, lending, recovery, investment, and risk mitigation
policies with regard to above operations are framed by their respective
Boards/Managements within the overall framework of RBI guidelines.

Further, such Lending Institutions have their board level committees viz. Audit
Committee, Risk Management Committee, etc. for taking care of, inter alia, risk
arising out of lending to MSE borrowers. It is submitted that CGTMSE has direct
dealing only with Institutions regulated by RBI and has only a single mandated
product, viz. providing guarantee. Therefore, setting up of Audit Committee, etc.
would not serve any useful purpose and may not be required. Further, CGTMSE
has already framed Enterprise Risk Management Policy through a professional
agency and the same is being implemented. Also, a Risk Officer has been
appointed and a Risk Committee has been constituted which takes care of risk
arising out of guarantee operations, investments, etc."
31. The Board of Trustees (BoT) had in November, 2015 approved a proposal for
formulation of regulatory guidelines for the Trust by a Consultant firm. The firm has
submitted a report in May, 2017 suggesting an accounting framework for CGTMSE,
fixing minimum parameters like solvency and capital adequacy, exposure norms,
leverage ratio and establishment of regulatory authority for the Trust. However, the

report of the Consultant was not placed before the BoT.

32. The Ministry in their reply submitted that C6TMSE has again hired a Consultant
for carrying out the Business Process Reengineering (BPR) and Enterprise Risk
Management (ERM) Framework which was underway when the audit submitted the
report. The Audit has observed that this report would be placed before the

Board/Settlors for their consideration.

33. | While tendering oral evidence, the Secretary, Ministry of MSME mentioned that a
Regulator should be there for the Trust but in what shape and in “what manner, that is

the only issue that is to be decided by the Government”.

(iii) Overlap of Functions - NCGTC and CGTMSE

34. The National Credit Guarantee Trustee Company (NCGTC) was incorporated in
March, 2014 to manage and operate various credit guarantee Trust funds. One of the
funds of NCGTC, Credit Guarantee Fund for Micro Units (CGFMU) provides guarantee

10 |


for loans up to Rs.10 lakh sanctioned by banks, NBFCs/MFls and other financial
intermediaries engaged in similar business. Ministry of Finance notified on 18 April,
2016 CGFMU for providing guarantees to loans extended under Pradhan Mantri Mudra
Yojana (PMMY)

35. The Board of CGTMSE in its meeting held on 5 August, 2015 resolved that no
fresh guarantees would be approved by the Trust to its MLIs for loans up to Rs. 10 lakh
once the guarantee scheme under PMMY/ MUDRA was made operational by NCGTC.
Further a decision was taken on 5.1.2017, during the meeting of the Banks, SIDBI and
CGTMSE under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of Micro, Smal! and Medium
Enterprises, that loans upto Rs.10 lakh should not be covered under CGTMSE and
should be covered under Pradhan Mantri MUDRA Yojana (PMMY)/MUDRA.

36. The Trust, however, did not implement the directions of the Ministry and
continued to provide guarantee against loans, which were eligible for guarantee cover
under the Credit Guarantee Fund for Micro Units (CGFMU) of National Credit
Guarantee Trustee Company Limited (NCGTC). Thus, both NCGTC (National Credit
Guarantee Trustee Company limited) and CGTMSE have been issuing guarantees

against loans upto Rs. 10 lakh for same type of projects.

37. Audit has objected to the CGTMSE continuing to extend credit guarantee for
loans upto Rs. 10 lakh though the Ministry had directed to discontinue them, as these
guarantees were covered by NCGTC. Audit has found that the Trust on its own decided
that the MLIs should be given option from which agency they want to take guarantee.
Facility of guarantee for the same type projects from two different Government backed
institutions not only results in overlapping of functions of the institutions but also
hampers the growth of both the institutions as time, manpower, and other resources are
invested in promoting the same product. There was no coordination between CGTMSE
and NCGTC and different MLIs to identify and prevent cases of overlap of guarantee.
The MLIs who obtained guarantee from both the institutions have no responsibility to
ensure mutual exclusion. This has concentrated funds with some entrepreneurs and
has prevented horizontal spread of credit funds. The Audit has found that the Trust,

while violating the direction of the Ministry has issued 3,70,391 number of guarantees

11|


amounting to Rs. 10,743.65 crore against loans up to Rs. 10 lakh during 6 January,
2017 and 30 September, 2018.

‘38. . The Committee also take note of the Recommendations of the Expert Committee
on Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises chaired by Shri U.K. Sinha which
recommended that NCGTC has been set up as a Government Company while
CGTMSE is predominantly owned by Government with SIDBI holding a minority share.
It has been felt necessary that the top management of both these institutions are
professionalised and sourced from a wider pool. Further, it has been felt that it would
also be appropriate that SIDBI disengage itself from day to day management and
Boards of both NCGTC and CGTMSE.

39. To a query as to why CGTMSE did not follow the above recommendations and
tried to widen the guarantee cases to cover up unfunded loans, the representative of the
Ministry of Small, Micro and Medium Enterprises while tendering evidence before the

Committee stated as under:-

“The Board of CGTMSE has decided that option of choosing the guarantee
scheme operated by CGTMSE and NCGTC Ltd. may be left to the concerned
MLIs while applying for the guarantee cover for eligible loans. Further, a suitable
mechanism to ensure that the same credit facility does not get covered by both
guarantee organisations has been put in place. It may be mentioned that NCGTC
can cover only MUDRA loans upto Rs.10 lakh. Further, all loans upto Rs.10 lakh
are not MUDRA loans and hence option should be given to MLIs for taking
guarantee cover from CGTMSE. A number of MLIs have given a feedback that
they favour guarantee cover of CGTMSE over Credit Guarantee Fund for Micro
Units (CGFMU) in the segment of loans below Rs.10 lakh and want the CGTMSE
Scheme to continue. It may be mentioned that the portfolio of CGTMSE for loans
below Rs. 20 lakh is more than 50% of its total portfolio. It is therefore proposed
that CGTMSE may be allowed to continue to provide credit guarantees for loans
upto Rs. 10 lakh.”

40. During oral evidence the representative of the Ministry/Trust clarified on the point
as follows:-
“But our own view is that this issue may not be insisted upon because it gives
more options to the MLIs, it gives more options to the small units.... This is an

issue for consideration of the august Committee. Based on your guidance
obviously we will go to the Government for final verdict on the matter.”

12 |


(iv) Coverage and Impact of the Guarantee Scheme

41. CGTMSE's participation in total outstanding credit to MSE sector as on 31४
March, 2019 was only 5.66%. Asked about the number of guarantees advanced during
the last five years, the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises in their written

reply stated as under:-

The number of guarantees furnished by CGTMSE

Financial Year_|No. __| Amount in Crores

16-17 452127 19931.49

17-18 263195 19065.90

18-19 435520 30168.57

19-20 846650 45851.22
42. While furnishing details of the changes in policy it has been informed that
CGTMSE has witnessed exponential growth in last three years. During FY 2020, the

amount of guarantees approved increased to Rs. 45,852 crore from Rs. 30,168 crore
during the previous year registering a growth of 52%. Further, the number of guarantees
has increased from 4.26 lakh in FY 2019 to 8.47 lakh in FY 2020 registering a growth of
94%.

43. The Committee also noted that the recommendation of the K.V. Kamath
Committee for credit to MSME sector from CGTMSE emphasis on coverage of 15% of
credit extended under CGTMSE. Asked as to how the Ministry proposed to enhance the
level of participation, the Ministry, in the first instance in a written reply mentioned as
under:
“The guarantee scheme being run by CGTMSE is an MLI driven scheme and the
option to take guarantee was wholly with the MLIs. MLIs are neither mandated to

cover all their MSE loans under the scheme nor all such loans are eligible for
coverage.”

44. On further enquiry in the matter the Ministry informed the Committee that position
of low coverage was analysed and major policy changes in the Credit guarantee
products in the recent past such as hybrid security model, inclusion of retail trade
activity, increase.in the extent of guarantee coverage to 75%, charging guarantee fees
on outstanding amount, inclusion of NBFCs, SFBs, Cooperative Banks etc. which made

the Credit Guarantee Scheme attractive to the MLIs as well as to the MSE borrowers.

13 |


45.

In view of the fact that two schemes were operational for providing credit

Guarantee, the Ministry was posed with the query regarding means by way which

universal credit guarantee could be ideally provided. In this regard, the Ministry in their

written reply stated as under:~

46.

“Each country operates Credit Guarantee Programmes in their respective
countries which operate within the scope and requirement of their respective
economies. The guarantee coverage generally ranges between 50% to 100%.
Further, within CGTMSE's Scheme, differential coverage/fee is prescribed for
extending some benefits to the needy segment of the MSE Sector as well to ring
fence Trust's financial viability from the risk perspective.”

v. Provision for weaker sections

On being asked about the details of credit guarantee advanced to weaker

sections of society, the MSME in a post evidence written reply, stated as under:-

47.

"As per data submitted by MLIs to CGTMSE, the percentage of SCs/STs is
around 3%. ॥ may be mentioned that MLIs, while applying for guarantee with
CGTMSE, update the data available with them at the time of sanction of credit
facilities. Further, it is not mandatory for the borrower to declare the category as
SC/ST at the time of applying for loan with the bank. Further, in respect of
Partnership firms and Limited companies obtaining social categorization may be
difficult by the MLIs.

Credit Guarantee is a demand driven scheme implemented through MLIs/Banks.
The Credit facilities sanctioned by MLIs/Banks are guaranteed by CGTMSE.
Lending Institutions/Banks have their own target to cover enterprises run by
Women and SC/ST entrepreneurs as per the Government directive. CGTMSE
provides credit guarantees to all such eligible credit facilities sanctioned by
MLIs/Banks. CGTMSE, however, provides benefits to MSEs run by Women
entrepreneurs by providing additional guarantee coverage and also by charging
concessional guarantee fee."

vi. Impact of COVID 19 Pandemic
Elaborating the impact of Covid-19 and demonetization on the guarantees given

to the small units, the MSME in their post evidence written reply stated as under:-

14 |

"A professional agency has been assigned by Credit Guarantee Trust for Micro &
Small Enterprises to assess the impact of CETMSE on economy. The agency
will interact with the CGTMSE's beneficiary units and also counterfactuals and
will submit its report. The agency has already commenced the survey. However,
due to COVID pandemic the survey is put on hold temporarily, which is expected
to re-start. The agency would be covering impact of COVID-19 and
demonetization on MSEs covered under CGTMSE guarantee. It is pertinent to
mention that CGTMSE has settled claims to the tune of $967 crore, %817 crore
and %1002 crore during the financial years 2018, 2019 and 2020 respectively.


This implies that demonetisation did not have any adverse impact on the
guarantees given by the Trust."
48. Asked about the steps taken by the Government 'Post-Covid’ for the MSME
sector the representatives of the Ministry while tendering oral evidence mentioned that
Government has taken number of initiatives under Atma Nirbhar Bharat Abhiyan to
support the MSME sector. Some of these are as follows:
i. Rs. 3 lakh crore Collateral Free automatic Loan for businesses
including MSMEs;
ii. Rs. 20,000 crore Subordinate Debt for Stressed MSMEs;

iii. Rs. 50,000 crore equity infusion through MSME Fund of Funds
iv. New Revised criteria for classification of MSMEs;

v. New Registration of MSMEs through “Udyam Registration” for ease
of doing Business’ and

vi. No Global tenders for procurement up to Rs. 200 crores, this will
help MSME.

49. Further, an online portal “Champion” has been lunched from 1 June, 2020 which
includes many aspects of governance and grievance redressal and hand holding of
MSMEs.

50. When asked about extra efforts being made by CGTMSE to help sustain SMEs,
whose businesses were affected due to the disruption caused by the pandemic and
exogenous shock due to Lockdown, the Ministry, in their reply stated as under:-

"CGTMSE is implementing the Credit Guarantee Scheme for Subordinate Debt
for supporting the stressed SMEs affected due to the disruption caused by the
pandemic and exogenous shock due to lockdown. Further, CGTMSE is also
allowing need based relaxation in the time limit for submission of application for
availment of Guarantee. Trust has also allowed guarantee for additional loan
sanctioned by MLIs due to COVID to the borrowers within the overall cap of = 200
lakh per borrower on outstanding basis.

51. The following key changes were announced/introduced during the last two years:

> Charging Annual Guarantee Fees (AGF) on Outstanding Loan Amount
rather than sanction amount under CGTMSE.

> Expanding the Coverage of the Credit Guarantee Scheme (CGS) to cover
MSE Retail Traders segment.

> Allowing loans with Partial Collateral Security under Credit Guarantee
Scheme. This has brought a large chunk of loans under the ambit of credit
guarantees.

> Extent of guarantee for loans above Rs. 40 lakh has been increased from
50% to 75%.

15 |


हि

Introducing new product for NBFCs to enable them to avail loan
guarantees under the credit guarantee scheme. Allowing NBFCs to avail
benefits of credit guarantee would increase the scheme coverage as
NBFCs have become an integral part of financial system in meeting credit
demand of MSE sector.

> Small Finance Banks, Cooperative Banks and Fin-tech NBFCs have
played a major role in lending MSEs. Therefore, CGTMSE has included
Small Finance Banks, Fin-tech NBFCs registered with RBI and
Cooperative Banks as Member Lending Institutions (MLIs) under
CGTMSE.

CGTMSE has removed one-time cap of Rs. 200 lakh and now the MSEs
can avail credit guarantee on the incremental credit facilities subject to a
maximum cap of Rs. 200 lakh on the outstanding basis.

vy

vii. Decline in number of Guarantee cases

52. The business of the Trust was showing a declining trend as the number of
guarantee covers issued to the MLIs for collateral free credit allowed to MSE sector
drastically declined (61%) from 4.63 lakh to 1.79 lakh during 2016-2019. The
corresponding amount of guarantees issued declined (17%) from Rs. 18,416.62 crore to
Rs. 15,241.57 crore during this period.

53. | When asked about the reasons for steady decline in amount and drastic decline
in number of guarantees issued from 2016 and 2019, the Ministry admitted to the

decline and replied as under:

"..., on observing that the business of the Trust was stagnant during FY 2015-
2018, the Trust analyzed the causes and accordingly introduced major policy
changes in the existing guarantee product during rebooting of CGTMSE. The
changes sought to make the credit guarantee product attractive to the MLIs as
well as to the MSE borrowers. With these policy changes the portfolio of
CGTMSE started growing with effect from FY 2019. During FY 2018 the amount
of guarantees approved were to the tune of Rs.19,066 crore. During FY 2020,
the amount of Guarantees approved increased to Rs. 45,851 crore from Rs.
30,169 crore during the previous year registering a growth of 52%.Further, the
number of guarantees has increased from 4.36 lakh in FY 2019 to 8.47 lakh in
FY 2020 registering a growth of over 94%. This was highest ever growth in
guarantee approvals.

Cumulatively, as on March 31, 2020, a total of over 43 lakh guarantees have
been accorded approvals for Rs. 2.22 lakh crore.

54. Noting that the Ministry has not specifically mentioned the reasons for steady
decline in the amount and in the number of guarantees granted during 2016-2019, the

Committee felt that one of the reasons may be due to incorporation of NCGTC which

16 |


started providing guarantee for loans upto Rs.10 lakh under CGFMU. Thus, the amount
in case of CGMSE Trust declined for loans upto Rs.10 lakh. The Audit has mentioned
that the Ministry and the Management did not provide any reply to Audit observations in
this respect. In this regard, the Committee have been informed:

“As per the overall architecture of CGTMSE guarantee scheme, the appraisal

and due diligence of the borrower is the responsibility of the MLIs. MLIs also
submit an undertaking that they have carried out proper due diligence.

In case an account is declared fraud by the lending institution, the same is not
eligible for claim settlement by CGTMSE. CGTMSE has the right to withdraw
guarantee/reject claim if major discrepancies noticed subsequent to issue of
guarantee. Further, Lending Institutions, regulated by RBI, are required to follow
RBI's guidelines on declaring an account as fraud. Therefore, Lending Institution
has to take action in accordance with the RBI's guidelines issued in this regard.”

55. During oral evidence, the Ministry was posed with the question on the ground
situation where the MLIs have rejected loans of MSMEs due to lack of collateral or third
party guarantee and whether in such case(s) it was possible for the Trust to extend
guarantee to the applicant and ask the MLI to extend loans. The Ministry, in their written
reply in this regard mentioned that banks have their own internal guidelines for giving
loans and CGTMSE does not interfere in that process. Such guidelines can be issued by
RBI.

IV. PERFORMANCE OF THE TRUST

i. Financial performance

56. During 2015-16 to 2018-19 the Trust has reported excess of income over
expenditure. This was due to interest on refund of Income Tax of Rs. 62.47 crore. The
Corpus fund of the Trust was increased vide modification made in the Trust deed in the
year 2017. It was increased to Rs. 7500 crore out of which the share of Government of
India is Rs. 7000 crore and share of SIDBI is Rs. 500 crore.

57. Government of India has contributed 57.68% and 11.15% of its share in the year
2017-18 and 2018-2019 respectively. Regarding leveraging of fund with the Trust, as
per the information furnished, guaranteeing collateral free credit was five times of the
corpus fund in the year 2001 and it was increased to 10 times in 2010. The leverage
benchmark on the basis of guarantee approvals does not exhibit a correct picture as
Trust is liable to pay only the guaranteed portion and the share of MLIs is excluded. The

17|


Trust does not estimate the outgo towards first claims rejected on technical grounds and
also second claims expected to be lodged by the MLIs. Also, as seen from the
information furnished applications are rejected on technical grounds and Information
Education Campaign (IEC) is not being implemented with full measures.

ii. Operational Problems relating to Data

58. Under CGS-I Scheme, MLIs are required to upload the borrower's information in
the prescribed format for obtaining guarantee cover from the Trust. The MLIs are not
required to upload the financial details of the primary security created by the borrowers
after disbursement of loan. These details are uploaded at the time of marking NPA and
lodgment of the first claim. As per the Scheme the Trust approves/ issues guarantees
on the basis of mandatory details filled by the MLIs like type of activity, nature of
industry, interest rate charged by the bank and the amount of loan, type of loan; details

of borrowers/ MSE unit, etc.

59. The Approval/ issue of guarantees on this basis did not take into consideration
the management of the borrower unit, technical feasibility of the project and financial
capacity of the borrower/ promoters. Even the system/ portal is not adequate enough to

verify the accuracy of the details filled by the MLIs.

60. The scheme framed by the Trust does not provide for any mechanism for
appraisal of loan applications/projects of the borrowers. The responsibility of appraisal
lies with the MLIs.

61. Thus, the present system of guarantee merely verifies the mandatory details of
borrowers as filled by MLIs. This process did not take into consideration the
management of the borrower unit, technical feasibility of the project and financial

capacity of borrowers/promoters. This has resulted in accounts becoming NPA.

62. It has been observed by Audit that there is lack of control of CGTMSE so far as
filling up of data by MLIs in the CGTMSE portal is concerned. MLIs did not fill up non-
mandatory data and quality of data filled were also of poor quality. In 99.84% cases
there was no legal ID and type of Chief Promoter of MSE, year of birth of Chief
Promoter was mentioned as 1794, 1657, 1690, 1653, 1904 etc. and year of sanction of
term credit mentioned as 2020, 2023, 2022, 2097 and 2098. PIN code of location of

18 |


MSE was mentioned as 000000. CGTMSE has not been insisting on PAN Card while
extending guarantee. In about 1852 cases examined by audit the number of employees
has not been mentioned. In 6007 cases, it was found that project sales turnover was
either zero or was blank or it is only Rs. 1000/-. In 94% cases Mobile number of Chief
Promoter was either missing or found to be not correct. The above mentioned cases are

only illustrative as observed by Audit.

63. These serious discrepancies have been accepted by the Ministry and it has
mentioned that Business Process Reengineering (BPR) exercise is being done and

there was no reply in regard to verification prior to extending guarantee.

64, MLIs are required to make online applications on the CGTMSE portal in the
prescribed format for obtaining cover. It has been found that MLIs are applying for
guarantee cover more than once on same application. Trust has issued guarantee
amounting to Rs.17.15 crore (indicative only) to such cases. Issue of duplicate
guarantee questions the efficacy of online guarantee system. The issue of duplicate
guarantees compromises the financial interest of the Trust and is reflective of lack of
business prudence. The Trust and the Ministry have accepted the audit observations.

65. During oral evidence, when asked about filling of data by MLIs and remedial

measures taken, the Ministry in a written reply, mentioned as follows:

“...the responsibility of feeding correct data lies with the MLIs as they only have
the primary source of data to verify the correctness. Nevertheless, to enhance
the correctness of data, logical validation of various fields have been introduced.
Further, drop down box option has been given to MLIs from selecting from the list
of values for the important data fields. These data fields are made mandatory
and such fields cannot be left blank. Provisions of pop up at the time of filling the
details have also been introduced. Further, MLIs are being strictly instructed to
ensure correctness of data.”

ii. Business Operations

66. Inadequate system of approval of guarantees had jeopardised the financial
interests and business viability of the Trust as can be seen from the fact that income
from core business activities was not adequate to meet the claims which resulted in
deferment of the claims and high level of NPAs. The Trust guarantees major portion of
the amount in default (50 per cent to 85 per cent of the loan amount guaranteed) which

19|


further underlines the requirement of an adequate system to minimise NPAs and claims

on account of above reasons.

67. The Management stated (March 2019) that CGTMSE has implemented a system
of basic scrutiny of guarantee applications above Rs. 1 crore on certain key parameters
at the time of approval of guarantee. Further, the Trust has recently formulated
guidelines for online capture of financial data such as operating income, Profit After Tax
(PAT), debt-equity ratio, net-worth, current ratio, CIBIL score of the chief promoters,
total assets, etc. in guarantee application form based on the ticket size of the guarantee
amount. In case of any deviations in the appraisal process before sanctioning of the
loan on account of delinquencies in the due diligence on the part of the MLI, the Trust is

not liable to pay the defaulted amount in respect of such accounts.

68. The Ministry added (September 2019) that CGTMSE has proved its viability by
way of successful operation over 18 years. The guidelines, as mentioned by the
Management, were introduced (13 November 2018) and made applicable from 1
December 2018 after being pointed out by Audit. Details, as mentioned by the
Management were not applicable for loan size upto %10 lakh despite the Trust having
business of around 90 per cent in this ticket size. Further, there were no guidelines for
decision-making based upon the information collected. Also, the online module did not
provide any platform for decision-making based on these details. As regards rejection of
claims on account of delinquencies in appraisal by MLIs, the inspections carried out by
the Trust were meagre to find out the delinquencies on the part of MLIs.

69. Audit has concluded that the reply of the Ministry does not hold good in the light
of the deficiencies pointed out by the Trust itself during inspections of MLIs.

iv. Investment grading, credit rating & its Impact

70. As per clause 9 of CGS-I all proposals for sanction of guarantee approvals for
credit facilities above Rs. 50 lakh and upto Rs.200 lakh will have to be rated internally
by the MLI and should be of investment grade. If there is no rating for loans upto Rs. 50
lakh, MLIs have to indicate NA (not available) in the format prescribed by the trust. The
Trust has not defined the term ‘Investment Grade’. Therefore, MLIs are free to decide

the investment grade on their own.

20 |


71. Analysis by Audit has disclosed that the column ‘internal rating’ was either left
blank by the MLIs or mentioned as NA/NIL. In 4495 cases, the guarantee amount was
more than हैं 50 lakh. In only 567 cases, the ratings were having symbols prescribed
under the performance and credit rating scheme for micro and small enterprises. In
about 1.18 lakh cases MLIs indicated symbols like A,B,B+, B++ etc. Since there was no
rating structure MLIs had liberty to put any character, numeral/symbol in the internal
rating column. There was no uniformity in rating structure and the Trust has not put in
place any mechanism to evaluate or assess the adequacy of the ratings done by the
MLIs as the physical document was not required to be uploaded in the system.

72. The rating column was to be filled in online as per the system prevalent upto 25
May, 2016. Subsequently the system was weakened by allowing indication of only
either ‘Yes’ or 'No' in the ‘rating column’ & in the column meant for marking ‘investment

grade’.

73. Both the Ministry and the Management have argued that MLIs are regulated by
RBI and they were required to comply with the risk management guidelines stipulated
by RBI. The Ministry also argued that scrutinizing the rating report alone at CGTMSE
would not add value. The Trust has not got any assurance from the MLIs that they have
been following RBI guidelines. Further, the Trust was required to issue guarantee only
for those proposals, which are properly rated by the MLIs. Further, the RBI, in its 2015
report titled “Report on the functioning of C6TMSE and the Credit Guarantee System in
India” has stated as follows:

“On account of substantial moral hazard inherent in such schemes and in
absence of a robust oversight mechanism from the CGTMSE, the present
scheme has got reduced to one that incentivises lax credit processing by banks
and reduced credit discipline on the part of the borrowers. This problem has the
potential to play havoc with our financial system and must be addressed by the
CGTMSE on priority basis.”

74. Explaining the reasons for not attempting to define 'Investment Grade' and details

of the connotations ascribed to the term, the Ministry replied as under:

"All MLIs assess / rate the proposals based on their internal guidelines, due
diligence and judgement of the promoters/projects. Further, all the lending
institutions are having their own rating/score models for classification of the loan
proposals as investment grade or otherwise. Investment Grade is a benchmark
based on which any lending institution takes a call for providing credit facility or
otherwise. Banks sanction the loans only to the proposals meeting the benchmark

23 |


of investment grade. Proposals sanctioned after passing through this criteria are
lodged for guarantee coverage.

It may therefore be. seen that undertaking for proper due diligence is already
obtained by the Trust and considering that each MLI follows its own guidelines for
due diligence, it may not be feasible for CGTMSE to define universal investment
grade.”

75. On the impact of CGTMSE guarantee instrument, it is observed that the figures
given on turnover, exports and employment were all estimated based on the information
furnished by MLIs at the time of lodging application with the Trust for seeking guarantee
cover and the data were not realistic or actual. The Trust also did not call for the details
or get the details uploaded from the MLIs in its portal after commencement of business
by the MSEs or close of a MSE unit after default.

76. The Management has accepted this observation and stated (to audit) that efforts
would be made to measure the realistic impact of the guarantees on a sample basis.
This would be done with verifiable data and not just projected estimations.

77. The Ministry informed (September 2019) that CGTMSE has initiated process for

pan India impact assessment study by a professional agency.

v. Collaterals
78. The primary objective of establishing the Trust by the Settlors was to provide
guarantee against loans not secured by collateral or third party guarantees. Clause 4 of
the Scheme also stipulates that the Trust would cover credit facilities extended by MLIs
to a single eligible borrower in MSE sector for credit facilities (term loan and/ or working

capital) without any collateral security and/ or third party guarantees.

79. Audit has observed that the MLIs, while applying for guarantee cover had to mark
‘Yes’ or ‘No’ options in the columns indicating ‘Collateral Security Taken’ and ‘Third
Party Guarantee’. The column indicating ‘Collateral Security Taken’ was a mandatory
field while column indicating ‘Third Party Guarantee Taken’ was not marked as
mandatory even though the Scheme did not allow acceptance of third party guarantees.

80. The Trust introduced (28 February 2018) a ‘Hybrid Security’ product wherein the
MLIs were allowed to obtain collateral security for a part of the credit facility whereas the
remaining part of the credit facility upto a maximum of Rs. 200 lakh could be covered
under Scheme. Accordingly, a new field was inserted in the online portal with the name

‘Application Under Hybrid Security Model’. The MLIs obtaining guarantee cover under

22 |


hybrid security model have to click ‘Yes’ or ‘No’ in this column. Review of the data of live
guarantees (guarantee started prior to 28 February 2018) disclosed that the MLIs took
collateral security from the borrowers in 314 cases (Rs. 42.50 crore), third party
guarantees in 391 cases (Rs. 45.59 crore) and both collateral and third party guarantee
in 28 cases (Rs.3.68 crore). The Trust provided sanction letters of HDFC Bank out of the
above mentioned cases. The sanction letters mentioned ‘Nil’ collateral security but there
was no mention of third party guarantees. Thus, the Trust did not implement adequate
checks in the system to prima facie reject those applications where the MLIs had
indicated acceptance of collateral and third party guarantees from the borrowers.
Further, the approver of the guarantee applications had also ignored these vital facts.
This is indicative that the MLIs had doubly secured themselves by accepting collateral or
third party guarantees as CGTMSE was not required to issue guarantee cover to these
MLIs where they had accepted collateral and third party guarantees from the MSEs. The
Ministry did not reply to the Audit observation made in this regard. The Management,
however, stated (March 2019) that filling the status of ‘collateral security’ and ‘third party
guarantee’ was mandatory for the MLI with ‘yes’ or ‘no’ option. The system rejects the
application if the MLI clicks ‘yes’ for collateral security or third party guarantee taken.
The fields were made optional after introduction of ‘hybrid security’ product.

81. Asked to explain the basis of the hybrid security model, the Ministry, in a written

reply, stated as under:-

"CGTMSE guarantees credit facilities sanctioned by its Member Lending
Institutions without any collateral security. “Hybrid Security’ model allows
guarantee cover for the portion of credit facility not covered by collateral security.
It may be mentioned that when a borrower, having collateral security with lesser
value than the loan requirement approaches bank for a loan, he/she was denied
the credit facility. With the introduction of Hybrid Security model, such borrowers
will also be eligible to get higher value loan and cover the portion of loan under
credit guarantee. Accordingly, this model supplements the stated objective of
CGTMSE to facilitate flow of credit to such cases where either the collateral
security is not available or not available in sufficient value, to the extent of
satisfaction of the lender."

82. When asked whether banks insist on collaterals, the representative of the Ministry

submitted as under:-

“Banks take the decision to provide loan on the basis of their internal guidelines
and CGTMSE does not interfere in the process. Banks furnish approval to loans
on the basis of internal credit guidelines issued by RBI, included in the

23 |


comprehensive guidelines of RBI and then take action. RBI regulates
Banks/Lending Institutions. Therefore, RBI/Government of India can issue
directives to CGTMSE for collateral free loans. As per the extant guidelines of
RBI, collateral security cannot be insisted on loans less than Rs.10 lakh. But
Trust do not require guarantee on such loans."

V. NPAS, CLAIMS AND RECOVERIES
i. Inspection and Recovery from MLIs

83. As per stipulations pertaining to CGS-1, the responsibility and accountability in
regard to sanction, monitoring and remittance of recoveries to the Trust lies with MLIs.
Clause 150) of the Scheme provides the Trust right to inspection or call for copies of the
books of account and other records of the lending institutions. As per the provision every
officer or other employee of the lending institution or the borrower who is in a position to
do so shall make available the documents to the officers of the Trust or SIDBI or the
person appointed for the inspection as the case may be.

84. The Trust did not plan the inspections of MLIs as no criterion was fixed for
selection of MLIs, targets and achievements in respect of MLIs and accounts to be
covered and regions to be focused upon. During 2016-17 and 2017-18, the Trust carried
out inspections on sample basis where claims settled was more than Rs. 10 lakh. The
inspections were not commensurate with the guarantees issued, NPAs reported, claims
lodged by the MLIs and shortcomings noticed in the inspection reports.

85. No inspection was carried out in respect of accounts where claim has not been
lodged by the MLI. The scrutiny of inspection reports disclosed the following

shortcomings:
(i) Stock statements not submitted by the borrowers timely to the MLI;

(iii) internal reports of the MLIs indicating the borrower as willful defaulter but
not reported to the RBI

(iv) non-availability of staff accountability reports;

(v) one-time settlement done by the MLIs but recoveries not remitted to the
Trust;

(vi) non-availability of end-use reports of the funds;

(vii) legal action taken by the MLIs after lodgement of the claims;

(शी) recoveries post-NPA date not mentioned by MLIs in the claim form;

(ix) recoveries not remitted to the Trust after payment of claim by the Trust;

24 |


(x) inspection not carried out by the MLIs as per norms;

(xi) mismatch of NPA date recorded in the CGTMSE’s portal with actual
record;

(xii) serious lapses on the part of MLI staff as per staff accountability report;

(xiii) end use of fund not found satisfactory;

(xiv) _ pre-sanction due diligence not observed by the MLIs

(xv) project financials and estimates and sales tax return not obtained from the
borrowers;

(xvi) KYC documents not signed by the borrowers at the time of sanction;

(xvii) Sanction of loan before receipt of pre-sanction reports;

(xviii) Forged balance sheet and profit and loss statement submitted by the

borrower, etc.

86. As per Clause 10 (५) of the scheme the lending institution would be liable to
refund the claim released by the Trust together with penal interest of the rate of four per
cent per annum above the prevailing bank rate, if a recall is made by the Trust in the
event of serious deficiencies having existed in the matter of appraisal/renewal/follow
up/conduct of the credit facility or where there existed suppression of any material
information on the part of the lending institutions for the settlement of claims. It was
found that out of 1749 accounts inspected by the Trust during 2015-16 to 2017-18, there
were recoveries in 507 accounts amounting to Rs.71.41 crore and MLIs deposited the
amount with delays ranging between 4 to 722 days. The Trust however, did not charge

any interest on account of delay of remittance of the amount.

87. In 2015, RBI made several suggestions: (i) to put in place suitable incentives and
penalties framework to enable the MLIs to undertake the ‘same rigorous credit discipline
and post disbursement follow up in collateral free loans as in the case of collateral
backed loans, (ii) mandatory internal rating of all the collateral free loans irrespective of
the loan amount, (iii) to put in place a strong data analytics team and a robust oversight
mechanism over the MLIs, (iv) to revamp the IT infrastructure etc. It has been observed
that the Trust had not implemented the suggestions and recommendations made by
RBI. The Management has accepted the facts and has informed the Audit that a
systemic approach to improve the effectiveness of inspection would be put in place as a

part of the policy.

25 |


ii. Recoveries from MLIs post settlement of claim
88. As per Clause 13 of the Scheme, the lending institutions are required to deposit

money recovered post settlement of claims with the Trust after adjusting legal cost of
recovery incurred by the MLIs. As per the scheme, the Trust is also required to
appropriate the recoveries firstly towards the pending annual service fee/annual
guarantee fee, penal interest and other charges to the Trust, and the balance, if any
shall be appropriated in such a manner so that losses on account of deficit in recovery
of the credit facility between the Trust and the lending institutions are in the proportion

of the risk shared.

89. It has been observed that MLIs were not remitting the recoveries made by them
post-settlement of claims. Though the Trust has directed in March 2014 to submit a
certificate from the Statutory Auditors stating that recoveries made by the MLIs post
settlement of claims by the CGTMSE in respect of guarantee covered under the CGS
have been duly passed on to the CGTMSE as per the provisions of the CGS, it was
found that only a few (around 10) MLIs submitted such certificate and in some cases in
ambiguous language. The Trust, on its part, did not lay stress on submission of
certificate of the Statutory Auditors and started accepting online declaration and
undertaking from MLIs before lodging claims in contradiction of its own direction. This
gave an opportunity to MLIs to retain exchequer’s money as the certificates created a
legal binding of fulfilment of duties on the Statutory Auditors while the undertakings or
declaration allow MLIs to take one or another plea for not remitting recoveries. Such

cases were observed in the inspection report.

90. As per the information furnished, the Ministry did not reply to the Audit
observation and the Management, while accepting the facts stated that most MLIs were
finding it very difficult to get the Statutory Auditors certificate, since it was not possible
for the Auditors to verify the transactions at the Branch level. The Trust, therefore,

started accepting online declarations and undertakings from the MLIs.

91. Asked how the Ministry proposed to ensure responsibility and accountability on
the part of Money Lending Institutions, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:-
“CGTMSE is carrying out inspections of MLIs based on the parameters like

guarantees issued, level of NPAs and claims, etc. Inspections are a regular
exercise conducted throughout the year for all MLIs based on the above criteria.

26]


Trust is also in the process of standardization of the inspection by formulating
Inspection Policy.”

iii. Issue of NPAs

92. As per RBI's Master Circular, MLIs should mark the account as NPA in
CGTMSE’s portal within one month once classified as NPA in their own system. This
would enable CGTMSE to assess the correct position of NPAs in its system and likely

claims on this account.

93. The Trust has, however, allowed the MLIs to mark NPAs in a particular calendar
quarter by end of subsequent quarter which is in contradiction of the direction of RBI.
Also MLIs did not mark NPAs even during the prescribed time set by the Trust and the
delay has been condoned by the Trust. It has been observed that the Trust admitted
that delay in marking NPAs was condoned when huge numbers of requests were

received from the MLIs.

94. It has been observed that MLIs have taken a time period up to 3352 days in
marking these cases as NPAs in the CGTMSE portal. In some cases it was found that
NPA date is the date of guarantee or even prior to that. Some accounts became NPAs
just after guarantee date which reflects lack of appraisal or internal control and checks
within the Trust. Management of the Trustee agreed to look into cases where accounts

became NPA within 90 days of issue of guarantee and first claim was released.

95. As per the information furnished, the reasons for accounts becoming NPA as
mentioned by the MLIs are, low generation of income due to downtrend and
mismanagement, business failure/ closure, diversion of funds, business not able to
compete in market, incompetent management, etc. The reasons indicate, inadequate
appraisal of projects by the MLIs as well as failure of the Trust in ensuring proper
assessment of applications before approving/ issuing guarantees. The inspection
reports of the MLIs disclosed major discrepancies like non-verification of Credit
Information Bureau (India) Limited (CIBIL) report of the borrower, CIBIL report showing
overdue but not taken into account by the MLIs, appraisal note not signed by the
officials, non-availability of pre-sanction reports with the MLIs, pre-sanction due

diligence not carried out properly, non-availability of credit information report of the

27|7?98 6


borrowers, etc. Besides, the Trust had detected fraudulent loans (12 cases) during
inspections of MLIs (2016-18).

96. The shortcomings are indicative of lack of responsibility and accountability of the

MLIs in appraisal of loan applications prior to sanction and disbursement of loans.

iv. Delays in submission of application

97. As per Clause 4 of CGS-I, MLIs are required to submit application for guarantee
cover in the next quarter from the quarter in which the credit proposals were sanctioned.
If the proposal was sanctioned in the April-June quarter, the application is to be
submitted within July-September quarter. In this context, it has been observed that
guarantees have been given even though applications were submitted after 3809 days
(about 10.5 years). About 39,456 cases involving about Rs.1260.92 crore applications
were submitted within 181 to 3809 days. There was no system to validate the data fed
by MLIs regarding date of application on the on-line system. The approver of the
application did not take into consideration the date of sanction while issuing guarantee.

98. The decision on Condoning of delay in submission of application for guarantee
upto three months has been delegated to an officer of the rank of Deputy General
Manager. In July, 2018 on the request of MLIs the Trust provided a further time period
of three months on standard accounts, thus allowing all MLIs an additional period of
three months which is apparently in contravention of the scheme provisions and that too

without the approval of the Board.

99. While the Ministry has not replied to the queries raised by Audit in this regard, the
Management informed that most of the MLIs represented to the Trust that application
could not be lodged due to some unavoidable circumstances viz. natural calamities,
amalgation of MLIs, technical errors etc. and CGTMSE regulated delay on the request
of MLIs.

Vv. Guarantee to ‘non-micro’/small category units

100. The Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development (MSMED) Act, 2006
defines MSEs as manufacturing and service enterprises based upon the investment in
the plant and machinery and investment in equipment. As per the Act the limit for micro
enterprises in manufacturing and service sector is Rs. 25 lakh and Rs. 10 lakh

28 |? ०52


respectively in plant and machinery. Similarly, in case of Small Enterprises
manufacturing sector has a limit of Rs. 25 lakh to Rs. 5 crore and Service Sector has a
limit of Rs. 10 lakh and Rs. 2 crore. This does not include expenditure on pollution

control, research and development, industrial safety devices and such other items.

101. While a unit is marked as a micro unit, the term credit from MLI as well as
guarantee from the Trust was more than Rs. 25 lakh and upto Rs. 2 crore. As per the
definition, these units could not be treated as micro enterprises. As per information
made available, however, in 15 cases, where the investment on equipment was more
than Rs. 2 crore and the unit was not to be considered as MSE, the Trust had issued

guarantee.

102. The Trust had also, in 3055 cases, considered some units as micro enterprises

and received guarantee fee 0.15 percent to 0.25 percent less than the standard rate.

103. Clause 15 (ii) of the Scheme empowers the Trust to inspect or call for the copies
of the books of accounts and other records (including any book of instructions or
manual or circulars covering general instructions regarding conduct of advances) of the
lending institution and of any borrowers from the lending institution. Any officer of
lending institution or the borrower are to place records before the officer of the Trust or
SIDBI. CGTMSE carried out inspection in 1749 number of accounts during 2015-2016
and 2017-2018. Audit observed that the Trust did not plan the inspections as no
criterion was fixed for selection of MLI, targets and achievements in respect of MLIs and
accounts to be covered and regions to be focused upon. No inspection was carried out
in respect of accounts where claim has not been lodged by the concerned MLI.

vi. Extending Credit on Personal Guarantee

104. As per the Audit findings the Trust issued guarantees on the basis of personal
guarantees of the borrowers without creation of primary security which was against the
approved scheme guidelines {Clause 7 (iii) of the scheme}. In the year 2013 the Board
had decided that credit facilities which do not envisage creation of assets would not be
eligible for guarantee under the scheme. Trust did not implement checks in the online
system to ensure that the credit facility extended by the MLIs created primary security

out of the credit facility extended to a borrower. The relevant column in the online

29 |


system viz. ‘APP IS PRIMARY SECURITY’ was left blank in 100 per cent cases by the
MLIs.

105. In one case, it was found that a Bank had accepted personal guarantee of
promoter of one MSE as primary security while the MSE had already hypothecated all
stock and book debts to their main banker and further the promoter was not creating any
primary security and funds were needed for opening a new office wherein the main
expenses like salary, rent etc. were required to be paid. Audit scrutiny disclosed that the
Trust received a letter dated 8 March 2017 from a private bank regarding acceptance of
personal guarantees as primary securities, based on discussion and confirmation by the
Trust on acceptance of personal security vide email dated 28 January, 2009. The Trust,
on the basis of an email communication on 28 January, 2009 extended guarantee upto
April 2017 to avoid inconvenience to the client. This was done without the approval of
Board of the Trust (BOT). After issuing the guarantee, the Trust suggested to the Bank
to carry out changes in its business module. Entire guarantee cover obtained by the

Bank was based on personal guarantee of promoters.

106. While the Ministry did not reply to the audit query, the Management of the Trust
mentioned that these credit facilities complement ‘the existing credit facilities from the
regular bankers of MSEs and are significant for MSEs. It further mentioned that
depriving MSEs of the guarantee cover due to non-availability of primary security would
affect the viability of the unit and slowdown the flow of credit to MSEs.

vii. Irregular Loans

107. Asked to furnish details of all cases of loans advanced irregularly by all lending

institutions, the Ministry stated as under:

“In case an account is declared fraud by the lending institution as per RBI's
guidelines in this regard, the guarantee is not eligible for claim settlement by
CGTMSE. Hence, such claim applications are rejected by CGTMSE. Lending
institutions are required to report the cases declared as fraud to RBI, the regulator
of MLIs, as per RBI's extant guidelines. However, CGTMSE does not have details
of cases of fraudulent loans advanced by all lending institutions. It is worthwhile to
mention that the MLIs are regulated by RBI who inspects the entire functioning of
MLIs not limiting to their CGTMSE portfolio. In addition, they are also subject to
Statutory Audit, internal audit and other mechanism as prescribed by their statute
/ guidelines."

30 |


108.

Queried about whether CGTMSE can withdraw its guarantee at any stage if there

are major discrepancies noticed subsequently, the Ministry in their reply stated as under:

109.

“Yes. In case an account is declared fraud by the lending institution, the same is
not eligible for claim settlement by CGTMSE. CGTMSE has the right to. withdraw
guarantee/reject claim if major discrepancies noticed subsequent to issue of
guarantee. Further, Lending Institutions, regulated by RBI, are required to follow
RBI's guidelines on declaring an account as fraud. Therefore, Lending Institution
has to take action in accordance with the RBI's guidelines issued in this regard."

When asked whether action has been taken against management of lending

institutions as well as management of CGTMSE for advancing loans in such cases

where appraisal note has not been signed by officials, the Ministry stated as under:

110.

"Taking action in the captioned scenario is the prerogative of the Member Lending
Institutions who take such action as per their respective policy guidelines. It is
worthwhile to mention that the MLIs are regulated by RBI who inspects the entire
functioning of MLIs not limiting to their CGTMSE portfolio. In addition, they are
also subject to Statutory Audit, internal audit and other mechanism as prescribed
by their statute/guidelines. However, as per CGTMSE’s guidelines, the cases
declared as fraud by MLIs are cancelled and claims are not settled. In case of
such declaration being put in place post settlement of claim, the claim amount is
recalled."

Further, explaining the regulatory powers to ensure responsibility and

accountability as part of money lending institutions, the Ministry replied as under:

111.

“As they are board managed entities, corporate governance is the responsibility
of the respective boards. CGTMSE carries out inspections of MLIs based on the
parameters like guarantees issued level of NPAs and claims, etc. Inspections are
conducted regularly throughout the year for all MLIs based on the above criteria.”

Insisting on conducting regular inspections of Member Lending institutions (MLIs),

the Ministry in their reply stated as under:

31]

"Yes. CGTMSE is carrying out inspections of MLIs based on the parameters like
guarantees issued level of NPAs and claims, etc. Inspection is a regular exercise
conducted throughout the year for all MLIs based on the above criteria. During
the audit period CGTMSE conducted inspections in respect of around 2000 cases
and recovered an amount of = 19 crore approximately. Conducting Inspections is
a continuous exercise."


PART -॥
Observations/Recommendations

Introduction:

1, The Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) represent a significant
part of the Indian Economy and are one of the strongest drivers of economic
development, innovation and employment. In order to give the MSME sector an
impetus, the Ministry of Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises (MSME) and Small
Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) established, in July 2000, the Credit
Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises’ (CGTMSE/ Trust). The
mandate of the Trust is to provide guarantee in respect of the credit facilities
(term loans and/ or working capital assistance) extended by the lending
institutions without any collateral security and/ or third party guarantees to the
new or existing Micro and Small Enterprises and to levy guarantee fee/ annual
service fee/ other charges on the lending institutions. C6TMSE implements two
schemes viz. (a) Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme for Micro and Small Enterprises
(CGS-l, for banks and financial institutions); and (b) Credit Guarantee Fund
Scheme for Non-Banking Financial Companies (CGS-ll). The C&AG of India
audited the performance of the guarantee schemes (primarily CGS-l) of the
period, 2015-16 to 2018-19 (30 September 2018). Audit found inter-alia that the
norms/ benchmarks with regard to minimum liquidity requirement for the Trust
were not fixed; Credit by way of loans up to Rs.10 lakh was extended by the two
organizations for similar type of business projects; authentic data on the
turnover, exports and employment generation was not available with the Trust;
benchmark leverage on the corpus fund was not fixed; system/ portal was not
geared up to verify the accuracy of the details filled in by the MLIs; inspections
were not planned as no criterion was fixed for selection of MLis; and the policy of
the Trust to allow a time period up to the end of next quarter following the release
of the loan (s) for identifying NPAs was not in consonance with RBI’s directions.
The Committee’s examination of the subject and their observations/
recommendations on the issues pointed out by Audit and related matters are

detailed in the succeeding paragraphs.

32]


Organisational Structure:

2. The MSME Sector has huge potential for growth and for creating
employment across the country. The Government is giving due importance to this
sector by way of extending various financial incentives as well as policy
measures. CGTMSE was established 21 years ago to facilitate MSME Sector to
get funds without collateral & Third Party guarantee. The Committee are
distressed to note that no professionalism has been developed in the area and
the institution has not been strengthened even after a long period of 21 years and
a lot of money being pushed into the lending institutions for providing easy credit
to the MSME Sector. The CGTMSE is continuing to work with only one office and
an employee strength of 45 Officers/Staff for taking care of its Pan - India
activities. Most of the officers at the senior level are inducted on deputation or
are engaged on contract basis. All the higher management personnel (Chief
Executive Officer, General Manager and Deputy General Manager) of CGTMSE are
drawn on deputation from SIDBI and the rest are engaged on contract basis. The
Committee, in this regard, have taken note of the recommendations made in the
U.K. Sinha Committee Report on MSMEs where-in it has been emphasized inter-
alia that it would be necessary that the top management of CGTMSE is
professionalized and sourced from a wider pool, and SIDBI disengage itself from
day-to-day management and the Board of CGTMSE. Audit has pointed out that
such factors have made the outreach of CGTMSE to MLIs difficult and has posed
the risk of inefficiency in the management of the Scheme. As on March 31, 2020,
four high ranking officers including the CEO were drawn on deputation from
SIDBI to CGTMSE. It is perplexing to note that while on the one hand, the U.K.
Sinha Committee had recommended disengaging SIDBI from the administration
of the Trust, on the contrary, the Ministry has favored continuing with the system
of drawing officers from SIDBI on the plea that SIDBI’s association has
purportedly helped the organisation by virtue of the understanding the officers
have on credit/lending and guarantee operations. The Committee are of the
strong opinion that while the Government is undertaking serious measures for
promoting the sector and increasing the financial allocation, it would not only be
appropriate but also a necessity to adequately strengthen CGTMSE so as to

33 |


enable fulfilling the objectives set by the Government and those envisaged under
the scheme. Undertaking credit/lending and guarantee operations mainly by
drawing officers from 51081 would possibly not be appropriate as substantial
expertise exists in the field outside SIDBI too and tapping such expertise would
contribute in improving the efficiency and contribute towards transparency of the
credit system as a whole. The Committee are of the opinion that the
organisational structure of the Trust needs to be revamped to this end. The
Human Resource Management of the Trust should ensure inter-alia that there is
no scope for vested interests to grow; and provide for fixing accountability in
case of serious lapses. Action taken to this end may be reported to the
Committee within three months of the presentation of this report to Parliament.

3. The Committee are of the opinion that CGTMSE, with only one office in India
is obviously not in a position to reach out to 6.3 crore SMEs and expand the
enlisted MLIs, as its lending partners so as to maximize coverage under the
Scheme. Geographically smaller countries like Japan and Korea have stronger
institutions for this sector with substantial corpus and staff in enabling
monitoring of development programmes. With a view to effectively meeting the
mandated tasks, the Committee recommend that the number of offices of the

CGTMSE be appropriately increased.

4, The Committee also fail to understand the reasons for not enabling the
Trust to evolve and grow as a professional body as is the case with Institutions in
the Financial Sector. The Committee strongly feel that at a time when the
Government is putting in a significant amount of money in the ‘guarantee
programme’, for ensuring effectiveness of the Trust in a wider area, and enabling
proper monitoring and transparency, strengthening the human resources of the
organisation is an absolute necessity. The Committee, accordingly, recommend
that CGTMSE engage dedicated personnel and do away with the policy of ad -
hocism in drawing personnel on deputation or fixed term basis to the

organization.
Operational Framework

5. The Committee’s examination of the subject reveals that the Trust, for most

of the lacunae that come to light in the system, hold the MLIs to be responsible.

34 |


While the MLIs work under the regulation of RBI and have their own Boards and
other monitoring units within their system, the Guarantee Scheme by itself has
ample provisions for monitoring, regulating through verification of documents
and questioning the officers concerned with a view to preventing: fraud and
implementing the scheme effectively. The Trust seems to have failed in
discharging this oversight function by way of ensuring that the rules that are
within its mandate are followed. The Committee therefore, urge the Ministry to
consider revamping the CGTMSE, ensure that the rules are followed, and in cases
of default on the part of MLIs or the officials of the Trust, suitable remedial action

is taken. Details of action taken in this regard may be intimated to the Committee.

6. The Committee, while deliberating on the issue also noted the fact that
MSME units mostly function at the District level, but there is no mechanism
available even at the State level to look into the proposals as also grievances of
MLIs. MLI units at these levels take decisions which are considered appropriate
and suitable to them. The Committee desire that the Ministry should look into the
matter and take appropriate action towards evolving an appropriate and feasible
mechanism for enabling co-ordination with different parties and also help in

addressing the grievances at the ground level.

Coverage of the Scheme

7. The Committee are disappointed to find that the credit extended to the
MSME Sector by way of providing guarantee from CGTMSE constitutes only
5.66% of the total credit as on 317 March, 2019. The Kamath Committee had
recommended ‘guaranteeing’ upto a level of 15% of the credit extended to be
ideal for the Sector. As per the information furnished at first, the guarantee ™
scheme run by the CGTMSE is an MLI driven scheme and the option for seeking
guarantee is up to MLIs. MLIs are not mandated to cover all their MSE Loans
under the scheme. In a subsequent reply however, the Committee have been
informed that the Ministry had undertaken an exercise for analyzing and
addressing the problem of low coverage following which certain policy changes
have been undertaken viz. permitting a hybrid security model, inclusion of retail

trade activity for extension of loans, increasing the extent of guarantee coverage

35 |


to 75%, charging guarantee fees for outstanding amounts of NBFCs, SFBs,
Cooperative Banks etc. As per the information furnished to the Committee,
following the policy changes, the number of guarantees extended has increased
from 4.36 lakh in FY 2019 to 8.47 Lakh in FY 2020 which amounts to a growth of
94%. The Committee, in this regard, desire that the scheme be appropriately
moulded to attract potential entrepreneurs in the MSME sector, and widening the
coverage to larger areas of the country to include players who are in a position to

generate employment in the country and also compete at the international level.

8. The Committee appreciate the initiatives taken for promoting MSME sector
under Atmanirbhar Bharat Abhiyan and recommend that the impact of all the
guarantees extended through these new initiatives may be analysed regularly so
that loopholes can be identified and removed promptly. The Committee find that
the Trust has engaged a professional agency to assess the impact of the scheme
on the economy. While interacting with the beneficiaries of the credit Scheme, the
Agency would cover aspects relating to impact of demonetization and the
Pandemic as well. The Committee desire that the Agency complete the project at
the earliest and the result thereof conveyed. The Committee also desire that the
Ministry may give suitable publicity to “Udyam Registration” and “Champion
Portal” so as to attract more units from the MSME sector. The Committee also
stress the importance of MLIs at the ground level to whom the applicants could
have easier access. The number of MLIs which presently stands at 145 is very
small given the size of the country. The Committee, accordingly, recommend that
more MLIs may be enrolled under the credit guarantee scheme so as to widen the

reach for entrepreneurs.

9. The Committee note that CGTMSE provides benefits to women
entrepreneurs under the scheme in the form of additional guarantee coverage
and concessional guarantee fee. As for the socially and economically weaker
sections of the society, it is seen from the information furnished to the Committee
that only 3% of the beneficiaries are from the weaker sections. As there is scope
for promoting entrepreneurs from the weaker sections under the scheme, the

Committee express the need for taking appropriate measures in this direction.

36 |


10. As per the Annual Report, 2020-21 of the Ministry, during the period 2015-
16, a total of 633.88 lakh unincorporated non-agriculture SMEs were engaged in
different economic activities which account for an estimated employed persons
of about 11.10 Crore in MSME sector. The Committee also note from the
Background note of the Ministry that as per National Sample Survey (NSS) 73°
round, conducted by the National Sample Survey Office, Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation, during the period 2015-16, MSME Sector contributed
to 30.30% of all India GDP and 37.30% of manufacturing during 2018-19, and
share of exports of MSME related products during 2019-20 was to the extent of
49.80%. The Committee, however, note from the Background Note of the Ministry
of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises that only 12,79,768 Enterprises have got
themselves registered in the ‘Udyam’ registration portal developed by the
Ministry. The Committee further note that, as per the Udyam Portal, the aggregate
of the classified and unclassified SMEs is 2136337. The Committee find that
despite their tremendous potential for employment generation, manufacturing
and export etc., the number of registrations of enterprises on the Udyam Portal
launched by the Ministry remained at a miniscule level. The Committee are of the
view that the low level of registration of the enterprises on the Udyam/Udyog
Aadhar Portal of the Ministry is indicative of poor outreach efforts. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that efforts be made by the Ministry for
increasing awareness amongst the SMEs. The Committee are of the opinion that
registering with the Udyam Portal is the first step to engage the SMEs for helping
them in getting benefits of various schemes of the Ministry. The Committee also
recommend that the Ministry of MSME may, in co-ordination with the other
Ministries/Departments like Ministry of Labour and Employment and Ministry of
Finance etc. dealing with MSME Sector, explore ways to get the enterprises

register their units on the Udyam/Udyog Aadhar Portal.

11. The Committee note that the Ministry had, on 27.6.2017, notified activities
not covered under MSMED Act, 2006 for registration under Udyog Aadhaar
Memorandum (UAM). The Committee note that this had led to debarment of retail
traders, except for those engaged in motor vehicles and motor cycle activities to
be classified for registration under Udyog Aadhaar Memorandum (UAM). The

37|


Committee note that retailers were not able to avail the benefits of the MSME
schemes including lending schemes as they were not registered as MSMEs under
Udyog Aadhaar Memorandum (UAM). The classification has since been
reconsidered and retail traders have now been included as part of the MSME
sector. The Committee trust that this will help the retail traders in availing the
benefits available to SMEs and will go a long way in helping them in these

pandemic ridden times.

Corpus of the Credit Guarantee Scheme

12. The Committee note that the Credit Guarantee Scheme (CGS) was launched
primarily for extending credit benefit without the hassles of collateral / third party
guarantee to MSME sector specially to the first generation entrepreneurs in
setting up their own enterprises. Further, to operationalize the scheme,
Government of India and SIDBI set up the Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro
and: Small Enterprises (CGTMSE) in July 2000 with a committed corpus of
Rs.2500 crore to be contributed by Government of India and Small Industries
Development Bank of India (SIDBI). The Committee note from the reply. of the
Ministry that the present corpus of the CGTMSE is Rs 8682 crores and the total
size of the fund is Rs.12,848 crore. The Committee further note that the present
leverage of CGTMSE corpus is about 8 times, which, as per the Ministry, is in line
with the international best practices. The Committee also note the submission of
the Ministry that there has not been a single instance where the Trust has
experienced depletion of its corpus. On the contrary, however, the Committee
also find that CGTMSE has been furnishing guarantees only to a small number of
enterprises as most of the SMEs are not registered. The Committee, in this
regard, also note that as per the revised definition, the Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises are now classified as units having investment of less than Rs.1 crore,
Rs.10 crores and Rs.50 crores and a turnover of less than Rs.5 crores, Rs.50
crores and Rs.250 crores respectively, per annum. The Committee desire that the
impact of the overall revision in the definition / classification of the enterprises in
the MSME sector should be analysed and the Committee apprised thereof.
Further, the Committee feel concerned to note that a large number of SMEs are

not included in the scheme and desire that the Ministry should give due publicity

38 |


to the scheme among potential entrepreneurs and groups and increase the
efforts to reach out to the potential borrowers needing credit guarantee. The
Ministry should also strive towards increasing the fund size of the scheme which
should be comparable to that of other countries and adequately meet the

potential domestic demand.

13. The Committee recommend that the benchmark for leveraging the fund be
fixed realistically. The Committee also recommend that in pursuance of the audit
observation, while fixing the benchmark, the adequacy of the corpus may be
analysed and the first claim, rejected claim and expected second claim of MLis
may also be taken into account. The Committee also strongly recommend that
measures be taken towards minimizing cases of rejection of applications for
availing credit and obtaining guarantee thereon and Information Education

Campaign started effectively in this direction.

Member Lending Institutions (MLIs):

14. The Committee note from the background note furnished by the Ministry
that presently there are 145 registered MLIs of CGTMSE availing the benefits of
CGS which include 22 private sector banks, 28 Non banking financial Companies,
51 Regional Rural banks, 6 Small Finance Banks, 6 Foreign Banks, 11 Scheduled
Urban Cooperative Banks, 9 Financial Institutions, and 12 Public Sector Banks.
The Committee find that one. of the major factors limiting the reach of the
CGTMSE scheme to the potential beneficiaries is the absence of MLIs near the
place of work. In view of this, the Committee recommend that the Ministry pursue
the matter with the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services), so as
to expand the list of Member Lending Institutions (MLIs). The Committee also
recommend that CGTMSE and the Ministry, on their own, need to have a clear
assessment of potential beneficiaries of an area and MLIs implementing CGS and
ensure that the information on the MLIs and the guarantee scheme is easily made

available to the public at large.

15. The Committee observe that one inherent shortcoming in the scheme is
that while MLIs are required to upload borrower’s information viz. type of activity,
nature of industry, interest charged by the bank, amount of loan, details of
borrowers/MSE unit etc., details regarding the management of the borrower unit,

39 |


technical feasibility of the project and financial capacity of the
borrower/promoters are not maintained. As the system portal has no such data,
correctness of this crucial data cannot be verified. Responsibility of appraisal lies
with the MLIs and the Trust has no role except for extending guarantees. The
Committee are surprised to observe that in 99.84% cases (out of those examined
by audit) there is no information about legal ID and type of Chief Promoter. In
most cases, the year of birth of Chief Promoter, year of sanction of loan, PIN code
of the location etc. are mentioned in a random, incorrect and incomprehensible
manner. In 1852 cases there are no details of the number of employees of the
unit, and in 6007 cases the sales turnover mentioned in the form is zero or NIL.
Also, there is no mention of the contact number of Chief Promoter in 94% cases.
These discrepancies have been accepted by the Ministry, and need to be
temedied. The Committee may be kept apprised of the remedial action taken to

this end.

16. The Committee also note that some MLIs have applied for guarantee cover
more than once in respect of the same application. As per the Ministry, the MLIs
have been strictly instructed to avoid such discrepancies. The Committee desire
that action against MLIs concerned may be taken on this count as per the

provisions of the scheme and they be informed of the details thereof.

Insistence on Collaterals

17. The Committee note that the primary objective of Credit Guarantee Scheme
is to provide guarantee against loans without any collateral or third party credit
guarantee. The Committee however note that the rule has been violated with
impunity. MLIs, while applying for guarantee cover have been marking as either
Yes/No against the column providing for whether ‘collateral Security was Taken’
which is mandatory, but the column pertaining to ‘Third party Guarantee’ was not
filled as the same was not mandatory. The Committee note that MLIs have taken
collateral security(314 cases) or Third Party Guarantee(391 cases) or both (in 28
cases) while approving the guarantee. The Committee desire that suitable action
is taken to ensure that such acts which are violative of the objectives with which
the Credit Guarantee Scheme has been formulated do not continue to recur. The

40 |


Committee wish to be apprised of the action taken in this regard within three

months of the presentation of this Report to Parliament.

18. Further, the Committee also note that the reluctance of banks to offer loans
without collaterals is a major reason for shortfall of funds with SMEs. The
Committee endorse the view of the Audit that instead of rejecting applications,
vigorous Information Education Campaign need to be initiated so as to ensure
that applications are submitted in the correct format. The Committee are of the
view that such a measure could help in generating more confidence in MLIs on
the efficacy of the guarantee instrument, provide assurance and thereby give
impetus for providing larger front-end support to MSME Sector. The Committee
also recommend that as a platform for providing credit guarantee, the CGTMSE,
in co-ordination with Department of Financial Services, Ministry of Finance
institute a mechanism whereby such applications in respect of which MLIs are
reluctant to offer loans to SMEs for want of collaterals or otherwise, may be
reviewed with a view to ensuring that no borrower suffers for want of security.
This would, in the long term, make the MLIs/ banks comfortably forthcoming in

extending credit and thereby increase the coverage under CGTMSE.

Impact of Covid-19 Lockdown on Micro, Small_and Medium Enterprises_and
decline in number of quarantee cases

19. The Committee note that CGTMSE has hired a professional agency to
assess the impact of the Trust on the economy. The Committee also note that the
said agency is to interact with CGTMSE’s beneficiary units and also other
agencies concerned and will submit its report. The Committee further note that
due to Covid-19 pandemic the survey has been temporarily put on hold. The
agency is to cover the impact of Covid-19 and demonetisation on MSMEs covered
under CGTMSE guarantee. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that
the number of guarantees extended during the year 2017-18 fell drastically to
nearly half at 263195 as against the number of guarantees extended during the
previous year 2016-17 which stood at 452127. This, the Committee feel, calls for a
thorough analysis with a view to identifying the reasons for the drastic fall in the
number of guarantees extended. The Committee recommend that the study of

impact on the economy be completed at the earliest with a view to formulating

41 |


appropriate response as well as long term measures for revival of MSME sector in
the wake of the effect of lockdown(s) imposed due to the pandemic. The action

taken in this regard may be intimated to the Committee at the earliest.

20. Various countries have responded to the challenges thrown by the recent
pandemic and lockdowns, particularly to their MSME sector. In India, the Ministry
of Finance have brought forth the Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme
(ECLGS) as one of the solutions. The Committee note that all policy decisions
regarding SMEs are taken by the respective Ministries concerned and there is no
convergence of policy making at one level. in this regard, the Committee also
take note of one of the recommendations of the U.K. Sinha Committee (Report of
the Expert Committee on Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, June 2019), that
the Ministry of MSME should be the nodal Ministry for all interventional actions
pertaining to the MSME sector, instead of having multiple schemes being run by
different Ministries for promotion of MSMEs in their respective domain. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises should be made a ‘convergence point’ for all issues relating to SMEs,
and a comprehensive proposal in this regard be mooted from the Ministry of

MSME for the consideration of the Government.

21. The acute crisis of availability of medical equipment and shortage of other
essential medical supplies in India during the pandemic, besides other sector
specific essentials arising in the wake of the lockdown(s) have been widely
reported. It would not be out of place to mention here that as a result of the
initiatives and interventions taken by the Ministry, the country is now
manufacturing enough Hand Sanitizer Bottle Dispensers (Pump/Flip) for meeting
almost all its sharply increased demand and developing/producing auxiliary items
like masks, face-shields, PPE Kits, sanitizer boxes, testing facilities etc. The
Committee feel that MSME Sector in India has, time and again, proven its
potential to rise up to face the challenges that emerge. They feel that if proper
financial support is given to MSMEs, they can grow substantially. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that similar to the targeted products launched elsewhere in
the world, the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises should adopt

sector specific approach and come out with special products especially for the

42 |


health sector, and other sectors in dire need to be revived by way of
governmental intervention. This, the Committee feel would give a fillip to the
SMEs, especially units which are working in the health Sector and prepare India
to effectively face the economic impact of the Pandemic. The Committee
recommend that Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises and CGTMSE
should come up with special credit guarantee coverage of product(s) thereby
facilitating MLIs to offer loans at a much cheaper rate with flexibility of repayment
incorporated in the scheme so as to help the ailing SMEs tide over the adverse
financial situation posed by lockdowns in the wake of Covid-19 pandemic.
Further, in these trying times, the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises may pitch in for relaxing NPA norms for the MSME Sector by taking

this matter up with the Ministry of Finance.

Issue of Regulatory Authority:

22. The Committee note that the Trust does not have a regulatory authority.
There is no benchmark prescribed by the GOl/Trust on the liquidity required vis-
a-vis guarantee approved/ issued, capital adequacy, solvency requirement
exposure caps for various types of MLIs, disclosure norms and accounting
standards. The Committee also note that there are no specific laws for regulating
many aspects of the functioning of the Trust like scope of operations,
governance, capital and operating requirements and access to state owned
funds. The Committee note that the Trust had, in 2015, initiated the process of
framing regulatory guidelines when it’s Board approved a proposal made in this
regard. The Consultant firm engaged on the basis of this proposal gave a report
in 2017 but the report was never placed before the BoT thereby rendering the

expenditure incurred a waste.

The Committee take note of the recommendation in the U.K. Sinha
Committee Report (Report of the Expert Committee on Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises, June 2019), that all Credit Guarantee Schemes should be subject to
the regulation and oversight/supervision of RBI. Further, as per the
recommendations, such regulatory guidelines could draw upon the well
acknowledged principle for design, implementation and evaluation of public
Credit guarantee Schemes for SMEs which has been evolved by the World Bank

43 |


Group. The Committee are of the view that in its present set up, monitoring by the
Board and the settlors (Ministry of MSME, Gol and SIDBI) is not adequate and
recommend that by giving up tentativeness of approach and without incurring
further unfruitful expenditure, a proper regulatory framework needs to be put in
place at the earliest so as to enable easy availability of funds to entrepreneurs in
a wider area and simultaneously ensure financial discipline. The role of a Credit
Guarantee Authority in the sector is very crucial when the credit scheme is
expanding. Constitution of a proper regulatory framework for the Trust by way of
setting up an Authority for the purpose, or bringing the Trust under the regulatory
purview of RBI in unambiguous and clear terms is a matter under consideration
of the government on which no conclusive decision has been taken so far. The
Committee trust that effective measures would be taken to ensure proper and
effective regulation of the functioning of institutions involved in providing credit

guarantees,
NCGTC& CGTMSE

23. The Committee note that NCGTC was incorporated in 2014 to manage and
operate various Credit Guarantee Trust Funds. One of the funds of NCGTC, is
CGFMU, which is designated for providing guarantee for loans up to Rupees ten
lakh sanctioned by banks, NBFCs/MLis and other financial intermediaries
engaged in similar businesses. Further, the Committee note that the Ministry of
Finance had w.e.f. 180 April, 2016, authorized the CGFMU to extend loans under
Pradhan Mantri Mudra Yojna following the launch of scheme. On account of this
factor, the Board of CGTMSE decided not to approve guarantee to any loan up to
ten lakh rupees following the operationalization of Pradhan Mantri Mudra Yojna
(PMMY). The Committee further observe that a meeting was held on 5" January,
2017 with Banks, SIDBI and CGTMSE under the aegis of Secretary, Ministry of
MSME wherein the decision not to sanction guarantee for loans up to rupees Ten
Lakh by CGTMSE was once again emphasized upon. These decisions have not
been followed and guarantees to loans to upto a limit of Rs.10 Lakh continued to
be extended on the plea that some MLIs have favored the presence of two
sources for providing guarantee so as to provide a choice of agency for providing
the cover. The Committee note that there is lack of clarity and control in regard to

44 |


the functioning of the Trust. In this regard, the Committee emphasize on ensuring
that the apparent overlap in the functioning of the two organizations does not
work out to be detrimental to their functioning and particularly with reference to

providing guarantees to credit availed by units in the MSME Sector.
INSPECTION POLICY

24. The Committee note that as per the scheme (CGS-l), sanctioning,
monitoring & remittance of recoveries to the Trust is the responsibility of MLIs.
Clause 15 (ii) of the Scheme gives power/right to the Trust to inspect or call for
copies of the books of accounts and other records of the lending institutions. The
Committee are surprised to note that despite the Trust being bestowed with the
power, it has not chalked out any plan for carrying out inspection, no criteria has
been formulated for inspecting MLIs and there is no inspection policy as such.
The Committee also note in this regard that a sample inspection undertaken by
the Trust during 2016-2017 & 2017-18 brought to light as many as 17
shortcomings. The cause of the shortcomings has been attributed solely to the
MLIs. This, in the view of the Committee is inappropriate and incorrect as the
Trust has not abided by the mandate of carrying out regular inspections, and
there has been no criteria formulated for carrying out the inspections. Also,
although the RBI had made several suggestions in 2015 for ensuring credit
discipline and post disbursement follow-up, the Trust has seemingly ignored
these suggestions while dealing with MLIs. Now, following the audit observation,
the Management has accepted the facts and has assured that a systematic
approach to improve the effectiveness of inspections would be put in place. The
Committee are of the opinion that an effective inspection policy, in addition to
inspecting claims, may factor in the systemic issues, compliance requirement
and performance vis-a-vis targets in respect of credit guarantees issued by the
CGTMSE. The parameters for inspection should be continuously refined, based
on the inputs and feedbacks received during the inspections and reviews. The
Committee desire that policy/guidelines framed in this regard be shared with the

Committee.

25. The Committee also note that as per Clause 10 (v) of the scheme, lending
institutions are liable to refund the claims released by the Trust together with

45 |


penal interest rate of four per cent per annum above the prevailing bank rate if a
recall is made by the Trust in the event of serious deficiencies in
appraisal/renewal follow-up of credit facility, suppression of material information
etc. The Committee are aghast to find that despite the provisions of the Scheme
being clear on this aspect, the Trust has been permitting MLIs to deposit the
amount even after a lapse of two years without charging penal interest. The
Committee would, apart from proposing taking action against the errant for the
lapses on this count, like to be apprised of the details of such delayed deposits

by MLIs in the last five years.

Post settlement Recovery

26. The Committee note that as per Clause 13 of the Scheme, the lending
institutions are required to deposit the money recovered post-settlement of
claims with the Trust after adjusting the legal cost of recovery incurred by the
MLIs. As per the scheme, the Trust is also required to appropriate the recoveries
firstly towards the pending annual service fee/annual guarantee fee, penal
interest and other charges. To this effect, the Trust had issued a direction in
March 2014 to the MLIs to submit a certificate from the Statutory Auditors stating
that recoveries made by the MLIs post settlement of claim by the CGTMSE in
respect of guarantees covered under the CGS have been duly passed on to
CGTMSE as per the provisions of the CGS. The Committee, however, observe that
MLIs have not been remitting the recoveries made by them post-settlement of
claims and only a few (around 10) MLIs had submitted such certificates, and in
some cases, there was ambiguity in the language. Further, to the surprise of the
Committee, it has also been noted that the Trust, on its part, did not lay stress on
submission of certificate(s) of the Statutory Auditors. Also, the Trust was acting
in contravention of its own directives by accepting on-line declarations and
undertakings from MLIs before the claims were lodged. This gave an opportunity
to MLis to retain the exchequer’s money as the undertakings or declaration
allowed them to take one plea or the other for not remitting recoveries. Such
cases were observed in the inspection report. The Committee are aghast to note
that the Ministry have not responded to the observation made by Audit in this

regard. The Management accepted the facts and pleaded that most MLIs were

46 |


finding it very difficult to get the Statutory Auditors certificate since it was not
possible for the auditors to verify the transactions at the Branch level due to
which, the Trust started accepting on-line declarations and undertakings from the
MLIs. The Committee are disappointed to note that the Trust itself has not been
following the rules formulated by it, and the MLIs as well as the Trust were acting
in contravention of the rules. The Committee feel the need for ensuring that
action is taken on the officers violating the guidelines of the Trust. The
Committee also desire that changes that are required in the directives owing to
the difficulties faced by the MLIs need to be suitably incorporated so as to

address the problem.

Appraisal and issue of guarantees

27. The Committee note from Audit findings that the Trust issued guarantees
on the basis of personal guarantees of the borrowers without creation of primary
security. This was against the approved scheme guidelines {Clause 7 (iii) of the
scheme}. In the year 2013, the Board had decided that credit facilities which do
not envisage creation of assets would not be eligible for being considered under
the Guarantee scheme. The Trust did not implement the checks in the on-line
system with a view to ensuring that the credit facility extended by the MLIs
created primary security out of the credit extended to a borrower. Further, the
MLIs applied for guarantee covers even after the expiry of the quarter following
the quarter in which the loan was sanctioned. Also, applications for guarantee
covers were made more than once for the same application/credit facility and the
Trust issued guarantee cover to the MLIs as per their application which was
against the financial interests, and business prudence and is also indicative of
poor internal controls. The Committee further note from the information furnished
by the Ministry that CGTMSE does not have details of cases of irregular loans that
may have been advanced by all lending institutions. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that CGTMSE enhance the frequency and quality of the inspections of
MLIs and undertake efforts to look into cases of irregular loans so as to arrive ata
conclusive mechanism to plug the loopholes, and thereby ensure that the
guarantees extended by CGTMSE are not misused. This exercise, the Committee

feel, will also help the MLIs in adopting the best practices.

a7 |


INVESTMENT GRADE AND RATINGS

28. Clause 9 of CGS -I provides that all proposals for sanction of guarantee
approvals for credit facilities above Rs.50 lakh and upto Rs.200 lakh will have to
be rated internally by the MLI and should be of ‘investment grade’. The Committee
note from the Audit findings that the Trust/Scheme had allowed the MLIs to
consider a proposal to be of ‘investment grade’ as per their own parameters. The
Committee also note that all the lending institutions have been following their own
‘rating/score models’ for classification of loan proposals as ‘investment grade’ or
otherwise. The Committee also observe that the Scheme did not encourage
‘ratings’ of the proposals, as the ‘ratings’ were not mandatory for credit proposals
upto Rs.50 lakh. It is surprising to note that upto 25 May, 2016, the applications
included a column for indicating the ‘rating’ position. However, the Trust has,
seemingly, weakened the system by modifying the format to only provide for
mentioning either ‘Yes’ or ‘No’ in the relevant column relating to ‘rating’ and
‘Investment Grade’. The Committee further note that while the Trust was required
to issue ‘guarantee’ only in respect of such proposals which have a rating/or are
rated, this has not been followed at all. The Committee recommend that CGTMSE
may prescribe broad parameters/ a check list for a proposal to be treated as of
‘Investment Grade’ so as to ensure uniformity in assessment of the proposals for
sanction of ‘Guarantee’. The CGTMSE may devise a rating structure similar to
rating structures prescribed by CRISIL and various other rating agencies. The
Committee feel that such empirical tools would not only come handy to CGTMSE

to formulate targeted guarantee products but also be of use to MLIs.

Foreign/PVT. Banks

29. The Committee note that guarantees have been extended on loans
sanctioned by private and foreign banks on the basis of personal guarantee. This
is in contravention of Clause 7 (iii) of the scheme as per which primary security is
to be created as a matter of necessity. As per Audit observation, the data on
status relating to ‘primary security’ has been left blank in 100 per cent of the
cases in the applications. What is even more surprising to note in this regard is
that the question posed by Audit has not been replied to and the plea taken is that
this only compliments the existing credit facilities available from regular bankers.

48 |


The Committee find it surprising that the Trust officers, who are duty bound to
keep a watch over public funds try to justify the acts which are apparently in
contravention of the guidelines. The Committee strongly recommend that a
thorough investigation of cases where guarantees have been issued on personal
guarantee and which do not create any primary security may be carried out.

Internal controls

30. The Committee note from the audit observation that due to inadequacies in
the system of approval of guarantees, the financial interest as well as business
viability of the Trust is being jeopardized. The Committee also note in this regard
that the Trust has initiated a process of scrutinizing applications for amounts
above Rupees one crore at the time of approval, and has also formulated the
guidelines for online capture of data relating to financial status of the business
unit. In case of any deviation in the appraisal process, before sanctioning of loan,
the Trust would not be liable to pay the default amount in respect of such
accounts. The Committee while noting that some action appears to have been
taken to protect the scheme and address the problem of misinformation of MLIs
and delinquencies in the appraisal system, nevertheless, emphasise on ensuring
that inadequacies in the system are adequately addressed. The Committee desire
to be furnished with details of the action taken and impact of the scrutiny on the

process of extending guarantees.

NEW DELHI; . SHRI ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
॥ March, 2022 Chairperson,
Phalguna, 1943 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

Jon oe

49 | 08 5


APPENDix~T

Confidential

MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2020-21) HELD ON 4४
JANUARY, 2021,

The Committee met on Monday, the 4th January 2021 from 1100 hrs. to 1320 hrs in Committee Room 'B’,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

NPP wn

Shri Jayant Sinha

RAJYA SABHA

8, Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
9. Shri Naresh Gujral
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

1. Shri T.G Chandrashekhar - Joint Secretary
2. Shri M.L.K. Raja - Director
3. Shri Alok Mani Tripathi - Deputy Secretary

-Sa-


REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA

1. Ms. Saubha Kumar - Dy. C&AG (Commi.)
2. Ms. Ritika Bhatia - Director General
3. Ms. Kavita Prasad - Director General
4... Sh. 0. Nedunchezhian - Director General

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES

1. Shri A.K. Sharma - Secretary

2. Shri Devendra Kumar Singh —- Additional Secretary & Development
Comm.

3. Shri Piyush Shrivastava - Additional Development Communication

4, Shri Sandeep Verma - CEO, Credit Guarantee Fund Trust

5. Shri Deepak Rao - Joint Development Comm.

2. At the outset, the Chairperson, PAC welcomed the Members and Audit Officers to the sitting of the
Committee, convened to have a briefing by the Audit Officers and the representatives of the Ministry of Micro,
Small and Medium Enterprises on the subject "Functioning of Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and
Small Enterprises" based on the C8AG's Report No. 10 of 2020.

3. The Chairperson then, asked the Dy. C&AG to brief the Committee on the shortcomings pointed out and
findings in their Report and suggestions made by them and elucidate on the Functioning of Credit Guarantee Fund

Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises.

4. The Dy. C&AG then detailed that the C&AG has taken up audit of the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises (MSME) and explained the various issues concerning shortfalls in the functioning of Credit Guarantee
Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE), which were revealed after Audit scrutiny and made a
presentation on the audit findings through a Power Point Presentation (PPT) for benefit of Members.

5. Following the briefing by Audit officers on the subject, the representative of Ministry of Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprises (MSME) were called in and the Chairperson welcomed them to the Sitting. Impressing upon
the confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee, the Chairperson asked the Secretary, Ministry of Micro,

-S]j-


Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) to enlighten the Committee on various aspects of the subject and

responses on the Audit findings/observations on the subject matter.

6. Accordingly, Secretary, Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) asked for permission for
CEO, CGTMSE to make a Power Point Presentation (PPT) which highlighted jnfer-alia the mandate of the
CGTMSE; the overlapping mandate of both CGTMSE and National Credit Guarantee Trustee Company Ltd
(NCGTC) ; the UDYAM registration; the institutional Framework of SIDBI; the Member Lending institutions and the
Eligible Lending Institutions ; the time limit of the Guarantee cover ; the tenure of the guarantee cover ; the extent

of coverage and the fees prescribed ; and the impact of the scheme.

7. The CEO of the CGTMSE also explained the responses of the MSME on the audit observations , covering
interalia the matters wherein the Trust had issued guarantees on the basis of the personal guarantees of the
borrowers without creation of primary security which was against the approved scheme guidelines; the sanctity and
accuracy of the data given by Member Lending Institutions; the case of overlapping of National Credit Guarantee
Trustee Company Ltd (NCGTC) with Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE);
absence of regulators; new initiatives of MSME in wake of challanges posed by Covid-19; and the simplification of

the entire process of financial aid and guarantee of loans to MSME etc...

8. The Chairperson and Members of the Committee put forth specific questions mainly about the absence of
regulatory framework; the duality of role of National Credit Guarantee Trustee Company Ltd (NCGTC) with Credit
Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE); percentage of guarantees to private sector
banks; acceptable level of guarantee; comparison with best international practices; accuracy of data being fed by
MLIS; review study to be taken up by CGTMSE to evaluate its guarantee instruments with other best practices in
any other country; actual functioning of the credit guarantee scheme at the district level; ground reality of insistence
on collateral by banks and MLIs; the importance and necessity of hybrid system of credit guarantee at the time, the
scheme was designed for guarantee in the absence of collaterals; the issue of extending guarantees and the
account subsequently turning to NPA and issue of extending guarantee cover for defaulting accounts without

proper CIBIL status.
9. The Members were of the unanimous view that despite C&AG's observations on the subject, much

remains to be done in this area due to which many delays persisted and there are a lot of unfinanced MSMEs
which are yet to be covered under the Credit Guarantee Scheme. As a number of queries remained unanswered,

~ 6a


the Chairperson asked the Ministry to furnish written replies to all the queries raised by the Members during the
discussion within 15 days. The Chairperson then thanked the representatives of the Ministry of Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprises (MSME) and other accompanied officers for appearing before the Committee and furnishing

valuable input and information on the subject.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitling has been kept on record.

The Committee, then, adjourned.


APPENDIX -छ

MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2021-22) HELD ON 10" FEBRUARY, 2022.

The Public Accounts Committee sat on Thursday, the 10" February, 2022 from
1500 hrs. to 1555 hrs. in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

Members
LOK SABHA
Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
Dr. Satyapal Singh
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
Shri Jayant Sinha
Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

©MBNOBARYN

RAJYA SABHA
10. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil
11, Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
12. Shri C.M.Ramesh
13. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy
14. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

1. Shri T.G. Chandrashekhar - Joint Secretary

2... Shri Tirthankar Das - Director

3. Shri 5.7. Mishra - Director

4. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Additional Director

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR
GENERAL OF INDIA

1. Shri Rakesh Mohan - Dy. C&AG
2. Shri Raj Ganesh Viswanathan - Dy C&AG
3. Smt. Ritika Bhatia - Director General
PART-A
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and the

Officers of the C&AG of India to the Sitting of the Committee. He then apprised the
Members of the following three agenda items before the Committee:

“Syme


i. = XXXX XXXX XXXX
ii, = XXXX XXXX XXXX.

iii. Consideration and adoption of 4 draft reports.

3. XXXX XXXX XXXX
4. XXXX XXXX XXXX
5. XXXX XXXX XXXX
6. XXXX XXXX XXXX
7. XXXX XXXX XXXX
8. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the following Reports:

i. Draft Report on "Functioning of Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small
Enterprises (CGTMSE)";

ii, = XXXX XXXX XXXX
ii, = XXXX XXXX XXXX
iv. = XXXX XXXX XXXX

9. XXXX XXXX XXXX

10. Following some deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid four Reports
without any change/modification. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to
finalise the aforesaid Reports on the basis of factual verification and present the same

to the Hon'ble Speaker/ Parliament.

PART-B
11. XXXX XXXX XXXX
12. XXXX XXXX XXXX
13... XXXX XXXX XXXX
14.  XXXX XXXX XXXX
15. XXXX XXXX XXXX

The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

A copy of the transcript of audio recording of the proceedings of the sitting has
been kept on record.

786 लए