112

NON- UTILISATION OF SOLAR THERMAL POWER
PLANT
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the

Committee contained in their Sixty - First Report (17 Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

ONE HUNDRED AND TWELFTH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

weet जयते

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2342

ONE HUNDRED AND TWELFTH
REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

Non- Utilisation of Solar Thermal Power Plant

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Sixty - First Report (17 Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY

सल्यमैव जयते
Presented to Lok Sabha on: 08.02.2024
Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 08.02.2024

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

February, 2024 /Magha, 1945 (Saka)


CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2023-24)

INTRODUCTION

CHAPTER I

CUAPTER II

CHAPTER HI

CHAPTER IV

CHAPTER V

le

nt

1२९॥७०॥............ ००००० ००_____्ञननननननननि नल ननन न ननि तन न

Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the (0एटापावला[..............------"__न्‍_न्‍न्‍न्‍-

Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to p ॥९ in view of the
replies received from the Government...

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration...

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
the Government have furnished interim replics........

APPENDICES

Minutes of the seventeenth sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2023-24) held on 05 February 2024

Analysis of the Acton Taken by the Government
on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Public Accounts Committee contained in their
Sixty-first Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)

* not appended to cyclostyled copy of the report


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson

MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

hri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu
hri Subhash Chandra Baheria
ri Bhartruhari Mahtab
hri Jagdambika Pal
Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi
Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
9. 511 Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara
5
5
D

SNOARWHN

hri Brijendra Singh
hri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
ir. Satya Pal Singh

11.
12.

13. Shri Jayant Sinha
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav

RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohli
17. Dr. K. Laxman

18. Shri Derek O' Brien”
19. Shri Tiruchi Siva

20. Dr. M. Thambidurai
21. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

Secretariat

1. Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Joint Secretary

2. Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja - Director

3. Shri Girdhari Lal - Deputy Secretary

4. Shri Ashikho Alemo - Committee Officer

5. Ms. Khyati - Assistant Committee Officer

" Blected w.c.f. 19.08.2023 consequent upon retirement of Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray, MP on 18.08.2023.
iv


INTRODUCTION

|, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this One Hundred and Twelfth Report
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their
Sixty-first Report on ‘Non-utilisation of Solar Thermal Power Plant" relating to
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy.

2. The Sixty-first Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 50
April, 2023. Replies of the Government to all the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report were received. The Public Accounts Committee considered and
adopted the One Hundred and Twelfth Report at their sitting held on O5th February
* 2024. Minutes of the Sitting are given at Appendix |.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the
Report.

4. The Committee also place in record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the Comptroller
and Auditor General of India.

5 An analysis of the action taken by the Government ०. the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixty-first Report (Seventeenth Lok
Sabha) is given at Appendix-ll.

NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY

07 February, 2024 Chairperson,
18 Magha, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


CHAPTER - 1
REPORT

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by
the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Sixty-first Report (17th Lok Sabha) on "Non-utilisation of Solar
Thermal Power Plant” relating to the Ministry of New & Renewable Energy.

2. The Sixty-first Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok
Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 05 April 2023. It contained nine
Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken Notes have been received from the

Ministry of New & Renewable Energy and are categorized as under:

(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:

Para Nos. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,10, 11

Total: 09
Chapter - Il

(iii) | Observations/Recommendations which the. Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:
Para Nos. -

Total: NIL
Chapter - Ill

(iv) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

Para Nos. -
Total: NIL

Chapter - IV

(v) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies/no replies:

Para Nos.
Total: NIL

Chapter -V


3. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee revealed non-
utilisation of Solar Thermal Power Plant sanctioned by the Ministry of New and
Renewable Energy (MNRE) under a Research and Development (R&D) project,
‘Development of a Megawatt-scale Solar Thermal Power Testing, Simulation and
Research Facility’ for implementation by Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay. The
project, expected to facilitate development of 1 MWh grid interactive solar thermal
power plant had generated 9 MWh of electricity upto 31 August 2015. While an
amount of Rs. 46.72 crore was released by MNRE for the project, the plant stopped
functioning from September, 2015 and remained nonfunctional without any further
action taken on the project. Upon scrutiny certain shortcomings were revealed from
the audit observations and the Committee had accordingly given their
observations/recommendations. in their Sixty-first Report. Gist of important
Observations/Recommendations in this Report is given as under:
i. The Committee desired that the MNRE ~ update their
monitoring/coordination mechanism. The Committee desired to be apprised
of the reasons for not taking appropriate measures towards developing a
dedicated workforce and recommended that the MNRE should adopt
systemic planning and exercise effective foresight in initiating such type of
projects. The Committee also recommended that officials responsible for

inaction in taking policy measures be suitably sensitized.

ii. The Committee felt that had the issue been handled with care and
foresight, the expenditure of 46.36 crore, incurred for completion of the
project would have not become Infructuous. The Committee desired that
the Ministry take appropriate measures, at least, now, with a view to

ensuring that such issues are avoided in similar projects in future.

ili. The Committee recommended that steps should be taken to revive the
plant as a significant amount of tax payer's money i.e. %46.36 crore has
been invested in implementing the project. The Committee further desired
that the Ministry should explore the possibility of improving the technology
of this plant so that it can contribute towards strengthening solar power

generation.


vi.

vii.

vill.

The Committee emphasised that the MNRE should follow a systemic
planning by taking into consideration all variables like availability of
tesources, credibility of implementing agency based on past performance,
time frame for completion of projects, maintenance and financial viability of
the project etc. at the planning stage of such type of projects so as to avoid

delay in completing/execution of the projects in future.

The Committee noted with concern that no serious interest seems to have
been taken for making the plant functional as recommended by the
Governing council of NISE. The Committee recommended that the MNRE
should take necessary measures towards revamping the plant and making

it functional.

The Committee desired to be apprised of the number of research projects
sanctioned till date; expenditure incurred thereon; output there from; and

institutions involved therein.

IIT Jodhpur intended to constitute a consortium for producing 1 Megawatt
of power by way of joining the facility of this Solar Thermal Power Plant and
a Photo Voltaic Power Plant. While taking note of the interest towards
operationalising the plant, the Committee desired to be informed about the

progress made and the current status of this project. The Committee

" wished to be apprised of the commercial viability of this arrangement and

the possibility of reviving and reusing the plant, as a whole.

The Committee desired to be apprised of the strategy formulated by MNRE
towards achieving this target, action taken thereon and present status of

power generation by means of both solar and wind energy till date.

The Committee took the view that had the feasibility of the project been
evaluated objectively and comprehensively, the loss could have been
avoided. The Committee therefore recommended that at least now, MNRE
should explore the possibility of reviving the plant at the earliest and make
it functional. The Committee, therefore, urge that instead of using this plant
as a mere demonstration project for R&D, efforts need to be made for


studying the technology used in the other plants of similar nature that are

being run successfully so as to enable in reviving the plant.

4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of New & Renewable Energy
on respective Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their
Sixty-first Report have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. The
Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government, on some of their

Observations/Recommendations which either need reiteration or merit comments.

5. The Committee desire the Ministry of New & Renewable Energy to furnish
Action Taken Notes in respect of Observations/ Recommendations contained in
Chapter | of the Report, positively within six months of the presentation of the

Report to the Parliament.

Recommendation at Para Nos. 3 - Dedicated workforce for the project

6. The Committee in their Report on the subject, had recommended as
under:

The Committee note that although the National Advisory Council had suggested
creating a dedicated workforce at the Solar Energy Centre (SEC) for running the plant
after commissioning of the project, yet MNRE did not take any action in this regard.
Consequently, the plant could not be run. As informed by MNRE, IIT Bombay had
developed a dedicated workforce for engagement till the date of completion of the project
and the expenses thereon were met from the project costs. After handing over to NISE
on 7th March, 2015, NISE retained the workforce and operated the plant till August 2015
by using its own budgetary resources. But, the arrangement was not sustainable as
NISE was newly formed and had very limited funds. The Committee are astonished to
note that neither the Ministry took any steps towards knowing the fund requirements of
NISE for this purpose nor did they try to resolve the issue of funding for creating a
dedicated workforce for the project. This is indicative of lack of co-ordination between

NISE and MNRE.

The Committee are of the view that NISE being a newly formed agency, the

MNRE should have taken adequate steps towards providing proper guidance and


direction, as well as adequate funds to NISE. The Committee further note that NISE, in
co-ordination with MNRE took initiatives towards operating the plant by means of floating
Eol for engaging a third party in August 2015 and in August 2018, but no potential
response was received. The Committee are of the view that it was essential on the part
of MNRE to take appropriate, adequate and timely action in this regard more so, as NISE
was identified as a potential agency for operation and maintenance of the plant for R&D
purpose following the commissioning of the project. The Committee, therefore, desire
that the MNRE update their monitoring/coordination mechanism so as to avoid such
lapses in future. The Committee also find it to be inappropriate that while IIT, Bombay, in
a written letter, had suggested that the Plant needs to be run on a continuous basis, no
positive action was taken by the MNRE/NISE for ensuring continuous operation of this
plant. The Committee desire to be apprised of the reasons for not taking appropriate
measures towards developing of a dedicated workforce and recommend that henceforth
the MNRE should adopt systemic planning and exercise effective foresight in initiating
such type of projects so that similar lapses do not recur. Suitable/clear guidelines need
to be developed and prescribed for these types of projects in future. The Committee also
recommend that officials responsible for inaction in taking policy measures need to be

suitably sensitized so that such happenings do not continue.

7. The Ministry of New & Renewable Energy in the Action Taken Notes has
submitted as under:
"It was found that even after deployment of a dedicated workforce
(although uneconomical), due to the technical reasons mainly lower radiation than
the design condition, lower power outputs, lower optical efficiencies of both
collector fields, and need for major repair/replacement different sub-systems, the
sustainable operation of the plant was not possible. Besides, it was not even

economical to run the plant therefore, the plant was not run on sustainable basis.

Even then, NISE engaged a team to revive the plant and the efforts
resulted in making the plant partially operational during the first week of March in
2018. NISE was able to make the collectors to track the sun manually and some
amount of steam was generated. However, sustained operation of the plant could

not be achieved.


NISE made efforts to run the plant through a third party for which it invited
the EOI titled ‘For running solar thermal power plant set up at NISE’ in August
2015. However, due to poor response from a single party with unreasonable tariff
of Rs. 39/kWh, the work could not be awarded.

MNRE has now revised the R&D scheme as the Renewable Energy
Research and Technology Development (RE-RTD) Programme with the

following monitoring mechanism: -

(i) The monitoring of the progress of the projects will be done by
project monitoring committee (PMC) comprising of the experts
identified by MNRE. IFD representative may also be included in the
PMC, if required.

(ii) The achievements claimed under the projects will be subjected
to validation of the technology/process so that appropriate action is
taken on furthering the technology development and demonstration in
the area. On completion, the outcome of the project will be screened
by expert committee to be constituted with the approval
of RDPAC. The achievements will be subjected to measurements in
relevant accredited test labs in the country or outside country.

(iii) In addition, interactive meets, R&D Conclaves will be organized
annually to share the achievements with researchers, experts from
R&D/academic institutions/industries, and other related stakeholders
for taking corrective steps for improvement in implementation of
projects.

Ministry has taken care that in any demonstration project, there must be
performance evaluation and running cost at a particular time with dedicated
manpower and instruction in this regard has also been reflected in R&D Project
Appraisal Committee (RDPAC). For demonstration research projects, operation

and maintenance budget provision may also be provided."

8. Noting that the plant could not be run as the Ministry neither took any
steps towards knowing the fund requirements for NISE for maintaining a
dedicated workforce nor did they try to resolve the issue of funding for creating
a dedicated workforce for the project, the Committee had found that there was
lack of co-ordination between NISE and MNRE. The Committee had desired that


the MNRE update their monitoring/coordination mechanism so as to avoid such
lapses in future. The Committee further found lack of any positive action by the
MNREINISE for ensuring continuous operation of the plant as suggested by IIT
Bombay to be inappropriate and desired to be apprised of the reasons for not
taking measures for developing a dedicated workforce and recommended that
the MNRE may adopt systemic planning, and exercise effective foresight in
initiating such projects and prescribe suitable/clear guidelines for the same. The
Committee had also recommended that officials responsible for inaction be
suitably sensitized to avoid recurrence of such lapses. The Committee take note
from the action taken notes of the Ministry that NISE had made efforts to run the
plant through a third party by inviting 501 in August 2015 but due to poor
response with unreasonable tariff proposed from a single party, could not award
the work. While the Committee note from the submissions of the Ministry that

the R&D Scheme _has been revised by MNRE as “the Renewable Energy

Research and Technology Development (RE-RTD) Programme" with enhanced.

monitoring mechanism, they feel that the issue of lack of coordination between
MNRE and implementing agencies has not been sufficiently addressed. The
Committee, therefore, desire that detailed guidelines for systemic planning,
Strict compliance of the R&D quidelines, a robust mechanism for ensuring
coordination amongst various agencies be developed so_as to ensure that
appropriate, adequate and timely action is taken in implementation of such
projects without incurring extra financial liability. The Committee further desire
to be apprised of the specific efforts made to sensitize the officials responsible

to avoid recurrence of such lapses.

Recommendation at Para Nos. 9 - Steps taken for Revival of Plant by IIT Jodhpur

9. The Committee in their Original Report had recommended as under:

During the oral evidence of the representatives of MNRE on the subject, the
Committee have been informed that IIT Jodhpur has expressed interest in the revival of
this plant. IIT Jodhpur intend to constitute a consortium for producing 1 Megawatt of
power by way of joining the facility of this Solar Thermal Power Plant and a Photo Voltaic
Power Plant and enter into a PPA with an Electricity purchasing company in Jodhpur, at


a tariff of Rs. 8/kWh. While taking note of the interest towards operationalizing the plant,

the Committee would also like to be informed about the progress made in this regard and

the current status of this project. The Committee wish to be apprised of the commercial

viability of this arrangement and the possibility of reviving and reusing the plant, as a

whole.

10.

The Ministry of New & Renewable Energy in the Action Taken Notes has

submitted as under:

11.

"IIT Jodhpur has shown the interest to take this power plant for further
research and development in Solar energy sector. IIT Jodhpur presented that a
PV-CSP Hybrid power plant with storage is proposed in consortium with Industry
M/s Luit Renewable Solutions Pvt. Limited New Delhi. Ministry has considered

the proposal on merit.

As proposed project would be a hybrid of PV and CSP, it's design would
allow about 16 hours of operation, thereby, producing approximately 16 MWhe
per day. During day period, PV will generate electricity and feed into the IIT
Jodhpur campus grid while after sunset, the stored thermal energy would be
utilized to run the turbine and feed electricity for 8 hours after sunset. A
preliminary DPR has been received from IIT Jodhpur and the Ministry has
accorded approval to NISE to transfer the entire facility to IIT Jodhpur for further
research and running of the plant with storage facility. NISE will transfer the facility
to IIT Jodhpur shortly. NISE will be fully involved during the research work and
MNRE will ensure the implementation and regular monitoring through a Project
Monitoring Committee. The entire arrangement will be at no cost to either MNRE
or NISE.

An agreement between IIT Jodhpur and M/s Luit Renewable Solutions Pvt.
Limited New Delhi has been finalised for purchase of power at Rs. 6.93/kKWh. This
will perhaps ensure the reusing of the entire facility and commercial viability of the

project."

Observing that IIT Jodhpur has expressed interest in the revival of plant

whereby the Institute intended to constitute a consortium for producing 1


Megawatt of power by way of joining the facility of the Solar Thermal Power
Plant and a Photo Voltaic Power Plant and enter into a PPA with an Electricity
purchasing company in Jodhpur, the Committee had desired to be informed of
the progress made in this regard and the current status of the project. The
Committee take note from the action taken notes submitted by the Ministry, that
iT Jodhpur had proposed a PV-CSP Hybrid power plant with storage in
consortium with Industry M/s Luit Renewable Solutions Pvt. Limited, New Delhi
and the Ministry has considered the proposal on merit. The Committee also take
note from the Ministry's submissions that NISE would transfer the facility to IIT
Jodhpur shortly and be fully involved during the research work and ensuring the
implementation and monitoring by MNRE through a Project Monitoring
Committee. The MNRE has neither provided any timeline for completion of the
transfer of the facility from NISE to IIT Jodhpur nor any updates in regard to
progress made in effecting this arrangement. The Committee desire to be
apprised of the present status of the arrangement. The Committee also urge
upon the Ministry to expedite the transfer of the facility within a specified
timeline with a view to avoiding further wastage of a facility developed with

public money.


CHAPTER Il

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
GOVERNMENT

Observation/ Recommendation

The Committee note that although the National Advisory Council had
suggested creating a dedicated workforce at the Solar Energy Centre (SEC) for
running the plant after commissioning of the project, yet MNRE did not take any
action in this regard. Consequently, the plant could not be run. As informed by
MNRE, IIT Bombay had developed a dedicated workforce for engagement till the date
of completion of the project and the expenses thereon were met from the project
costs. After handing over to NISE on 7th March, 2015, NISE retained the workforce
and operated the plant till August 2015 by using its own budgetary resources. But,
the arrangement was not sustainable as NISE was newly formed and had very limited
funds. The Committee are astonished to note that neither the Ministry took any steps
towards knowing the fund requirements of NISE for this purpose nor did they try to
resolve the issue of funding for creating a dedicated workforce for the project. This is
indicative of lack of co-ordination between NISE and MNRE.

The Committee are of the view that NISE being a newly formed agency, the MNRE
should have taken adequate steps towards providing proper guidance and direction,
as well as adequate funds to NISE. The Committee further note that NISE, in co-
ordination with MNRE took initiatives towards operating the plant by means of
floating Eol for engaging a third party in August 2015 and in August 2018, but no
potential response was received. The Committee are of the view that it was essential
on the part of MNRE to take appropriate, adequate and timely action in this regard
more so, as NISE was identified as a potential agency for operation and maintenance
of the plant for R&D purpose following the commissioning of the project. The
Committee, therefore, desire that the MNRE update their monitoring/coordination
mechanism so as to avoid such lapses in future. The Committee also find it to be
inappropriate that while IIT, Bombay, in a written letter, had suggested that the Plant
needs to be run on a continuous basis, no positive action was taken by the
MNREI/NISE for ensuring continuous operation of this plant. The Committee desire to
be apprised of the reasons for not taking appropriate measures towards developing
of a dedicated workforce and recommend that henceforth the MNRE should adopt
systemic planning and exercise effective foresight in initiating such type of projects
so that similar lapses do not recur. Suitable/clear guidelines need to be developed
and prescribed for these types of projects in future. The Committee also recommend


that officials responsible for inaction in taking policy measures need to be suitably
sensitized so that such happenings do not continue.

(Para. 3 of the Part II

Report of the Public Accounts Committee

(17 Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by Government

It was found that even after deployment of a dedicated workforce (although uneconomical),
due to the technical reasons mainly lower radiation than the design condition, lower power
outputs, lower optical efficiencies of both collector fields, and need for major
repair/replacement different sub-systems, the sustainable operation of the plant was not
possible. Besides, it was not even economical to run the plant therefore, the plant was not

run on sustainable basis.

Even then, NISE engaged a team to revive the plant and the efforts resulted in making the
plant partially operational during the first week of March in 2018. NISE was able to make the
collectors to track the sun manually and some amount of steam was generated. However,

sustained operation of the plant could not be achieved.

NISE made efforts to run the plant through a third party for which it invited the EOI titled ‘For
running solar thermal power plant set up at NISE’ in August 2015. However, due to poor
response from a single party with unreasonable tariff of Rs. 39/kWh, the work could not be

awarded.

MNRE has now revised the R&D scheme as the Renewable Energy Research and
Technology Development (RE-RTD) Programme with the following monitoring

mechanism: -

(i) The monitoring of the progress of the projects will be done by project
monitoring committee (PMC) comprising of the experts identified by
MNRE. IFD representative may also be included in the PMC, if
required.

(ii) The achievements claimed under the projects will be subjected to
validation of the technology/process so that appropriate action is
taken on furthering the technology development and demonstration
in the area. On completion, the outcome of the project will be


screened by expert committee to be constituted with the approval
of RDPAC. The achievements will be subjected to measurements in
relevant accredited test labs in the country or outside country.

(iii) In addition, interactive meets, R&D Conclaves will be organized
annually to share the achievements with researchers, experts from
R&D/academic institutions/industries, and other related stakeholders
for taking corrective steps for improvement in implementation of
projects.

Ministry has taken care that in any demonstration project, there must be performance
evaluation and running cost at a particular time with dedicated manpower and instruction in
this regard has also been reflected in R&D Project Appraisal Committee (RDPAC). For
demonstration research projects, operation and maintenance budget prevision may also be

provided.

(Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, OM. No. 354/12/2019-NSM dated 30.01.2024)

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee are constrained to observe that the plant was taken over from
iT, Bombay by MNRE _ before’ getting the project performance
appraised by the RDPAC. The MNRE, however, indicated that the project was
appraised by the R&D Sectoral Project Appraisal Committee on Solar Thermal on 07-
08-2013 wherein the RDPAC observed that most of the project goals had been
achieved. The reasoning given by the Ministry that the project was ending in 2015,
owing to which it was felt that obtaining approval of RDPAC prior to the timeline is
not tenable. The entire responsibility is sought to be put on NISE on the ground that
the project was completed with NISE as a responsible consortium partner is also not
totally justifiable. The manner in which the Ministry took over the plant from IIT,
Bombay without getting the performance apprised by RDPAC and placing the
responsibility of operation and maintenance on NISE without assessing the
requirements of NISE for enabling in sustained functioning of the Plant is, in the
opinion of the Committee incorrect. The MNRE do not appear to have taken this issue
seriously till the lapse was pointed out by Audit and that too after a significant time
gap, and incurring an expenditure to the tune of Rs. 46.36 crore. The Committee


consider it be unfortunate that no efforts were made by MNRE for obtaining the
‘completion Report’, which is an essential requirement in the process of handing over
a project. The Committee feel that had the issue been handled with care and
foresight, the expenditure of Rs. 46.36 crore, incurred for completion of the project
could have not become infructuous. The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to
take appropriate measures, at least, now, with a view to ensuring that such issues are

avoided in similar projects in future.
(Para 4 of the Part Il

Report of the Public Accounts Committee (17th Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by Government
The plant was handed over to NISE after the review and recommendation of RDPAC in
meeting held on August 2013 in which the Committee observed that most of the project
goals had been achieved. The project had resulted in facility which offers unique opportunity
to gain a lot of experience in operation, vendor management and generating performance

data.

Since, NISE was the one of the consortium partners for the project, the R&D project had
been completed with extension, and the project was in NISE campus, accordingly, the
MNRE found NISE as responsible agency for its operation and maintenance after the end of

project period.

Performance appraisal of a Research and Development (R&D) project is crucial to ensure
that it meets its objectives, stays on track, and contributes effectively to an organization's

innovation goals

This was an R&D project, first of its kind solar thermal power plant which was_ established
and performance appraisal was done by the committee of pioneer experts in the area of
solar thermal Chaired by Prof. S. Srinivasa Murthy, IIT Madras and the external members
were Prof. K. Chattopadhyay, IISc Bangalore, Prof. T.C. Kandpal, IIT Delhi, Dr. H.S. Jain,
Former ED BHEL Hyderabad, Prof. N.K. Bansal Former VC, SMVD University. The

Committee noted/observed the following :

+ ‘All major components of the power plant have been installed and tested for its
functionality. This includes testing of turbine using steam generated from the solar


field comprised of parabolic trough solar collectors and linear Fresnel reflectors.
Power evacuation from the solar plant would start as soon as the weather conditions
become favourable.

* An oil test rig has been installed and commissioned at project site for evaluation of
thermal performance of concentrators. Presently, trial runs are being performed on a
paraboloid dish called Arun supplied by Clique Developments Pvt. Ltd., Mumbai.

- A flux mapping system has been designed for measuring the concentrated flux
obtained from linear focusing solar collectors. This is a novel low cost technique, and
can be effective in laboratory environment as well as outdoor conditions. A Patent
has been filed on this system.

: The preliminary version of the simulator was released in July 2011, and
subsequenily its Evaluation Version v 1.0 was released in November-2012

The committee observed that most of the project goal have been achieved. The
project has resulted in facility which offers unique opportunity to gain a lot of experience
in operation, vendor management and generating performance data. However, future of
facility in terms of assigning responsibility for its operation and maintenance after the
project period ends need quick address by the Ministry. In terms of utilization, the facility
has high potential for research work aiming at cost effective solar thermal power
generation, manpower training and component testing. The Committee. suggested
Ministry to take view in the matter”

Ministry has now revised R&D scheme through an external panel of Experts under the
Chairmanship of Dr. Anil Kakodkar, (Former Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission and

Secretary to the Government of India). The following were the policy recommendations:

¢ The Ministry should invite competitive proposals from industry in collaboration
with academia/research institutions that could deliver on a specified user need
while pushing the technology envelope.

e Deliverables including the performance and qualification requirements should
be clearly spelt out.

¢ There should be independent test houses to ascertain performance of products
developed.

* There should be support for guaranteed purchase up to a specified quantum
provided the products meet the specified qualification and the price.

« The focus of science departments (DST) could be on laboratory development
leading to proof-of concept level development and that of user ministries
should be on commercialisation / market entry of a developed technology.


MNRE therefore should focus on upgrading the technology from low
Technology Readiness Level (TRL) to high TRL ready for commercialisation.

e Support for 100% grant for the industry is important and should be
incorporated in the policy. A project can be evaluated and funded according to
the gap in viability. For industry, funding should be in graded manner, 100% for
first level research and 50% for prototype/product developmental research and
viability gap funding for larger size demonstration projects.

¢ Involvement of the industry from the initial level of R&D should be high. This
will expedite commercialization of technology.

e Ministry should aim at allocating a higher budget and more projects should be
taken up be in a time bound manner.

Accordingly, Ministry has revised the scheme as the Renewable Energy Research and
Technology Development (RE-RTD) Programme in December 2021. Suggestions of the

committee have been noted.

(Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, OM. No. 354/12/2019-NSM dated 30.01.2024)

Observation/ Recommendation

The Committee further find that no action could be initiated for sale of 1Mwe Solar
Power planned to be generated from the plant. In this regard, the
Committee have been informed that NISE initiated actions and approached
Dakshin Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam (DHBVN) for facilitating in feeding the power to
the grid. Although, NISE made efforts towards signing of PPA for Power evacuation
with Haryana Power Purchase Centre at the rate of Rs. 6.44 per KWh as per the
provision made for Solar Photovoltaic power in April 2015, no formal response was
received. Further, as apprised by the MNRE, while NISE was operating the plant from
March, 2015 to August, 2015, it was found that the power output was much lower than
the designated value of 1.0Mwe and operating the plant was uneconomical.
Consequently, the plant became non-operational from 1st September 2015 and no
further action was initiated by NISE for signing of PPA with Haryana Power Purchase
Centre. During the course of evidence, the representative of MNRE informed the
Committee that the project was mainly R&D oriented, power generation was not the
main objective of this project, and it was not commercially viable for being run for a
long time. The Committee note in this regard that when the decision was taken at first


to build this project, the basic objective stated was to generate 1Mwe solar power. It
was only after the project proved to be commercially unviable that it has been formed
as a R&D project. The Committee feel that if the plan was to conceive the plant as
only R&D oriented, the MNRE should have satisfied the audit about the objectives of
the plant so that the Audit would have made a suitable Observation and the
Committee would not have been seized of the matter. A representative of MNRE too
accepted and stated during evidence that if the sanction given was for generating 1
MW electric power, it should have been generated, at least for a couple of years. The
Committee, recommend in this regard that steps should be taken to revive the plant
as a significant amount of tax payer's money i.e. Rs. 46.36 crore has been invested in
implementing the project, which remained wasted as there is no generation of
energy. The Committee further desire that the Ministry should explore the possibility
of improving the technology of this plant so that it can contribute towards

strengthening solar power generation.
(Para. 5 of the Part II

Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(17th Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by Government

As already mentioned that even after deployment of a dedicated workforce (although
uneconomical), due to the technical and financial reasons mainly lower radiation than the
design condition, lower power outputs, lower optical efficiencies of both collector fields, and
need for major repair/replacement different sub-systems, high and unviable O&M cost the
sustainable operation of the plant was not possible. Hence, there was no possibility of

further research in the plant.

The plant was used for successful demonstration of the technology. The technology has
worked but the cost was very high. Therefore, it was used for as example for successful
technology for training and demonstration. Ministry is also exploring the possibility of
improving the technology of solar thermal plant as per latest technological development. IIT
Jodhpur has shown interest to utilise the assets of this plant in developing a solar thermal
plant with storage in combination with solar PV. The transfer of the assets to IIT Jodhpur is

in progress.


As suggested by the committee, the further research will be carried out by IIT Jodhpur and
NISE will also be associated in the research with IIT Jodhpur. MNRE will also monitor the

research work on regular basis with NISE.

(Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, OM. No. 354/12/2019-NSM dated 30.01.2024)

Observation/ Recommendation

There was long delay of eight years (September 2009 to 2017) in making the Solar
Thermal Power Plant functional. From the information furnished by MNRE, the
Committee note that following the sanction on 7th September, 2009, the project was
in the execution phase till September, 2014, which was further extended fill 6th
March, 2015.

The information furnished by the Ministry is also silent on the reasons for delay of
three years in operationalizing this Solar Thermal Power Plant (STPP), as well as
escalation in cost of plant, i.e., from Rs. 41.17 crore sanctioned in 2009 to Rs. 46.72
crore till 2015. Lack of foresight and proper planning seem to be the reasons behind
the delay in making the plant functional and the consequent loss of expenditure
incurred thereon. The Committee, therefore, emphasise that, henceforth, the MNRE
should follow a systemic planning by taking into consideration all variables like
availability of resources, credibility of implementing agency based on past
performance, time frame for completion of projects, maintenance and financial
viability of the project etc. at the planning stage of such type of projects so as to

avoid delay in completing/execution of the projects in future.
(Para. 6 of the Part ॥

Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(17th Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by Government

The project was sanctioned in September 2009 and was handed over to NISE on 6" March
2015. It was run by NISE till August 2015. Hence, there was not a long delay. Thereafter,
the efforts were made by NISE in September 2017 till March 2018 to revive the plant and
make it commercially viable to at least recover the O&M cost. The suggestions of the
committee have been noted to follow a systemic planning of R&D projects. Accordingly, the

present revised R&D guidelines envisage a proper systemic planning by taking into


consideration all variables like availability of resources, credibility of implementing agency
based on past performance, time frame for completion of projects, maintenance and

financial viability of the project etc. at the planning stage of such type of projects.

(Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, OM. No. 354/12/2019-NSM dated 30 .01.2024)

Observation/ Recommendation

The Committee note that during 2015 to 2017, the plant was nonoperational on
account of administrative, financial and technical reasons. The facility was used for
training and demonstration purpose since its commissioning. The Committee are
constrained to observe that though NISE had taken several steps viz. engaging a
team to revive the plant, making the collectors to track the sun manually,
approaching the MNRE for seeking funds, facilitating a study which was conducted
through consultants appointed by the United Nations Industrial Development
Organisation (UNIDO) during January to March 2019 for assessing the technical
problems associated with solar field power block, other major accessories and
software for reviving the operation of the plant, it could not be made functional. The
Committee have also been apprised by the MNRE that a detailed Report titled
“Refurbishment of the 1.0 Mwe Concentrating Solar Power Plant at the NISE' was
prepared and presented to MNRE in the last week of March, 2019, which detailed the
various components, parts/systems to be overhauled/repaired/replaced along with
the financial implication on account of making the plant operational. Further, the
Governing Council of NISE in the 8th Meeting held on 20-06-2019, recommended that
efforts should be made to make the plant functional preferably on economical basis
for recovering the cost of O&M through electricity generation from the project. The
Committee are concerned to note in this regard that no serious interest seems to
have been taken for making the plant functional as recommended by the Governing
council of NISE. The Committee recommend that the MNRE should take necessary
measures towards revamping the plant and making it functional.
(Para. 7 of the Part Il
Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(17th Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by Government

For revamping of the plant, a detailed study was conducted by NISE through
consultants (one from Germany and another from India) appointed by the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) during January to March, 2019 for assessing
the technical problems associated with solar field, power block, other major accessories and


software for reviving the operation of the plant and to estimate requirement of funds for this
purpose. The study report titled ‘Refurbishment of the 1.0 MWe Concentrating Solar Power
Plant at the NISE’ indicates about the various components, parts/systems to be
overhauled/repaired/replaced along with financial implications for making the plant
operational. The detailed list of the spares is also given in the report. The cost of
renovation/refurbishment of the power plant was estimated about Rs. 3.22 crore and annual
operation and maintenance cost was estimated about Rs. 74.20 lakh. The report was

presented in the MNRE in the last week of March, 2019.

The MNRE took a considered decision indicating that “The main objectives of this R&D
project of 1.0 MWe Solar Thermal Power Plant have been achieved. The operation of
this 1.0 MWe Solar Thermal Power Plant is not economically viable and feasible on
sustainable basis. It cannot even recover operation and maintenance cost if operated
on commercial basis. This project has encouraged the developers for development and
deployment of solar thermal plant across the Country and as a result 3 solar thermal
power plants with a total capacity of 225 MW were established which were operational
in India.” The decision of MNRE was conveyed to PAC in the background note
submitted in August 2020 with the approval of Hon'ble Minister.

Thus, it was found that even after complete revival by spending another Rs. 3.22 crore and
deployment of a dedicated workforce with annual expenditure of Rs. 74.20 lakh (although
uneconomical), due to the technical and financial reasons mainly lower radiation than the
design condition, lower power outputs, lower optical efficiencies of both collector fields, and
need for major repair/replacement different sub-systems, high and unviable O&M cost the
sustainable operation of the plant will not be possible, bedsides, the financial constraints of

NISE. Therefore, the plant could not continue its operation.

The plant was used for successful demonstration of the technology. The technology has
worked but the cost was very high. It was used for as example for successful technology for
training and demonstration. Ministry has explored the possibility of improving the

technology of solar thermal plant as per latest technological development in association


with IIT Jodhpur and the entire facility is being transferred to IIT Jodhpur for further

research and running of the plant by incorporating the storage facility.

(Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, OM. No. 354/12/2019-NSM dated 30.01.2024)

Observation/ Recommendation

The Committee note that the Solar Thermal Power Project in its present condition is
being utilized for demonstration and training purpose for the National and
International training programmes being organised by NISE, besides having visitors
and students to showcase PTC and LFR based solar thermal power plant technology.
The Committee have been informed that till 2019-20, NISE organised 134 National and
36 international training programmes in the campus in which the facility was utilized
for training and demonstration purposes. The Committee are of the view that it may
not be appropriate to see any R&D project in isolated or ‘non-functional state’. The
Committee also wish to point out in this regard that Rs. 46.36 crore were spent on
this single project which had not lead to any scientific R&D nor contributed to energy
generation. Further, the Ministry have not apprised the Committee about the
percentage of R&D Budget sanctioned for this purpose and actual R&D expenditure
incurred thereon. The Committee desire to be apprised of the number of research
projects sanctioned till date; expenditure incurred thereon; output there from; and

institutions involved therein.
(Para. 8 of the Part Il

Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(17th Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by Government

The major achievements of this R&D project sanctioned to IIT Bombay in terms of scientific

R&D are given below:

e The objective of the project ie., design and development of two different
technology integrated 1.0 MWe grid interactive solar thermal power plant and
development of. indigenous technology and capability through continuous
experimentation and research have been achieved. The integration of PTC and
LFR technology for power generation in the plant was conceptualized and

demonstrated for first time in the Country.


The project encouraged the developers, who visited the project and interacted
with team of IIT Bombay for development and deployment of solar thermal power
plant across the Country. As a result, following 3 solar thermal power plants with
a total capacity of 225 MW were established with the learnings from this project

in India:

i. 125 MW plant (LFR technology) in Dhursar, Rajasthan completed in 2014
ii. 50 MW plant (PTC technology) in Nokh Village, Rajasthan completed in 2013
iii, 50 MW plant (PTC technology) in Anantpur, AP completed in 2014

The test facility designed, fabricated and commissioned for its use as a test bed
for concentrating collectors was first of its kind in India. The test rig includes an
oil circuit and a water circuit interlinked through a heat exchanger. The principle
of operation is the transfer of heat between hot thermic oil and cold water to give
out energy extracted from sun. The testing was conducted for a parabolic dish
concentrator (ARUN 100) supplied by Clique Development Ltd.

A solar thermal simulation package developed based on learning of this plant is
in public domain (http://www.ese.iitb.ac.in/oldweb/simulator/simulator.html) and is
being utilized for designing of solar thermal power plants in the country. The
preliminary version of the simulator was released in July 2011 that was
downloaded in 250 institutes, 450 industry and other organisation across 24
countries. The evaluation version v 1.0 of the solar thermal simulator released in
November 2012 that is being used by Tata Power also. The simulator was used
by NETRA-NTPC and was made available to L&T. The Evaluation License for
testing of the version was given to Fitchner India Pvt Ltd. The solar simulator
Version 2.0 has been downloaded by 991 persons Universities/Industry/Govt.

Agencies/Individuals from all over the world.


The R&D projects are sanctioned to various R&D/academic institutions, industries etc.
following the MNRE's policy and guidelines. During period from 2017-18 to 2020-21 Period,
35 nos. of R&D projects in solar thermal, solar PV, biogas/biogas purification, bio-fuel,
hydrogen and fuel cells were sanctioned with total allotted budget of Rs. 188.00 crore to
various R&D/academic institutions, industries, etc. and an expenditure of Rs. 130.00 crore
was incurred. A total no. of 206 research papers in National Journals and International
Journals were published during the period of 2017-18 to 2020-2021. 14 patents were also
registered. The major outcomes of these research activities are given below:

i. Solar cell

e High efficiency crystalline silicon solar cell of 19.4% efficiency was achieved
under a National Centre of Photovoltaic Research and Educations (NCPRE)
project at IIT, Bombay

e BHEL has developed high efficiency PERC solar cell with targeted
efficiency of 21.4%.

e IIT Bombay has developed pervoskite solar cell with 21% efficiency

e Indigenous Silicon ingot has been prepared at SSN College of Engineering
in Tamil Nadu

ii. Solar system

e Cost effective reliable Solar-powered Clean Drinking Water Systems
suitable for various locations are installed in the different part of the country
by NISE, Gurugram.

« PV powered induction motor-pump set for irrigation by IIT Bombay

¢ The All India Survey of PV Module Reliability by IIT Bombay

iii. Solar thermal

¢ 1MWe Solar Thermal Power Plant with 16 hours thermal storage has set up
at Mount Abu by World Renewable Spiritual Trust (WRST), Mumbai which
is running successfully.

« ॥56 Bangalore has developed a supercritical CO2 Turbomachinery along

with high efficiency receiver for solar thermal power plants


¢ Central Tasar Research & Training Institute (C.T.R & T.l) Ranchi,
Jharkhand has successfully developed solar energy systems for Trasar post
cocoon technology operations.

* CSIR-Central Salt & Marine Chemicals Research Institute, Bhavnagar,
Gujarat and NIT Agartala has developed a 5 Kg solar dryer installed at NIT-
Agartala for drying of natural rubber sheets as demonstration unit.

iv. Biogas and biomass

¢ Conducted studies on assessment of biomethane potential of paddy straw
and biomass characterization.

e Pretreatments of paddy straw, evaluation and comparison of biogas
production potential at laboratory and field scale anaerobic reactors

e Development of hybrid high rate biomethanation reactor with locally
available media for treating waste water and solid waste.

e Developed a 3 kWe Biogas based power generation system utilizing
Lignocellular biomass.

v. Wind Energy

« Met-Ocean Measurements (Wind, Wave, Tide, Current, Water Level, etc.,)
at Gulf of Knambhat and Gulf of Mannar for fostering the growth of offshore
wind in the country.

e Integrated Wind and Solar Resource Assessment through Mapping and

Measurements
Hydrogen and Fuel cell

vi.

e Maximize the gaseous energy recovery from organic wastes through
Biohythane process

¢ Design and developed the porous graphene modified metal oxide photo
anode for photo electro chemical water splitting

« 1 kW Low Temperature Polymer Electrolyte Membrane (LT-PEM) fuel cell
sent to IOCL is 80W/Kg and 70W/I, 110mW/sq.cm

The R&D scheme of MNRE has been revised with stringent monitoring mechanism
in December 2021 with a budget outlay of Rs. 228 crore for a period till 2025-26.


(Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, OM. No. 354/12/2019-NSM dated 30.01.2024)

Observation/ Recommendation

During the oral evidence of the representatives of MNRE on the subject, the
Committee have been informed that IIT Jodhpur has expressed interest in the revival
of this plant. IIT Jodhpur intend to constitute a consortium for producing 1 Megawatt
of power by way of joining the facility of this Solar Thermal Power Plant and a Photo
Voltaic Power Plant and enter into a PPA with an Electricity purchasing company in
Jodhpur, at a tariff of Rs. 8/kWh. While taking note of the interest towards
operationalizing the plant, the Committee would also like to be informed about the
progress made in this regard and the current status of this project. The Committee
wish to be apprised of the commercial viability of this arrangement and the

possibility of reviving and reusing the plant, as a whole.
(Para. 9 of the Part ॥

Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(17th Lok Sabha)

Action Taken by Government

IIT Jodhpur has shown the interest to take this power plant for further research and
development in solar energy sector. IIT Jodhpur presented that a PV-CSP Hybrid power
plant with storage is proposed in consortium with Industry M/s Luit Renewable Solutions Pvt.

Limited New Delhi. Ministry has considered the proposal on merit.

As proposed project would be a hybrid of PV and CSP, it's design would allow about 16
hours of operation, thereby, producing approximately 16 MWhe per day. During day period,
PV will generate electricity and feed into the IIT Jodhpur campus grid while after sunset, the
stored thermal energy would be utilized to run the turbine and feed electricity for 8 hours
after sunset. A preliminary DPR has been received from IIT Jodhpur and the Ministry has
accorded approval to NISE to transfer the entire facility to IT Jodhpur for further research
and running of the plant with storage facility. NISE will transfer the facility to IIT Jodhpur
shortly. NISE will be fully involved during the research work and MNRE will ensure the
implementation and regular monitoring through a Project Monitoring Committee. The entire

arrangement will be at no cost to either MNRE or NISE.


An agreement between IIT Jodhpur and M/s Luit Renewable Solutions Pvt. Limited New
Delhi has been finalised for purchase of power at Rs. 6.93/kWh. This will perhaps ensure

the reusing of-the entire facility and commercial viability of the project.

(Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, OM. No. 354/12/2019-NSM dated 30.01.2024)


CHAPTER III

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE
GOVERNMENT

-NIL-


CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF

GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH
REQUIRE REITERATION

-NIL-


CHAPTER V

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT
HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES

-NIL-
NEW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
07 February, 2024 Chairperson,

18 Magha, 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


{APPENDIX - Il)

(Vide para 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
CONTAINED IN THEIR SIXTY FIRST REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

10)
(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

Total No of Observations/Recommendations
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
which have been accepted by the Government:

Para Nos. 3 to 11
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do

not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the
Government:

-Nil-
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which

teplies of Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:

-Nil-

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies:

-Nil-

09

Total: 09
Percentage — 100%

Total: Nil
Percentage - 0%

Total: Nil

Percentage— 0%

Total: Nil
Percentage -0%