84

MISAPPROPRIATION OF PUBLIC MONEY IN
DEPARTMENT OF POSTS

MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

EIGHTY-FOURTH REPORT

SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2314

EIGHTY-FOURTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2023-24)

(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)

MISAPPROPRIATION OF PUBLIC MONEY IN

DEPARTMENT OF POSTS

MINISTRY OF COMUNICATIONS
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS)

Presented to Lok Sabha on:

Laid in Rajya Sabha on:

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

February 2024/ Magha 1945 (Saka)


CONTENTS

PAGES
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2023-24) (ii)
INTRODUCTION (iii)
REPORT
PART- I
1. | INTRODUCTORY 1

|] MISAPPROPRIATION OF PUBLIC MONEY IN DEPARTMENT OF POSTS | |

| AUDIT FINDINGS | |
PART -॥
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE | 685 |
APPENDICES
Pt Minutes of the Third Sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) held
on 30-10-2023.

| | Minutes of the Sixteenth Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2023-
24) held on 17-01-2024.



COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

(2023-24)
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA

2 Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria

3 Shri Thalikkottai Rajuthevar Baalu

4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

5. Shri Jagdambika Pal

6 Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi

7 Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

8. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale

9. Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara

10. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
11. Shri Brijendra Singh

12. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh
13. Shri Jayant Sinha

14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
RAJYA SABHA

16. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil
17. Dr. K Laxman

18. Shri Derek O’Brien

19. Shri Tiruchi Siva

20. Dr. M. Thambidurai

21. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari
22. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Director
3. Shri Girdhari Lal - Deputy Secretary
4. Ms. Pragya Nama - Assistant Committee Officer


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) having been
authorized by the Committee, do present this Eighty-fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok
Sabha) on “Misappropriation of public money in Department of Posts” based on
Para 3.5 of the C&AG’s Report No. 15 of 2022 (Compliance Audit) relating to the
Ministry of Communication (Department of Post).

2. The Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid on the Table
of the House on 08 August 2022.

3. The Public Accounts Committee (2023-24) took oral evidence of the
representatives of Ministry of Communication (Department of Post) on 18 July, 2023
The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 17
January, 2024. The Minutes of the sittings of the Committee are appended to the
Report.

4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold and form Part-II of
the Report.

5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Communication (Department of Posts) for tendering evidence before
them and furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in connection with the
examination of the subject.

6. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance
rendered to them in the matter by the Committee Secretariat and the Office of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
177 January, 2024 Chairperson,

27 Pausha 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

iii


REPORT
PART-I

A. Introductory

This Report is based on Para 3.5 of C&AG Report No.15 of 2022 on the subject,
“Misappropriation of Public Money in Department of Posts” pertaining to the
Department of Posts.

B. Misappropriation of Public Money in Department of Posts

The Post Office Savings Bank (POSB) caters to the investment needs of both
urban and rural clientele. The Department of Posts (DoP) provides these services on
an agency basis for the Ministry of Finance, Government of India. Offering a variety
of products, DoP's POSB services are designed to meet diverse investment
requirements for the convenience of the public.

C. AUDIT FINDINGS:

1. To ensure the integrity of Savings Bank Operations and prevent fraud, DoP
has established internal checks as outlined in the Post Office Savings Bank
Manuals. Responsibilities for fraud prevention are clearly defined for staff at various
levels, including Sub Post Offices, S.O. Group, and the Saving Bank Control
Organization (SBCO) in Head Post Offices, Divisional, Regional, and Circle Offices.
DoP has also issued directions to Postal Circles through internal orders, specifying
preventive checks and actions to avert fraudulent activities by its staff.

2. In pursuit of enhanced control and monitoring over POSB operations, DoP
initiated the IT Modernization Project 2012. As part of this initiative, the
implementation of Core Banking Solution (CBS) commenced in December 2013,
replacing the existing "Sanchay Post" software in Post Offices. To verify the
authenticity of Sanchay Post data migrated to CBS, DoP issued instructions in March
2016 for verification before and after migration in all post offices.

3. Despite these measures, complaints have been received regarding
misappropriations and irregularities in investment schemes, leading to unauthorized
withdrawal of funds by postal staff. An audit conducted between November 2002 and
September 2021 revealed that the S.O. Branch and SBCO in Head Post Offices
failed to conduct prescribed checks related to POSB operations. Coupled with delays
in validating data migrated from Sanchay Post to CBS, this resulted in the
misappropriation of at least 95.62 crore in various test-checked Post Offices across
14 Circles. Various fraudulent activities and misappropriations were identified,
totaling %95.62 crore, with recovery efforts resulting in 14.39 crore (inclusive of
penalty/interest of 40.85 lakh). However, $81.64 crore remained due for recovery.
The audit analysis highlighted several modus operandi, including fraudulent
withdrawals, database manipulation, uncredited cash deposits, fake
signatures/thumb impressions, unauthorized use of User IDs, and connivance with
outsiders to open fake accounts.

4. Despite actions taken against some delinquent officials and partial recovery,
the lapses in conducting prescribed internal checks and monitoring failures were
evident. Some Postal Circles reported issuing guidelines for settlement and
investigation by Enforcement Directorate and Central Bureau of Investigation, while


others indicated actions were in process. Replies from several Postal Circles were
still awaited as of the last update in February 2022.

5.

Regarding the details of frauds in Small Saving Accounts, Sukanya Samridhi

and other Term Deposit Accounts Schemes detected in last 15 years and the action
taken by the Department against fraudsters involved along with the total recovery
made therefrom, the Ministry responded as below:

6

“A fraud case may involve misappropriation spread across various
products/schemes viz SB, RD, TD, PLI/RPLI, fraud associated with
remittances etc. Details of frauds are not maintained at present under specific
products/scheme heads. The Department of Posts maintains consolidated
data of live cases of loss and fraud, even of live cases that are more than 15
years old. Similarly, the details of amount recovered is maintained and it
includes recovery in all types of live loss and fraud cases. The headwise
details of live loss and fraud cases relating to POSB as on 31.03.2023 is
included in Col. ‘Head —iv & v’ of the annexed table. Besides the above
recoveries, disciplinary action is taken against the primary/main identified offenders
and subsidiary offenders like dismissal, compulsory retirement, withholding of
increment, reduction to lower stages etc. under the CCS (CCA) Rules 1965 and
recovery, reduction/withholding of pensionary benefits with respect to pensioners
under CCS (Pension) Rules 2021 in the case of departmental officials and GDS
(Conduct and Engagement Rules) 2020 with respect to GraminDakSevaks as
applicable. In the case of penalties, there is indirect recovery. For example, when an
employee is dismissed from service, all his pensionary benefits are ceased and
thereby, there is substantial saving to the Government. This indirect recovery to the
government exchequer is not exactly quantifiable. This indirect recovery is not
included in the recovery column of the table at Annexure E.”

When sought to know about the internal checks placed at various hierarchical

levels in Post Offices/DoP, the Ministry furnished the response as under.

The prescribed internal checks/inspections at different levels/offices of the
Department is as follows:-

(1) Daily Audit by SBCO Branch
(i) | 100% transactions vouchers checking on daily basis

{ii) Checking the genuineness of manually entered
transactions in CSI F & A Module on daily basis

(2) Checking in Accounts Branch

Reconciliation of Bank Remittances and Drawals which includes
POSB transactions

(3) Checking in Postal Accounts Offices

100% vouchers checking in respect of Savings Certificates
issued before 01.07.2016

(4) Internal Check Inspection / Internal Audit

(i) Inspection frequency has been revised to annual from
once in 18 months w.e.f. 01.01.2022.

(ii) Checking the accounting functions of Head Post Offices,
one Sub Post Office and one Branch Post Office

(iii) Inspection / Auditing of POSB operation and SBCO
operation.


(5) Other checks and balances with respect to accounts

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

(vi)

Verification of withdrawals of = 10,000/- and above at
the counters of BOs -Through Assistant
Superintendent Posts (ASP) / Inspector Posts (IP) /
Public Relation Inspectors (P)

Verification of balances in the passbooks of Savings
Account, Sukanya Samriddhi Accounts and Public
Provident Fund accounts maintained in the BOs at the
time of receipt of passbooks for posting of annual
interest in SO

Verification of balances of accounts standing at BOs the
passbooks of which are not received for interest
posting through Sub Divisional Heads

Review of Sub Postmasters’ Monthly Report (SMR) -
Analysing the monthly deposits / withdrawals with the
corresponding month of the previous year हि

Cent percent verification of one BO in one month in each
Postal Division

It is the special responsibility of the Heads of Circle to see
that all the preventive measures / checks are exercised
meticulously and every effort made to nip frauds in the
bud. The Heads of Circles are also free to devise any
further special checks they want to carry out in the light
of local circumstances. However, the overall endeavour
should be to minimise the incidents of SB frauds and tone
up the Divisional Administrations.

(6) Inspections

(i)

(ii)

a)
b)

०)
५)

Quarterly visit to Branch Post Offices (BO) by the Mail
Overseers

a) Checking of cash and balances of other valuable
items
b) Checking of all the new accounts indexed with

accounted receipts

c) Verification of specified number of passbooks
balances with the balances in office records

d) Checking of all transactions

Annual Inspection at Branch Post Offices (BO) & Sub
Post Office (SO) by the Inspector Posts (IP) / Asst.
Superintendent Posts (ASP) / Divisional Heads

Checking of cash and balances of other valuable items

Checking of accounted transactions randomly for four
days

Verification of stock of passbooks / cheque books
Checking of balances in specified number of passbooks


(iil) | Second Inspection of BO & SO) by the Inspector Posts
(IP)/Asst. Superintendent Posts (ASP) / Divisional
Heads in case of non- satisfactory annual inspection

(iv) Half-year verification (June & December) / Annual
Inspection at Head Post Offices by Divisional Heads

a) Checking of cash and balances of other valuable items

b) Checking of accounted transactions randomly for four
days

c) Verification of stock of passbooks / cheque books
d) Checking of balances in specified number of passbooks

(v) Annual inspection of SBCO of each Head Post Office by
Accounts Officer Internal Check Organization (SB) (AO
ICO (SB))

a) Checking of accounts closed on transfer from other office
for any selected days

b) Checking of balances in 20 pass books
c) Checking of stock of cheque books

d) Checking of inward and outward cheque clearance
transactions with the transactions accounted in Treasury

e) Checking the functioning of SBCO
f) | Checking of prescribed office accounts balances
(7) Visits:
Visits by various authorities including CPMGs are also

prescribed as per a format during which cash and valuable items are
checked. Previous day’s transactions are also verified.

7. When asked about the measures prescribed by the Post Office Saving
Bank Manuals for preventing frauds and fraudulent activities in Saving Bank
Operations at various levels, the Ministry replied as under: :

(i) Various technological steps were taken to make system more secure
and avoid any chances of frauds. Most of the frauds listed in the C &
AG report under reference relate to manual manipulation or alteration
of the Sanchay Post database by official/s with malafide intent. CBS
has been implemented in all post offices and Finacle is a highly secure
system with proven security features across the banking system.

(ii) To make the process more secure and to facilitate secure customer
access, the following initiatives after roll out of CBS have been taken by
the department : -

(a) e-Passbook: - Account holders can view balance/mini statement of
their account online through India Post website.

(b) Printing of passbooks has been mandated to be done only through
passbook printers in CBS post offices.


(c) Collection of passbooks has been made mandatory for closure of
accounts in single handed and double handed post offices.

(d) Account transfer, account freeze/unfreeze and silent account
revival process is centralized at the HO level with two supervisor's roles
identified.

(e) CBS-CSI GL integration has been implemented, which enables
automatic accounting of all transactions carried out in Finacle in CSI.

(f) Common List of Transactions/Consolidated Journal have been
implemented, which has improved efficiency in checking of vouchers at
SBCO.

(g) Interactive Voice Response (IVR): - By calling toll free number
18002666868, customer can inquire about their account, balance and
transactions.

(h) Customer Due Diligence: - For awareness of the customers, ‘Safety
Instructions for Depositors” have been issued and the same are being
displayed on the India Post website, notice boards and counters to
safeguard customers’ money.

(i) Mobile Number Validation: - Mobile number has been made
mandatory for opening of any account, modification of any account or
to carry out any financial transaction.

() SMS alerts: - Free SMS alerts are issued automatically about
various financial transactions as well as non-financial transactions to
the customers. This includes all debit transactions and any credit
transactions above Rs. 499. There are SMS alerts about change of
mobile number and alerts one month before the maturity of any
account.

(k) Fraud Risk Management Unit (FRMU):-

A separate Fraud Risk Management Unit (FRMU) has been established
to scrutinize the alerts generated by the system about various
transactions, on the basis of certain set of rules. In case of any
deviation from the specified rules, alerts are generated and the same
are verified through post offices, Inspectors of the Department.

() Online PAN Validation: - Online PAN validation has been
implemented to verify PAN number with NSDL.

(m) DBT credit through ACH/NACH: - All state/central Government
scheme/s beneficiaries’ amount are being deposited in respective PO
Savings Accounts online through ACH/NACH facility.

(n) ATM facility: 1000 ATMs have been installed across the country in
post offices and these ATMs are inter-operable with banks.

(0) Internet banking/mobile banking: -

Customer can open and close accounts online (RD/TD/MIS/KVP
schemes & NSC), transfer fund online through NEFT/RTGS and view
online statements.

(p) 100% voucher checking by SBCO: - After implementation of CBS,
100% voucher checking is prescribed to scrutinize every transaction.


8.

(q) Credit of interest earned in Time Deposit, Monthly Income Scheme,
and Senior Citizen Savings Scheme Accounts is transferred directly
into the Post Office/Bank Savings Account of the depositor.

(r) Maturity proceeds in all Small Savings Schemes is being directly
credited into the Post Office/Bank Savings Account of the Account
Holder.

(s) New POSB (CBS) Manual: - After implementation of CBS, various
preventive measures have been taken. To spread awareness amongst
operative staff, supervisory staff, inspecting authorities and internal
audit, POSB (CBS) manual has been updated by incorporating all
updated rules and procedures. It improves the knowledge of staff and
facilitates better monitoring/control of POSB operations.

(t) e-KYC : - e-KYC is likely to be implemented shortly in POSB, which
will facilitate the biometric authentication of customers, strengthening
the existing system further. It will facilitate speedy account opening and
avoid any chances of misappropriation, as identification of the
customers will be established on the basis of biometric authentication
through AADHAAR.

(u) Aadhaar authenticated payment: - After implementation of e-KYC
module for Small Savings Schemes, the payment to customers will be
made by authenticating biometrics through UIDAI. It will secure the
complete payment system and avoid any chances of defalcation/
misappropriation.

(v) Aadhaar/biometric authenticated login: - Biometric login by the
postmaster/other authorised official is already implemented in 1.29 lakh
Branch Post Offices. Biometric login in other Post Offices is under
development. Thereafter, the risk of misuse of passwords due to
sharing etc. will be eliminated.

being asked how the Department of Posts (DoP) ensures the

implementation of internal checks and preventive measures against fraud and
whether any specific directions have been issued to the Postal Circles in this regard,
the Ministry replied as follows:

9

“To ensure the implementation of internal checks and preventive measures
against fraud, instructions are issued to all Postal Circles through SB orders
from time to time, which have been detailed in the reply to question No. 89
above.In addition, as a preventive measure, as and when new Modus
Operandi emerges in any of the frauds, the same along with systemic gaps
identified, if any, are communicated to all the postal circles for taking
corrective action to avoid any further re-occurrence. Case studies are also
used for training.”

Audit noticed that Savings Branch and the Saving Bank Control Organisation

(SBCO) of DoP’s Head Post Offices failed to implement internal checks codified by
Department of Posts and orders issued by Directorate from time to time. Fraudulent
activities such as withdrawals made from closed saving accounts by Postal staff,
fake entries were made, fake accounts were opened, cash deposits taken from
customers were not entered in their accounts and unauthorised use of user id and
passwords by Postal staff, were found. These irregularities led to mis-appropriation

6


of public money amounting to %95.62 crore in Post Offices spread over fourteen
Postal Circles over the period November 2002 to September 2021, of which %14.39
crore (including penalty/ interest of %40.85 lakh) was recovered and balance
recoveries were yet to be effected.

10. In response to the audit observation regarding fraudulent activities in POSB
accounts, Ministry contended that frauds committed using stated Modus Operandi,
are not technology driven and frauds could not be detected for long due to failure in
supervision on the part of Account Offices or/and SBCO, whereas there is
appropriate control mechanism is already available.

11. | Further when asked to briefly highlight the control mechanism put in place to
detect such fraud risks and to address it in time, the Ministry's response was as
under:

“The control mechanisms in place to detect such fraud risks are as follows:

(i) Various technological steps were taken to make system more secure and
avoid any chances of frauds. Most of the frauds listed in the C & AG report
under reference relate to manual manipulation or alteration of the Sanchay
Post database by official/s with malafide intent. CBS has been implemented in
all post offices and Finacle is a highly secure system with proven security
features across the banking system.

(ii) To make the process more secure and to facilitate secure customer
access, the following initiatives after roll out of CBS have been taken by the
department : -

(a) e-Passbook: - Account holders can view balance/mini statement of
their account online through India Post website.

(b) Printing of passbooks has been mandated to be done only through
passbook printers in CBS post offices.

(c) Collection of passbooks has been made mandatory for closure of
accounts in single handed and double handed post offices.

(d) Account transfer, account freeze/unfreeze and silent account
revival process is centralized at the HO level with two supervisor's roles
identified.

(e) CBS-CSI GL integration has been implemented, which enables
automatic accounting of all transaction carried out in Finacle in CSI.

() Common List of Transactions/Consolidated Journal have been
implemented, which has improved efficiency in checking of vouchers at
SBCO.

(g) Interactive Voice Response (IVR): - By calling toll free. number
18002666868, customer can inquire about their account, balance and
transactions.

(h) Customer Due Diligence: - For awareness of the customers, ‘Safety
Instructions for Depositors” have been issued and the same are being
displayed on the India Post website, notice boards and counters to
safeguard customers’ money.

(i) Mobile Number Validation: - Mobile number has been made
mandatory for opening of any account, modification of any account or
to carry out any financial transaction.

7


(j) SMS alerts: - Free SMS alerts are issued automatically about
various financial transactions as well as non-financial transactions to
the customers. This includes all debit transactions and any credit
transactions above Rs. 499. There are SMS alerts about change of
mobile number and alerts one month before the maturity of any
account.

(k) Fraud Risk Management Unit (FRMU):-

A separate Fraud Risk Management Unit (FRMU) has been established
to scrutinize the alerts generated by the system about various
transactions, on the basis of certain set of rules. In case of any
deviation from the specified rules, alerts are generated and the same
are verified through post offices, Inspectors of the Department.

(0) Online PAN Validation: - Online PAN validation has been
implemented to verify PAN number with NSDL.

(m) DBT credit through ACH/NACH: - All state/central Government
scheme/s beneficiaries’ amount are being deposited in respective PO
Savings Accounts online through ACH/NACH facility.

(n) ATM facility: 1000 ATMs have been installed across the country in
post offices and these ATMs are inter-operable with banks.

(0) Internet banking/mobile banking: -

Customer can open and close accounts online (RD/TD/MIS/KVP
schemes & NSC), transfer fund online through NEFT/RTGS and view
online statements.

(p) 100% voucher checking by SBCO: - After implementation of CBS,
100% voucher checking is prescribed to scrutinize every transaction.

(q) Credit of interest earned in Time Deposit, Monthly Income Scheme,
and Senior Citizen Savings Scheme Accounts is transferred directly
into the Post Office/Bank Savings Account of the depositor.

(r) Maturity proceeds in all Small Savings Schemes is being directly
credited into the Post Office/Bank Savings Account of the Account
Holder.

(s) New POSB (CBS) Manual: - After implementation of CBS, various
preventive measures have been taken. To spread awareness amongst
operative staff, supervisory staff, inspecting authorities and internal
audit, POSB (CBS) manual has been updated by incorporating all
updated rules and procedures. It improves the knowledge of staff and
facilitates better monitoring/control of POSB operations.

(t) e-KYC : - e-KYC is likely to be implemented shortly in POSB, which
will facilitate the biometric authentication of customers, strengthening
the existing system further. It will facilitate speedy account opening and
avoid any chances of misappropriation, as identification of the
customers will be established on the basis of biometric authentication
through AADHAAR.

(u) Aadhaar authenticated payment: - After implementation of e-KYC
module for Small Savings Schemes, the payment to customers will be
made by authenticating biometrics through UIDAI. It will secure the


12.

complete payment system and avoid any chances of defalcation/
misappropriation.

(v) Aadhaar/biometric authenticated login: - Biometric login by the
postmaster/other authorised official is already implemented in 1.29 lakh
Branch Post Offices. Biometric login in other Post Offices is under
development. Thereafter, the risk of misuse of passwords due to
sharing etc. will be eliminated.”

On being asked as to whether the irregularities pointed out by Audit were

flagged by the Internal Audit of the DoP or its circles as well, the Ministry responded
as below:

13.

“Whenever any irregularity is noticed at the field level in operational units, the
same is being reported / flagged by Circles for taking remedial action across
all the Postal Circles. Accordingly, procedural and technological changes
required to prevent re-occurrence of such cases are carried out in the
appropriate systems.

Since data from Sanchay Post software, was migrated to Finacle software as

live accounts, the Committee desired to know how it is being ensured that such data
are not tempered and manipulated. Also the Committee desired to be explained what
safeguards, including data validation to the new systems coupled with, KYC
verification of account holders/beneficiaries have been taken for the purpose. The
Ministry in this regard, replied as below:

14.

(i) Detailed instructions were issued from the technical team to all the
Circles/post offices in respect of preparation of Go-Live in the shape of
‘Check-list for Go-Live’.

(ii) However, incorrect migration of closed accounts into Finacle might have
occurred due to various reasons including carelessness by the operating staff
at field level.

(iii) After such errors were noticed, corrective action is being taken including
identification of such accounts and marking closure of such identified
accounts. Various instructions have been issued to the Circles in this regard.

(iv) To obviate fraud in wrongly migrated accounts, all accounts that matured,
but were not seen as closed after 3 years have been marked ‘FREEZE’. The
closure of such freeze account is allowed only through Head Post Offices and
with the approval of two supervisors after obtaining proper KYC and other
necessary documents.

(v) No manipulation / data entry in the existing data base is allowed in Finacle
which is a standard banking application used by various banks across the
banking sector.

(v) e-KYC is likely to be implemented shortly in POSB, which will facilitate the
biometric authentication of customers, strengthening the existing system
further. Biometric login by the postmaster/other authorised official is already
implemented in 1.29 lakh Branch Post Offices. Biometric login in other Post
Offices is under development. Thereafter, the risk of misuse of passwords due
to sharing etc. will be eliminated.

When asked to explain the effectiveness of the Fraud Risk Management Unit

(FRMU), an IT initiative taken by the Department to prevent fraudulent/manipulative


practices and ensure disbursal of money to the rightful claimants, the Ministry’s

response was as below:
‘The FRMU analyses the data of FINACLE Database, studies the
frauds/modus operandi and develop the scenarios wherever possible in the
tisk areas in the operation of Small Savings Schemes. Based on the
scenarios, alerts are generated by FRMU and sent to Divisional Office (DO)
for verification. DO in turn sends the alerts to Head Post Offices for
verification. Alerts are thoroughly verified by Head Post Offices and reported
back to DO for further action. The Circle Office monitors the FRMU alerts
attended by DOs/HOs.

FRMU alerts are generated during the following scenarios:-

Revival of Silent A/c, pre-mature closure of RD/TD/MIS/PPF/SCSS accounts,
NSC/KVP. discharged at office other than the registration office, agent
transactions like closure of discontinued RD accounts/RD loans/premature
closure of RD accounts/idle RD accounts, closure of all discontinued
schemes, operation in idle accounts, online transactions like E-banking/M-
banking and channel transactions etc.

The Department has defined risk categories for Small Savings Schemes. The
tisks are categorized as:-

14... Lowrisk - All transactions with value less than Rs.50000/-

2. Medium risk - All transactions with value less than Rs.10 lakh and
>=Rs.50000/-

3. — High risk - All transactions with value greater than and equal to Rs.10
lakh.”

15. To a query whether the Department proposes to sign any Memorandum of
Understanding with the RBI with regard to its supervisory function related to Post
Office Saving Bank, the reply of the Ministry was as under:

“The rules and regulations for POSB Schemes are issued by Ministry of
Finance under the provisions of the Government Savings Promotions Act
1873. Post Office Savings Bank (POSB) functions as an agency under
Department of Economic Affairs (DEA), MOF. POSB schemes are defined. by
MOF and the funds collected are accumulated in National Small Savings Fund
(NSSF), which is a Public Account established in 1999. POSB is not defined
as a bank under the provisions of “The Banking Regulation Act, 1949” and
thus, POSB does not come under the supervision of RBI. Therefore,
regulations and advisories of RBI are not applicable to POSB operations as
such. However, POSB is covered under the Payment and Settlement Systems
Act, 2007 and hence RBI guidelines are followed in case of all digital modes
of transactions. Besides, while defining Operating Procedure for POSB
operations, RBI guidelines are also taken into consideration wherever
feasible. Technology management of POSB Operations has been handed
over to India Post Payment Bank (IPPB) from August, 2022, which is
regulated by the RBI, and IPPB complies with guidelines of RBI.”

10


16. Giving summary of Action taken on offenders in the 60 cases as pointed out in
Audit Para, the Department explained as under:

Main Offenders | Co-Offenders | Subsidiary
offenders

Total number | | 37 782
of offenders
Action 27 P| 313
completed
Action 37 2 91
initiated
Yet to 798 | 34 25 342
initiated

From the above, it is noted that out of 98, action on 27 offenders has since
been completed while action has been initiated in respect of 37 offenders.

17. | Further on being asked to briefly share the details of the actions taken or
being taken against the offenders, the Ministry detailed as under:
“Action has been completed against 34 offenders, as per details below:-

Type of Action Number of
offenders

Dismissal 24

Removal | कि

Compulsory retirement 03

Reduction to lower stage |_४ |

Further, action has now been initiated against 45 offenders and detail of
proceedings initiated aginst them is as under:-

Action Initiated Number of
offenders

Rule 10 of GDS (Conduct & pe |

Engagement) Rules

Rule 14 of CCS (CCA) Rules 37

Rule 9/Rule .8 of CCS 01

(Pension) Rules

Rule 16 of CCS (CCA) Rules Pom

11


18. On being asked to specify what actions are being taken to expedite the

enquiry against the offenders and complete it in a time bound manner, the Ministry's

response was as below:
“Based on the amount of misappropriation involved, loss and fraud cases are
periodically reviewed at Directorate. Similar action is done across field
establishments. Necessary instruction for completion of pending aspects of
the cases are issued on case-to-case basis. Status of action against offenders
are also reviewed and Circles and Regional Offices are instructed for timely
action as per CVC guidelines.”

19. The Committee noted that a new system has been proposed under Core
System Integration for monitoring cash balances in post offices whereby an alert
message could be automatically sent to the concerned Divisional Head for taking
action in case that cash balance of the post office varies from its authorized cash
balance, thereby limiting human intervention, as a pilot project in three Postal
Divisions, Hoshiarpur Division, Karnal Division and South-West Division in Delhi
Circle.

20. When enquired about the status of the outcome of the implementation of the
proposed pilot project in the three Postal Divisions and possibility of extending it to
all the Postal Circles at the earliest for strict monitoring of the excess cash retention
in post offices, the Ministry’s response was as under:
“A user-friendly MIS (consolidated report) is available under Core System
Integrator (CSI) to the Postal Divisional Heads, pan India to monitor the
maximum/minimum cash balances of the Post Offices and to identify the
excess cash held by Post Offices on a daily basis, beyond the maximum
authorized cash limit. Further, an alert mechanism has also been developed
across the country in which alert is sent via e-mail to the Divisional Head by
CEPT whenever the Post Offices within the jurisdiction of a division breaches
the cash limit for more stringent system of monitoring of cash balances.”

aI

12


PART - Il

OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE

Report No. 15 of 2022 of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
(CAG) on Finance and Communication of the Union Government contained
significant results of Compliance Audit of the Ministry of Communications,
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology, Ministry of Finance and the
Departments/ Public Sector Undertakings under these Ministries. The
Committee selected Para 3.5 of the aforementioned Report which dealt with
the subject, “Misappropriation of public money in Department of Posts” for
detailed examination and report.

Audit Report had highlighted mis-appropriation of public money
amounting to %95.62 crore in Post Offices spread over fourteen Postal Circles,
due to failure of the Head Post Offices under DoP in implementing internal
checks codified for prevention of Fraudulent Activities in operation of Post
Office Saving Bank (POSB) Schemes. The Committee’s examination of the
subject and their observations/. recommendations are detailed in the

succeeding paragraphs.

1. Internal Control and Monitoring

The Committee observe that Post Office Saving Bank Manuals issued by
Department of Posts (DoP) prescribes the internal checks and clearly defines
the responsibilities for prevention of frauds and fraudulent activities in Saving
Bank Operations for various levels of staff in Sub Post Offices, 5.0. Group and
Saving Bank Control Organization in Head Post Offices, Divisional, Regional
and Circle Offices. However, Audit scrutiny revealed misappropriation of
public money amounting to %95.62 crore in Post Offices spread over fourteen
Postal Circles, due to failure of the Head Post Offices in implementing internal
checks codified for prevention of Fraudulent Activities in operation of Post
Office Saving Bank (POSB) Schemes. The DOP added that most of the cases
pointed out by Audit relate to manual manipulation or alteration of the
Sanchay Post database by official/s with malafide intent. The Committee are
shocked to note that despite having prescribed internal checks/inspections at
different levels/offices such as Daily Audit by SBCO Branch; Checking in
Accounts Branch; Checking in Postal Accounts Offices; Internal Check

13


Inspection / Internal Audit; Verification of withdrawals of = 10,000/- and above
at the counters of BOs; Quarterly visit to Branch Post Offices and Visits by
various authorities including CPMGs etc. instances of misappropriation of
money were observed. As regards the measures taken for preventing frauds
and fraudulent activities in Saving Bank Operations at various levels, the
Department explained that various technological steps have been taken to
make the system more secure and avoid any chances of fraud. Besides, rollout
of Core Banking Solution (CBS) in all post offices, Finacle, a highly secure
system with proven security features across the banking system has been
introduced. Also, various other initiatives have reportedly been taken that
include introduction of e-Passbook; CBS-CSI GL integration, which enables
automatic accounting of all transaction carried out in Finacle in CSI; Fraud
Risk Management Unit (FRMU); Online PAN Validation; e-KYC; Aadhaar
authenticated payment etc. The Committee, while noting the steps being taken
by the Department to secure customer access, desire that check/inspection
done by each of the levels/offices may be tracked through an integrated online
portal, so that deviations if any are brought to the notice of higher ups at an
early stage and timely action taken thereon to prevent frauds and fraudulent
activities in Saving Bank Operations. The Committee also recommend
stringent punitive action against the officials who failed to ensure
implementation of the internal checks codified for prevention of Fraudulent
Activities in operation of Post Office Saving Bank (POSB) Schemes.

2. As regards applicability of the RBI Guidelines with respect to the Post
Office Saving Bank (POSB) operations, the Committee have been apprised that
the traditional post office savings bank was under the purview of Ministry of
Finance and has been functioning as an agency. However, POSB is now
covered under the Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007 and hence RBI
guidelines are required to be followed in case of all digital modes of
transactions. Besides, while defining Operating Procedure for POSB
operations, RBI guidelines are also taken into consideration wherever feasible.
The Department also stated that technology management of POSB Operations
has been handed over to India Post Payment Bank (IPPB) from August, 2022,
which is regulated by the RBI. The Committee, while noting the large volume of
transactions involved in the POSB desire that DOP should also enter into an
MOU with RBI for undertaking a review of the internal controls/ internal checks
in place at regular intervals to arrest fraudulent activities in operation of Post

14


Office Saving Bank (POSB) Schemes and ensure safety of the hard earned
money of customers and ensure that they do not become vulnerable to

fraudulent activities.

3. With respect to the poor monitoring mechanism in the Department of
Posts, the Committee in their in their 89th Report (16thLok Sabha) on the
subject “Non-Compliance by Department of Posts” and 15th Report on action
taken by the Government on the Observations and Recommendations
contained in the 89" Report, had inter alia highlighted monitoring issues viz.
‘pension disbursement’ and ‘retention of excess cash in post offices’ and
recommended evolving and implementing a more stringent system of
monitoring and stricter norms of compliance to the Department’s own code of
financial conduct. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the
updated account of details of action taken in this regard.

4. Sanchay Post Data Migration

The Committee observe that to safeguard the public money and enable
better customer experience, DoP decided to computerise the banking
operations through one central platform under IT Modernisation Project 2012.
Accordingly, DoP started implementation of Core Banking Solution (CBS) from
December 2013 to enable customers to operate their accounts to achieve
“Anywhere, Anytime Banking” by replacing the existing banking platform of
“Sanchay Post" software in Post Offices. Since data from Sanchay Post
software, was migrated to Finacle software as live accounts, and to ensure
that such data was not tempered and manipulated, the Department stated that
detailed instructions were issued from the technical team to all the
Circles/post offices in regard to preparation of Go-Live in the form of ‘Check-
list for Go-Live’. DoP however, indicated that incorrect migration of closed
accounts into Finacle might have occurred due to various reasons including
carelessness by the operating staff at field level. Further, after such errors
came to notice, corrective action is being taken including identification of such
accounts and marking such identified accounts for closure. To obviate fraud in
wrongly migrated accounts, all accounts that matured, but were not seen as
closed after 3 years have been marked ‘FREEZE’. The closure of such frozen
accounts is allowed only through Head Post Offices and with the approval of
two supervisors after obtaining proper KYC and other necessary documents.

15


No manipulation / data entry in the existing data base is allowed in Finacle
which is a standard banking application used by various banks across the
banking sector. Observing that the Department is itself not confident of
accuracy of data migrated from Sanchay Post to Finacle and the identification
process of tampered and manipulated accounts is still underway, the
Committee cannot help expressing apprehension over ensuring hassle free
delivery of services till the last mile. The Committee desire that the process of
verification of sanchay data be completed in a time bound manner so that the
confidence of both urban and rural clientele in the country’s oldest banking
system is ensured and public money safeguarded. The Committee while
noting that e-KYC is likely to be implemented shortly in POSB, which will
facilitate biometric authentication of customers, strengthening the existing
system further, desire that the same be completed at the earliest and the

Committee be apprised thereof.

5. Un-authorised withdrawal of funds by postal staff

The Committee note that the 5.0. Branch as well as SBCO in Head Post
Offices failed to carry out the prescribed checks relating to the POSB
Operations. This, coupled with delays in timely validation of data migrated
from Sanchay Post to CBS led to misappropriation of public money of at least
95.62 crore in various Post Offices of 14 Circles, as test checked by Audit.
Further in some cases, inspecting authorities of the Department also failed to
detect the fraud/ misappropriations even after a lapse of more than five years
and frauds came into light only after customer complaints. In response, the
Department contended that the frauds committed by using the stated modus
operandi, are not technology driven and could not be detected for long due to
failure in supervision on the part of Account Offices or/and SBCO. This has
happened despite appropriate control mechanism being already available.
Regarding the product/ scheme wise fraud details and the extent of public
money lost due to this, the Department informed that a fraud case may involve
misappropriation spread across various products/schemes viz SB, RD, TD,
PLI/RPLI, fraud associated with remittances etc. and their specific details are
not maintained at present. The Department of Posts however, maintains
consolidated data of live cases of loss and fraud, inclusive of cases that are
more than 15 years old. Similarly, the details of amount recovered is

16


maintained which includes recovery in all types of live loss and fraud cases.
As regards the action taken against the fraudsters, the DOP stated that
besides the recoveries being made, disciplinary action is taken against the
primary/main identified offenders and subsidiary offenders with penalties like
dismissal, compulsory retirement, withholding of increment, reduction to
lower stages etc. imposed under the CCS (CCA) Rules 1965; and measures
such as recovery, reduction/withholding of pensionary benefits taken with
respect to pensioners under CCS (Pension) Rules 2021 in the case of
departmental officials and GDS (Conduct and Engagement) Rules 2020 as
applicable with respect to Gramin Dak Sevaks. DOP also added that cases of
imposition of penalties, there is indirect recovery as when an employee is
dismissed from service, all his pensionary benefits are ceased thereby
resulting in substantial saving to the Government. This indirect recovery to the
Government exchequer is not exactly quantifiable. The Committee desire the
Department to take measures for maintaining details of frauds and amounts
involved under specific products/scheme heads so as to enable pointed
monitoring; and immediate introduction of preventive measures as and where
required. The Committee also recommend that major reasons/modus operandi
of frauds may be studied and besides plugging the loop holes, all branches
may be directed to introduce checks to avoid a repeat of similar frauds in their
areas. Also, the general public may also be made aware of the modus operandi
of the frauds to with a view to ensuring safety of their money.

6. The Committee, while expressing their dissatisfaction over the manner
in which the Department has claimed that with indirect recovery effected by
withholding pensionary benefits of a dismissed employee, there is substantial
saving to the Government, would like to emphasise that concrete steps should
be taken to plug the loopholes in the existing monitoring system. The
Committee are also of the considered opinion that not only disciplinary action
needs to be taken against the erring employees, but appropriate measures
taken for recovering the misappropriated amounts urgently. Further, the
Committee desire to be apprised of cases where criminal proceedings have
been initiated against the employees found involved in misappropriation of
funds.

7. Fraud Risk Management Unit (FRMU)

17


The Committee note that a separate Fraud Risk Management Unit
(FRMU) has been established to scrutinize the alerts generated by the system
about various transactions, on the basis of certain set of rules. In case of any
deviation from the specified rules, alerts are generated and the same are
verified through Post Offices and Inspectors of the Department. In this regard,
DOP also stated that the FRMU analyses the data of FINACLE Database,
studies the frauds/modus operandi and develops the scenarios wherever
possible in regard to the risk areas in the operation of Small Savings Schemes.
Based on the scenarios, alerts are generated by FRMU and sent to Divisional
Office (DO) for verification. DO in turn sends the alerts to Head Post Offices for
verification. Alerts are thoroughly verified by Head Post Offices and reported
back to DO for further action. The Circle Office monitors the FRMU alerts
attended by DOs/HOs. FRMU alerts are generated during the following
scenarios:-Revival of Silent A/c, pre-mature closure of RD/TD/MIS/PPF/SCSS
accounts, NSC/KVP discharged at offices other than the registration office,
agent transactions like closure of discontinued RD accounts/RD
loans/premature closure of RD accounts/idle RD accounts, closure of all
discontinued schemes, operation in idle accounts, online transactions like E-
banking/M-banking and channel transactions etc. While noting the growing
complexities of the frauds, the Committee recommend that FRMU should also
be aptly augmented by strong internal controls and_ regular
updating/strengthening. To ascertain and maintain the effectiveness of the
FRMU, the Committee also recommend that a review of the functioning of Unit
should be conducted at periodic intervals. Concrete steps should also be
taken to reduce the average time taken for processing and redressal of the
fraud cases under the new dispensation.

8. Action taken on offenders

As regards the action being taken against the offenders found involved
in misappropriation of public money, the Department appraised the Committee
that out of 98 Main offenders, 37 Co-offenders and 782 Subsidiary offenders,
action was yet to be taken in case of 34 Main offenders, 25 Co-offenders and
342 Subsidiary offenders. The Committee note from Department’s response
that out of a total of 917 offenders whose involvement is of varying degrees,
action was yet to be initiated in as many as 401 cases i.e., about 44 percent of

18


cases. Considering these facts, the Committee are of the considered view that
the approach of Department while dealing with the serious offences of
misappropriation of public money has been lackadaisical. The Committee also
note from the reply of the Ministry that based on the amount of
misappropriation involved, loss and fraud cases are periodically reviewed at
the Directorate and similar action is taken across field establishments. Further,
necessary instructions for completion of pending aspects of the cases are
issued on case-to-case basis. Status of action taken against offenders is also
reviewed and Circles and Regional Offices are instructed to take timely action
as per CVC guidelines. The Committee are not satisfied with the action taken
by the Department against the offenders and desire that a special cell be
created in the Department to monitor and expedite these cases with immediate
effect and complete the proceedings and book the culprits in a time bound
manner. Further, on account of slow process of action being taken, the
Committee would also like to be appraised of the reasons for the delay in the

matter.

9. Recovery in the cases of fraud

The Committee observe that out of the frauds/ misappropriation of
public money amounting to %95.62 crore, DoP has only been able to
recover®14.39 crore (inclusive penalty/ interest of $40.85 lakh) and an amount
of $81.64 crore remains to be recovered. Taking exception to the sluggish pace
of recoveries from the fraudsters, the Committee may be apprised of the
reasons for the same and the measures being taken to recover the dues with

promptitude.

KRKKKKK
NEW DELHI: ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
477 January, 2024 Chairperson,
27 Pausha 1945 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

19